==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Development of an LCOE Optimization Tool used for the 
Siting and Planning of Hybrid Floating Wind and Wave 
Farms 
 
 
Jorge Izquierdo Pérez 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0323 
August 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Jorge Izquierdo Pérez  
Title: Development of an LCOE Optimization Tool used for the Siting and 
Planning of Hybrid Floating Wind and Wave Farms 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03233 
August 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
February 2019 – August 2019 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Niels-Erik Clausen 
Antonio Manuel Pegalajar Jurado 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Offshore floating hybrid wind and wave energy is a young technology that still needs
to be scaled up. To ensure its competitiveness in the sustainable energy market, the
total costs of the energy production must be reduced by either improving the tech-
nology or maximizing the farm’s efficiency. The key indicator to be minimized is the
Levelized Cost of Energy, subject of optimization in the model developed in this work.
A full energy production and costs model has been built for the hybrid P80 concept
designed by the company Floating Power Plant A/S. The technical aspects involved
in the model include the wakes and waves shadow, the power output conversion values
of both wind and waves generators, as well as all the expenditures and economical fac-
tors involved in the project: CAPEX, OPEX, and discount rate. The site-dependent
parameters considered are: the wind and wave resources, the bathymetry, and the
distances to shore, to the harbors and to the grid. A Particle Swarm Optimization
algorithm consummates the tool, taking as decision variables the layout, the offshore
substation position, and the export cable choice. It was found that more sophisticated
algorithms are needed to find consistent results in this kind of optimization process.
The model has been applied off the west coast of Ireland in a site of interest for
the company. With a layout of 25 platforms in 5 rows, the LCOE was minimized
to a value of 116.56 AC/MWh when using the considered base parameters. The main
vessel routes, the area’s grid strength, and the visual impact of the farm were also
studied. It was then found that lower costs of about 85 AC/MWh can be reached in
the short-term, and the room for improvement in the structure’s design and materials
was highlighted, with an LCOE reduction potential of up to a 32%. It is also proved
that a model of this kind serves usefully as a preliminary analysis, but the uncertainty
estimate of an 11% indicates that site-specific studies and measurements are essential.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical
University of Denmark in Risø, in collaboration with the company Floating Power
Plant A/S, in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree
in Sustainable Energy with a specialization in Wind Energy.
Copenhagen, August 1, 2019
Jorge Izquierdo Pérez (s172587)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Niels-Erik Clausen and An-
tonio Manuel Pegalajar Jurado for giving me freedom and autonomy throughout the
whole Master Thesis, not only always supporting me but also giving me new insights
and offering constructive solutions to any challenge encountered. They opened the
door to their department, helped me with my organization and always directed me
in the right direction and towards the right people.
I am also very grateful with the help provided by FPP, specially from Nis Ebsem,
my supervisor in the company, who was always quick and generous at answering ques-
tions and providing useful information and documentation, not to forget about Sarah,
Pilar and Anders, that let me in the company with their arms open and offered their
help and advice. Also, thanks to Morten and Chris for efficiently providing informa-
tion when I asked for it.
I would also like to thank Niels, Daniel, Andreas and Nikolay, that received me,
in some cases more than once, and offered their knowledge and support. A special
thanks to Alfredo, that granted me access to his work and let me use it in my tool,
and Neil, who provided crucial data for the model. Also thanks to Hugo and Gyde,
for allowing me to have a basis from where to build my work and take inspiration,
specially in the unclear and abstract beginning.
Particularly, I want to express my special gratitude to Joaquín and Bruno for
offering their priceless help from a very different environment in a completely altru-
istic effort. And finally thank you very much to my loving family, friends, and the
fellowship of the Ring for their everyday support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
The Technology
5
2.1
Floating Power Plant A/S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
P80: the concept used in the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
The Model
15
3.1
Wave energy model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Wind energy model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Costs model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Optimization algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
51
4.1
General description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Implementation of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Results and Discussion
69
5.1
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2
Uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6
Conclusion
83
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
87
A Costs Figures: Sources and Assumptions
93
A.1 Design and project management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.2 Wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.3 Electrical infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.4 Decommissioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.5 Discount rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.6 Vessel speeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B Confidential data from Floating Power Plant A/S
101
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
AEP
Annual Energy Production
ASO
Agent Swarm Optimization
CAPEX
Capital Expenditures
DHI
Danish Hydraulics Institute
EI
Electrical Infrastructure
FPP
Floating Power Plant A/S
GWA
Global Wind Atlas
Hs
Wave’s significant height
HV
High Voltage
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Energy
Lw
Waves wavelength
MV
Medium Voltage
NEWA
New European Wind Atlas
OPEX
Operational Expenditures
O&G
Oil & Gas
O&M
Operation & Maintenance
PSO
Particle Swarm Optimization
PTO
Power Take-Off unit
Te
Wave’s energy period
Tz
Wave’s zero-crossing period
WEC
Wave Energy Converter
w.s.
Wind speed
WTG
Wind Turbine Generator
θ wa
Waves direction
θ wi
Wind direction
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
One of the main issues that determine the future of planet Earth, the environment,
and human civilization since the industrial revolution is climate change. Global warm-
ing as a consequence of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is a reality, and there is a
consensus among more than 97% of the scientific community on the fact that human
emissions are the main reason of this phenomenon [1].
As a consequence, since the late 1990s, several arguably soft agreements and ef-
forts such as the Kyoto protocol in 1997, the pact at the COP 21 summit in 2015 or
the 2020 targets proposed by the European Commission, have been launched at the
international level. These actions are becoming urgent as latest findings and studies
already predict inevitable catastrophic consequences from climate change [2].
Among other targets, middle term national green new deals point at a transition
to a full sustainable energy generation system, as one of the main sources of these
greenhouse gas emissions is, in fact, electricity generation, which represents around
25% of the total emissions, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) [3], as shown in Fig. 1.1:
Figure 1.1: Total anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (GtCO2eq/yr) by eco-
nomic sector in 2010 (based on [3]).
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Together with other technologies such as solar photovoltaic (PV), wind energy
plays a crucial role in this transition, in part thanks to the irruption of offshore wind
farms, that are contributing to propel the wind energy potential worldwide. In fact,
the installed wind capacity around the globe has been increased from 432 GW in 2015
to 597 GW by the end of 2018, currently supplying a 14% of Europe’s and 6% of the
world’s total electricity demand [4–6], of which 23 GW corresponds to offshore farms
worldwide [7], with growth expectations of other 8 GW by 2023 [8].
The newly exploitable offshore resource presents significant advantages with re-
spect to that available onshore as it is both more constant and powerful, two very
valuable characteristics for the energy market.
These features combined with the
lower spatial restraints in the sea have allowed the manufacturers to develop bigger
and taller turbines that can be placed further from each other and which already reach
capacities of up to 8, 10 or even 12 MW in the case of General Electric’s Haliade-X,
which can provide energy to 16,000 European households, according to GE [9].
State of the art technologies keep allowing access to more convenient and previ-
ously unexploitable wind resources; while mass installation of offshore bottom-fixed
wind turbines is already a reality, it is now pilot farms and projects with floating
platforms such as Hywind Scotland, IDEOL’s Floatgen, Fukushima FORWARD and
the upcoming PLOCAN Canary Islands wind hub which are exploring and expanding
this market.
Figure 1.2: Main concepts of floating wind turbines [10].
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Motivation
3
The floating concepts, showed in Fig.1.2, present new attractive advantages: they
can be installed in sites where the seabed is too deep for the feasible installation
of bottom-fixed foundations. This way, the turbines can be placed further offshore,
where the wind resource is often of even better quality; and also off the shore of regions
with steep seabeds like Europe’s West coast in the Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean
Sea or California’s coast. In contrast, the main downside of floating technology is the
need of big amounts of material (generally steel) that can enclose enough air to ensure
the whole structure’s buoyancy, thus increasing its cost significantly. Concepts like
Stiesdal’s TetraSpar, about to be tested in Norway, aim to find a solution to this
issue, in this case by reusing old decommissioned turbine towers as floaters [11].
A new twist in the latest offshore floating technologies are the hybrid concepts
that combine different sources of energy, thus allowing the efficient use of resources
for more than a single process: these are the so-called synergies. One of the most
developed concepts is the hybrid wind and wave technology, which combines Wind
Turbine Generators (WTG) and Wave Energy Converters (WEC). This combination
of technologies leads to the following synergies: the possibility of finding a common
regulatory framework for both energy generation methods with regards to the licens-
ing and planning of space and infrastructure; the increase of spatial efficiency of the
energy yield; the improvement of the output power, which is smoother and more re-
liable; and the opening of the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) window of both
devices thanks to the WEC’s waves shadow effect, thus reducing the costs [12, 13].
This leads to the device object of this study: the P80, a semi-submersible hybrid
wind and wave energy production concept designed by Floating Power Plant A/S
(FPP) in Denmark, further analyzed in Section 2.2.
1.1
Motivation
As it is usual in every state-of-the-art technology, the new hybrid concepts currently
struggle to be cost-competitive in the energy market and to prove themselves feasible
so that they can be object of a power generation project. Their competitiveness may
be achieved in different ways: by improving the technology design itself, reducing the
amount of material needed (as mentioned above), or maximizing the usage efficiency
of the existing designs.
The latter is the target of the present study, in which a P80 farm layout optimiza-
tion model has been developed in MATLAB in order to minimize the total energy
generation costs of a project taking into account all the expenses involved, as well
as the technical characteristics of the energy generators, the conditions of the geo-
graphic site of interest, the available wind and wave resources, and the interaction
between the different generators (wind wakes and waves shadows). The optimization
is carried out by means of a Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm, as this or
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
another type of metaheuristic evolutionary algorithm is needed due to the non-linear
characteristics of a problem of this nature.
The indicator subject to be minimized in the model is the Levelized Cost of En-
ergy (LCOE) since, as it is fully explained in Section 3.3.1, it represents the average
generation cost of a unit of energy along the lifetime of a project, thus being a power-
ful indicator that allows investors to compare the variation of costs with time, among
different arrangements and technologies.
1.2
Content
The following sections of the report provide a logical and structured explanation
of the model developed with its further application and discussion: In Chapter 2,
the state of the art P80 concept engineered by FPP is presented.
Following the
technology analysis, in Chapter 3 all the details regarding the model’s construction
are explained: its main parts, the logic behind it, the equations used, the assumptions
made and its consequent limitations. Next, in Chapter 4, after a qualitative study,
the numerical model is applied in a geographical area of relevance for FPP located off
the west coast of the Republic of Ireland: different sites within the area are considered
and an ideal final site and layout are chosen after a description of the optimization
process that was followed.
Finally, a discussion about the results, together with
sensitivity and uncertainty analyses, and a study of the technology’s projection in
the future are made in Chapter 5; and Chapter 6 serves as a summary of the work
carried out, where the conclusions extracted are presented to culminate the report.
Additionally, the appendices contain all the figures and sources of the costs and
technical parameters used in the model: Appendix A shows the data obtained from
the literature research regarding the design and project management, wind turbines,
electrical infrastructure and decommissioning related costs, as well as the discount
rate value and the vessel speeds used. Finally, the sensitive data from FPP is specified
in a confidential appendix.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
The Technology
As it has been anticipated, the hybrid wind and wave concept that has been used in
the model is Floating Power Plant’s P80. Therefore, all its technical and economical
characteristics are implemented as inputs in the model: these are the WTG power
curve, the WEC power output matrix, and all the costs figures related to the device.
These now rather straightforward input parameters are the output magnitudes of a
complex technology that is analyzed in the chapter after a brief introduction to the
company.
2.1
Floating Power Plant A/S
FPP is a rather recent international engineering company based in Denmark, the
United Kingdom and Norway. It emerged in the late 90s from the conception of a
new wave energy generation system, being the company finally established in 2004.
Since then, the first offshore-proven combined floating wind and wave device to have
delivered power to the grid has been engineered, upscaled, and is now being commer-
cialized. The company’s progression is shown in Fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: FPP’s history timeline (diagram based on [14]).
Given its European origins, FPP’s most immediate objectives are several partic-
ular areas off the shore of European countries. However, the company’s target by
==PAGE:18==
6
2 The Technology
2050 is to exploit 20 GW of the worldwide wind and waves resources available in
the offshore areas depicted in Fig. 2.2, where the rather deeper seafloor, the good
wind resource, and the strong waves are best suitable for their hybrid concept, in
comparison to other existing bottom fixed and floating wind energy concepts.
Figure 2.2: FPP’s worldwide potential market [14].
Up to now, the company has developed two models of their hybrid product: the
P37 and the P80 (shown in Fig. 2.3 and 2.4 respectively). The former, named after
”Poseidon” and its 37 m length characteristic, was the first ever wind and wave con-
cept to produce energy for the grid from an offshore environment. It was installed
off the shore of Lolland, Denmark, as a demo device and it has been used for testing,
improvement and implementation of its main components: the wave absorbers and
the Power Take Off system (PTO). All of this with the goal of developing the P80
large-scale production model.
With regards to the P80 version, the product is in early stages of commercial-
ization and the company currently aims at two possible markets for it: on the one
hand, the goal in the long run is to use it in large-scale electricity generation farms
(which is the application for which it is modeled in this study); and on the other, in
the short term, the concept is meant to be used as the energy source for offshore oil
extraction processes in the oil and gas (O&G) sector. This will play a non-negligible
role in the decarbonization of fuel extraction processes, and it will serve for further
testing, quality proving and market demonstration of the technology.
Currently, FPP is involved in several potential projects (the most advanced ones in
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Floating Power Plant A/S
7
the United Kingdom), and latest news are the signature of a Memorandum of Under-
standing with the Oceanic Platform of the Canary Islands (PLOCAN) for a potential
deployment of FPP’s technology in the testing facilities in the Spanish archipelago;
also, together with Aalborg’s University, FPP has been conceded grants from the
Danish EUDP program for developing and testing advanced control strategies for the
waves PTO system, and for further developing FPPs technology towards the O&G
market.
Figure 2.3: P37 concept installed in Lolland, Denmark [14].
Figure 2.4: Virtual model of the commercial P80 concept [14].
==PAGE:20==
8
2 The Technology
2.2
P80: the concept used in the model
Among the several existent types of combined offshore energy generation systems,
the P80 is a hybrid multipurpose floating platform that is capable of extracting en-
ergy simultaneously from the waves (not to be confounded with tidal energy) with its
WEC system, and from the wind, as an offshore wind turbine is also installed on the
structure. The platform is 80 meters wide, the beam along that dimension hosts four
wave absorbers, depicted in red in the figures, two at each side of the central axis
beam, which is 90 m long and where the WTG, the turret (connecting point of the
mooring and electrical output systems) and the third leg of the platform are placed.
In terms of height, depending on its site specific characteristics, the wind turbine hub
can currently be in the order of 100-150 meters tall.
Figure 2.5: Components of the P80 (figure obtained from FPP).
2.2.1
Semi-sub platform
The platform is a semi-submersible (see Fig.1.2) floating structure made of steel that
has the functions of hosting all the components of the P80, ensuring the proper buoy-
ancy of the structure, controlling the draft by means of hollow chambers that can
be filled or emptied of water with the installed water pumps, and, together with the
WECs, passively vanning (rotating) the whole structure around the turret mooring
point, so it faces the main waves direction thanks to the interaction of the waves with
its geometry.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 P80: the concept used in the model
9
The passive vanning is an important and cumbersome behavior as it will limit
the amount of energy that can be extracted from the waves (thus implying a vanning
efficiency), and it will be affected by the direction of not only the different types of
waves (wind and swell waves) but also the direction of the tides.
2.2.2
Wave Energy Converter (WEC)
The WEC is a state of the art commercial design, developed in FPP. As it has been
mentioned, there are four WECs installed in the front side of the P80, each of which
has a capacity of 500-800 kW, a total of 2-3.2 MW per platform. The exact power
magnitude will depend on its ultimate site-specific design, according to the size of the
waves. The main components of the WEC, showed in Fig. 2.6, are presented below.
Figure 2.6: Wave Energy Converter (WEC) components (figure obtained from
FPP).
A 18.5 m wide front pivot Wave Absorber with one degree of freedom that
rotates within its hosting chamber converts the wave energy into pitch kinetic energy
with an efficiency of 60-70% and transmits the waves mechanical energy through a
connecting rod to the PTO.
The Power Take-Off (PTO) system is a complex hydro-electronic device that,
by means of automatic control, actively changes its damping characteristics so as to
==PAGE:22==
10
2 The Technology
absorb as much energy as possible from the waves. It has two main functions: con-
verting the energy carried by the absorber into electricity (reaching PTO efficiencies
of 55-70%), and smoothing out the electricity output.
Naturally, the produced electricity depends on the instantaneous characteristics of
the waves, which (as it is further explained in the following sections) are characterized
by their significant height (Hs) and energy period (Te), consequently originating an
electrical output power matrix that is a function of these two parameters. The maxi-
mum power produced is limited, so when the waves are bigger than the size that the
system is designed for, the PTO automatically locks the wave absorbers to maintain
their integrity.
2.2.3
Wind Turbine Generator (WTG)
The WTG is placed just in front of the intersection of the platform’s two main beams
as showed in Fig. 2.7, the supported capacity being 5-8 MW, which represents the
biggest share of electricity production of the P80. Due to the motion of the WECs,
the system has four extra degrees of freedom on top of the six d.o.f. involved in a
standard floating wind turbine, so the WTG controller needs to be optimized for the
complex motion pattern that this entails.
Figure 2.7: Position of the WTG on the P80 (figure obtained from FPP).
As every wind turbine nowadays, the P80s WTG hub yaws (rotates around its
==PAGE:23==
2.2 P80: the concept used in the model
11
vertical axis) actively to face the wind direction, and therefore its orientation is inde-
pendent from that of the platform. The WTG is also placed very close to the turret
mooring point, so the forces and moments affecting it have the least possible influence
on the passive vanning of the platform.
2.2.4
Turret Mooring and Power Export System
The turret is the point around which the platform has the freedom to rotate and
where the mooring lines and the electrical output power system are connected to the
platform. The turret has the fundamental characteristic of being detachable, so both
the mooring system and the electrical infrastructure can be installed before towing
the actual platform to the site. A buoy keeps the connectable end of the mooring
lines floating at a certain depth under water for their later connection.
FPP works with different configurations of mooring lines, but the one that is
currently most defined and developed is the redundant system, which consists of
three double-lines separated by 120º and is designed to work from 40 to 200 m of
depth. Figure 2.8 shows the disposition and elements of the mooring lines.
Figure 2.8: Mooring lines disposition and components (figure obtained from FPP).
As for the electrical system, the electricity is exported through a 33 kV, 50-70
mm2 flexible stainless steel armored copper cable. In order to allow the platform to
rotate independently from the export cable, a slip ring connects it with the turret.
The cable is stress-terminated and fitted with some buoyancy modules as shown in
Fig. 2.9. The dynamic cable thus floats underwater in a similar way as it occurs with
==PAGE:24==
12
2 The Technology
the mooring lines, and it is further equipped with protections along the area where
it makes contact with the seafloor.
Figure 2.9: Dynamic power cable (figure obtained from FPP).
As a wrap up on the P80, all the above presented devices and technology make up
a device that, as most floating concepts, has its main disadvantage in the excessive
amount of steel needed for its structure, but which presents several characteristics
that make it interesting in an engineering and economical way:
- The provided energy output is smoother and more predictable than that of only-
wind concepts, thus reducing the system balancing costs and improving the power
generation reliability. This is caused by the following facts: the wave energy out-
put is generally flatter; also, as very often wind and waves are not correlated, the
energy produced from both sources balance quite well the peaks and valleys of each
other; on top of this, sea states can be predicted accurately with two to three days in
advance, whereas accurate wind forecasts are available just a few hours ahead [15, 16].
- A direct effect of taking energy from the waves is the flattening of the water
surface behind the platform, i.e. the significant reduction of the waves height behind
the absorbers, which increases considerably the amount of hours when the sea state
is suitable for O&M, something specially sensitive in the winter season. This reduces
==PAGE:25==
2.2 P80: the concept used in the model
13
the platforms downtime and thus increases the Annual Energy Production (AEP).
- The third advantage is the fact that the platform can be built onshore, in the
harbor (which is how it has been modeled) and it can be towed to the site afterwards,
so expensive installation vessels with cranes are not needed in the process. The same
happens when the O&M process requires to tow the platform back to the harbor.
In fact, the feature of being able to regulate the platform’s height from a draft of 8
meters to 24 meters is specially useful for this application.
==PAGE:26==
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
The Model
The model developed in the present study is untangled in this chapter. In general
terms, it consists in a lifetime costs calculation of an offshore hybrid farm project
composed of P80 platforms, in relation to the many inputs and variables involved in
the project, all of which are explained in the following sections. The type of farm that
can be calculated by the model has the following structure: the P80s are connected
to an offshore floating electrical substation through inter-array cables; from the off-
shore substation, an export cable transmits the electricity produced in the farm to
an inland electrical substation which is connected to the grid; furthermore, a harbor
is used to carry out certain necessary operations in the farm along the project that
will also influence the costs.
The model is composed of four main modules: the wind and waves power gener-
ation models, the costs calculation model, and in a different plane, the optimization
algorithm. With the intention of providing a big picture of the model so the reader
can understand its general logic, a diagram of its components is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: General diagram of the model.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 The Model
The waves and wind power production models aim at simulating the physical
and technical phenomena that result in a certain Annual Energy Production (AEP).
This energy output depends, on the one hand, on the quality of the wind and waves
climate, which determines the energy that could be potentially extracted from na-
ture, and on the other, on the characteristics of the devices that convert the available
energy into electricity: the WTG and WEC respectively.
In contrast, the costs model is a series of economical calculations that uses these
AEP results as inputs to find the costs of the project in relation to the energy pro-
duction by means of the LCOE indicator.
Additionally, the energy losses due to
downtime periods and transmission of electricity are calculated in the costs model.
A Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm has been set up to obtain
the minimum LCOE in any site with its specific inputs. It does so by modifying
some decision variables like the platforms layout. The algorithm foundations and its
implementation process are explained in the last section of this chapter.
The model was built under three main principles: first of all, minimizing as much
as possible the many uncertainties involved in this complex calculation, naturally still
assuming some limitations; secondly, reducing its running time, specially for the sake
of the optimization process; and in the third place, developing it in a user friendly
way, so the tool results useful for the company.
The model code was developed in MATLAB. However, in order to achieve the
two latter goals presented above, all the inputs to the model were introduced in the
form of Excel spreadsheets, instead of directly through the code. This way, specific
values that may be reconsidered or subject to change in time, can be easily modified.
In order to avoid the increase of computational time that this may cause, the inputs’
loading is done outside of the optimization loop, as it is shown in Fig.
3.1, only
keeping the strictly necessary calculations in it.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Wave energy model
17
3.1
Wave energy model
The first module to be described is the waves model, where the AEP obtained from
the waves (AEP waves) is calculated. This model is based on a prior model developed
in 2014 between DTU and FPP by Hugo de Sevin [17]. Some modifications were done
to adapt it, improve significantly its computation speed (from about 30 to 2 seconds),
and to match newer physical considerations and findings made in FPP since then. A
diagram with the flows of information of the waves model is shown in Fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Waves model diagram.
3.1.1
Inputs: loading and processing
As it is shown in Fig. 3.2, the inputs to the model are the platforms’ coordinates
(which depend entirely on either the user or the optimization tool, as it is the main
decision variable), the bathymetry and waves characteristics of the site, and the WEC
power output matrix (obtained in FPP), that provides the electrical power output
as a function of the waves characteristics, taking into account the technology and
efficiencies involved in the waves absorber and PTO.
The most straightforward site-dependent input is the bathymetry. It is directly
introduced in the model through a spreadsheet that contains information of the
seafloor depth at every coordinate point in a grid. This data can be obtained from
the Digital Terrain Model of the online portal of the European Marine Observation
and Data Network (EMODnet) [18], that provides the seafloor depth from survey
data-sets, composite DTMs, and Satellite Derive Bathymetry (SDB) data products.
With regards to the waves climate, the parameters that best describe its energy
content are the significant height (Hs), which represents the average height of the
==PAGE:30==
18
3 The Model
third highest waves, and the energy period (Te), a non-direct parameter that describes
the period of the waves [19]. The third characteristic that has much influence in the
potential waves energy exploitation is their direction (θwa), as it will influence the
power output of the WECs depending on their relative position due to the shadow
effect, further explained in this section.
Given the high economic cost of obtaining time series with this information, the
interest of the company from the beginning was to develop the tool using probabilistic
scattered tables instead: three matrices that indicate the probability of occurrence of
three parameters, two by two, i.e.: p (Hs, Tz), p (Hs, θwa), and p (Tz, θwa), being Tz
the zero-crossing period of the wave:
Figure 3.3: Example of a scattered matrix p (Hs, Tz).
In the model, it has been considered that the waves characteristics are, in gen-
eral, decoupled to each other and also to the wind speed. Even though some studies
indicate their dependence in some areas (e.g.: the joint distribution in the Northern
North Sea [20]), in bigger and more open oceans this may not be the case.
These input matrices can be obtained by FPP in the portal of the Danish Hy-
draulic Institute (DHI A/S) [21] for any site, at a cost zero for the company. As
it is recurrently evinced further in the text, this transformed data implies a loss of
information and therefore a slight increase in the uncertainty of the results. Indeed,
the most immediate issue that rises is the fact that the values of p (Hs, Te, θwa) are
unknown. None of the three probabilistic matrices provide the whole picture.
For this reason, in an early stage of the study, the scattered matrices were com-
bined to obtain the probability of occurrence of the three parameters in the form of
a 3-D matrix calculated as follows:
p (Hs, Te, θwa) =
p (Hs, Te) · p (Hs, θwa) · p (Te, θwa)
∑p (Hs, Te) · p (Hs, θwa) · p (Te, θwa)
(3.1)
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Wave energy model
19
Being ∑p (Hs, Te, θwa) = 1. If the 3-D matrix is subsequently multiplied by the
number of hours in a year, the amount of hours of occurrence of each type of wave is
obtained, and thus the AEP waves can be calculated as it is explained further in this
section. The method described in Eqn. (3.1) was checked and compared with a time
series set of data of a specific site owned by FPP, obtaining more than fairly accurate
AEP waves results with an error that remained below 5%.
As the reader may have noticed, previously it has been stated that the energy
content of a wave is best described with the energy period (Te), and the scattered
matrices provide the information for the zero-crossing period (Tz) instead. In fact, in
the WECs power matrix, the power output is expressed as a function of the former:
P (Hs, Te) in MWh.
The two periods are closely linked, but their relation depends on the type of sea
or ocean: the peak enhancement factor (γ) of the site’s wave spectrum defines it and
it is used in the model to convert Tz into Te by means of the following empirical
equation developed by FPP, which was included in the model:
Te = Tz ·
(
0.0017 · γ2 −0.0246 · γ + 1.2093
)
(3.2)
The value of γ depends on the level of development of the sea climate. If the
exact figure in the site is unknown, lower values may be used for more open and fully
developed seas such as the Atlantic Ocean (e.g.: γ = 1.5) where waves are mainly
generated by local winds, and higher ones for fetch-limited wind seas where waves
are not fully developed (e.g.: γ = 3.3), as observed in the Joint North Sea Wave
Observation Project (JONSWAP) for the North Sea [22].
One last parameter is needed as an input to the waves shadow model: the wave-
length (Lw), which depends on Tz and the depth (introduced in this model as the
site’s average depth). On the one hand, the wave’s angular frequency (ω) is expressed
as:
ω = 2 · π
Tz
(3.3)
On the other, the following dispersion equation is defined [19]:
ω2 = g · k(ω) · tanh k(ω) · d
(3.4)
Being g the gravity, and d the depth. A third equation allows then an iterative
process to obtain Lw [17]:
Lw = −2 · π
k
(3.5)
This iteration process, implemented in the original model by de Sevin, has been
optimized and extracted from the optimization loop, being this one of the places
==PAGE:32==
20
3 The Model
where the computational speed was improved.
3.1.2
Waves shadow calculation
The wave shadow effect is defined as the reduction of the waves’ mean height (not so
of their wavelength) in the wake of a WEC as a consequence of the energy extraction
from the waves [13], similarly to what happens with the wind speed at the wake of a
WTG. This reduction of the waves’ height and thus of their energy content is negative
in terms of further energy exploitation, and therefore it needs to be taken into account
when deciding the position of the WECs. The function to calculate this effect is the
main contribution of the original model developed by de Sevin, even though a few
changes have also been made.
The inputs to the function have been introduced previously: the platforms posi-
tions (x and y coordinates) and the discrete values of Lw and θwa. As an output, a
wave height reduction factor Hred (with values between 0 and 1) is obtained at
the position of each WEC, for each wavelength and direction of the waves.
The model is based on the measurements obtained in a test made in Cork, Ireland,
in 2015 [23]. A down-scaled version of the WEC was submitted to waves with different
wavelengths and heights, and the height reduction was measured in the positions
shown in Fig. 3.4:
Figure 3.4: Diagram of the test carried out in Cork, Ireland [17].
In de Sevin’s model, this height reduction, then converted into the Hred fractional
factor, is linearly upscaled, extrapolated and fitted in the two dimensions: along the
direction of the waves (x), and in the perpendicular direction (y); finding finally the
following expression:
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Wave energy model
21
Hred(L, x, y) = 1 + f(L, x) · e−
y2
D(L)
(3.6)
where:
f(L, x) = 1 +
1
A(L) · x + B(L)
(3.7)
The original model was slightly corrected as it was found that a mistake had been
made when introducing one of the test’s distances. Also, the curve fitting function
used was modified in order to increase the computing speed of the calculation.
As a general remark, further concept specific, non-linear hydro-dynamic models
should be subject of development in the future, as the upscaling of the measurements
means an assumption that may result inaccurate. On the other hand, general models
can not be applied in this case, as the behavior of the waves depends directly on the
geometry of the specific type of WEC.
3.1.3
Calculation of the AEP from the waves (AEPwaves)
Once the Hred has been obtained for each wavelength, direction and platform position,
the significant heights (Hs) from the wave scatter will now be platform dependent,
i.e.: the wave resource in each P80 will be different. Therefore, for each platform i,
the new Hs is calculated as follows:
Hs, i (Hs, Te, θwa) = Hs, waves. · Hred, i (Te, θwa)
(3.8)
Being Hs, waves., the significant height values of the wave scatter data. It should
not be forgotten that Te and Lwa are directly related. Each value of Te corresponds
to a value of Lwa, and therefore, even though Hred depends on Lwa, it can also be
expressed as a function of Te as it is done in Eqn. (3.8).
As the yearly number of hours of occurrence of the three characteristics for each
P80 is known, now the wave resource is fully characterized in all the platforms, and
thus the energy output in a year (AEPwaves, in MWh) can be obtained just by
multiplying these time values by the power output corresponding to each Hs and
Te (this information is, of course, stored in the WEC’s power output matrix). The
described calculation has the following shape:
AEPwaves, gross =
n plat
∑
i=1
∑
Hs
∑
Te
∑
θwa
t (Hs, i, Te, i) · P (Hs, Te)
(3.9)
As additional information, this way of calculating the waves energy output has
been implemented in this work. In the original model, the efficiency of the WEC de-
pended on the WEC-to-waves size rate, a consideration that was regarded as doubtful
==PAGE:34==
22
3 The Model
later on in the company. The power output matrix was eventually developed exper-
imentally and therefore it could be integrated in the model in this project, both
providing more reliable results and allowing a faster computation.
3.1.3.1
Vanning losses
The energy production obtained in the previous question is not quite the output value
of the waves model, as there is one last efficiency that needs to be considered. Two
types of waves are generally found in a typical waves climate: the wind and swell
waves. The wind sea is defined as those waves which are generated by the wind
in the area where they are observed or measured, whereas the swell climate is the
result of the propagation of these waves away from the initial area, the latter being
the prominent carrier of energy in the ocean [24].
The two types of waves coexist simultaneously together with the sea tide, and
their directions are, in general, different, very much depending on the site where they
are observed. Bringing the discussion to the P80, the passive vanning behavior of
the platform will align it with an intermediate direction, depending on the amount
of energy carried by each one of the two types of waves, as well as that of the tide.
In terms of energy output, this phenomenon is translated into a reduction of the
exploitable energy of the waves. Figure 3.5 shows the directional efficiency of the
WEC when it is not aligned with the incoming waves.
Figure 3.5: Efficiency as a function of vanning misalignment (figure obtained from
FPP).
As the waves input data is not detailed enough (it only contains mean probabilis-
tic values), the exact energy output loss cannot be calculated in the model and an
assumption needs to be made based on other previously analyzed full sets of data.
After consulting with the company, it was concluded that the vanning efficiency gen-
erally lays in the range of 85-95%, an energy loss not negligible. In order to remain
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Wave energy model
23
in the safe side, a value of an 85% of efficiency was adopted in the model.
The vanning efficiency (effvan) is applied on the gross annual energy production
from waves calculated above, obtaining the final AEPwaves, the output of the waves
model:
AEPwaves = AEPwaves, gross · effvan(%)
(3.10)
==PAGE:36==
24
3 The Model
3.2
Wind energy model
Concurrently with the waves model, the Annual Energy Production from the wind
(AEPwind) is calculated in the second part of the model. Its proper calculation is
specially relevant since, as it has been mentioned in Section 2.2.3, the energy from
the wind represents the biggest share of the electricity generated in the P80. The
computing time of the model is kept under 1 second, something very convenient for
the optimization loop.
Figure 3.6: Wind model diagram.
3.2.1
Data inputs
As it is depicted in Fig. 3.6, the inputs to the model are the WTG’s coordinates (plat-
form’s coordinates), the site’s characteristics (in this case, only the wind resource is
relevant), and the WTG specifications, which include the power curve, thrust coeffi-
cient curve, hub height and rotor diameter.
The power (P (w.s.)) and thrust coefficient (CT (w.s.)) curves provide in-
formation about the power produced and the thrust forces experimented by a WTG
as a function of the wind speed (w.s.), the latter being due to the pressure difference
between the front and the back of the rotor. As an example, Fig. 3.7 shows these two
curves for a simulated 8 MW WTG being developed currently in the company [25].
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Wind energy model
25
Figure 3.7: Power and thrust coefficient curves of the WTG being modeled between
FPP and DTU (graph based on [25]).
The 8 MW maximum values of the power curve determines the capacity of the
WTG. Also, cut-in and cut-out wind speeds of 4 and 25 m/s can be observed: these
magnitudes represent respectively the minimum profitable w.s. and the maximum
working w.s. in which the safety is secured.
Figure 3.8: Extract of a probabilistic wind resource matrix with wind speeds from
0 to 20 m/s and wind directions from 0 to 150º.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 The Model
Regarding the wind resource, similarly to the waves scattered matrices, the in-
put to the model consists of a matrix that provides the probability of occurrence of
every wind speed and direction p (w.s., θwi) at a certain height, the only two param-
eters needed to obtain the energy content of the wind in the model. An example of
such matrix is shown in Fig. 3.8. This information is usually not found in this shape,
but rather in regional Generalized Wind Climates (GWC) or time series. In Section
4.2.2 it is explained in detail how the wind resource was obtained and processed for
its use in the case study.
An assumption is being made with regards to the wind resource. As the P80
concept is generally meant to be used at seabeds deeper than those suitable for
bottom-fixed concepts, it is assumed that the location of any site in the model is far
offshore enough for the wind climate to be considered identical at every point in the
site. After consulting with experts in Risø it was found that, as a rule of thumb, this
assumption can be made from distances to shore 100 times the height of the WTG,
i.e.: 10 km for a hub height of 100 m.
Therefore, just a single matrix of information is needed for the whole farm site,
assuming all the probabilistic values of wind speeds and directions identical for every
position.
This means an important advantage, since otherwise, as it is generally
done in onshore and near-shore wind farms, the regional GWC would need to be
transformed into a localized wind climate at each point, being influenced by the
different land elevations, obstacles, roughness lengths and atmospheric conditions
[26]. This would either complicate the coding significantly and increase the running
time or it would make necessary the use of external tools.
3.2.2
Wind wakes calculation
In comparison to the wave energy sector, both the research and the industry scenes
of the wind energy field are much more developed, and therefore there are more cal-
culation tools available in the market. Focusing on the calculation of the Annual
Energy Production of wind farms, WAsP [27] (developed and supported in DTU) is
the reference software nowadays. In an early stage of the project, the possibility of
linking WAsP to the model was considered in order to carry out the wind related
calculations. However, this was soon discarded given the different coding language
embedded in the software, and the incompatibility of this option with running fast
enough optimization loops.
Alternately, it was possible to get access and make use of two MATLAB codes:
the code developed by de Sevin [17] together with his waves model, and a function
developed by A. Peña in the Wind Energy department of DTU in Risø, Denmark [28].
In a similar way as the waves shadow function does, these codes calculate the wind
speed reduction behind a WTG due to its wake. They are both based on the so-called
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Wind energy model
27
PARK calculation developed by N.O. Jensen, which uses momentum deficit theory
to predict the flow field, assuming a linear expansion of the wake behind the rotor [29].
De Sevin’s and Peña’s models were compared with the results obtained after car-
rying out identical calculations in WAsP, which also makes use of the same theory.
Considering these results as a reference, different arrangements with different num-
bers of platforms, positions and wind resources were tried, obtaining significantly
smaller errors in the wake losses calculation (and therefore in the AEPwind calcula-
tion) in Peña’s model. Given the results shown in Table 3.1, Model 2 (Peña’s) was
considered as a reliable model that could be used with guarantees in the study.
Net AEP wind
Wake Losses
Model 1
Model 2
Model 1
Model 2
Case 1
1.53%
0.75%
17.56%
8.17%
Case 2
0.14%
0.16%
3.33%
5.33%
Case 3
1.59%
0.86%
18.95%
9.47%
Case 4
1.23%
0.70%
15.58%
8.44%
Case 5
0.33%
0.08%
5.35%
0.15%
Maximum
1.59%
0.86%
18.95%
9.47%
Minimum
0.14%
0.08%
3.33%
0.15%
Average
0.67%
0.35%
9.84%
3.49%
Table 3.1: Error of wakes models with respect to calculation in WAsP in five differ-
ent scenarios (Model 1: de Sevin’s; Model 2: Peña’s).
As it has already been advanced, the wake losses are translated into a reduced
speed (V ) at a distance (X) behind the WTG, which depends on the free stream
speed (U), the WTG’s diameter (D), the thrust coefficient (CT ), and the wake decay
coefficient (k). The reduced wind speed is then calculated as follows [29]:
V = U ·
[
1 −
(
1 −
√
1 −CT
) (
D
D + 2 · k · X
)2]
(3.11)
A scheme with all the variables is shown in Fig. 3.9. The only non-straightforward
parameter involved in the calculation is the wake decay coefficient (k), which deter-
mines both the downstream reduction and also the wake’s opening angle. In principle,
this value is determined by semi-empirical means with the following expression [29]:
k =
A
ln (h/z0)
(3.12)
Where A ≈0.5 is a constant, h is the hub height and z0 is the roughness length,
which, in the offshore cases, would be very close to zero. However, according to the
==PAGE:40==
28
3 The Model
literature, the wake decay coefficient can be simply approximated to a general value
of k = 0.05 in offshore wind farms [28], and so it was done in the model.
Figure 3.9: Wind speed in the wake of a WTG and parameters involved [29].
A couple of general remarks about the wakes model shall be made: some mod-
ifications were done so the particular energy output from each WTG can now also
be found, information that can be useful so as to find the efficiencies of the differ-
ent WTGs, or even to eventually particularize electrical transmission losses at each
platform’s export cable; most importantly, it was found that in order to get results
with enough accuracy, the probabilistic input matrix should provide directional infor-
mation at least every 10◦. Otherwise, directional empty areas may result in hidden
WTGs for the model, meaning wake losses calculation errors.
3.2.3
Calculation of the AEP from the wind (AEPwind)
Once the reduced wind speed w.s.red has been obtained at every WTG for every w.s.
and θwi according to the relative positions of all the platforms, the energy output
(AEPwind) is calculated by multiplying these wind speeds with the WTG’s power
curve, the probability matrix and the number of hours in a year:
AEPwind =
nplat
∑
i=1
∑
w.s.
∑
θwi
w.s.red, i · P (w.s.) · t (w.s., θwi)
(3.13)
In this case, no other efficiencies are involved in the wind energy output alone.
However, as it is explained in the next section, further energy losses due to downtime
periods and electrical transmission are applied to the final merged energy output
which, at this point, after the wakes and shadow effect (AEPgross = AEPafter wakes),
is simply calculated as follows:
AEPgross = AEPafter wakes = AEPwind + AEPwaves
(3.14)
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Costs model
29
3.3
Costs model
The costs model is the last module inside the tool’s optimization loop and, as its name
indicates, all the costs involved in the farm project (from before the start until the end
of its lifetime) are calculated by it: the ones due to the capital expenses (CAPEX),
those derived from the operational expenditures (OPEX) and the costs associated to
the inevitable energy losses due to the generators’ downtime periods and transmission
of the electricity. The costs model also continues the energy flow: the gross power
generation has been calculated in the wind and wave models alongside with their
respective wakes and shadow losses, and now these energy inputs see individual yearly
decrements due to the mentioned downtime and transmission losses as illustrated in
Fig. 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Energy flow along the model.
The inputs to the costs model are, on the one hand, the gross AEP from wind
and waves after the wakes and shadow losses (constant along the years at this point);
and on the other, the values relative to the site characterization (its bathymetry and
coordinates, and the inland substation, harbor and shore positions), and more than
140 costs related figures, many of which have been obtained directly from FPP and
compared with existent models from external literature (the values used in the model
are depicted in Appendix A). The output is no other than the Levelized Cost of Energy
(LCOE), arguably the most useful indicator for seeking financing, as it represents the
average lifetime cost in the lifetime of a project, and it is ideal to compare the costs
of different technologies [30, 31].
3.3.1
LCOE
The LCOE, expressed in AC/MWh, indicates the average cost of the energy produced
along the lifetime of a project, and therefore, the minimum average price at which
the energy should be sold in order for the project to be profitable [32]. Unlike other
more simple indicators, the LCOE takes into account the time value of money, as it
weights the annual expenses TC t in each year t by means of a discount rate r, which
is determined by the investors according to the inflation and the estimated risk of the
project. The LCOE is calculated in the model as follows:
==PAGE:42==
30
3 The Model
LCOE =
∑LT
t=0
T Ct
(1+r)t
∑LT
i=0
qt
(1+r)t
(3.15)
Where q t represents the yearly energy production in period t, and LT the lifetime
of the project. As a clarification, the discount rate is a purely economic factor and
the apparent discounting of the energy production in Eqn. (3.15) is just a result of
algebraic rearrangement.
Even though some sources include further costs, neither taxes nor any other socio-
economic factors have been considered in this study for being often subjective or highly
dependent on the country or area. Therefore, it was concluded that including these
terms would only increase the uncertainty of the results. The calculation method-
ology of the costs (sorted into CAPEX and OPEX) and energy transformations are
exposed below.
3.3.2
CAPEX
The capital expenditures of a project involve all the investment, administrative, ac-
quisition and installation costs that make the project possible, before and along the
project’s lifetime . With regards to this model, almost all the costs are considered
to be executed in the year immediately before the start of the project (i.e.: year 0).
The exception is the so-called decommissioning cost, executed in the last year of the
project, and which is often regarded as an independent expenditure (DECEX). How-
ever, as its influence in the final LCOE value is very small (specially after discounting
it), this expenditure has been calculated as a part of the CAPEX in this study.
The CAPEX categories considered in the model are the following: design and
project management expenses (C P M), wind turbine costs (C W T G), P80 costs (CP 80),
mooring costs (CMoor), costs associated to the electrical infrastructure (C EI), instal-
lation costs (CInst) and decommissioning costs (C Decom); all of them expressed in
AC. The installation costs associated to each one of these categories are calculated
separately. The simple CAPEX calculation is shown below, i being the year of the
expenditure:
CAPEXi = C P M, i+C W T G, i+CP 80, i+CMoor, i+C EI, i+CInst, i+C Decom, i (3.16)
Below, the calculation of the different introduced costs categories is explained.
3.3.2.1
Design and project management
This expenditure includes all the administrative, design, engineering and project man-
agement related costs and also all the expenses originated from the site specific analy-
ses and studies that are needed before the start of the project: these analyses have to
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Costs model
31
do with resource data acquisition, the environment, the parts involved/ affected by
the project and so on [33, 34]. The design and project management costs are applied
in year zero and they are divided into concession (C concession) and design (C design)
costs:
C P M = C concession + C design
(3.17)
where:
C concession [AC] : costs relative to the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA),
site analyses (bathymetry measurements, meteorological mast,
wind monitoring), surveys, site-specific design engineering,
administrative fees, grid analyses and consent application.
C design [AC]
: FPP’s total margin.
The two new categories are calculated in the model as follows:
C concession = C con., cap · Cap T ot
(3.18)
C design = Margin · (C P 80 + C transp + C ass)
(3.19)
with:
C con., cap [AC/MW] : estimation of concession costs per capacity unit.
Cap T ot [MW]
: total capacity of the farm.
Margin [%]
: FPP’s margin as a percentage of investment costs.
C P 80 [AC]
: acquisition cost of the P80.
C transp [AC]
: cost of components’ transportation to assembly site.
C ass [AC]
: P80 assembly costs.
3.3.2.2
Wind turbines
The acquisition cost of the wind turbines (C W T G, in AC) is one of the most relevant
expenditures in the lifetime of the project. Naturally, this is a pure investment cost
and it is therefore applied in year 0. In the present study, as in most works of the
kind, it is calculated as a linear function of the wind turbine capacity. Since it is
linear, for the whole farm, the cost is found by multiplying the total capacity of the
WTGs of the farm (Cap wind, in MW) by a considered cost per capacity (C W T cap.,
in AC/MW):
C W T G = C W T cap. · Cap W T
(3.20)
As a reminder, the figure of the cost per capacity used in the model and the logic
behind it can be found in Appendix A.2.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 The Model
3.3.2.3
P80
The acquisition costs involved in the P80 platform and WEC (C P 80, in AC) are nu-
merous and very diverse. However, they are modeled in a very simple way, and, as
most of the CAPEX, they are also applied in year 0 of the project. The costs figures
are obtained from FPP:
C P 80 = C plat · n plat + C site
(3.21)
As it can be inferred from Eqn. (3.21), some of them are unit dependent (C plat, in
AC/P80) and therefore, they are multiplied by the number of platforms (n plat). These
include the acquisition costs of the platform (hull fabrication, corrosion protection
and marine systems outfitting), the absorbers (fabrication, hull bearing, locking and
control systems), the PTO (hydraulic and control systems, connection rod and yoke),
the power system, and some data acquisition related costs.
On the other hand, there are other costs that are considered constant, so they do
not depend on the size of the farm (C site, in AC). These are the costs associated to
condition monitoring and SCADA system.
3.3.2.4
Mooring system
The mooring costs (C Moor, in AC), also obtained from the company, are divided into
the anchor acquisition costs, which include the six anchor kits needed in each P80
unit; and the mooring line costs that are considered to increase linearly with the
depth. Again, this cost is applied in year 0:
C Moor =
n plat
∑
i=1
C anch. + C lines · l
d · d i
(3.22)
having:
C anch. [AC/P80] : fixed cost of a platform’s mooring system (anchors, shackles,
buoyancy elements, etc.).
C lines [AC/m]
: length dependent cost of the mooring lines (which includes both
the chains and polyester lines costs, depicted in Fig. 2.8).
l/d
: linear rate of mooring lines length per seafloor depth.
d i [m]
: depth under platform i.
In reality, attending to site dependent physical conditions (like natural frequencies
originated from the wind and the waves, or the seabed characteristics), the length of
the mooring line would not necessarily increase linearly with the depth. Instead, its
buoyancy, horizontal length, and the length and size of its elements would be designed
according to these site specific parameters. However, as this is clearly off the scope of
the present study, and after consulting with experts in the company, a linear growth
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Costs model
33
has been assumed in this case, making use of an existent design of a 100 m depth as
the base case.
3.3.2.5
Electrical infrastructure
The investment costs associated to the electrical infrastructure (EI) are an intricate
aspect to model as, on the one hand, there is not much information available on the
prices of certain key components, and on the other, depending on the country and
even on the year of commissioning, the state may assume all the costs, part of them,
or the developer might have to take charge of the whole investment.
For this reason and since it represents an expense of the project, independently
of who takes responsibility for it, the costs associated to the electrical infrastructure
(C EI, in AC), are included in the LCOE calculation, although it could be argued that
the inland infrastructure costs (underground bedding or overhead lines) are not in-
cluded. The reason is that they were considered way too uncertain and completely
site dependent.
The expenses involved are the following: acquisition costs of inter-array cables
(C MV ), offshore and onshore export cable (C HV ), offshore substation (C sub),
and other costs (C el. other), which include those associated to devices like reactive
power dynamic compensators, connector sets and so on [35, 36]. All of them are
expressed in AC.
C EI = C MV + C HV + C sub. + C el. other
(3.23)
Regarding the inter-array and export cables, both of their costs are modeled as
a linear function of their length, having been the latter considered identical in its
onshore and offshore stretch, so both distances are considered in the calculation. In
the case of the inter-array cables, they are modeled as independent cables that connect
each platform with the offshore substation, since this is the preferred disposition in
the company at the moment given the quite dynamic characteristics of the concept.
C MV =
n plat
∑
i=1
l MV, i · C dyn. cab.
(3.24)
C HV = C HV, length · (l HV off. + l HV on.)
(3.25)
with:
l MV, i [km]
: length of the inter-array cable of each platform.
C dyn. cab. [AC/km]
: acquisition cost per length of the inter-array MV dynamic
cables (described in Section 2.2.4).
C HV, length [AC/km] : acquisition cost per length of the export HV cable.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 The Model
l HV off. [km] : length of subsea HV export cable (distance from offshore
substation to shore).
l HB, on [km] : length of inland HV export cable (distance from shore to onshore
substation).
The offshore substation is one of the project’s cost components that was found to
be more difficult to obtain costs information for, not to talk about intending to find
data for all the devices involved in it. After some research was made, it was decided
to use the method proposed by Gonzalez-Rodriguez [33], as it uses costs data from
several existent projects as a reference. Exceptionally, as in this case its acquisition
expense includes the mooring costs, they are not taken into account in their pertinent
section.
C sub. = 539, 000 · Cap 0.687
T ot
(3.26)
Being Cap T ot, in MW, the total capacity of the farm (including both the wind
and waves capacity). Finally, a platform dependent value (C el. other plat., AC/P80),
obtained from FPP, was used to calculate the costs of the additional equipment
introduced above:
C el. other = C el. other plat. · nplat
(3.27)
3.3.2.6
Installation costs
After the acquisition costs, depicted in the previous sections, the installation costs
are calculated. They are those expenses associated to both the human workforce and
the technology used in the transportation, assembly, connection and testing of all the
infrastructure involved in the construction of the project before it has started. Any
other operation on the infrastructure during the lifetime of the project is considered
as part of the operational expenses (OPEX), presented later in this chapter.
Figure 3.11: Flowchart of the installation process (based on information from FPP).
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Costs model
35
An approximate flowchart of the installation process considered most optimal in
the company can be seen in Figure 3.11.
The different processes depicted in the
flowchart divide the expenses into: the cost of transportation of the components
to the assembly site (C transp.), assembly costs (C ass.), mooring installation
costs (C inst. moor.), costs of installation of the EI (C inst. elec.), costs of on-site
platforms installation (C inst. P 80), and commissioning or connection costs
(C connec.).
C Inst. = C transp. + C ass. + C inst. moor. + C inst. elec. + C inst. P 80 + C connec. (3.28)
As it was advanced in Chapter 2, one of the advantages of the P80 is the possibility
of assembling it in the harbor and afterwards towing the whole structure to the
site, thus avoiding the costly offshore assembly process, but of course, still involving
some assembly and component transportation related costs. The latter component is
modeled as a percentage of the acquisition costs of the devices involved (WTG, P80,
EI and mooring system), this being an estimation made by FPP:
C transp. = 10% · (C W T G + C P 80 + C E.I. + C Moor)
(3.29)
As for the assembly costs, that of a single P80 (C ass. P 80, in AC/platform) is
defined by the company taking into account all the devices involved in the process,
and the personnel and infrastructure needed for it:
C ass. = C ass. P 80 · n plat
(3.30)
Moving on to the installation processes that take place on-site, the mooring sys-
tems of all the platforms and the substation are installed before the rest of the infras-
tructure is transported to the site, and as it was also mentioned before, its attachable
end is left floating underwater at a desired depth:
C inst. moor = C inst. anch. · (n plat + 1)
(3.31)
Being C inst. anch., in AC/P80, the anchors installation cost per platform and sub-
station. It is assumed that the mooring costs of the substation and the platforms are
identical, which probably means overestimating the ones relative to the substation,
remaining this way in the safe side, as the loads on the floating substation are quite
smaller.
The installation of the EI (C inst. elec, in AC) is divided in four different processes:
on the one hand, the offshore HV export cable (Cinst. HV ), the MV inter-array cables
(C inst. MV ) and the onshore export cables (Cinst. HV, on.) are installed in different
operations, and on the other, the substation is considered to be installed as if it was
just one more platform, just towing it from the harbor, and this is therefore modeled
later on.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 The Model
C inst. elec = C inst. MV + Cinst. HV + Cinst. HV, on.
(3.32)
Being the three components calculated as follows:
C inst. MV = C inst. dy. cab. · n plat
(3.33)
C inst. HV = C inst. HV fix. + C c.l. vessel ·
(l HV
s c. l.
+
dharb
s ret. c.l.
· 24−1
)
(3.34)
Cinst. HV, on = C HV on. · inst rate
(3.35)
with:
C inst. dy. cab. [AC/P80] : inter array cables installation cost per platform (data from
FPP).
C inst. HV fix. [AC]
: cable laying vessel and team mobilization cost and other
fixed costs.
C c.l. vessel [AC/day]
: daily cost of cable laying vessel and team.
l HV [km]
: HV subsea export cable length.
s c. l. [km/h]
: cable laying speed.
s ret. c.l. [km/h]
: cruise speed of cable laying vessel.
inst rate [%]
: estimated costs of installation of the onshore EI as a
percentage of the acquisition costs (again, this figure is
hard to model as there is very little information about this
type of cost).
Finally, once the fixed part of the installation is prepared, the platforms and the
substation are ready to be towed to the site and prepared to operate. Below, the
calculation of the costs of both processes is shown:
C inst. P 80 = (n plat + 1) ·
[
C inst. P 80 fix+
+ C tow vess. ·
(d harbor
s tow
+
dharb
s ret. t.v.
)
· 24−1
]
(3.36)
C connec. = C con. P 80 · n plat
(3.37)
having:
C inst. P 80 fix [AC/P80] : costs per P80 of towing team, vessel, equipment, etc.
C tow vess. [AC/day]
: towing vessel cost per day.
s tow [km/h]
: towing speed of P80 and offshore substation.
s ret. t.v. [km/h]
: return speed of towing vessel.
C con. P 80 [AC/P80]
: testing and commissioning costs per P80 (from FPP).
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Costs model
37
3.3.2.7
Decommissioning
In the last place with regards to the CAPEX, the decommissioning costs are obtained.
It is worth reminding once again that these costs are applied in the last year of the
lifetime of the project, and therefore, due to the presence of the discount rate, their
influence is quite low in the LCOE value.
Now all the devices and infrastructure installed in the project need to be removed.
Therefore, the categories of decommissioning costs are the EI (C d. grid), the plat-
forms (C d. P 80), the mooring system (C d. moor.) and the paperwork involved in
the process (C d. other). All of them, once again, expressed in AC.
C Decom = C d. grid + C d. P 80 + C d. moor. + C d. other
(3.38)
In the same way as it was done with the installation costs, the offshore substa-
tion towing process is calculated as if it was one more platform. Therefore, the EI
decommissioning costs can be modeled by separating that due to the MV inter-array
cables (C d. grid MV ) and the one associated to the removal of the HV export cable
(C d. grid HV ):
C d. grid = C d. grid MV + C d. grid HV
(3.39)
C d. grid MV = C d. g. mob. + C d. g. day ·
⌈(
l MV
s cab. rem.
+ 2 · d harb
s ret.
)
· 24−1⌉
(3.40)
C d. grid HV = C d. g. mob. + C d. g. day ·
⌈(
l HB
s cab. rem.
+ d harb
s ret.
)
· 24−1⌉
(3.41)
being:
C d. g. mob. [AC]
: mobilization costs of cable removal vessel and team.
C d. g. day [AC/day] : daily cost of cable removal vessel and team.
l MV [km]
: total length of inter array cables.
s cab. rem. [km/h] : cable removal speed of the vessel.
d harb [km]
: distance from site to harbor.
s ret. [km/h]
: cruise speed of the cable removal vessel.
l HV [km]
: length of subsea HV export cable.
It is assumed that the huge amounts of decommissioned steel and other materials
from the platforms is collected by external companies for which these are valuable,
and therefore, for the sake of this model, the direct decommissioning costs associated
to the P80s and offshore substation (C d. P 80, in AC) are just the expenditure of towing
them back to harbor, which is calculated as follows:
==PAGE:50==
38
3 The Model
C d. P 80 = C d. P 80 mob + (n plat + 1) · C d. P 80 day ·
⌈( d harb
s tow. ret.
+ d harb
s tow
)
· 24−1⌉
(3.42)
with:
C d. P 80 mob [AC]
: mobilization cost of towing vessel and operations team.
C d. P 80 day [AC/day] : daily cost of towing vessel and team.
s tow. ret. [km/h]
: cruise speed of towing vessel.
s tow [km/h]
: tug speed of towing vessel.
Similarly as in their installation process, the cost of decommissioning the mooring
systems of both the platforms and offshore substation is calculated by means of a cost
per platform (C r. anch., in AC/P80) derived from removing the anchors and turret in
each of them:
C d. moor. = (n plat + 1) · C r. anch.
(3.43)
The last expenditure with regards to the decommissioning process is that derived
from surveys, reports and the bureaucracy that comes with it, being estimated by
FPP a cost per platform (C r. surv. in AC/P80):
C d. other = n plat · C r. surv.
(3.44)
3.3.3
OPEX
The Operational Expenditures (OPEX) include the costs associated to all types of
maintenance and any other operation along the lifetime of a project (e.g.: inspections,
checks, testing, cleaning, painting, replacement of components, etc.), being often di-
vided into planned and unplanned or unscheduled O&M [37]. These maintenance
operations have an associated energy generation downtime, as they often involve a
failure or require shutting down the generators. The generation downtime is thus
modeled together with the O&M costs as part of the OPEX.
As it has been done when modeling the CAPEX, and more relevantly in this case
due to its distribution along the years, the annual costs associated to the OPEX are
calculated individually every year, so they can be discounted in the LCOE calculation
as explained above. Thus, in the broadest level, for each year i in the project’s lifetime,
the maintenance operations (O&M i, in AC) and their associated downtime (DT i, in
hours) are calculated as follows:
O&M i = O&M planned, i + O&M unplanned, i
(3.45)
DT i = DT planned, i + DT unplanned, i
(3.46)
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Costs model
39
Initially, it was considered to carry out an O&M strategy optimization, however
the uncertainty associated to the components’ failure rates, their dependence on the
climate, and the lack of information regarding the interaction between the different
devices involved in the technology, made the optimization attempt too unreliable. For
this reason, estimations from FPP were regarded as the best option for the present
study, even though these operational strategies have never actually been carried out
before. The strategy is based on experience with similar structures in the offshore
wind energy and O&G sectors, and it considers the materials and devices used in the
concept and their behavior under typical offshore conditions.
Planned O&M and Downtime
Three types of planned operations are defined in FPP’s maintenance strategy, each
of which presents a specific estimated cost and downtime. They are the following:
• An annual operation that involves inspections of the platform’s corrosion,
the WTG and the WEC, as well as maintenance of the ballast, electrical and
cooling systems.
• An intermediate survey every 3-4 years, which consists in a further analysis
of some elements like the mooring lines and the EI.
• And a major inspection every 7 years that involves towing the platform to the
harbor for an exhaustive onshore examination and the replacement of a number
of internal components.
Currently, it is considered that the major operations could be potentially avoid-
able, as it is not clear whether the full process of towing the platforms to land will
be strictly necessary or not. For this reason, its impact in the LCOE is analyzed in
the sensitivity analysis further in the report (Section 5.1).
For each year i in the project’s lifetime, the planned O&M and its associated
downtime periods are expressed as follows:
O&M planned, i = C O&M site + n plat · C O&M P 80, i
(3.47)
DT planned, i = t O&M, i
(3.48)
being:
C O&M site [AC/year]
: the fixed yearly O&M cost: port charges, warehouse,
fixed costs of vessels and personnel...
C O&M P 80, i [AC/P80/year] : the O&M cost per platform in year i, which may
include costs of yearly, intermediate and/or major
operations, depending on the year.
t O&M, i [h/year]
: hours of downtime in year i, which may include
those due to yearly, intermediate and/or major
operations, depending on the year.
==PAGE:52==
40
3 The Model
Unplanned O&M and Downtime
In the case of the operations due to unexpected or sudden breakdowns, the costs
and their associated downtimes are implemented by sorting the failures into five dif-
ferent severity levels: remote reset, minor fault/ inspection, medium fault
(module replacement), large fault (offshore repair), and major fault (harbor re-
pair). Each one of these categories presents a certain occurrence probability that is
translated in the model as a number of incidents per year.
The yearly unplanned O&M costs and downtime are thus implemented in the
model as shown in Equations (3.49) and (3.50):
O&Munplanned =
5
∑
i=1
{
n plat·f fail, i·
[
C fixed, i + C h, i ·
(
t rep, i + d harb
s go, i
+ d harb
s ret., i
)] }
(3.49)
DTunplanned =
5
∑
i=1
[
f fail, i ·
(
t rep, i + d harb
s go, i
)]
(3.50)
with:
f fail, i
: estimated number for failures per year for failure type i.
C fixed, i [AC/P80] : fixed repair cost per failure for failure type i (mobilization
costs, etc.).
C h, i [AC/h/P80] : time dependent cost for failure type i (it includes personnel,
vessel costs, etc.).
t rep, i [h]
: repair time for failure type i.
d harb [km]
: average distance to harbor.
s go, i [km/h]
: going speed of the vessel used in failure type i.
s ret., i [km/h]
: return speed of the vessel used in failure type i (it involves
towing the platform in the case a major fault).
Two assumptions were made regarding the downtime: it is considered that the
O&M affects the energy production of the whole P80, and not only the individual
wind or waves energy production, as many operations may need a full shut down of
the platform for control or safety related reasons, giving it, this way, a conservative
approach; on top of this, the downtime is modeled as a number of hours that represents
a fraction of an entire year, being this figure multiplied by the gross energy generation
of the farm (after wakes and waves shadow losses) to obtain the total energy loss,
instead of particularizing the energy output of each platform. The AEP after wake
losses and downtime is then the following:
AEP after DT, i = AEP gross −
(
AEPgross · DT i
8760
)
(3.51)
where AEP gross, in MWh, is the energy output in a year after deducting the
wakes and waves shadow losses.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Costs model
41
3.3.4
Transmission losses
The transmission losses are the last step before obtaining the net AEP of a farm, and
therefore they are included in the costs submodel after discounting the O&M down-
time from the gross AEP. In reality, they directly depend on many factors: power
input of the transmission lines, temperature, material of the cables, grid frequency,
insulation thickness, rated values and other characteristics that make its precise cal-
culation very complex. For this reason, as a fair approximation that also allows quick
computing, the following simplified loss model is used to calculate the transmission
losses (P loss, in MW) [38]:
P loss = P0 · l + C0 · l3 + Pk · l · S2
in
S2n
(3.52)
being:
P0, C0
: no load parameters that depend on the cable’s rated voltage.
Pk
: load parameter that depends on the cable’s rated voltage.
l [km]
: cable’s length.
Sin [VA] : cable’s input apparent power.
Sn [VA] : cable’s rated apparent power (=
√
3 · Vr · Ir, for a triphase system).
As the input data of neither the wind nor the waves are time series but non-
joint probabilistic data, the value of the simultaneous power output of both at all
times is by all means unknown. On top of this, as the input apparent power in Eqn.
(3.52) is squared, the simultaneous power outputs of both technologies cannot just
be summed afterwards to obtain the total power losses. As a compromise solution,
an assumption was made to estimate the power in the cables (Sin): as wind energy
production predominates, the wind power output was up-scaled by the P80-to-wind
capacity rate and it was considered as the total power output of the wind farm, as
it is defined in Eqn. (3.56) and (3.57). Subsequently, the number of hours per year
for each power output case (cables power input) is obtained from the wind scatter,
so the yearly transmission losses (T losses, i, in MWh) are implemented as follows:
T losses, i = T l. MV, i + T l. HV, i
(3.53)
T l. MV, i =
∑
w.s.
∑
θ wi.
P loss, ins.(S in MV ) · t w.s., θ wi.
(3.54)
T l. HV, i =
∑
w.s.
∑
θ wi.
P loss, ins.(S in HV ) · t w.s., θ wi.
(3.55)
with:
T l. MV, i [MWh] : transmission losses in the inter array cables.
T l. HV, i [MWh] : transmission losses in the export cable.
P loss, ins. [MW] : power loss calculated as in Eqn. 3.52 (it is a function of the
power input, and cable’s characteristics).
==PAGE:54==
42
3 The Model
t w.s., θ wi. [h/year] : yearly hours of a wind speed and direction.
S in MV [VA]
: inter-array cables’ input apparent power.
S in HV [VA]
: export cable’s input apparent power.
Taking, as mentioned before, the input power of both the inter-array and export
cables as the wind energy production (which of course depends on the wind speed)
up-scaled to simulate the capacity of the platform:
S in MV = S wind (w. s.) · Cap P 80
Cap wind
(3.56)
S in HV =
n plat
∑
i=1
S wind, i (w. s.) · Cap P 80
Cap wind
(3.57)
being:
S wind, i [MW]
: power output of turbine i at a certain wind speed and direction.
Cap P 80 [MW] : P80 capacity.
Cap wind [MW] : WTG capacity.
The presence of reactive power implicates various undesired effects in the electri-
cal infrastructure: it increases the transmission losses of the cables and it also puts
in risk the safety of the grid [35]. For these reasons, sets of power factor correction
capacitors are often used to maintain the reactive power at low levels, and thus, the
power factor (cos(ϕ)) values as close to 1 as possible. Normally, figures in the range
of 0.85 to 0.95 are obtained [39, 40]. In order to remain in the safe side, a power factor
of 0.85 has been used in the present study. This parameter has a direct effect on the
transmission losses and on the maximum output capacity of a farm for a given export
cable, as the apparent power in the cable depends on it (S cable = P gen./cos(ϕ)).
After discounting the transmission losses, the net AEP for every year along the
lifetime is obtained. As introduced previously, it is the energy that will actually be
sold to the grid and it is therefore the value used in the LCOE calculation.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Optimization algorithm
43
3.4
Optimization algorithm
Once the full LCOE calculation model is ready, it can be executed in two different
ways: the user can define manually all the inputs (platforms coordinates, substation
position, export cable to be used, harbor chosen for operations, inland substation
chosen...) and run de model to find a solution; or certain variables can be left open
to modification by an optimization algorithm so as to find a solution that minimizes
the LCOE result, being this a single objective optimization problem.
Given the complexity of the model, it is impossible to carry out a classical ana-
lytical or gradient based optimization. This is due to the wide range of variables and
the nature of many of the parameters involved: discrete scattered matrices that can-
not be defined with a function, choices among different available options for a given
parameter, spatial restraints and convexity (the problem presents several localized
minimums) [41, 42].
For this reason, it is necessary to use other metaheuristic algorithms that are not
based in the classic differential methods to solve the problems. These are the evo-
lutive algorithms: calculation methods that take metaphorical inspiration on certain
processes that occur in nature [43]. Most generally, they work by improving the ob-
tained results in an iterative way, modifying the variables (called decision variables)
each time according to each algorithm’s working principle or logic.
Among the most extended evolutive methods, the Genetic Algorithm (GA) and
the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) can be found. The former, extensively used
in the wind energy field [41, 44, 45], emulates the principles of evolution theory by, for
example, mixing solutions that give birth to new ones, or mutating offspring solutions
to find other exotic ones. With regards to the PSO, it is based in bird flocking, fish
schooling, and swarming theory, having also ties with the GA [46].
After consulting with experts in the optimization field, and taking into consid-
eration the description of the problem, the first intention was to use a new type of
algorithm that has not been used in the wind energy sector up to now (the algorithm
comes from the water systems dimensioning sector). It is called Agent Swarm Opti-
mization (ASO) and it integrates behaviors of the two described algorithms, among
others, preventing it from terminating in localized minimums, increasing the compu-
tational speed, and allowing multi-objective optimizations [47, 48].
However, the implementation of this algorithm was finally not possible due to the
lack of time to translate it into MATLAB and the unavailability of the developers.
As also very often the good functioning of the algorithms depends mostly on the way
it has been implemented rather than in the type of algorithm used, it was finally
decided to use the PSO algorithm (particleswarm function in MATLAB).
==PAGE:56==
44
3 The Model
3.4.1
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
The PSO is primarily based on the movement of the different individuals (in this
case known as particles, each of which, after all, represents a set of decision variables)
with respect to the rest of the members (population) of the swarm [46]. The new vari-
ables tried in each iteration shift from the previous ones according to three different
components, shown in Fig. 3.12:
Figure 3.12: Illustration of PSO velocity and particle position [49].
After the modification of the algorithm in 1998 by Eiberhardt [50], the weight of
each one of these components is determined by the following equation:
v i(k+1) = ω·v i(k)+c 1·r 1·
(
x p best
i
(k) −x i(k)
)
+c 2·r 2·
(
x n best
i
(k)−x i(k)
)
(3.58)
being ω the inertia parameter, c1 the cognitive/ own-best position/ self adjustment
weight, and c2 the neighborhood/social/group adjustment weight, the factors that
influence the particle’s motion.
3.4.2
Algorithm configuration
Four main parties are involved in the way the optimization process is built: the
objective function (minimization of the LCOE), the decision variables (subject
of change to improve the result), the decision variables’ associated restraints, and
the penalizations (worsening of the objective value due to the infringement of the
restrictions).
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Optimization algorithm
45
3.4.2.1
Decision variables
Among the wide range of parameters that could be subject of change to minimize the
LCOE, in the last version of the optimization algorithm eight parameters, divided in
three groups, were chosen as decision variables:
First, the decision variables associated to the positions of the platforms: arguably,
the most relevant decision variables of the model. With a set number of platforms
in the farm, in an early stage the platforms were free to be located independently
within the limited site’s area. However, rather messy and unorganized arrangements
were obtained, and this option was soon discarded due to negative visual impact and
the operational difficulties that this may involve (e.g.: difficulty to define boat routes
and safe access areas). Moreover, this arrangement method involved having 2 decision
variables per platform (x and y coordinate for each one of them), which increased the
computational time significantly.
In order to solve these issues, the platforms were finally forced to be arranged
in rows and a total of five decision variables were found to be necessary to define
completely the positions of all the platforms: these are the number of rows (d. var 1),
the separation between rows (d. var 2), the separation between platforms in
each row (d. var 3), the row offset (d. var 4), which is the relative positional shift
along the rows’ direction of consecutive rows , and the angle of orientation of the
rows (d. var 5). These decision variables are shown in Fig. 3.13:
Figure 3.13: Decision variables associated to the platforms positions (being O the
center of the site).
==PAGE:58==
46
3 The Model
As it can be seen in the figure, the platforms are located around the site’s center
coordinates, so the rows are distributed equally to each side. Needles to say, these
optimizer input parameters or decision variables were needed to be converted into the
platforms coordinates inside the function: first, the number of platforms and rows
is read, and therefore the rows are created with their specified spacing (d. var 2 and
d. var 3); then the uneven extra platforms are successively added from the last row
towards the first one; and finally, the orientation angle is applied by multiplying each
platform’s coordinates by a two-dimensional rotation matrix (Rθ) as follows:
[
x rot
y rot
]
= Rθ ·
[
x coord.
y coord.
]
(3.59)
being: Rθ =
[cos(θ)
−sin(θ)
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
]
and θ = d. var 5 the orientation angle.
The second group of decision variables (d. var 6 and d. var 7) are the coordinates
of the offshore substation, specified as x and y distances with respect to the center
of the site O. Finally, the last decision variable (d. var 8) is the export cable choice
among the available ones (of course, this depends on the inputs, in the next section
the considered export cables in the case study are specified); the chosen cable will
therefore have its own specifications. As an extra remark, as the PSO does not allow
to choose input decision variables as integers, d. var 1 and d. var 8 had to be rounded
up or down inside the function to integer values. However, undesired behavior was
observed due to the rounding of integer variables. In Section 4.2.5 it is explained
what was done to deal with this issue.
A few other parameters that a priori seemed subject of also being optimized were
eventually discarded as decision variables for various reasons. These parameters are
the following:
- Harbor and inland substation choice among the available ones in the area: even
though the LCOE output definitely depends on this decision, there are many exter-
nal factors that condition it as this choice highly depends on the state legislation
and planning; it also depends on particular characteristics of both the harbour and
substation: their size, availability and so on. Therefore, it is very difficult to model
these factors and it has been considered that it should be the user who makes this
decision, after a site-specific study.
- The number of platforms: similarly, this factor depends mainly on the region
and country where the farm would be installed. Factors like the strength of the grid
or the need of power in the surrounding area will determine the total capacity of the
farm, and thus it is something that must be chosen manually after studying these
particularities. The procedure followed in the case study to determine this parameter
is explained in Section 4.1.2.
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Optimization algorithm
47
- WTG size: it was one of the initial decision variables considered. However, as
the P80 is currently designed to host a 8 MW WTG, it was finally decided to de-
velop the model with it. Another type of WTG would imply different input costs, a
different hub height and therefore different wind speed inputs, and probably also a
different size of the platforms and WEC.
- Lifetime: this parameter depends entirely on the design of the structures in-
volved in the project, not on the project planning itself. As the P80 design is given
for granted in the model with its consequent costs and characteristics, it does not
make sense to optimize the lifetime. In fact, the model would tend to increase the
lifetime indefinitely, in order to share the investment costs with the maximum energy
production possible, thus decreasing the LCOE. This is clearly unrealistic. It was
also considered to model an aging rate, but this was regarded as being too uncertain
due to the lack of information about a real behavior along time of the P80.
3.4.2.2
Restraints and penalizations
All the decision variables have restraints that are directly or indirectly associated to
them as, on the one hand, they cannot adopt any size due to their nature, and on the
other, third party variables which depend on the values of these decision variables may
also have their own restraints. Below, the restraints involved in the model are listed:
- Minimum separation between platforms: they cannot be placed closer than
a certain distance (because of wakes turbulence, mooring lines length, etc.). Again,
the particular values decided in the case analysis are explained in Section 4.2.4.
- Site delimitation: the available space can not be infinite as the model is con-
sidering a single climate for the whole site. The site area is defined with a radius
of 10 km around the center coordinates.
These two first restraints affect directly
the coordinates of the platforms, and indirectly the decision variables that determine
their arrangement (d. var 1 to d. var 5).
- Depth range: which is determined by the depth boundaries of the mooring
system (from 40 to 200 m, as presented in Chapter 2).
- Minimum separation between platforms and substation: similarly to the
first restraint.
- Rated power of the export cable: so the algorithm chooses an export cable
that can bear the farm’s maximum output power.
On top of these restraints, the eight decision variables specified have associated
boundary parameters that define the maximum and minimum values they can adopt.
Technically, this would not be necessary as long as the restraints specified above are
==PAGE:60==
48
3 The Model
fulfilled. However, setting these values is convenient in order to minimize, once again,
the computing time (e.g.: setting the orientation angle from -180◦to +180◦), so that
the optimizator does not try values out of this range.
As advanced above, these restraints have associated penalizations that prevent
the algorithm from choosing a non-feasible result as an optimal solution.
These
penalizations are applied at the beginning of the LCOE function, before the waves
energy calculation. If the value they adopt is greater than zero (a restraint has not
been fulfilled), the LCOE output also adopts a certain value in an order of magnitude
greater than that of a reasonable result. If so is the case, the rest of the function
is not computed (this is done by means of a return command) so as to decrease
the computing time. Furthermore, these penalizations have to be modeled in a way
that the further away the variables are from fulfilling their restraints, the greater
the penalizations become: thus the LCOE value obtained is a function of the degree
of unfulfillment of the restraint. This way, the particles will evolve towards feasible
solutions. Figure 3.14 shows this principle visually:
Figure 3.14: Working principle of the penalizations.
3.4.2.3
Performance improvement
Several parameters can be modified in order to optimize the performance of the al-
gorithm. This performance is basically determined by two aspects: the computing
speed of the algorithm (how long it takes to find an optimized minimum), and the
ability to avoid the choice of local minimums as the final solution. It has been tried
to deal with these issues as explained below:
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Optimization algorithm
49
Once the algorithm has found what looks like the surrounding area of a minimum,
it often starts to modify the values of the particles (decision variables) in a very small
scale, technically still improving the output result, but actually doing so very slowly
and irrelevantly, as the tiny changes may improve the output value in very small val-
ues, which, apart from not really making a difference and preventing the algorithm
from finishing the optimization quickly, the resolution of the results at that point is
actually too precise if the uncertainties and error tolerance associated to the model
are taken into consideration. In order to prevent this from happening several actions
were tried:
First, all the decision variables (not only the integers) were rounded to a certain
decimal base that was regarded as a reasonable resolution according to its nature.
For example, the angles were rounded to integers, having a change resolution of 1◦,
or the separation between platforms were rounded to the nearest hundred meters.
However, it was found that this solution resulted in a termination of the optimization
too prematurely, as the algorithm would often see no change in the objective function
when modifying the values of the inputs, sometimes preventing it from finding and
jumping to a new better local minimum.
Secondly, the rounding was also applied to the LCOE output value, which was
found to provide better results. This solution satisfactorily stops the algorithm from
trying to find irrelevant better solutions for too long, however still with a risk of
ending the optimization too soon in a non-global minimum. Something similar is
achieved when modifying the option TolFun of the algorithm, which determines the
tolerance in the change of the objective function for the algorithm to consider it as
an improvement.
The third modification made was adjusting the values of the previously described
inertia weight (InertiaRange option in MATLAB), which can also be dynamic (i.e.:
it can change along the optimization loops), the self adjustment weight (SelfAdjust-
mentWeight) and the social adjustment weight (SocialAdjustmentWeight). Optimum
values for them and for the amount of particles in each iteration (SwarmSize) were
found in literature [51] given the number of input variables, although this also very
much depends on the structure of the function being optimized. Three sets of opti-
mum parameters are given:
Problem
dimensions
Fitness
evaluations
PSO Parameters
SwarmSize
ω
c1
c2
10
2,000
63
0.6571
1.6319
0.6239
204
-0.2134
-0.3344
2.3259
20,000
53
-0.3488
-0.2746
4.8976
Table 3.2: Optimum PSO parameters [51].
==PAGE:62==
50
3 The Model
Being the problem dimensions of 10, the case found in literature closest to the 8
decision variables of this optimization case. After implanting these changes, it was
observed an improvement in the results but an increase in the optimization time, as
it is presented in Section 4.2.5.3.
The last modification made to improve the performance of the algorithm was
running successive optimizations, defining each time the optimum result found in
the previous optimization process as one of the initial particles/decision variables
(InitialSwarmMatrix) of the next loop. A slight improvement in the final value was
found as a result. However, it again exists the risk of limiting the search area of the
algorithm to a local minimum.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4
Case Study: Siting in
the Republic of Ireland
In this chapter, an application case of the model is presented. Sligo bay, at the North-
West of the Republic of Ireland, is the target area of this study. Given the significant
wave power density in the Northern Atlantic Ocean (the waves climate is too power-
ful for current wind floating concepts), this site presents an appropriate climate for
the P80 concept. The area’s particularities in terms of power generation and costs
calculation are analyzed, together with relevant factors such as the bathymetry, the
electrical system and the activities taking place in the area.
Figure 4.1: Area of interest: Sligo Bay (figure obtained from Google Earth).
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
4.1
General description
The Republic of Ireland is one of the countries in Europe with the highest share of
wind power production, currently entailing a 29% of the country’s electricity demand.
And this is only growing: 19 new wind farms were built in 2018, and latest news are
the target of increasing the share of renewables from 30% to 70% by adding 12 GW
of clean energy capacity by 2030, 3.5 GW of which are reserved for offshore capacity
[52, 53].
One of the measures being launched to achieve this target is the new Renewable
Electricity Support Scheme (RESS), after several years without support from the
state since the Feed-in Tariff scheme closed in 2015 [54]. This new scheme consists in
an auctions based system that will take into account not only the bid generation price
but also aspects like the communities’ ownership of the project, the demand-supply
ratio of the area and the financial structure of the project. The auctions also include
Floating Feed-in Premiums, a relevant aspect for a concept like the P80 [55].
Focusing on the wind energy field, most of the Irish wind farms are placed onshore,
spread all around the country. At this point, only one offshore wind farm has been
commissioned. Placed in the East coast, the Arklow Bank Wind Park consists of
7 WTGs that produce a total of 25 MW, very little capacity in comparison to the
ambitious aspirations of the country.
4.1.1
The Irish energy system
A Single Electricity Market was established in 2007 enclosing both Northern Ireland’s
and the Republic of Ireland’s Transmission System Operators (TSOs): these are the
System Operator of Northern Ireland and EirGrid respectively. The grid is further
interconnected with Scotland and Wales, and a future connection with mainland Eu-
rope is planned.
The most demanding area of the island in terms of power is the East coast, mainly
due to Dublin and its metropolitan area, and also that of Belfast. For this reason, a
big offshore project in the West coast as the one considered in this study may not seem
the most suitable from the point of view of demand-supply ratio and grid strength at
first sight. Nevertheless, the suitability of this type of project is guaranteed, given the
state’s ambitious plans of shifting to renewables (phasing out non-renewable capac-
ity, which leaves space for generation), and the on-going North-West Project, which
precisely has the goal of strengthening the grid in the area for future wind energy ca-
pacity by connecting the Srananagh and Clogher substations [56]. Figure 4.2 depicts
a map of the grid system in the area of interest.
As it can be seen, most of the substations found in the area have a rated voltage
of 110 kV, the smallest type of high voltage station among the existent ones in the all-
==PAGE:65==
4.1 General description
53
island grid system. However, a bigger 220 kV substation can be found in Srananagh,
only 10 km away from Sligo, which is the largest town in the area with about 20,000
inhabitants.
Figure 4.2: Transmission system map of the Sligo Bay area [56].
4.1.2
Grid strength and farm size
Given that the TSO specifies that large generation stations of more than 100 MW of
capacity shall be connected to 220 kV, 270 kV or 400 kV stations [56], and since no
other transformer of these characteristics can be found in the area, Srananagh 220
kV substation was chosen in an early stage as the inland grid substation to which
connect the farm. As it can be seen in Fig. 4.2, a couple of wind farms are located
close by, also a hydro power plant can be found further North, and the Thawnagh-
more 153 MW thermal generation plant, which may be subject of decommissioning
soon, is located to the West, not far from the chosen station.
The grid strength determines the reliability of the network, as a new generator may
have a big impact on a weak grid, reaching the thermal limit of its cables, suffering
voltage changes and emitting harmonic frequencies (flickering).
The short-circuit
impedance expressed in ohms (Z k, Ω) needs to be calculated in order to quantify
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
this grid strength.
For the sake of this calculation, the general characteristics of
Srananagh’s transformer, necessary to obtain of the short-circuit impedance of the
system, are shown below together with the calculation made:
Name
Rating (MVA)
HV/LV (kV)
Impedance
(p.u. with 100 MVA base)
T2101
250
220/110
R=0.001
X=0.064
Table 4.1: Srananagh’s transformer characteristics [56].
Z base =
u2
base (kV )
S base (MV A) = 2202
250 = 484 Ω
(4.1)
Z k, Ω= Z base · Z p.u. = 484 ·
√
0.0012 + 0.0642 = 30.98 Ω
(4.2)
Moreover, the short circuit current of the transformer (Ik) is presented in Table
4.2, which shows the maximum and minimum values for Srananagh’s station (those
of 2016 and the predicted ones for 2019 and 2022):
Year
2016
2019
2022
Summer
Max
3.89
3.98
4
Min
3.72
3.83
3.84
Winter
Max
4.99
5.33
6.71
Min
4.75
5.07
6.26
Table 4.2: Srananagh transformer short circuit currents (Ik) in kA [56].
Taking into account the minimum value (when the grid is the weakest), and con-
sidering that the farm would not be commissioned before 2022, the short circuit power
of the station can then be calculated as follows:
Sk = 3 · |Z k, Ω| · I2
k = 3 · |30.98| · 3.842 = 1370.45 MV A
(4.3)
Finally, the grid strength is best represented by the short circuit ratio (rate be-
tween the wind farm’s capacity and the short circuit power) which should be kept
below a controlled value. This value, unknown in this case, depends on the country
and substation. In general, according to [36], the short circuit ratio should lay within
the following boundaries:
2% ≤Cap T ot
Sk
≤20%
(4.4)
==PAGE:67==
4.1 General description
55
Therefore, in this case, for a short-circuit ratio of 20%, the maximum wind farm
capacity would be that of Cap T ot = 274 MV A. Taking into account the previously
explained grid-strengthening project and the phasing-out of non renewable generation
plants, it was considered a farm size of 25 platforms, i.e.: 250 MW (even though,
according to the figures, this capacity would be very tight if the grid is not modified
at all, specially taking into account the influence of the reactive power).
4.1.3
Analysis of the area of interest
Sixteen possible sites spread throughout the bay have been analyzed for the sake of
this study. These sites were chosen according to the wind and waves resources’ dis-
crete resolution (being placed 25-30 km apart from each other), covering as much as
possible the entire area of the bay.
The studied location is an open ocean bay with the fishing practice as its main
activity, being most of the bustle due to boats coming in and out from the port of
Sligo, which was the harbor chosen for all the operations involved in the project given
its greater dimensions in comparison to the only other harbor in the area: Killybegs
Harbor. The vessel activity density of the area (obtained from Marine Traffic), as
well as the location of the considered sites and that of the harbors, are shown in Fig.
4.3.
Figure 4.3: Position of the possible sites and boat routes [57].
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
As it can be deducted from the figure, the area is not very concurred. However,
the sites 1, 2, and 3, placed at the South part of the bay, have to be discarded since
they lay in the main shipping route of the bay. On top of this, Site 1 was considered
to be placed too close to shore, where both its visual impact and the shallow seafloor
make it an unsuitable site.
Regarding possible environmental issues that may condition the siting, the only
protected areas that can be found are the estuaries of the three rivers that flow into
the bay: the Drumcliff, Garavogue and Bonet rivers. These estuaries are protected by
the European Union and they have been defined as Natural Heritage areas. However,
these areas are placed very close to shore, thus not meaning an issue for a far-shore
farm of this kind.
The third main factor that may involve a direct elimination of further sites is the
seafloor depth (as a reminder, the mooring system of the P80 can be installed in
depths from 40 to 200 m). The depth of the seafloor throughout the bay is depicted
in Fig. 4.4:
Figure 4.4: Seafloor depth of the bay [18].
As it can be observed, most of the sites present a suitable seafloor depth, which is
out of the range of bottom-fixed concepts and which lays in the P80 range. However,
a very steep depth increase up to thousands of meters is observed just before the three
sites placed further offshore (Sites 14, 15 and 16), making impossible the installation of
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Implementation of the model
57
the platforms. Finally, after this primary analysis, the suitable locations are reduced
to Sites 4 to 13.
4.2
Implementation of the model
Up to this point, the choice of harbor and inland station (and therefore their coordi-
nates) has been established. Furthermore, several sites were discarded due to a prior
analysis, and the number of platforms in the farm has been determined given the
grid characteristics. Before the model can be run, now all the site-specific inputs and
parameters need to be determined and loaded in the model.
4.2.1
WTG used in the model
Several 8 MW WTGs were considered for the study, one of them being the WTG
developed in DTU and used in Section 3.2.1 as an example.
However, given the
availability of its data and its level of development and detail, it was finally decided
to use LEANWIND’s reference 8 MW wind turbine [58], which is based in both
the 5 MW turbine designed in the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
and DTU’s 10 MW reference wind turbine. Its power and thrust coefficient curves
are the following:
Figure 4.5: Power and Thrust Coefficient curve of the LEANWIND 8 MW WTG.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
Furthermore, the chosen WTG has the following relevant specifications that are
used in the model:
• Rated Power: 8 MW
• Hub height: 110 m
• Rotor diameter: 164 m
• Cut-in wind speed: 4 m/s
• Cut-out wind speed: 25 m/s
4.2.2
Wind resource
The most up-to-date wind data has been used in the case analysis after an investiga-
tion of the different sources available. The data used, in the form of a Generalized
Wind Climate, was obtained from the New European Wind Atlas (NEWA) develop-
ing team.
The NEWA [59] is soon going to be launched, becoming the newest and most ad-
vanced source of wind climate data available. Following the work done in the Global
Wind Atlas (GWA), the NEWA will provide the results obtained by the Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model [60], which consists of new down-scaling
methodologies that have been implemented using new long-term data sets. Unlike
the GWA, the NEWA data also includes information of distances up to 100 or even
200 km offshore.
For this study case, it was possible to contact the developers, who provided the
data of the locations specified. This was very valuable due to the lack of information
about the sites placed furthest offshore in the currently available GWA, and also due
to the significant differences between both sets of data. Figure 4.6 shows these dif-
ferences in the wind profiles, which give an idea of the importance of having a good
and trustworthy data source.
As mentioned, in this case the wind data was obtained in the form of General-
ized Wind Climate (GWC) files, which contain information about the different wind
speeds’ frequency of occurrence in the form of the parameters of a Weibull distribution
(extensively used to describe wind speed variations) for twelve directions (every 30◦),
several heights (50, 75, 100, 150 and 200 m) and terrain roughness lengths (using, in
this case, a roughness length of 0 m, as the wind farm is placed offshore). However,
once the GWC is obtained, this information needs to be processed and transformed
in every site to make it suitable and readable by the model.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Implementation of the model
59
Figure 4.6: Wind profiles of Sites 7 and 11.
Given the characteristics of the model and the WTG used, the wind data in the
form of p (w.s., θ wi.) is needed for a hub height of 110 m. Since there is no specific
information about this particular height in the GWC, the first step is to load the file
in WAsP, where the Weibull distributions at all heights are interpolated taking into
account the atmospheric conditions of the site’s geographical area. Then, a reference
site with the desired height is placed so the Weibull parameters at 110 m can be read
and extracted from WAsP. These parameters have the following structure:
Sector
Wind
direction
Weibull A
[m/s]
Weibull k
Mean w.s.
[m/s]
1
0
9.4
2.44
8.29
2
30
9.5
2.2
8.42
3
60
8.5
2.42
7.55
4
90
8.1
2.62
7.24
5
120
9.9
2.17
8.78
6
150
12.3
2.35
10.92
7
180
12.5
2.51
11.08
8
210
13.1
2.38
11.57
9
240
12.3
2.47
10.89
10
270
10.6
2.05
9.43
11
300
10
2.26
8.85
12
330
9.1
1.94
8.05
Table 4.3: Example of Weibull parameters at 110 m obtained from WAsP.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
This information now needs to be transformed into the probabilistic values for
each wind speed and direction p (w.s., θ wi.), since it is the way the model can read it
as explained in Section 3.2.1. Since the Weibull parameters for the twelve directions
are known, the probabilities are calculated using the Weibull distribution, shown
below:
p( w.s.) = k
A ·
(w.s.
A
)k−1
· exp
(
−
(w.s.
A
)k)
(4.5)
being A the Weibull scale parameter in m/s and k the Weibull form parameter.
Finally, as it explained in Section 3.2.2, the wind speed probabilities that, at this
point, are defined every 30◦, need to be converted to a resolution of every 10◦so
the wakes can read them properly. In the absence of a better method (the result
can only be as accurate as the data is), this was done by dividing each one of these
probabilities’ values in three sectors (e.g.: the probabilities obtained for 90◦were
divided by three and distributed equally for 80◦, 90◦and 100◦). In fact, the matrix
depicted in Fig. 3.8, used as an example of a wind speed scattered matrix, has this
shape.
Figure 4.7: Example of wind rose (Site 11).
Focusing back on the analyzed area, as it can be seen in Fig.
4.7, the wind
was found to come predominantly from the South-West in every site, which is not
surprising given that the land is placed at the East side of the bay. On the other
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Implementation of the model
61
hand, the obtained average wind speeds at 110 m go from 10.65 m/s in Site 11 to
10.85 m/s in Site 6. As a preliminary observation before the calculations are run, it is
worth mentioning that the increase of the wind speed when going further offshore is
not as steep as it could seem, probably meaning that the sites placed far offshore may
not be feasible when taking into consideration the costs involved in this increment of
distance to shore.
4.2.3
Waves resource
In the case of the waves climate, as advanced in Section 3.1.1, the data is obtained
from the DHI in the form of three scattered matrices. The generation method of this
data is the MIKE 21 Spectral Wave numerical model [61] developed in the DHI. As
it can be seen in Fig. 4.8, the prevailing and almost exclusive waves direction in the
area is from West to East: coming from ocean to land.
Figure 4.8: Example of waves rose (Site 11).
At this point, it is worth mentioning that, in principle, the wind wakes are much
more determinant for the positioning of the platforms than the waves shadows. This
is due to two main facts: as it has already been discussed in the report, the highest
share of energy is produced by the wind so a decrease in the wind energy production
reduces more significantly the value of the LCOE; and, on the other hand, the WTGs
wakes have a longer spatial range than that of the waves shadows, meaning that the
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
proportional loss of energy at longer distances is higher in the case of the WTGs. The
results from the lay-out optimization process should be clarifying in this regard.
4.2.4
Definition of the rest of the parameters
Once all the site dependent inputs have been determined, only the parameters that
influence the decision variables (restraints) and the discount rate are left to be estab-
lished.
Regarding the minimum separation between the platforms, two main factors in-
fluence this value: on the one hand, unlike the waves shadows, which only have an
effect on wave height reduction (thus creating a more still water surface), one of the
main issues involved in the wind wakes of a WTG is the appearance of turbulence,
which causes undesired and uneven loads (wind shear) in the WTGs placed close
by. For this reason, as a rule of thumb, a minimum separation between WTGs of
five to seven times the diameter of the WTG is often used as the minimum separation.
On the other hand, the mooring systems also needs to be taken into account, spe-
cially given the dynamic nature of the platform in this concept. As shown in Fig. 2.8,
the P80 mooring system is designed to be quite spread in the horizontal direction
in comparison to the depth. In the example shown in the picture, this horizontal
distance is in the range of a thousand meters, or even more if the last laying chain
stretch is considered. However, this rather long distance is, in general, oversized, and
it is believed in FPP that there is still room to optimize the depth-width rate of the
mooring system.
Given the exposed reasons above, the minimum separation between platforms
(sep plat) was modeled as follows:
sep plat = max
{
5 · diam W T G, 2 · 80% · 1000
100 · depth
}
(4.6)
having considered as 80% the reduction in horizontal distance after optimizing
the mooring system.
The second restraint to be established was the minimum separation between the
platforms and the offshore substation It was decided to use a value of 1000 m. Given
that the mooring system of the substation is considered to be much more simple and
static than that of the P80s, this separation is more than enough, even in the cases
where the depth may be greater than 100 m. Furthermore, it is assumed that no fur-
ther interaction between substation and generators exists in terms of wind blocking
and waves shadow.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Implementation of the model
63
The 16 types of HV export cables considered in this case analysis, and their
nominal current (Ir), section (Sec), nominal voltage (Vr) and rated power (Sr) where
chosen among the most typical ones found in the literature and data sheets. Their
characteristics are presented below:
Sr (MW )
Sec (mm2)
500
630
800
1000
Ir (A)
655
715
775
825
Ur (kV )
110
124.8
136.2
147.7
157.2
132
149.8
163.5
177.2
188.6
220
249.6
272.5
295.3
314.4
275
312
340.6
369.1
393
Table 4.4: Available cables and their section area, and rated voltage, current and
apparent power.
All these cables are subject to be chosen by the optimizer, which will intend to find
a balance between their cost and transmission losses. Further characteristics like the
loss coefficients and prices of the different types of cables are presented in Appendix
A.3.
Furthermore, it is worth reminding that the site delimitation was set to a circular
area with a radius of 10 km around the site’s center coordinates, due to the fact that
the wind and waves resources cannot be considered constant at higher distances and,
as it is proven in the following sections, having the security that the optimum coordi-
nates perfectly fit within this delimited area, this not being a constraining factor.
Finally, as it is explained more in depth in Appendix A.5, after consulting several
sources, the discount rate value that has been considered for this type of technology
and that has been used throughout the optimization process in this case analysis is
that of 9%, although this is one of the parameters with the highest level of uncertainty.
In fact, the value considered in the company is generally a 7%. The influence of the
variation of this parameter is analyzed in Section 5.1.
4.2.5
Optimization Methodology
In this section, it is explained how the optimization was carried out after narrowing
down all the determinant factors that influence the calculation: the successive steps
taken in the optimization process and the results obtained in each one of them.
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
4.2.5.1
Step 1: finding the best sites
The first part of the process had the goal of discarding the least feasible sites con-
sidered up to this point. The model was run for every site with the same identical
decision variables and layout (shown in Fig. 4.9), composed of 25 platforms. This
way, the long optimization process could be avoided in many of these sites. In the lay-
out figure and in all the figures of the kind from now on, the small blue and red circles
represent the positions of the P80s and that of the offshore substation respectively,
and the big red circle depicts the site’s delimited area.
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
104
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
104
Export cable: 220 kV, 1000 mm2
Figure 4.9: Base layout in Step 1 (in blue, the positions of the platforms; and in
red, that of the offshore substation).
Furthermore, the site’s mean depth, and the AEP wind, AEP wind, and LCOE
values obtained in the different sites are shown in Table 4.5. As it can be deducted
from the results, Sites 4, 7, 8, and 11 (in green) were found to provide the best figures
due to a better balance between the energy production and the costs associated to
the distance from shore. It is easy to realize that these four sites are the ones placed
closer to shore and also those ones where the seafloor is more shallow (although this
second factor does not have such a big impact in the LCOE).
On the other hand, even though both the wind and waves energy production
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Implementation of the model
65
in the rest of the sites is generally higher (with the exception of Site 4), this fact
is not enough to balance their longer distance to shore, which increases their costs
significantly. This is specially observed in the sites marked in red (Site 6, 10, and
13), the ones placed the furthest from shore. Given the significant difference in the
LCOE value, only the green sites were chosen for the second step of the process.
LCOE
(AC/MWh)
Mean Depth
(m)
AEP wi
(GWh)
AEP wa
(GWh)
Site 4
121.2
97
1045.65
156.06
Site 5
127.3
97
1042.64
171.79
Site 6
133.1
120
1046.66
179.13
Site 7
119.1
83
1034.70
146.79
Site 8
123.3
95
1036.96
163.40
Site 9
127.5
98
1038.64
171.13
Site 10
132.5
119
1044.93
177.91
Site 11
123.1
76
1032.88
152.41
Site 12
127.9
98
1036.38
165.73
Site 13
132.6
109
1038.71
174.05
Table 4.5: Results of Step 1.
As it is discussed more in depth further in the report, a conclusion that may
be extracted from these preliminary results is that in this area the climate’s power
growth with distance is not steep enough. It is also worth remarking the big difference
obtained between the wind and waves energy generation, as advanced in the previous
chapters. In every site, the latter only represents 10-15% of that of the wind in all
the sites.
4.2.5.2
Step 2: optimization and choice of the best site
The second step of the process consisted in finally carrying out the optimization in
the selected best sites. From the results obtained in the previous step, it seems like
Site 7 is the clear favorite as its LCOE value is around 2 AC/MWh lower than that
of the second best site. However, given that the energy production of this second one
is higher (better wind resource), the optimization of the layout could have a more
relevant effect in the minimization of its LCOE.
A last minute dismissal was made. Given the nature of the model, which takes
into account the linear distances (between site, harbor, onshore substation and shore
connection point), a modification should be made in Site 11. Since it is located behind
a cape, the length of the export cable and the distances of the O&M and installation
operations are actually higher than the ones considered in the first approach as their
path should go around the prominent land. These factors, together with the fact that
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
its LCOE is one of the highest in the selected group (and it cannot be minimized
too much since the site’s wind and waves power is not very high), were considered
enough to also discard Site 11 for this step.
As it has been advanced in Section 3.4.2.1, after a few prior optimization at-
tempts, it was noticed that the integer decision variables of the optimization problem
presented some issues, as the algorithm would get trapped in a localized minimum.
Two integer decision variables are part of the optimization: the number of rows and
the choice of the HV export cable.
Regarding the latter, after running the model several times, it was observed
straightforwardly that given the orders of magnitude of the distances to shore and
the power generation, one of the cables was providing the best results in every case:
the 220kV , 800mm2 and 775A cable. Therefore, this decision variable was eliminated
and this specific cable was set as a fixed parameter in every case.
As for the number of rows, the solution was not so simple. Five different opti-
mizations for each number of rows were carried out in one of the three sites: Site 4.
This way, similarly as it was done when discarding sites in Step 1, the best numbers
of rows were found and the optimization process with other less optimal numbers
of rows in the rest of the sites was avoided. An example of these types of succes-
sive optimizations can be seen in Fig. 4.10, where the graph at the left depicts the
improvement in the LCOE in each optimization process until it stabilizes, and the
graph at the right shows the layout that provides the newest value of LCOE.
Figure 4.10: Example of simulation for 8 rows.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Implementation of the model
67
Therefore, given the consistent and better results obtained in Site 4 for the num-
bers of rows equal to 5,6,7 and 8 (although this last option provided quite unorganized
layouts), the same simulations were then run for the rest of the sites. The average
results of the five optimizations made in each case are shown in Table 4.6:
N. rows
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Avg.
Site 4
119.26
119.04
119.07
118.67
118.79
118.72
118.81
118.91
Site 7
-
-
-
116.96
117.07
117.02
117.09
117.04
Site 8
-
-
-
120.85
120.98
120.912
121
120.94
Table 4.6: Average values of LCOE in AC/MWh obtained in each case.
Clearly, it is Site number 7 the one that presents the best results with 5 and 7
rows. In all the cases, this first optimization process reduced in more than 2 AC/MWh
the value of the LCOE obtained in the previous step. As it can be deducted from
the table, even though the energetic resource is better in Site 4, the optimization of
the layout did not mean a significant improvement in the LCOE value with respect
to the other two sites, and Site 7 still resulted to be the one with the lowest energetic
cost. Once the best site has been chosen, the final layout is obtained in the last step.
4.2.5.3
Step 3: final optimization
In the last step of the process, the optimizations for Site 7 in the cases of 5 and 7 rows
were carried out. In each case this was done in two ways to make sure that all the
results span was covered. Each one of these types of optimization was run 10 times:
In the first type of optimization, de default PSO parameters of inertia, self and so-
cial adjustment weights were used (dynamic ω = 0.1 −1.1, c1 = 1.49 and c2 = 1.49).
Furthermore, the five results obtained in the previous step were given to the algo-
rithm as an initial solution (InitialSwarmMatrix). This could have two effects: either
it makes the optimization start from a good solution (if it is considered to be close
to the global optimal) and therefore it allows it to further improve it; or it prevents
the algorithm to find other existent minimums that may be better.
Due to this second possibility, an alternative way to carry out the optimization was
attempted: one of the optimal sets of PSO parameters proposed in literature (shown
in Table 3.2) were used instead: S = 63, ω = 0.6571, c1 = 1.6319 and c2 = 0.6239.
In this case, no initial sets of decision variables were given to the algorithm, leaving
this option to be randomly decided by the PSO as it has been done in Step 2.
After a long process that involved running the optimization ten times for each one
of the four cases (each optimization taking an average of 30 to 60 minutes in the case
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Case Study: Siting in the Republic of Ireland
of the ones with the default variables and an hour to an hour and a half for those
using the recommended parameters), the five best values obtained in each case are
the following:
N. of rows
Paramenters
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
5
Default
116.7
116.71
116.71
116.71
116.71
Recommended
116.56
116.59
116.71
116.73
116.75
7
Default
116.81
116.83
116.83
116.84
116.84
Recommended
116.48
116.48
116.49
116.53
116.7
Table 4.7: Five best results of each optimization type in Step 3.
It is quite clear how the optimizations run with the default parameters that make
use of the initial swarm from Step 2 provided results that slightly improved those
from the previous step. However, when they are compared to the optimizations that
make use of the recommended parameters, it is evident how the former are stuck in
a localized minimum that may be improved.
In the next chapter, an argued choice of the possible final layout (or layouts) is
presented, not only taking into account the LCOE results but also other qualitative
aspects relevant in the study. The values obtained are analyzed and compared and a
discussion is made about the technology.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
In the view of the results obtained and presented in the previous chapter, several
final layouts were considered candidates to be chosen as the most convenient. Even
though reducing the value of the LCOE of the project is the ultimate goal, other
considerations also need to be taken into account.
Among the layouts that provide the best LCOE output, two clear groups of very
similar arrangements were found.
Within each of these two groups, the different
solutions differ in small variations in the orientation angle or separation between
platforms which result in the very small difference of LCOE observed in Table 4.7.
These two main groups of arrangements are the following:
Figure 5.1: Layout of a possible final solution with 5 rows.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.2: Layout of a possible final solution with 7 rows.
After considering the pros and cons of both layouts, it was decided that it is the
first one, with five rows, the one that would be more convenient in a real case. On
the one hand, the small difference of LCOE between both cases (0.08 AC/MWh) is,
most likely, below the error threshold of the model, and therefore it is not regarded
as a determining factor. On the other hand, it has been considered that the second
arrangement is quite unorganized, and therefore more messy for the visual impact
(analyzed more in depth below). It also makes it more difficult to establish routes for
vessels operating in the farm.
The input variables of the selected layout are shown in Table 5.1:respectively:
Separation between rows
2187.12 m
Separations between platforms in a rows
2535.44 m
Row offset
3798.86 m
Angle of orientation
-24.99◦
x-coordinate of the substation
2364.55 m
y-coordinate of the substation
-1649.08 m
Table 5.1: Decision variables of the chosen layout.
==PAGE:83==
5 Results and Discussion
71
In a first intuitive outlook of the the optimized input variables, it is easy to notice
that these are quite logical. First of all, for every layout solution, the position of
the offshore substation is always located in the fourth quadrant of the site (at its
South-West), as it is the direction towards which the offshore substation is located in
this case, as seen in Fig. 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Location of the farm in the area.
In red: the subsea stretch of the
export cable. In orange: its inland stretch.
In the figure above, the distance from the farm to the onshore substation (about
80 km) and the harbor (in the order of 60 km) can be observed, being that to the
closest land about 15 km. It should be remarked that the land closest to the farm
is quite unpopulated, only finding very small villages in the surroundings, like Glen-
colmcille, with only a few hundreds of inhabitants.
A more close-up look to the site, depicted in Fig. 5.4, reveals more information
about the farm. Given the influence of the inter-array cables cost, the offshore substa-
tion is quite centered in the site, as the algorithm finds a balance between the costs
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Results and Discussion
and transmission losses of these two types of cables (the influence of the different
depths in the mooring cost should not be forgotten either, although its cost contri-
bution is quite low). Secondly, and with a higher influence in the LCOE output,
it makes sense that the orientation of the rows and the position of the WTGs tend
to minimize the wind wakes when the main directions of the wind are taken into
consideration. For this reason, the rows directions have resulted to be perpendicular
to the main wind direction observed in the wind rose.
Figure 5.4: Farm arrangement, position of the offshore substation (bolt symbol)
and wind rose of the site.
Given the presented arrangement of the wind farm, the energy values obtained
in the model are those shown in Table 5.2. It is quite evident how the algorithm
tends to minimize the wind wakes losses given its low values, one of the advantages
of offshore areas with low spatial restrictions.
Furthermore, as advanced earlier on, the waves shadow range is quite smaller than
that of the wind wakes and this is shown in the output values. In this case, the result
is an energy loss due to the wave’s shadows ten times smaller in proportional terms
than that caused by the WTG’s wakes. The rest of the parameters depicted are as
dependent on the layout, but rather on the site’s location and the technology.
==PAGE:85==
5 Results and Discussion
73
AEP wind gross
1034.70 GWh
Wake losses
7.16 GWh
(0.69%)
AEP wind net
1027.53 GWh
AEP waves gross
164.11 GWh
Shadow losses
0.08 GWh
(0.05%)
Vanning losses
13.12 GWh
(8%)
AEP waves net
150.90 GWh
Avg. downtime losses
123.2 GWh/year
Avg. transmission losses
1.73 GWh/year
Table 5.2: Output results of the chosen layout.
With regards to the economic figures of the calculation, the proportions depicted
in Fig. 5.5 have been obtained in this case.
Figure 5.5: Piechart with the discounted costs proportions.
Several comments shall be made with regards to the costs. As it can be seen,
most of the costs account for the CAPEX (around a 90%) and this is furthermore
stimulated by the discount rate: the earlier the costs are executed, the bigger the
proportional impact they will have in the final LCOE value. Even having considered
the major planned maintenance operations, its total contribution to the discounted
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Results and Discussion
costs does not reach the 10%. The opposite to the CAPEX occurs to the decom-
missioning costs, which apart from being low per se, the discount rate makes their
influence insignificant.
As it was expected, among the CAPEX costs, the first contribution are those
costs associated to the P80, and the devices that integrate it. Specially, the high
amount of stainless steel that is needed for the platform structure increases the total
cost significantly and its influence is, in fact, analyzed in the next section. The wind
turbines represent the second highest cost of the projects and the grid costs the third.
Their variation is also further analyzed.
Moving on from the strictly costs related aspects of the project, one of the issues
that are originated by wind farms is their impact in the landscape, as it may be too
invasive and, in some cases, they can even cause flickering due to the sun light going
through the rotor blades. For these reasons, even though, as it has been said before,
the area is quite unpopulated, the visual impact of the farm has been analyzed:
Figure 5.6: Visual impact from the highest point in the surrounding area.
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Sensitivity analysis
75
The image (obtained through the combination of Google Earth and WAsP) shows
the farm, composed of 110 m tall wind turbines, from one of the very few points in
land where it is visible, as the terrain is elevated. Even so, from this point only very
small marks can be distinguished in the horizon, and the farm is completely invisible
from any urban space in the area. Therefore, it can be concluded that the visual
impact of the farm is irrelevant.
5.1
Sensitivity analysis
Once the main cost components of the project have been highlighted, the influence
they have in the change of the LCOE needs to be studied. Naturally, even though all
the costs related values have been researched and confirmed, as this is a hypothetical
project that has not undergone thorough professional area specialized analysis, these
values may be subject of variation for very diverse reasons: country specific conditions,
change of market tendencies, resources availability, new technological considerations,
legislation changes, etc.
The four parameters depicted in Fig. 5.7 are regarded as highly influential for
the output LCOE value and they are also quite sensitive to change. The following
sensitivity analysis has been applied to the optimal layout case presented above:
Figure 5.7: LCOE change with the variation of the main cost components.
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Results and Discussion
From the four studied parameters, the discount rate is the most influential figure
in the final cost as it can be seen in the graph. On the other hand, it is considered to
also be the most uncertain of them all. As it completely depends on the investor’s risk
considerations, the value can only be estimated by carrying out surveys, consulting
it with companies and comparing the concept with other similar and more mature
technologies of which this parameter is known (the figures considered in this study
and their sources are presented in Appendix A.5).
In fact, FPP considers a 7% discount rate that should even decrease after the
technology has been tested and proved in small and eventually bigger projects like
this one. The lower value implies a reduction in no less than almost a 15% of the
LCOE. However, throughout this study the discount rate of 9% was used as it was
compared to that of existent offshore wind farms, having the concept been regarded
as a new technology that still needs to consolidate in the market. Anyhow, chances
are that the value will decrease in the close future.
The second most influential parameter is the amount of steel needed to build
the platform. As in most of the offshore floating concepts, this cost is definitely the
first contributor to the final LCOE value of the project, and a reduction of 25% in the
amount of steel would mean a decrease of as much as an 8% of the LCOE. Naturally,
this involves a technological or geometrical change of the concept, as the buoyancy of
the whole structure would change with the mass reduction, and therefore the amount
of stored air would need to be different, but it is clear that there is a lot of room for
improvement in this sense.
Regarding the WTG costs, this is a value that may be subject to change in both
directions due to two main factors: on the one hand, the technology is constantly
improving, and thus bigger and more efficient wind turbines keep being built at lower
prices. However, as the wind energy market and more specifically the offshore wind
one are in an up-wards tendency, the high demand of wind turbines may increase
their cost (or at least stop its current down-slope price tendency). Paradoxically, also
the presence of support schemes may encourage the manufacturers to increase the
WTG price, given the consequent higher economical power of the developer. Any-
how, given the data found with regards to the costs (shown in Appendix A.2), the
upper and lower values shown in the graph have been considered, meaning a change
in the LCOE of 3-4%.
Lastly, the lifetime of the project has an important impact in the final cost too.
As it has already been mentioned, it completely depends on the technology’s design,
and on climate related factors like the corrosion and the erosion of the materials, and
the loads on the devices. As a P80 has never been tested offshore yet, these consider-
ations are also somewhat uncertain. FPP works with a lifetime of 25 years, and it is
the one that has also been assumed in this case, but in the sensitivity analysis it is
shown the impact of a possible increase or decrease of 5 years. It should be mentioned
==PAGE:89==
5.1 Sensitivity analysis
77
that an increase of the lifetime may also involve de rise of other costs like the O&M,
and vice-versa. This must be taken into account when doing a more specific study
on the matter.
Concurrently, it has also been studied the variation of the LCOE when applying
specific changes that do not only have to do with the modification of certain costs, or of
the values of certain parameters. Instead, these changes consist in the modification
certain project or technology dependent procedures or characteristics.
Figure 5.8
shows the LCOE reduction originated from three different variations: omitting the
major planned O&M operations, excluding the electrical infrastructure costs (in case
the state takes responsibility for it), and in a hypothetical case where the platform
would be made of concrete instead of steel.
Figure 5.8: LCOE variation with concept and project related changes.
One of the main areas that is subject to change in FPP’s current costs model is
the O&M procedures, which are based on strategies normally carried out in offshore
structures of the O&G sector, but they have not been able to be optimized or at
least particularized for the P80 yet.
In this sense, the main action considered to
be avoidable is the major planned O&M operation, which, as explained in Sec-
tion 3.3.3, consists in a periodical onshore inspection and maintenance service that
involves towing the P80 to the harbor with the economical and downtime related
expenses that this means. It has been found that avoiding this procedure reduces the
LCOE in a 3% in the case studied. In general, this value depends on the distance to
the operations harbor.
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Results and Discussion
Without neglecting its cost impact, the action is actually not considered to be so
significant, specially when taking into consideration that eliminating this big opera-
tion may involve having to increase the frequency of other types of planned operations,
or it may force the concept to be out of service more often.
The second main project-related change that has been investigated is the case
when the state bears the costs related to the electrical infrastructure. In
this case, it has been considered that the developer would still be responsible for
the costs associated to the acquisition and installation of the inter-array MV cables.
Other than that, the costs of the offshore substation, onshore and offshore export HV
cable and their respective installations are excluded from the costs model. In this
case, a bigger impact has been found, having the LCOE been reduced by as much as
a 9%.
As an extra remark on the matter, even though in this case the LCOE is con-
sidered to be reduced, in reality this cost still exists and, in general, and having a
long-run perspective of a context where all renewable technologies’ projects are fea-
sible, the developer will probably have to take charge of these expenses. However, it
is true that nowadays in some countries this cost is subject to be taken out from the
equation, resulting in a significant improvement in terms of costs.
Finally, one last and arguably more hypothetical case where the P80’s platform
would be made of reinforced concrete instead of steel is studied. Some con-
crete floating offshore wind concepts already exist and the claim is that they are
significantly cheaper due to the lower acquisition costs of the materials, the cheaper
manufacturing process, the lower demand of O&M operations due to avoiding corro-
sion, and the possibility of increasing significantly the lifespan of the technology [62].
For this reason, given the amount of steel that conforms the platform, a few sce-
narios where it is used reinforced concrete instead of steel have been considered. They
have been based on the following figures:
- Assumed current average cost of steel: 3.4 AC/kg.
- Steel density: 8050 kg/m3.
- Assumed current average cost of concrete: 90 AC/m3.
- Reinforced concrete estimated density: 2400 kg/m3.
It needs to be taken into account that changing the material of the structure has a
lot of implications. In terms of buoyancy, the displaced volume of water depends on
the materials’ density difference if the structure’s volume is kept constant, and there-
fore the air chambers that ensure this buoyancy need to be redesigned accordingly.
Additionally, the materials’ different resistances to distinct types of loads (compres-
sion, torsion, etc.) will condition the platform’s walls’ geometry and thicknesses.
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Sensitivity analysis
79
Having these complex factors in mind (subject of a much more thorough study)
and taking into account that concrete is in the order of ninety times cheaper than
steel and three times lighter, the LCOE was then calculated in three cases: assuming
the same volume of concrete as there is of steel currently, doing so with the mass,
and an intermediate solution where a hypothetical optimized geometry is assumed.
In all three calculations it was found that concrete itself is so much cheaper than
steel that the reduction of LCOE in all the cases was significant and very similar
to each other, as the order of magnitude of the structure’s materials cost completely
changed: the LCOE has been reduced by about a 32%, the biggest impact among all
the measures studied in the sensitivity analysis. In light of this notable cost reduction,
it is considered that the cost can definitely be reduced this way in the future. If it
is technically very difficult to design a structure completely made of concrete due to
resistance or impermeability reasons, finding alternative solutions that combine the
use of steel and reinforced concrete can still decrease this cost considerably, in the
view of the results obtained.
As a general wrap up of the sensitivity analysis and moving back to more im-
mediate costs variations, a case has been calculated (also using the optimal layout
obtained earlier) with some of the parameters modifications presented above, which
are considered as perfectly reasonable in the short-term. These are the following:
- Discount rate: 7%.
- The cost associated to the electrical infrastructure are assumed by the state
instead of the developer.
- The major planned O&M operations are excluded.
The LCOE value obtained with these parameters is 87.71 AC/MWh. The reduction
from the original value is quite significant, and it is relevant specially when comparing
it with the LCOE values of other technologies: commissioned onshore wind farms
are currently in the range of 55 to 70 AC/MWh, whereas some bottom-fixed offshore
wind farms auctioned in 2019 and 2020 are expected to have an LCOE of 60 to 75
AC/MWh [63].
The P80 costs in this case are still higher than those of its competing technologies.
However, in the case of a farm with a higher number of platforms, where the wind
and waves resources are stronger, the O&M is optimized, and where the WEC is
purposely designed according to the specific site’s conditions, the competitiveness of
the technology is ensured. Not to mention the possible technological modifications
discussed above that can eventually change the game in this sense.
==PAGE:92==
80
5 Results and Discussion
5.2
Uncertainty analysis
As it has been remarked and reminded constantly throughout the report up to now,
this model (as any other) is based on a series of assumptions and simplifications that
make possible the calculation itself as, otherwise, the complexity of some of the phe-
nomena involved would impede the feasibility of a study that involves such variety of
factors. Furthermore, some of these simplifications make possible a fairly quick calcu-
lation that also allows an optimization process that would otherwise take much longer.
Having these premises in mind, the uncertainties of a prior analysis model of this
kind need to be quantified when possible, and otherwise the user should be aware
of the possible sources of inaccuracy. It must be mentioned that the uncertainty in
specific values of parameters (like costs or rates as the ones seen in the sensitivity
analysis) are not included in this study, as their accurate values can eventually be
found with a more in-depth and resourceful research. The considered uncertainties
are, in change, those due to the model construction itself, the assumptions made, and
the source models of the resources inputs. In this case, the uncertainties have been
classified into quantifiable and unquantifiable (or, at least, unquantified at this point):
Quantified uncertainties:
- The uncertainty of the wind speed profile provided by the WRF model (NEWA)
was obtained by the developers after comparing results and observation. The error
with the observations is ∆w.s. = 9 −15% [60].
- Similarly, when checking the reliability of the MIKE21 waves model, DHI found
a maximum difference with measurements of ∆Hs = 0.25m [61].
- In the case of NO Jensen’s wakes model, the uncertainty can have two sources:
that due to the wave decay coefficient considered (showing a difference in the wake
losses of ∆wakes = 30% [64]), and that originated by the difference in the atmo-
spheric stability (causing a change of ∆AEP wind = 6% [65]).
- Additionally, the observed difference between the used wakes model and the
values obtained by WAsP is an average of ∆AEP wind = 0.4%, and a maximum value
of ∆AEP wind = 0.9%.
- As commented in Section 3.1.1, another source of uncertainty is that due to the
transformation of the scattered waves probabilistic matrices, obtaining a difference
with time series values of ∆AEP waves = 5%.
- The vanning efficiency uncertainty is not included in this study as the worst case
scenario value of ∆AEP waves = 15% was adopted, a conservative enough value.
- Lastly, it is estimated that there can be an uncertainty due to the interpolation
between the GWC standard heights. However, as a 110 m hub height has been used
in this case, being very close to the reference height of 100 m, the uncertainty due to
this interpolation is discarded.
==PAGE:93==
5.2 Uncertainty analysis
81
Unquantifiable uncertainties:
- The waves shadow model is arguably the main unknown uncertainty as it could
not be compared with an up-to-date non-linear model. However, it has been seen that
the influence of the waves energy in the total LCOE is much lower than that of the
wind, and the waves shadow losses are really small due to the big distances between
the platforms. Therefore, an error would not have a big impact in the calculation.
- An error associated to the power output matrix of the WEC, but its parameters
were obtained from both numerical calculations and measurements, so the output
values provided by FPP should be reliable.
- The land shadow influence on the wind speed at different parts of a site was
assumed as negligible. This is one of the reasons why having real measurements of
the site before carrying out a project is very important.
- The transmission losses model used is based on observed losses in real cables.
However, the empirical values in which it is based could not be completely accurate
for all cases. However, this uncertainty is unknown.
The graphs with the AEP wind and AEP waves variations due to the described
quantifiable uncertainties are presented below:
Figure 5.9: Uncertain factors effect on AEPwind and AEPwind.
==PAGE:94==
82
5 Results and Discussion
In the first element of the left chart, it has been estimated that the difference in
the wind speed means a variation in the power output of the WTG according to its
power curve slope (assumed linear trend-line of 407 kW/m/s), and since the mean
wind speed in this case is 10.65 m/s, the changes of 9% and 15% in the wind speed
have an influence in the AEP wind of 8.3% and 13.9% respectively. In order to get
the variation of AEP waves due to the waves height error of 0.25 m, the scattered
probabilistic matrices were shifted 0.5 m (their minimum resolution), and the change
in AEPwaves was then divided by two, obtaining the shown ∆AEP waves = 12.5%.
Given that all the presented uncertainties are assumed to be stochastic indepen-
dent processes, the combined average uncertainties can be calculated as follows:
(∆AEP wind
AEP wind
)2
total
=
(∆AEP wind
AEP wind
)2
NEW A
+
(∆AEP wind
AEP wind
)2
W DC
+
+
(∆AEP wind
AEP wind
)2
AT
+
(∆AEP wind
AEP wind
)2
W AsP
(5.1)
(∆AEP waves
AEP waves
)2
total
=
(∆AEP waves
AEP waves
)2
DHI
+
(∆AEP waves
AEP waves
)2
inputs
(5.2)
Obtaining a 11.9% uncertainty on the AEP wind calculation and a 13.4% in the
case of AEP waves. And thus the uncertainty in terms of the LCOE is defined as:
(∆LCOE
LCOE
)2
total
=
(∆LCOE
LCOE
)2
wind
+
(∆LCOE
LCOE
)2
waves
(5.3)
Which provides a total uncertainty in the model’s LCOE calculation of 11.7%.
Once this value has been obtained, it is convenient to mention that in order to min-
imize the effects of the uncertainties, the policy has been followed is to adopt fairly
conservative values throughout the model and in this case analysis.
As a consequence of these results it shall be said that, even though these conser-
vative assumptions have often been adopted, at the end this model can serve as a
primary analysis of the costs and energy output that result of this type of project,
which should be then followed by a thorough study of the site of interest in case
of having the intention of actually carrying out a specific project.
Both more in-
depth research, and also site and technology specific physical measurements should
be made in order to obtain accurate results that can be assured to match reality with
all guarantees.
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The main objective of the present study was to develop a tool that allows the user
to minimize the lifetime costs of an offshore farm composed of the Floating Power
Plant’s hybrid wind and wave concept. The different models or parts that conform
the tool were built in MATLAB, followed by a demonstration of the tool through a
case analysis. An easy-to-use philosophy, motivated by the objective of providing a
useful tool, led to implementing all the inputs (divided into site, power converters
and costs related inputs) through spreadsheets instead of directly in the code, so
the parameters are easily modifiable. The tool consists of the waves, wind and costs
models, and the layout optimization algorithm.
In the wave energy model (first undertaken part of the project), the most
immediate challenge was the adaptation of the waves input in the form of three
scattered matrices that depict the probability of occurrence of their energy defining
characteristics: the significant height, the energy period and the direction. This data,
freely accessible for FPP at any site, was transformed to a single three-dimensional
probabilistic matrix with a wave energy output error of just a 5% in comparison to
time-series data. Next, a wave shadows calculation model was adapted, introduc-
ing a relationship between the waves’ zero-crossing and energy periods, correcting a
mistaken length value, and decreasing its computing time to 4% of the original one.
Finally, the WEC’s power output matrix was integrated, an 85% vanning efficiency
due to simultaneous waves directions was added, being then able to obtain the the
wave’s annual energy production.
The wind energy model was subsequently implemented. The input informa-
tion, commonly in the form of Generalized Wind Climates, is transformed into a
probability matrix that relates the wind speed and direction at a certain hub height.
Two MATLAB wind wakes models based on N.O. Jensen’s calculation method were
acquired and compared with WAsP. The chosen model provides an average error of
0.35% in the wind energy output and a 3.5% error in the wake losses. It was observed
that a resolution of 10◦in the input data is needed to ensure a correct calculation.
The wind annual energy production is then found by multiplying the WTG’s power
curves with the wind speeds after the wakes effect.
After obtaining the annual energy production, a costs calculation method was
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Conclusion
defined to obtain the farm’s Levelized Cost of Energy, a powerful indicator for in-
vestors. On the one hand, the energy generated undergoes further variations in this
last module as downtime and transmission losses are discounted, finally obtaining the
net energy sold to the grid each year. On the other, all the expenses were calculated
using around 140 figures and parameters: the investment costs (CAPEX), applied
before the start of the project except for the decommissioning; and the maintenance
operational costs (OPEX) and downtime periods (applied throughout the lifetime).
These costs depend on the site’s distance to shore, to the harbor, and to the grid, as
well as on the bathymetry. All in all, the LCOE, primary output value of the model
is obtained, remaining the computing time of the entire tool below 5 seconds.
The last step to conform the tool was the optimization process that carries out
the cost minimization by modifying certain decision variables. Given the problem’s
convex nature and the presence of discrete parameters, a metaheuristic algorithm is
needed. After considering different options, the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO),
based on animal swarm behaviors, was chosen.
The decision variables that were
finally implemented are the platforms’ positions (arranged in rows for visual and
operational considerations), substation position, and the export cable choice. Fur-
thermore, restraints and penalizations associated to the variables were implemented.
The algorithm is able to find optimized solutions but a few issues were found regard-
ing integer input variables, and when obtaining a consistent global minimum.
In the final phase of the project, a case study was carried out off the west coast
of Ireland, an area with a convenient wind and waves climate. A farm size of 25
platforms and a grid connection through an onshore 220kV substation were chosen
by means of a study of the area’s grid strength. After a qualitative and quantitative
process of elimination, Site 7 was chosen, with an LCOE of 116.56 AC/MWh. The
result was put in context, and relevant costs variations due to the most influential
factors were investigated through a sensitivity analysis. The factor with the highest
influence, also considering its degree of uncertainty, is the discount rate, with a vari-
ation effect on the LCOE of about a 14%, for a 2% change of the parameter (from
its base 9% value to a 7%). Furthermore, situations with certain modifications were
studied and a severe cost reduction was found if concrete was to be used instead of
steel. A plausible short-term scenario with certain parameter variations was calcu-
lated, obtaining a result of 87 AC/MWh, significantly closer to that of bottom-fixed
wind farms currently being auctioned (60 to 75 AC/MWh). It is considered that the
technology presents good potential as there is room for costs reduction, specially in
the structure’s material (first cost component of floating concepts), where just a shift
from steel to concrete could result in LCOE values in the range of 60 to 70 AC/MWh.
Finally, an uncertainty analysis was carried out, resulting in an estimated variation
of an 11.7% in the LCOE output, and highlighting relevant aspects regarding the
input data, its processing, and the model construction, possible sources of inaccuracies.
It is deducted that a study of this kind should only be serve as a preliminary tool
==PAGE:97==
6.1 Future work
85
which must be followed by accurate site specific research. A special effort should be
made in the wind and waves climate measurement, due to the important discrepancies
between the existent data models.
6.1
Future work
A list of possible modifications, investigation fields and improvements to the model
developed is presented below:
- The scaling effects of the WEC’s shadows model should be investigated, as well
as the linearities assumed by the numerical model in order to prove that it reproduces
well the lab-scale measurements.
- A more specific O&M strategy should be modeled after offshore testing.
A
trustworthy aging rate could be defined and the O&M could be optimized for a
certain lifetime of the project.
- A DC export transmission system (normally feasible for distances higher than
100km offshore) could also be modeled, allowing the optimization algorithm to choose
between AC and DC.
- The power output matrices of different sized WEC should be developed so the
algorithm would choose the most optimal one among the different possibilities. Sim-
ilarly, it could be done so with the WTGs (two more decision variables).
- An optimization of the inter-array cables disposition can also be done (instead
of exclusively connecting all of them to the substation individually), in order to study
which is the most convenient arrangement in each case.
- A more advanced algorithm can be implemented for lay-out optimization: for
example the Agent Swarm Optimization algorithm, that means a solution to other
algorithms’ issues.
- A translation to other programming languages of the model, like Python, would
be interesting, as it could communicate, for example, with the upcoming PyWAsP or
with TopFarm, and some routines could be run with these more specialized tools.
- Aside from the present model, a study should be made with regards to the
technological feasibility of changing the platform’s material from steel to concrete,
given the high cost reduction potential.
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
NASA and S. Callery. (2019). Global climate change: Scientific consensus, [On-
line]. Available: https://climate.nasa.gov/scientific-consensus.
[2]
D. Wallace-Wells, The uninhabitable earth. Crown Publishing Group, 2017.
[3]
R. K. Pachauri, M. R. Allen, V. R. Barros, J. Broome, W. Cramer, R. Christ,
J. A. Church, L. Clarke, Q. Dahe, P. Dasgupta, et al., Climate change 2014:
synthesis report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the fifth
assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ipcc,
2014.
[4]
World Energy Council (WEC). (2015). Wind energy resource, [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.worldenergy.org/data/resources/resource/wind/
(visited on 2019).
[5]
W. Europe, Wind energy in europe in 2018, trends and statistics, 2018.
[6]
World Wind Energy Association (WWEA). (2019). Wind power capacity world-
wide reaches 597 gw, 50.1 gw added in 2018, [Online]. Available: https://
wwindea . org / blog / 2019 / 02 / 25 / wind - power - capacity - worldwide -
reaches-600-gw-539-gw-added-in-2018/ (visited on 2019).
[7]
Statista. (2019). Global offshore wind energy capacity from 2008 to 2018 (in
megawatts), [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
476327/global-capacity-of-offshore-wind-energy/.
[8]
Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC). (2019). 51.3 gw of global wind capacity
installed in 2018, [Online]. Available: https://gwec.net/51-3-gw-of-global-
wind-capacity-installed-in-2018/.
[9]
G. R. Energy. (2019). Haliade-x offshore wind turbine platform, [Online]. Avail-
able: https : / / www . ge . com / renewableenergy / wind - energy / offshore -
wind/haliade-x-offshore-turbine (visited on 2019).
[10]
“Floating offshore wind vision statement,” Wind Europe, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[11]
H. Stiedsal, “Tetraspar and tetrabase: Industrialized offshore wind turbine foun-
dations,” Stiedsal Offshore Technologies, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[12]
C. Pérez-Collazo, D Greaves, and G Iglesias, “A review of combined wave and
offshore wind energy,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 42,
pages 141–153, 2015.
==PAGE:100==
88
Bibliography
[13]
S. Astariz and G. Iglesias, “Enhancing wave energy competitiveness through co-
located wind and wave energy farms. a review on the shadow effect,” Energies,
volume 8, number 7, pages 7344–7366, 2015.
[14]
Floating Power Plant A/S. (2019). Invest in the future, [Online]. Available:
http://www.floatingpowerplant.com/.
[15]
C. Pérez-Collazo, M. M. Jakobsen, H. Buckland, and J. Fernández-Chozas, “Syn-
ergies for a wave-wind energy concept,” 2013.
[16]
W. Power. (2019). Why wave power, [Online]. Available: https://www.waves4power.
com/why-wave-power/.
[17]
H. de Sevin, “Development of an array design framework for a hybrid converter
offshore farm,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
[18]
EMODnet. (2019). Bathymetry viewing and downloading service, [Online]. Avail-
able: http://portal.emodnet-bathymetry.eu/?menu=19.
[19]
A. Pecher and J. P. Kofoed, Handbook of ocean wave energy. Springer London,
2017.
[20]
K. Johannessen, T. S. Meling, S. Hayer, et al., “Joint distribution for wind
and waves in the northern north sea,” in The Eleventh International Offshore
and Polar Engineering Conference, International Society of Offshore and Polar
Engineers, 2001.
[21]
Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI A/S). (2019). Waves data, [Online]. Available:
https://www.dhigroup.com/.
[22]
J. Pastor and Y. Liu, “Wave climate resource analysis based on a revised gamma
spectrum for wave energy conversion technology,” Sustainability, volume 8, num-
ber 12, page 1321, 2016.
[23]
S. Bellew, A. Køhler, A. Juliussen, P. Le Faucheux, A. Yde, and V. David, “Joint
wind wave testing and validation of floating power plant’s renewable hybrid,”
2015.
[24]
A. Semedo, K. Sušelj, A. Rutgersson, and A. Sterl, “A global view on the
wind sea and swell climate and variability from era-40,” Journal of Climate,
volume 24, number 5, pages 1461–1479, 2011.
[25]
R. Li, “Simulation of 8mw floating wind turbine,” Technical University of Den-
mark, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[26]
D. W. Energy. (2019). Wind atlas methodology, [Online]. Available: https://
www.wasp.dk/WAsP/Details/Wind-Atlas-Generation/WindAtlasMethodology.
[27]
——, (2019). Wasp, [Online]. Available: https://www.wasp.dk/.
[28]
A. Peña, P.-E. Réthoré, and O. Rathmann, “Modeling large offshore wind farms
under different atmospheric stability regimes with the park wake model,” Re-
newable energy, volume 70, pages 164–171, 2014.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
89
[29]
P. Sanderhoff, “Park-user’s guide. a pc-program for calculation of wind turbine
park performance,” 1993.
[30]
L. Kitzling, D. Møller, and R. Bramstoft, “Feasibility studies of energy projects,
lecture note 3: Levelized cost of energy,” Technical University of Denmark, Tech.
Rep., 2017.
[31]
M. Lerch, M. De-Prada-Gil, C. Molins, and G. Benveniste, “Sensitivity analysis
on the levelized cost of energy for floating offshore wind farms,” Sustainable
Energy Technologies and Assessments, volume 30, pages 77–90, 2018.
[32]
G. L. Ohlsen, “Positioning of danish offshore wind farms until 2030 using lev-
elized cost of energy (lcoe),” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark,
2019.
[33]
A. G. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, “Review of offshore wind farm cost components,”
Energy for Sustainable Development, volume 37, pages 10–19, 2017.
[34]
L. Castro-Santos, E. Martins, and C. G. Soares, “Cost assessment methodol-
ogy for combined wind and wave floating offshore renewable energy systems,”
Renewable energy, volume 97, pages 866–880, 2016.
[35]
E. Camm and C. Edwards, “Reactive compensation systems for large wind
farms,” in 2008 IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Ex-
position, IEEE, 2008, pages 1–5.
[36]
T. Cronin, “Grid connection. planning and development of wind farms,” Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[37]
J. F. Manwell, J. G. McGowan, and A. L. Rogers, Wind energy explained: theory,
design and application. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[38]
S. Lundberg, “Performance comparison of wind park configurations,” Chalmers
University of Technology, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[39]
M. Alonso and H. Amarís, “Impact of wind farms in power systems,” Wind
Farm, 2011.
[40]
A. Kusiak and H. Zheng, “Optimization of wind turbine energy and power factor
with an evolutionary computation algorithm,” Energy, volume 35, number 3,
pages 1324–1332, 2010.
[41]
G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and B Diviacco, “Optimization of wind turbine posi-
tioning in large windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm,” Journal of Wind
Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, volume 51, number 1, pages 105–116,
1994.
[42]
J. S. González, A. G. G. Rodriguez, J. C. Mora, J. R. Santos, and M. B. Payan,
“Optimization of wind farm turbines layout using an evolutive algorithm,” Re-
newable energy, volume 35, number 8, pages 1671–1681, 2010.
[43]
T. Back, Evolutionary algorithms in theory and practice: evolution strategies,
evolutionary programming, genetic algorithms. Oxford university press, 1996.
==PAGE:102==
90
Bibliography
[44]
S. Grady, M. Hussaini, and M. M. Abdullah, “Placement of wind turbines using
genetic algorithms,” Renewable energy, volume 30, number 2, pages 259–270,
2005.
[45]
A. Emami and P. Noghreh, “New approach on optimization in placement of
wind turbines within wind farm by genetic algorithms,” Renewable Energy, vol-
ume 35, number 7, pages 1559–1564, 2010.
[46]
R. Eberhart and J. Kennedy, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on neural networks, Citeseer, volume 4, 1995,
pages 1942–1948.
[47]
I. M. Arango, J. I. Sebastián, R. P. García, and J. B. M. Rodríguez, “Water dis-
tribution system design using agent swarm optimization,” in Water Distribution
Systems Analysis 2010, 2010, pages 747–763.
[48]
I. Montalvo, J. Izquierdo, R. Pérez-García, and M. Herrera, “Water distribution
system computer-aided design by agent swarm optimization,” Computer-Aided
Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, volume 29, number 6, pages 433–448, 2014.
[49]
J. Stopa, D. Janiga, P. Wojnarowski, and R. Czarnota, “Optimization of well
placement and control to maximize CO￿trapping during geologic sequestra-
tion,” AGH Drilling, Oil, Gas, volume 33, number 1, page 93, 2016, issn: 1507-
0042. doi: 10.7494/drill.2016.33.1.93.
[50]
Y. Shi and R. Eberhart, “A modified particle swarm optimizer,” in 1998 IEEE
international conference on evolutionary computation proceedings. IEEE world
congress on computational intelligence (Cat. No. 98TH8360), IEEE, 1998, pages 69–
73.
[51]
M. E. H. Pedersen, “Good parameters for particle swarm optimization,” Hvass
Lab., Copenhagen, Denmark, Tech. Rep. HL1001, pages 1551–3203, 2010.
[52]
Irish Examiner. (2019). Ireland second highest in europe for wind energy, [On-
line]. Available: https://www.irishexaminer.com/breakingnews/ireland/
ireland-second-highest-in-europe-for-wind-energy-910442.html.
[53]
Wind Power Monthly. (2019). Ireland plans 12gw renewables boost, [Online].
Available: https://www.windpowermonthly.com/article/1587884/ireland-
plans-12gw-renewables-boost.
[54]
Department of Communications, Climate Action & Environment of the Repub-
lic of Ireland. (2019). Renewable electricity support scheme, [Online]. Available:
https://www.dccae.gov.ie/en-ie/energy/topics/Renewable-Energy/
electricity / renewable - electricity - supports / ress / Pages / default .
aspx.
[55]
Government of Ireland, “Renewable electricity support scheme. high level de-
sign,” 2019.
[56]
EIRGRID and SONI, “All-island ten year transmission forecast statement,”
2016.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
91
[57]
Marine Traffic. (2019). Density maps, [Online]. Available: https://www.marinetraffic.
com.
[58]
C. Desmond, J. Murphy, L. Blonk, and W. Haans, “Description of an 8 mw ref-
erence wind turbine,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, IOP Publishing,
volume 753, 2016, page 092 013.
[59]
New European Wind Atlas (NEWA). (2019). Wind resource for wind farm
siting, [Online]. Available: http://www.neweuropeanwindatlas.eu/.
[60]
B. Witha, A. N. Hahmann, T. Sile, M. Dörenkämper, Y. Ezber, E. G. Busta-
mante, J. F. Gonzalez-Rouco, G. Leroy, and J. Navarro, “Report on wrf model
sensitivity studies and specifications for the mesoscale wind atlas production
runs: Deliverable d4. 3,” 2019.
[61]
Danish Hydraulics Institute, “Mike 21 wave modelling spectral waves fm short
description,” 2017.
[62]
R. Ebenhoch, D. Matha, S. Marathe, P. C. Muñoz, and C. Molins, “Comparative
levelized cost of energy analysis,” Energy Procedia, volume 80, pages 108–122,
2015.
[63]
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Renewable power generation
costs in 2017- key findings and executive summary, 2017.
[64]
T. Sørensen, M. L. Thøgersen, P. Nielsen, and N. Jernesvej, “Adapting and
calibration of existing wake models to meet the conditions inside offshore wind
farms,” EMD International A/S. Aalborg, 2008.
[65]
A. Peña and O. Rathmann, “Atmospheric stability-dependent infinite wind-
farm models and the wake-decay coefficient,” Wind Energy, volume 17, num-
ber 8, pages 1269–1285, 2014.
[66]
J. H. Larsen, H. C. Soerensen, E. Christiansen, S. Naef, and P. Vølund, “Experi-
ences from middelgrunden 40 mw offshore wind farm,” in Copenhagen offshore
wind conference, 2005, pages 1–8.
[67]
I Slengesol, W. P. de Miranda, N Birch, J Liebst, and A van der Herm, “Offshore
wind experiences: A bottom-up review of 16 projects,” Project ref. OW2010-002.
Ocean Wind AS, Norway, 2010.
[68]
ODE, “Study of the costs of offshore wind generation. technical report urn num-
ber 07/779,” Offshore Design Engineering (ODE) Limited, Renewables Advisory
Board (RAB) & DTI, 2007.
[69]
G. Gerdes, A Tiedemannm, and S. Zeelenberg, Case study: European offshore
wind farms-a survey for the analysis of the experiences and lessons learnt by
developers of offshore wind farms, 2006.
[70]
D. Westwood, “Offshore wind assessment for norway,” Oslo: The Research
Council of Norway. North Sea Energy, 2010.
==PAGE:104==
92
Bibliography
[71]
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). (2018). Wind costs 2010-
2015, [Online]. Available: http : / / resourceirena . irena . org / gateway /
dashboard/?topic=3\&subTopic=31.
[72]
D. Energinet, Technology data for energy plants for electricity and district heat-
ing generation, 2016 (Updated in 2019).
[73]
BloombergNEF. (2018). 2h 2017 wind turbine price index, [Online]. Available:
https://about.bnef.com/blog/2h-2017-wind-turbine-price-index/
(visited on 2019).
[74]
X. ABB, Submarine cable systems. attachment to xlpe land cable systems user’s
guide, 2010.
[75]
G. Smith, C. Garret, and G. Gibberd, Logistics and cost reduction of decomis-
sioning offshore wind farms. DNV GL, 2015.
[76]
Grant Thornton; Clean Energy Pipeline, Renewable energy discount rate survey
results – 2018, 2018.
[77]
A. Myhr, C. Bjerkseter, A. Ågotnes, and T. A. Nygaard, “Levelised cost of
energy for offshore floating wind turbines in a life cycle perspective,” Renewable
Energy, volume 66, pages 714–728, 2014.
[78]
Grant Thornton; Clean Energy Pipeline, Renewable energy discount rate survey
results – 2017, 2017.
[79]
Offshore Engineer. (2019). Maintaining tension in subsea cable laying, [On-
line]. Available: https://www.oedigital.com/news/461464-maintaining-
tension-in-subsea-cable-laying.
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A
Costs Figures: Sources
and Assumptions
The costs related figures used in the model and obtained from the literature through
a research process are presented in the following Appendix. Their values, sources,
and the decision-making process are depicted below.
Nevertheless, FPP’s specific
Design and Project Management, Mooring, P80, Installation, O&M and decommis-
sioning related costs, as well as the WEC power output matrix were left out, as they
are specified in an alternative and confidential appendix in order to maintain the
company’s competitiveness in the market.
A.1
Design and project management
Country
Wind Farm
Cost
Cap [MW]
kAC2016/MW
DK
Middelgrunden
2.98 MAC
40
89
[66]
DK
Horns Rev & Nysted
0.1 MAC/MW
109
[37]
NL
Prinses Amalia
10 MAC
120
92
[67]
UK
ODE Costs Model
5.6 M£
108
88
[68]
UK
Scroby Sands
1.7 M£
60
52
[69]
UK
North Hoyle
0.8 M£/MW
144
[67]
Table A.1: Project management costs for commissioned offshore wind farms.
The design and project management strategy implemented was the one considered
currently in FPP. However, a general alternative parameter was initially modeled,
entailing an initial capital cost that has been observed to be dependent on the farm’s
total capacity and it has been implemented linearly in the model. As in many other
cases, the difficulty of its estimation comes from the unavailability of real information
and/or its low degree of specificity. In general, this cost involves several aspects such
as bathymetric and meteorological investigation, resources monitoring, financing, li-
==PAGE:106==
94
A Costs Figures: Sources and Assumptions
censing, legislation management, marketing, environmental impact assessment (EIA),
stakeholders management and design engineering [33, 34].
For the model, a country based average was selected as the cost value of the design
and project management. As an example, projects based in the UK have a cost of
94.67 kAC/MW. In countries without relevant information, the world average of 97.57
kAC/MW can be used instead.
A.2
Wind turbines
With regards to the cost of wind turbines, commercial secrecy and economies of scale
make difficult to establish a clear relation between their price and capacity.
The
costs of wind turbines also depend greatly on the year of acquisition as the market is
changing quickly, the capacity is constantly growing and the number of both manu-
facturers and promoters and their requests fluctuate quite a lot lately.
The turbines’ costs can generally be split into three components: acquisition,
shipping-assembling and electrical installation; the second one depending on the dis-
tance to shore and climate characteristics of the area [33]. Even though according to
certain sources the cost of turbines may also include the acquisition and/or the instal-
lation of the foundation, the three main cost components are in average distributed
as follows: 85% for the acquisition, about 5% for the installation (of the turbine only),
and the last 10% accounts for the electrical part. [70].
Using data from several commissioned and yet-to-be commissioned wind farms
(all prior to 2015), the following correlation between capacity and price was then
found to fit quite acceptably the wind turbine total costs [33]:
Costwt [kAC] = 1374 · Capacity0.87
wt
(A.1)
Presenting those of the studied farms with turbines bigger than 5 MW a cost in
the range of 1400-1600 kAC/MW, and those smaller between 500 and 800 kAC/MW.
On the other hand, focusing on somewhat more recent data, for turbines with
diameters greater than 95 m, an average value of 1143 USD/kW is the turbine price
index provided by Bloomberg NEF for 2015 [71], and a total cost of acquisition of
1107 kAC/MW was determined by DEA and Energinet in 2015 [72].
All in all, in order to meet the available data, disregarding the 5% that suppos-
edly corresponds to the installation, and taking into account the historical rate of
costs decrease obtained from IRENA (91.8 USD/kW/year), the more conservative
one predicted from DEA (48.6 AC/kW/year) [71, 72], and Bloomberg’s WTG costs
==PAGE:107==
A.3 Electrical infrastructure
95
projection shown in Figure A.1, it has been determined a cost of wind turbine of 850
kAC/MW by 2019.
Figure A.1: Turbine price by delivery date as of 2017 [73].
A.3
Electrical infrastructure
Sixteen types of export cables were included in the model for this study, as presented
in Table 4.4 (Section 4.2.4). Their associated costs are given in Table A.2 and they
have been obtained from the progressions depicted in Fig. A.2
Cost
(k€2016/km)
Section (mm2)
500
630
800
1000
Rated Voltage
(kV)
110
436.75
529.2
597.25
702.75
132
518
592
690
805
220
843
946
1,061
1,214
275
1,046.1
1,271.1
1,292.9
1,469.6
Table A.2: Costs of the cables used in the model.
==PAGE:108==
96
A Costs Figures: Sources and Assumptions
Figure A.2: Cables cost [33] (the values for the 110 kV and 275 kV cables were inter
and extrapolated respectively).
In order to define their rated apparent power and transmission losses through
the model presented in Section 3.3.4, the cable’s sections, rated current and loss
coefficients used in the model are presented below:
MV (V=10-90 kV)
HV (V= 100-300 kV)
S (mm2)
Irated (A)
S (mm2)
Irated (A)
95
300
300
530
120
340
400
590
150
375
500
655
185
420
630
715
240
480
800
775
300
530
1000
825
400
590
500
655
630
715
800
775
1000
825
Table A.3: Cables sections and rated current [74].
==PAGE:109==
A.4 Decommissioning
97
Voltage (kV)
P0
C0
Pk
11
5.01
0.0212
57656
22
13.08
0.0354
57656
33
21.48
0.0421
57656
45
38.40
0.0694
57656
66
70.71
0.1069
57656
110
149.70
0.149295
55566
132
200.87
0.1726
49470
220
530.30
0.2982
51211
275
878.4891
0.3606
55565.85
Table A.4: Transmission loss coefficients [38].
Having, again, been interpolated the coefficients of the 110 kV cable and extrap-
olated those of the 275kV cable as it is shown in Fig A.3.
Figure A.3: Cables loss coefficient with respect to its voltage (in kV).
Regarding the inter-array cables and the rest of the electrical costs, this informa-
tion was provided by FPP and therefore it is kept confidential.
A.4
Decommissioning
As it was done with the Design & Project Management costs, it has been used FPP’s
specific decommissioning costs. However, alternative figures based in existent wind
farms and estimations can be used in general terms.
However, due to the fact that most of the offshore wind farms still have not ar-
rived to the end of their lifetime, decommissioning still remains as a quite unknown
process when it comes to its costs. This uncertainty is increased by the facts that
==PAGE:110==
98
A Costs Figures: Sources and Assumptions
wind farms are currently being installed further offshore and wind turbines are con-
siderably bigger, so the conditions are changing. Also, the moderate but incessant
increase in the frequency of these decommissioning processes as offshore wind farms
start reaching their lifetime in the upcoming years, might also have an effect in its
costs.
And evidently, more uncertain is the case when it comes to floating wind,
not to talk about hybrid technologies. Arguably, offshore technology might imply
somewhat lower costs, which may, on the other hand, compensate for the increasing
distance offshore. [75].
A well fitted linear progression that uses values from future offshore projects esti-
mates a fixed cost of 1606 kAC2016, with a capacity dependent slope of 114 kAC2016/MW,
which provides a value of 13 MAC for a 100 MW farm [33]. As a contrast, available
data from few past decommissions of wind farms with 3-4 MW wind turbines indi-
cates quite higher costs, in the range of 300 to 500 kAC/MW, and thus 30-50 MAC for
a 100 MW wind farm [75].
As a solution of compromise and having the purpose of trying to match the rather
contradictory data, the linear expression ?? was used.
A.5
Discount rate
The discount rate, also defined as the opportunity cost of capital, represents the risk
cost of investing money in a specific project as opposed to doing so anywhere else,
and it is a key parameter for investors to determine the actual market value of these
projects [37, 76]. Of course, this risk depends highly on the type of technology used
in the project and its maturity.
Its impact in projects is quite big but, as it is not an entirely objective value, it is
a value difficult to estimate. It depends on investors and the studies they carry out
when analyzing the convenience of investing in specific projects. Also, once again,
secrecy makes the research of this value even more difficult.
As a first approach, when calculating costs of renewable energies, IRENA esti-
mates a discount rate of 7.5% for OECD countries [63], which is not precise enough
as there are quite different technologies with various risks and maturity in the wide
range of renewables. Focusing on offshore installations it was observed a decrease
with time of their discount rate. According to some studies, its value for offshore
projects was estimated to be from 8% to 12% in 2013 [31, 77]. However, more recent
data obtained from surveys made in 2017 and 2018 present somewhat lower average
values:
==PAGE:111==
A.6 Vessel speeds
99
Country
2017
2018
Ireland
Levered
9.50%
8.50%
Unlevered
8.25%
6.50%
United Kingdom
Levered
9%
8.75%
Unlevered
7.75%
7.25%
Nordic Countries
Levered
8.25%
8%
Unlevered
7%
6.75%
Germany
Levered
8%
8.25%
Unlevered
6.25%
6%
France
Levered
9.75%
9.50%
Unlevered
8.25%
8%
Table A.5: Surveyed discount rate by country for offshore wind energy projects [76,
78].
Given the discount rate’s uncertainty, taking into account the previous information
and knowing, as it has been remarked, that the rate’s trend is negative, but keeping
in mind on the other hand that hybrid wind-wave technology is a yet-to-scale and
therefore more risky technology, a rather conservative discount rate of 9% has been
used in the model.
A.6
Vessel speeds
The following speeds of the boats involved in the installation, maintenance and de-
commissioning of the farm are considered in the model:
- Towing vessel: cruise speed (return) of 14 knots (25.9 km/h) and towing speed
of 5 knots (9.26 km/h).
- Cable laying vessel: cruise speed of 14 knots, and cable laying speed of 0.65
knots (1.2 km/h) [79].
- General passenger O&M vessel: average cruise speed of 20 knots (37 km/h).
- Cable removal vessel: cable removal speed of 0.5 knots (0.9 km/h).
==PAGE:112==
100
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B
Confidential data
from Floating Power
Plant A/S
==PAGE:114==
