==PAGE:1==
August 4, 2019
Inﬂuence of concrete microstructure on
the elastic modulus
Master’s thesis
Caroline Marquar Larsen - s143950
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of civil engineering
Brovej, building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Civil Engineering at the Techni-
cal University of Denmark (DTU) in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring
an M.Sc. in civil engineering. The project is credited to 30 ECTS points and
has been carried out in the period 04/03/2019 - 04/08/2019. The project was
made under the supervision of Gregor Fischer and Ieva Paegle.
The thesis deals with investigating the inﬂuence of the microstructure of con-
crete on its elastic modulus. This is done through experiments using Digital
Image Correlation (DIC) to investigate the deformation in diﬀerent phases of
the concrete. The thesis consists of six chapters. The ﬁrst chapter introduces the
scope of the thesis and the ﬁeld of research. The second chapter presents some
theory and a literature review on the subject. The third chapter reviews the
materials, the test specimens and the execution of the experiments. In chapter
four the results are presented and in chapter ﬁve the results are discussed. Fi-
nally, the last chapter presents the conclusion and recommendations for further
work.
Caroline Marquar Larsen
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
I would ﬁrstly like to thank my supervisors Gregor Fischer and Ieva Paegle for
their guidance and help with everything from practical matters to understand-
ing the results throughout the project.
Additionally, I would like to thank fellow students Crestian Ib Bronér and Sła-
womir Derewianko with whom most of the experiments were conducted. Thanks
for the good collaboration and for sharing your knowledge on the subject.
Lastly a special thanks to the technicians at DTU’s department of civil engi-
neering, for the help with all the practical matter of casting and test set-up.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The inﬂuence of the concrete microstructure on the elastic modulus was investi-
gated in this master’s thesis. This was done through a series of test on specimens
made with glass rods representing coarse aggregates. The glass rods were cast
in specimens made with two diﬀerent mortar types, with diﬀerent compositions
and diﬀerent elastic moduli.
The ﬁrst specimens were made with four 20mm glass rods arranged two diﬀerent
ways. Thereafter the number of aggregates were increased adding smaller glass
rods in steps around the basis arrangements. This was done to investigate the
inﬂuence of the amount and arrangements of aggregates on the elastic modulus
of concrete.
The experiments were performed by compression of the test specimens with
the surface deformations tracked and analysed using Digital Image Correlation
(DIC). Additionally, some specimens were tested with extensometers for com-
parison.
It was concluded that the aggregate amount and composition inﬂuence the de-
formations and thereby the elastic modulus of concrete. It was found that the
mortar composition changed how deformations appeared in the mortar between
aggregates. It was observed that denser mortar made with silica fume led to
larger deformations in lines between the coarse aggregates. The porous mortar
was seen to deform more evenly until a certain amount of coarse aggregates were
present.
Nothing conclusive could be said based solely on the found elastic moduli of
the specimens. However, investigation of the deformations showed tendencies
related to the elastic modulus of concrete. The experiments showed that the
stiﬀness of concrete is determined by the deformations of the components. It
was observed that the number of coarse aggregates controlled which phases of
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
the concrete took the biggest part in the total deformation. Additionally, it was
seen that more stiﬀaggregates led to a higher deformation of the soft mortar in
the interface between the mortar and aggregates. Based on this it was concluded
that the addition of coarse aggregates to the mortar mix would not necessarily
change the total deformation and thereby the elastic modulus. It was addition-
ally found that for some mortar mixes the addition of aggregates led to higher
deformations of the interface, which indicated that the interface became softer.
Lastly, it was, based on some of the observed tendencies, speculated whether
the specimens used in the experiments, actually imitate the conditions of real
concrete completely.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgement
iii
Abstract
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory and Literature Review
3
2.1
Elastic modulus of concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Main factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Interfacial transition zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Aggregate properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Volume and gradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methods
11
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Glass rods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Test specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Casting and preparation of specimens
. . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Testing procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Compressive strength
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Elasticity tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Results
29
4.1
Compression strength
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Visualisation of deformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Deformations in the load direction . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Deformations perpendicular to the load direction . . . . .
35
4.3
Elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.1
Displacement of phases in load direction . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.2
Displacement of phases perpendicular to load direction . .
52
4.4.3
Displacement of interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4.4
Movements of aggregates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Discussion
61
5.1
Aggregates eﬀect on the elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Inﬂuence of aggregate composition on the deformations
. . . . .
63
5.2.1
Visualised deformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2.2
Actual displacement and relative displacement
. . . . . .
64
5.2.3
Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2.4
Movements of aggregates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Reliability of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Conclusion
71
6.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Bibliography
75
Appendices
77
A
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B
Temperature measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C
Stress-strain curves for mortar specimens
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.1
Stiﬀmortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.2
Soft mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
D
Specimen datasheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
E
Aggregate movements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The elastic modulus of concrete has been investigated by many and has been
found to be highly inﬂuenced by the diﬀerent components. However, as concrete
is a multiphase material, determining how the composition of these components
aﬀects the elastic modulus has proven more diﬃcult. Understanding how the
composition of concrete inﬂuences its elastic modulus, as well as other proper-
ties, requires an understanding of how the components are aﬀected by and aﬀect
one another. Concrete is usually said to be made up of aggregates, a cement
paste matrix and the interface between these known as the interfacial transition
zone (ITZ). So understanding how these phases inﬂuence the elastic modulus
individually and combined is required.
In this thesis, the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent components on the elastic modulus
of concrete is investigated. The focus is on how the elastic modulus and general
behaviour of concrete in uniaxial compression, are aﬀected by its composition.
Speciﬁcally, the inﬂuence from the amount and composition of coarse aggre-
gates, as well as the stiﬀness and composition of diﬀerent mortars, is explored.
Experiments will be made testing the eﬀects of variations in the arrangements
and number of coarse aggregates, as well as the eﬀect of using diﬀerent mortar
mixes. The concrete specimens will be tested in uniaxial compression and Dig-
ital Image Correlation (DIC) will be used to visualise the deformations. The
data will be analysed with the purpose of getting an understanding of the eﬀects
the composition has on the elastic modulus and the general behaviour.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement
The goal of this thesis is to show how the structure of concrete inﬂuences its
elastic modulus. To due this the following questions will be addressed
• What makes the stiﬀness of concrete?
• In what way does the coarse aggregates inﬂuence the stiﬀness of concrete?
• What inﬂuence does the arrangement of the aggregates have on the defor-
mations of concrete in compression?
• How does changing the aggregate amount inﬂuence the behaviour of con-
crete in compression?
• How are deformations in concrete in compression inﬂuenced by the stiﬀness
and composition of the mortar?
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theory and Literature
Review
This chapter is a review of previous literature within the ﬁeld of elastic modulus
of concrete and the eﬀects of the microstructure. First, some general theory of
the elastic modulus of concrete is presented, as well as the factors that aﬀect
the elastic modulus. Thereafter, diﬀerent studies investigating the inﬂuence of
especially the aggregates eﬀect on the elastic modulus of concrete is reviewed.
The review is based on the ﬁndings of a review made previously by the author,
before the beginning of this project. The main points from the previous review
are included based on relevance, as well as points from additional literature.
The full literature review, made previously, can be found in Appendix A.
2.1
Elastic modulus of concrete
The elastic modulus of a material, also called Young’s modulus, is a property
that describes the stiﬀness of a material. The elastic modulus, E, is deﬁned
as the ratio between the stress applied, σ, and the resulting strain, ε, of the
material. The relation between these is described by Hooke’s law [1]:
σ = E · ε
(2.1)
In the case of linear elastic materials, the stress is linearly proportional to the
strain and can be described with equation (2.1). In this case, the elastic modu-
==PAGE:14==
4
Theory and Literature Review
lus is constant.
Concrete is a multiphase heterogeneous material and the stress-strain relation-
ship is, therefore, curvilinear [2]. The stress-strain relation for concrete is rel-
atively linear until about 50% of the ultimate strength. Hereafter the slope of
the curve begins to ﬂatten [3, p. 83].
The elastic modulus of concrete is therefore not constant, but rather depending
on the applied stress. For this reason, the elastic modulus of concrete is usually
determined by either a secant modulus or a tangent modulus.
A secant elastic modulus is the slope of a line between two points on the stress-
strain curve:
Ecm = σ2 −σ1
ε2 −ε1
(2.2)
A tangent elastic modulus is the slope of the curve at a point on the stress-strain
curve:
Etan = dσ
dε
(2.3)
Figure 2.1 displays the form of a general stress-strain curve for concrete with
the diﬀerent elastic moduli.
Figure 2.1: Stress-strain curve for concrete with diﬀerent elastic moduli.
2.2
Main factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus
The elastic modulus of concrete is aﬀected by a lot of factors. According to
Mehta & Monterio [3, p. 86-88], as concrete is a heterogeneous multiphase ma-
terial, the elastic modulus is mainly determined by the porosity, density and the
elastic moduli of the diﬀerent components that makes up the material.
Concrete is sometimes considered as a two-phase material consisting of a cement-
paste matrix and aggregates as the components [3, p. 556-559].
The elastic modulus of the cement-paste matrix is, according to Mehta & Mon-
terio [3, p. 86-87], determined by the porosity of the matrix as the porosity
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Main factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus
5
determines the elastic modulus of the component. The porosity of the cement-
paste matrix is determined by the water-cement ratio (w/c-ratio), the air con-
tent, the degree of hydration and the addition of admixtures.
As for the eﬀect from the aggregates, it is stated in [3, p. 86-87] that the most
important characteristic inﬂuencing the elastic modulus of the concrete, is the
porosity of the aggregates. Generally the larger the amount of coarse aggregates
in a concrete mix with high elastic modulus, the higher the elastic modulus of
the concrete becomes. In addition to this, it is stated that the other properties
such as the size, shape, surface texture and grading of the aggregates also aﬀects
the elastic modulus of concrete.
In addition to the cement-paste matrix and the aggregates, the interface be-
tween these, known as the Interfacial Transition Zone (ITZ), also inﬂuences the
elastic modulus of concrete. The ITZ has a diﬀerent microstructure than the
rest of the cement-past matrix. Generally, the ITZ has more capillary voids,
microcracks and calcium hydroxide crystals than the rest of the cement-paste
matrix, which are factors contributing to a higher porosity, which leads to a
lower elastic modulus.
Lastly, according to Mehta & Monterio [3, p. 88], the elastic modulus of concrete
is aﬀected by the testing parameters. The elastic modulus of concrete is most
commonly found by adding load in compression to a test specimen while mea-
suring the corresponding strain in the specimen. The moisture state at which
the concrete is at during testing has been found to aﬀect the elastic modulus
of a concrete specimen. Specimens tested in wet conditions have been found
to have up to 15% higher elastic modulus. Additionally, the rate at which a
specimen is loaded can aﬀect the measured elastic modulus. If the load is added
instantaneously the specimen will fail with only very little strain development,
making the elastic modulus higher. Conversely, if the load is added very slowly
the elastic modulus is lower as this leads to superimposed elastic and creep
strain.
2.2.1
Interfacial transition zone
The ITZ is, as mentioned, a zone in the cement-paste matrix around the ag-
gregates with diﬀerent properties than the rest of the matrix. In addition to
having a lower elastic modulus, the ITZ also has lower strength and is therefore
a weak link in the matrix. The development of the ITZ happens, as described
by Mehta & Monterio [3, p. 40], when the concrete is freshly compacted and a
water ﬁlm is formed around the aggregate which leads to a higher w/c-ratio in
the area. This means that larger calcium hydroxide crystals form in the area,
which increases the porosity and thereby decreases the elastic modulus and the
strength.
It has been described by Metha & Monterio [3] and Neville [2] how the ITZ is
often where the concrete ﬁrst cracks under loading. Due to movements between
==PAGE:16==
6
Theory and Literature Review
aggregates and the cement paste during curing, microcracks already occur in the
ITZ before loading, and these increase in numbers as the load is increased. This
increase in microcracks during loading is what shapes the stress-strain curve.
Where both the aggregates and the cement paste that make up concrete usually
remain elastic until failure, concrete as a material shows inelastic behaviour.
This is due to the microcracks in the ITZ increasing with the stress, and ac-
cording to Neville [2], the stronger the bond between the aggregate and the
cement paste, the longer concrete shows linear stress-strain relation. In cases
e.g. with lightweight aggregate concrete the bonds between the cement paste
and the aggregates are strong, and there are no early microcracking in the ITZ.
The stress-strain relation can therefore be linear with stresses up to 90% of the
strength.
According to Mehta & Monterio [3, p.
40-41], the ITZ exist around all ag-
gregates in the cement paste, and the size of the ITZ depends on the size of the
aggregates. This way the ITZ account for between one-third and one-half of the
volume of the cement paste. This is according to Neville [2], who also states that
the connection between the size of the ITZ and the aggregate is due to bigger
aggregates having a thicker water ﬁlm layer. The same was found by Jia et al.
[4], in a study made to characterise the elastic properties of the ITZ. In the
study, the elastic modulus of diﬀerent parts of concrete specimens with diﬀerent
characteristics was found. The elastic modulus was found in the mortar of the
concrete at diﬀerent distances from the surface of a coarse aggregate. It was
found that the bigger the aggregate, the larger the thickness of the ITZ. It was
also found that an increase in the w/c-ratio led to an increase in the thickness of
the ITZ. Additionally, it was found that the elastic modulus of concrete is high
in the mortar and moving towards the ITZ of a coarse aggregate, it decreases
and then increases and levels out in the aggregate. Finally, it was concluded
that the elastic modulus of the ITZ is more or less independent of the size of
the aggregate.
In a study made by Aquino et al. [5], the inﬂuence of the aggregate size and
variations in the cement paste matrix on the stiﬀens of the ITZ was investi-
gated. This was done with a so-called ’push-out test’ performed on slices of
concrete with a single aggregate in the middle. The aggregate was pushed out
while the displacement was measured in order to characterise the bond between
the aggregate and the cement paste matrix. Here it was also found that the
stiﬀness of the ITZ is independent of the size of the aggregate. Additionally, it
was found that an addition of ﬁne aggregates to the cement paste matrix did
not aﬀect the bond between the matrix and the coarse aggregate. However, it
was found that the addition of other coarse aggregates in the matrix lowered
the stiﬀness of the ITZ between the investigated aggregate and the matrix, and
cracks towards the additional aggregates were observed.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Main factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus
7
2.2.2
Aggregate properties
In this section, studies investigating the eﬀect of diﬀerent physical properties of
aggregates, such as size, shape, surface and stiﬀens, on the elastic modulus of
concrete, are looked at. In the previous section, it was described how the size
of the aggregates is part of determining the size of the ITZ, and that the bigger
ITZ leads to a lower elastic modulus. However, in a study made by Wolinski et
al. [6] the initial elastic modulus of concrete with diﬀerent maximum aggregate
sizes was tested. It was found that the maximum aggregate size did not have
any inﬂuence on the initial elastic modulus. As it was seen earlier the ITZ has
the biggest inﬂuence at higher stresses and since only the initial elastic modulus
was tested in the study, the ﬁndings in the studies by Jia et al. [4] and Aquino
et al. [5] are explained.
At the beginning of Section 2.2 it was described how the stiﬀens of the ag-
gregates inﬂuences the elastic modulus of concrete. In a study made by Zhou
et al [7] a series of test of high strength concrete with aggregates with diﬀerent
elastic moduli were made, in order to see the eﬀect on the elastic modulus of
concrete. It was found that the elastic modulus of the aggregates had a clear
eﬀect on the elastic modulus of concrete. This was also found by Giaccio &
Zerbino [8] who made a study investigating diﬀerent mechanical properties of
concrete with coarse aggregates with diﬀerent characteristics.
In ordinary concrete, there is a diﬀerence between the elastic moduli of the
matrix and the aggregates leading to concrete having an elastic modulus in be-
tween these [3]. It has been described by Neville [2] and later found in a study
be Domaga & Dobrowolska [9] that cases where the diﬀerence between the stiﬀ-
ness of the aggregates and the cement paste matrix is small, there is a better
stress transfer. This is because the concrete then acts like a more homogeneous
material.
Lastly, it has been found that the shape and the surface texture of the ag-
gregates are important to the bond between the cement paste matrix and the
aggregates and thereby inﬂuences the elastic modulus of concrete. In a study
made by Choubane et al. [10] the dynamic and static elastic modulus of concrete
with diﬀerent types of coarse aggregates where determined. The aggregates were
with diﬀerent surface textures and diﬀerent shapes. It was found that concrete
made with aggregates with rough surfaces and angular shapes had a noticeably
higher elastic modulus than concrete with round aggregates with smooth sur-
faces. Additionally, in a study made by Hong et al. [11] the elastic modulus of
concrete made with round glass balls as coarse aggregates was tested. The glass
balls were made with polished, sandblasted and notched surfaces respectively.
In this study, it was also found that a rougher surfaces texture of the aggregates
led to a higher elastic modulus.
==PAGE:18==
8
Theory and Literature Review
2.2.3
Volume and gradation
Several studies have been made investigating the inﬂuence of the amount of
aggregates and gradation on the elastic modulus of concrete. In a study by Sad-
owski & Jaskulski [12], it was investigated how the weight ratio of the amount of
ﬁne aggregates to the total amount of aggregates inﬂuenced the elastic modulus
of concrete. With a ﬁne-to-total aggregate ratio ranging from 25% to 75% in
the experiments, it was found that an increase in the ﬁne aggregate content led
to a lower elastic modulus of concrete. This ﬁnding was concluded to probably
be due to the increase in the amount of porous matrix in the volume of the con-
crete, which has a lower stiﬀness, as the amount of coarse aggregates decreases.
In a similar study made earlier by Yang & Huang [13] it was also investigated
how the ﬁne-to-total aggregate ratio inﬂuences the elastic modulus of concrete.
However, in this study, it was found that changing the ratio had no eﬀect on
the elastic modulus of concrete. In this study, a lower w/c-ratio was used than
in the one by Sadowski & Jaskulski [12] which gives the cement paste matrix a
lower porosity and thereby a higher elastic modulus. It has been pointed out by
Neville [2], that when the cement paste has a high elastic modulus the diﬀerence
between this and the elastic modulus of the aggregates are small, and therefore
the addition of more aggregates will not have much inﬂuence on the elastic mod-
ulus of concrete. Therefore, it seems that the eﬀect the amount of aggregates
has on the elastic modulus of concrete, depends on the elastic modulus of the
cement paste matrix.
As for the grading of the aggregates, a study made by Rangara et al.
[14]
investigated the inﬂuence of changing the gradation of the ﬁne and coarse ag-
gregates respectively. In the study, the elastic modulus of concrete specimens
with the same total volume of aggregates, but with diﬀerent gradation curves
was investigated. It was found that changing the gradation curves within the
limit of standard recommended gradation curves, does not aﬀect the elastic
modulus of concrete. In an earlier study also made by Rangara et al. [15] it
was investigated how the inter aggregate spacing aﬀects the elastic modulus of
concrete. In the study the spacing was controlled by the grading of the aggre-
gates, so that better grading lead to less spacing between the aggregates. It
was hypothesised that smaller space between the aggregate would lead to an
overlap of the ITZ and thereby reduce the elastic modulus. It was however,
found that there were not any signiﬁcant eﬀect on the elastic modulus. This is
consistent with the ﬁndings in the later study [14], namely that the grading of
the aggregates does not inﬂuence the elastic modulus of concrete.
The combined eﬀects of aggregate grading, the volume fraction of aggregates
and the sand-cement ratio on the elastic modulus of concrete was investigated
in a study by Rahai et al. [16]. In the study concrete specimens with four diﬀer-
ent volume fractions of lightweight aggregates with three diﬀerent sand-cement
ratios and three diﬀerent gradations, were tested. It was found that an increase
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Main factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus
9
in the sand-cement ratio leads to an increase in the elastic modulus indepen-
dent of the gradation and volume fraction of the aggregates. Additionally, it
was found that an increase in the volume fraction of aggregates led to a decrease
in the elastic modulus independent of the gradation and the sand-cement ra-
tion. Lastly, it was found that with an aggregate grading such that there was
a higher amount of coarse aggregate, led to a decrease in the elastic modulus
almost independently of the volume fraction and the sand-cement ratio. This
study used more extreme grading curves than in the study by Rangara et al.
[14] and the experiments were made with lightweight aggregates, which might
explain the inconsistencies in the ﬁndings.
==PAGE:20==
10
Theory and Literature Review
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Methods
In this chapter, the experiments executed in the project are presented. First,
the properties of the materials used for the test specimens are examined. There-
after the set-up and execution of the tests are explained, and lastly, the data
analysis process is presented.
For this project, a series of tests were made investigating the elastic modulus of
concrete. The elastic modulus was found using DIC on test specimens cast of
concrete made with the coarse aggregates represented by glass rods systemati-
cally placed in a mortar matrix
The test specimens were made with the glass rods going all the way through the
specimens so that the arrangement of the coarse aggregates in the concrete was
visible on two sides of the specimens. The purpose of using glass rods instead
of normal coarse aggregates was to represent a two-dimensional specimen all
the way through. In this way, the damages should appear the same all the way
through the specimens.
As the placement of the aggregates was visible and controlled, the eﬀect of the
aggregates placement and formation, as well as the complexity and size distri-
bution, could be analysed. This was done using DIC in order to get a graphical
representation of the behaviour of the concrete during compression, and the ef-
fects from the coarse aggregates, as well as the interface between the aggregate
and the mortar.
The tests were made ﬁrst on specimens where four aggregates with 20 mm di-
ameter were simply arranged in two diﬀerent basis formations. Hereafter the
==PAGE:22==
12
Methods
complexity of the aggregate arrangement was increased by adding more to the
original formations, and the tendencies in the behaviour analysed.
3.1
Materials
The materials used in the experiments can be separated into two categories:
the mortar and the glass rods. As it was reviewed in Chapter 2.2, properties
of the diﬀerent components in concrete has the biggest inﬂuence on its elastic
modulus, and therefore the properties of the materials used in the experiments
are important.
3.1.1
Mortar
The mortar mixes used in the experiments were chosen based on a series of trials
with casting of small mortar prisms of diﬀerent mixes. Many diﬀerent mix de-
signs were tried in order to ﬁnd both a stiﬀand a soft mix that ﬁt some speciﬁc
criteria. First of all, the mixes had to be very workable and as liquid as possible
without segregating, as they had to be able to ﬂow in between glass rods that in
some cases were placed in a tight grid. Additionally, it was important to avoid
too many air voids at the surface, as these could make it diﬃcult to get good
results with DIC.
The two diﬀerent mixes that were chosen for the experiments were cement pastes
mixes with two diﬀerent stiﬀnesses, and with sand with 0 −2mm grain size dis-
tribution. The mix designs of these can be seen in Table 3.1 and the diﬀerent
mix ratios in Table 3.2.
Table 3.1: Mortar mix design.
Ingredients
Low stiﬀness mix, L2
High stiﬀness mix, H2
Cement [kg/m3]
300.0
750.0
Sand [kg/m3]
1344.4
751.8
Dolomite Filler [kg/m3]
400.0
0.0
Quartz powder [kg/m3]
0.0
350.0
Silica fume [kg/m3]
0.0
150.0
Superplasticiser [kg/m3]
2.5
5.5
As can be seen in the tables, the stiﬀmix, H2, was made with quartz powder and
silica fume as these increase the density and the strength, and thereby the stiﬀ-
ness of mix. The cement content was made high since the cement adds strength
and stiﬀness to the mix and the w/c-ratio made low for the same reason.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Materials
13
Table 3.2: Mix ratios.
Mix
Low stiﬀness mix, L2
High stiﬀness mix, H2
w/c
0.63
0.33
water/powder
0.27
0.20
agg/powder
1.92
0.60
The softer mix, L2, was made with a lower cement content and a higher w/c-
ratio. In addition, the soft mix contained dolomite ﬁller to lower the porosity of
the mix. The cement used in both mixes was Aalborg Portland rapid cement,
CEM I 52.5N (LA), and in both mixes a superplasticiser, Melﬂux 2641 f, was
used to increase the workability.
The strength and elastic modulus of the two mortar mixes were determined.
First, 12 specimens of each mortar mix were cast in prisms moulds with the
dimensions 40 × 40 × 160mm. The specimens were labelled with letters from a
to l. The specimens were then cured in water of approximately 32◦C for 14 days
before they were tested. During the curing, the temperature of the water was
monitored and a graph showing the measurements can be seen in Appendix B.
The strengths of the mortar mixes were found ﬁrst on three specimens from
each mix. This was done as described in DS/EN 12390-3 [17], by compressing
the specimens with a servo-hydraulic Toni machine at a rate of 0.6MPa/s until
failure.
Next, the elastic modulus of each of the remaining specimens was found. In
the standard DS/EN 12390-13 [18], the testing method for ﬁnding the secant
elastic modulus of concrete is described. In the standard method B prescribe
the specimens to be loaded ﬁrst with a preload, then loaded up to 30% of the
compressive strength and then unloaded back down to the preload. This should
be done three times with a rate of 0.06MPa/s. However, due to safety issues
the load could not be force controlled and therefore the specimens were loaded
with displacement controlled loading, at a rate of 0.01mm/s. Additionally, the
specimens were loaded once slowly to 30% of the strength before the tests in
order to ﬁnd the necessary displacement needed to reach the correct load level.
On two opposite sites of the specimen, extensometers were mounted to mea-
sure the strain in the specimen. The load and corresponding strain were logged
during each test. These tests were performed using a servo-hydraulic MTS ma-
chine. The compressive strength was hereafter found for all the specimens used
for the elasticity test. Figure 3.1 shows the measured compression strength of
each of the specimens, and Figure 3.2 shows the mean value of the secant elastic
moduli found from the measured strain from the two extensometers on each of
the specimens. Stress-strain curves from both extensometer for each specimen
==PAGE:24==
14
Methods
can be seen in Appendix C.
(a) L2 mortar
(b) H2 mortar
Figure 3.1: Strength of mortar specimens.
In Figure 3.1b it can be seen that the strengths of specimens a and d of the H2
mortar specimens were found to be considerably lower than the other specimens.
This was due to the specimens not being centred correctly between the com-
pression heads, and these are therefore not included in the mean value. Since
two of the specimens gave unreliable strength results it was decided that two
more specimens should be strength tested before the elasticity test. This only
left 6 out of 12 specimens left for elasticity test for the H2 mix. This is why the
elasticity test was made on 8 specimens of the L2 mix and 6 specimens of the
H2 mix.
(a) L2 mortar
(b) H2 mortar
Figure 3.2: Elastic moduli of mortar specimens.
The mean values of the compression strength, fc,m, and the elastic modulus,
Em, for the two mixes can be seen in Table 3.3.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Materials
15
Table 3.3: Mean compression strengths and elastic moduli of mortar mixes.
Mix
fc,m [MPa]
Em [GPa]
L2
35.85
34.75
H2
111.15
44.5
The idea was to have a stiﬀand a soft mortar mix to use in the experiments.
However, as can be seen the diﬀerence in the elastic moduli is not extremely
high. Nevertheless, in the rest of this report they will be referred to as the soft
and the stiﬀmortar respectively.
3.1.2
Glass rods
The glass rods that were cast into the mortar mixes were AR-GLAS from
SCHOTT AG [19]. The diameters of the rods that were used were 8mm, 12mm,
16mm and 20mm respectively, and had a full length of 1500mm, which were cut
before casting to ﬁt the length of the concrete moulds. The elastic modulus of
the rods were 73GPa. The four diﬀerent sizes of the glass gods can be seen in
Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Glass rods.
==PAGE:26==
16
Methods
3.2
Test specimens
For the experiments, the test specimens were made with the mortar mixes and
the glass rods described previously. The specimens were made as mortar prisms
with the dimensions h × w × d = 150 × 100 × 50mm. In the centre of each
specimen in a 100×100mm square, the glass rods of diﬀerent sizes were arranged
in patterns, composed systematically. The diﬀerent arrangements of glass rods
can be seen in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Arrangements of the glass rods.
The Arrangements were made with increased complexity for each row in the
ﬁgure. Each row has the same mortar/aggregate ratio, but with diﬀerent place-
ment and distance between the aggregates. Table 3.4 shows volume percentage
of the glass rod aggregates in the concrete, and total volume percentage of
aggregates (sand + glass rods) in the concrete, corresponding to the diﬀerent
arrangement of the glass rods.
The specimens were named systematically based on the arrangement of the glass
rods, the mortar type and the test type. An example of a specimen name is
HA1-E1. The ﬁrst part of the name tells the mortar type and the arrangements
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Test specimens
17
Table 3.4: Amount of aggregates in specimens for diﬀerent arrangements.
Arrangement
vol% glass
vol% agg
A1
12.57
57.78
A2
12.57
57.78
A3
22.62
62.63
A4
22.62
62.63
A5
36.19
69.19
A6
36.19
69.19
A7
50.27
75.98
A8
50.27
75.98
number. The second part tells the test type and number. Table 3.5 shows an
example of the name of a specimen and explains the diﬀerent naming options.
Table 3.5: Naming of specimens.
H
A1
-
E
1
Stiﬀness
Arrangement
Test type
Test number
H: high
E: elasticity (DIC)
L: low
Ext: extensometer
3.2.1
Casting and preparation of specimens
The test specimens were made by casting big concrete blocks with the glass
rods arranged inside, spanning all the way through.
From these blocks, the
specimens were cut out in the right sizes. The concrete blocks were made in a
150 × 150 × 600mm steel mould. For each end of the mould wooden plates were
made with holes drilled in the shape of arrangements of the glass rods.
The inside of the steel mould was ﬁrst greased with oil on the two long sides
and the bottom, while the ends were left clean.
Two of the wooden plates
corresponding to a speciﬁc arrangement were chosen, and the fronts of the plates
were greased with oil as well. On the backside of the plates, double-sided tape
was attached. Each of the glass rods was cut to be a couple of millimetres less
than the length of the mould, and then placed in the holes between the two
wood plates.
Before placing the plates with the glass rods in the mould, each glass rod was
whipped with propanol in order to get remove any dirt. Once the plates and
==PAGE:28==
18
Methods
glass rods were placed in the mould, the plates were pressed ﬁrmly against the
ends of the mould to make sure they stayed in place.
Figure 3.5 shows the
process of placing the glass rods in the mould.
(a) Fitting of glass rods.
(b) Prepared mould.
Figure 3.5: Mould preparation.
The mortar was mixed after the moulds and glass rods were prepared. For each
of the concrete blocks, approximately 12 litres of one of the mortar mixes in
Table 3.1 were mixed. First, the dry ingredients were measured and then mixed
for about 2 minutes, after which the water was added. The mortar was then
mixed for about 10 minutes where after 5 minutes, the mixer and the timer was
stopped, while the bottom of the mixing bowl was scraped.
Once the mortar was done, the mould was placed on a vibration table and ﬁlled
about 1/3 with the mortar. The vibration table was turned on and the mould
vibrated for 30-40 seconds. Hereafter the mould was ﬁlled to about 1cm above
the highest placed glass rod and then vibrated again. The moulds were not
ﬁlled all the way to the top as the top part was to be cut oﬀanyway, in order
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Test specimens
19
for the test specimens to have the correct shape.
A total of 9 concrete blocks were cast, with the diﬀerent aggregate arrangements
and mortar mixes. Arrangement A1-A5 and A7 were cast with the soft mortar
and arrangement A1-A3 were cast with the stiﬀmortar. Arrangement A6 and
A8 were not cast due to lack of time.
After casting, the moulds were covered with a thin plastic sheet and left out
overnight, and the concrete blocks were demoulded the following day. After de-
moulding the concrete blocks were left to cure in a water tank with a temperature
of approximately 40◦C. During the curing, the temperature was monitored, and
a graph showing the temperature measurements can be seen in Appendix B.
The blocks were left in the water for 3 days before they were taken out and cut
into slices of 8-10 specimens. Hereafter the specimens were placed back in the
water and cured until a minimum of 14 days. Normally concrete is assumed to
have full strength and stiﬀness development after curing at around 20◦C for 28
days [3, p. 59]. When curing in higher temperatures the strength and stiﬀness
development is sped up [3, p. 60], and therefore the specimen were cured for 14
days in water at 40◦C.
After 14 days the best looking specimens were selected and taken out of the
water for testing. The ones meant for testing of the elastic modulus with DIC
were ﬁrst photographed, and then spray-painted on the two sides where the
glass rods were visible. The two sides were painted ﬁrst completely with white
and then covered with small black dots in a stochastic pattern as seen in Figure
3.6.
Figure 3.6: Stochastic pattern on specimen.
==PAGE:30==
20
Methods
3.3
Testing procedure
3.3.1
Compressive strength
The compressive strength of the specimens was ﬁrst determined.
This was
mainly done to determine what load level the specimens should reach during
the elasticity test.
However, the results were also used to investigate if the
diﬀerent arrangement of aggregate would have an inﬂuence, and if a potential
diﬀerence in the compressive strength would be the same for both the stiﬀand
soft mortar.
After curing in 14 days, three specimens of each type were taken out, and their
compressive strengths were found. This was done as described in DS/EN 12390-
3 [17] by compressing the specimens at a rate of 0.6MPa/s until failure. The test
was executed on a servo-hydraulic Toni machine, while the time and load were
logged on a separate data logger. After failure, the fracture was inspected and
if a failure was unsatisfactory, another specimen was tested. Figure 3.7 shows
the test set-up.
Figure 3.7: Compressive strength test set-up.
3.3.2
Elasticity tests
As mentioned, the stress-strain relation of the concrete was investigated using
DIC. This was done with a test set-up where the painted specimen was placed in
the centre of a servo-hydraulic MTS machine between two compression heads.
Thin wooden plates with a thickness of about 3mm were placed between the
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Testing procedure
21
specimen and the compression heads, to even out any irregularities in the con-
crete. In the top compression head, a ball bearing was sat in place to make
sure the load was evenly distributed on the top of the specimen. A camera was
placed on each of the two sides of the specimen with the aggregate arrangements
showing. One camera was placed so that the whole specimen was visible in the
shot and another was placed closer to the specimen in order to get a close-up
shot of some of the aggregates. Around the specimen, a protection screen was
mounted for safety, with a hole in each side for the camera lenses. In each corner
of the protection screen, a light was placed pointing towards the specimen, to
make sure the specimens were well lit for the best possible pictures. A schematic
of the set-up can be seen in Figure 3.8 and 3.9.
Figure 3.8: Sketch of test set-up, front.
Figure 3.9: Sketch of test set-up, side.
The load was applied by vertical displacement of the bottom compression head.
First, a compression preload of 5kN for the concrete with soft mortar, and
10kN for the concrete with stiﬀmortar, was applied. The machine was ﬁrst
==PAGE:32==
22
Methods
programmed to increase the load and hereafter decrease it back down to the
preload. This was repeated to a total of three cycles, where at the end of the
third cycle all of the load was removed. The load was held for 10 seconds be-
tween the increase and decrease of every cycle. During the tests, the force and
displacement of the machine were logged every half second.
Before the beginning of a test, the specimen was placed by eye in the centre
between the compression heads with an extensometer mounted on each of the
smaller sides. First, a little load was added to the specimen while the strain
from each extensometer was monitored. If the measured strains were not close
to each other, the specimen was moved a little. This was done to make sure the
specimen was centred. Once the specimen was centred, the preload was manu-
ally added and the extensometers removed. During the test, the testing machine
was programmed to be load controlled. This means that the load was added
to the specimen by programming the machine to displace a certain amount. In
order to ﬁnd the displacement of the machine needed to get the right load on the
specimen, the specimen was loaded in small steps manually until the right load
was applied. The displacement corresponding the desired load was noted. The
load was then set back down to the preload, and the machine was programmed
to move the compression head a distance corresponding to what was needed for
the right load to be applied. This was done in the three cycles described earlier
with the rate of the displacement set to 0.01mm/s.
The cameras used in the test were both of the model Nikon 800D. The camera
for the full specimen shots was equipped with a 60mm lens and the camera for
the close-up shots with a 105mm lens. The settings on the two cameras were
set diﬀerently to get the best pictures possible in the two diﬀerent shots.
The cameras were controlled using the programme digiCamControl to trigger
the cameras at the same time. The pictures were taken in a time interval of
approximately 1.5 seconds during the test. After the preload was applied the
testing machine and the cameras were started at the same time.
For the specimens with the stiﬀmortar, the load was raised to approximately
30% of the average compressive strength. For the specimens with the soft mor-
tar, the load was for the ﬁrst couple of specimens increased to about 50% of
the compressive strength. This was later changed to about 70%, and the ﬁrst
specimen types were retested with the increased load. The change was due to
the increased load giving more clear results. The reason for the diﬀerence be-
tween load on the specimens with low and high stiﬀness respectively, was that
the stiﬀspecimens also had a lot higher compressive strength. With 30% of the
strength, the load was so high that the machine could not safely compress more
without damaging any of the equipment.
For the ﬁrst couple of tests, three specimens were tested for each concrete type.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Testing procedure
23
All three were tested before the data was analysed. For the specimens tested
later in the project period, only one specimen of each concrete type was tested
and then the data was analysed. The procedure was changed as it was found
that the analysis was necessary to determine whether a test gave useful results
or not. If any changes to the set-up or the load application were needed, it
was not discovered between the three tests, and thereby three specimens were
wasted.
Eﬀectively, the data from the tests made with only one specimen at a time were
analysed, and if the pictures gave useful results, no other specimens of this type
were tested. So for some concrete types, up to ﬁve specimens were tested and
for others, only one or two were tested. However, this also meant that not all
specimens were tested after exactly 14 days, and in some cases, a specimen of a
concrete type were tested several weeks later.
In addition to specimens tested with the deformations traced using cameras,
a few specimens were also tested were the deformations were traced with exten-
someters. This was done in order to be able to evaluate the result found with
the cameras. As it was not possible to see the whole specimen with the cameras
when the extensometers were used, these were used on separate specimens of
the same types. The test was the same as with the cameras, except the strains
were logged with the load of the machine. The extensometers were used on two
specimen types: HA3 and LA3.
A table of all the diﬀerent specimens tested and the load per cent and curing
time can be seen in Table 3.6. Here it can be seen how the number of tested
specimen per type varies a lot. The pictures for each of the specimens were
analysed using DIC in the programme GOM correlate, and the ones that gave
the best visualisation of the deformations were chosen for a deeper analysis. For
each type of specimen, one was chosen for the analysis except for specimen type
HA2, as none of these specimens gave any useful results. The rows marked with
a dark green colour in Table 3.6, shows which specimens that were chosen for
the deeper data analysis. The rows marked with the lighter green colour are the
extensometer test.
==PAGE:34==
24
Methods
Table 3.6: Maximum applied loads and curing times.
Specimen
Maximum load [kN]
Maximum load [%]
Curing time [days]
HA1-E1
202.31
34.27
22
HA1-E3
173.79
29.44
22
HA1-E4
192.19
32.56
56
HA1-E5
201.08
34.06
69
HA2-E1
206.97
31.37
14
HA2-E2
206.14
31.25
14
HA2-E3
187.52
28.42
14
HA2-E4
232.91
35.30
22
HA2-E5
220.72
33.46
43
HA3-E1
220.46
36.29
14
HA3-Ext1
204.56
33.67
15
LA1-E1
94.43
50.49
14
LA1-E2
94.99
50.79
14
LA1-E3
87.75
46.92
14
LA1-E4
121.26
64.84
28
LA1-E5
136.11
72.78
46
LA2-E1
101.88
41.57
14
LA2-E2
96.24
39.27
14
LA2-E3
88.72
36.20
14
LA2-E4
148.96
60.78
32
LA3-E1
114.29
66.68
15
LA3-E2
105.62
61.62
32
LA3-Ext1
115.68
67.49
40
LA4-E1
81.36
51.58
14
LA4-E2
105.27
66.74
15
LA5-E1
119.16
70.7
14
LA5-E2
114.98
63.64
22
LA7-E1
73.56
49.75
14
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Data analysis
25
3.4
Data analysis
The pictures taken during the tests were, as mentioned, analysed using DIC
in the programme GOM correlate.
GOM correlate is a DIC and evaluation
software specially made for material research and material testing [20]. The
software ﬁnds patterns on the ﬁrst picture and compares these the patterns on
the following pictures. The changes in the pictures are used to investigate the
deformations across a surface.
For each of the specimens the pictures taken, of each side of the specimens,
were analysed in GOM correlate. After running the algorithm on a set of pic-
tures, the strains relative to the ﬁrst picture can be displayed across the surface
of the specimen on each picture. There are diﬀerent options for displaying the
strains, however for this project, the strains in and perpendicular to the load
direction were looked at. Even though it is called strain in the programme, it
is not always necessarily an actual strain the programme is displaying. For this
reason, it will be referred to as visualisation of deformations in the rest of the
report.
The visualised deformations were looked at for all specimens tested, and based
on the quality of these results the eight specimens marked with the dark green
colour in Table 3.6, were chosen for the full data analysis.
In GOM correlate it is possible to measure the change in distance between
two points relative to the ﬁrst picture. The actual displacement in millimetres
between the two points, and the displacement relative to the distance measured,
can be found for each picture. These measurements can then be displayed in a
graph as a function of time.
For each of the chosen specimens, the actual displacement and the displacements
relative to the measuring distance was found on the shots of the full specimen.
This was done for the full length and full width of the specimens through three
measuring lines in the load direction, and perpendicular to the load direction
respectively. The measuring lines on each specimen can be seen in Figure 3.10.
In addition, the displacements and relative displacements were also measured
in pieces, meaning the measurements were split up into three phases: mortar,
aggregate and interface. This was also done through all the measuring lines in
Figure 3.10.
Furthermore, the relative displacement was found in the three measuring lines
in the load direction at a distance 50mm from the top of the specimens to 50mm
from the bottom of the specimens.
Lastly, the displacement was also measured between the four 20mm glass rods
that are present in all specimens.
On the close-up pictures, the actual displacements and relative displacements
==PAGE:36==
26
Methods
Figure 3.10: Measuring lines in full specimens.
were also found. Here the measurements were taken in the load direction in
three lines for the total length of the picture. Additionally, measurements were
taken, when possible, around an aggregate at the interface. The measurements
were taken at eight locations around the aggregate. At the top and bottom
of the aggregate in the load direction, in both sides perpendicular to the load
direction and at four 45 degree angles between the other measurements. The
actual and relative displacements were found at the 45 degree angles both in the
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Data analysis
27
load direction and perpendicular to the load direction. The actual displacement
and the relative displacement in the 45 degree angles was then found using
Pythagoras theorem. The measuring lines on the close-up shots can be seen in
Figure 3.11
(a) In load direction.
(b) Interface around
aggregate.
Figure 3.11: Measuring lines in close-up.
The actual and relative displacements were exported from the programme, and
the data processed in Matlab.
In order to calculate the elastic moduli of the specimens, the measurements were
matched with the corresponding stresses, logged with the data-logger, in a Mat-
lab script. The pictures could not be taken with an exact time-step due to the
saving time on the cameras. Therefore, the average time distance between all
pictures in a series was calculated based on the length of the test and the num-
ber of pictures. A timestamp was then given to each picture in GOM correlate,
which was exported with the measurements. This timestamp was then matched
to the closest time stamp in the corresponding log-ﬁles from the data-logger,
and this way a corresponding force was found for each of the measurements
from GOM correlate.
The elastic modulus was found on both sides of each specimen. For the full
specimen shots the displacements relative to the measuring distance, found in
the middle part of the specimen, was used to calculate the elastic modulus.
This length was used in order to ﬁnd the modulus without the eﬀect of end
plate resistance interfering with the measurements.
The elastic moduli were
found by plotting the stresses from the data-logger as a function of the relative
displacements from GOM correlate, and ﬁtting a linear trend line. The slope of
the trend line was then taken as the elastic modulus.
The measurements at the full length of the specimen were used to illustrate
the actual displacement of the specimen and the load at diﬀerent times. The
measurements split up into diﬀerent phases were used to illustrate how the dif-
ferent phases act at diﬀerent times and to see how much the diﬀerent phases
==PAGE:38==
28
Methods
deform relative to each other. Finally, the measurements between the four 20mm
aggregates were used to see how these moves relative to each other, and how
adding additional aggregates aﬀect these movements.
The result from some of the measurements led to graphs with a lot of noise. The
noise on the graphs was smoothed to give a better visualisation of the course of
the graphs.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Results
In this chapter, the results of the tests described in the previous chapter will
be presented. As mentioned, not all tested specimen have been analysed, only
one from each of the diﬀerent mixes that at ﬁrst look gave the most usable re-
sults. However, for each of these specimens there are a lot of results, so to give
an overview, the results from the data analysis are collected for each specimen
and presented on three A3 datasheets per specimen. These A3 datasheets can
be seen in Appendix D. The ﬁrst two pages are data for the full shot of the
specimens. On these pages, ﬁrst, the pictures of the specimen with and without
paint are shown, as well as visualisations of the deformations in GOM corre-
late for the maximum load of the last loading cycle. Several graphs and bar
plots are shown for the displacements in and perpendicular to the load direction
respectively. First, a graph of the actual full displacements with the correspond-
ing load over time and the stress-strain curves with the corresponding elastic
moduli are shown. Furthermore, graphs with the actual displacements and the
relative displacements of the diﬀerent phases are shown and bar plots of the
displacements at the top of each load cycle. These are made for each measuring
line both in the load direction and perpendicular to the load direction. On the
third page, the results from the close-up shots are presented. Here a picture
showing the specimen before testing with the close-up shot marked, and the
painted surface is ﬁrst shown. For the close-up, the visualisation of the defor-
mations are also shown, as well as a graph with actual displacements and load
over time. Additionally, stress-strain curves with corresponding elastic moduli
==PAGE:40==
30
Results
along the three measuring lines in the load direction. Lastly, graphs showing the
displacements and relative displacements for measurements around the interface
of an aggregate.
In the following, the results from the experiments are presented, using selected
pictures and graphs from diﬀerent specimens that best illustrate the general
results.
4.1
Compression strength
The compression strength was found for the diﬀerent specimen types. The mean
strength of the three tested specimens with standard deviations can be seen in
Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Compressive strength of diﬀerent specimen types.
From the ﬁgure, it can be seen that, as expected, the concrete made with the
stiﬀmortar have a compressive strength that is a lot higher than the concrete
made with the soft mortar mix. Compared to the strength of the mortar mixes it
seem that the addition of coarse aggregates increases the compressive strength
slightly. However, it seems that there is no noticeable diﬀerence in the com-
pressive strength between the specimens with few coarse aggregates and the
specimens with many aggregates.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Visualisation of deformations
31
4.2
Visualisation of deformations
During the tests, the loads were increased slowly while the pictures were taken.
Using DIG it can be displayed in which parts of the concrete specimens the
deformations are larger and how the deformations develop over time. In the fol-
lowing some pictures from GOM correlate displaying these deformations both
in the load direction and perpendicular to the load direction, will be shown. Ex-
amples from a few of the analysed specimens will be presented and the ﬁndings
explained. In Appendix D the visualisation of the deformations at the top of
the last loading cycle can be seen for each specimen.
4.2.1
Deformations in the load direction
The deformations of the specimens in the load direction are ﬁrst looked at.
Figure 4.2 shows the deformations in the full shot of specimen HA1-E3, and
Figure 4.3 shows the deformations of the close-up shots on the other side of
the specimen. In both ﬁgures the deformations are displayed for 10%, 30% and
100% of the total load applied in the ﬁrst of the three loading cycles.
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load-
(b) Deformations at app.
30% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.2: Deformations in load direction of specimen HA1-E3 at diﬀerent
stages within the ﬁrst cycle for full specimen.
==PAGE:42==
32
Results
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
30% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.3: Close-up of deformations in load direction of specimen HA1-E3
at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle.
In the pictures the light blue colour indicate little to no deformation. The darker
the blue colour the more deformed an area is.
It can be seen that the areas that deforms the most, are the areas in the mortar
around the aggregates and lines running horizontally between the aggregates.
Additionally it can be seen that the deformations start around the top two
aggregates in the right side by the edge of the specimen and runs toward the
closest aggregate when the load is increased. Looking at the pictures of the full
specimen, the deformations around the bottom two aggregates seems to start
at around 30% of the load. They start in the middle of the two aggregates
and continue towards the aggregates. On the close-up, which is taken on the
other side of the specimen and focused around the bottom two aggregates, the
deformation also seem to start in the mortar between the aggregates, however
on this side it seems to start earlier a around 10% of the load.
Figures 4.4 and 4.5 shows the deformations of specimen LA2-E4 for the full
and close-up shot respectively. The deformations are shown for 10%, 40% and
100% of the applied load respectively.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Visualisation of deformations
33
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
40% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.4: Deformations in load direction of specimen LA2-E4 at diﬀerent
stages within the ﬁrst cycle for full specimen.
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
40% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.5: Close-up of deformations in load direction of specimen LA2-E4
at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle.
In Figure 4.4a it can be seen that the ﬁrst visible deformation starts at the edge
of the specimen in the mortar in the left side where one of the aggregates are
closest to the edge. As the load is increased the largest deformations becomes
more clear around the aggregates and at the full load the areas with the biggest
deformations can mainly be seen around the aggregates. The same is seen on
the close-up pictures where the ﬁrst visible deformation also starts around 10%
of the full load as well. In this case the deformation does not seem to spread
away from the aggregate.
The deformations of specimen LA5-E1 can be seen in Figure 4.6 for the full
specimen and Figure 4.7 for the close-up. In this specimen the bigger deforma-
tions also starts at around 10% of the total load. As with the previous specimen
==PAGE:44==
34
Results
the ﬁrst visible deformations occur at the edge of the specimen next to an aggre-
gate closest to the edge. At around 40% the deformations seems to be around
almost all the aggregates at the interface between the aggregate and the mortar.
At the full load the deformations are very large at the interfaces and seems to
be spread to the mortar between the aggregates.
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
40% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.6: Deformations in load direction of specimen LA5-E1 at diﬀerent
stages within the ﬁrst cycle for full specimen.
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
40% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.7: Close-up of deformations in load direction of specimen LA5-E1
at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle.
Looking in Appendix D, it can be seen that specimen LA1-E5 and LA4-E2
seems to show the same tendency as LA2-E4 with the largest deformation in
the load direction being only visible at the interface between the mortar and
the aggregate and not in the rest of the mortar. Specimen LA3-E2 and LA7-E1
however, show the same tendency as LA5-E1 with the deformation being mainly
at the interface until high loads where the deformations spread into the mortar
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Visualisation of deformations
35
toward other aggregates. All these specimens are made with the soft mortar but
there are more aggregates in LA3-E2, LA5-E1 and LA7-E1 and they are placed
closer together than in LA1-E5, LA2-E4 and LA4-E2.
Additionally specimen HA3-E1 seems to behave the same as HA1-E3 with both
being made with the stiﬀmortar and both showing larger deformations in both
the mortar and at the interface. It therefore seems that the larger deformations
in the load direction occurs easier in the stiﬀmortar.
4.2.2
Deformations perpendicular to the load direction
Looking at the deformations perpendicular to the load direction it can be seen
that the specimens are expanding.
Looking again at specimen HA1-E3, the
deformations are shown in Figures 4.8 and 4.9 for the full specimen and the
close-up respectively. The deformations are shown for the same load percentages
as the deformations in the load direction in the previous section.
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
30% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.8: Deformations perpendicular to load direction of specimen
HA1-E3 at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle for full specimen.
==PAGE:46==
36
Results
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
30% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.9: Close-up of deformations perpendicular to load direction of
specimen HA1-E3 at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle.
In this case the yellow colour means little to no deformation and red indicate
areas with higher deformation. On the full picture it can be seen that not a lot
of deformation is visible at 10% and 30% as was the case in the load direction
and only at higher loads does areas with larger deformation become visible. In
Figure 4.8c it can be seen that the deformations are largest at the interface
around the aggregates and in a vertical line between the aggregates. The same
can be seen in the close-up pictures in Figure 4.9 but here the displacements can
be seen earlier at 30% of the load as was the case in Figure 4.3. It can also be
seen that the deformations seem to start in the mortar between the aggregates
and then later in the interface around the aggregates.
For concrete specimens made with the soft mortar deformations perpendicular
to the load direction seems to show up around the same load level as deforma-
tions in the load direction. Looking e.g. at specimen LA5-E1 in Figures 4.10
and 4.11, it can be seen that larger deformations begin do appear already at
10% of the applied load both in the mortar and at the interface.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Visualisation of deformations
37
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
40% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.10: Deformations perpendicular to load direction of specimen
LA5-E1 at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle for full
specimen.
(a) Deformations at app.
10% load.
(b) Deformations at app.
40% load.
(c) Deformations at
100% load.
Figure 4.11: Close-up of deformations perpendicular to load direction of
specimen LA5-E1 at diﬀerent stages within the ﬁrst cycle.
As the load is increased the lines of deformations become clear around and
between all aggregates and moves more and more vertically.
It is general for all the specimens that the deformations are focused at the
interfaces and in the mortar vertically between the aggregate as seen in the
two examples. Additionally, it is generally seen that the larger deformations
perpendicular to the load direction show up clearer in the specimen with soft
mortar than in the specimens with stiﬀmortar. Whether this is due to the
weaker mortar or the higher load is not known. This tendency seems to be
regardless of the amount of aggregates but it seems that they appear earlier and
are of higher magnitude, the more aggregates that are present.
==PAGE:48==
38
Results
4.3
Elastic modulus
For all specimens, the displacements relative to the measured distance (strains)
were found on both the full shots and the close-up shots of the specimens. In
the full shots, the relative displacements were found in the middle part of the
specimen covering a length of approximately 50mm, for each of the three vertical
measuring lines. For the close-up, the relative displacements were found over the
total height of the shot. The relative displacements were then pared with the
corresponding stress and the stress-strain curves were found. The stress-strain
curves are plotted with a trend line and the elastic modulus corresponding the
slope of the trend line displayed. The stress-strain curves for specimen LA2-
E4 can be seen in Figure 4.12, and the rest can be seen for each specimen in
Appendix D.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Elastic modulus
39
(a) Left measuring line.
(b) Left measuring line.
(c) Centre measuring line.
(d) Centre measuring line.
(e) Right measuring line.
(f) Right measuring line.
Figure 4.12: Stress-strain curve for specimen LA2-E4 in full shot (left) and
close-up shot (right).
As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the elastic modulus varies across the specimen. In
the full shot the left side is softer than the right side, and in the close-up the left
side is stiﬀer than the right (corresponding to the same sides on the full shot,
as the cameras were placed on opposite sides of the specimen). This is also the
case for the other specimens, with some having bigger variations than others.
==PAGE:50==
40
Results
The slope of the curves for the full shot in Figure 4.12 starts really high and
then ﬂattens a little. The slope of the curve from the close-up shots seems to
keep the same value at all points. For some of the other specimens it can be
seen that the beginning of the curves are more ﬂat and then steepens. In these
cases the trend line and thereby the elastic modulus is found at the linear part
of the curve. All the elastic moduli found with DIC can be seen in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Elastic moduli of specimens found with DIC.
(a) Full shots.
Right
Centre
Left
HA1
77.90 GPa
50.00 GPa
77.12 GPa
HA3
43.68 GPa
41.14 GPa
43.70 GPa
LA1
35.29 GPa
32.56 GPa
34.99 GPa
LA2
33.94 Gpa
32.10 GPa
43.08 GPa
LA3
21.14 GPa
18.71 GPa
20.23 GPa
LA4
50.83 GPa
32.88 GPa
37.56 GPa
LA5
13.02 GPa
17.34 GPa
21.09 GPa
LA7
36.63 GPa
37.10 GPa
35.00 GPa
(b) Close-up shots.
Right
Centre
Left
HA1
37.72 GPa
32.56 GPa
31.27 GPa
HA3
47.27 GPa
51.38 GPa
47.51 GPa
LA1
59.22 GPa
56.52 GPa
62.82 GPa
LA2
51.16 GPa
44.87 GPa
41.92 GPa
LA3
59.75 GPa
70.36 GPa
95.92 GPa
LA4
17.62 GPa
17.25 GPa
16.86 GPa
LA5
-
-
-
LA7
27.35 GPa
26.07 GPa
30.72 GPa
In addition to the elastic moduli being found with DIC, the elastic moduli was
as mentioned also found from using the extensometers on the specimens types
HA3 and LA3. One of each type were tested, and each with an extensometer
on each side. The measurements from the extensometers can be seen in Figure
4.13. The elastic moduli displayed in the graphs are found as a mean from the
two extensometers on each specimen.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Elastic modulus
41
(a) HA3-Ext1.
(b) LA3-Ext1.
Figure 4.13: Stress-strain curves and elastic moduli measured with
extensometers.
As can be seen from the graphs the elastic modulus for specimen HA3-Ext1
was higher than from specimen LA3-Ext1. Furthermore it can be seen that the
curves for the diﬀerent extensometers does not follow the same slope in both
tests.
Figure 4.14 shows a graph of the elastic moduli measured from the full shot,
the close-up shot and the extensometers for each of the specimen types. The
mean of the elastic moduli from the three measuring lines are used for the full
and the close-up values. As can be seen on the graph and the table, there is a
Figure 4.14: Elastic moduli for all specimen types from diﬀerent
measurements.
==PAGE:52==
42
Results
big diﬀerence in some of the specimen between the elastic moduli measured in
the full shots and the close-up shots. The specimen in which the elastic moduli
are the closest is HA3-E1, and it can be seen that the elastic modulus measured
with the extensometer is within range of the other.
Otherwise, it does not seem that there is any correlation between the found
elastic moduli for the other specimens.
4.4
Displacement
As mentioned in Section 3.4, the actual displacements and displacements relative
to the measured distance were found through three measuring lines through the
specimens, both in the load direction and perpendicular to the load direction.
Figure 4.15 shows the full actual displacements in the load direction and force
over time of specimen HA3-E1. It can be seen how the specimen is compressed
in three cycles and how the displacements follow the load. It can also be seen
how the displacement at diﬀerent places in the specimens are almost the same
at the top of the load cycles and goes back to around zero when the load goes
down.
Figure 4.15: Force and full displacements in the load direction over time for
specimen HA3-E1.
Generally there are some diﬀerent tendencies in the actual displacements in the
diﬀerent specimens. Figure 4.16 shows the force and corresponding displace-
ments in the load direction for specimen LA5-E1, here it can be seen that the
maximum displacement increases for each cycle.
The same can be seen for
specimen LA7-E1.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Displacement
43
Figure 4.16: Force and full displacements in the load direction over time for
specimen LA5-E1.
The graphs also show that there is a larger displacement in the left and right
sides of the specimen and a smaller displacement in the centre of the specimen.
Additionally, it can be seen that the displacement goes above zero when it is
unloaded. This is also seen in several of the other specimens but mainly the
ones made with the soft mortar. Looking for example at the graphs for specimen
LA4-E2, this can also be seen. The force and displacement in the load direction
for this specimen are shown in Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17: Force and full displacements in load direction over time for
specimen LA4-E2.
In this case, the displacement is bigger in the centre measuring line. Generally,
==PAGE:54==
44
Results
the displacements in the three measuring lines are either relatively close or show
the centre line to displace either more or less than the others, in all the spec-
imens. Compering the general sizes of the displacement in the load direction
for the diﬀerent specimens, there does not appear to be a connection to the
aggregate composition.
Additionally, it is worth noticing that on the graph in Figure 4.17, ’valleys’ occur
in the displacement graphs when the specimen is unloaded after the ﬁrst two
cycles. This can also be seen on corresponding graphs for specimen LA7-E1.
Looking at the displacement graphs from the close-up shots in Appendix D,
these ’valleys’ can also be seen to occur for specimen HA1-E3 and LA3-E2.
Perpendicular to the load direction some of the same tendencies can be seen.
Looking at Figure 4.18 where the actual displacements perpendicular to the load
direction is shown for specimen HA1-E3. From the ﬁgure, it can be seen that as
Figure 4.18: Force and full displacements perpendicular to load direction
over time for specimen HA3-E1.
the load increases the specimen is expanding through all three measuring lines.
Furthermore, it can be seen that there is a diﬀerence between the maximum
displacement at diﬀerent places in the specimen. As with the displacements in
the load direction, this is the case for most of the specimens, but especially for
specimen LA2-E4 and LA4-E2. Generally, in this direction, there does not seem
to be a connection between the amount of aggregates and where on the speci-
men the displacements are large or small. Nor does there appear to be a clear
connection between the size of the displacements and the aggregate amount.
In Figure 4.19 the displacements perpendicular to the load direction for spec-
imen LA5-E1 is shown. Here i can be seen that, as with the displacements in
the load direction, the displacements increase for each cycle.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Displacement
45
Figure 4.19: Force and full displacements perpendicular to load direction
over time for specimen LA5-E1.
4.4.1
Displacement of phases in load direction
The measuring lines in the load direction are now looked at again. However, now
the displacements are split into three diﬀerent phases: Mortar, aggregate and
interface. Figure 4.20 shows the displacements over time of the three measuring
lines in the load direction, with corresponding bar plots of the displacements at
the top of each load cycle, for specimen LA2-E4.
==PAGE:56==
46
Results
(a) Displacements over time, left.
(b) Maximum displacements, left.
(c) Displacements over time, centre.
(d) Maximum displacements, centre.
(e) Displacements over time, right.
(f) Maximum displacements, right.
Figure 4.20: Displacements in the load direction of diﬀerent phases in
specimen LA2-E4 through diﬀerent measuring lines.
From the ﬁgure it can again be seen that there is a diﬀerence in the total dis-
placement across the specimen. Furthermore it can be seen that the largest part
of the displacement comes from the mortar, a small part is from the aggregates
and only a very little from the interface. It can also be noted that in Figure
4.20d it can be seen that the displacement of the aggregate is lager than in the
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Displacement
47
other two measuring lines, which corresponds with there being twice as many
aggregates. This can also be seen on the same graphs for the other specimens
in Appendix D, where the lines through places in the specimens with more ag-
gregates shows a bigger part of the displacement coming from the aggregates.
Similarly it can be seen that when more aggregates are present the interface
becomes a bigger part of the total displacement. At a certain point the inter-
face becomes the biggest part of the total displacement, while the aggregates
becomes the smallest part. An example of this can be seen in Figure 4.21 where
the actual displacements for specimen LA5-E1 is shown.
==PAGE:58==
48
Results
(a) Displacements over time, left.
(b) Maximum displacements, left.
(c) Displacements over time, centre.
(d) Maximum displacements, centre.
(e) Displacements over time, right.
(f) Maximum displacements, right.
Figure 4.21: Displacements in the load direction of diﬀerent phases in
specimen LA5-E1 through diﬀerent measuring lines.
In this case there are a lot more aggregates which means the interface in some
places account for the biggest part of the displacement. Furthermore, it can
be seen that the part of the specimen that leads to the increase total in dis-
placement for each cycle, comes from the interface. The same can be seen for
specimen LA7-E1 in Appendix D.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Displacement
49
As for how much each phase displace relative to the total length of that phase,
some of the same tendencies occur in all the specimens. Looking ﬁrst at Figure
4.22, which shows the relative displacements through the right and left measur-
ing lines in specimen HA1-E3, it can be seen that the interface is by far the part
of the specimen that displaces the most relative to its size. The second largest
relative displacement is from the mortar, and the aggregates has the smallest
change in length relative to its size. This can be seen for all the specimens
tested.
(a) Relative displacements over time,
left.
(b) Maximum relative displacements,
left.
(c) Relative displacements over time,
right.
(d) Maximum relative displacements,
right.
Figure 4.22: Relative displacement in the load direction of diﬀerent phases
in specimen HA1-E3 through diﬀerent measuring lines.
HA1-E3 is made with the stiﬀmortar and has only four 20mm aggregates. For
specimen HA3-E1 which is made with the same kind of mortar but with more
aggregates, it can be seen that the relative displacements are smaller. Figure
4.23 shows relative displacements through the left measuring line of specimen
HA3-E1.
==PAGE:60==
50
Results
(a) Displacements over time, left.
(b) Maximum displacements, left.
Figure 4.23: Relative displacements in load direction of diﬀerent phases in
specimen HA3-E1 through left measuring line.
This seems to speciﬁcally be a tendency for the specimens made with the stiﬀ
mortar. For the specimens with the soft mortar, it seems that the specimen with
the higher aggregate content has larger relative displacements in the interface.
An example of this can be seen in Figure 4.24, which shows the relative displace-
ments in the left measuring line for specimens LA1-E3, LA3-E1 and LA5-E1.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Displacement
51
(a) Relative displacements over time
for LA1-E5.
(b) Maximum relative displacements
LA1-E5.
(c) Relative displacements over time
for LA2-E2.
(d) Maximum relative displacements
for LA3-E2.
(e) Relative displacements over time
for LA5-E1.
(f) Maximum relative displacements
for LA5-E1.
Figure 4.24: Relative displacements in the load direction of diﬀerent phases
in specimen LA1-E3, LA3-E1 and LA5-E1 through left
measuring lines.
==PAGE:62==
52
Results
4.4.2
Displacement of phases perpendicular to load direc-
tion
The displacements of the specimens perpendicular to the load direction were
as mentioned also split into the diﬀerent phases. Since the total displacement
graphs showed that the specimen expanded, it is expected that all the diﬀerent
phases in the specimen would expand as well. This is also the case for most of
the specimens. An example can be seen in Figure 4.25, which shows the actual
displacement perpendicular to the load direction over time with corresponding
bar graphs of the maximum displacement in each cycle, for specimen HA3-E1
for all three measuring lines.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Displacement
53
(a) Displacements over time, top.
(b) Maximum displacements, top.
(c) Displacements over time, middle. (d) Maximum displacements, middle.
(e) Displacements over time, bottom. (f) Maximum displacements, bottom.
Figure 4.25: Displacements perpendicular to the load direction of diﬀerent
phases in specimen HA3-E1 through diﬀerent measuring lines.
It can also be seen that for the measuring lines at the top and the bottom, the
biggest displacement comes from the mortar, then the aggregate and only very
little comes from the interface. For the measuring line in the middle, the biggest
displacement is still from the mortar, but it is a lot less and here more comes
from the interface. The diﬀerence in the measuring lines is again the number
==PAGE:64==
54
Results
of aggregates it runs through, where in the middle there is an extra aggregate.
This can also be seen in the graphs for some of the other specimens, where there
are also additional aggregates.
Figure 4.26 shows the displacements of the phases for specimens LA3-E2 and
LA5-E1 perpendicular to the load direction in the top of the specimens.
In
these it can be seen that the interface is expanding where the mortar and the
aggregates are in compression when the load is increased. This can be seen in
all three measuring lines through the specimens and only occur in these two
specimens.
(a) Displacements over time.
(b) Maximum displacements.
Figure 4.26: Displacements over time perpendicular to the load direction of
diﬀerent phases in specimen LA3-E2 and LA5-E1 in the top
measuring lines.
Furthermore, it is worth noticing that the perpendicular displacement of spec-
imen LA5-E1 the expansion of the interface increases for each cycle and does
not go back to zero after a cycle. This is also seen a little in specimen LA7-E1
but not nearly as expressed.
The results of the displacements relative to the measured length in the direction
perpendicular to the load are a little unclear. In all the specimens it seems that
the relative displacement is largest in the interface in almost all the measuring
lines. This seems to be the general case for all the specimens. Furthermore,
it seems that in the measuring lines with more aggregates shows a larger rela-
tive displacement, especially for the interface. This can be seen in Figure 4.27
where the relative displacements in the direction perpendicular to the load for
specimen LA3-E2 are shown.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Displacement
55
(a) Relative displacements over time,
top.
(b) Maximum relative displacements,
top.
(c) Relative displacements over time,
middle.
(d) Maximum relative displacements,
middle.
(e) Relative displacements over time,
bottom.
(f) Maximum relative displacements,
bottom.
Figure 4.27: Relative displacements perpendicular to the load direction of
diﬀerent phases in specimen LA3-E2 through diﬀerent
measuring lines.
On the ﬁgure it can also be seen that there are a lot of noise in especially the
interface graph. This is also the case in most of the graphs for the other speci-
==PAGE:66==
56
Results
mens (see Appendix D). Due to this noise, it is diﬃcult to see clear tendencies
across the diﬀerent specimens.
4.4.3
Displacement of interface
The displacement of the interface is now looked into closer. The actual dis-
placements and relative displacements were, as mentioned, measured in eight
diﬀerent directions around an aggregate in the close-up shots. Figure 4.28 is
an example of the relative displacements in the diﬀerent directions the interface
around an aggregate in specimen LA1-E5, LA4-E2 and LA5-E2. The relative
displacements, as well as the actual displacements of the interface on the re-
maining specimens, can be seen in Appendix D.
(a) LA1-E5.
(b) LA4-E2.
(c) LA5-E1.
Figure 4.28: Relative displacements in diﬀerent directions around aggregates
over time.
In Figure 4.28a it can be seen that, as expected, the interface is expanding in
the east and west direction when the specimen is loaded. Additionally, it can
be seen that the north and south directions are in compression. In all other
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Displacement
57
directions, the interface is in compression when the specimen is loaded. The
largest positive relative displacement (expansion) is in the west direction, and
the largest negative relative displacement (compression) is in the northwest di-
rection.
In Figure 4.28b it can also be seen that the west and east directions are ex-
panding when the specimen is loaded. Additionally, it seems that the interface
also expands in the northeast direction. Again the highest positive relative dis-
placement is in the west direction. The highest negative relative displacement
is in the southeast direction, closely followed by the northwest direction. The
missing graph for the north direction in Figure 4.28b is due to the aggregate
not being completely visible in the close-up shot.
Lastly, in Figure 4.28c it seems like almost all directions are expanding when
the load is increased. Looking closely at the graph it can be seen that only the
north and south directions stay around zero. In this case, the largest relative
displacement is in the northeast direction, with the east and southeast direction
also being really high.
Compering the three graphs it can be seen that the maximum relative displace-
ment increase when the amount of aggregates in the specimen increase. This
also be seen when comparing most of the other graphs for the diﬀerent speci-
mens in Appendix D.
Generally, when looking across all the graphs for all the specimens it can be
noted that the highest expansion of the interface is almost always in the west
or east direction, though the highest compression is rarely in the north or south
directions as one might expect. Otherwise, the directions in which the inter-
face is in compression or is expanding, seems a little random, especially in the
directions that are not in or directly perpendicular to the load direction.
4.4.4
Movements of aggregates
The movements of the four 20mm aggregates were, as mentioned, measured on
the diﬀerent specimens. For the specimens with arrangement 1, 3, 5 and 7,
the displacements between the aggregates were measured horizontally and ver-
tically.
Figure 4.29 illustrates the movements in specimen HA1-E3 and LA1-E5. The
measurements are shown at the top of the last loading cycle. It can be seen that
in the load direction of the specimen with the soft mortar mix, the aggregates
moves more than in the specimens with the stiﬀmortar mix. This however, is
probably mostly due to the specimen in the soft mix being compressed with a
higher load compered to its strength (see Table 3.6). As for the direction per-
pendicular to the load it can be seen that the aggregates move away from each
other, with a higher displacement in the specimen with the stiﬀmix, than the
specimen with the soft. The same can also be seen when comparing specimen
HA3-E1 and LA3-E2 in Appendix E.
==PAGE:68==
58
Results
(a) HA1-E3.
(b) LA1-E4.
Figure 4.29: Movements of aggregates.
For the specimens with arrangement 2 and 4 the displacement of the 20mm
aggregates were measured in the load direction, perpendicular to the load di-
rection and inclined between the aggregates. Figure 4.30 shows the movements
between the aggregates for specimen LA2-E4 and LA4-E2.
(a) LA2-E4.
(b) LA4-E2.
Figure 4.30: Movements of aggregates.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Displacement
59
When compering the movement of aggregates within the two specimens, it can
be seen that in the load direction the displacement between the two aggregates is
lower in specimen LA4-E2. Perpendicular to the load direction the displacement
is lower in specimen LA2-E4.
For most of the other specimens it can be seen that the displacement decrease in
the load direction and increase perpendicular to the load direction, when more
aggregates are in the specimen.
As for the inclined measurements it is seen that for specimen LA2-E4 all the
aggregates move toward each other. For specimen LA4-E2 however, it can be
seen that the distance between the bottom aggregate and the two aggregates in
the sides decrease, but the distance between the aggregates in the sides and the
top aggregate increase.
==PAGE:70==
60
Results
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In the previous chapter, the results from the experiments were presented, and
general tendencies found. In this chapter, the results from the experiments are
discussed in relation to the diﬀerent analysis in the result chapter and the ﬁnd-
ings of others presented in the literature review.
In the ﬁrst part of the chapter, the elastic modulus found from the diﬀerent
experiments are discussed. Thereafter the ﬁndings in regards to the deforma-
tions seen in the investigated areas of the surfaces are discussed and lastly, the
general reliability of the results are discussed.
5.1
Aggregates eﬀect on the elastic modulus
Looking ﬁrst at the results from the elastic moduli found for the diﬀerent spec-
imens in Section 4.3, it is seen that the size of the elastic modulus varies across
the surface of several specimens. This was the case for both sides of the spec-
imens, and there can be several reasons for this. Generally, the reason for the
diﬀerent elastic moduli is due to a larger deformation in one side of the speci-
men. As the amount of aggregates varies in the measuring lines, it is expected
that the elastic modulus should vary as well. However, the aggregate amount
should be the same in the left and right measuring lines and therefore it would
be expected that the elastic modulus would be as well. As can be seen, this is
not the case and the elastic modulus is in most cases found to be largest in one
==PAGE:72==
62
Discussion
side and lowest in the other side of the surfaces. Therefore the diﬀerence is due
to something other than the diﬀerence in aggregate amount.
For the specimens with a big diﬀerence in the elastic modulus across the surface,
a likely reason for the bigger deformation is that the specimen was not com-
pletely centred in the direction sideways relative to the cameras. This would
lead to one side of the specimen being compressed more than the other, which
would give larger deformations in one side. Thereby this side would seem softer
in the calculation of the elastic modulus as these are calculated based on the
assumption that the stress is the same in the entire specimen.
However, as
described in Section 3.3.2 before each test, extensometers on each side of the
specimen was used to adjust the specimen so that it was centred. Due to noise
in the extensometers, the centring was a however little imprecise.
As mentioned, the deformations are expected to be the same in the left and right
measuring lines. This however, is assuming the aggregates are placed symmetri-
cally in the centre of the specimens. Looking at the pictures of each specimen in
Appendix D it can, on several specimens, be seen that while the arrangements of
the aggregates are symmetrical, the placement is not completely centred. This
means that stress distribution is not completely the same on both sides of the
specimens, which can also lead to diﬀerences in the deformations. It is therefore
also likely that this is the reason for the diﬀerence.
Additionally, the mortar matrix is not a homogeneous material, and therefore
the development of microcracks is not the same across the specimen.
This
might also lead to smaller diﬀerences across the surfaces. However, this should
not solely cause the big diﬀerences seen in the result, but could be contributing.
When looking at Figure 4.14 where the mean elastic moduli found from the
full shots and the close-up shots are compered for each specimen, it can be seen
that for almost all specimens there is a very big diﬀerence between the two. As
the measurements on the two diﬀerent shots are not the same, a diﬀerence in
the elastic moduli is to be expected. This could be due to the measurements on
the close-up being shorter and in some cases taken e.g across a stiﬀaggregate.
However, in this case, the diﬀerence in measurements is so big that it can not
only be due to the diﬀerence in measuring lines. Especially when in one case,
the mean of the calculated elastic moduli from the close-up surpasses the elastic
modulus of the glass rods.
The most likely reason for the diﬀerences in the elastic moduli is that the spec-
imens were not compressed equally during the tests. It is likely that the speci-
mens were loaded eccentrically and thereby compressed more in one side towards
one of the cameras (the opposite direction then what was checked for with the
extensometers). The elastic moduli were calculated based on the assumption
that the stress was the same in both sides of the specimens. However if the
specimens were loaded in such a way that it is compressed more on one side of
the specimen than in the other, one side would appear to deform more, corre-
sponding to what is assumed to be the same stress level. Eﬀectively one side of
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Inﬂuence of aggregate composition on the deformations
63
the specimen would appear to have an elastic modulus that is a lot higher than
the actual elastic modulus. Additionally, the other side would have an elastic
modulus that is a lot lower than the actual elastic modulus.
From the visualised deformations, it is seen that in one side of some of the spec-
imens, the deformations show at lower loads than in the other side. This also
indicates that the specimens have been eccentrically loaded.
In Figure 4.14 the elastic moduli of the two specimens calculated using the mea-
surements from with the extensometers, is also shown. For the specimen type
HA3, it can be seen that for both the calculations from GOM correlate and the
extensometers are around the same size. For the specimen type LA3 however, it
can be seen that the elastic modulus found from the extensometers is somewhere
between the other two. The extensometers were placed on the sides opposite
to the cameras, and opposite from the direction the specimens are suspected
to have been eccentrically loaded. This means that the eﬀect of the eccentric
loading of the specimen would not be as noticeable in the measurements from
extensometers. Therefore the measurements from these are more reliable and
should show results somewhere between the ones measured with DIC. This was
also the case for specimen type LA3, but as mentioned earlier not the same
specimen was used for the results found with DIC and the extensometers, so
they can not be compared directly. This is probably also why the elastic modu-
lus found with the extensometer is not in between the ones found with DIC for
specimen type HA3.
Generally when comparing the mean values of the elastic moduli from Figure
4.14 or the actual values from Table 4.1, there seems to be no connection be-
tween the elastic moduli found for the diﬀerent specimens. As there is such a
big diﬀerence between the values for the two sides on one specimen, nothing
can be said about the inﬂuence of the aggregate arrangements based on these
results alone.
5.2
Inﬂuence of aggregate composition on the de-
formations
Even though the elastic moduli found based on the measurements from the
experiments does not show any tendencies regarding the inﬂuence of the ag-
gregates, the results focusing on the deformations seems to show some relevant
tendencies.
5.2.1
Visualised deformations
Considering the visualisation of the deformations in the specimens, it can be
seen that in the load direction the higher deformations moves horizontally from
one side of the specimen towards the aggregates. As mentioned earlier when
==PAGE:74==
64
Discussion
looking at the diﬀerent specimens it can be seen that the aggregates were in
most specimens placed a little oﬀ-centre. The reason for this is that the cutting
of the specimens was imprecise with the equipment available. It would appear
that the side in which the deformations starts, is always the side where the ag-
gregates are closest to the edge of the specimen. This makes sense as this side
should have higher stress concentrations. It is also consistent with this side of
the surface appearing to have lower elastic modulus as the deformations will be
larger compared to the other side of the surface.
For all specimens, both in the load direction and perpendicular to the load di-
rection, it is clear that the interfaces around the aggregates are the areas that
show the largest deformations. This ﬁts well with what was found in the studies
in the literature review, that the ITZ is weaker than the rest of the mortar.
The ITZ has a lower elastic modulus and thereby a higher displacement. Ad-
ditionally, it can be seen that the deformation in the interfaces was often more
clear around larger aggregates which relates to what was found in the studies
by Jia et al. [4], that the thickness of the ITZ is dependant of the size of the
aggregates.
Furthermore, it is seen that there in the specimens with the stiﬀmortar mix
were larger deformations in lines between the aggregates, whereas this was not
the case for the specimens with the soft mix. The explanation for this may be
that the stiﬀmix is less porous than the soft mix, as the stiﬀmix is made with
silica fume which decreases the porosity. With a more porous mortar in the soft
concrete mix, the deformations happen more in the pores and therefore might
deform more evenly. For the stiﬀmix, which is less porous, the higher deforma-
tions might appear clearer where the stress concentrations are higher. As the
stress concentrations are higher in the smaller spaces between the aggregates,
this is where the deformation lines can be seen.
Compering the deformations from all specimens it is seen that the more aggre-
gates that are present, the more deformation of the interfaces is seen. This is the
case both for deformations in the load direction and perpendicular to the load
direction. It is partly due to the increase in the total amount of coarse aggre-
gates, and partly due to the decreased spacing between them. When comparing
the specimens made with the same amount of coarse aggregates and diﬀerent
basis arrangement, it can be seen that the once made with closer spaced aggre-
gates seems to show more deformation in the interface. However, it seems that
the amount of aggregates has a bigger inﬂuence than the spacing.
5.2.2
Actual displacement and relative displacement
When looking at the measured actual total displacement of the specimens it
would be expected that the total displacement decreases with the addition of
more of the stiﬀaggregates. It was seen from the literature review in Chapter 2,
that increasing the amount of coarse aggregates should lead to either a higher
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Inﬂuence of aggregate composition on the deformations
65
elastic modulus and thereby a lower displacement of the specimen, or no change
in the elastic modulus.
However, comparing the maximum displacements in
the diﬀerent specimens, it is seen that the displacements were in some cases
higher in the specimens with more aggregates. There can be several reasons
for this. As it was mentioned previously, many of the specimens are likely to
have been loaded eccentrically during the tests and therefore been subjected to
a higher load in one side of the specimen, and as such the displacement are not
really comparable between the diﬀerent specimens. Additionally, the load was,
as mentioned in Section 3.3.2, applied on the specimens through displacement
controlled loading. The desired loading level was achieved by loading the speci-
men manually once before the actual test to ﬁnd the displacement corresponding
to the load. The eﬀect of this was that due to deformations in the thin wooden
plates, the desired load level was very hard to reach and as it can be seen in
Table 3.6, the specimens were therefore not loaded to the exact same load per-
centage. This also means that the displacements in the diﬀerent specimens are
diﬃcult to compare with one another.
Despite this, it can in some cases be seen that even though the load percentage
is lower on a specimen with few aggregates, the maximum total displacement
of the full specimen in the load direction is higher than one with more aggre-
gates (e.g when comparing specimen LA2-E4 and LA4-E2). However, mostly
the opposite is the case, where a lower load percentage in a specimen with many
aggregates leads to a higher maximum displacement in the load direction than
in a specimen with a higher load percentage with few aggregates (e.g when com-
paring specimen LA1-E5, LA3-E2 and LA5-E2). Again, this can be due to the
eccentric loading, but it also indicates that the specimens do not completely
represent real concrete as more coarse aggregates have been found by others to
lead to less or no change in displacement [13, 12].
For some of the specimens, the displacements graphs are seen to go above zero.
It is not because the specimens are expanding, but because the cameras were
started with the preload already on the specimen. With the permanent defor-
mations in the wooden plates, the load often went below the preload due to the
displacement controlled loading. So the specimens are seen to expand further
than the starting point as the preload is removed. This however, should not
aﬀect the results considerably.
Furthermore, in some of the displacements graphs, it was observed that a ’valley’
occurs around the time were the specimen turns from unloading to reloading.
This is unusual as it would be expected that the displacement would at all time
follow the load. The ’valley’ however, is most likely the cause of the eccentric
loading of the specimens towards the cameras mentioned previously. However,
it would appear that the specimen goes into tension as it is reloaded and then
turns and gets compressed at a certain load level. Considering this in relation
to Navier’s formula σ = N/A + M/W, with the moment M = e · N. Here
the stress σ, is linearly dependant on the force, N, when the eccentricity, e, is
==PAGE:76==
66
Discussion
constant. So for the specimen to go from tension to compression, it would mean
the eccentricity should be varying. This could be possible if the top surface of
the specimen were skewed during the test, leading to the distribution of the load
to change as it increases.
It is seen that a lot of the results points to the specimens being eccentrically
loaded towards one of the cameras. This would however, mean that the ball
bearing in the top compression head did not have the intended eﬀect, of dis-
tributing the load equally on the top surface.
As for the diﬀerent phases of the concrete that makes up the total displace-
ment, it was seen that in both directions, the actual displacement of the mortar
phase is what contributes the most when there are few aggregates. However, as
the number of aggregates increases the interface and the aggregates become big-
ger parts of the total displacement. This is expected because when the amount
of aggregate is increased, they correspond to a bigger part of the area, and
thereby more interface is present as well. It was additionally seen that for the
relative displacements of the diﬀerent phases in the load direction, the interface
represents the biggest displacement. This indicates that the interface is softer
than the rest of the mortar matrix, and this observation is consistent with what
is seen on the visualisations of the deformations.
It would be expected that the addition of a higher amount of stiﬀer material
would lead to less total displacement and thereby a stiﬀer concrete. However, it
can be seen that with the aggregates becoming a bigger part of the displacement,
so does the interface. As the interface is softer than the rest of the mortar, it
cancels out some of the stiﬀness from adding more aggregates. Due to some
of the errors in the tests discussed previously, it is not possible to compare the
diﬀerent specimens directly to see how much the soft interface cancels out the
stiﬀaggregates. However, it is consistent with what was found by Sadowski &
Jaskulski [12] and Yang & Huang [13], that the stiﬀness becomes either higher
or does not change when more coarse aggregates are present.
5.2.3
Interface
The eﬀects of the interface have already been discussed in the previous sections
in connection with the total deformations. However, now only the eﬀects of the
concrete composition on the interface are looked at.
In Figure 4.24, on the graphs displaying the relative displacement in the load
direction it could, speciﬁcally for the soft mortar, be seen that when the amount
of aggregates were increased, the relative displacements of the interface were in-
creased as well. This suggests that as the amount of aggregates increase the
interface becomes softer, which is consisting of the ﬁndings in the study by
Aquino et al. [5]. The opposite was seen for the specimens made with the stiﬀ
mortar. The reason for this might be in the mortar composition, but needs
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Inﬂuence of aggregate composition on the deformations
67
further investigation to be determined.
On the total displacement graphs for specimens LA5-E1 and LA7-E1, it could
be seen that for each cycle the displacements increased in both directions. By
comparison with the displacement and relative displacement graphs for each
phase, it can be seen that the increasing displacement comes speciﬁcally from
the interface. The increase in the interface displacement indicates that perma-
nent deformations (cracks) have formed in the two specimens which becomes
larger for each cycle. The fact that this was not seen in any of the other spec-
imens indicate that cracks occur easier as the amount of aggregates increases.
This makes sense as microcracks often starts in the ITZ and spreads into the
mortar between the aggregates [3, p. 40], so with a shorter distance between
the aggregates the crack development can happen easier.
The reason the eﬀect was more noticeable in specimen LA5-E3 than LA7-E1,
is most likely due to specimen LA7-E1 being loaded to a lower load level (see
Table 3.6).
When looking closer into the relative displacement of the interface, it is also seen
from the close-up shots that the displacement of the interface becomes larger as
the amount aggregates are increased in the soft specimens. Additionally, it can
be seen from Figure 4.28 that the relative displacement becomes signiﬁcantly
bigger for specimen LA5-E1, which corresponds with what was discussed above.
From the measurements of the interface in the close-up shots, it is seen that typ-
ically the directions directly perpendicular to the load direction has the largest
relative displacements. This makes sense as these directions are mainly exposed
to the forces in one direction. Conversely, it is seen in many of the specimens that
in the measurements directly in the load direction, the relative displacements
are not particularly large. As the aggregates are stiﬀer than the mortar the
stresses are lead around the aggregates through the specimen. The placement
of additional aggregates above and below the investigated aggregate therefore
leads the stress to the sides of the aggregate. Thereby the relative displacements
become relatively low at these measurements.
5.2.4
Movements of aggregates
The movements of the 20mm aggregates show that increasing the amount of
aggregates in concrete, decrease the movements between two aggregates in the
load direction. This makes sense as adding a stiﬀaggregate between the two,
should lower the concretes ability to deform and thereby the movements be-
tween two aggregates. Additionally, it is seen that the movements between two
aggregates perpendicular to the load direction are increased as more aggregates
are added.
This could be expected as it is seen that the addition of aggre-
==PAGE:78==
68
Discussion
gates leads to permanent deformations occurring easier in the mixes with many
aggregates, especially in the direction perpendicular to the load. Therefore it
makes sense that the aggregates would move further away from each other in
the perpendicular direction with the addition of aggregates.
When comparing the specimens with diﬀerent mortar mixes and the same ar-
rangement of aggregates, it is seen that the movements of aggregates perpen-
dicular to the load direction is higher in the specimen made with the stiﬀmix.
This is despite these specimens being loaded to a lower load percentage, than
the specimens with the soft mortar mix. This is unexpected as Poisson’s ratio
for high-strength concrete usually is lower than for normal concrete. In this
case however, it would indicate that Poisson’s ratio is higher for the specimens
with higher strength. The reason for this is unknown and would need further
investigation as it could be related to some of the other things creating confus-
ing results discussed earlier, or it could have something to do with the speciﬁc
matrix composition of the mortar.
5.3
Reliability of the results
Generally, the tendencies found in the result chapter are only based on the ﬁnd-
ing in one specimen of a certain type, This means that for the results to be
conclusive, more specimens of the same types needs to be analysed. In this
case, the reason only one specimen was analysed for each type, was due to diﬃ-
culties in getting useful data from the other tested specimen. There are several
reasons for this. In some cases, the specimens were simply not loaded enough
for any noticeable deformations to be detected in GOM correlate. However, for
most of the specimens, the problem was that the pictures were not good enough
for GOM correlate, to detect the deformations across the entire surface of the
picture.
On the ﬁgures showing the visualisation of the deformations, especially in the
close-ups, it can be seen that there are holes in the pictures where the move-
ments have not been detected. There can be several reasons for this. In some
cases, the cameras were not completely parallel with the surface of the specimen,
which leads to parts of the shots being out of focus, and thereby this area could
not be detected by the software. Furthermore, the holes would appear due to
the paint being with either too big or too few dots, or because of big air void in
the surface.
With these holes in the pictures being from missing data, the reliability of the
results from these pictures can be said to be questionable. When comparing
the pictures with a lot of holes to the measurements it can be seen that the
measurements are often with more noise than corresponding ones from pictures
without, or with few holes in. However, in most of the cases despite the noise in
some of the graphs the tendencies are still seen clearly, and thereby these results
are still relevant and can be said to be relatively reliable.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Reliability of the results
69
It is seen that the measurements perpendicular to the load direction is in many
cases noisier than the measurements in the load direction. This is probably due
to these deformations being so small that the painted pattern on the surface,
plus the amount of pixels in the pictures, is not ﬁne enough for GOM correlate
to properly detect the deformations.
Throughout the project, it has been said that the specimens were made with a
’stiﬀ’ and a ’soft’ mortar mix. However, looking at the elastic moduli for each of
the mixes it can be seen that the diﬀerence is actually relatively small. Despite
this, the specimens cast with the diﬀerent mixes have still shown some diﬀerent
tendencies for each mix type. It is therefore diﬃcult to conclude if the diﬀer-
ences in the results are speciﬁcally due to the stiﬀness of the mixes, as the mixes
have a big strength diﬀerence, and are made with diﬀerent ingredients. In the
previous section, it was e.g. mentioned that the addition of silica fume might be
the reason one mix seemed more dense, even though the actual stiﬀness is not
that much higher. Thereby the diﬀerences are likely more due to the diﬀerent
ingredients in the mixes, then the actual stiﬀness being higher.
Furthermore, it has been assumed that curing the specimens in 40◦C water for
14 would give the same development in strength and stiﬀness as curing concrete
in 20◦C water for 28 days. At 28 days the development in concrete properties
is normally so slow that they are considered fully developed. As such, curing
the specimens for 14 days at 40◦C should give properties that do not change
much over a short period of time, and therefore testing the specimens after more
than 14 days should not change the results signiﬁcantly. However, in [3, ﬁgure
3-9a] a graph showing days at a speciﬁc curing temperature corresponding to
the 28 days strength, shows the 40◦C equal to around 21 days. This means that
there could be some diﬀerence in the strength and elastic moduli between the
specimens tested as they were not tested on the same day.
Lastly, there are several standards on ﬁnding the elastic modulus of concrete.
The elastic modulus of the mortar was found by following Method B in DS/EN
12390-13 [18]. However, as mentioned the load was not applied as prescribed in
the standard and thereby the prescribed load of 30% of the compressive strength
were not reached exactly. However, as the compressive strength was found in
tests with some uncertainty a slight deviation from the 30% should not have
inﬂuenced the elastic modulus of the mortar. The same can be said for the con-
crete specimens made with the stiﬀmortar, as these were also loaded to around
30%. However, the concrete specimens made with the soft mortar were loaded
up to around 60-70% of the compressive strength. This should lead to lower
elastic moduli as the slope of the stress-strain curves is lower at higher stresses
in concrete. The results for the calculated elastic moduli were discussed earlier
in the chapter and it was seen that the results were very scattered. This is most
likely due to the other circumstances discussed, and the eﬀects of deviating from
the standard can therefore be seen as negligible in this case.
==PAGE:80==
70
Discussion
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this thesis, the eﬀect of the concrete composition on the elastic modulus and
the general behaviour of concrete in uniaxial compression has been investigated.
The eﬀect of changing the content and arrangement of coarse aggregates and
mortar composition have been investigated with the use of DIC. Based on the
results and discussion the following can be concluded.
Firstly, it can be concluded that the amount of aggregates in concrete has a
clear inﬂuence on the deformations in concrete in uniaxial compression.
Based on the calculated elastic moduli found from inspection using DIC on con-
crete specimens in compression, nothing deﬁnitive can be concluded about the
stiﬀness of concrete due to complications with the test set-up. However, based
on the results it has been found that the deformations in concrete are biggest
in the interface between the mortar and the coarse aggregates. Additionally, it
has been observed that larger deformations occur easier in the mortar between
the coarse aggregates for concrete made with a more dense mortar mix. The
concrete made with porous mortar have been observed to have larger visible de-
formations located mainly around the coarse aggregates until a certain amount
of coarse aggregate is present.
Additionally, it has been observed that for concrete made with a porous mor-
tar matrix, the addition of coarse aggregates increases the deformations of the
interface relative to its size, and thereby lowers its stiﬀness.
Furthermore, it was seen that the part of concrete, that is responsible for the
==PAGE:82==
72
Conclusion
biggest deformations is the mortar, followed by the aggregates and the interface.
As the amount of coarse aggregate is increased, these take up a bigger part of
the deformation. As a result of this, the interface also becomes a bigger part
of the total deformation. Based on this it can be concluded that the amount
of coarse aggregates is part of determining the ratio of what phases in concrete
that makes the deformations and thereby the stiﬀness.
Lastly, it has been observed that the tests specimens made with a high amount
of coarse aggregates, showed larger deformations than the once made with few
coarse aggregates. This is uncommon and it is therefore believed that the test
specimens might not completely represent what would happen with real con-
crete. However, this needs further investigation.
6.1
Further work
For further work, it would ﬁrst and foremost be recommended that some ad-
justments were made to the test set-up and the casting and cutting process of
the specimens in order to avoid some of the errors that were seen in the re-
sults. Especially with focus on avoiding eccentric loading of the specimens as
this was seen to cause a lot of unreliable results in this project. Additionally,
force-controlled loading would give results that could be compared easier.
In this project, most of the result was found using DIC. However, the accuracy
of the results from this method compared to the traditional methods was not
really looked at. A way to verify the DIC measurements could be to also mea-
sure the strain in a diﬀerent way at the same time, on the same specimen. This
could be done e.g. with strain gauges on the two sides of the specimen that is
not used for DIC.
In addition to the ways of improving the results found in this project, some
new types of specimen, and other testing parameters could be investigated.
In this project the specimens were cast with six of the eight suggested aggregate
arrangements, so the two remaining arrangements could be cast and tested. The
untested arrangements correspond to the second basis of arrangements of the
20mm glass rods. By testing these the result could be compared to the results
from specimens made with the ﬁrst basis of arrangements. This could lead to a
deeper understanding of how the arrangement of the same amount of aggregates
aﬀects the concrete properties.
Additionally, the experiments were only made with two diﬀerent types of mor-
tar with stiﬀnesses relatively close to one another, and with two diﬀerent mix
designs. It would therefore be interesting to see the eﬀect of using mortars with
mix designs made of the same components but with a higher diﬀerence in the
stiﬀness. Furthermore, the eﬀect of making changes to the grain sizes of the
sand could also be investigated. In this project, a small maximum grain size
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Further work
73
was used to make sure the sand would ﬁt between the glass rods in the casting
process. However, to get gradation conditions closer to what is normal in con-
crete, the mortar could be made with a larger maximum grain size of the sand.
It could also be interesting to look into the eﬀect of changing the curing condi-
tions so that some specimen were air-cured, as this could lead to pre-cracking
due to drying shrinkage.
Lastly, it would be a natural progression to include the subjects of the two other
projects that were carried out alongside this project. This would be done by
testing specimens with diﬀerent surface treatments of the glass rods, and/or test
of the fatigue behaviour.
==PAGE:84==
74
Conclusion
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
Jens Ole Freriksen and Gitte Normann Munch-Petersen. “E-modul”. In:
Betonhåndbogen. 2015. Chap. 10.3, pp. 10.3–1–10.3–8. url: https://
betonhaandbogen.dk/Soeg-i-bogen?q=elasticitetsmodulet.
[2]
Adam M. Neville. “Aggregate bond and modulus of elasticity of concrete”.
In: ACI Materials Journal 94.1 (1997), pp. 71–74.
[3]
P. Kumar Mehta and Paulo J. M. Monterio. Concrete: Microsructure,
Properties and Materials. Fourth edi. McGraw-Hill Education, 2014, p. 675.
[4]
Zijian Jia et al. “Quantitative characterization and elastic properties of in-
terfacial transition zone around coarse aggregate in concrete”. In: Journal
Wuhan University of Technology, Materials Science Edition 32.4 (2017),
pp. 838–844. issn: 19930437. doi: 10.1007/s11595-017-1677-8.
[5]
Matthew J. Aquino, Zongjin Li, and Surendra P. Shah. “Mechanical Prop-
erties of the Aggregate and Cement Interface”. In: Advanced Cement Based
Materials 2.6 (1995), pp. 211–223.
[6]
Szczepan Wolinskl et al. “Inﬂuence of aggregate size an fracture mechanics
parameters of concrete”. In: The International Jurnal of Cement Compos-
ites and Lightweight Concrete 9.May (1987), pp. 95–103.
[7]
F P Zhou, F D Lydon, and B I G Barr. Eﬀect of coarse aggregate on elastic
modulus and compressive strength of high performance concrete. Tech. rep.
1. 1995, pp. 177–186.
[8]
G Giaccio and R Zerbino. “Combined Eﬀects of Coarse Aggregates and
Strength Level”. In: Advanced Cement Based Materials 7.2 (1998), p. 41.48.
==PAGE:86==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9]
Lucyna Domaga and Justyna Dobrowolska. “The inﬂuence of an applied
standard test method on a measurement of concrete stabilized secant mod-
ulus of elasticity”. In: Matec Web of Conferences 163 (2018).
[10]
Bouzid Choubane, Chung-Lung Wu, and Mang Tia. “Coarse Aggregate Ef-
fects on Elastic Moduli of Concrete”. In: Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1547.1 (1996), pp. 29–34.
issn: 0361-1981. doi: 10.3141/1547-05.
[11]
Li Hong, Xianglin Gu, and Feng Lin. “Inﬂuence of aggregate surface rough-
ness on mechanical properties of interface and concrete”. In: Construc-
tion and Building Materials 65 (2014), pp. 338–349. issn: 09500618. doi:
10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2014.04.131.
[12]
Grzegorz Sadowski and Roman Jaskulski. “Comparative analysis of depen-
dence of the elastic modulus of concrete on its composition”. In: Materials
Structures Technology 1.1 (2018), pp. 1–9.
[13]
Chung-Chia Yang and Ran Huang. “Eﬀect of S/A ratio on the elastic
modulus of cement-based materials”. In: Journal of the Chinese Institute
of Engineers 21.3 (1998), pp. 357–364. issn: 2158-7299. doi: 10.1080/
02533839.1998.9670399.
[14]
Prasad Rangaraju, Marcus Balitsaris, and Harish Kizhakommudom. Im-
pact of Aggregate Gradation on Properties of Portland Cement Concrete
Sponsored by the South Carolina Department of Transportation Final Re-
port. Tech. rep. 2013, p. 81.
[15]
Prasada Rao Rangaraju, Jan Olek, and Sidney Diamond. “An investiga-
tion into the inﬂuence of inter-aggregate spacing and the extent of the
ITZ on properties of Portland cement concretes”. In: Cement and Con-
crete Research 40.11 (2010), pp. 1601–1608. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.
2010.07.002.
[16]
A. Rahai et al. “Studying the eﬀect of various parameters on mechanical
properties of lightweight aggregate concrete using MANOVA”. In: Ma-
terials and Structures 48.8 (2014), pp. 2353–2365. issn: 1359-5997. doi:
10.1617/s11527-014-0317-4.
[17]
DS-EN-12390-3. “Dansk standard Prøvning af hærdnet beton – Del 3 :
Prøvelegemers trykstyrke Testing hardened concrete – Part 3 : Compres-
sive strength of test specimens”. In: (2012).
[18]
DS-EN-12390-13. Dansk standard Prøvning af hærdnet beton – Del 13 :
Bestemmelse af elasticitets- modul ( sekantmodul ) under trykpåvirkning.
2013.
[19]
SCHOTT AG. Tubing. 2015. url: https://www.schott.com/d/tubing/
5937001c-3e4d-4731-8854-5b15a79969b3/ar-glas%7B%5C_%7Dbrosch%
7B%5C_%7Duk%7B%5C_%7D20140216.pdf.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
[20]
GOM. What is GOM Correlate. 2019. url: https://www.gom.com/3d-
software/gom-correlate.htm (visited on 08/02/2019).
==PAGE:88==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:89==
Appendix
A
Literature review
The following is a literature review on the topic of elastic modulus of concrete.
The review was made prior to this thesis and was meant as preparation for the
project. Therefore the review covers a larger range of topics where some did not
seem relevant to mention in the theory and literature review at the beginning
of this report.
==PAGE:90==
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
Literature review
Caroline Marquar Larsen (s143950)
February 25th 2019
==PAGE:91==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
3
2.1
Deﬁnitions of elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Eﬀects of aggregates on the elastic modulus
4
3.1
Numerical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Interfacial transition zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Physical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Volume and gradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Testing of elastic modulus
8
4.1
Standard testing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Digital image correlation (DIC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Conclusion
9
5.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
==PAGE:92==
1
Introduction
This report is a literature review summarising the current knowledge of the elastic modulus of concrete
and the parameters aﬀect this. The literature review is made as a background for an upcoming project
investigating the eﬀects of aggregate composition on the elastic modulus of concrete. First some literature
concerning the general understanding of the traits and development of the elastic behaviour of concrete
are reviewed. Hereafter literature giving a deeper understanding of the factors inﬂuencing the elastic
modulus of concrete, especially the aggregates and the concrete composition, are reviewed.
As the
upcoming project will involve experimental testing of the elastic modulus, a part of this literature review
focuses on relevant literature relating to the testing methods used for ﬁnding the elastic modulus. Lastly
a short conclusion summarising of the main points and a description of what will be investigated in the
project, based on this literature review, are made.
2
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
2.1
Deﬁnitions of elastic modulus
The elastic modulus of a material is the the ratio between the stress and strain of a material and deﬁned
from Hooke’s law
σ = E · ε
(1)
where σ is the stress, ε is the corresponding strain and E is the elastic modulus also known as Young’s
modulus [1].
For some materials the stress-strain relation is linear and the elastic modulus is therefor constant. This
however, is not the case for concrete, that has a linear relation between the stress and strain until about
50% of the ultimate strength (depending on mix) where the curve begins to level out [2, page 81-82], this
can be seen in Figure 1.
Due to the nonlinear relationship, diﬀerent methods are used to determine the elastic modulus. For the
static modulus of elasticity there are three diﬀerent types of elastic moduli [2, page 83]:
• Secant modulus is given by the slope of a line drawn from the origin to a speciﬁc point on the curve.
In the American standard it is set to be the point corresponding to 40% of the ultimate strength
of the concrete [2, 3], and in the European standard it is the point corresponding to 1/3 of the
ultimate strength [4].
• Tangent modulus is the slope of a line drawn tangent to any point on the stress-strain curve.
• Chord modulus is the slope of a line drawn between any two points on the stress-strain curve.
In addition to these static moduli of elasticity for a material under compression or tension, there is
also a dynamic modulus of elasticity which corresponds to a very small instantaneous strain, and it is
approximately give by the initial tangent modulus. This modulus is usually 20-40% higher than the static
modulus of elasticity and is appropriate to use for analysis of structures subjected to impact loading.
Additionally there is also a ﬂexural modulus of elasticity, which can be determined from deﬂection tests
on a beam, and depends on the support and load type [2, page 83-84]. The secant, tangent and initial
tangent modulus can be seen i Figure 1.
Figure 1: General stress-strain curve for concrete, with display of some of the diﬀerent elastic moduli.
(https://www.quora.com/Why-there-is-3-modulus-for-concrete)
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
3
==PAGE:93==
The above mentioned elastic moduli are usually used to the deﬁne the elastic modulus in experimental
context when the stress-strain curve is known. In concrete design however, the modulus of elasticity is
usually estimated from empirical expressions that assume that there is a direct relationship between the
modulus of elasticity and the strength, or in some cases the density, of the concrete [2, page 85].
There are diﬀerent standards with diﬀerent expressions from diﬀerent areas of the world, but according
to Eurocode 2 [5], the secant elastic modulus Ecm can be estimated as
Ecm = 2.2 · 104(fcm/10)1/3
(2)
where fcm is the mean value of concrete cylinder compressive strength [5, page 28-29]. Expression (2)
is recommended for concretes med with quartzite aggregates. For concretes made with diﬀerent types
of aggregates, there are some recommendations to reductions or increases depending on the type of
aggregate.
2.2
Factors aﬀecting the elastic modulus
There are many factors that inﬂuence the elastic modulus of concrete. According to Mehta & Monterio
[2, page 86-88], the main thing that aﬀect the elastic modulus is the porosity of the individual elements in
concrete, as the porosity of a material is oppositely related to the density and the density is directly related
to the elastic modulus of homogeneous materials. For concrete, which is a heterogeneous multiphase
material, the porosity, density and the elastic modulus of the diﬀerent components as well as other
characteristic of these, determined the elastic modulus of the combined material.
In [2, page 86-87], it is stated that the most important of the aggregate characteristics is the porosity
since this determines the elastic modulus of the aggregate. It is stated that in general the larger amount
of coarse aggregates with high elastic modulus in a concrete mix, the greater the elastic modulus of
the concrete. In addition, other characteristics such as shape, size, surface, grading and mineralogical
composition of the aggregates aﬀects the elastic modulus of the concrete. The aﬀect of especially the
coarse aggregates, will be looked at in more detail in the following sections.
The elastic modulus of the cement paste matrix is also determined by the porosity. Here the factors that
determine the porosity is the water-cement ratio (w/c-ratio), the air content, the degree of hydration
and the admixtures. The transition zone, also known as the Interfacial Transition Zone (ITZ), is an
area around the aggregates that has has a diﬀerent micostructure than the rest of the cement paste,
and therefor a diﬀerent elastic modulus. The elastic modulus of this zone is also highly dependent on
the porosity. In this zone there are generally more capillary voids, microcracks and calcium hydroxide
crystals than in the rest of the cement matrix, which contribute to a higher porosity and thereby a lower
elastic modulus. The ITZ can have diﬀerent properties depending on the the aggregates, and this will
therefor also be looked into in more detail in a later section.
Lastly, according to Mehta & Monterio [2, page 88], the elastic modulus of concrete can be aﬀected by
the testing parameters. As mentioned the elastic modulus of concrete can be be found through testing,
which can be done several ways, but the most common is by adding load in compression and measuring
the corresponding strain. It has been observed that the moisture state at which a concrete specimen
is tested can change the measured elastic modulus, and it has been found that specimens tested in wet
conditions have 15% higher elastic modulus. In addition, the load-rate at which the elastic modulus is
tested on a concrete specimen can inﬂuence the measured elastic modulus. If the loading is instantaneous
the specimen will fail with only little strain development, and thereby making the elastic modulus high,
whereas a very slow loading rate leads to superimposed elastic and creep strain, that leads to lower
modulus of elasticity.
3
Eﬀects of aggregates on the elastic modulus
3.1
Numerical models
A simple way of estimation the elastic modulus of concrete is by using composite material formulations
that incorporates the volume fractions and elastic moduli of the components. Several of such formulations
exists, where the simplest are two phase models [2, page 556-559]. Using these models concrete can be
taken as a two phase composite material consisting of a cement matrix and aggregates. The two simplest
of these models are the Voigt model and the Reuss model that consider the two phases parallel (uniform
strain), and in series (uniform stress) respectively. The Voigt model and Reuss model is said to be the
simplest way of estimating the elastic modulus of concrete, and the results from the models should be
4
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
==PAGE:94==
the upper and lower bounds of the modulus respectively. There are other well known two phase models
that are more complicated than these and some more accurate [2].
In a study made by Zhou et al. [6] it was tested how well measured elastic moduli of concrete specimens
made with diﬀerent types of aggregates, ﬁtted to diﬀerent two phase models. It was found that diﬀerent
two phase models (including The Voigt and Reuss models) estimated the elastic modulus of the concrete
quite well except for the concretes with aggregates with very high and very low elastic moduli. In this
study the volume fraction of the aggregates were kept constant but in a study made by Cho et al. [7] it
was found that increasing the volume fraction of the aggregates would lead to worse estimations of the
elastic modulus, when a two face model was used.
Others have also found that there are cases where the two phase models are not suﬃcient, and therefore
suggested new models incorporating more phases. Cho et al. [7] suggested and tested a three phase
model where the voids were incorporated as the third phase in mortar mixes. Others such as Aoussi et
al. [8] and Lee & park [9] have proposed three phase models of concrete where the third phase is the
interfacial transition zone between the cement matrix and the aggregates.
3.2
Interfacial transition zone
As mentioned above, the interfacial transition zone (ITZ) is a zone around the aggregates in concrete
with a diﬀerent microstructure than the the rest of the cement paste matrix.
The ITZ development has been described by Mehta & Monterio [2, page 40]: When concrete is freshly
compacted, water ﬁlm is formed around the aggregates which make the w/c-ratio higher in the area. Due
to this increase larger crystals of calcium hydroxide form and thereby the zone becomes more porous
which, as mentioned earlier, decreases the elastic modulus and makes the area the weak link.
Due to this weak link the ITZ is often where the concrete cracks under loading, and due to movements
between aggregates and cement paste there are already microcracks in the zone before loading and these
increase in size and number as load is added. As described by Mehta & Monterio [2] as well as Neville [10]
the development in microcracks during loading is what determines the shape of the stress-strain curve.
All the components in concrete usually remain elastic until failure whereas concrete itself shows inelastic
behaviour. This is due to the increase in the microcracks in the ITZ with increase in stress.
According to Neville [10], in cases with e.g. lightweight aggregate concrete the bond between the cement
paste and the aggregates are strong and there are no early microckacking in the ITZ which leads to the
stress-strain relation being linear with stresses up to 90% of the ultimate strength.
According to Mehta & Monterio [2, page 40-41] the size of the ITZ depends on the size of the aggregates,
and the zone exist not only around the coarse aggregates but also the ﬁne aggregates and accounts for
between one-third and one-half of the volume of the cement paste [10]. It is stated that the bigger the
aggregate the thicker the water ﬁlm around the aggregate and thereby the thicker the ITZ. This was also
found by Jia et al. [11] who made a study to characterise the elastic properties of the ITZ with variation
in diﬀerent parameters such as aggregate size, w/c-ratio and curing time. In the study experiments were
made where the elastic modulus was found in the mortar at diﬀerent distances from the coarse aggregate
surface, using nanoindentation. In addition to the aggregate size aﬀecting the thickness of the ITZ it was
also found that an increase in the w/c-ratio leads to increase in the thickness of the ITZ and that an
increase in curing time decreases the thickness of the ITZ. Furthermore, it was found that generally the
elastic modulus in concrete is high at the aggregates and moving outward from the aggregates it decreases
in the ITZ and hereafter increases and then levels out as the distance to the aggregate increases. Finally
it was found that the elastic modulus of the ITZ is more or less independent of the size of the aggregate.
In another study made by Aquino et al. [12] parameters aﬀecting the stiﬀness of the ITZ was inves-
tigated. The inﬂuence of the aggregate size and variations in cement paste composition was investigated.
A so called push-out test was performed, where slices of hardened cement paste discs with a single ag-
gregate core in the middle were tested. The aggregate core was pushed out as the displacement was
measured in order to characterise the bond between the aggregate and the cement paste. In the study
the elastic modulus of the ITZ was not directly found but an ”interfacial stiﬀness parameter” was used to
compere the results. In this study it was also found that the stiﬀness of the ITZ is independent of the size
of the aggregate. Furthermore, it was found that the addition of ﬁne aggregates to the the cement paste
matrix did not inﬂuence the bond between the coarse aggregates and the matrix. However, it was found
that the addition of other coarse aggregates to the cement paste matrix lowered the stiﬀness parameter
between the investigated aggregate and the matrix and cracks towards the additional aggregates were
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
5
==PAGE:95==
observed. Lastly it was found that the addition of admixtures such as silica fume and latex to the cement
paste, decreased the porosity of the ITZ and thereby increased the stiﬀness.
3.3
Physical properties
3.3.1
Size
As discussed in the previous section the size of the aggregate has an inﬂuence on the bond between
the aggregates and the cement paste matrix, in the sense that the size of the aggregate determines the
thickness of the ITZ which has found to be the ”weak link” in concrete. In addition to this it has been
described by Neville [10] that smaller aggregate size leads to lager surface area which leads to lower bond
stress. In a study made by Wolinski et al. [13], the initial elastic modulus of concrete was tested for
diﬀerent maximum aggregate sizes raging from 2 mm to 40 mm. In this study however, it was found that
changing the maximum aggregate size did not have any eﬀect on the initial elastic modulus.
As only the initial elastic modulus was tested in this study the maximum aggregate size could perhaps
be shown to have an inﬂuence on the secant elastic modulus as it has been showed by others that the
later shape of the stress-strain curve is inﬂuenced by the the ITZ and the size of the aggregates has an
inﬂuence on the thickness of the ITZ and thereby the total fraction of ITZ in a concrete. This however,
needs further investigations to be proven.
3.3.2
Shape and surface texture
The shape of the aggregate as well as the surface texture has been found to be important when it comes
to the bond between the cement paste and the aggregates. It was pointed out by Neville [10] that light
weight aggregate concrete usually has good bonding between the aggregate and the cement paste due
to the rough surface texture of many lightweight aggregates, which leads to a mechanical interlocking.
In a study by Choubane et al. [14], diﬀerent aggregate types with diﬀerent surface texture and shapes
were tested, and both the dynamic and static modulus of elasticity was determined. It was found that
the concrete with coarse aggregates with rough surfaces and angular shape had noticeably higher elastic
(static and dynamic) moduli than the concrete with round coarse aggregates with smooth surfaces. In
this case the aggregates were a combination of shape and surfaces texture and it can therefor not be
concluded weather diﬀerence is due to shape, surface texture or a combination of the two.
In study by Hong et al. [15], the elastic modulus of concrete specimens with round glass balls as coarse
aggregates were tested. The glass balls were made with three types of surface texture: polished, sand-
blasted and notched. In this case it was also found that the rougher the surface texture the higher the
elastic modulus of the concrete, though in this case it was found regardless of the shape of the aggregate.
3.3.3
Stiﬀness and Porosity
As was described in section 2.2, the stiﬀness of the aggregates is determined by their porosity, where more
dense aggregates have a higher elastic modulus. In the study by Choubane et al. [14], beside the eﬀect
of the shape and the surface texture, it was also found that the concrete made with porous aggregates
had considerably lower elastic modulus compered to the ones made with dens aggregates. In another
study by Zhou et al. [6] tests of high strength concrete with aggregates with diﬀerent elastic moduli were
performed in order to see how these aﬀect the elastic modulus of the concrete. It was found that the
elastic modulus of the aggregates had a clear eﬀect on the elastic modulus of the concrete and that the
higher the elastic modulus of the coarse aggregates the higher the modulus of the concrete. The same was
found by Giaccio & Zerbino [16] in a study where mechanical properties, including the elastic modulus,
of concrete with coarse aggregates with diﬀerent characteristics, were investigated.
In common concrete the elastic modulus of the aggregates are higher than the elastic modulus of the
matrix which leads to the concrete having an elastic modulus in between these [2]. It has been found by
Domaga & Dobrowolska [17] and Neville [10] that in cases where the elastic modulus of the aggregate are
close to that of the cement matrix it leads to better stress transfer between these, because the concrete
acts more like a homogeneous material.
3.4
Volume and gradation
The amount of aggregates and the gradation of the aggregates has also been studied, and found by some
to have an inﬂuence on the elastic modulus of concrete.
In a study by Cho et al. [7] the inﬂuence of the eﬀect of the volume fraction of ﬁne aggregate on the
6
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
==PAGE:96==
elastic modulus of mortar was investigated. The elastic modulus of mortar was found for diﬀerent volume
fractions of ﬁne aggregates and diﬀerent w/c-ratios. It was found that elastic modulus in mortar increases
when the content of ﬁne aggregates increases for mortar with diﬀerent w/c-ratios.
In another study made by Sadowski & Jaskulski [18] the weight ratio of the amount of ﬁne aggregates
to the total aggregate and its inﬂuence on the elastic modulus of concrete was investigated. The elastic
modulus was found for concrete with two diﬀerent w/c-ratios where the ﬁne aggregate to total aggregate
ratio was in the range of 25-75%. For both w/c-ratios it was found that an increase in ﬁne aggregate
content leads to lower elastic modulus in concrete. It was concluded that this is probably due to the
increase in the amount of porous matrix, which has a lower stiﬀness, as the amount of stiﬀer coarse
aggregates decreases.
In an older but similar study made by Yang & Huang [19] the eﬀect of changing the ratio between ﬁne
aggregate and the total aggregate content, on the elastic modulus of concrete was also investigated. The
diﬀerence from the other study was that in this study lower w/c-ratios were used and it was found that
the increase in ratio between ﬁnd and coarse aggregates does not have an eﬀect on the elastic modulus
of the concrete.
The diﬀerence in results in these to studies might be due to the fact that the study by Yang & Huang
was made with high strength concrete, which due to the low w/c-ratio has low porosity of the cement
paste and therefor high elastic modulus. As pointed out by Neville [10], when the elastic modulus of the
cement paste is high there is a smaller diﬀerence between the elastic modulus of the cement paste end
the aggregates and therefor the addition of more aggregates will not have as much (if any) inﬂuence on
the total elastic modulus of the concrete. So the eﬀect of the amount of aggregates has on the elastic
modulus of concrete depends on the stiﬀness of the cement paste, which depends on the w/c-ratio.
As for the grading of the aggregates, a study that investigated the inﬂuence of changes in ﬁne and
coarse aggregate gradation respectively, was made by Rangaraju et al. [20]. In the study concrete spec-
imens were cast with the same volume of aggregate but with diﬀerent gradation curves. It was found
that change in the gradation of coarse aggregates as well as ﬁne aggregates has no signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the elastic modulus of elasticity, at least not within the limits of the standard recommended grada-
tions. There might be a change in the in the elastic modulus if the gradation falls to much outside the
recommendations though no clear evidence of this was found as they did not look at extreme cases. In
an earlier study by Rangaraju et al. [21] it was investigated how the inter aggregate spacing aﬀects the
elastic modulus of concrete. It was hypothesised that if the space between the aggregates were reduced
it would lead to overlap between the ITZ of aggregates and thereby reduce the concrete properties. The
distance between the the aggregate were controlled by changing the grading of the ﬁne aggregates and
keeping a constant volume fraction of aggregates, so that better grading lead to less space between the
aggregates. It was found that decreasing the space between the aggregates did not have any signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the elastic modulus. However, the ﬁndings are consistent with those found in the later study
[20], that the modulus of elasticity is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the grading of the aggregates.
In a study made by Rahai et al.
[22] the combined eﬀects of aggregate grading, volume fraction of
aggregates and sand to cement ratio on the elastic modulus of concrete with lightweight aggregates was
investigated. In the study concrete specimens were cast with four diﬀerent volume fractions of lightweight
aggregates, with three diﬀerent sand-cement ratios and three diﬀerent gradations (36 diﬀerent concrete
mixes). For each of these specimens the elastic modulus were determined and the results evaluated for
each parameter. It was found that independent on grading and volume fraction there was an increase
in the elastic modulus of concrete with an increase in the sand to cement ratio. It was also found that
there was a decrease in the elastic modulus when the aggregate grading was such that there were a higher
amount of coarse aggregates (almost independent on the sand to cement ratio and the volume fraction),
as well as a decrease in the elastic modulus with an increase in the volume fraction of aggregates (com-
pletely independent of the grading and sand to cement ratio). In the study they also evaluated, based
on MANOVA, the signiﬁcance of the three parameters and it was concluded that all the parameters had
equally signiﬁcance on the elastic modulus. This study uses more extremes in grading curves than [20]
and the experiments were made with lightweight aggregates, which might be the reason for the inconsis-
tent ﬁndings regarding the gradation, and it is hard to say if the trends would be the same for concrete
with aggregate with higher strength and lower porosity.
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
7
==PAGE:97==
4
Testing of elastic modulus
4.1
Standard testing methods
There are diﬀerent ways of testing for the elastic modulus of concrete, depending on which elastic modulus
one wants to ﬁnd. In the upcoming project the secant modulus of elasticity is what is wanted, which
is the one used in structural design [17].
The American standard ASTM C469 [3], suggest that the
secant modulus of elasticity is found by loading the test specimen with at least three loading cycles with
a maximum loading of 40% of the ultimate strength. The secant modulus is then calculated from the
measured stress at 40% of the ultimate strength and the corresponding measured strain. The European
standard EN 12390-13 [4], suggest two methods for ﬁnding the secant elastic modulus of elasticity. Method
A can be used both to ﬁnd the initial secant modulus and the stabilised secant modulus, where method B
is only used to ﬁnd the stabilised secant modulus. With method A the specimen is loaded with ﬁrst three
small cycles where the upper loading being between 0.1 and 0.15 of the ultimate strength of the specimen,
and then an additional three big loading cycles where the upper loading is 1/3 of the ultimate strength.
The initial secant modulus is then calculated from the ﬁrst three cycles and the stabilised secant modulus
is calculated from the other three cycles. For method B the stabilised secant modulus is found by only
loading the specimen with three big cycles where the upper limit is 1/3 of the ultimate strength of the
specimen. During the tests the applied stress and corresponding strain is measured and these are used to
calculate the elastic modulus. In the standard it is not indicated which of the two methods is best to use
to ﬁnd the stabilised secant modulus of elasticity, and if the two method will give the same result. This
however, has been tested by Domaga & Dobrowolska [17], who made an experimental study where the
stabilised secant modulus of elasticity was found using both method A and method B for diﬀerent types
of concrete with diﬀerent w/c ratios and diﬀerent aggregate types (normal weight and light weight). It
was found that there was considerable diﬀerence between the two methods. Method A gave higher elastic
moduli in all cases, and it was concluded that this might be due to compaction of the concrete during
the cycles for the initial modulus or the higher values for the lower stress in method A. Furthermore it
was found that the diﬀerence in the elastic moduli was more pronounced for concrete with normal-weight
concrete than for lightweight concrete.
4.1.1
End plate resistance
In the standards mentioned above, it is required that the specimens must, be at least 2 times as higher
than wide. This requirement is most likely due to the phenomenon of end plate resistance. According
to research made by Kotsovos [23] and Kumar et la. [24], when a test specimen is under uniaxial com-
pression a relatively high friction between the concrete surface and the steel surface of the loading device
occur. This leads to additional inward stress in the concrete specimen parallel to the surface, at the top
and bottom. The additional stress is highest at the surfaces (end zones) and reduces toward the middle
of the specimen, and for specimens that has a high height to width ratio, the additional stress due to
the friction is zero around the middle part of the specimen (central zone). The additional inward stress
in the end zones result in a complex compressing state. When the ultimate strength of the specimen is
reached at the central zone cracks appear parallel to the loading direction, at this point the end zones
still remain stressed below the ultimate strength and remain uncracked. This result in a much higher
lateral expansion of the central zone than in the end zones, which result in two counteracting lateral
stresses acting on the end zones at the same time: the outward stress from the expansion of the of the
central zone and inward stresses from the stresses from the friction between the surface of the concrete
and the steel plates on the testing device. With the continuous increase in expansion of the central zone
the stress on the end zone will eventually reach the ultimate strength which will result in a failure of
the entire specimen. This results in a stress-strain curve that increases until the ultimate strength of the
central zone is reached and then slowly decrease until the ultimate strength of the end zones are reached.
It was showed by Kotosovos [23] that if the end plate resistance is eliminated, the specimen will suﬀer a
complete and immediate loss of load-carrying capacity and the stress-strain curve will have a 90 degree
slope at this point, as shown by Kumar et al. [24].
In the standards the eﬀect of the end plate resistance is taken into account by advising that the spec-
imens is slender enough to make sure that there is a central zone where the stress from the friction is
zero. However, there are methods that have been proposed and tested to minimise the friction between
the concrete and the testing devise. In the study made by Kotsovos [23] an experiment testing 3 diﬀer-
ent ”anti-friction” media was conducted. These ”anti-friction” media were: a layer of synthetic rubber,
8
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
==PAGE:98==
MGA pads and a ”brush platen” made by splitting a steel platen longitudinally and transversely to form
a number of bristles. A test compering the ultimate strength of a tall cylinder (2.5 height to diameter
ratio) with that of a cube, showed that the use of the ”brush plate” gave results nearly equal to those
found for the cylinder, indicating that the brush plate almost eliminates the end plate resistance.
According to Kumar et al. [24], a ”brush platen” is what is most commonly known to eﬀectively elimi-
nate end plate resistance, they however made an experimental study where they tested four other ”anti-
friction” media, that were commercially available and easy to use. These media were: Neoprene rubber,
PVC, Teﬂon and grease. In the study it was found that the use of grease was the most eﬀective of the
four tested ”anti-friction” media and showed stress-strains curves with an almost 90 degree slope at the
descending part, due to almost complete loss of load carrying capacity.
In both studies, [23] and [24], it was found that the ascending branch of the stress-strain curve is essen-
tially unaﬀected by the end plate resistance whereas the descending part of the curve is very depending
on the end plate resistance. Furthermore, it was in both cases found that the eﬀect of the end platen
resistance was more prominent for lower strength concrete. Other than that it is diﬃcult to compere the
results between the two studies because the test methods and the criteria that the results are based on
are not comparable and it is therefor not possible to say if the ”brush platen” or the grease is the most
eﬀective against end plate resistance as neither study compere both.
4.2
Digital image correlation (DIC)
Part of the experimental programme in the upcoming project involve investigation of the elastic behaviour
using digital image correlation. Therefor other studies were this technique have been used is investigated.
Only very few studies has been made where DIC is used to investigate the elastic behaviour of concrete.
One study by Santos et al. [25] has been made where they found the elastic modulus of concrete using
DIC. In this study they used a USB microscope to capture images of a small section of a concrete
cylinder and correlated these with the applied load to generate a stress strain curve and calculate the
elastic modulus. The results from the DIC were compered to once obtained using traditional strain gauges
to determine the deformation. It was found that there were a diﬀerence of up to 4% between the elastic
moduli determined using DIC and the traditional way.
5
Conclusion
There are a lot of factors that inﬂuence the elastic behaviour of concrete. In this literature review it has
been found that some of the most important factors that inﬂuence the elastic modulus of concrete is the
porosity of the diﬀerent components (cement paste, aggregates and transition zone), the bond between
the aggregates and the cement paste, and the testing conditions. It has been seen that there are many
variables that in various degrees aﬀect these factors, and that there are still some uncertainties as to
how much some of these variables aﬀect the elastic modulus. The main variables that has been found
to aﬀect the elastic modulus of concrete is the composition of the cement past matrix which control the
porosity matrix as well as the interfacial transition zone, and the physical properties of the aggregates
which also aﬀect the transition zone as well as the overall bonding strength. It has been seen that the
overall composition of the concrete, such as aggregate grading and volume may also have an eﬀect on the
elastic modulus of the concrete however the understanding of these eﬀects does not seem to be completely
developed.
5.1
Project plan
In the upcoming project the elastic behaviour of concrete will be investigated. The focus of the project
will be the changes in elastic behaviour and the elastic modulus of concrete as the complexity of the
coarse aggregates increases. In addition to this the microstructural behaviour will be investigated.
Through a series of tests the elastic behaviour of concrete will be found using two methods: The standard
testing method for ﬁnding the secant elastic modulus of concrete as described in EN 12390-13 [4] and
Digital Image Correlation (DIC). The DIC will be used to look into the behaviour of the entire surface
of test specimens in order to get an understanding of the strain composition as they are subjected to
uniaxial loading. The tests will be performed with an increase in complexity of the coarse aggregates,
and the ﬁndings from the two test methods will be compered with each other as well as the ones found
in other studies reviewed in this report.
The tests of the elastic behaviour will be performed on concrete specimens, with glass rods going all the
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
9
==PAGE:99==
way through the specimens acting as coarse aggregates and thereby the eﬀect of the coarse aggregates can
be investigated visually through DIC. The number as well as the size distribution of the glass rods will
systematically be increased and thereby increasing the complexity of the aggregates as well as changing
the gradation and ﬁne to coarse aggregate ratio. The glass rods will be cast into mortar mixes of diﬀerent
w/c-ratios and thereby diﬀerent strengths, as this review indicated that this can have an eﬀect on the
elastic modulus when it come to changes in gradation and ratio between ﬁne and coarse aggregates.
As the test specimens will be cubes, tests to ﬁnd the optimal way of eliminating end plate resistance will
also be made and tests of the compressive strength of the test specimens will be performed as well, as
these might be aﬀected of the change in aggregate complexity.
References
1.
Freriksen, J. O. & Munch-Petersen, G. N. in Betonh˚andbogen 10.3–1–10.3–8 (2015). https://
betonhaandbogen.dk/Soeg-i-bogen?q=elasticitetsmodulet.
2.
Mehta, P. K. & Monterio, P. J. M. Concrete: Microsructure, Properties and Materials Fourth edi,
675 (McGraw-Hill Education, 2014).
3.
ASTM C 469-02. Standard Test Method for Static Modulus of Elasticity and Poisson’ s Ratio of
Concrete in Compression. ASTM International 04, 1–5 (2010).
4.
DS-EN-12390-13. Dansk standard Prøvning af hærdnet beton – Del 13 : Bestemmelse af elasticitets-
modul ( sekantmodul ) under trykp˚avirkning 2013.
5.
DS/EN-1992-1-2. Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures - Part 1-1: General rules and rules for
buildings tech. rep. (2004), 225. www.eurocodes.dk,.
6.
Zhou, F. P., Lydon, F. D. & Barr, B. I. G. Eﬀect of coarse aggregate on elastic modulus and
compressive strength of high performance concrete tech. rep. 1 (1995), 177–186.
7.
Cho, S.-W., Yang, C.-C. & Huang, R. Eﬀect of aggregate volume fraction on the elastic moduli and
void ratio of cement-based materials. Journal of Marine Science and Technology 8, 1–7 (2000).
8.
Aouissi, F., Yang, C. C., Brahma, A. & Bederina, M. Study of the inﬂuence of the interfacial
transition zone on the elastic modulus of concrete using a triphasic model. Journal of Adhesion
Science and Technology 30, 994–1005. issn: 15685616 (2016).
9.
Lee, K. M. & Park, J. H. A numerical model for elastic modulus of concrete considering interfacial
transition zone. Cement and Concrete Research 38, 396–402. issn: 00088846 (2008).
10.
Neville, A. M. Aggregate bond and modulus of elasticity of concrete. ACI Materials Journal 94,
71–74 (1997).
11.
Jia, Z. et al. Quantitative characterization and elastic properties of interfacial transition zone around
coarse aggregate in concrete. Journal Wuhan University of Technology, Materials Science Edition
32, 838–844. issn: 19930437 (2017).
12.
Aquino, M. J., Li, Z. & Shah, S. P. Mechanical Properties of the Aggregate and Cement Interface.
Advanced Cement Based Materials 2, 211–223 (1995).
13.
Wolinskl, S., Hordijk, D. A., Reinhardt, H. W. & Cornelissen, H. A. W. Inﬂuence of aggregate size
an fracture mechanics parameters of concrete. The International Jurnal of Cement Composites and
Lightweight Concrete 9, 95–103 (1987).
14.
Choubane, B., Wu, C.-L. & Tia, M. Coarse Aggregate Eﬀects on Elastic Moduli of Concrete. Trans-
portation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1547, 29–34. issn: 0361-
1981 (1996).
15.
Hong, L., Gu, X. & Lin, F. Inﬂuence of aggregate surface roughness on mechanical properties of
interface and concrete. Construction and Building Materials 65, 338–349. issn: 09500618 (2014).
16.
Giaccio, G. & Zerbino, R. Combined Eﬀects of Coarse Aggregates and Strength Level. Advanced
Cement Based Materials 7, 41.48 (1998).
17.
Domaga, L. & Dobrowolska, J. The inﬂuence of an applied standard test method on a measurement
of concrete stabilized secant modulus of elasticity. Matec Web of Conferences 163 (2018).
18.
Sadowski, G. & Jaskulski, R. Comparative analysis of dependence of the elastic modulus of concrete
on its composition. Materials Structures Technology 1, 1–9 (2018).
10
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
==PAGE:100==
19.
Yang, C.-C. & Huang, R. Eﬀect of S/A ratio on the elastic modulus of cement-based materials.
Journal of the Chinese Institute of Engineers 21, 357–364. issn: 2158-7299 (1998).
20.
Rangaraju, P., Balitsaris, M. & Kizhakommudom, H. Impact of Aggregate Gradation on Properties
of Portland Cement Concrete Sponsored by the South Carolina Department of Transportation Final
Report tech. rep. (2013), 81. https://www.scdot.scltap.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/
SCDOT-SPR-689-Project-Final-Report1.pdf.
21.
Rangaraju, P. R., Olek, J. & Diamond, S. An investigation into the inﬂuence of inter-aggregate
spacing and the extent of the ITZ on properties of Portland cement concretes. Cement and Concrete
Research 40, 1601–1608 (2010).
22.
Rahai, A., Dolati, A., Kamel, M. E. & Babaizadeh, H. Studying the eﬀect of various parameters on
mechanical properties of lightweight aggregate concrete using MANOVA. Materials and Structures
48, 2353–2365. issn: 1359-5997 (2014).
23.
Kotsovos, M. D. Eﬀect of testing techniques on the post-ultimate behaviour of concrete in compres-
sion. Mat´eriaux et Constructions 16, 3–12. issn: 00255432 (1983).
24.
Kumar, S., Mukhopadhyay, T., Waseem, S. A., Singh, B. & Iqbal, M. A. Eﬀect of Platen Restraint
on Stress–Strain Behavior of Concrete Under Uniaxial Compression: a Comparative Study. Strength
of Materials 48, 592–602. issn: 15739325 (2016).
25.
Santos, A. H. A., Pitangueira, R. L. S., Ribeiro, G. O. & Carrasco, E. V. M. Concrete modulus of
elasticity assessment using digital image correlation. 9, 587–594 (2016).
Modulus of elasticity of concrete
11
==PAGE:101==
Temperature measurements
91
B
Temperature measurements
The following graphs display the temperature measurements in the water tanks
for curing of the mortar and concrete specimens respectively.
Figure 1: Temperature in water tank with mortar specimens.
Figure 2: Temperature in water tank with concrete specimens.
==PAGE:102==
92
Appendices
C
Stress-strain curves for mortar specimens
The graphs in this appendix displays the stress and the corresponding strain
measured with extensometers on the mortar prisms, for the stiﬀand soft mortar
mix respectively.
C.1
Stiﬀmortar
Figure 3: Specimen b.
Figure 4: Specimen e.
Figure 5: Specimen h.
Figure 6: Specimen i.
==PAGE:103==
Stress-strain curves for mortar specimens
93
Figure 7: Specimen k.
Figure 8: Specimen l.
C.2
Soft mortar
Figure 9: Specimen b.
Figure 10: Specimen c.
==PAGE:104==
94
Appendices
Figure 11: Specimen e.
Figure 12: Specimen f.
Figure 13: Specimen h.
Figure 14: Specimen i.
Figure 15: Specimen k.
Figure 16: Specimen l.
==PAGE:105==
Specimen datasheets
95
D
Specimen datasheets
In the following pages all pictures, diagrams, graphs and some general informa-
tion about testing conditions, are collected on three A3 pages for each of the
analysed specimens.
==PAGE:106==
HA1-E3 Full
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
f
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 118.1 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 44.5 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥= 34.9 Mpa (29.44%)
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction, right
Max displacements in load 
direction, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
==PAGE:107==
f
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular 
to load direction, right
Displacements over time perpendicular 
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
HA1-E3 Full
==PAGE:108==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen (51 mm x 33 mm)
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
f
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
HA1-E3 Close-up
Measuring lines at interface
==PAGE:109==
HA3-E1 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 118.1 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 44.5 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥= 44.1 MPa (36.29%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction , centre
Max displacements in load
direction, centre
Displacements over time 
in load direction , right
Max displacements in load
direction, right
==PAGE:110==
f
HA3-E1 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, centre
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, centre
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, right
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, centre
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, centre
==PAGE:111==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen (54 mm x 35 mm)
f
HA3-E1 Close-up
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Interface not visible enough to measure
==PAGE:112==
LA1-E5 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 37.8 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 34.8 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥=27.2 MPa (72.78%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction, right
Max displacements in load 
direction, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
==PAGE:113==
f
LA1-E5 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular 
to load direction, right
Displacements over time perpendicular 
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
==PAGE:114==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen (52 mm x 34 mm) 
f
LA1-E5 Close-up
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
==PAGE:115==
LA2-E4 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 37.8 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 34.8 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥=29.8 MPa (60.78%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction , centre
Max displacements in load
direction, centre
Displacements over time 
in load direction , right
Max displacements in load
direction, right
==PAGE:116==
f
LA2-E4 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, centre
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, centre
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, right
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, centre
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, centre
==PAGE:117==
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen (52 mm x 34 mm)
f
LA2-E4 Close-up
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
==PAGE:118==
LA3-E2 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 37.8 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 34.8 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥=21.1 MPa (61.62%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction , centre
Max displacements in load
direction, centre
Displacements over time 
in load direction , right
Max displacements in load
direction, right
==PAGE:119==
f
LA3-E2 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, centre
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, centre
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, right
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, centre
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, centre
==PAGE:120==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen (50 mm x 33 mm)
f
LA3-E2 Close-up
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
==PAGE:121==
LA4-E2 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 37.8 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 34.8 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥=21.1 MPa (66.74%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction , centre
Max displacements in load
direction, centre
Displacements over time 
in load direction , right
Max displacements in load
direction, right
==PAGE:122==
f
LA4-E2 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, centre
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, centre
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, right
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, centre
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, centre
==PAGE:123==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen 55 mm x 36 mm)
f
LA4-E2 Close-up
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
==PAGE:124==
LA5-E1 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 37.8 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 34.8 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥=23.8 MPa (70.7%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction , centre
Max displacements in load
direction, centre
Displacements over time 
in load direction , right
Max displacements in load
direction, right
==PAGE:125==
f
LA5-E1 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, centre
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, centre
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, right
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, centre
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, centre
==PAGE:126==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen (50 mm x 33 mm)
f
LA5-E1 Close-up
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
To much noise in measurements to display stress-strain curves
==PAGE:127==
LA7-E1 Full
f
Specimen properties
𝑓𝑐= 37.8 MPa
𝐸𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑎𝑟= 34.8 GPa
σ𝑚𝑎𝑥= 14.7 MPa (49.75%)
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
Perpendicular to load direction
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Measuring lines
Load and corresponding displacements
perpendicular to load direction 
Displacements over time 
in load direction , left
Max displacements in load
direction, left
Displacements over time 
in load direction , centre
Max displacements in load
direction, centre
Displacements over time 
in load direction , right
Max displacements in load
direction, right
==PAGE:128==
f
LA7-E1 Full
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, left
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, left
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, centre
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, centre
Displacements over time perpendicular
to load direction, right
Max displacements perpendicular  
to load direction, right
Relative displacements over time  in 
load direction, right
Max relative displacements in
load direction , right
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, top
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, top
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, bottom
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, left
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, left
Relative displacements over time 
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Max relative displacements
perpendicular to load direction, centre
Relative displacements over time in 
load direction, centre
Max relative displacements in 
load direction, centre
==PAGE:129==
Load and corresponding displacements
in load direction 
Vertical measuring lines
Measuring lines at interface
f
Specimen before testing
Painted specimen 58 mm x 38 mm)
f
LA7-E1 Close-up
Visualisation of displacements
in load direction
Visualisation of displacements
perpendicular to load direction
Opening of interface around aggregate in mm
Opening of interface around an aggregate in %
Stress-Strain curve, left
Stress-Strain curve, centre
Stress-Strain curve, right
==PAGE:130==
120
Appendices
E
Aggregate movements
Diagrams illustrating the maximum movements in the 20mm aggregates in the
third loading cycle for each specimen.
Figure 17: Specimen HA1-E3.
Figure 18: Specimen HA3-E1.
==PAGE:131==
Aggregate movements
121
Figure 19: Specimen LA1-E5.
Figure 20: Specimen LA3-E2.
Figure 21: Specimen LA5-E1.
Figure 22: Specimen LA7-E1.
==PAGE:132==
122
Appendices
Figure 23: Specimen LA2-E4.
Figure 24: Specimen LA4-E2.
