==PAGE:1==
Eﬀect of oscillatory masses in operational
modal analysis
Master’s Thesis, August 2019
Lasse F. Thunbo
Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Lasse F. Thunbo and Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen
Eﬀect of oscillatory masses in operational
modal analysis
Master’s Thesis, August 2019
Supervisors:
Evangelos Katsanos, Adjunkt, DTU-BYG
Tobias Friis, Ph.d.-student, DTU-BYG
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Posthoc, DTU-BYG
Rune Brincker, Professor, Structural Dynamics, DTU-BYG
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Eﬀect of oscillatory masses in operational modal analysis
This report was prepared by:
Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen, s143857
Lasse F. Thunbo, student, s143874
Supervisors:
Evangelos Katsanos, Adjunkt, DTU-BYG
Tobias Friis, Ph.d.-student, DTU-BYG
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Postdoc, DTU-BYG
Rune Brincker, Professor, Structural Dynamics, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
February 2019 - August 2019
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
MSc
Field:
Structural Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The thesis is completed by Lasse Thunbo and Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen and it is submitted
as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Civil
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis is conducted in the period
between 28th of January 2019 to 3rd of August 2019 and it is credited to 32.5 ECTS points.
The topic of the project was suggested by the supervisors where small adjustments have
been made during the period in collaboration between the supervisors and authors.
We would like to thank our supervisors Professor Rune Brincker, Adjunkt Evangelos Kat-
sanos, Postdoc Sandro D. R. Amador and Ph.d.-student Tobias Friis for the valuable
advice, input and feedback during the project and for always keeping their doors open.
A special thanks is send to Tobias Friis for providing and order the materials needed to
conduct the experiment and sharing his experience of the experimental setup.
We would also like to acknowledge the funding provided by Centre of Oil and Gas-
DTU/Danish Hydrocarbon Research and Technology Center (DHRTC).
A special thanks is sent to the staﬀof the test facilities at DTU Department of Civil
Engineering where Klaus Myndal and Troels V. Kristensen have helped with the prepara-
tion of the experimental setup. Furthermore, we would also like to thank Bjørn Førde for
correcting grammar and setup.
Kgs. Lyngby, August 3, 2019
Lasse F. Thunbo
s143874, MSc Student
Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen
s143857, MSc Student
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Dynamic systems like oﬀshore platforms that employs large tanks on top to temporarily
store the extracted oil, can during strong wind induced vibrations experience closely spaced
modes with similar mode-shapes. This occur as a result of the oscillatory liquid mass in
the storage tanks counteracting the motion of one of the structural modes, which in turn
allows the storage tanks to be considered acting as a passive damping device in the form
of a tuned liquid damper (TLD). The eﬀects of the TLD on the dynamic properties of
the structural system is therefore an important factor when constructing and designing
oﬀshore platforms. But due to strong nonlinearities of the oscillating liquid mass in the
tanks, the identiﬁcation and estimation of the dynamic properties can be diﬃcult.
This thesis investigates if this pair of closely spaced modes with similar mode shapes can
reliably be identiﬁed by the means of identiﬁcation techniques developed for operational
modal analysis (OMA). The investigation is employing an experimental setup of a scaled
oﬀshore platform with a liquid container representing the storage tanks for the oil and
working as a tuned liquid damper.
Notably, the experimental setup consists of three stacked steel plates, which are supported
by four steel columns and excited by pneumatic actuators with white noise characteristics.
The setup is equipped with accelerometers to measure the platform response and laser
sensors to capture the relative movement of the liquid, when subjected to low amplitude
excitations. The TLD is tuned to counteract the motion of the ﬁrst structural mode by
utilizing well known theoretical formulas, derived by assuming a linear approach and from
empirical correlations.
A correlation-driven OMA identiﬁcation based on the AR/PR
technique is used to identify the system’s modal properties from the measured response,
which enables an assessment of the eﬀect of the oscillating mass on the dynamic properties
of the experimental system. Furthermore, an FE-model of the experimental model is used
to simulate a response, which is put through a similar OMA identiﬁcation procedure to
study the eﬀects of the TLD when it is tuned by considering it as two SDOF-systems with
linear properties.
The study shows that classical OMA can reliably identify the modal properties of closely
spaced modes with similar mode shapes of systems with oscillatory masses. This in turn
allowed the possibility of assessing the eﬀects of the TLD on the dynamic properties of the
platform, resulting in the splitting of a single mode and a reduction in induced vibration
response.
Furthermore, the simulation study alongside the experimental investigation,
revealed the noteworthy applicability of using a linear approach when tuning a TLD to
a speciﬁc structural mode. Moreover, an investigation of the natural frequency of the
applied liquid container displays compliance with well known theoretical formulas.
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
List of Symbols
A
Mode-shape after change
AC
Companion matrix
an
Mode-shape vector after change
Ana
Auto regressive matrix
B
Mode-shape matrix
b
Width of TLD
Ba
Active mode-shape matrix
Bd
Deleted mode-shape matrix
bn
Mode-shape vector
Br
Reduced mode-shape matrix
C
Damping matrix
cd
Damping coeﬃcient
dt
Time-step
F(t)
Load vector
fd
Frequency of damper
fn
Natural frequency
fs
Sampling frequency
fv
Nyquist frequency
fw
Sloshing frequency
fwith
Natural
frequency
of
platform
with TLD
fw/o
Natural
frequency
of
platform
without TLD
g
Gravitational acceleration
H
Hankel matrix
H(ω)
Frequency response function
h0
Still water level
I
Identity matrix
K
Stiﬀness matrix
Ka
Reduced stiﬀness matrix
ka
Stiﬀness element in TLD
kd
Stiﬀness of damper
kj
Modal stiﬀness
L
Longitudinal length of TLD
M
Mass matrix
Ma
Reduced mass matrix
m
Total mass of water in TLD
ma
Active mass
mb
Rigid attached mass
md
Mass of damper
mn
Modal mass
N
Number of data points
Nt
Number of time-lags
P
Observation matrix
Q
Load distribution matrix
q(t)
Modal coordinates
Ry(τ)
CF matrix
Sy(ω)
Spectral density function
bS(ω)
Estimated spectral density func-
tion
T
Period
T
Transformation matrix
bT
Estimated transformation matrix
Texp
Duration of experiment
t
Time
ud
Discrete response state vector
w
Tapering window
x
Displacement
˙x
Velocity
¨x
Acceleration
y(t)
Response vector
Y (ω)
Fourier Transform
Yf(ω)
Filtered Fourier Transform
Yk(t)
Time
segmented
data
in
fre-
quency domain
v
==PAGE:12==
vi
ζ
Damping Ratio
ζd
Damping Ratio of Damper
ζw/o
Damping Ratio of Platform with-
out TLD
ζwith
Damping Ratio of Platform with
TLD
λ
Continuous Time pole
µ
Mass Ratio
ν
Kinematic viscosity
σ2
Variance
τ
Time-Lag
ϕd
Discrete Eigenvector
Ω
Tuning Ratio
ω0
Natural Angular Frequency
==PAGE:13==
Abbreviations
AR
Auto Regressive
AR/PR
Auto regressive, Poly Reference
CF
Correlation Function
DAQ
Data Acquisition
DC
Direct Current (the Fourier coeﬃcient at frequency zero)
DOF
Degree of Freedom
EFDD
Enhance Frequency Domain Decomposition
FDD
Frequency Domain Decomposition
FE
Finite Element
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FRF
Frequency Response Function
LSCF
Least Squares Cost Function
MAC
Modal Assurance Criterion
MDOF
Multi Degree of Freedom
OMA
Operational Modal Analysis
PSD
Power Spectral Density
SD
Spectral Density
SDOF
Single Degree of Freedom
SEREP
System Equivalent Reduction Expansion Process
SHS
Square Hollow Section
TLD
Tuned Liquid Damper
TMD
Tuned Mass Damper
vii
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Table of Content
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
List of Symbols
v
Abbreviations
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Litterateur Review
5
3
Theory
7
3.1
Classic Structural Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Tuned Liquid Damper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Experimental Model
15
4.1
Experimental Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
FE-Model and Simulation
19
5.1
FE-Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Simulated Response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
OMA-Based identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Experimental Setup
27
6.1
Experimental Setup and Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Test Program and Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3.1
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Experimental Results
33
7.1
Tuning of TLD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.2.1
Displacements and Accelerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2.2
Theoretical Sloshing Frequency vs Experimental
. . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Updated FE-Model
45
8.1
Updated FE-Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
FE-Model With TLD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2.1
OMA identiﬁcation on Updated FE-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2.2
Active Mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
ix
==PAGE:16==
TABLE OF CONTENT
x
9
Discussion
59
10 Conclusion
63
10.1 Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
References
65
List of Figures
66
List of Tables
71
Appendices
73
A Additional Theory
75
A.1 Orthogonality Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Tuned Mass Damper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.3 Aligned Mode-shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.4 SEREP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B Laser Sensor
81
B.1
Laser Manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2
Calibration of Laser Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.3
Surfaces to Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C Tuning of Experimental Setup
87
C.1
Extraction of Matrices From Ansys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
C.2
Tuning of FE-model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
C.3
Tuning of Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
C.4
Spectral density with one and four laser sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.5
Spectral density with four lasers in the corners
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.6
Large Amplitude Excitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
D C matrix and Calculations of TLD
97
D.1 Estimation of C and comparison of response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
D.2 Tuning of TLD to mode 1 in the experiment and Updated FE-Model . . . .
97
E FE-model with TMD
101
E.1
Tuning of TMD to Mode 1 and Mode 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
E.2
FE-Model with TMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
E.3
Simulation of Platform with TMD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
F CF Matrices
109
G Technical Drawing
115
H Poster to YRD 2019
117
I
Annex
119
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Predicting the dynamic behavior of an oﬀshore platform to withstand excitations from
earthquakes or environmental fatigue due to ocean waves or wind is essential in the de-
signing process. An external damping device can therefore be implemented to reduce the
excitations of a platform, which is deﬁned as its ability to dissipate the energy when a
structure is exposed to an external dynamic load. A well-known passive damping device
is a Tuned Mass Damper (TMD) which is considered as a linear single-degree-of-freedom
(SDOF) system and by tuning its natural frequency and mass correctly it is possible to
reduce the excitations of a structural system. From the previously study in [5] written by
Gidewon G.Tekeste, it is seen that the displacement of a pedestrian bridge can be reduced
60 % by implementing a TMD with a mass ratio of 5 % between the bridge and TMD.
A more simple and economical passive damping device is a Tuned Liquid Damper (TLD)
and it is known to work eﬀectively when a structure is subjected to horizontal excitations
in the low frequency domain. An oﬀshore platform has often a liquid container mounted
on top used to temporarily store extracted oil, and it can act as a TLD if it is tuned
correctly. Tuning the oscillatory mass of the TLD to a speciﬁc mode will in turn lead
to the occurrence of closely spaced modes with similar mode-shapes due to the damping
eﬀect.
However, the TLD is considered as a non-linear system containing inﬁnite DOFs, and it
is therefore diﬃcult to tune the system to one speciﬁc mode with a simple and reliable
approach. Furthermore, this makes it diﬃcult to estimate the eﬀect of the oscillatory mass
on the dynamic properties of the platform, since the damping eﬀect highly depends on the
external loading, the occurrence of wave breaking and other surface contamination that
leads to a turbulent ﬂow as described in the paper [9] written by M.J. Tait.
In order to simplify the behavior of the TLD, a linear approach to estimate the dynamic
properties of the TLD when it is subjected to low excitation’s has been developed. The
sloshing frequency can therefore be determined by Lamb’s linear theory of liquid surface
motion and the active mass participating in the damping process can be determined by a
linear model developed by Housner [6].
Along with the recent technological improvements in recording equipment and compu-
tational methods, identiﬁcation techniques of modal parameters that are relatively low
in cost and easily implemented have become quite attractive in structural engineering.
One of these identiﬁcation techniques is called Operational Modal Analysis (OMA), which
provides the user with useful methods for identiﬁcation of modal parameters. There are
several diﬀerent OMA-based identiﬁcation techniques, but in this thesis it is only the cor-
relation driven AR/PR identiﬁcation that is used to analyse the response of the platform
and the eﬀect of the TLD.
1
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The OMA based identiﬁcation technique is proven to be a solid tool to identify linear
dynamic properties of structural systems but since the TLD is considered as a nonlinear
system, it can be diﬃcult to estimate its eﬀect on the platform. The aim of the thesis is
therefore to conduct a tuning process of a TLD by using a linear approach and identify
the closely spaced modes that occur when it is installed on a scaled platform by estimating
the modal properties of the structural system, which leads to the following focus for the
thesis.
Can the modal parameters of a scaled oﬀshore platform with an implemented Tuned
Liquid Damper be identiﬁed through the means of Operational Modal Analyses, and does
the experimental observations coincide with the theoretical linear formulas?
In order to answer the stated question above, a linear approach is taken to tune the
TLD to the ﬁrst structural mode of a simpliﬁed and scaled platform. The rectangular
TLD is attached on top of the platform and excited with a random load with white
noise characteristics. The model of the platform is then analysed with and without the
TLD installed through simulations and an experimental investigation, where the modal
parameters are identiﬁed by the use of a OMA-based identiﬁcation technique.
The platform consists of three stacked steel plates supported by four steel columns while
the TLD is made of a plastic rectangular container placed in the middle of the top plates.
The platform is excited by a pneumatic system that induce low amplitude excitations in
the form of random loading with white noise characteristics in the form of wind. The
response of the platform is measured by three accelerometers and the relative water eleva-
tion is recorded by four laser sensors located in the middle of each side of the water tank.
The identiﬁcation of the closely-spaced modes and the modal parameters consist of iden-
tiﬁcation of the natural frequencies, damping ratios and the characteristic mode-shapes
of the system. The ﬁndings in terms of the attached TLD is evaluated with respect to
the theoretical linear formulas used in the tuning process and well known theory on the
subject.
2
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.1
Thesis Outline
The thesis can be divided into three parts: the tuning process, experimental work and sim-
ulation of an updated FE-model based on the experimental results. The steps conducted
throughout the thesis are depicted in the diagram below.
Figure 1.1.1: Block diagram of the thesis processes.
In the tuning process, a FE-model is created based on the experimental platform with
diﬀerent number of top plates and they are analysed in relation to the natural frequency
and modal mass so it is possible to tune a TLD to the ﬁrst mode of the ﬁnal experimental
setup. Since, the water in the TLD is not able to reﬂect the laser back to the sensor
diﬀerent surfaces was investigated, where a ﬂoating roof consisting of a polystyrene plate
with humid paper on top was found to give the best results.
The next phase is the experimental work where the modal parameters of the structural
system with and without the TLD is identiﬁed by a OMA-based identiﬁcation technique.
In the ﬁnal phase, a FE-model of the platform is updated to the experimental model so
the natural frequencies are identical to the ones obtained from the experiment. It is then
investigated if the linear equations for the TLD can be used to implement the damper in
the FE-model as two SDOF-system and yield the same results as the experiment.
3
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Litterateur Review
Several studies have been conducted on the well-known TMD which have been proven to
be a solid tool in order to reduce excessive excitations of a structural system. In the paper
[5], written by Gidewon G.Tekeste, the eﬀects of implementing a TMD on a pedestrian
bridge is studied by analysis through OMA identiﬁcation techniques. The modal properties
are extracted by using Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition (EFDD), where it is
concluded that OMA is a reliable tool in estimating the modal properties of footbridges and
damage detection purposes, where a good choice of sampling rate and signal conditioning
are very important. Moreover, the study revealed that by utilizing a mass ratio between
1-5% the implementation of the TMD yielded satisfying results with up to 60% reduction
in displacement.
Another paper conducted by C.M. Casado et. al [14] studied the eﬀects of installing a TMD
for vibration serviceability assessment of a lively footbridge, where the fundamental modal
parameters of the footbridge was identiﬁed by OMA identiﬁcation techniques as Frequency
Domain Decomposition (FDD) and EFDD. The study concluded that the modes and
damping ratios were successfully identiﬁed by the means of OMA, and that the installed
TMD showed considerable reduction in the acceleration response of the footbridge. The
same conclusion regarding the reliability of estimating modal parameters of a footbridge
with EFDD and FDD was also established in [11] written by R. Morbin et. al, where the
TMD reduced the excitations signiﬁcantly.
An alternative way to suppress a structures vibrations is to install a TLD, which is a more
economical solution compared to a TMD. In the paper [10] written by Pei-Ming Chang et.
al., the eﬀect of the TLD was investigated by experimental work based on reducing the
excitations of a base frame. The TLD was implemented on top where baﬄes was installed
inside to inﬂuence the water motion. From the results, it was observed that a TLD can
be used to reduce structural vibrations by tuning it correctly, which highly depends on its
dimensions and water depth.
In the paper [13] written by Leonel Ramos, a TLD is designed and tested by expressing
the sloshing frequency of a rectangular tank with Lamb’s linear theory of liquid surface
motion. The TLD was excited by a shaking table where the water elevation and horizontal
interaction force was monitored. It was concluded that the sloshing frequency of the TLD
for rectangular tanks conforms with the linear theory, especially for low base displacement
amplitudes. Furthermore, it was concluded that the sloshing frequency of the TLD would
increase with increasing base amplitude, as the sloshing motion is directly proportional to
the velocity of the liquid particles. However, increasing the excitation amplitude too far
beyond the natural frequency of the TLD, would possibly lead to the phenomenon known
as the ”stiﬀness hardening” eﬀect of the liquid. The study also proposed a tuning process
of the TLD, mentioning that the optimal mass ratio between the TLD and structure lies
5
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. LITTERATEUR REVIEW
between 1-4% which also was concluded in [16], written by Meng-Zia Zhou et. al.
A way to counteract the occurrence of the ”stiﬀness hardening” eﬀect was investigated
in the paper [9] written by M.J. Tait et.
al.
Here, it was found that it was possible
to diminish the ”stiﬀness hardening” eﬀect by installing a ﬁlter screen in the middle of
the TLD. This allowed the tuning ratio to remain closer to the optimal value for a large
range of amplitudes. The ﬁndings revealed that the active mass that participates in the
sloshing, the sloshing frequency itself and the damping eﬀect all increased with increasing
excitation.
Both experiments conducted by Leonel Ramos and M.J. Tait et. al were conducted with
the knowledge of the base amplitudes, and the TLD was only excited in its longitudinal
direction. Both studies investigated the possibility of capturing the non-linear TLD be-
haviour by semi-empirical models as suggested by Sun et. al. [1] where the concept of a
virtual mass and damping were used to determine an equivalent TMD by experimentally
estimated values. This was obtained by performing several shaking table tests at various
amplitudes with diﬀerent types of TLDs.
Another way of suppressing the ”stiﬀness hardning” eﬀect is to use a TLD with a slopped
bottom which changes the properties of the TLD so it will not be mistuned under large
excitations, leading to a softening behavior.
Such a TLD is investigated in the paper
[12] written by S. Gardarsson et.al., where it is conﬁrmed that a slopped TLD is just as
eﬀective in dissipating energy as a rectangular TLD. From the results, it is conﬁrmed that
a slopped bottom act like a softening spring due to the wave-motion will run up a slope
and the response force on the wall will therefore be decreased. Instead, larger excitation
will increase the eﬀective length of the TLD and increase the percentage active mass.
The experiment was conducted by exciting the sloped bottom TLD with a shaking table,
where the wave response were measured with wave gauges, the water surface variation
were measured by a laser sensor and ﬂuorescein dye was dissolved in water.
In the paper by Hong-nan [15], a TLD was investigated for the possibility of using it as
a wind-induced control device for the Dalian International Trade Mansion. The paper
investigated the speciﬁc tuning of a TLD by comparing shallow-water and deep-water
theory. The ﬁndings revealed that constructing a TLD in the shallow-water regime, an
increase in peak displacement and acceleration reduction was observed compared to using
the deep-water regime. The study used continuous equations, and Navier stokes equations
for the tuning process of the TLD.
Based on the articles presented, it is concluded that several studies has been performed
in terms of the validation of OMA as a reliable identiﬁcation technique in terms of modal
parameters. Furthermore, several of these studies combine the investigation of a TMD and
its ability to reduce excessive vibrations. However, no studies have previously investigated
the eﬀect of a TMD on the dynamic properties of a structural system by the use of OMA
identiﬁcation techniques, by assessing the changes in natural frequencies, damping ratios
and mode-shapes. Moreover, the numerous studies conducted on TLDs has been found
to be focusing on estimating the dynamic properties of the TLD itself under varying
excitation amplitudes, the use of ﬁlter screens and diﬀerent tank dimensions. The studies
mentioned do not investigate the interaction between a TLD and a structural system, from
where the TLDs eﬀect on the dynamic properties can be assessed. As a ﬁnal conclusion,
no studies has been found that combines the study of the TLDs eﬀect on dynamic systems
by the use of OMA identiﬁcation techniques.
6
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
In this chapter the theories behind the project will be covered which include the theory
behind OMA and how the physical properties are extracted from the operational response
of a structural system. The basic ideas of OMA will therefore be described brieﬂy together
with the applied identiﬁcation method used in this study. Since the project assess the
diﬃculties incorporated with splitting of a mode and reducing vibrations of a structural
system, the main theory behind classic dynamics and passive dampers as a TLD are
also covered, which later is used in the simulations and experimental work. Additional
theory is presented in Appendix A, which include orthogonality conditions, TMD, aligned
mode-shapes and SEREP (system equivalent reduction expansion process) which is used
throughout the study.
3.1
Classic Structural Dynamics
The dynamic response of a linear structural system with multi-degrees-of-freedom (MDOF)
can be described by the equation of motion shown in Equation (3.1.1). It is a second order
diﬀerential equation based on the balance between the internal forces and external forces
where the external force is denoted as a vector F. The internal forces consist of three parts,
the inertia force, M ¨x, the damping force, C ˙x, and the elastic force, K x. [7]
M ¨x + C ˙x + K x = F(t)
(3.1.1)
M, C, K are the square, mass, damping and stiﬀness matrices respectively, while x is
the displacement vector where one dot denotes the velocity (ﬁrst derivative) and two
dots denote the acceleration (second derivative) of the structural system. In addition to
Equation (3.1.1), the solution also require two initial conditions for each degree of freedom.
x(0) = x0
,
˙x(0) = ˙x0
(3.1.2)
where x0 and ˙x0 are the initial position and the initial velocity.
The solution for free undamped vibrations is determined by considering the equation of
motion without external loading and zero damping, C = 0, which corresponds to the
homogeneous equation of motion.
M ¨x + K x = 0
(3.1.3)
The solution will be in the form of a harmonic oscillation with a constant shape, and leads
to the following solution where the time variation is expressed in complex notation.
x(t) = bn ei ω t
(3.1.4)
7
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
where ω is the angular frequency and b describe the mode-shape vector independent of
time. By substituting the assumed solution from Equation (3.1.4) into the homogeneous
equation of motion, the generalized eigenvalue problem is obtained.
(K −ω2 M) bn = 0
(3.1.5)
The nontrivial solution b can only be determined when the matrix is singular which means
that the determinant of the system matrix is zero. [7]
det(K −ω2 M) = 0
(3.1.6)
The ﬁnal solution of the generalized eigenvalue problem consist of n number of mode-
shapes (eigenvectors) with the corresponding angular frequencies (eigenvalues), where the
number of solutions depend on the n number of degrees-of-freedom (DOF).
3.2
Operational Modal Analysis
The basic idea behind the process known as OMA is to characterize the modal parameters,
such as the natural frequencies, fn, damping ratios, ζ, and the inherent characteristic
mode-shapes, bn, of an elastic structure through the identiﬁcation of its natural vibration
modes from its operating response. The idea builds on the concept related to having the
test structure excited by a type of excitation that has roughly white noise characteristics.
This means that the excitation has energy distributed over a wide frequency range, which
includes the frequency range of the desired modal characteristics of the structure to be
tested. However, this does not mean that for OMA to be successful the load has to have
exact white noise characteristics. The most important thing is to have all the desired
modes that are to be investigated, adequately excited in order to capture and measure
their contribution.
In OMA it is normal practice to assume that the signals have zero mean and are Gaussian
distributed, or are at least close to Gaussian. According to the central limit theorem,
that states that when independent and identically distributed random variables are added
they will tend to be Gaussian distributed even if the original variables are not. When
considering a set of random variables {x1, x2, ..., xM} of size M with mean, µ, and variance,
σ2, a linear combination of the random variables can be presented as.
y =
M
X
m=1
am xm
(3.2.1)
According to the central limit theorem, for large values of M the distribution of y will
be approximately Gaussian and become Gaussian distributed for M →∞, regardless
of the type of distribution of the individual random variables. This also explains why
the response of lightly damped structural systems will tend to be Gaussian, despite the
loading not being Gaussian distributed. The structural system can be considered to act as
a loading ﬁlter, where the overall response is determined as the sum of individual responses
as a result of single impulse loads. [2]
Correlation Functions
As mentioned for a white noise input, the resulting dynamic response will always tend to
be approximately Gaussian, even if the individual load contributions are non-Gaussian.
8
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
So in order to extract all physical information from a random signal, all that is needed
to be done is to determine and calculate the correlation functions, since the Gaussian
distribution in case of zero mean multivariate data is totally described by its correlation
matrix.
The correlation function (CF) for a random process, y(t), is deﬁned as the average value of
the product y(t)y(t+τ), where one signal is sampled at time, t, while the other is sampled
at a time-lag, t + τ. In practice with several measured data, with N measurements, where
the response is collected in a vector as y(t) = {y1(t), y2(t), ..., yN(t)}T , the CF matrix can
be expressed as.
Ry(τ) = E[y(t) yT (t + τ)] = 1
T
Z T
0
y(t) yT (t + τ) dt
(3.2.2)
where the last term is the CF matrix calculated by time averaging. It can be seen that
for τ = 0 the correlation function equals the variance, σ2. Furthermore for τ →∞, the
variables y(t) and y(t+τ) becomes independent of each other and the correlation function
takes the form E[y(t)]E[y(t + τ)] which equals µ2. For a signal with zero mean this in
turn means that when τ →∞the correlation function takes the form of.
Ry(τ)
τ→∞
= 0
(3.2.3)
This is an advantage when considering a periodic signal with zero mean, as this makes
it possible to consider the correlation functions as free decays. If the signal is considered
to be periodic with the period, T, or it is assumed that T →∞, even though this is not
the case for truly random signals, the CF matrix as deﬁned by Equation (3.2.2) can be
expressed as.
Ry(τ) = y(−t) yT (t)
(3.2.4)
which is the convolution property of the CF matrix between the signal at y(−t) and
y(t). This is a quite important property due to the fact that the convolution between
two signals easily can be determined in the frequency domain as the product of their
corresponding Fourier transforms. In this study the CF matrices are determined by the
simple direct estimation method, and the estimated correlation functions are therefore in
this case unbiased, meaning that the assumption of periodicity will not lead to leakage
errors on the CF matrices. However, some error does appear in the noise-tail as a result
of the estimation method.
Spectral Densities
In this study the modal parameters are estimated from the CF matrices and the spectral
density (SD) matrices are only used for inspection of the acquired response. However, a
brief description is given on the usage of the SD matrices in relation to OMA.
When considering a naturally occurring random process, the time history, y(t), of the
sample function is not periodic and can therefore not be represented by a discrete Fourier
series. In order to conduct a Fourier analysis of the sample function, the analysis should
instead be performed on its correlation functions. This is possible due to the assumption
that the correlation functions are considered as free decays of the system, and the cor-
relation functions indirectly gives information about the frequencies present in a random
process. [3]
9
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
The Fourier transform of the correlation function, Ry(τ), deﬁnes the auto-spectral density
function for a time series, y(t), as.
Sy(ω) = 1
2 π
Z ∞
−∞
Ry(τ) e−i ω τ dτ
(3.2.5)
where the spectral density, Sy(ω), is a function of the angular frequency, ω. The inverse
relation of the spectral density deﬁnes the correlation function, and when determining the
initial value of the correlation function at τ = 0, a signiﬁcant property of the spectral
density becomes apparent as.
Ry(0) = E[x2] =
Z ∞
−∞
Sy(ω) dω
(3.2.6)
which indicates that for a zero mean signal, the area under the spectral density is equal to
the variance of the signal in the case of the auto-correlations and covariance in the case of
the cross-correlations. This is known as the Parseval theorem which relates the spectral
density to energy or power, thus the spectral density function is commonly referred to as
the power spectral density (PSD).
In this study the spectral density is estimated by the use of the Welch averaging method,
which uses data segments by segmenting the data from the original time series in the time
domain in overlapping data segments. Taking the deﬁnition of the spectral density as
deﬁned by Equation (3.2.5), the expression for the convolution property of the CF matrix
stated by Equation (3.2.4), and meanwhile using the time reversal property of the Fourier
transform, y(−t) ↔Y (−ω) = Y ∗(ω), the following expression for an estimate of the SD
matrix is formed.
bS(ω) = ˜y(ω) ∗˜yT (ω)
(3.2.7)
with ˜y(ω) being the Fourier transform of y(t) in vector notation. Now using Equation
(3.2.7) for the data segments {y1(t), y2(t), ..., yS(t)}, the estimated SD matrix can be
averaged in the frequency domain with S number of data segments.
bS(ω) = 1
S
S
X
s=1
˜ys(ω)∗˜yT
s (ω)
(3.2.8)
If the segmented data can through synthesis reconstruct the original time series, then
Equation (3.2.8) satisﬁes the Parseval theorem as explained earlier. Due to the assumption
of periodicity in the signal, a leakage bias is introduced in Equation (3.2.8). This occurs due
to the fact that in the Welch averaging method, the FFT algorithms let the integration be
carried into the continuation of the data segments, meaning that the frequencies carrying
high energy such as the modal peaks in the spectral density, will leak its energy to the
surrounding frequencies. This results in blunting of the modal peaks which in turn will
lead to an overestimation of the modal damping. The leakage due to the assumption of
periodicity can be reduced by taking longer data segments and increasing the sampling
time.
Identiﬁcation Method
As mentioned in the previous section, all the physical information of the considered system
is contained in its CF and SD matrices.
The way this information is extracted from
these matrices, is by performing identiﬁcation techniques where the modal parameters are
10
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
estimated either in the frequency domain or time domain. In this study the identiﬁcation
technique is constrained to the time domain, and the focus is therefore to determine the
modal parameters from the estimated CF matrices.
The simplest way to perform identiﬁcation in OMA is to take use of auto-regressive (AR)
models on the free decays created by the CF matrices. The technique is referred to as
the AR/PR identiﬁcation, due to a similar technique known as the poly reference (PR)
identiﬁcation by Vold et. al., that uses impulse response functions instead of correlation
functions [2]. The ﬁrst step in the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique is to express the free
decays in discrete time as.
y(n) −A1y(n −1) −A2y(n −2) −· · · −Anay(n −na) = 0
(3.2.9)
where the free decay, y(n), contains n = 1, 2, ...np number of samples and A1, ..., Ana are
the AR matrices. The aim is then to estimate the AR matrices from the free decays, since
they represent the system’s physical properties, by forming a block Hankel matrix with
na block rows.
H1 =


y(1)
y(2)
. . .
y(np −na)
y(2)
y(3)
. . .
y(np −(na −1))
...
...
...
...
y(na)
y(na + 1)
. . .
y(np −1)


(3.2.10)
and a block Hankel matrix with a single block row.
H2 =

y(na + 1)
y(na + 2)
. . .
y(np)

(3.2.11)
This in turn makes it possible to express Equation (3.2.9) for all the possible np −na
values of n as.
H2 −A H1 = 0 ⇐⇒A H1 = H2
(3.2.12)
where the matrix A is a collection of the AR matrices deﬁned as.
A =

Ana, Ana−1, ..., A1

(3.2.13)
By transposing Equation (3.2.12), an overdetermined problem is established for the deter-
mination of the AR matrices.
ˆA = H2 H+
1
(3.2.14)
Here ˆA is only an estimate for the matrix A since the constructed problem is overdeter-
mined. If the measured response has nc number of channels the problem is overdetermined
as long as np −na > na × nc. Due to the presence of noise in the measured data, the
identiﬁcation technique will only work if the problem is well overdetermined. Therefore
for the procedure to work satisfactory, it is required that.
np −na >> na × nc
(3.2.15)
With the estimated A matrix containing the auto regressive matrices established, the
modal parameters are found by deﬁning the companion matrix for discrete time.
AC =


0
I
0
0
...
0
...
...
0
...
I
Ana
Ana−1
. . .
A1


(3.2.16)
11
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
where I is the identity matrix with the same size as the AR matrices. With the companion
matrix deﬁned, Equation (3.2.9) can now be rewritten in state space formulation as.
AC ud(n) = ud(n + 1)
(3.2.17)
where ud(n) is the stacked discrete response state vector. With the companion matrix
advancing the state vector with one time step and considering the free decays to be ex-
pressed as y(n) = beλn∆t, an eigenvalue problem can be formed where the state vector is
expressed as.
ud(n) =









beλ(−na+1)∆t
...
beλ(−1)∆t
b









eλn∆t = ϕd µn
(3.2.18)
where b is the mode shapes, λ is the continuous time pole, µ = eλ∆t is the discrete time
pole and ϕd is the discrete eigenvector. Equation (3.2.17) can therefore now be expressed
as an eigenvalue problem in the form of.
AC ϕd = µ ϕd
(3.2.19)
Thereby the discrete mode shapes and the discrete poles can be located as the eigenvec-
tors and eigenvalues to the companion matrix AC, and from there the mode shapes and
continuous time eigenvalues can then be determined.
3.3
Tuned Liquid Damper
A tuned liquid damper (TLD) is a economical passive damping system which function
is to primarily reduce the horizontal vibrations of a structure. It consist of a tank that
contains a liquid, where the tank either can be circular or rectangular. The motion of
the free liquid surface in the container, called the sloshing motion, will in the case of a
circular tank require a three-dimensional ﬂow analysis and a rectangular tank requires
a two-dimensional analysis.
It is only the theory behind the rectangular tank that is
described in this chapter due to the experiment is based on this type of tank geometry.
The function of a TLD is similar to a TMD as described in Appendix A.2, where the
oscillating mass counteracts the motion of a structure with its inertia force. The main
diﬀerence between a TLD and a TMD, is that the TLD consist of a liquid mass which will
experience deformations during an acceleration. In order for the TLD to work optimally
it is tuned to a speciﬁc frequency that often is the ﬁrst mode of the structure which it is
connected to. However, the interaction between the liquid and the tank walls are complex
in nature where an inﬁnite number of natural frequencies appears during its sloshing
motion. A TLD includes nonlinear eﬀects which depends on the amplitude of the motion,
and it means that the natural frequencies are slightly diﬀerent from the linear frequencies
obtained from linear formulas.
The TLD will only become activated when horizontal excitations are applied, due to
the liquid being in-compressible during vertical accelerations. However, a TLD is very
attractive in order to reduce horizontal vibrations at low frequencies due to the TLD
having a near zero acceleration trigger level. The sloshing motion of the water in the tank
is one component of the hydrodynamic pressure that makes up the TLD. This is related
with the convective pressure of the liquid exerted on the tank walls in the upper region of
12
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
the TLD. Another component is when the lower part of the liquid moves with the same
velocity as the tank, which means that the lower region is proportional to the acceleration
of the system, exerting an impulsive pressure on the tank walls.
There are two types of sloshing: low- and high ﬁll that is characterized by the formation
of waves for the applied excitations near resonance. If high ﬁll depths is considered (deep
water regime) standing waves will arise, compared to the low ﬁll depth (shallow water
regime) where travelling waves will arise, as illustrated in Figure 3.3.1. When a low ﬁll
depth is used, a high impact pressure will occur due to the impact of the travelling waves
with the container walls [13]. The shallow water regime becomes valid if h/L < 0.15 and
deep water is considered when h/L > 0.15.
Figure 3.3.1: Wave formation with low (left) and high (right) ﬁll depths [13].
The sloshing motion of the water highly depends on the force interaction between the
liquid and the tank walls, where the liquid motion can either be linear, weakly nonlinear
or strongly nonlinear as depicted in Figure 3.3.2. The liquid tends to be nonlinear when
it is submitted to strong excitations yielding turbulent ﬂow. When the TLD is submitted
to really strong excitations the so called “stiﬀness hardening” property of the liquid ap-
pears which will prevent the waves from interacting with the walls. However, this can be
prevented by installing a TLD with a slopped bottom, adding roughness to the surface or
by installing a ﬁlter screen in the middle of the tank.
Figure 3.3.2: Linear-, weakly nonlinear- and strongly nonlinear motion of the water [13].
As mentioned, the nonlinear eﬀects will lead to diﬀerent sloshing frequencies of the liq-
uid, why the later established equations is based on the linear behavior. The sloshing
frequencies also depends on the excitation level, where an increase in motion will lead to
an increase in the sloshing frequency due to the water interfering with the tank walls with
increasing force. When low amplitude excitations are considered and linear behaviour is
assumed, the sloshing frequency can be determined by Equation (3.3.1) for rectangular
tanks using Lamb’s linear theory of liquid surface motion.
fw = 1
2 π
r
π g
L tanh
π h0
L

(3.3.1)
13
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
where, L, is the tank length in the tuned direction of motion, g, is the acceleration of
gravity and, h0, is the still water level. The sloshing frequency depends therefore highly
on the dimensions of the tank. In order for the TLD to reduce the vibrations of a structural
system optimally, the sloshing frequency has to be tuned to one of the structures natural
frequency, leading to a parameter called the tuning ratio, Ω. It is determined by Equation
(3.3.2) where the optimum tuning ratio is Ω= 1.
Ω= fw
f
(3.3.2)
When the tank is subjected to low excitation the participation of the liquid mass can
be lower than 100%. Housner [6] has developed a linear model that separates the liquid
mass into a rigid mass and active mass, where the active mass is the part that reduces
the vibrations. The rigid mass, mb, is connected directly to the structural system and the
active mass, ma, is connected to the structure via a stiﬀness component, ka. The system
is illustrated in the Figure below.
Figure 3.3.3: Analogy of a TLD when only a part of the water is active [13]
The active- and rigid mass are determined by the following two equations.
ma = m
1
3
r
5
2
a
h0
tanh
r
5
2
h0
a

,
mb = m tanh(
√
3 (a/h0))
√
3 (a/h)
(3.3.3)
where a=L/2.
The active mass has to be large enough to reduce the vibrations of a
structural system and it leads to the mass ratio, µ, between the structural system and
the TLD, deﬁned in Equation (3.3.4) below. It is an important tuning parameter where
research shows that the optimal mass ratio is between 1 to 4 % which yields a suﬃciently
high damping rate [16].
µ = ma
mj
(3.3.4)
where mj is the modal mass of the structure. The active mass is attached to a stiﬀness
element as illustrated by Figure 3.3.3 and is deﬁned by Equation (3.3.5).
ka = 3 m2
a g h0
m a2
(3.3.5)
The damping ratio of the ﬁrst asymmetric mode in rectangular tanks can be determined
with the following empirical equation.
ζ =

ν
p
L3 g
0.5
(3.3.6)
where ν is the kinematic viscosity. This expressions is however only valid if h0/L ≥1.
14
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental Model
In order to see the eﬀect of the TLD, it is important that the TLDs sloshing frequency is
tuned to the ﬁrst natural frequency of the platform. Diﬀerent simulations of the experi-
mental model is conducted in Ansys in order to inﬂuence the frequencies of the structural
system, so it is possible to tune the sloshing frequency of the TLD to the ﬁrst mode of the
platform. The analysis is completed by considering 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 top plates on the plat-
form, where the natural frequencies and modal masses are determined. The results of the
analysis is presented in Appendix C.2. Furthermore, diﬀerent experimental test-setups are
also investigated with respect to the natural frequencies of the platform, to again ensure
that the sloshing frequency of the TLD can be tuned to the ﬁrst mode. The results from
the investigation of the experimental setups are presented in Appendix C.3, from where it
is seen that the optimal setup is when the platform is assembled with three stacked plates.
The ﬁnal experimental model without the TLD installed will be described in detail in this
chapter. This speciﬁc experimental model is the foundation for the experimental setup
when the TLD is to be installed and the simulations conducted parallel to the experimental
study.
4.1
Experimental Model
The experimental model is a simpliﬁed and scaled model of an oﬀshore platform consisting
of three stacked steel plates supported by four steel columns. The measurements of the
experimental model without the TLD installed is illustrated in Figure 4.1.1, where one
single plate has the speciﬁc dimensions 450 x 450 x 5 mm, leading to a total dimension
of 450 x 450 x 15 mm when three plates are considered. The plates are connected to
four steel columns with four A4-70 bolts connecting each column to the platform. The
columns consist of 850 mm tall SHS steel proﬁles with the cross-sectional dimensions 15
x 15 x 10 mm as depicted in Figure 4.1.1.b. At the supports of each leg the inner part
of the columns consist of a thread, from where a threaded steel rod with a diameter of 5
mm is connecting the columns to the foundation. The threaded steel rod has a free length
of 100mm, leading to a total height 965 mm for the experimental model. The steel rod
is connected to a 40mm thick wooden plate by four nuts where two of them are counter
nuts. The supports can therefore be described as ﬁxed spring supports where the wooden
plate acts as the foundation for the experimental model. The dimensions of the wooden
plate are illustrated in Appendix G, with a technical drawing of the platform.
15
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL MODEL
Figure 4.1.1: a) Measurements of the top plate with accelerometers glued on at a length of 50mm
from the platform edges, b) The SHS proﬁle of the columns and c) Experimental model seen from
the front. All measurements are in the unit [mm].
The connections between the plates at the top and the columns acting as the legs are
depicted in Figure 4.1.2.1. Meanwhile the connection between the threaded steel rod and
wooden plate acting as the foundation is illustrated in Figure 4.1.2.2.
Figure 4.1.2: 1) Connection between the plates and columns, 2) connection between threaded steel
rod and wooden plate. The measurements are in the unit [mm].
The response of the platform is measured by three accelerometers and their location is
denoted as X1, X2 and X3 in Figure 4.1.3. The three accelerometers are glued on the
second of the three steel plates that together constitute the platform, to ensure that the
16
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL MODEL
accelerometers capture the overall response. The accelerometers are located at a distance
of 50 mm from the edges so they align with the legs of the platform. Due to the location
of the accelerometers and the chosen placement of the coordinate system, one response
is measured in the x-direction, X1, and two responses are measured in the y-direction,
X2 and X3. Placed opposite of the accelerometers are three aluminum plates with the
dimensions 50 x 50 x 2 mm that capture the applied load. The applied load is induced
by a set of pneumatic actuators and their location is denoted as F1, F2 and F3. The
accelerometers and the location of the applied loads are depicted in Figure 4.1.3.
Figure 4.1.3: Measurement points (accelerometers) and the applied load denoted as Xn and Fn
respectively.
17
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
FE-Model and Simulation
In this chapter, the ﬁrst simulation is performed to obtain knowledge about the dynamic
properties of the experimental model in the previously described chapter. The FE-model is
on the basis of the previously described measurements of the experimental model assembled
in Ansys, from where the mass- and stiﬀness matrices are extracted to Matlab by the
steps presented in Appendix C.1. From the assembled FE-model a simulated response
is obtained by applying a random load with white noise characteristics. The obtained
simulated response is later analysed by a time-domain based OMA identiﬁcation technique
to identify the modal properties such as the natural frequencies and mode-shapes.
5.1
FE-Model
The FE-model of the platform is illustrated in Figure 5.1.1 with measurements based on
the experimental model with units in [mm], and consists of one top plate and four columns
connected to four steel rods with a diameter equal to 5 mm. The model is assumed to
be simply supported although the supports for the experimental model is considered to
act as a ﬁxed spring support. This will lead to an underestimation of the stiﬀness in
the FE-model which in turn will lead to lower natural frequencies than the experimental
investigation might indicate. The thickness of the top plate is determined by considering
the mass of all three steel quadratic plates, the empty water container, the four laser
sensors and the equipment which the laser sensors are attached to. The diﬀerent masses
are listed in Table 5.1.1 where the masses of the laser sensors include the mass of the
equipment which they are mounted on.
Table 5.1.1: Table of masses of the experimental model where the mass of the lasers also include
the equipment which the lasers are attached to.
3 plates
Laser 1
Laser 2
Laser 3
Laser 4
Empty TLD
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
23.778
1.306
1.300
1.346
1.299
0.275
The thickness of the top plate is determined from the total mass of Table 5.1.1, by assuming
the steels density to be ρs = 7850 kg/m3, which also apply for the rest of the model. By
considering the mass, width, length, depth and density of the steel, the thickness of the
top platform is determined to be 18.44mm.
19
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
Figure 5.1.1: Illustration of the FE-model assembled in Ansys in [mm]. a) The platform seen from
the side, b) The platform seen from above with the three sensors, representing the 3 degree-of-
freedom system.
Each node in the FE-model consists of a total of 6 DOFs with three being translational
DOFs and three being rotational DOFs, which together represents the response in the
x-, y- and z-directions respectively. The model in Ansys consist of 17436 DOFs in total,
and all connections are merged yielding one element. Since the model is simply supported
the translational DOFs are constrained at the supports. When the mass- and stiﬀness
matrices are extracted to Matlab, the model is reduced to a 3 DOF system by using the
theory of SEREP as explained in Appendix A.4. The 3 DOFs that are left after reducing
the FE-model from Ansys are chosen as the nodes that are placed in the same positions
as the three accelerometers in the experimental setup, yielding a 3 DOF system with three
translational DOFs. The ﬁrst DOF is in the x-direction where the second and third DOF
are in the y-direction, as illustrated in Figure 5.1.1.b.
The mode-shapes, bn, and the corresponding natural frequencies, fn, are determined
by solving the eigenvalue problem as shown in Equation (3.1.6), where free undamped
vibrations are considered. It is only the ﬁrst three mode-shapes that are of interest since
the mode-shapes that comes at higher natural frequencies will tend to become local modes.
Table 5.1.2: The ﬁrst three natural frequencies of the 3-DOF FE-model.
f1
f2
f3
[Hz]
[Hz]
[Hz]
1.99
1.99
2.67
It is seen from Table 5.1.2 that the ﬁrst two modes are closely spaced and practically
identical modes due to the double symmetry of the platform. The corresponding mode-
shapes are illustrated in Figure 5.1.2 and they are scaled by dividing each individual
20
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
mode-shape with its largest component.
Figure 5.1.2: The ﬁrst three mode-shapes of the 3 DOF FE-model.
It is seen from the illustration that the ﬁrst and second mode-shapes are identical bending
modes and oscillates in the x- and y-direction respectively, while the third mode-shape is
observed to be a torsional mode. From Figure 5.1.2, it is seen that the reduction to a 3
DOF system adequately can describe the ﬁrst three mode-shapes of interest.
As mentioned in the theory, the modal mass of the three modes above is an important
parameter in order to tune the TLD. The mass ratio between the modal mass and the
active mass of the TLD should be in the range of 1 to 4 % in order to see a suﬃcient
reduction in the vibration response of the platform. The modal mass of the platform can be
determined if the mode-shapes fulﬁll the orthogonality conditions explained in Appendix
A.1 and they are determined by the use of Equation (A.1.6). The modal masses are listed
in Table 5.1.3.
Table 5.1.3: Modal Mass of the ﬁrst three modes for the 3 DOF FE-model.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
mn [kg]
30.144
30.144
17.00
From the table it is seen that the modal mass for mode 1 and mode 2 are identical as
expected for modes with identical frequencies and symmetric mode-shapes.
The third
mode is seen to have a lower modal mass than the ﬁrst two modes, due to the fact that a
lower mass is being activated when the platform rotates.
5.2
Simulated Response
The simulation of the FE-model is based on the physical properties which include the
mass, stiﬀness and damping matrices. The damping matrix is established by the function
C modal damping in Matlab based on the calculations described in Appendix D.1. In
order to convert the model to discrete time state-space format, the state-space formulation
in Equation (5.2.1) is used where y(t) and ˙u(t) are the response and state-vector respec-
tively. This type of simulation is conducted due to the later simulation of the updated
FE-model with the TLD implemented where general damping is considered. However, this
21
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
simulation is also applied for the platform without the TLD where proportional damping
is considered.
˙u(t) = A u(t) + Q x(t)
y(t) = P u(t)
(5.2.1)
where the state-space vector, u(t), the load distribution matrix, Q, and the observation
matrix, P, are given by.
Q =
 −M−1
[0]

,
u(t) =
 ˙y(t)
y(t)

,
P =

−[0]
I

(5.2.2)
The solution to the state-space formulation described above represent the response of the
structural system and it is deﬁned by.
u(t) = exp(A t) u(0) +
Z t
0
exp(A(t −τ)) Q x(τ)dτ
(5.2.3)
where the ﬁrst term represent the homogeneous solution which is the transient response
due to the initial conditions of the system, and the second term is the particular solution
that corresponds to the external forces. The solution will include the velocity in the upper
half and the displacement in lower half as depicted in the state-space vector.
The response, y(t), is created in Matlab by using the function stateSpaceSim provided
by Phd. student Tobias Friis. The response is obtained by considering the mass-, stiﬀness-
, and damping matrices, the applied load, x(t), and time-step, ∆t. The load x(t) for the
simulation is created by the random function randn which follows a Gaussian distribution
and it is applied in the ﬁrst three nodes. The simulation is performed with the sampling
frequency, fs, Nyquist frequency (cut-oﬀfrequency), fv, duration, T, number of data
points, N, and time-step, ∆t, listed in Table 5.2.1 below.
Table 5.2.1: Simulated load properties.
fs
fv
T
N
∆t
[Hz]
[Hz]
[min]
[-]
[-]
Load
25
12.5
35
52500
0.04
The upper limit of the frequency band is given by the Nyquist frequency expressed as
fv = fs/2 with the sampling frequency fs = 1/∆t and sampling time step ∆t. With the
chosen sampling frequency, the criterion established by Rune Brincker and Ventura and
recommended for practical purposes is fulﬁlled, as fs > 2.4fmax = 2.4 · 2.67 = 6.4Hz
[2]. The sampling frequency is therefore suﬃcient to allow all the modes of interest laying
within the frequency band to be adequately excited. It is desirable to measure the response
of a structure during a complete duration of a speciﬁc excitation where the choice of the
duration of recording depends on the choice of bias when random signals are considered.
Based on the journal [8] written by Tobias Friis et. al. the duration of the simulation and
later the experiment is determined by Equation (5.2.4). The duration is based on the ﬁrst
natural frequency of the FE-model, f1 = 1.99 Hz, and the assumed structural damping
ratio of 1%.
Texp =
42
(ζ · f)min
≈35min
(5.2.4)
As stated by Equation (5.2.4) the duration of the simulated response should approximately
be 35 min. To make the response more realistic, random noise with a magnitude of 1o/oo of
22
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
the r.m.s. value of the original response is added since no noise is considered to be present
in the original simulation. The simulated random loading with white noise characteristics
and the resulting simulated random response is illustrated in Figure 5.2.1 for node 1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
104
-5
0
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
104
-2
0
2
4
10-3
Figure 5.2.1: The simulated load x(t) with white noise characteristics and resulting simulated
response y(t) for node 1, generated from the load parameters presented in Table 5.2.1.
The simulated load described in this section is applied to the three nodes as mentioned
above, leading to three random responses {y(t)1, y(t)2, y(t)3} contained in the row vector,
y(t), for further investigation.
5.3
OMA-Based identiﬁcation
The response of the FE-model is simulated with the function stateSpaceSim as de-
scribed in the previous section where the damping matrix, C, is established by assuming
the structural damping to be 1 %. From the response, the modal parameters such as
the mode-shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios are estimated by a OMA-based
identiﬁcation technique. In order to conduct OMA, the Matlab toolbox called OMA
Toolbox.A developed and provided by Rune Brincker is used. The speciﬁc OMA-based
identiﬁcation method used in this study is the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique described
in Section 3.2 where the method is based on correlation identiﬁcation in the time domain.
The simulated response needs no ﬁltering or decimation and the estimated CF matrices
are determined by the unbiased direct estimation method.
Before the modal parameters are identiﬁed with the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique, the
singular values in the SD matrix are checked for data-quality by a simple FDD analysis
in the frequency domain. The singular values of the SD matrix is depicted in Figure 5.3.1
and it is created by applying the function fftspec on the simulated response, y(t). The
function estimates the SD matrix as a function of the frequencies by using the Welch
averaging technique with a Hanning window with 50 % overlap as described in Section
3.2.
23
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure 5.3.1: Singular values of the SD matrix estimated by the Welch averaging method for the
simulated response y(t).
From the singular values of the platforms response, two clear peaks are observed within the
frequency band of approximately 2−3 Hz, presented by the ﬁrst singular value. However,
the ﬁrst peak consist of two modes illustrated by the peak of the second singular value at
around the same frequency of 2 Hz, yielding two closely-spaced modes. The closely-spaced
modes can be identical modes with the same frequency, due to the double symmetry of
the platform. The third mode is illustrated with the third singular value, which is not
being excited as much as the to ﬁrst modes, but its presence is clearly identiﬁed.
By using the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique the modal parameters are established from
the CF matrix containing the unbiased correlation functions considered as free decays.
The identiﬁcation is performed with the function dircor in Matlab based on the CF
matrix in the time domain with a maximum number of time lags Nt=1024. The estimated
auto-correlation function for node 1 is depicted in Figure 5.3.2, while the full plot of the CF
matrix including all the auto- and cross-correlation functions are illustrated in Appendix
F.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
Figure 5.3.2: First auto-correlation of the ﬁrst signal for the simulated response of the FE-model.
The unbiased correlation functions do not contain leakage errors due to the FFT-algorithms,
but some estimation error does appear in the tail (noise tail) of the correlation functions
24
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
and some in the beginning due to the presence of noise. The identiﬁcation is therefore
performed by considering the correlation functions in the time-lag interval 5 ≤τ ≤100.
The part that is used for ﬁtting in the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique is depicted with
the dotted lines in the ﬁgure above.
The identiﬁcation is conducted by the use of the function id tdpr in Matlab, where
only the stable modes with positive damping is returned. The number of AR matrices
used when identifying the modal properties is chosen as na=3 which for a response con-
taining three channels leads to the identiﬁcation of 4 modes. The output of the function
id tdpr consist of imaginary conjugates of the mode-shapes, natural angular frequencies
and damping ratios. The natural angular frequencies and damping ratios are determined
based on continuous time poles with the formulas stated in Equation (8.2.5). The char-
acteristic mode-shapes are extracted by considering the real part, deﬁned as the spatial
distribution of movement of the full structural system. The modal properties identiﬁed
for the simulated response are listed in Table 5.3.1 together with the percentage deviation
in relation to the FE-model from Ansys.
Table 5.3.1: Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the platform.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
fw/o
[Hz]
1.99
2.00
2.67
∆fw/o
[%]
0
0.5
0
ζw/o
[%]
1.00
1.00
1.00
∆ζw/o
[%]
0
0
0
From Table 5.3.1 it is seen that the modal parameters from the AR/PR identiﬁcation ﬁts
with the parameters from the Ansys FE-model where only the frequency for the second
mode deviates with 0.5 %. Due to the ﬁrst two mode-shapes being closely spaced, they
tend to mix together and are therefore aligned to the mode-shapes obtained in the FE-
model which is further described in Appendix A.3. The ﬁrst three aligned mode-shapes
are illustrated in Figure 5.3.3.
Figure 5.3.3: The ﬁrst three mode-shapes based on AR/PR identiﬁcation technique where the black
dotted lines corresponds to the static shape of the platform.
It is clear that the identiﬁed mode-shapes correspond very well to the mode-shapes from
the FE-model, where the ﬁrst two modes are bending modes in the y- and x-direction and
25
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. FE-MODEL AND SIMULATION
the third mode is a torsional mode. The correlation between the mode-shapes obtained
from the OMA based identiﬁcation and the FE-model are presented by their MAC-values,
determined by the following equation.
MAC(bn, an) =
|aH
n bn|2
(aH a) (bH b)
(5.3.1)
The MAC value corresponds to cos2(θ), where θ is the angle between the two mode shapes,
which means that similar mode shapes yield a MAC value equal to one. The MAC values
are determined between all mode-shapes and are listed in the Table below.
Table 5.3.2: MAC values between the simulation and FE-model.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 1
1.00
0.00
0.00
Mode 2
0.00
1.00
0.28
Mode 3
0.00
0.28
1.00
26
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Experimental Setup
The ﬁnal experimental setup and test program is described in this chapter, which is based
on the possibilities of tuning the TLD to the ﬁrst mode of the platform. The fundamental
equations for the experimental setup are therefore the sloshing frequency and active mass
of the TLD shown in Equation (3.3.1) and Equation (3.3.3) respectively. As previously
mentioned in Section 4.1, the response of the platform is measured by three accelerometers
and the water elevation is measured by four laser sensors. In order to capture the best
possible measurements of the waters elevation, the capability of diﬀerent materials to
reﬂect the lasers back to the sensors was tested since the water alone can not reﬂect the
lasers.
The results with the diﬀerent surfaces on the water is presented in Appendix B.3 which
include paper, cardboard, coﬀee, shaving foam and polystyrene with humid paper on top.
Furthermore, it was investigated if one laser sensor could yield the same results as with the
ﬁnal setup with four laser sensors. The test was conducted with one laser sensor located in
the corner and middle of one side in the TLD respectively, and the investigation was done
by sime FDD analysis of the singular values. The results where only one laser is considered
are presented in Appendix C.4. However, proper modal analysis can not be conducted with
one signal alone and the ﬁnal experiment include therefore four laser sensors. Furthermore,
the experimental setup is also investigated in relation to increasing the random loading,
where the singular values from the investigation is presented in Appendix C.6. However,
it was observed that using lower excitations yielded more clear results.
The ﬁnal experiment is divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part, the platform is considered
with a empty TLD attached on top of the plates and in the second part the TLD is ﬁlled
with water before applying the load on the platform.
6.1
Experimental Setup and Equipment
Both experiments are conducted with the four laser sensors on top of the platform. The
laser sensors are attached to aluminum tracks with double sided tape and two threads
as depicted in Figure 6.1.2, where the aluminum tracks are connected to the plates with
two bolts and two nuts.
The laser sensors are raised 10cm above the surface of the
water corresponding to still water level from where the laser sensors can measure ±3.5
cm between 1 and 5 V. The laser sensors record the water elevation in the middle of each
side of the rectangular TLD as depicted in Figure 6.1.1.a. The calibration and instruction
manual to the laser sensors are presented in Appendix B.1 and Appendix B.2.
The TLD container is made of plastic and it is located on top of the steel plates in the
middle where it is secured with double sided tape. The TLD is ﬁlled with 19 cm of water,
leading to the width and depth at still water level being 125 x 190 mm as depicted in
27
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 6.1.1. The dimensions results in a sloshing frequency of 2.02 Hz in the longitudinal
direction and 2.53 Hz in the transversely direction. The procedure of tuning the TLD
is described in detail in Section 7.1. Polystyrene with humid paper is placed on top of
the water from where the lasers are reﬂected back to the sensor. This type of surface
acts as a ﬂoating roof, where wave breaking, turbulence and other contamination of the
water surface is prevented due to the higher stiﬀness of the polystyrene. In addition, the
measured response becomes more linear and noise reduced. The preparation of the water
surface for the TLD is illustrated in Figure 6.1.2.b.
Figure 6.1.1: Illustration of the experimental setup. a) Platform viewed from the top with the
location of the lasers, accelerometers, Xn, and applied load, Fn. b) Platform viewed from the side
with the measurements of the TLD. All measurements are in [mm].
The ﬁnal experimental setup is depicted in Figure 6.1.2 where the most important parts
are marked with numbers which is explained in Table 6.1.1.
28
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 6.1.2: a) Picture of experimental setup where the important parts are denoted with numbers,
b) surface used to capture the water elevation.
Table 6.1.1: Impotent parts of the experimental setup.
Number
Function
1
Accelerometers
2
Nozzles
3
Lasers
4
Water tank
5
Equipment holding the lasers
6
Air hose
7
Valve to open and close the air
8
Aluminum plates
The load is expressed as wind and it is applied by a complex pneumatic actuator system
that induce time-varying loading with white noise characteristics through three nozzles
located 20 cm from the platform, inducing low amplitude excitations. In order to distribute
the random loading with approximately the same magnitude on both sides of the platform,
the two nozzles aiming in the y-direction have a diameter of 1 mm while the single nozzle
in the x-direction has a diameter of 1.5mm. The nozzles are attached to aluminum tracks
as illustrated in Figure 6.1.3, yielding the opportunity to change the magnitude of the
random loading by changing the distance between the nozzles and platform. The air is
transported by an air hose and it is controlled by the software Labview on the computer.
The computer and the pneumatic system is connected to DAQ 2 which is illustrated in
29
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
the ﬁgure below denoted as 3, where DAQ 2 is connected to a power supply set to 24V.
Figure 6.1.3: DAQ 1 is connected with the accelerometers (1) in Mod 1 and lasers (2) in Mod 2.
DAQ 2 is connected to the pneumatic system (3) with Mod 5. The pictures to the right illustrate
the accelerometers and nozzles.
The data from the accelerometers and laser sensors are recorded with the software NI
SignalExpress which is connected to DAQ 1 in MOD 1 and 2 respectively. DAQ 1 is
connected to an external power supply set to 24V and so is the laser sensors. The two
MODs used for the lasers and accelerometers are restrained to measurements in the range
of ±5V, while the MOD used for the pneumatic system in DAQ 2 is restrained to ±10V.
6.2
Test Program and Steps
The test is divided into two parts where the data acquisition in the ﬁrst part only consists
of the three accelerometers, since the platforms modal parameters without liquid in the
TLD are of interest. The experiment is conducted though the following steps.
1. Estimate the sloshing frequency of the TLD using Lamb’s linear theory.
2. Setup the experiment with no water in the tank.
30
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
3. Open the valve on the air hose.
4. Connect the computer to DAQ 1 and DAQ 2 and start NI-SignalExpress and
Labview.
5. Run the data in NI-Signalexpress for 3 minutes before starting the actual test,
in order to ensure that the equipment have adjusted.
6. Setup Labview so the load is randomly applied on the structure and set the timer
to 35 minutes.
7. Start recording the signal in NI-SignalExpress when the experiment begins and
save the data as a .txt ﬁle when it stops.
The second part of the experimental investigation consist of the platform installed with
the TLD, where the response from the laser sensors also is measured. The same procedure
is conducted but with a water depth of 19cm is added to the water tank. The ﬂoating
roof of polystyrene and humid paper is placed on the water surface in order to measure
the linear response of the water elevation.
6.3
Data Acquisition
The data acquisition is acquired by NI SignalExpress which measures the response from
the accelerometers in the unit [g] and the relative displacement from the laser sensors in
voltage [V ]. The ﬁrst step in processing the data acquired from NI SignalExpress is
therefore to convert this data to a meaningful unit.
Normally sensors are calibrated by the manufacturer or supplier, but before the laser
sensors were taken into use a calibration of the instruments were performed to ensure
proper sensor operation and to determine the sensors calibration constant. Each of the
four used lasers were checked for calibration by using a calibration stand, as described in
Appendix B.2, which allows the user to perform measurements at precise intervals.
Each sensor has a maximum range of voltages between 1 to 5V and a measurement range in
terms of displacement of 65mm-135mm. In order to make sense of the acquired response,
the data is converted from voltage to displacement in the unit [m], by using the following
conversion equation.
Laser sensors :
Signal(m) = 1.75 cm
V Signal(V) 10−2
(6.3.1)
where 1.75 is the calibration constant.
In terms of the accelerometers placed on the
platform, the acquired data from NI SignalExpress is converted to acceleration with
unit [m/s2] by the following expression.
Accelerometers :
Signal(m/s2) = 9.81 m
s2 Signal(g)
(6.3.2)
For practical purposes the mean of the acquired signal is removed, which normalizes the
data and meanwhile removes the DC oﬀsets in the signal which could lead to excessive
noise at low frequencies due to the measurement equipment.
31
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
6.3.1
Filtering
To reduce the noise level, the desired signals are sampled with a higher frequency than
needed during the identiﬁcation analysis.
It is therefore important during the signal
processing step to re-sample the acquired signal to a more suitable sampling frequency by
down-sampling or decimation. This task is performed by FFT-ﬁltering, which takes use of
the fact that the eﬀect of any frequency response function (FRF), H(ω), on a signal, y(t),
can be obtained by multiplication of the signals Fourier transform, Y (ω), with the FRF.
This allows the ﬁltered signal, yf(t), to be determined in the frequency domain expressed
by Equation (6.3.3).
Yf(ω) = H(ω) Y (ω)
(6.3.3)
The FFT-ﬁltering begins with segmenting the data from the original time series in the
time domain in overlapping data segments. In order to avoid large discontinuities between
the data segments, a tapering window in the form of a Hanning window with 50% overlap
is implemented. The time segmented data is thereafter stored in the frequency domain
which can be expressed by the following equation.
Yk(t) =
(
y(t) w(t −tk)
; t ∈[tk; tk + T]
0
; t∈[tk; tk + T]
(6.3.4)
and can be assembled to form the original signal.
Y (f) =
X
k
Yk(f)
(6.3.5)
where Yk(t) is the kth data segmented Fourier transform of the original signal, w(t) is the
applied tapering window and T is the size of the data segment. The ﬁltered signal is deter-
mined in the frequency domain as stated by Equation (6.3.3), and then reassembled from
its ﬁltered contributions through synthesis expressed by Equation (6.3.5). The ﬁltered
signal is then ﬁnally converted back to the time domain by its inverse Fourier transform.
Due to diﬀerent sensors are used during the same OMA test, the signals from the ac-
celerometers are converted to displacements in order to make it possible to have all the
signals included in the same identiﬁcation analysis. This task is done by noticing that
integration of a signal in the time domain corresponds to division by iω of the Fourier
transform in the frequency domain expressed by.
Z
y(t)dt ↔Y (ω)
iω
(6.3.6)
The n times integration is thereby performed as a one-shot FFT-ﬁltering with the FRF
H(ω) = (iω)−n. Due to the numerical integration can create errors concentrated around
DC and close to the Nyquist frequencies, the FRF series is multiplied by a window in the
frequency domain in the form of a band-pass ﬁltering window. It keeps the middle part
of the information in the Nyquist band and discards the rest. The Fourier transform of
the resulting signal is then obtained by multiplying the Fourier transform of the original
signal with the mentioned FRF with the applied window, i.e, H(ωk) = W(ωk)(iωk)−n.
The rule that must be respected in all OMA is that the same ﬁltering must be applied to
all channels of data. After having all signals decimated to a lower sampling frequency by
FFT-ﬁltering and converting the acquired data from the accelerometers to displacement,
the signals from the laser sensors has to have a high- and low-pass ﬁltering performed on
them. This is the case since the FFT-ﬁltering does not implement a band-pass ﬁltering as
the integration by one-shot FFT-ﬁltering does. The high-pass ﬁltering and the low-pass
ﬁltering excludes the lower and higher frequencies in the Nyquist band, respectively.
32
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Experimental Results
The modal parameters from the response of the platform and the TLD acquired from
the experiment described in the previous chapter is now identiﬁed using the time domain
AR/PR identiﬁcation technique. Since the tuning of the TLD is essential for the exper-
imental setup, the inherent properties and the used linear assumptions are described in
detail. An additional simple experiment is also conducted, where a free decay of the wa-
ter surface in the TLD is analysed and used to verify the calculated theoretical sloshing
frequencies and damping ratios.
7.1
Tuning of TLD
The geometry of the tank is vital in order to tune the sloshing frequency of the TLD
correctly to the natural frequency of the platform, and furthermore to ensure that the
active mass is large enough to reduce excessive vibrations. The ﬁnal dimensions with the
corresponding parameters of the TLD are presented in Table 7.1.1, with the calculations
presented in Appendix D.2. The calculations are based on linear assumptions and with
the aim of tuning the TLD to the ﬁrst mode of the platform. Since the TLD consist of
a rectangular tank it will have diﬀerent properties in the transversely and longitudinal
direction as depicted in the table below.
Table 7.1.1: Final dimensions of the TLD with its corresponding properties in the longitudinal and
transversely direction.
L
b
h0
m
fw
ma
mb
ka
ζ
[m]
[m]
[m]
[kg]
[Hz]
[kg]
[kg]
[N/m]
[%]
Longitudinal direction
0.19
0.125
0.19
4.51
2.02
1.18
3.64
192.77
0.20
Transverse direction
0.125
0.19
0.19
4.51
2.49
0.78
4.08
194.10
0.27
From the table above it is seen that the rigid mass of the TLD corresponds to 80.75 % of
the total mass of the water, while only 26.25 % of the total mass is considered to be active.
A mass ratio of 3.93 % between the TLD and the ﬁrst mode of the platform is thereby
obtained in the longitudinal direction. The natural frequencies of the platform without
the TLD installed are listed in Table 7.2.1, and the sloshing frequency in the longitudinal
direction is tuned to the ﬁrst mode of the platform with a natural frequency of 2.01 Hz.
The tuning ratio is therefore Ω= 0.99 in the longitudinal direction. From the tuning
parameters, a clear damping eﬀect of the platform should be expected to be obtained in
the experimental results. This assumption is based on the the ﬁndings according to [16]
written by Jin-Ting Wang et. al, where the optimal mass ratio of the TLD was found to
be between 1 and 4% in order to adequately reduce structural vibrations. However, no
signiﬁcant damping growth was observed when the mass ratio became larger than 1.5 %.
33
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
By considering the sloshing frequency in the transversely direction and comparing this
with the natural frequencies of the platform from Table 7.2.1, the tuning ratio becomes
Ω= 1.22 for the second mode of the platform.
This indicates that the vibrations at
the second mode of the platform will not experience a signiﬁcant eﬀect due to the TLD
not being optimally tuned to this speciﬁc mode. Nonetheless, if the aim was to reduce
vibrations at the ﬁrst and second mode, it would be possible to tune the TLD in both
directions by changing the geometry of the container. However this was not possible or
the aim in this speciﬁc study.
7.2
Experimental Results
As previously described, the experimental investigation is performed with and without the
TLD installed in order to investigate the eﬀect on the dynamic properties of the platform.
For the experimental investigation without the TLD ﬁlled, the response is only acquired
from the three accelerometers attached to the platform with the setup as depicted in
Figure 6.1.2. When the TLD is implemented in the system the laser sensors capture the
linear response due to the ﬂoating roof, and the setup is the same as before but using the
tuning parameters from Table 7.1.1 for the TLD.
In order to minimize noise in the measurements, the sampling rate of the raw data from
the accelerometers and lasers are overestimated with a sampling rate of 1652.89 Hz and a
time step of ∆t = 0.000605. Since only the frequencies in the range of approximately 1
to 5 Hz is of interest, the data is decimated by a factor of 96 leading to a sampling rate
of 17.21 Hz and cut-oﬀfrequency of 8.6 Hz for both measurements. The decimation is
conducted by using the function fftfilt1 in Matlab that performs FFT-ﬁltering using
a Hanning window with 50 % overlap.
In order to have all the acquired data in the same unit, the raw data from the accelerom-
eters are converted from acceleration to displacement by the function fftint1.
The
function integrates the signal matrix using one-shot FFT-ﬁltering and applies a band-pass
ﬁlter in the frequency domain to suppress noise close to DC and Nyquist. The data from
the accelerometers are converted to displacement by integrating the signal twice and iso-
lating the modes of interest using a band-pass ﬁlter deﬁned by the two cut-oﬀfrequencies
f1=1.5 Hz and f2=6.5 H with a soft ﬁlter shape parameter of m=2.
The data from the four laser sensors are ﬁltered with a low- and high-pass ﬁlter which
exclude the lower frequencies and higher frequencies in the Nyquist band. In general,
low-pass ﬁlters are used to remove DC (the Fourier coeﬃcient at frequency zero) drift and
high-pass ﬁlters are used to remove the energy in the high-frequency region. The ﬁltering
process is conducted by the function fftfilt1, where the low-pass ﬁltering is performed
with cut-oﬀfrequencies of 0 to 1 Hz and the high-pass ﬁltering with cut-oﬀfrequencies of
6.5 to 8.5 Hz.
The singular values of the SD matrix obtained from the experiments with and without
the TLD are presented in Figure 7.2.1. Again, the function fftspec is used to estimate
the SD matrix and a simple FDD analysis is used as a data-quality check. The number of
data points in each segment is chosen to be N=1024.
34
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure 7.2.1: Singular values of the SD matrix of the platform without a TLD, platform with a
TLD, water elevation and the total system including the platform and TLD.
From the ﬁrst experiment without the TLD it is observed that the singular values of the SD
matrix for the ﬁltered signal are quite similar to the ﬁrst conducted simulation in Figure
5.3.1, where two singular values appear to peak in the frequency band of approximately
2 −3.5 Hz. The ﬁrst and second singular value contain most of the information about
the system, clearly indicating the presence of two closely spaced modes around 2 Hz and
a third mode at around 3.5 Hz. The third singular value is observed to be more ﬂat but
indicates the presence of a third torsional mode. The platform without the TLD have
therefore three modes just as for the simulated response of the FE-model, where the ﬁrst
two modes are closely-spaced.
The singular values when the TLD is attached to the platform is depicted in the second
sub-ﬁgure of Figure 7.2.1, where only the response acquired from the accelerometers are
considered. Compared to the case without the TLD, the singular values now indicate the
presence of four modes. The ﬁrst singular value presents four peaks in the frequency band
of 1.8 −2.2 Hz while the second singular value peaks twice, representing the ﬁrst mode of
the system without the TLD being split into two modes with similar mode-shapes. The
eﬀect of the TLD is thereby clearly observed, with the ﬁrst original mode being split into
two modes on either side of the second mode. The amplitude of the ﬁrst and third peak
has a diﬀerence of approximately 10 db, which means that the tuning can be optimized
35
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
further until a plateau is obtained. Additionally, it is observed that the second mode has a
lower frequency and amplitude than observed without the TLD, indicating that the mass
of the TLD has had en eﬀect in reducing the frequencies of the system.
In the third plot of the singular values of the SD matrix, the measurements of the wa-
ter elevation from the four laser sensors are depicted yielding four singular values. An
interaction between the TLD and platform is observed as three peaks from the ﬁrst sin-
gular value are depicted in the frequency band of 1.8 −2.2 Hz as previously observed.
However, the occurrence of a fourth peak at approximately 2.5 Hz is only observed when
considering the singular values of the response from the laser sensors. The observed fourth
peaks placement on the frequency band resembles the sloshing frequency of the TLD in
the transversely direction of 2.49 Hz, and could therefore be assumed as the TLDs second
asymmetric mode. The ﬁrst singular value depicts the presence of the ﬁrst and third mode
with possibly similar mode-shapes, while the second singular value indicates the second
and fourth mode also as similar mode-shapes. The fourth plot of the singular values is
obtained by combining the response from the accelerometers with the response from the
laser sensors.
For all the four plots presented in Figure 7.2.1, the presence of noise is low as indicated
by the relatively smooth singular value lines and the distinct peaks.
Furthermore, a
clear separation of the presented singular values is observed, which indicates that the SD
matrices contains a signiﬁcant amount of information about the system. Moreover, since
the singular values indicate that it is possible to identify the modes of the platform and
TLD alike, it can be considered that the TLD possess linear properties at these modes.
As previously mentioned, the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique performs identiﬁcation in
the time-domain by the use of the estimated CF matrices. The unbiased CF matrices are
estimated with the direct method with the function dircor in Matlab with Nt=1025
time-lags.
The estimated auto-correlation function for the response in the ﬁrst node
with and without the TLD installed is illustrated below, where the full CF matrices are
presented in Appendix F.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
-5
0
5
10-7
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
-5
0
5
10-7
Figure 7.2.2: Auto-correlation function of the response in node 1 with and without the TLD installed
The number of data points in the CF matrix used for ﬁtting in the AR/PR identiﬁcation
36
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
technique, with and without the TLD installed, is marked with the dotted lines. This
is done due to the error in the noise tail caused by the estimation method of the CF
matrices as a result of the ﬁnite time length, and the possible error due to the measurement
equipment in the beginning. The number of data points used when only the platform is
considered is deﬁned by the time-lag interval 10 ≤τ ≤200, and when the TLD is attached
to the platform a time-lag interval of 10 ≤τ ≤400 is considered.
The number of used AR parameters is chosen as na=3 for both identiﬁcations of the two
experiments. The ﬁrst dataset without the TLD therefore contains four modes, while the
dataset with the TLD includes 20 modes. The identiﬁed modal parameters, including the
natural frequencies and damping ratios, are listed in Table 7.2.1 where the percentage
deviation between the experiment and the ﬁrst simulation also is presented.
Table 7.2.1: Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the experiment without and with the TLD.
The percentage deviations are between the ﬁrst simulation of the FE-model and experimental results.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
fexp,w/o
[Hz]
2.014
2.045
3.347
−
−
∆fw/o
[%]
1.00
2.51
25.47
−
−
ζexp,w/o
[%]
0.41
0.21
0.31
−
−
∆ζw/o
[%]
−59.00
−79.00
−69.00
−
−
fexp,with
[Hz]
1.811
1.899
2.192
2.497
3.352
ζexp,with
[%]
1.19
0.33
2.16
5.45
0.14
The upper part of Table 7.2.1 shows the identiﬁed modal parameters of the platform
without the TLD, where it is observed that the ﬁrst two natural frequencies only deviate
with 1 % and 2.51 % from the frequencies of the FE-model. However, the third natural
frequency is 25.47 % larger than the frequencies from the FE-model. This might be due to
the rotational stiﬀness in the z-axis is underestimated in the simulation, primarily due to
the FE-model is simply supported. Furthermore, a large deviation between the damping
ratios is observed, which is due to the structural damping is assumed to be 1% in the
simulation.
From the natural frequencies listed in the lower part of the table above, it is observed that
the frequencies for mode 1 and 3 corresponds to the splitted mode, while a lower frequency
is obtained for mode 2 due to the additional mass added from the installation of the TLD.
However, the ﬁfth mode yields approximately the same frequency as the torsional mode
before implementing the TLD, which might be due to the fact that the TLD at large
excitations will add more stiﬀness to the system due to the ”stiﬀness hardening” eﬀect.
In terms of the damping ratios it is seen that they all increase when the TLD is attached
to the platform, except for the torsional mode where the damping seems to decrease.
Moreover, the damping ratio for the fourth mode is signiﬁcantly larger than the others,
which might correspond to the fact that the speciﬁc mode is considered as the mode of
the TLD itself with a sloshing frequency equal to its transversely direction.
The ﬁrst three mode-shapes from the experiment without the TLD are aligned with the
mode-shapes obtained from the FE-model and are depicted in Figure 7.2.3. The ﬁrst ﬁve
mode-shapes identiﬁed when the TLD is attached on top of the platform are illustrated in
Figure 7.2.4. In order to illustrate the oscillatory direction of the platform when the TLD
is attached, the mode-shapes are scaled 1:3 so that the platforms movement is multiplied
with a factor 3 times larger than of the TLD.
37
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 7.2.3: First three mode-shapes of the experimental model without TLD.
Figure 7.2.4: First ﬁve mode-shapes of the experimental model with the attached TLD.
38
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
For the ﬁrst case without the TLD attached, it is observed that the aligned mode-shapes
of the experimental model ﬁts with the FE-models projected mode-shapes.
From the
mode-shapes with the TLD attached, it is indicated that the TLD is in-phase with the
platform for mode 1 and out-of-phase with the platform for mode 3, which corresponds
to the splitted mode. Moreover, the TLD is indicated to be in-phase with the platform
at the second mode, due to the TLD not being tuned to that speciﬁc mode. This leads
to the fourth mode where only the water is excited, yielding the mode of the TLD in the
transversely direction. Finally, it is observed that the TLD is not activated in the ﬁfth
mode. It should be pointed out that the phase diﬀerence between the platform and TLD
has not been investigated, why the TLD may not be entirely in- or out-of-phase with the
platform.
7.2.1
Displacements and Accelerations
The eﬀect of the TLD is also illustrated by considering the reduction in maximum displace-
ment and maximum acceleration. To examine the eﬀect of the TLD on the response for
the identiﬁed modes, a modal decomposition of the response acquired from the accelerom-
eters is carried out by expressing the response as a linear combination of the eigenvectors
deﬁned by Equation (7.2.1).
y(t) =
N
X
n=1
bnqn(t) = [bn]q(t)
(7.2.1)
where [bn] represents the identiﬁed mode-shapes and q(t) is the modal coordinates. Due
to the ﬁrst mode in the original system has been split into two, represented by mode 1
and 3, the eﬀect is examined by comparing the modes that are similarly aligned. Since,
the identiﬁed fourth mode is considered as a mode of the TLD, it is neglected in this
investigation. From the identiﬁed mode-shapes illustrated in Figure 7.2.4, the ﬁrst and
third transitional mode-shape is dominant in the y-direction, thus it is only accelerometer 2
and 3 that are taken into consideration. The second transitional mode-shape is dominant
in the x-direction, and the response from accelerometer 1 is therefore considered. For
the torsional mode-shape all accelerometers are taken into account because both the x-
and y-directions are contributing to the response. The peak maximum displacement and
acceleration reduction as a result of installing the TLD is presented in Table 7.2.2. Here,
mode 3/1 refers to comparison between mode 3 with the TLD and mode 1 without the
TLD, and similar approach goes for the comparison of mode 5/3.
Table 7.2.2: Maximum peak displacement and acceleration of measurements with and without the
TLD.
Mode 1/1
Mode 2/2
x [mm]
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
Acc.1
−
−
−
2.8
2.28
−17.67
Acc.2
1.43
0.416
−70.98
−
−
−
Acc.3
1.46
0.410
−71.97
−
−
−
¨x [m/s2]
Acc.1
−
−
−
0.479
0.342
−28.69
Acc.2
0.245
0.0782
−68.13
−
−
−
Acc.3
0.250
0.0771
−69.21
−
−
−
39
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Mode 3/1
Mode 5/3
x [mm]
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
Acc.1
−
−
−
1.0
1.9
83.25
Acc.2
1.43
0.429
−70.02
1.1
1.8
64.68
Acc.3
1.46
0.462
−68.39
1.1
1.9
73.69
¨x [m/s2]
Acc.1
−
−
−
0.442
0.869
96.73
Acc.2
0.245
0.0711
−71.03
0.470
0.785
67.17
Acc.3
0.250
0.0764
−69.46
0.487
0.909
86.48
0
1
2
3
104
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-3
0
1
2
3
104
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-4
-2
0
2
4
10-4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-0.05
0
0.05
w/o. TLD
w. TLD
Figure 7.2.5: Displacement and acceleration for accelerometer nr. 2 for the response at mode 1
when the platform is mounted with and without a TLD. Due to similarities in the top plots, the
bottom plots are there to illustrate the phase lag between the acceleration and displacement.
From Table 7.2.2 above it is seen that for mode 1, the maximum displacement and ac-
celeration is reduced by approximately 70% in node two and three. For mode 2, which
was not aimed to be damped, a reduction of 18% in displacement and 29% in acceleration
is observed for node 1. Although the TLD can be observed to reduce the response for
the two transitional modes, it also seems to amplify the response for the torsional mode
regarding both the displacement and acceleration.
The eﬀect of the TLD is further investigated by determining the relative displacement of
the water surface in relation to the movement of the platform. As previously, a modal
decomposition is performed to investigate the eﬀect at each individual identiﬁed mode.
Since the experiment is performed with four laser sensors, the relative displacement of the
water is determined from the lasers that are measuring the movement in the dominant
direction of the mode in question. As for mode 1 and 3, lasers 2 and 4 are used, while for
mode 2 and 4, lasers 1 and 3 are used. For the torsional mode 5, all lasers are taken into
use. As for the chosen lasers, the accelerometers used are taken as the ones that represent
the dominant movement of the platform at the speciﬁc mode in question.
40
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Table 7.2.3: Maximum displacement of the platform and TLD at each identiﬁed mode.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Platform
[mm]
0.416
2.28
0.462
0.12
1.9
TLD
[mm]
2.29
4.92
3.12
3.73
0.0068
The displacement of the lasers and platform are depicted in Figure 7.2.6 for the individual
modes.
0
1
2
3
104
-4
-2
0
2
4
10-3
0
1
2
3
104
-5
0
5
10-3
0
1
2
3
104
-4
-2
0
2
4
10-3
0
1
2
3
104
-5
0
5
10-3
0
1
2
3
104
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-3
TLD
Platform
Figure 7.2.6: Laser displacement versus accelerometer displacement for the individual identiﬁed
modes.
From Figure 7.2.6 it is observed that the displacement of the water surface is much larger
than for the platform itself for mode 1 and 3.
This is also indicated by Table 7.2.3
where it can be seen that the TLD has a displacement that is 5.5 times larger than the
platform. From the displacement for mode 2 it is seen that there still is a relatively larger
displacement of 2 times more than for the platform. As previously mentioned, mode 4 is
considered to be a mode of the TLD, where the relative displacement of the water surface
is 31 times the response of the platform. In the ﬁfth torsional mode, the displacement
of the TLD is practically non-existent, with a platform displacement of 279 times the
displacement of the TLD, yielding the assumption that the TLD has no damping eﬀect
on this speciﬁc mode.
7.2.2
Theoretical Sloshing Frequency vs Experimental
Using the observations acquired from the experimental study, the sloshing frequency and
damping ratio of the TLD used in the experiment are compared with the theoretical values
stated by Equation (3.3.1) and Equation (3.3.6). The investigation is done by performing
a simple experiment on a rigid table, with the TLD and one laser sensor measuring the
water elevation in the middle of the longitudinal and transversely direction. Since it is
only the sloshing frequency and damping ratio of the TLD that are of interest in this
investigation, one side of the tank is lifted and dropped to obtain a free decay of the water
surface in the direction of interest. The test is performed in both the longitudinal and
41
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
transversely direction to examine if the theory actually holds for both directions. The free
decay in both directions are illustrated in Figure 7.2.7.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-5
0
5
10-3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-5
0
5
10-3
Figure 7.2.7: The ﬁgure illustrates a free decay of the measured relative displacement of the wa-
ter surface in its longitudinal and transversely direction, including every second zero-crossing to
indicate the period.
The frequency of the TLD is determined by detecting every other zero-crossing of the
above response from which the period can be obtained. With the period, T, known the
frequency is determined simply by the deﬁnition f = 1/T. The damping ratio is then
determined by the logarithmic decrement with the following equation, where the damping
ratio is determined from one maximum to the next.
δ = ln
 aj
aj+1

=
2 π ζ
p
1 −ζ2
(7.2.2)
The resulting sloshing frequencies and damping ratios from the simple experiment are
presented together with the theoretical values from Equation (3.3.1) and Equation (3.3.6)
in Table 7.2.4.
Table 7.2.4: Theoretical and experimental sloshing frequencies and damping ratios of the TLD in
the longitudinal and transversely direction.
Excitation dir.
Longitudinal
Transversely
fn,theoretical
[Hz]
2.023
2.499
fn,experimental
[Hz]
2.014
2.460
∆fn
[%]
0.45
1.56
ζn,theoretical
[%]
0.20
0.27
ζn,experimental
[%]
2.62
3.64
∆ζn
[%]
-92.36
-92.58
42
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
It is clear from Table 7.2.4 that the theoretical sloshing frequencies deﬁned by Equation
(3.3.1) shows compliance with the experimental results in the longitudinal and transversely
direction. Other than conﬁrming the reliability of the theoretical sloshing frequency it also
adds validation for the existence of the identiﬁed extra fourth mode as being the mode
of the TLD itself. Furthermore, it is observed that the theoretical damping ratios are
much smaller than the ones obtained from the experimental results. However, due to the
nonlinear behavior of the TLD, it is diﬃcult to estimate the damping ratio as it is known
from the theory that the damping eﬀect is highly dependent on the excitation amplitude.
Nonetheless, the acquired damping ratios from the simple experiment are closer related to
the damping ratios identiﬁed from the AR/PR identiﬁcation conducted on the response
from the experimental model, than the theoretical stated values indicate.
43
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Updated FE-Model
As an extension to the OMA based identiﬁcation performed on the experimental model
in the previous chapter, the FE-model from Section 5.1 is updated so the frequencies are
identical to the frequencies obtained from the experiment. It is then investigate if the linear
equations for the TLD can be used to implement the damper in a FE-model as two SDOF-
system and yield the same results as the experiment. As previously, a response of the
FE-model is simulated and the modal parameters are identiﬁed by AR/PR identiﬁcation.
Furthermore, by using the updated FE-model a numerical investigation is performed to
validate the theoretical active mass.
8.1
Updated FE-Model
In order to obtain the most accurate representation of the experimental model, the FE-
model from Section 5.1 is updated so the natural frequencies correspond to the frequencies
obtained from the experimental study. The updating is carried out by a nonlinear opti-
mization algorithm in Matlab provided by Phd. student Tobias Friis, where the algorithm
uses a least square cost function approach which minimize the sum between the observed
value and ﬁtted value from the model. The updating is based on ﬁtting the stiﬀness at
the four supports of the FE-model to the actual supports of the platform which is some-
where between a simple support and ﬁxed support, thus the previous model with simple
supports must be updated accordingly. The updating starts with the previous FE-model
being stripped from its simple supports, which is carried out in Ansys by creating a simi-
lar FE-model but with no supports. As before the FE-model is converted to Matlab, but
before running the update, the translational stiﬀness in each direction at the supports are
set to a ﬁxed value in order to restrain any translational movements. The translational
stiﬀness at each support in each direction is set to ktranslational = 1 · 1010 N/m.
The FE-model is then updated by an iteration process of the three rotational DOFs at
the supports, by requesting the natural frequencies of the FE-model to be equal to the
frequencies obtained from the experiment without the TLD. The iteration is performed
on all 4 supports with 3 rotational DOFs resulting in 12 stiﬀness elements. The iteration
process runs until the LSCF is no longer varying and has become stable, indicating that
the optimal parameters have been obtained under the mentioned conditions. Since the
FE-model possess double symmetry, the stiﬀness to be added to the rotational stiﬀness at
the supports is the same for each support and are listed in Table 8.1.1.
45
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
Table 8.1.1: Stiﬀness parameters for the rotational DOF at the supports before and after updating,
together with the added stiﬀness determined during the updating.
Rotational DOF
x
y
z
kPre−Update
[N/m]
2.87 103
2.87 103
1.10 103
kPost−Update
[N/m]
2.88 103
2.87 103
1.13 108
∆k
[N/m]
10.48
4.19
1.13 108
From Table 8.1.1 it is observed that the rotational stiﬀness in the z-direction is increased
with 1.13 108 N/m, which explains why the natural frequency of the third mode in the ﬁrst
simulation deviates with 25.47 % from the experimental model. With the above added
stiﬀness, the FE-model is reduced by using the theory behind SEREP as described in
Appendix A.4. The natural frequencies of the updated FE-model is then determined by
solving the eigenvalue problem, yielding the following natural frequencies in Table 8.1.2.
Table 8.1.2: Natural frequencies before and after updating the FE-model together with the percentage
deviation from the experimental results.
Mode
1
2
3
fn,Pre−Update
[Hz]
1.99
1.99
2.67
fn,Experimental
[Hz]
2.014
2.045
3.347
fn,Post−Update
[Hz]
2.015
2.046
3.342
∆fn
[%]
-0.02
-0.05
0.13
The corresponding mode shapes to the natural frequencies given above are presented in
Figure 8.1.1
Figure 8.1.1: The ﬁrst three mode-shapes of the updated FE-model corresponding to the natural
frequencies from Table 8.1.2.
From the new natural frequencies and the corresponding mode-shapes it is seen that
the modal properties of the updated FE-model ﬁts well with the properties from the
experimental platform.
46
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
8.2
FE-Model With TLD
The TLD is in this section implemented in the updated FE-model by using a SDOF
implementation analogy, where two SDOF-systems are added to the original system in the
x- and y-direction respectively. Due to the TLD possess nonlinear properties dependent
upon the excitation amplitude, implementing a TLD in a FE-model is quite diﬃcult when
working with random response generated by white noise loading. However, based on the
experimental results, it is observed that the two sloshing frequencies in the longitudinal and
transversely direction express linear properties when they are excited by low amplitudes.
It should therefore be possible to implement the TLD as two SDOF-systems in the FE-
model, and detect the same linear properties during the OMA identiﬁcation.
The TLD is implemented by adding two additional translational DOFs in the x- and
y-direction at the center of the platform. The location at which the TLD is to be im-
plemented is illustrated in Figure 8.2.1, represented by node 4 and 5. The mentioned
nodes only represent the location of the TLD in the experimental setup, meaning that the
updated FE-model before the TLD is implemented is seen as a 5-DOF system.
Figure 8.2.1: Platform with 5 DOF before implementing the TLD.
In order to determine the eﬀect of the TLD before and after implementation, the response
of the two updated FE-models with respectively 3-DOF and 5-DOF has to be identical.
This is done to ensure that node 4 and 5 does not change the dynamic properties of the
FE-model when added, since increasing the number of DOFs in the FE-model will change
the response due to an increase in the accuracy of the model. The last two columns in
the mode-shape matrix, Br, representing mode four and ﬁve due to the added nodes, are
therefore replaced with random numbers such that the response of the platform are equal
to the response of the 3-DOF system. The response of the two FE-models in the ﬁrst
three nodes are illustrated in Figure 8.2.2.
47
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
104
-1
0
1
2
10-4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
104
-2
0
2
10-4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
104
-2
0
2
10-4
Figure 8.2.2: Comparison between the response of the FE-model with 3 DOF (blue line) and 5 DOF
(black line). Due to the added nodes not altering the dynamics of the FE-model, the two responses
are identical.
In order for the simulated response to resemble the experimental observations as much as
possible, the tuning of the implemented TLD is based on the linear developed formulas
presented in Section 3.3, yielding the same parameters of the TLD used for the experi-
mental work. The mass of the implemented TLD, md, in the y-direction is thereby equal
to the theoretical active mass in the longitudinal direction of the TLD, yielding the same
mass ratio, µ, as used in the experimental investigation. The same goes for the tuning
ratio, Ω, where the sloshing frequency of the TLD in its longitudinal direction is tuned to
the ﬁrst mode of the FE-model.
Tuning the TLD optimally is as mentioned diﬃcult when creating a simulated response,
which is apparent when discussing the damping terms which indeed are nonlinear. More-
over, the simple experiment conducted in section 7.2.2 resulted in a higher damping ratio
than obtained by the theoretical formulas, which was closer related to the experimental
observations. The experimental damping ratio from Table 7.2.4 is therefore used for the
tuned damping ratio, ζd, of the TLD, and the damping coeﬃcient, cd, is simpliﬁed and
determined using the same approach as for a traditional SDOF TMD, by the use of Equa-
tion (A.2.5). This leads to the following tuning parameters used for implementation of
the TLD as presented in Table 8.2.1.
48
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
Table 8.2.1: Tuned parameters of the implemented TLD in the FE-model.
md
fd
kd
ζd
cd
[kg]
[Hz]
[N/m]
[%]
[-]
Longitudinal direction
1.18
2.02
192.77
2.62
0.646
Transverse direction
0.78
2.49
194.10
3.64
0.897
The additional mass, md, stiﬀness, kd, and damping, cd, from the TLD, is then imple-
mented in the mass-, stiﬀness and damping matrices for the FE-model, which means that
the size of the matrices is increased to 7x7. The new mass matrix, M, stiﬀness matrix,
K, and damping matrix C, are illustrated below including the method of implementation.
In the following matrix assembling, the subscripts d1 and d2 refer to the longitudinal and
transversely direction, respectively.
M =


M11
.
.
.
.
0
0
.
M22
.
.
.
0
0
.
.
M33
.
.
0
0
.
.
.
M44
.
0
0
.
.
.
.
M55
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
md1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
md2


(8.2.1)
K =


K11
.
.
.
.
0
0
.
K22
.
.
.
0
0
.
.
K33
.
.
0
0
.
.
.
K44 + kd1
.
−kd1
0
.
.
.
.
K55 + kd2
0
−kd2
0
0
0
−kd1
0
kd1
0
0
0
0
0
−kd2
0
kd2


(8.2.2)
C =


C11
.
.
.
.
0
0
.
C22
.
.
.
0
0
.
.
C33
.
.
0
0
.
.
.
C44 + cd1
.
−cd1
0
.
.
.
.
C55 + cd2
0
−cd2
0
0
0
−cd1
0
cd1
0
0
0
0
0
−cd2
0
cd2


(8.2.3)
In order to solve the eigenvalue problem for the structural system with the TLD, general
damping is considered instead of proportional damping. This is done due to the fact that
the damping matrix does not satisfy the Caughey and O’Kelly conditions leading to the
modes being imaginary-valued and are therefore not diagonalized [2]. The equation of
motion is therefore solved in state-space format leading to a diﬀerent format including
the displacement, y(t), and its derivative ˙y(t). The mode-shapes with their correspond-
ing natural frequencies are therefore determined by solving the new system matrix, A,
illustrated below.
A =
 −M−1 C
−M−1 K
I
[0]

(8.2.4)
Where I is an 7x7 identity matrix and [0] is a zero matrix. The system matrix is solved
just as Equation (3.1.6). The new angular frequency and damping ratio are determined by
49
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
the two Equations in (8.2.5) where λ is the eigenvalue obtained from the system matrix.
ω0 =
√
λ λ∗= |λ|
,
ζ = −Re(λ)
ω0
(8.2.5)
Since the mode-shapes are in complex format, the real values are extracted in order to
plot the mode-shapes. This is due to the real values representing the amplitude and the
imaginary part representing the phase lag. The natural frequencies, damping ratios and
characteristic mode-shapes are determined from the eigenvalue problem, and are listed in
Table 8.2.2 and illustrated in Figure 8.2.3, respectively.
Table 8.2.2: Natural frequencies and damping ratios for the FE-model with the TLD implemented.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
fn
[Hz]
1.833
1.976
2.236
2.539
3.422
ζn
[%]
1.34
1.15
1.82
3.15
1.41
For the case of the installed TLD, all mode-shapes are normalized in relation to the
movement of the TLD, since this has the largest displacement.
Due to the relatively
large displacement of the TLD in relation to the platform, the mode-shapes are for visual
inspection purposes presented by using a scaling factor of 1:3, meaning that the movement
of the TLD is 3 times larger than the platform.
Figure 8.2.3: The ﬁrst ﬁve mode-shapes of the updated FE-model with the TLD implemented. The
platform has a scaling factor of 1:3.
50
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
In Figure 8.2.3, the displacement of the TLD in the FE-model is only described by two
responses, compared to the experimental investigation where four lasers were used. The
displacement is only horizontal in this case, and to illustrate the water elevation, the dom-
inant displacement of the TLD is plottet as acting vertically. The dominant displacement
of the TLD is thereby illustrated as a sloshing motion in the given direction.
8.2.1
OMA identiﬁcation on Updated FE-model
The updated FE-model is a more precise model of the experimental observations than
the previous FE-model, and can give a more realistic interpretation on the inﬂuence of
the oscillatory mass in the form of the installed TLD. As with the experimental investi-
gation, the new updated FE-model is put through an OMA identiﬁcation analysis with
and without the TLD installed. The response of the updated FE-model with and with-
out the TLD installed is simulated as it was in Chapter 5.2 by the use of the Matlab
function stateSpaceSim. The simulation of the response is performed with the same
sampling frequency, fs, Nyqvist frequency (cut-oﬀfrequency), fv, duration, T, number of
data points N and time-step ∆t as presented by Table 5.2.1. Before OMA-identiﬁcation
on the modal parameters is performed, a simple FDD analysis is conducted by considering
the singular values of the SD matrix of the system with and without the TLD installed as
depicted by Figure 8.2.4.
0
2
4
6
8
10
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure 8.2.4: Singular values of the spectral density matrix for the simulated response of the updated
and reduced FE-model with and without the TLD installed.
51
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
From the singular values of the SD matrices for the updated FE-model presented in Fig-
ure 8.2.4, similar results in terms of modal peaks are observed as for the experimental
investigation. When the TLD is installed, the tendency of splitting the ﬁrst mode of the
platform is observed clearly, however it appears the damping eﬀect is overestimated as
the modal peaks for the splitted mode have more identical amplitudes. Furthermore, the
appearance of an extra mode is similar to the case of the experimental observations, which
could indicate that this mode represents the TLD acting in the transversely direction.
The dynamic properties are analyzed through OMA-identiﬁcation with the use of the
AR/PR identiﬁcation technique. The unbiased CF matrices are therefore estimated with
the same approach as with the previously described identiﬁcations, with a maximum
number of time lags Nt = 1024. In Figure 8.2.5, the ﬁrst auto-correlation functions from
the estimated CF matrices are depicted for the updated FE-model with and without the
TLD implemented.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-5
0
5
10-7
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-5
0
5
10-7
Figure 8.2.5: Auto-correlation function for the simulated response of the updated FE-model with
and without the TLD implemented. The time lag interval used as the number of data points in the
CF matrix is indicated for both systems.
Using the correlation functions as free decays, the dynamic properties of the simulated
response is determined using the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique with the following num-
ber of AR coeﬃcient matrices na = 3. For the case without the TLD implemented, the
CF matrices are considered in the range of 5 ≤τ ≤200 time-lags, and when the TLD is
implemented a time-lag interval of 5 ≤τ ≤100 is used. The resulting natural frequencies,
fn, damping ratios, ζ, and percentage deviations in relation to the experimental results
can be observed in Table 8.2.3 for the case without and with the TLD.
52
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
Table 8.2.3: Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the updated FE-model with and without the
TLD. The percentage deviation is between the experimental results and the results obtained from
the updated FE-model.
w/o TLD
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
fupdated,w/o
[Hz]
2.016
2.043
3.343
−
−
∆fw/o
[%]
0.1
−0.01
−0.12
−
−
ζupdated,w/o
[%]
1.07
0.97
1.00
−
−
∆ζw/o
[%]
62
78
69
−
−
w. TLD
fupdated,with
[Hz]
1.832
1.978
2.233
2.538
3.426
∆fwith
[%]
1.16
4.16
1.87
1.64
−2.21
ζupdated,with
[%]
1.13
1.25
1.75
3.12
1.26
∆ζwith
[%]
−5.00
278.79
−18.98
−42.75
800.00
When only the FE-model without the TLD is considered, it can clearly be observed that
nearly no percentage deviation is found for the natural frequencies, which shows that
the updated FE-model of the platform is a good resemblance of the experimental model.
However, some deviation is obtained for the damping ratios, but this is due to the already
implemented structural damping of the FE-model of 1%. On the other hand when the
TLD is installed, an increase in the percentage deviation in terms of the natural frequencies
of the identiﬁed modes is observed, but the deviation does not exceed 5% for any of the
modes why they still can be considered as reasonable. In terms of the identiﬁed damping
ratios a large deviation can be seen to appear for all the modes, especially for the second
and ﬁfth mode, which show extremely high damping ratios compared to the experimental
observations.
The mode-shapes corresponding to the natural frequencies given in Table 8.2.3 for the
system without and with the TLD implemented are presented in Figure 8.2.6 and Figure
8.2.7 respectively, where the mode-shapes are aligned to the mode-shapes determined from
the FE-model.
Figure 8.2.6: The ﬁrst three mode-shapes of the updated FE-model determined by AR/PR identi-
ﬁcation.
As with the experimental mode-shapes without the TLD installed, it can be seen that the
53
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
ﬁrst and second modes consists of two bending mode-shapes while the third mode consist
of a torsional mode-shape. It is already clear from the AR/PR identiﬁcation technique
that the identiﬁed mode-shapes from the simulated response of the reduced and updated
FE-model has a high MAC value in relation to the experimental observations.
Figure 8.2.7: The ﬁrst ﬁve mode-shapes identiﬁed by AR/AP identiﬁcation with a scaling factor
of 1:3.
As with the experimental observations two additional mode-shapes are identiﬁed when
the TLD is implemented. The ﬁrst and third mode-shape can be seen to be identical with
translational movement along the y-direction, which is expected as the ﬁrst mode of the
original system now has been split. The extra mode identiﬁed from the singular values
of the SD matrix from Figure 8.2.4 is depicted as the fourth mode-shape, which illustrate
the relatively large displacement of the TLD compared to the platform which in this case
is barely moving. The ﬁfth mode is the torsional mode, but the TLD is in this case more
active compared to the experimental observations where the TLD can be considered as
inactive.
A MAC-value investigation is performed on the identiﬁed mode-shapes from the updated
54
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
FE-model with and without the TLD installed together with the experimental observa-
tions. The correlation between the identiﬁed mode-shapes is presented with their respec-
tive MAC-values in Table 8.2.4.
Table 8.2.4: MAC-values between the identiﬁed mode-shapes with and without TLD from the ex-
perimental observations and the simulation of the reduced and updated FE-model.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
w/o. TLD
Mode 1
1.00
0.00
0.00
−
−
Mode 2
0.00
1.00
0.28
−
−
Mode 3
0.00
0.28
1.00
−
−
w. TLD
Mode 1
0.99
0.00
0.78
0.00
0.00
Mode 2
0.00
0.96
0.00
0.76
0.07
Mode 3
0.81
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
Mode 4
0.00
0.96
0.00
0.99
0.00
Mode 5
0.00
0.56
0.00
0.4
0.59
From the MAC-values presented above it is observed that there is a high correlation
between the identiﬁed mode-shapes from the FE-model and the experimental observations.
Furthermore, due to the symmetry of the platform, it is observed that there also is a
correlation across the x- and y-translational mode-shapes. This is indicated by mode 2
and 4 which both move along the x-direction even though mode 4 is considered for the
TLD alone, and mode 1 and 3 which both move along the y-direction with the TLD moving
respectively in-phase and out-of-phase. Moreoever, the MAC value for mode 5 indicates
that the updated FE-model deviates from the experimental observations, due to the mode
of the TLD being active in the simulation.
The eﬀect of the implemented TLD in the FE-model is further investigated by considering
the reduction of the peak maximum displacement and acceleration for the platform with
and without the TLD implemented. The same approach is used as for the experimental
investigation, where a modal decomposition of the simulated response is performed by
using Equation (7.2.1). The reduction in peak maximum displacement and acceleration of
the FE-model as a consequence of the implementation of the TLD is listed in Table 8.2.5.
Table 8.2.5: Maximum peak displacement and acceleration of measurements with and without the
TLD.
Mode 1/1
Mode 2/2
x [mm]
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
Node 1
−
−
−
2.68
1.57
−41.27
Node 2
4.09
1.28
−68.61
−
−
−
Node 3
4.09
1.27
−68.93
−
−
−
¨x [m/s2]
Node 1
−
−
−
0.649
0.400
−38.38
Node 2
0.678
0.206
−69.58
−
−
−
Node 3
0.687
0.204
−70.24
−
−
−
55
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
Mode 3/1
Mode 5/3
x [mm]
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
w/o
w.TLD
∆%
Node 1
−
−
−
1.37
1.18
−13.45
Node 2
4.09
1.28
−68.81
1.65
1.02
−37.95
Node 3
4.09
1.29
−68.59
1.77
0.86
−51.50
¨x [m/s2]
Node 1
−
−
−
0.568
0.415
−27.78
Node 2
0.678
0.207
−69.53
0.730
0.501
−31.46
Node 3
0.687
0.207
−69.48
0.736
0.469
−32.77
The eﬀect of the implemented TLD is illustrated in Figure 8.2.8, where the displacement
and acceleration of the platform with and without the TLD is depicted for node 2 at mode
1.
0
1
2
3
4
5
104
-4
-2
0
2
4
10-3
0
1
2
3
4
5
104
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
w/o. TLD
w. TLD
Figure 8.2.8: Displacement and acceleration for node 2 for the response at mode 1 when the FE-
model is implemented with and without the TLD.
It can be observed from Table 8.2.5 that mode 1 and 3, which is the result of mode
1 being split in the original system, has the largest reduction of approximately 70% in
both maximum displacement and acceleration.
Furthermore, it can be seen that the
implemented TLD also has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the other modes, resulting in a reduction
of the response for all the identiﬁed modes. Compared to the experimental investigation,
the reduction at mode 1 and 3 is similar to that observed in Table 7.2.2, indicating that
the FE-model produces a good representation for the splitting of the ﬁrst mode in the
original system. Meanwhile the reduction at mode 2 and 5 is seen to be larger for the FE-
model than observed for the experiment. This might be due to the fact that the nonlinear
properties of the TLD is not possible to simulate.
The eﬀect of the implemented TLD in the FE-model is again further investigated by
considering the displacement of the TLD in comparison to the displacement of the platform
as presented by Table 8.2.6. As before a modal decomposition is performed on the response
containing the displacement of the platform and TLD.
Table 8.2.6: Displacement of the TLD and the platform for the updated and reduced FE-model.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
Platform
[mm]
1.94
2.79
1.31
0.108
1.19
TLD
[mm]
10.3
7.51
6.33
2.64
2.45
The displacement of the TLD and platform from the FE-model is illustrated in Figure
56
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
8.2.9.
0
2
4
104
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0
2
4
104
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0
2
4
104
-5
0
5
10-3
0
2
4
104
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-3
0
2
4
104
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-3
TLD
Platform
Figure 8.2.9: Laser displacement versus platform displacement for all the identiﬁed modes of the
updated FE-model with the TLD implemented.
From Table 8.2.6 and Figure 8.2.9 it can be observed that the implemented TLD has a
maximum displacement of approximately 8 times the displacement of the platform for
the ﬁrst mode.
For the second mode the TLD has a displacement of nearly 3 times
that of the platform, while for mode 3 the displacement is 5 times larger. The largest
diﬀerence is observed for mode 4, where the TLD has a displacement of 26 times that of
the platform. For the torsional mode 5, it can be determined that the displacement is 2
times the displacement of the platform, which deviates from the experimental investigation
where it was observed that the relative displacement of the water surface for the TLD is
practically non-existent and is standing still. However, the same tendency is observed as
with the experimental investigation, regarding the displacement of the TLD in relation
to the platform and the splitting of the ﬁrst mode.
Moreover, the identiﬁed natural
frequencies coincide well with the experimental observations.
8.2.2
Active Mass
The theoretical active mass deﬁned by Equation (3.3.3) is now investigated for correlation
with the experimental results. Since, the active mass of the TLD during the experiment
is not measurable in the same manner as the sloshing frequency, the analysis is performed
by utilizing the same nonlinear updating algorithm incorporated in Matlab as used for
updating the previous FE-model.
The starting point of the investigation is the updated FE-model composed in the previous
section. The next step is then further updating the FE-model, but this time in terms of
the experimental observed natural frequencies with the TLD installed. The aim is now
to observe the change in mass of the TLD needed to ﬁt the natural frequencies of the
FE-model to the experimental results. To take account for the fact that the TLD has
diﬀerent sloshing frequencies in its longitudinal and transversely directions, the updating
and validation of the theoretical active mass is done by considering the ﬁrst and second
mode from the experimental observations. These modes move in the longitudinal and
57
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 8. UPDATED FE-MODEL
transversely direction respectively, and are thereby enough to individually describe the
two sloshing frequencies and active masses of the TLD.
The updating and investigation of the active mass is done by performing the iteration
process over the part of the mass, stiﬀness and damping matrix that contains the tuned
parameters of the TLD. However, it is only the change in the mass that is considered. The
process can be considered as adding a SDOF-system to the center of the platform, with
a mass, stiﬀness and damping coeﬃcient which represents the tuned parameters of the
TLD. The added mass needed to resemble the experimental observations are presented in
Table 8.2.7.
Table 8.2.7: The table presents the theoretical and experimental active mass of the water tank in
both its longitudinal and transversely direction.
Excitation dir.
Longitudinal
Transversely
ma,theoretical
[kg]
1.18
0.782
ma,experimental
[kg]
1.26
0.8288
∆ma
[%]
-6.2
-5.65
It can be observed from Table 8.2.7 that the experimental active mass deviates with
approximately 6% from the theoretical active mass as deﬁned by Equation (3.3.3). The
deviation is slightly higher than obtained in the case of the experimental and theoretical
sloshing frequency as indicated by Table 7.2.4. However, as mentioned previously, the
excitation amplitude has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the properties of the TLD.
58
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 9
Discussion
Based on the observations presented throughout the study and in Appendix C, it is seen
that it is possible to split the ﬁrst structural mode of the platform and identify the inherent
dynamic properties by simple means of installing a TLD. The simple approach yielded a
tuning ratio of Ω= 0.99 and a mass ratio of 3.93%.
Experimental Setup
From the presented results in Appendix C.4, it is observed that the same eﬀect when
installing the TLD in terms of changes in natural frequencies and modal peaks, can also
be identiﬁed by using a single laser sensor that measures the water elevation in the corner
of the TLD. The investigation was also performed with the laser located in the middle of
one side of the TLD, from where it was observed that it was only possible to describe the
TLD in one of the sloshing directions.
The results from the singular values from the SD matrix with one- and four laser sensors,
indicate that the tuning of the TLD could have been more optimal. This is indicated
by considering the results from one sensor, as the two splitted modal peaks have ap-
proximately the same amplitude. When applying four laser sensors to the platform, the
splitting becomes less distinguishable, which could be due to the added mass causing a
less precise tuning ratio. However, it is not possible to conduct a modal analysis of the
TLD when only one signal is considered and four sensors are therefore used in the ﬁnal
experimental setup.
In addition, the tested surfaces that made it possible to measure the surface elevation
of the water, all lead to the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst splitted mode, but the approach
which was found to be most optimal was using polystyrene with humid paper placed on
top. Compared to the other surfaces, this type acted as a ﬂoating roof which prevented
wave breaking and other contamination of the water surface, which made the measured
response from the laser sensors linear and noise reduced.
Based on the results in Appendix C.5 where four laser sensors are considered and the
recordings of the water elevation are located in the corners of the TLD, it is observed that
similar results in terms of modal peaks are obtained as in the ﬁnal experiment. However,
the singular values are more separated when the sensors are located in the middle of
each side of the TLD, yielding more clear system information. As presented in Appendix
C.6, the experimental setup with four lasers located in the corners was also conducted by
increasing the excitation with larger nozzles that were placed 10 cm from the platform. The
results indicated the same tendency of splitting the ﬁrst mode of the platform. However,
the fourth modal peak corresponding to the transversely mode of the TLD was less clear
and distinguishable, which might indicate that the TLD behaved more nonlinear. The
observations coincide with the presented theory and literature study.
59
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION
OMA-Based Identiﬁcation
As stated previously, the fourth identiﬁed modal peak from the experimental singular
values presented in Figure 7.2.1, is considered as the transversely mode of the TLD. This
is due to the fact that it seems that the modal peak is only identiﬁable when considering the
response of the TLD, and it shows compliance with the sloshing frequency obtained from
the free decay in Figure 7.2.7 and with the linear theoretical formulas. Since OMA-based
identiﬁcation generally only extracts the linear properties of nonlinear systems, this implies
that this mode could be considered to be acting linearly, which coincides with the linear
assumptions in the theoretical formulas. The results indicates that the linear assumptions
are eﬀective to use when tuning the parameters of the TLD, as it has been shown that
they are precise in terms of the sloshing frequency. However, the ﬁrst asymmetric mode of
the TLD in its longitudinal direction is not identiﬁed from the plot of the singular values,
due to fact that the mode interacts with the ﬁrst mode of the platform which results in
splitting of the structural mode. From the achieved mode being split it can be concluded
that the TLD has similar eﬀects as a TMD tuned to the ﬁrst mode, by splitting the mode
in the same manner as described in Appendix E.
Furthermore, it is observed that the second mode has a lower frequency and amplitude
compared to the platform without the TLD, which might be due to the additional mass of
the TLD and as a consequence of the equipment added to the platform. The amplitude of
the ﬁfth mode corresponding to the torsional mode is observed to be ampliﬁed when the
TLD is installed, which also is conﬁrmed in the comparison of the maximum displacement
and acceleration with and without the TLD implemented as presented by Table 7.2.2. The
increase in displacement and acceleration for the ﬁfth mode, could be due to the added
height and geometry of the equipment, leading to changes in the moment of inertia at the
rotational displacements.
Tund Liquid Damper
Since only 26.25 % of the total mass of the TLD is considered to be the active mass, the
size of the TLD can be optimized further by decreasing the h/L ratio to the shallow water
regime (h/L ≤0.15). By designing the TLD in the shallow water regime, the eﬀectiveness
of the TLD would increase, as a larger percentage of the total water mass would become
active. As stated by Hong-Nan Li et. al. in [15], when a deep water tank is used compared
to a shallow water tank, the reduction in peak displacement and acceleration is decreased,
due to the fact that the stronger damping properties of the TLD begins to vanish as the
deep water regime is approached and wave breaking does not occur. However, it is still
desirable to maintain a mass ratio between 1 and 4%, which in turn means that it is
probably necessary to install multiple TLDs on the platform if they are considered in the
shallow water regime.
Even though the experiment is carried out with the TLD being in the deep water regime,
it is stated in [15] that increasing the excitation yields an increasing damping eﬀect, since
the damping of the sloshing motion is directly proportional to the horizontal velocity of
the liquid particles. This should be chosen with care, as too large excitations could lead
to the ”stiﬀness hardening” property of the liquid, which was observed for the ﬁfth mode
of the platform after installing the TLD. This can be reduced by installing a ﬁlter screen
in the middle of the TLD which will maintain the tuning ratio closer to the optimal value
and increase the eﬀect of damping due the pressure loss across the screens.
Since the water is in fact behaving nonlinearly the parameters of the TLD presented in
60
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION
Table 7.1.1 will change if the applied load is changed. However, the sloshing frequency
obtained from the experimental work coincide well with the linear theoretical formulas,
while the damping ratios seems to deviate more. This was indicated by the simple exper-
iment with the free decay, where the damping ratios determined by Equation (3.3.6) were
observed to be quite low compared to what was obtained, meaning that the damping ratio
could be more amplitude dependent than the sloshing frequency.
Simulation of updated FE-model
From the updated FE-model it is seen that it is possible to obtain the same tendency in
relation to splitting the ﬁrst mode of the platform and showing the eﬀect of implementing
the TLD as observed during the experimental study. The obtained plots of the singu-
lar values in Figure 8.2.4 resembles the experimental observations, where the splitting of
the ﬁrst structural mode is accomplished and the presence of a fourth mode is detected,
corresponding to the transversely mode of the TLD. The identiﬁcation by AR/PR tech-
niques yields natural frequencies and mode-shapes similar to what was acquired from the
experimental study, with a percentage deviation between the frequencies no larger than
5%.
Furthermore, when comparing the reduction in maximum displacement and acceleration
for the FE-model with the experiment, an approximately similar reduction is observed
for the splitted mode, which indicates that the FE-model is a good representation for the
TLD when tuned to the ﬁrst structural mode. However, the reduction at mode 2 and 5
is seen to be larger for the FE-model compared to the experimental result. This might be
due to the nonlinear properties of the TLD which are not possible to simulate, i.e. the
”stiﬀness hardening” property observed for mode 5. In addition, a large deviation between
the damping ratios was observed, which is considered to be due to the strongly nonlinear
damping eﬀect of the TLD. Meaning that it is diﬃcult to establish a linear relationship
for the damping ratio of the TLD. However, the numerical investigation of the active mass
showed that the theoretical formulas corresponds well with the obtained results from the
experimental study.
61
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
This study includes the design of a TLD and its eﬀect on a scaled oﬀshore platform with
the aim to identify the closely-spaced modes with similar mode-shapes of the structural
system, by using Operational Model Analysis. The platform is excited by a pneumatic
actuator system that induce time-varying loading with white noise characteristics, where
the TLD is attached on top of the platform. The response of the platform is measured
by three accelerometers and the response of the TLD is measured by four laser sensors.
The study also include a simulation of an updated FE-model based on the experimental
model, where the linear theoretical equations for tuning of the TLD are implemented and
investigated.
• The experimental investigation lead to the conclusion that the installed TLD eﬀec-
tively acts as a passive damping device at low frequencies during horizontal excita-
tion, by splitting a mode into two separate modes with similar mode-shapes, which
indicate a damping eﬀect similar to a traditional TMD.
• From the operational modal analysis identiﬁcation based on the AR/PR technique
conducted on the structural system, it is concluded that it is possible to reliably
identify the closely spaced modes that occur when a TLD is tuned to the ﬁrst
structural mode, even though the TLD is considered as a nonlinear system.
• Furthermore, it is concluded that through identiﬁcation by OMA it is possible to
identify the modal properties of the TLD, yielding the conclusion that the TLD can
be assumed to possess linear characteristics at the identiﬁed modes.
• It is further concluded that the TLD can reliably be tuned to a speciﬁc mode by
the use of a linear approach with the linear derived theoretical formulas, leading to
a signiﬁcant reduction in induced vibrations.
• The linear theoretical sloshing frequency was found to ﬁt very well with the exper-
imental observations, but relatively large deviations was concluded in terms of the
damping ratio and less deviation was found in terms of the active mass.
• It was also concluded that the TLD with the use of the linear theoretical formu-
las, could be implemented through a SDOF analogy as two single-degree-of-freedom
systems in an FE-model. The simulation presented a good representation of the ex-
perimental observations, with the TLD splitting the ﬁrst structural mode. However,
the simulation only provides reasonable results for the linear properties of the TLD,
why some deviation should be expected when estimating the damping ratios due to
strong nonlinearity.
63
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 10. CONCLUSION
• In addition, it was observed that by using a single laser sensor to measure the water
elevation in the corner of the TLD, it was possible to detect the presence of the TLD
from the singular values in the SD matrix. However, due to the limited number
of signals, a full identiﬁcation and description of its dynamic properties could not
established.
• Moreover, the experimental study showed that by increasing the excitations, the
transversely mode of the TLD became less distinguishable and the TLD behaved
more nonlinear.
• Finally, it was concluded that the ﬂoating roof on top of the TLD leads to the best
results since it diminishes the noise and nonlinear behavior of the water. However,
paper and mixing shaving foam in the water was proven to work as well, since it was
possible to identify the presence of the TLD but the ﬁnal results include more noise.
10.1
Future Work
Based on the literature review presented in the beginning of the report, the theory on
TLD as a passive damping device and the experimental investigation, the following chal-
lenges and possibilities related to future studies of TLDs in relation to OMA and oﬀshore
platforms are listed below.
• One of the basic assumptions in OMA is that the response is invariant and station-
ary. This ensures the reliability of the use of OMA identiﬁcation as the physical
parameters remain unchanged. A challenge therefore presents itself in relation to
this speciﬁc study, by using varying mass ratios between the TLD and platform and
then performing OMA identiﬁcation on the measured response to examine the eﬀect
of the non-stationary mass.
• As mentioned in the report, the speciﬁc study is performed with a TLD which prop-
erties can be considered as being governed by the deep water regime, but according
to the literature review and theory of TLDs the damping eﬀects could be optimized
by considering the shallow water regime. An interesting investigation would then be
to perform the same study but lowering the water depth in the TLD to the shallow
water regime, and observe if a more signiﬁcant damping of the structural system
would occur.
• In this study, the damping eﬀect of the TLD is only investigated in one direction
by the splitting of a single mode. A study with a square TLD yielding the same
sloshing frequency in both directions could therefore be interesting to analyse, in
order to reduce the excitations in two directions of a structure and by splitting both
the closely spaced modes.
• One focus in this study has been to perform a tuning of the TLD to the ﬁrst structural
mode. A challenge that has presented itself during the tuning process has been the
limitations in terms of changing the geometry of the water tank. A future study
could therefore be to build a customized TLD that would allow for a wide ranges of
possible dimensions and geometry, allowing the tuning process to be optimized.
64
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
L.M. Sun et. al. The Properties of Tuned Liquid Dampers Using A TMD Anal-
ogy. Division of Civil Engineering. Technical Research Institute of Obayashi Corp.,
Shimokiyoto 4-640, Kiyose-shi, Tokyo 204, Japan, Department of Civil Engineering,
The University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1. Bunkyo-ku. Tokyo 113, Japan, Arun Chais-
eri Consulting Engineers, Bangkok 10330, Thailand, Ammann Whitney, Inc.. New
York. NY. 10014-3309, U.S.A, 1995.
[2]
Rune Brincker and Carlos E. Ventura. Introduction To Operational Modal Analysis.
Technical University of Denmark University of British Columbia, Canada, 2015.
[3]
Professor of Engineering D.E. Newland. An Introduction to Random Vibrations Spec-
tral Wavelet Analysis. University of Cambridge, Dover Publications Inc, Mineola,
New York, 2005.
[4]
R. Pintelon E. Zhang and P. Guillaume. Modal Identiﬁcation Using OMA Tech-
niques: Nonlinearity Eﬀect. chool of Mechanical Engineering, Zhengzhou University,
Science Road 100, Zhengzhou 450000, China
Department of Fundamental Electricity and Instrumentation, Vrije Universiteit Brus-
sel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050
Brussels, Belgium, 2015.
[5]
Gidewon G.Tekeste. Dynamics of Footbridges through Operational Modal Analysis
and Vibration Control using Tuned Mass Dampers. Department of Civil Engineering,
Architecture and Georresources, Instituto Superior Tecnico, University of Lisbon,
Portugal, 2015.
[6]
G. W. Housner. Dynamic pressures on accelerated ﬂuid containers. Bullitin of the
Seismological Society of America, 1957.
[7]
Steen Krenk. Dynamics of Sructures. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Civil
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[8]
C. Georgakis R. Brincker M. Tarpø T. Friis. The Statistical Errors of the Estimated
Correlation Function Matrix for Operational Modal Analysis, submitted to Journal
of Sound and Vibration. DTU Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering,
2019.
[9]
A.A. El DamattyB M.J. TaitA and N. IsyumovC. The Dynamic Properties of a
Tuned Liquid Damper using and equivalent amplitude dependent Tuned Mass Damper.
The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, 2002.
[10]
Jack Y. K. Lou Pei-Ming Chang and Loren D. Lutes. Model Identiﬁcation and Con-
trol of a Tuned Liquid Damper. Civil Engineering Department, Texas A M Univer-
sity, College Station, TX 77843-3136, USA, 1998.
[11]
C. Pellegrino. Improvement of dynamic behaviour of the Varesine-Garibaldi foot-
bridge (Milan, Italy) with TMD. Dept. of Civil, Environmental and Architectural
Engineering -ICEA, University of Padova, Italy MBA Impianti Engineering SpA,
Torri di Quartesolo (VI), Italy, 2014.
65
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12]
Harry Yeh S. Gardarsson and Dorothy Reed. Behavior of sloped-bottom tuned liquied
dampers. University of Iceland, University of Washington Seattle, 2001.
[13]
Leonel Jos´e dos Santos Teixeira Ramos. Study and Simulation of the Synchronized
Pedestrian Footstep Load and Passive Damping Solutions for Footbridges. University
of Porto, 2011.
[14]
Vibration Serviceability Assessment and Passive Vibration Control of a Lively Foot-
bridge. CARTIF Centro Tecnol´ogico, Parque Tecnol´ogico de Boecillo, Parcela 205,
E- 47151,Boecillo, Valladolid, Spain, 2010.
[15]
Guo-Xin Wang. Wind-Induced Vibration Control of Dalian International Trade Man-
sion by Tuned Liquid Dampers. Faculty of Infrastructure Engineering, Dalian Uni-
versity of Technology, Dalian 116023, China, 2011.
[16]
Meng-Xia Zhou. Real-time hybrid simulation of multi-story structures installed with-
tuned liquid damper. State Key Laboratory of Hydroscience, Engineering, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China
Changjiang Institute of Survey Planning, Design, and Research, Wuhan 430010,
China
China Three Gorges Corporation, Beijing 100038, China, 2015.
66
==PAGE:83==
List of Figures
1.1.1 Block diagram of the thesis processes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3.1 Wave formation with low (left) and high (right) ﬁll depths [13]. . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2 Linear-, weakly nonlinear- and strongly nonlinear motion of the water [13].
13
3.3.3 Analogy of a TLD when only a part of the water is active [13] . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.1 a) Measurements of the top plate with accelerometers glued on at a length
of 50mm from the platform edges, b) The SHS proﬁle of the columns and
c) Experimental model seen from the front. All measurements are in the
unit [mm]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.2 1) Connection between the plates and columns, 2) connection between
threaded steel rod and wooden plate. The measurements are in the unit
[mm].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.3 Measurement points (accelerometers) and the applied load denoted as Xn
and Fn respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.1 Illustration of the FE-model assembled in Ansys in [mm]. a) The platform
seen from the side, b) The platform seen from above with the three sensors,
representing the 3 degree-of-freedom system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.2 The ﬁrst three mode-shapes of the 3 DOF FE-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.1 The simulated load x(t) with white noise characteristics and resulting simu-
lated response y(t) for node 1, generated from the load parameters presented
in Table 5.2.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3.1 Singular values of the SD matrix estimated by the Welch averaging method
for the simulated response y(t). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.2 First auto-correlation of the ﬁrst signal for the simulated response of the
FE-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.3 The ﬁrst three mode-shapes based on AR/PR identiﬁcation technique where
the black dotted lines corresponds to the static shape of the platform.
. . .
25
6.1.1 Illustration of the experimental setup. a) Platform viewed from the top
with the location of the lasers, accelerometers, Xn, and applied load, Fn.
b) Platform viewed from the side with the measurements of the TLD. All
measurements are in [mm].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.1.2 a) Picture of experimental setup where the important parts are denoted
with numbers, b) surface used to capture the water elevation. . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.3 DAQ 1 is connected with the accelerometers (1) in Mod 1 and lasers (2) in
Mod 2. DAQ 2 is connected to the pneumatic system (3) with Mod 5. The
pictures to the right illustrate the accelerometers and nozzles. . . . . . . . .
30
7.2.1 Singular values of the SD matrix of the platform without a TLD, platform
with a TLD, water elevation and the total system including the platform
and TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
67
==PAGE:84==
LIST OF FIGURES
7.2.2 Auto-correlation function of the response in node 1 with and without the
TLD installed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2.3 First three mode-shapes of the experimental model without TLD. . . . . . .
38
7.2.4 First ﬁve mode-shapes of the experimental model with the attached TLD. .
38
7.2.5 Displacement and acceleration for accelerometer nr. 2 for the response at
mode 1 when the platform is mounted with and without a TLD. Due to
similarities in the top plots, the bottom plots are there to illustrate the
phase lag between the acceleration and displacement. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.2.6 Laser displacement versus accelerometer displacement for the individual
identiﬁed modes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2.7 The ﬁgure illustrates a free decay of the measured relative displacement of
the water surface in its longitudinal and transversely direction, including
every second zero-crossing to indicate the period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.1.1 The ﬁrst three mode-shapes of the updated FE-model corresponding to the
natural frequencies from Table 8.1.2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.2.1 Platform with 5 DOF before implementing the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8.2.2 Comparison between the response of the FE-model with 3 DOF (blue line)
and 5 DOF (black line). Due to the added nodes not altering the dynamics
of the FE-model, the two responses are identical. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2.3 The ﬁrst ﬁve mode-shapes of the updated FE-model with the TLD imple-
mented. The platform has a scaling factor of 1:3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2.4 Singular values of the spectral density matrix for the simulated response of
the updated and reduced FE-model with and without the TLD installed.
.
51
8.2.5 Auto-correlation function for the simulated response of the updated FE-
model with and without the TLD implemented. The time lag interval used
as the number of data points in the CF matrix is indicated for both systems. 52
8.2.6 The ﬁrst three mode-shapes of the updated FE-model determined by AR/PR
identiﬁcation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.2.7 The ﬁrst ﬁve mode-shapes identiﬁed by AR/AP identiﬁcation with a scaling
factor of 1:3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.2.8 Displacement and acceleration for node 2 for the response at mode 1 when
the FE-model is implemented with and without the TLD. . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.2.9 Laser displacement versus platform displacement for all the identiﬁed modes
of the updated FE-model with the TLD implemented. . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2.1Two-degree-of-freedom system with a implemented TMD. [7]
. . . . . . . .
76
A.2.2Dynamic ampliﬁcation of structures response. ωd = ω0, δ: ... 0, - 0.1, -.-
0.3, –∞. [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B.1.1Picture of one of the four laser sensors with the wires that connects the
sensor to the power supply and MOD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2.1Experimental setup of the calibration of laser sensors.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.2.2Calibration of Laser 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.2.3Calibration of Laser 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.2.4Calibration of Laser 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.2.5Calibration of Laser 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.3.1Tested surfaces to the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
68
==PAGE:85==
LIST OF FIGURES
C.3.1Singular values from the SD matrix from the experimental tuning with 1,
2, 3 and 4 plates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
C.4.1Location of laser when optimizing the setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.4.2Experimental results of the platform with the TLD when only 1 laser is
recording the water elevation in the middle, where paper acts as the surface
of the water.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.4.3Singular values of the SD matrix from experimental results of the platform
with the TLD when only 1 laser is recording the water elevation in the
corner, where paper acts as the surface of the water. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.4.4Singular values of the SD matrix for the platform with the TLD when only
1 laser is recording the water elevation in the middle, where shaving foam
is mixed with the water. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C.4.5Spectral density of experimental tuning when 1 laser sensor is recording in
the corner and shaving foam is mixed with the water.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.5.1Singular values of the SD matrix from experimental results when four laser
sensors are located in the corners of the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C.6.1Singular values of the platform and TLD with increasing excitations. Using
larger nozzles and placing them 10 cm from the platform. . . . . . . . . . .
96
E.2.1Five mode-shapes of the platform with a TMD installed where the TMD is
tuned to the ﬁrst and second mode.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
E.3.1Singular values of the SD matrices from the platform without and with the
two TMDs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
E.3.2Auto- and cross-correlation functions for the simulated response of the FE-
model with the TMD implemented. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
E.3.3The ﬁrst ﬁve mode-shapes with the TMD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
F.0.1CF matrix ﬁrst simulated response of the FE-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
F.0.2CF matrix for the experimental response without the TLD. . . . . . . . . . 110
F.0.3CF Matrix for the experimental response with the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . 111
F.0.4CF matrix for the simulated response of the updated FE-model without the
TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
F.0.5CF matrix for the simulated response of the updated FE-model with the
TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
69
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
List of Tables
5.1.1 Table of masses of the experimental model where the mass of the lasers also
include the equipment which the lasers are attached to.
. . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.2 The ﬁrst three natural frequencies of the 3-DOF FE-model. . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.3 Modal Mass of the ﬁrst three modes for the 3 DOF FE-model.
. . . . . . .
21
5.2.1 Simulated load properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1 Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the platform. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.2 MAC values between the simulation and FE-model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.1 Impotent parts of the experimental setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.1.1 Final dimensions of the TLD with its corresponding properties in the lon-
gitudinal and transversely direction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2.1 Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the experiment without and with
the TLD. The percentage deviations are between the ﬁrst simulation of the
FE-model and experimental results.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.2.2 Maximum peak displacement and acceleration of measurements with and
without the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2.3 Maximum displacement of the platform and TLD at each identiﬁed mode. .
41
7.2.4 Theoretical and experimental sloshing frequencies and damping ratios of
the TLD in the longitudinal and transversely direction.
. . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.1.1 Stiﬀness parameters for the rotational DOF at the supports before and after
updating, together with the added stiﬀness determined during the updating. 46
8.1.2 Natural frequencies before and after updating the FE-model together with
the percentage deviation from the experimental results.
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.2.1 Tuned parameters of the implemented TLD in the FE-model. . . . . . . . .
49
8.2.2 Natural frequencies and damping ratios for the FE-model with the TLD
implemented. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2.3 Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the updated FE-model with and
without the TLD. The percentage deviation is between the experimental
results and the results obtained from the updated FE-model.
. . . . . . . .
53
8.2.4 MAC-values between the identiﬁed mode-shapes with and without TLD
from the experimental observations and the simulation of the reduced and
updated FE-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.2.5 Maximum peak displacement and acceleration of measurements with and
without the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.2.6 Displacement of the TLD and the platform for the updated and reduced
FE-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.2.7 The table presents the theoretical and experimental active mass of the water
tank in both its longitudinal and transversely direction.
. . . . . . . . . . .
58
71
==PAGE:88==
LIST OF TABLES
B.3.1Test surfaces to the water so the elevation can be measured with the laser
sensor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C.2.1Natural frequencies and modal mass for the ﬁrst three modes where diﬀerent
numbers of plates on the platform are considered. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
C.3.1Natural frequencies for the ﬁrst three modes when diﬀerent numbers of
plates on the platform are considered.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
D.2.1Dimensions of the TLD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
E.2.1The natural frequencies and damping ratios of the FE-model when a TMD
is attached on top of the FE-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
E.3.1Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the platform with the TMD
implemented. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
E.3.2MAC values between the experimental results and simulation with and with-
out TLD/TMD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
72
==PAGE:89==
Appendices
73
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Additional Theory
A.1
Orthogonality Conditions
In order to decouple a structural system the system matrices have to fulﬁll the orthogo-
nality conditions. By considering the two mode-shape vectors bj and bk which satisﬁes
the generalized eigenvalue problem i.e. Equation (3.1.5) with the corresponding natural
angular frequencies ωj and ωk, the following two equations can be established. [7]
(K −ω2
j M) bj = 0
,
(K −ω2
k M) bk = 0
(A.1.1)
The orthogonality relation for the mass- and stiﬀness matrix is then obtained by pre-
multiplication Equation (A.1.1) with bT
k and bT
j respectively, which yields.
bT
k K bj = ω2
j bT
k M bj
,
bT
j K bk = ω2
k bT
j M bk
(A.1.2)
Subtracting the two equations above will lead to the following two expressions for the
mass- and stiﬀness matrices.
(ω2
j −ω2
k) bT
j M bk = 0
,
(ω−2
j
−ω−2
k ) bT
j K bk = 0
(A.1.3)
From the equation above it is seen that for ωk ̸= ωk the mode-shapes and corresponding
natural angular frequencies satisfy the following orthogonality relation.
bT
j M bk = 0
,
k ̸= j
(A.1.4)
bT
j K bk = 0
,
k ̸= j
(A.1.5)
The generalized eigenvalue problem does not determine the magnitude of the mode-shape
vector and they can therefore be normalized by multiplying with a scaling factor. By using
the deﬁnitions of the orthogonality relations in Equation (A.1.4) and Equation (A.1.5) the
modal mass- and stiﬀness for mode j can be expressed by.
mj = bT
j M bj
,
kj = bT
j K bj
(A.1.6)
This relation leads to the modal mass- and stiﬀness matrices will be a diagonal matrix
where each element in the diagonal represent the modal mass in that speciﬁc mode for a
displacement equal to one. [7]
75
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX A. ADDITIONAL THEORY
A.2
Tuned Mass Damper
When a structural system is exposed to random external excitations, large vibration am-
plitudes may start to develop near the structure resonance frequency. Several damping
devices can be used and implemented to reduce large structure vibrations which are not
deemed humanly comfortable and it can lead to a reduction in the overall structural
health. Most simple methods, such as increasing the stiﬀness of structural components by
constructing larger dimensions, are not usually favorable among engineers and architects.
Another more favorable solution to meet the demands for acceptable structural vibrations,
is to implement a TMD. The principle of a tuned mass damper is illustrated as a simpliﬁed
one-degree-of-freedom system in Figure A.2.1.
Figure A.2.1: Two-degree-of-freedom system with a implemented TMD. [7]
The tuned mass damper is attached at a speciﬁc location on the structure where the
damper will be most eﬃcient, and tuned to a speciﬁc natural frequency and mode of
the structural system. The damper consist of a secondary mass, md, stiﬀness, kd, and
damping parameter, cd. The optimal damper characteristics should be chosen with care,
since if the damping is too low, undesirable dynamic ampliﬁcation will develop at two
separate resonant frequencies, ωA and ωB, which are independent of the damping, due to
the damper not absorbing enough energy.
Figure A.2.2: Dynamic ampliﬁcation of structures response. ωd = ω0, δ: ... 0, - 0.1, -.- 0.3, –∞.
[7]
Considering the opposite case where the damping is too high, the damper will result in
restriction of its relative motion and create a system with a single mass, m0 + md, that
oscillates at a frequency equal to the geometric mean of ωd and ω0. The characteristic
frequency of the overall system can in this case be expressed by the following equation.
ω∞=
ω0
√1 + µ = √ωd ω0
(A.2.1)
The goal is therefore to select a suitable tuning frequency intermediate of the two un-
damped resonant frequencies, which leads to equal dynamic ampliﬁcation at the two fre-
76
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A. ADDITIONAL THEORY
quencies ωA and ωB. This is secured by the following expression.
ωd
ω0
=
1
1 + µ
(A.2.2)
where ωd is the tuned frequency of the damper, ω0 is the natural frequency of the desired
mode to be damped and µ is the mass ratio between the TMD and structure.
From
the tuned frequency the stiﬀness, kd, of the damper can be obtained by the following
expression.
kd = ω2
d md
(A.2.3)
A suitable damping parameter, ζd, can be determined by requiring as before an equal
dynamic ampliﬁcation at the two undamped resonant frequencies ωA and ωB. A reasonable
choice for the intermediate frequency is the characteristic frequency of the overall system,
ω∞, when the two masses act as one. By considering the dynamic ampliﬁcation at ω∞to
be that of ωA and ωB, the optimal damping parameter can be expressed as.
ζ2
d = 1
2
µ
1 + µ
(A.2.4)
Finally the damping parameter, cd, can from the tuned damping ratio, ζd, be determined
by the following expression.
ζd =
c
2√kd md
(A.2.5)
A.3
Aligned Mode-shapes
If mode-shapes are closely-spaced they tend to mix together which is the case in the simula-
tions and experimental results. The modes-shapes from the simulations and experimental
results are therefore aligned and projected to the mode-shapes from the FE-model in order
to separate them from each other. It is conducted by the mode-shape matrices from the
FE-model, A, and resulting mode-shape matrices from the simulations and experiment,
B, through a linear combination.
A = B T
(A.3.1)
where T is the linear transformation matrix that deﬁnes the linear combination of the
mode-shapes in B which is used to form the mode-shapes in A. The number of DOF’s
in the two matrices must be equal which is secured by using SEREP in the FE-model
and the three accelerometers as described in the thesis. An estimate, bT, of the linear
transformations matrix T, is obtained by.
bT = B+ A
(A.3.2)
where B+ is the pseudo inverse of the mode-shape matrix leading to the aligned mode-
shape is obtained by.
bA = B bT
(A.3.3)
77
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX A. ADDITIONAL THEORY
A.4
SEREP
In the context of this report, it is desirable to compare the results of an analytical model
with results from an experimental setup. To achieve this comparison in a meaningful way,
it is useful to have the analytical model reduced so the reduced form is only formulated
by reference to the DOFs that were measured in the experimental setup.
One model
reduction technique that produces a reduced form that eﬀectively represents the true
properties of the original full model, is called the ”System Equivalent Reduction Expansion
Process” (SEREP). The model reduction technique starts with the modal decomposition
formulation for a response, y(t), where the full set of DOFs in the original analytical
model is divided into two separate sets of DOFs.
y(t) = Bq(t) =
Ba
Bd

q(t)
(A.4.1)
where the mode shape matrix, Ba, is representing what can be known as the ”active”
DOFs that is measured in the experimental setup, and, Bd, represents the DOFs that are
not wanted in the comparison and they are therefore ”deleted” in the reduction process.
If only the active DOFs are considered, the response can be expressed as.
ya(t) = Baq(t)
(A.4.2)
If the number of active DOFs are larger than the number of modes that are used in the
comparative analysis, the above equation can be considered as an overdetermined problem
and can be solved for the modal coordinates as.
bq(t) = B+
a q(t)
(A.4.3)
where B+
a is the pseudo inverse but since the number of active DOFs are considered to be
larger than the number of modes needed in the analysis, the inverse of Ba is an estimate
and so is the modal coordinates, bq(t). However, if the number of DOFs is the same as the
number of modes, the problem is no longer overdetermined and the inverse of Ba becomes
exact. By combining the above equation with the total response given by Equation (A.4.1),
an estimate of the total response can be expressed as.
ˆy(t) = Bˆq(t) =
Ba
Bd

B+
a ya(t) =
Ba
B+
a
Bd
B+
a

ya(t) = Tya(t)
(A.4.4)
where the transformation matrix, T, is given by.
T =
Ba
B+
a
Bd
B+
a

= BB+
a
(A.4.5)
Considering the equation of motion for a multiple-degree-of-freedom system with free
vibrations, using the modal decomposed response for the full system and premultiplying
both sides with BT , the equation of motion for free vibrations becomes.
BT MB¨q(t) + BT KBq(t) = BT x(t)
(A.4.6)
Using Equation (A.4.1), the estimate of the total response given by Equation (A.4.4) and
the transformation given by Equation (A.4.5), the equation of motion for the reduced set
of DOFs can be expressed by.
BT MBB+
a ¨ya(t) + BT KBB+
a ya(t) = BT x(t)
(A.4.7)
78
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A. ADDITIONAL THEORY
By premultiplying both sides with the transpose of B+
a and utilizing the transformation
matrix T, the equation of motion in the reduced set of DOFs can be expressed as.
TT MT¨ya(t) + TT KTya(t) = TT x(t)
(A.4.8)
From this equation the reduced mass and stiﬀness matrices are deﬁned by.
Ma = TT MT
,
Ka = TT KT
(A.4.9)
In the case where the number of active DOFs are the same as the number of modes used
in the analysis, the mass and stiﬀness matrices deﬁne the exact mass and stiﬀness for the
reduced system. [2]
79
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B
Laser Sensor
B.1
Laser Manual
The model of the laser sensors are called ”Omron ZX1” and they can measure in the
range of 7 cm, yielding ±3.5 cm from the zero measurements which corresponds to the
still water level in the TLD. This means that the sensors have a measurement range in
terms of displacement of 65mm-135mm, why they must be located at a distance of 10
cm above the water surface in order to acquire data. The laser sensors record the water
elevation in voltages in the range of 1-5 V. The lasers work by emitting a laser light which
is reﬂected back to a sensor, from where the displacement is recorded in voltage. Thus the
object which is to be measured should have a reﬂective surface in order for the laser sensors
to work probably. In order to setup the laser sensors, the following steps are conducted.
1. Install the lasers on the platform 10 cm from the surface of the water.
2. Connect lasers to a MOD with ±5 V and a power supply with 10-30 VDC.
3. Create a surface to the water so the laser is reﬂected back to the sensors.
4. Run NI SignalExpress for 3 minutes before starting the actual measurements to
avoid noise and adjust the lasers.
5. Record the signal in NI SignalExpress where the data is converted to a .txt ﬁle.
6. Multiply the data with 1.75 in order to convert the data to displacement in [cm].
An overview of the laser sensors properties are presented on the next page.
Figure B.1.1: Picture of one of the four laser sensors with the wires that connects the sensor to
the power supply and MOD.
81
==PAGE:98==
Omron ZX1-LD100A81 Laser 
  
 
 
 
Measurement range 
100 ± 35 mm 
Laser datasheet 
Spot diameter 
0.33 mm dia. 
Exitation Voltage 
10-30 VDC 
Resolution *5 
7 μm 
Response time 
Super-high-speed (SHS) Mode: 1 ms 
High-speed (HS) Mode: 10 ms 
Standard (Stnd) Mode : 100 ms 
Analog output 
Current output: 4 to 20 mA, maximum load resistance: 300 Ω(The output is 20 mA for the 
nearest point in the measurement range in respect to the Sensor 
and 4 mA for the farthest point.) 
 
Laser connection
Binder  male connector
 
 
p.4 
p.3 
p.5 
p.2 
p.1 
Female connections 
solder side
seen from the 
Male connections 
solder side
seen from the 
Skærm 
25
0Ω 
Male connections 
pin side
seen from the
Conversion cable from 4-20mA to 1-5V
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B. LASER SENSOR
B.2
Calibration of Laser Sensors
Each laser sensor was calibrated by performing a 1 minute long measurement inside the
measurement range at intervals of 1 cm. To ensure the accuracy and validation of the
calibration check, each measurement was performed 5 times. The experimental setup is
illustrated in the ﬁgure below where a calibration stand is used to reﬂect the laser back
to the sensor. The recordings from the sensors are captured with NI SignalExpress as
described in Section 6.1.
Figure B.2.1: Experimental setup of the calibration of laser sensors.
The results of the calibration check for each laser sensor are depicted in the next four
ﬁgures. From the measurements it is seen that the calibration constant is 1.75 since 1-5 V
corresponds to 7 cm. The same conclusion is obtained from the calibration curves where
it is seen from the ﬁgures that the slope is equal to 1.75.
83
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX B. LASER SENSOR
0
20
40
60
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1 cm
2 cm
3 cm
0 cm
-1 cm
-2 cm
-3 cm
1
2
3
4
5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure B.2.2: Calibration of Laser 1
0
20
40
60
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1 cm
2 cm
3 cm
0 cm
-1 cm
-2 cm
-3 cm
1
2
3
4
5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure B.2.3: Calibration of Laser 2
84
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX B. LASER SENSOR
0
20
40
60
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1 cm
2 cm
3 cm
0 cm
-1 cm
-2 cm
-3 cm
1
2
3
4
5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure B.2.4: Calibration of Laser 3
0
20
40
60
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1 cm
2 cm
3 cm
0 cm
-1 cm
-2 cm
-3 cm
1
2
3
4
5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Figure B.2.5: Calibration of Laser 4
85
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX B. LASER SENSOR
B.3
Surfaces to Water
The diﬀerent surfaces that was tested in order to record the waters elevation are listed in
the table below. The test was conducted by exciting the platform for 15 minutes where
the TLD was installed on top of the platform.
Table B.3.1: Test surfaces to the water so the elevation can be measured with the laser sensor.
Working
Not Working
Cardboard
×
Paper
×
Shaving Foam
×
Coﬀee
×
Polystyrene with paper
×
From the test results it is concluded that paper, shaving foam and polystyrene with humid
paper on top can reﬂect the laser back to the sensor during the test.
As previously
mentioned, it is polystyrene with humid paper that is used in the ﬁnal experiment due
to a more linear behavior, which acts in the form of a ﬂoating roof preventing wave
breaking and contamination of the water surface. Cardboard have the same function as
polystyrene due to the higher stiﬀness than the water, but during the experimental work
the cardboard absorbed too much water and began to submerge. The ﬁnal surface tested
was coﬀee, which was expected to work due to the speciﬁc color. However, the coﬀee could
not reﬂect the laser back consistently.
Figure B.3.1: Tested surfaces to the TLD.
86
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX C
Tuning of Experimental Setup
In this section the steps to extract the matrices from Ansys will be described. It also
includes the results from the tuning process of the experimental setup in order to make
it possible to tune the sloshing frequency of the TLD to the natural frequency of the
platform. The results are also presented where only one laser was used to measure the
water elevation with diﬀerent surfaces to the water. In addition, the results of the platform
with the TLD is presented where the four laser sensors are measuring the water elevation
in the corners. Finally, the experimental work where the excitation was increased is also
presented here.
C.1
Extraction of Matrices From Ansys
When the FE-model is created in Ansys the matrices are extracted to Matlab using the
following steps.
1. Move the model created in Ansys to APDL.
2. Create .cdf ﬁle by Preprocesser →archive model →write. Close APDL and open
empty APDL.
3. Change ﬁle names in MassAndStiﬀnessMatExport.cmd and run from ADPL using
/input.
4. Extract matrices in mmf format where the three ﬁles needed are called: MassMat-
MMF.mmf, StiﬀMatMMF.mmf and MappingBMatMMF.mmf which is the mass ma-
trix, stiﬀness matrix, and location of the nodes.
C.2
Tuning of FE-model
The main changes in order to tune the experimental setup is conducted by changing the
number of plates on top of the platform. As mentioned in the thesis, 3 plates stacked on
each other are used for the ﬁnal experiment. The natural frequency and modal mass of
the platform with 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 plates obtained from Ansys and Matlab are listed in
Table C.2.1.
87
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Table C.2.1: Natural frequencies and modal mass for the ﬁrst three modes where diﬀerent numbers
of plates on the platform are considered.
1 plate
2 plates
3 plates
4 plates
5 plates
f1
[Hz]
2.81
2.31
1.99
1.78
1.62
f2
[Hz]
2.81
2.31
1.99
1.78
1.62
f3
[Hz]
3.71
3.07
2.67
2.38
2.17
m1
[kg]
14.27
22.21
30.14
38.07
46.00
m2
[kg]
14.27
22.21
30.14
38.07
46.00
m3
[kg]
11.65
17.85
24.03
30.21
36.38
From the results, it is seen that by using 3, 4 and 5 plates it is possible to get a reasonable
low natural frequency which the TLD can be tuned to. However, the modal mass is to
large when 4 and 5 plates are considered due to the mass ratio between the platform and
TLD should be in the range of 1-4 %. It will therefore require a large amount of water
since the density of the water is much smaller than steels.
C.3
Tuning of Experimental Setup
An analysis of the actual experimental model was also conducted in order to verify the
analysis from Ansys regarding the natural frequency of the platform. The duration of the
experiments was 15 minutes and it was conducted with 1, 2, 3 and 4 plates respectively.
The analysis of the test is done by simple FDD analysis on the natural frequencies from
the plot of the singular values in the SD matrix, and the results are shown in Figure C.3.1.
The natural frequencies obtained from the diﬀerent setups are listed in the table below.
Table C.3.1: Natural frequencies for the ﬁrst three modes when diﬀerent numbers of plates on the
platform are considered.
1 plate
2 plates
3 plates
4 plates
f1
[Hz]
3.39
2.62
2.01
1.84
f2
[Hz]
3.49
2.68
2.04
1.94
f3
[Hz]
5.28
4.18
3.35
3.11
From the natural frequencies of the four tests it is seen that the sloshing frequency can
be tuned to the platform if 3 and 4 plates are stacked on each other. However, since 4
plates will lead to a higher modal mass, the setup with three plates is used in the ﬁnal
experiment. Furthermore, it is observed that the natural frequencies are decreasing by
adding more mass to the platform as expected. The spectral densities are depicted in the
Figure C.3.1.
88
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2
4
6
8
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2
4
6
8
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
2
4
6
8
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
Figure C.3.1: Singular values from the SD matrix from the experimental tuning with 1, 2, 3 and 4
plates.
89
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
C.4
Spectral density with one and four laser sensors
In order to obtain the best measurements of the water elevation when only one laser
was considered, diﬀerent measurement locations for the laser was investigated during the
excitation of the platform with three plates on top. The test was conducted when the
laser sensor was measuring in the corner and in the middle of one side in the longitudinal
direction of the TLD, as depicted in Figure C.4.1. The test was conducted with a duration
of 15 minutes with paper and shaving foam on the water surface.
Figure C.4.1: Location of laser when optimizing the setup.
Paper
The singular values in Figure C.4.2 is based on the results when the laser is located in the
middle and where the surface of the water is paper.
90
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure C.4.2: Experimental results of the platform with the TLD when only 1 laser is recording the
water elevation in the middle, where paper acts as the surface of the water.
It is observed from the data with the accelerometers that the ﬁrst mode have been split
into two modes. However, the results from the single laser sensor seems to include more
noise and the extra mode from the TLD in the transversely direction can not be identiﬁed.
The singular values in Figure C.4.3 is obtained by locating the laser sensor in the corner
of the TLD and using paper for the water surface.
91
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure C.4.3: Singular values of the SD matrix from experimental results of the platform with the
TLD when only 1 laser is recording the water elevation in the corner, where paper acts as the
surface of the water.
It is observed that by locating the laser sensor in the corner, it is possible to identify a
fourth mode corresponding to the transversely mode of the TLD.
Shaving Foam
The experiment when shaving foam is mixed with the water of the TLD is conducted with
the same procedure, with three plates on top where the test duration is 15 minutes. The
singular values depicted in Figure C.4.4 is obtained by locating the sensor in the middle.
92
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure C.4.4: Singular values of the SD matrix for the platform with the TLD when only 1 laser
is recording the water elevation in the middle, where shaving foam is mixed with the water.
It is observed that a similar result is obtained as when the paper is placed on top of the
water in the TLD and the laser is located in the middle.
Figure C.4.5 shows the results when the laser sensor measure the water elevation in the
corner where the water is mixed with shaving foam.
93
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure C.4.5: Spectral density of experimental tuning when 1 laser sensor is recording in the corner
and shaving foam is mixed with the water.
It is again observed that the transversely mode-shape of the water can be identiﬁed when
the laser sensor is located in the corner of the TLD and when shaving foam is mixed with
the water. In general, it can be concluded that by using a single laser sensor it is possible to
identify the transversely mode of the TLD and the four modes of the platform. However,
since only one signal is measuring the water elevation it is not possible to describe the
water movement due to proper modal analysis require more than one signal.
C.5
Spectral density with four lasers in the corners
The ﬁnal experiment with four laser sensors attached to the platform are conducted where
the four lasers are located in the middle and corners of the TLD. The results obtained
where the lasers are located in the middle of each side of the TLD is depicted in Figure
7.2.1 in the main text. The singular values from the SD matrix, when the laser sensors
are located in the corners, are depicted in Figure C.6.1 where the duration of the test is
35 minutes.
94
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure C.5.1: Singular values of the SD matrix from experimental results when four laser sensors
are located in the corners of the TLD.
By comparing the results between the laser sensors located in the middle of each side and
when located in the corners of the TLD, it is seen that the same results are obtained.
Splitting of the ﬁrst mode appears and the transversely mode of the TLD is identiﬁed in
both setups. However, the ﬁrst peak from the third singular value, which indicates the
third mode of the structural system, is more signiﬁcant when the laser sensors are located
in the middle of each side of the TLD. In general, it is preferable to have a separation
between the singular values in order to obtain more information regarding the system.
The experimental setup with the lasers located in the middle of each side of the TLD is
therefore chosen to be the optimal setup.
C.6
Large Amplitude Excitations
The eﬀect of increasing the excitation by using larger nozzles and moving them 10 cm closer
to the platform was also investigated, where the duration of the test was 15 minutes. The
investigation was performed to observe if any changes would occur in the simple FDD
analysis of the modal peaks, and if it still would be possible to identify the fourth mode,
considered as the mode of the TLD in the transversely direction.
95
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX C. TUNING OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
-150
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure C.6.1: Singular values of the platform and TLD with increasing excitations. Using larger
nozzles and placing them 10 cm from the platform.
The same tendency of splitting the ﬁrst mode is observed from the singular values from
the accelerometers. However, the fourth peak identiﬁed as the transversely mode of the
TLD is less clear from the ﬁgure above, which indicates that a more nonlinear behavior is
observed by increasing the random excitations. This in turn coincide with the previously
mentioned theory of the TLD.
96
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX D
C matrix and Calculations of TLD
D.1
Estimation of C and comparison of response
In order to determine the response of the FE-models by using the function stateSpaceSim
in Matlab, the damping matrix, C, has to be determined ﬁrst since the function requires
the mass, stiﬀness and damping matrices. The damping matrix is determined with the
function C modal damping provided by Phd. student Tobias Friis. Before it is possible
to determine the damping matrix the damping ratios have to be calculated. When no
external damping is considered the damping ratio of the structure is assumed to be 1 %,
but when external dampers are attached to the model, the damping ratios are determined
from the eigenvalue problem. The steps in the function in order to establish the damping
matrix is described below.
The damping matrix is established from the modal damping ratios leading to the modal
mass being determined by.
mj = BT M B
(D.1.1)
Where B is the mode-shape matrix which is determined by solving the eigenvalue problem.
The damping coeﬃcient, c, can then be determined by the equation below where it can
be rewritten by considering the expression for the angular frequency.
ζj =
cj
2
p
kj mj
,
ω2 = kj
mj
(D.1.2)
It yields the following equation for the damping coeﬃcient.
cj = 2 ζj mj ωj
(D.1.3)
D.2
Tuning of TLD to mode 1 in the experiment and Up-
dated FE-Model
The calculations of the tuning of the TLD in the longitudinal and transversely direction
are presented in this section, where the dimensions and length of the tank are listed in the
table below. The calculations are used to tune the TLD to the experimental setup and
updated FE-model.
97
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX D. C MATRIX AND CALCULATIONS OF TLD
Table D.2.1: Dimensions of the TLD.
L
b
h
m
g
[m]
[m]
[m]
[kg]
[m/s2]
Longitudinal direction
0.19
0.125
0.19
4.51
9.81
Transverse direction
0.125
0.19
0.19
4.51
9.81
The ﬁrst calculations are based on the dimensions of the longitudinal direction which is
tuned to the ﬁrst mode of the platform yielding the sloshing frequency.
fw,l = 1
2 π
r
π g
L tanh
π h
L

= 2.02 Hz
(D.2.1)
Before the active mass can be determined, half the length of the container is calculated.
al = L
2 = 0.095 m
(D.2.2)
Leading to the active mass.
ma,l = m
1
3
r
5
2
a
h tanh
r
5
2
h
a

= 1.18 kg
(D.2.3)
and rigid attached mass to the platform.
mb,l = m
tanh
√
3

a
h

√
3

a
h


= 3.64 kg
(D.2.4)
The stiﬀness of the TLD can then be determined by.
ka,l = 3 m2
a g h
m a2
= 192.77 N/m
(D.2.5)
The damping ratio is determined with the empirical formula below where the viscosity of
the water is assumed to be 1.004 10−6 J/kg K when 20 degrees is assumed.
ζl =

ν
p
L3 g
0.5
= 0.0020
(D.2.6)
The properties of the TLD in the transversely direction are determined by the same
equations but with new dimensions yielding the following properties.
fw,t = 1
2 π
r
π g
L tanh
π h
L

= 2.50 Hz
(D.2.7)
at = L
2 = 0.063 m
(D.2.8)
ma,t = m
1
3
r
5
2
a
h tanh
r
5
2
h
a

= 0.78 kg
(D.2.9)
mb,t = m
tanh
√
3

a
h

√
3

a
h


= 4.08 kg
(D.2.10)
98
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D. C MATRIX AND CALCULATIONS OF TLD
ka,t = 3 m2
a g h
m a2
= 194.10 N/m
(D.2.11)
ζt =

ν
p
L3 g
0.5
= 0.0027
(D.2.12)
The properties of the TLD are inserted in the updated FE-model by assuming a SDOF-
system analogy.
99
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX E
FE-model with TMD
It is known that the eﬀect of the TLD on a structural system has a similar eﬀect as a
TMD attached to a structural system, since they both are able to reduce the excitations
of a structural system and split one or two modes if they are tuned correctly. In order to
verify that the eﬀect of the TLD is similar to that of a TMD, two TMDs are implemented
in the longitudinal and transversely direction in the FE-model from the ﬁrst simulation
in Section 5.1. Two TMDs are therefore implemented due to one TMD is considered as a
SDOF-system, and due to the TLD is analysed in both the longitudinal and transversely
direction.
E.1
Tuning of TMD to Mode 1 and Mode 2
The calculations of the tuning of the two TMDs implemented in the FE-model is presented
below. The two TMDs are tuned to the ﬁrst and second mode of the FE-model presented
in Section 5.1, where the mass of both TMDs is assumed to be 1.18 kg and is therefore
equal to the active mass of the TLD in its longitudinal direction. It is therefore considered
that the two TMDs have identical properties. The mass yields the following mass ratio
and tuning parameters.
µ =
md
30.1437 = 0.039
(E.1.1)
The angular frequency is determined by.
ωd
1.99 2 π =
1
1 + µ
⇒
ωd = 12.08 rad/s
(E.1.2)
From where the stiﬀness of the TMD can be calculated.
ω2
d = kd
md
⇒
kd = 172.30 N/m
(E.1.3)
The damping ratio of the TMD depends on the mass ratio and it is determined by the
following equation.
ζ2
d = 1
2
µl
1 + µl
⇒
ζ = 0.14
(E.1.4)
Leading to the damping ratio of the entire structural system including TMD and platform
where the structural damping is assumed to be 1 %.
ζl = 3
4 ζs + 1
2 ζd = 0.076
(E.1.5)
The damping coeﬃcient can then be determined.
101
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
ζd =
c
2 √kd md
⇒
c = 3.91Ns/m
(E.1.6)
E.2
FE-Model with TMD
The two TMDs are implemented by using the same steps as described in Section 8.2 and
they are therefore attached in the middle of the top plates. By solving the eigenvalue prob-
lem by using Equation (8.2.4) the modal properties are determined which are illustrated
in Table E.2.1 and Figure E.2.1.
Table E.2.1: The natural frequencies and damping ratios of the FE-model when a TMD is attached
on top of the FE-model
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
fn
[Hz]
1.82
1.84
2.11
2.16
2.67
ζn
[%]
7.34
5.56
7.58
8.85
1.00
102
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
Figure E.2.1: Five mode-shapes of the platform with a TMD installed where the TMD is tuned to
the ﬁrst and second mode.
From Table E.2.1 it is seen that two additional modes are established due to mode 1 and
103
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
mode 2 are split into four modes. This leads to ﬁve modes in total, where the ﬁfth mode
corresponds to the third mode when the FE-model is considered without a TMD.
The damping ratio for the ﬁfth mode is 1 % and it corresponds with the assumed structural
damping, leading to the conclusion that the TMD is passive in the torsional mode. The
damping ratio for the ﬁrst four bending modes is signiﬁcantly higher due to the TMD
is activated as depicted in Figure E.2.1. Here, it is seen that the TMD is in-phase with
mode-shape 1 and 2 and out-of-phase with mode-shape 3 and 4. Since mode 1 and 3 are
excited in the y-direction, they correspond to the ﬁrst mode of the platform without the
TMD where mode 2 and 4 corresponds to the second mode of the platform without the
TMD.
E.3
Simulation of Platform with TMD
The simulation of the FE-model with the two attached TMDs is conducted with the same
procedure as the simulation of the FE-model in Section 5.3 and the updated FE-model
in Section 8.2.1. The singular values of the SD matrices from the FE-model with the
two TMDs implemented are illustrated in the ﬁgure below, where the FE-model without
damping is depicted in the ﬁrst subﬁgure.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
Figure E.3.1: Singular values of the SD matrices from the platform without and with the two
TMDs.
By considering the singular value plot of the platform with the TMDs, it is seen from the
104
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
ﬁrst and second singular value, that the ﬁrst modal peak have changed to a plateau due
to the TMDs are tuned to the ﬁrst and second mode. This indicates that the excitation
of the ﬁrst two modes are reduced, which also is veriﬁed by considering the amplitudes
between the ﬁrst and third peak, where the ﬁrst peak now is signiﬁcantly smaller than the
third modal peak. The third peak have the same amplitude due to the TMD is not tuned
to that mode, which also is indicated when considering the singular values of the TMD
alone.
In order to identify the modal parameters of the platform with the two TMDs, the AR/PR
identiﬁcation technique is used which is conducted with the same procedure as in the
simulations in the main text. The unbiased estimated CF matrix is therefore established
with the function dircor in Matlab with Nt = 1024 time lags.
The estimated CF
matrix with its auto- and cross-correlation functions is illustrated in the ﬁgure below.
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
-5
0
5
10-7
Figure E.3.2: Auto- and cross-correlation functions for the simulated response of the FE-model
with the TMD implemented.
105
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
Due to the error from the estimation method in the noise-tail and due to the possible noise
in the beginning, the correlation functions are only considered in the interval 5 ≤τ ≤200,
which is the part of the CF matrix that is used for ﬁtting in the AR/PR identiﬁcation
technique.
By using the function id tdpr in Matlab the modal properties are determined by the
AR/PR identiﬁcation technique, where the number of AR parameters is chosen as na=3,
which with ﬁve channels leads to 7 modes. The ﬁve modes of the structural system is
illustrated in the table below.
Table E.3.1: Natural frequencies and damping ratios of the platform with the TMD implemented.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
fwith
[Hz]
1.83
1.84
2.12
2.16
2.67
∆fwith
[%]
0.54
−0.54
0
0
0
ζwith
[%]
6.58
5.59
7.17
8.44
1.03
∆ζwith
[%]
−10.35
0.5
−5.28
−4.6
0.03
The natural frequencies of the ﬁve identiﬁed modes with the TMDs implemented, corre-
sponds with the estimated frequencies from the FE-model, but there is a deviation between
the damping ratios. The mode-shapes corresponding to the natural frequencies above, are
aligned to the mode-shapes from the FE-model and are illustrated in the ﬁgure below.
106
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
Figure E.3.3: The ﬁrst ﬁve mode-shapes with the TMD.
From Figure E.3.3 it is seen that the mode-shapes are identical compared to the estimated
mode-shapes from the FE-model. The TMD is observed to be in-phase in mode 1 and
107
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX E. FE-MODEL WITH TMD
2 and out-oﬀ-phase in mode 3 and 4 with the platform. It leads to the conclusion that
mode 1 and 3 are the two new modes as a result of mode 1 being split when no TMD is
implemented, and mode 2 and 4 corresponds to the second mode being split. The ﬁfth
mode is identical to the third mode when no TMD is implemented, leading to the torsional
mode where the TMDs are not activated.
The correlation between the mode-shapes determined from the experimental observations
in Section 7.2 and the ones obtained from the simulated response of the FE-model with
the TMDs implemented, is presented with their respective MAC-values, listed in Table
E.3.2 below.
Table E.3.2:
MAC values between the experimental results and simulation with and without
TLD/TMD.
Mode 1
Mode 2
Mode 3
Mode 4
Mode 5
W/o. TLD/TMD
Mode 1
1.00
0.00
0.00
−
−
Mode 2
0.00
1.00
0.28
−
−
Mode 3
0.00
0.30
1.00
−
−
w. TLD/TMD
Mode 1
1.00
0.00
0.877
0.00
0.00
Mode 2
0.00
0.94
0.00
1.00
0.04
Mode 3
0.95
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
Mode 4
0.00
0.99
0.00
0.88
0.00
Mode 5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.98
From the table above, it is seen that the MAC-values are equal to 1 between the simulations
and the experimental results when no external damping is considered. By implementing
the TLD in the experimental model and the TMD in the simulation, it is seen that the
mode-shapes of the two systems are identical for mode 1, 3 and 5. The deviation between
mode-shape 2 and 4 is due to the TMD is tuned to both mode 1 and mode 2, whereas the
TLD is only tuned to the ﬁrst mode of the platform.
108
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX F
CF Matrices
The full CF matrices including the auto-correlation in the diagonal and the cross-correlations
from all identiﬁcations are depicted below.
CF matrix of ﬁrst simulation in Section 5.3
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
Figure F.0.1: CF matrix ﬁrst simulated response of the FE-model.
109
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX F. CF MATRICES
CF matrix of experiment without TLD in Section 7.2
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-6
0
500
1000
-4
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-7
Figure F.0.2: CF matrix for the experimental response without the TLD.
110
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX F. CF MATRICES
CF matrix of experiment with TLD in Section 7.2
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-8
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-8
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-4
-2
0
2
10-8
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
4
10-7
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-8
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
1000
-1
0
1
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-5
0
5
10-8
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
0
500
1000
-2
0
2
10-7
Figure F.0.3: CF Matrix for the experimental response with the TLD.
111
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX F. CF MATRICES
CF matrix for updated FE-model without TLD in Section 8.2.1
0
200
400
600
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
-1
0
1
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10-6
Figure F.0.4: CF matrix for the simulated response of the updated FE-model without the TLD.
112
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX F. CF MATRICES
CF matrix for updated FE-model with TLD in Section 8.2.1
0
200
400
600
-5
0
5
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-5
0
5
10-8
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-7
0
200
400
600
-5
0
5
10-7
0
200
400
600
-5
0
5
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-7
0
200
400
600
-5
0
5
10-7
0
200
400
600
-5
0
5
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-6
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-6
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-7
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-6
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-6
0
200
400
600
-2
0
2
10-7
0
200
400
600
-1
0
1
10-5
Figure F.0.5: CF matrix for the simulated response of the updated FE-model with the TLD.
113
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX G
Technical Drawing
115
==PAGE:132==
255
500
550
550
130
385
440
495
2000
1000
180
500
350
350
450
450
40
100
50
410
40
850
100
450
50
50
5
450
450
50
50
50
450
50
50
5
40
40
100
850
Platform
Wooden Plate
Front
Left Side
Top
D a t e:
R e v i s i o n:
P r o j e c t:
S c a l e A3:
D r a w i n g T i t l e:
R e v i s i o n  n o t e s:
Rev:
Date:
Notes:
Drawn by:
Client:
Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen
Lasse F. Thunbo
Technical University of Denmark
MSc Project
Effect of oscillatory masses in operationalmodal analysis
Technical Drawing of Experimental Setup
30-07-2019
1:10
1
1
  30-07-2019
               Technical drawing of experimental setup including the wooden plate
               acting as the foundation of the platform and the platform seen from three different angles
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX H
Poster to YRD 2019
117
==PAGE:134==
Effect of non-stationary and oscillatory masses in 
operational modal analysis 
Lasse Thunbo, MSc student, Technical University of Denmark 
Niklas C. Ørum-Nielsen, MSc student, Technical University of Denmark 
Effect of TLD with the use of 
Operational Modal Analysis 
Block diagram for project work on 
the analysis of the effect of tuned 
liquid dampers (TLD) in Operational 
Modal Analysis (OMA).  
The project is divided into two 
parts, an experimental and a 
simulation study. The final result is 
a comparison between the effects of 
the simulated tuned mass damper 
(TMD) and the experimental TLD. 
Purpose of analysis 
• Identification of the 
effects of TLD  
Estimation of theoretical 
sloshing frequency of 
water container 
Simulation on the effect 
of the TMD 
Optimisation of FE-Model  
Operational Modal 
Analysis           
parameter estimation 
Modal parameters: 
•
Frequency [Hz ] 
•
Sloshing frequency  [Hz] 
•
Damping [%] 
•
Mode shapes [-] 
Optimized experimental 
setup  with and without 
TMD 
Outcome of analysis 
Figure 8: Singular value spectral matrix of experiment 
with TLD implemented. 5 % mass ratio resulting in 
splitting peaks and 1 additional mode shape. 
Simulation Study 
To study the effect of a TMD implemented in a structural system, a FE-Model is 
generated by extraction of the mass- and stiffness matrices from the simulation 
software ANSYS. The analysis without TMD is performed by reducing the FE-
Model to 3 dof by the use of SEREP representing the 3 accelerometers. During 
the analysis with TMD the FE-Model is reduced to 5 dof where the 2 additional 
dof represent the TMD. The modal parameters are estimated by using 
Operational Model Analysis and the results from 5 % mass ratio tuning of the 
first mode are illustrated below. 
Figure 1:Singular value spectral matrix of simulation 
without TMD implemented. First 3 natural 
eigenfrequencies identified. 
Figure 4: 5 mode shapes for the structural system 
with TMD. Mode shapes of the structure are shown 
as blue. Mode-shape of TMD is highlighted as red 
illustrating in- and out of phase movement. 
Figure 2:Singular value spectral matrix of simulation 
with TMD implemented. 5 % mass ratio resulting in 
splitting modes and a plateau. 
Table 1: Natural eigenfrequencies and damping 
ratios identified from OMA with and without TMD.  
Figure 3: 3 Mode shapes for the structural system 
without TMD. Mode shapes of the structure are 
illustrated as blue. 
Figure 6: Singular value spectral matrix of experiment 
without TLD implemented. First 3 natural 
eigenfrequencies identified. 
Table 2: Natural eigenfrequencies and damping ratios 
identified  from OMA with and without TLD. 
Figure 9: Mode shapes from experiment with TLD. 
Figure 5: Singular value spectral matrix of laser during 
experiment. Theoretical sloshing frequency is 2.05 Hz. 
Experimental Study 
The experimental study is performed with random excitation 
induced by 3 pneumatic actuators. The response is measured 
with NI SignalExpress from 3 accelerometers placed opposite 
of the point of excitation.  The TLD with 5 % mass ratio is 
installed such that the sloshing frequency dampens the first 
mode. 
To minimize noise the data is filtered in the frequency domain 
and converted to displacements. The modal parameters are 
then determined with OMA. 
Figure 7: Basic theory of a TLD. It is the active mass 
that dampens the structural system. 
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX I
Annex
119
==PAGE:136==
Annex
- Animation of experimental result
- Experimental results
- FE-Model With and Without
TMD
- Laser Calibration
- Tuning in Ansys
- Tuning of TMD and TLD
. Updated FE-model
Updated FE-Model
- FE_Model_Updated_with_TLD_And_Simulation.mat
- FE-Model_Updated_without_TLD.m
- FEModel_updating.m
- FEModel_Updating_Activemass_Transversely_Direction.m
- FEModel_Updating_Activemass_Longitudinal_Direction.m
- MappingBMatMMF.mmf
- MassMatMMF.mmf
- StiffMatMMF.mmf
Animation of experimental result
Animation_With_TLD_Mode_1_2_3_4.oma
Animation_With_TLD_Mode_5.oma
Final_Animation_With_TLD.mat
Tuning of TMD and TLD
- TLD.mw
- TMD.mw
Tuning in Ansys
- 1 Plate
- 2 Plates
- 4 Plates
- 5 Plates
4 Plates
- MappingBMatMMF.mmf
- MassMatMMF.mmf
- StiffMatMMF.mmf
1 Plate
- MappingBMatMMF.mmf
- MassMatMMF.mmf
- StiffMatMMF.mmf
FE-Model with and Without TMD
- C_modal_damping.m
- Comparison between_3DOF_5DOF.m
- FE-Model_Simply_Supported_Without_TMD.m
- FE-Model_with_TMD.m
- PlotModes.m
- Simulation of FE-Model with and without TMD.m
- stateSpaceSim.m
- MappingBMatMMF.mmf
- MassMatMMF.mmf
- StiffMatMMF.mmf
Laser Calibration
- Laser 1
- Laser 2
- Laser 3
- Laser 4
3 Plates
- MappingBMatMMF.mmf
- MassMatMMF.mmf
- StiffMatMMF.mmf
2 Plates 
- MappingBMatMMF.mmf
- MassMatMMF.mmf
- StiffMatMMF.mmf
Experimental results
- Data with one laser
- Final Experimental Results - 4 lasers
- Results - Platform with different nr. of plates
- Final_Experiment_Data.m
- Modal-response (displacements and-
accelerations).m
Final Experimental Results - 4 lasers
- Platform with Empty TLD - Final
- TLD Frequency and Damping (Free Decay)
- TLD placed in the longitudinal direction - 15 min test
- TLD placed in the longitudinal direction - 35 min test -
Final
- TLD placed in the transversely direction - 15 min test
- TLD placed in the transversely direction - 35 min test
Final
Results - Platform with different nr. of plates
- 1_Plate.txt
- 2_Plates.txt
- 3_Plates.txt
- 4_Plates.txt 
Data with one laser
- Platform_1laser_f2_h18_10min_paper_corner
- Platform_1laser_f2_h18_10min_ShavingFoam_Corner
- Platform_1laser_h18_f2_15min_paper_middle
- Platform_1laser_h18_f2_15min_ShavingFoam_Middle
