==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Cultural heritage classification
by image recognition
In collaboration with the National Museum
of Denmark
Huayu Zheng (s162077)
Shuk Man Heung (s171876)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master thesis describes a solution for automatic labelling of culture her-
itage images using deep learning techniques.
The design of this project was advised by Jacob Riddersholm Wang, the coor-
dinator of Digital Initiative of National Museum of Denmark. The majority
of the training data is also from the museum’s database.
An assembled model of two Convolutional Neural Networks, one single-label
classifier and one multi-label classifier, is proposed as the final solution.
The final solution provides a good result in the context of suggesting valuable
labels of digital collections for museum professionals. It is worth expanding
the solution into more classes.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Cultural heritage classification by image recognition thesis was prepared
at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a
MSc degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, August 1, 2019
Huayu Zheng (s162077)
Shuk Man Heung (s171876)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor, Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen, for
supporting and guiding us throughout this thesis. Her advice was critical and
kept us moving in the right direction towards completing this project. We
would also like to thank Jacob Riddersholm Wang from the National Museum
of Denmark for giving us inspiration on this interesting topic and providing
generous help whenever we needed it.
We would also like to thank all our friends who helped us throughout this
project, especially to Alechandrina Julieta Pereira Espinoza, Martina Loka-
jová, Shuk Yee Heung, Peter Filtenborg-Simonsen, and Jens Strøm, as well
as our families, who supported and encouraged us during our journey of the
MSc degree.
Last but not least, we would like to thank the microwave in the DTU library
which functioned as good as always throughout our project and allowed us to
have warm nice meals.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Scope of Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Approach and Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Structure of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Fundamentals and State of the Art
9
2.1
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Image Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Pre-trained models of Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . .
21
2.7
Interpretation of Performance Measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.8
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Solution Concept
33
3.1
Digitisation in National Museum of Denmark . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Training base on Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Implementation and Experimental Result
45
4.1
Platform and Libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2
First Level Classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Second Level Classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Combination of Classifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Evaluation and Discussion
69
5.1
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6
Conclusion and Future Work
83
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
85
B Script for customised data loader
95
C Interface of user annotation test
97
D User test result of single-label classification
99
E User test result of multi-label classification
107
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter includes an overview of our motivation behind writing a thesis
about image recognition within culture heritage domain. It describes the real-
life problem this paper is aiming to solve, and lays out the content and the
scope of the thesis.
1.1
Motivation
According to Dr.Goode, a museum is “an institution for the preservation of
those objects which best illustrate the phenomena of nature and the works
of man, and the utilisation of these for the increase of knowledge and for the
culture and enlightenment of the people” (Goode 1895). There are two pri-
mary purposes of museums: to interest and inspire the general public, and to
facilitate the researches of academic or personal study (Schuchert 1896).
However, in a traditional museum, these two purposes can hardly be served
at the same time due to limited space and the different needs of its visitors.
A report published by UCL Institute of Archaeology presented interesting re-
sults in a survey answered by museum users in England and Wales (Keene,
Stevenson, and Monti 2008). The result shows that 73% of the respondents
think that the collections were not sufficiently used in the large national mu-
seum, especially the ones that were not presented during exhibitions. The
result also expresses that research students demand more online catalogues of
digital collections. Moreover, a case shows that publishing online exhibition
can help to encourage users to visit the traditional museum in person.
Along with the findings, interviews have been conducted with Jacob Ridder-
sholm Wang, the coordinator of Digital Initiative of the National Museum of
Denmark (NMD). The goal was to understand the current online (digitalised
images) and offline collection management situation in NMD.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
According to Jacob Wang, the online and offline collections are managed in
two distinct ways because they are serving different purposes. The Offline
museum is targeting the general public who has interest in the domain and
enjoys beautiful objects, but does not have a clear goal of researching. There-
fore, the collections are managed in a structure of presenting a story to catch
the visitors’ interest, e.g. explaining the concept “How did Vikings use to
live?”. To answer this question, collections of drawings of the Viking’s houses
along with their clothing, food containers, and furniture, can all be presented
because they are supporting the topic from different angles. However, the on-
line museum works differently. It works as a public resource in a systematic
way where users can access all digitalised collections in order to get global
insights within the domain, e.g. answering the question “How did airplanes
look like in the 19th century?”. A digital museum with well-organised collec-
tions and indexes to each category will be able to answer this question in few
seconds.
Figure 1.1: Catalogue of a collection in NMD
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivation
3
Now the question arises - where do the data used for indexing comes from?
NMD, like most of the national museums in the world, has thorough cata-
logues for collections. One example of the catalogues is shown in Figure 1.1.
Data in the catalogue becomes the first-hand information of the collection and
is transferred to the “description” and “title” fields of the meta-data in the
digital museum.
Apart from “description” and “title”, “label” data is also very important. To
be able to document the representative characteristics of collections in text,
each collection should be categorised in a meaningful way. This process of
extracting information from an image and assigning various attributes to this
image is called annotation (Sorokin and Forsyth 2008). After annotation, la-
bels become indices within those categories. Labels can describe a collection
from all different angles e.g.
what material it is made out of or what the
content is. However, the more representative the chosen labels are, the more
hits appear in the search results. Therefore, institutions need to find the most
effective and economical mean to provide access to collections (Calhoun 2006).
Currently, there are three types of labels used in NMD’s digital museum. “Ver-
ified” labels are given by the professional curators, “Crowd” labels are volun-
tary provided by online users, and “Automated” labels are generated by an
artificial intelligence (AI) algorithm NMD once engaged with. However, there
are limitations in the current status of labels. Since most of the “Verified” la-
bels are provided by professionals who tend to have an in-depth knowledge of
the subject, it may cause a “semantic gap” (Trant and Wyman 2006) between
professionals’ perspective and users’ perception of a collection. “Automated”
labels do not have a strong reliability because the algorithm was not trained
on the museum’s dataset, but on general images found online. Among all the
labels, “Crowd” labels are the most representative ones, since they are given
by the end-users of the digital museum from users perspectives.
However,
only 5000 out of 533,033 collections have been labelled by crowds, which is
not sufficient to support good search results.
Giving high quality labels is one of the critical steps to keep the digital col-
lections well-organised as well as giving the online visitors better access to
the collections. However, labelling the collections can also be a very labour-
intensive task. If the whole process is done manually by a human, one should
define and memorise the ontology, give labels under the same rule for all the
533,033 collections, and keep the digital library updated when new collections
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
arrive. Therefore, it is desired that the annotation process could be automated
with the help of a machine learning algorithm.
1.2
Problem Statement
While computers are good in storing, querying, and displaying well-structured
text data, they struggle with interpreting images like human beings. Although
this decade has been considered as the era of computer vision with the boom
of algorithms in self-driving cars, healthcare, and retail industries, etc. there
is still a lack of machine learning algorithms focusing on the culture heritage
domain.
Therefore, the fundamental research problem is, “How can machine learn-
ing optimise the process of annotation in the National Museum of
Denmark by automatic labelling?”
More specifically, the following questions can be asked:
• How to prepare a good training set?
– How can one make good use of the existing labels from the NMD
online collections?
– If getting images from NMD online collection is not enough, what
can be done to enlarge the training set?
• How can one evaluate the quality of the prediction?
– How can one evaluate the result if the prediction is only partially
correct?
• Which machine learning method would achieve the best performance?
– Does the algorithm needs to learn from existing known tasks?
• How to improve the classification performance?
1.3
Scope of Work
The questions raised in the previous section are classic machine learning ques-
tions.
They have been investigated in various existing studies.
However,
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Approach and Goals
5
choosing suitable technologies and applying them into real-life situation is
still worth exploring.
Deep learning has been considered a very successful approach to represent
high-level abstractions, e.g. in vision, language, and other AI-level tasks, by
using deep architectures with many levels of operation (Bengio 2009). Apply-
ing deep learning to the field of image recognition could result in a promising
performance. Therefore, this thesis focuses on using deep learning models to
solve a real-life problem.
The quality of labels predicted by deep learning models do not only relay
on the algorithms, but also on the quantity and quality of the dataset. The
majority of the dataset used in this thesis is provided by NMD, the rest are
scrapped images from Google 1 that are considered supplementary data. To
provide good labels for the training and validation dataset, the ontology cho-
sen for this thesis is a hierarchical structure with one multi-class single-label
level and one multi-class multi-label level.
To limit the scope of this project, 7 classes are chosen in the first multi-class
single-label level, which means that one collection needs to be classified into
only one of the classes. After the first level, multi-class multi-label classifi-
cation is done only within the class of “Photography”. In this level, all the
predicted photos are assigned with a set of labels. The number of labels that
can be assigned to an image varies from 0 to L, where L is the total number
of classes.
1.4
Approach and Goals
To answer the refined questions in Problem Statement, existing technology
in the domain of image classification as well as basic theory in museum man-
agement is researched and discussed. Based on this knowledge, a simplified
museum ontology is defined, follwing this, a deep learning model is designed
and implemented in a form of a prototype solution for NMD, finally the re-
sulting system is evaluated and conclusions are made.
1Referred has “Google Images” in the following part of the thesis
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
The main goal of this thesis is to find a suitable algorithm that automatically
suggests high quality labels for images in museum’s collections, thus optimising
the annotation process. In order to do that, recent advances in deep learning
are studied to see if and how they can provide significant performance to war-
rant its use specifically in culture heritage domain.
Several sub-goals should be achieved in order to meet the main goal. The
following are the approaches of each of them:
• Define an ontology structure for labelling. Get inputs from mu-
seum professionals and relevant studies.
• Prepare adequate and high quality training set. Base on NMD
dataset, experimentally involve third-party dataset. Use human annota-
tion to provide high quality labels. Introduce data augmentation tech-
nique to expose the neural network to a wide variety of variations.
• Find a suitable way to measure the performance of the model.
When doing multi-label classification, take partially correct results into
consideration.
• Choose a deep learning model that gives a good accuracy. Study
the recent advances in Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Use trans-
fer learning to utilise knowledge from previously learned image recogni-
tion tasks and apply them to cultural heritage domain.
• Using techniques to improve the model. Tune hyperparameters
e.g. threshold and learning rate in the model. Use error analysis to find
the direction of improvement.
1.5
Structure of Thesis
The rest of this thesis is structured as follow:
The second chapter “Fundamentals and State of the Art” introduces the
former works and general techniques in the field of machine learning, deep
learning, and image classification.
Next, the chapter “Solution Concept” focus on describing the process and
decision of label selection with a museum institution background, and then
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Structure of Thesis
7
giving the structure of the ontology for those labels. This chapter will also
propose an assembled model of two deep CNN models as the final solution for
NMD.
In the chapter “Implementation and Experimental Result” describes
the details of implementation. This includes the general components and li-
braries used to develop the deep neural network, as well as the experiments
conducted in order to select the most suitable model.
Following, the chapter “Evaluation and Discussion” evaluates the quality
of the dataset, as well as calculated confusion metrics in order to compare
the performance of deep learning models with performance of human. It also
discusses the result from various tools and techniques.
Lastly, the chapter “Conclusion and Future work” provides a summary of
methods and obtained results, along with a short prospect of possible future
improvements that could be done in this area.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Fundamentals and
State of the Art
This chapter introduces the basic state-of-the-art technologies which are highly
relevant to this thesis.
2.1
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a field of study that gives computers the ability to learn
without being explicitly programmed (Samuel 2000) and the term was first
coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel.
There are multiple types of machine learning including supervised learning,
unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, etc. (James et al. 2014). This
project uses supervised learning which means both input and output will be
given to the machine for training.
Split dataset
Data are crucial for machine learning as it is where the model
learns from. To prepare the data, we first need to split the data into training
set, validation set, and test set (Mirisaee, Douzal, and Termier 2015).
As
the name indicated, training set is used to train the model, so the model
learns directly from the training data. Validation set is to evaluate how the
model is trained from the training set works and improves over it by tuning
the hyperparameters. As validation set evaluates the model and decides if
the hyperparameters need to be changed, it also affects the model indirectly.
Therefore, test set is used to evaluate the model and gives the gold standard
on how the model works in real-life as the data in test set is completely new
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
to the model.
Fit and tune models
There are two types of parameters in machine learn-
ing algorithms. Model parameters are configuration variables, which can be
learned directly from the training data, e.g. weights in an artificial neural net-
work, while hyperparameters are assigned by practitioner, e.g. learning rate
for training a neural network. After splitting the dataset, training set and
validation set will be used to fit and tune the model. Tuning the model means
tuning hyperparameters in order to find the best combination of parameters
to give the best prediction for the specific problem (Eiben and Smit 2011).
Regularization
Before selecting the best model, overfitting, the common
problem of machine learning algorithms, needs to be considered. Overfitting
means the model performed exceptionally well on train data, but the perfor-
mance significantly decrease when making prediction for test data. The tech-
nique to reduce overfitting is called “Regularization”, which used to define a
penalty term in the loss function (M. Bishop 2005) and adopted a broader
meaning - “make to a learning algorithm that is intended to reduce its test
error but not its training error” (Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Courville
2016a).
Model selection
After all the previous steps, it comes to the point to
validate the performance of the machine learning model on un-trained data.
Therefore, validation dataset should be fit into the algorithm and the predic-
tions should be validated in order to choose the best model (best combination
of hyperparameters). There are various means to measure the performance
of the algorithm, e.g. classification accuracy, confusion matrix, logarithmic
loss, area under curve (AUC), and F-measure (Flash 2018). However, it is
important to understand the context before choosing the mean of measure-
ment, because each machine learning model tries to solve one specific problem
with a different objective using a different dataset. More information of these
measures as well as which one is suitable in our problem will be introduced in
Section 2.7.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Image Classification
11
2.2
Image Classification
Image classification
One popular application of machine learning is image
classification which can be considered as a sub-category of computer vision.
Image classification aims to assign digital image or part of it into categories
or classes of interest (Denniss 1995).
Museum ontology
A well-defined ontology is needed before choosing the
categories. Ontology is a set of attributes that the resources can take rela-
tionship between resources (Pretorius 2004; Van Rees 2008). When defining
ontology, many different aspects such as: “How is the ontology going to be
used?” “What fundamental attributes are essential to fulfil this use case?”
“What is the syntax used by the attributes?” should be taken into account
(Noy and Mcguinness 2001). There is some existing museum ontology, e.g.
ISO 21127:2014, Getty Vocabularies LOD. However, when defining ontology
for this thesis, it is also important to understand how users perceive the col-
lections as well as the current approach and expectation of NMD.
2.2.1
Modes of Image classification
There are several modes of classification methodology. Multi-class or multi-
label is the distinction of whether a single image can only belong to one class
or belong to multiple classes. Multi-class classification makes the assumption
that each sample is assigned to one and only one label, while multi-label
assigns to each sample with a set of target labels (Clare and King 2001).
Soft or hard classification is whether the image is assigned to the given
classes or provided values (probability) represent its “membership” grade with
the classes (F. Wang 1990).
Flat or hierarchical classification defines
whether any of the classes has hierarchically relationship. Classification based
on hierarchical cost can be significantly more informative (Jia Deng et al.
2010).
2.2.2
Methods of image classification
Feature engineering
Traditionally, image classification problem has been
approached by using hand-engineered features like SIFT (Lowe 2003) and HoG
(Dalal et al. 2005). After the features have been acquired, learning algorithms
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
like Support Vector Machines (SVMs) follows to learn and classify the image.
However, the performance of the algorithms essentially relied on the quality
of the features used.
This means to improve the classification result, it is
important to progress on the quality of sets of features coming from hand-
engineering (Srinivas et al. 2017).
Learning algorithm
When features learned from the images become more
and more complex, there is a need to develop learning algorithms that can
give promising result, even based on high level features. Early examples like
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (E Hinton 2002), Deep Belief Networks (E
Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006), and Stacked Autoencoders (Vincent et al.
2010) incorporates learning of features from raw images. In 2012, the ILSVRC
competition (Russakovsky et al. 2015) involves the task of classifying an image
into one of a thousand categories, introduced a CNN based deep learned model
which gives significant performance and beats traditional hand-engineered ap-
proaches. After that, CNN have been widely adopted by the vision commu-
nity.
2.3
Neural Networks
The first artificial neural network was invented in 1958 by psychologist Frank
Rosenblatt. The network was called “perceptron” (Rosenblatt 1958), which is
an algorithm for supervised learning of binary classifiers. It was intended to
model how the human brain processed visual data and learned to recognise
objects.
2.3.1
Perceptron model
In the perceptron model, a neuron takes a vector of inputs, sums up the
multiples of inputs and its corresponding weights, pluses a bias b, and returns
the output neutron. This output neutron can be used as the output of the
system or as an input neuron of the next layer of the system.
Figure 2.1
illustrates the structure of a single layer perceptron model.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Neural Networks
13
Figure 2.1: Structure of a single layer perceptron model, where x is the inputs
and w is the weights
2.3.2
Multilayer network
A simple single layer perceptron can perform simple task by mapping similar
input patterns to similar output patterns. However, when a task requires the
network to learn the mapping of a different input and output pattern, the
single layer perceptron model will be unable to perform necessary mappings
(Du and Swamy 2014). Therefore, multilayer perceptron is introduced and
used to perform more complicated tasks. A multilayer perceptron is structured
as Figure 2.2 by stacking perceptron models. Layers between input and output
layer are called hidden layers, which are formed by a certain amount of hidden
units. The hidden units record the input patterns and the similarity of the
patterns. Thus, it can support the required mapping from the input to the
output units (D. E. Rumelhart and McClelland 1987).
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
Figure 2.2: Structure of a multilayer perceptron model, where x is the inputs
and Y is the outputs
2.3.3
Activation function
Activation function is used to transform or activate the resulting sum from
the previous layer to a meaningful output. One example is hard-limiter acti-
vation, which is used in one-neuron perceptron for binary classification (Du
and Swamy 2014). It returns 1 if the summing result is greater than or equal
to 0; otherwise, returns -1.
α(x) =
{
1,
x ≥0
−1(or 0),
x < 0
Activation function takes an important part in deep neural network as it intro-
duces non-linear properties to the network. A few commonly used activation
functions will be introduced in the followings.
Sigmoid
sigmoid function is a bounded differentiable real function with non-
negative derivative at each point. The formula of a sigmoid function is given
as:
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
Sigmoid function mostly used in output layers specially for predicting probabil-
ity and binary classification as it converts any real number to (0, 1). However,
because of its non-zero mean, it is not suitable for deep network with ran-
dom initialisation (Glorot and Yoshua Bengio 2010). Moreover, because of its
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Neural Networks
15
bounded property, a large change in the value will only result in a small shift
in the result, which will then cause the vanishing gradient problem (Pascanu,
Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio 2013).
Softmax
Similar to sigmoid, softmax is also mostly used to compute proba-
bility with a input vector of real numbers and returns a vector of values in the
range of 0 and 1. The main difference between sigmoid and softmax is that,
the output of softmax always sums to 1 while sigmoid takes all inputs inde-
pendently and not necessarily sums to 1. This property makes softmax mostly
used in multi-class single-label classification tasks. The formula of softmax is
given as:
f(xi) =
exi
∑
j exj
Rectified Linear Unit
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), is given as f(x) =
max(0, x), which is now commonly used in most of the neural networks espe-
cially in CNN. ReLU is linear for all positive values and zero for all negative
values. This means it is cheap and fast to compute while solving the vanishing
gradient problem. It increases linearly with the increases of the input values;
therefore, it does not saturate the network. ReLU activation is firstly used
in AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton 2012) instead of
logistic activation functions, such as sigmoid. The use of ReLU activation in-
side the convolutional layers gains a great improvement in CNN performance.
Therefore, ReLU now becomes the default settings for most of the state-of-
the-art CNN (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al. 2016).
2.3.4
Training Neural Network
A network is trained to perform tasks by mapping an input to an output.
The network is trained by updating its weights to optimise the performance
by minimising the difference between the computed output and the desired
output. One common method is called backpropagation (David E. Rumelhart,
Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Williams 1988). Backpropagation adjusts the network
weights from the back (outputs) and propagates through the hidden units
towards the front (inputs) to minimise the difference.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
2.3.5
Loss function
The difference between the computed output and the desired output is mea-
sured by a loss function. Different loss functions are used for different types
of tasks. Some commonly used loss functions are introduced in this section.
Mean Square Error
As suggested by its name, Mean Square Error (MSE)
calculates the difference between the computed output and the desired output
by their average square difference. Due to the property of squaring, MSE is
always non-negative. It heavily penalises the prediction point which is far from
the actual point. At the same time, minimising the error when the prediction
point is close to the actual data point. This loss function is commonly used
in regression tasks. The calculation of MSE is done as the following formula:
MSE =
∑n
i (yi −ˆyi)2
n
Cross Entropy Loss
Cross Entropy Loss function is a common loss func-
tion used in classification tasks (Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Courville
2016b). It measures the cross entropy value between the computed output
and the desired output. It is now the most common setting for classification
problems because it exponentially increases the loss if the predicted probabil-
ity of the true label is close to zero, meaning that it gives great penalty to a
wrong prediction or a true prediction with low confidence. At the same time
solves the problem of MSE, which saturates the network and results in slow
learning in classification tasks with binary desired output. The formula of
Cross Entropy Loss is given as the following:
CrossEntropyLoss = −
n
∑
i
yi log ˆyi
2.3.6
Typical problems
In the history of deep neural network development, there are several problems
causing difficulties in training a good neural network. This section introduces
some common problems in deep learning and some solution approaches.
Overfitting
“Overfitting is the use of models or procedures that violate
parsimony” stated by Hawkins (Hawkins 2004). It is a common deep learning
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Neural Networks
17
problem that the network overfits to the training data and generalises poorly
on other data. This can be identified by a high training accuracy but a much
lower validation or test accuracy. Regularization is a collective of strategies
aiming at reducing test error, possibly at the expense of increased training
error (Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Courville 2016b). Multiple ways to
apply regularization in deep neural network can be concluded in the following
categories, and examples of the method is also given as following (Kukačka,
Golkov, and Cremers 2017):
• Regularization via data: Transform training set (data augmenta-
tion).
• Regularization via network architecture: Change the size of the
network, add drop-out or pooling layers.
• Regularization via the loss function: Select the loss functions that
are robust to class imbalance, e.g. Dice coefficient optimisation (Mil-
letari, Navab, and Ahmadi 2016).
• Regularization via the Regularization term: Introduce regularizer
e.g. weight decay into loss function
• Regularization via optimisation: Stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
can work as an implicit regularizer - a short training time prevents over-
fitting (Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2015).
Vanishing gradient problem
Vanishing gradient problem appears when
the gradient of the loss approaches zero and causes difficulty in training. The
use of certain activation functions can be a cause of such problem. An example
would be the use of sigmoid function, which squishes all numbers into a space
between 0 and 1. Therefore, a large change in the input can only result in a
small change in the output of sigmoid function. If multiple sigmoid functions
are used in the deep neural network, it causes small derivatives when perform-
ing backpropagation. Thus, results in vanishing gradient problem which the
network is not able to learn from the change of gradient. Vanishing gradient
problem caused by the use of certain activation function can be solved by
using an alternative activation function that does not saturate the network,
such as ReLU. The use of ReLU in hidden layers is now a default setting
for most state-of-the-art CNN (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
2012; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014).
Apart from the use of certain activation function, vanishing gradient problem
(Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and Frasconi 1994a; Pascanu, Mikolov, and Yoshua
Bengio 2013) can also appear when training a very deep neural network. Gra-
dient of a network is computed by backpropagation which starts from the
output, finding the derivatives between layers and propagates back towards
the input.
Therefore, the derivatives of the initial layers may become too
small for the network to learn as its derivatives multiplies through-out the
process, causing the vanishing gradient problem. One solution is to use resid-
ual blocks, firstly proposed by He in ResNet (He et al. 2016), which provides
residual connections straight to earlier layers. The use of residual connection
makes very deep networks possible. Further introduction of ResNet can be
found later in Section 2.6.4.
2.4
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional architecture
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a
class of neural networks specialised in dealing with 2D shaped data with the
idea of extracting elementary visual features by convolutional layers, pool-
ing to reduce dimension, followed by an activation function for adding non-
linearity. One of the very first CNN is LeNet proposed by LeCun in 1998
(Lecun et al. 1998), followed by the released of AlexNet by Krizhevsky in
2012 (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton 2012) which is a much
deeper and wider version of LeNet. With the use of ReLU activation func-
tion and max pooling in AlexNet, it outperforms all other state-of-the-art
techniques in that period and starts the domination of CNN in the field of
computer vision. Figure 2.3 shows the architecture of LeNet-5, which is the
basic architecture of a CNN.
Data invariant
When processing 2D image data, features of a class are
invariant. Therefore, a well trained CNN are expected to detect the classes’
main characteristics and exploit these data invariants, meaning it can classify
an image according to its main characteristics regardless of the object position
and rotation. However, training such model is often found difficult because
of the lacking of data. One way to solve this problem is to increase the data
invariant by data augmentation such as rotating, translating and flipping the
image. It is because a small change of transformation will not change the main
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Transfer Learning
19
Figure 2.3: Architecture of LeNet-5 (Lecun et al. 1998)
characteristics of the image and at the same time increase the data invariance
(Chen, Dobriban, and Lee 2019).
2.5
Transfer Learning
According to Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt, transfer learning is a research
problem in machine learning that focuses on storing knowledge gained while
solving one problem and applying it to a different but related problem (Thrun
and Pratt 1998).
The need of transfer learning
Comparing to traditional machine learning
methods, deep learning highly depends on the size of the training dataset. It is
because it needs to learn from massive amount of data in order to understand
the patterns of them (Tan et al. 2018). However, in some real-life machine
learning scenarios, there are cases which are expensive or difficult to to build
a large-scale, high-quality annotated dataset. Therefore, it is necessary to cre-
ate a representative high-performance algorithm trained on large-scale related
source domain, with the possibility to transfer the learned knowledge to the
target domain (Pan and Yang 2010).
Benefits of transfer learning
A research suggested three possible bene-
fits when using transfer learning (Torrey and Shavlik n.d.). First, the initial
performance in the target task is higher than the initial performance of an
ignorant agent. Second, the amount of time for a transfer learning model to
learn the target task is shorter than a model to learn it from scratch. Third,
the final performance a transfer learning model can achieve in the target task
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
Figure 2.4: An illustration of the three benefits of transfer learning (Torrey
and Shavlik n.d.)
is higher than a model without transfer. These three benefits are illustrated
in Figure 2.4.
How to use transfer learning
When using a transfer learning technique,
a pre-trained model trained on the source task should be chosen from available
models. In recent years, there are some promising models trained on large and
powerful datasets. These models are included in the pool of candidate models
a target task can choose from. Some state-of-the-art CNN models that use
image as input will be introduced in section 2.6. After a pre-trained model is
selected, the weights in the model can be used or partly be used as the starting
point. The last few layers of the model is tuned base on the target task, and
the model is fine-tuned with the target dataset, in order to refine the model for
a better performance on the target task. A Study on CNN Transfer Learning
for Image Classification (Hussain, Bird, and Faria 2018) indicates that even
using a pre-trained model which was trained on massive dataset, the model
would still achieve a higher accuracy if it was tuned with a larger dataset.
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Pre-trained models of Convolutional Neural Network
21
2.6
Pre-trained models of Convolutional
Neural Network
An important part of transfer learning is to select the suitable pre-trained
model which is trained from a similar and generalised large dataset. ImageNet,
presented in 2009, is one of the largest image dataset. It consists of over 15
million labelled images and is seen as the catalyst for the AI boom world
(J. Deng et al. 2009). Based on ImageNet, an annual competition called the
ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) is considered
to be the annual Olympic in computer vision domain which always marks the
state of the art performance (Russakovsky et al. 2015). Apart from ImageNet,
two big players in the internet word, Google and Microsoft also have their
contribution by providing Google Open Images (Kuznetsova et al. 2018) and
Microsoft Common Objects in Context (COCO) dataset(Lin et al. n.d.) as
well as related challenges. The pre-trained models introduced below are the
famous ones from the ILSVRC.
2.6.1
AlexNet
In 2012, the invention of AlexNet shocked the computer vision community by
wining the ILSVRC competition and achieving the top-5 error rates of 15.3%
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton 2012). The astounding im-
provement achieved by CNN marked AlexNet as a revolutionary work that
can take image recognition to the next level. Since then, CNN has become an
household name in competitions (Md. Zahangir Alom et al. 2018).
As shown in Figure 2.5, the network was made up of 5 convolutional layers,
some of which are followed by max-pooling layers, and 3 fully connected lay-
ers with 1000-way softmax (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton
2012). The network firstly uses “drop out” regularization method and com-
putationally free data augmentation method to combat overfitting. It also
changes the traditional saturating tanh activation function to non-saturating
ReLU activation function, which improves the training speed. Moreover, due
to the limited GPU memory capacity back in the time, the network splits
the training process into two GTX 580 GPUs, which takes slightly less time
comparing with training on one-GPU net with half amount of kernels in each
convolutional layers.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
Figure 2.5: An illustration of the architecture of CNN (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Geoffrey E Hinton 2012)
By using these techniques, AlexNet significantly optimised the state-of-the-art
by increasing the accuracy and efficiency. Therefore, it becomes a milestone
in computer vision domain.
2.6.2
GoogLeNet
GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al. 2014), the winner of ILSVRC14, achieves the new
state-of-the-art performance for classification and object detection in the chal-
lenge.
It is a 22 layers deep network with 12 times less parameters than
AlexNet while being more accurate.
The idea of GoogLeNet is to make a
model that can also be used on a smart-phone. Therefore, they limit the com-
putational resources at around 1.5 billion multiply-adds on prediction.
GoogLeNet proposed a new architecture called Inception module. An Incep-
tion module consist of 1 × 1 convolutions, 3 × 3 convolutions, 5 × 5, and 3 × 3
max pooling, which are stacked together at output. Illustration of an Incep-
tion module can be seen in Figure 2.6a. The idea of the Inception module is
to cover a bigger area and at the same time keep a fine resolution for small
details in the images.
However, performing 5 × 5 convolutions directly on the input is very expen-
sive. Therefore, 1 × 1 convolutions are used to compute reductions before
the expensive 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 convolutions. See 2.6b Inception module with
dimension reduction.
==PAGE:33==
2.6 Pre-trained models of Convolutional Neural Network
23
(a) Inception module, naïve version
(b) Inception module with dimension reductions
Figure 2.6: Inception module architecture proposed in GoogLeNet (Szegedy
et al. 2014)
Figure 2.7 shows the architecture of GoogLeNet. The sparse architecture al-
lows GoogLeNet goes deeper with less computational resources and low mem-
ory footprint.
Its success yields solid evidence that the idea of moving to
sparser architectures is feasible and useful (Szegedy et al. 2014).
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
Figure 2.7: Architecture of GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al. 2014)
2.6.3
VGGNet
VGGNet focus on how the depth of a CNN architecture affects its performance.
To research on this question, VGGNet uses only 3×3 convolutions with stride
1 and pad 1, 2 × 2 max pooling with stride 2 throughout the whole network.
As 3 × 3 convolutions is the smallest size for a receptive field to capture the
notion of the centre and all directions (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014).
VGGNet has similar training procedure as AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Geoffrey E Hinton 2012) and improves over it.
Therefore, instead of
11 × 11 convolutions with stride 4 in AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Geoffrey E Hinton 2012), and 7×7 convolutions with stride 2 in ZFNet (Zeiler
and Fergus 2013), VGGNet uses multiple layers of 3×3 filter one after another
to convolve the input at every pixel.
Figure 2.8 illustrates that 2 layers of 3 × 3 filters can cover a 5 × 5 area. By
the same mean, 3 layers of 3 × 3 filters have a 7 × 7 effective receptive field.
By using a stack of 3 × 3 convolutional layers instead of a single larger con-
volutional layer reduces the number of parameters (Simonyan and Zisserman
2014). Moreover, with the non-linear ReLU activation following on each con-
volutional layers, the use of multiple convolutional layers increase both the
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Pre-trained models of Convolutional Neural Network
25
Figure 2.8: An illustration of a 5 × 5 area covered by 2 layers of 3 × 3 filters
(Tsang 2018)
depth and non-linearity of the network. This enables the network to learn
more complex features and make the decision function more discriminative.
VGGNet tested the performance of models with different depth and other
settings. As shown in Figure 2.9, it shows that adding Local Response Nor-
malisation (LRN) does not improve the performance. Therefore, this setting
from AlexNet was not used in the VGGNet. Moreover, VGGNet shows that
the performance increases with the increases in network depth, but it starts
converging between VGG16 and VGG19 as shown in Table 2.1.
VGGNet successfully proved that increasing the depth of network increases
the accuracy. However, as the depth of the model increases, it also causes
another problem such as vanishing gradient problem(Y. Bengio, P. Simard,
and Frasconi 1994b). Vanishing gradient problem is a common problem in
training a very deep neural network, details can be seen in Section 2.3.6..
Moreover, as the model is very heavy with the depth and the huge amount of
parameters, it also causes difficulties in training (Glorot and Yoshua Bengio
2010).
Configuration
A
A-LRN
B
C
D
E
top-1 val. error (%)
29.6
29.7
28.7
28.1
27.0
27.3
top-5 val. error (%)
10.4
10.5
9.9
9.4
8.8
9.0
Table 2.1: Performance of VGGNet in different configurations (Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014)
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
Figure 2.9: Configurations of VGGNets with different depth settings. ReLU
activation function is not shown for brevity. (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
2.6.4
ResNet
After several years of discovery, it has been proved that network depth is cru-
cially important to the performance. Very deep models are now possible to
make due to the more powerful and faster CPUs and GPUs.
However, networks cannot learn better by easily stacking more layers be-
cause of the following issues. The vanishing gradients problem (Y. Bengio,
P. Simard, and Frasconi 1994b; Glorot and Yoshua Bengio 2010) hampers
convergence, causing the neurons in the earlier layers learn very slowly. In
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Pre-trained models of Convolutional Neural Network
27
addition to the degradation problem: the accuracy gets saturated first, and
then degrades rapidly. This increases the training error when the network
has more layers (He et al. 2016). Most of the vanishing gradient problem can
be solved by using ReLu activation function, normalised initialisation (LeCun
et al. 1998; He et al. 2015) and intermediate normalisation layers while a deep
residual learning framework is introduced to address the degradation problem
(He et al. 2016).
Figure 2.10: Left: a building block for ResNet-34, Right: a bottleneck building
block for ResNet-50/101/152(He et al. 2016)
The deep residual learning framework is construed of the building blocks as
shown in the left of Figure 2.10. Instead of optimising the stacked layers to
approximate H(x), it lets these layers approximate a residual function F(x),
which is equivalent to H(x) −x. Thus, the original function H(x) becomes
F(x) + x. A hypothesis has been made that minimising the residual function
to zero is easier than fitting the original identity mapping.
Based on this hypothesis, the residual learning blocks, so called shortcut con-
nections, has been adopted to every few stacked layers on top of a plain
network based on VGGNet as shown in Figure 2.11. As the architecture is
designed for very deep models, a bottleneck design using 1×1 convolutions to
reduce parameters, as shown in the right of Figure 2.10, has been introduced to
reduce the complexity of the network. With no extra parameters, ResNet has
lower complexity comparing to shallower VGGNet. 152-layer ResNet achieved
a 3.57% top-5 error that beats human-level performance and won the 1st place
in ILSVRC 2015. The invention of ResNet leads the way to train a very deep
network efficiently.
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
Figure 2.11: Example of network architectures.
Right: Residual Network
with 34 parameter layers(He et al. 2016). Middle: A plain network with 34
parameter layers. Left: The VGG-19 model (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
==PAGE:39==
2.7 Interpretation of Performance Measures
29
2.7
Interpretation of Performance Measures
There are different ways to interpret the performance of a classification model,
this section introduces some commonly used measures for performance inter-
pretation.
2.7.1
Confusion Matrix
A confusion matrix is a table used for interpreting the performance of a clas-
sification model on a set of data which its actual class is known. It shows
the predicted and actual classifications on a matrix of size ℓ× ℓ, where ℓis
the number of different label values or number of classes (Kohavi and Provost
1998). Table 2.2 shows a confusion matrix with ℓequals 2.
Predicted Value
Negative
Positive
Actual Value
Negative
True Negative (TN)
False Positive (FP)
Positive
False Negative (FN)
True Positive (TP)
Table 2.2: A 2 × 2 confusion matrix
2.7.2
Performance Measures
This session introduces some commonly used performance measures in classi-
fication tasks.
Accuracy
Accuracy is the most intuitive performance measure which is sim-
ply calculated by the number of correctly predicted samples divided by the
number of total samples. This calculation is mostly used in single label clas-
sification when the prediction is either true or false with the same value for
false negative and false positive. The formula is given as follow.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
Precision and Recall
Precision and recall were first defined in 1955 in the
field of information retrieval (Kent et al. 1955). In the paper, precision was
defined as the fraction of retrieved documents that are relevant to the query,
meaning the fraction of true positive samples from all the predicted positive
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Fundamentals and State of the Art
samples. Optimising precision is useful when the task requires minimum false
positive prediction, such as spam email detection. The formula of precision is
given as below.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Similar to precision, recall was defined as the fraction of relevant documents
that are successfully retrieved, meaning the fraction of true positive samples
from all the actual positive samples. Different from precision, optimising recall
is useful when the task requires minimum false negative prediction, such as
disease prediction. The formula of recall is given as follow.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
F-score
F-score is also known as F-measure or F1 score, which is calculated
from Precision and Recall. It is the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall
and conveys the balance between Precision and Recall. F-score is useful when
the performance of a model cannot be interpreted simply by its Accuracy
and want to seek balanced Precision and Recall. Example can be multi-label
classification tasks, which Accuracy does not take partially correct predictions
into account. The formula is given as follow.
F −score =
(
precision−1 + recall−1
2
)−1
= 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
=
2 · TP
2 · TP + FP + FN
2.8
Related work
There are some existing studies about museum labelling, which could bring
good input to this thesis.
A research paper named “Challenges in Content-Based Image Indexing of
Cultural Heritage Collections” introduced a study based on Bibliothèque Na-
tionale de France image collections. It discusses the use of automatic tools
==PAGE:41==
2.8 Related work
31
to both automatically provide labels and search through the collections (Pi-
card, Gosselin, and Gaspard 2015). 569 classes has been chosen in the study
and been divided into different domains: Semantic (459), visual (62), histori-
cal (26), geographical (14), and physical (8). Mid-level feature extracted from
three different methods: Fisher vectors, compact preprocessed vector of locally
aggregated tensors (CPVLAT), and deep CNN-based features taken from the
penultimate layer of CNNs. These features are fed into a linear support vec-
tor machine and trained with five-fold cross-validation. The result from this
study shows that it is very difficult to design a numerical representation that
can encode both microscopic and macroscopic properties (e.g. brush strokes
and scene layout in painting) with the present techniques.
Another study named “The Shape of Art History in the Eyes of the Machine”
applied several state-of-the-art CNN to classify the styles of 771 images of
paintings, and visualised the learned representation in order to analysis the
correlation. The result shows that some underling factors are correlated with
the style patterns suggested by Heinrich Wölfflin (1846-1945). These factors
are able to explain the visual variations of styles in art (Elgammal et al. 2018).
The study offers insights into the functions of styles for art historians, and
provides proof of meaningful patterns learned from machine for further explo-
ration.
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Solution Concept
This chapter first describes how the labels are selected based on researches,
and then defined those labels in a hierarchical structure.
Furthermore, it
generally introduces the framework of our solution and how it addresses the
problems mentioned in the previous chapters.
3.1
Digitisation in National Museum of
Denmark
The National Museum of Denmark (NMD) is the largest museum of cultural
history in Denmark. The museum covers 14,000 years of Danish history as
well as foreign cultures. Recently, NMD has embraced itself to meet new user
demands and expectations by pushing the process of digitisation (J. R. Wang
n.d.). 533,033 collections have been digitalised and opened to the public to
empower the users to make good use of the cultural heritage resources.
3.1.1
Selection of image retrieval system
However, focusing only on digitisation is not enough to make image collections
more accessible to the users. Labels of categories and indexes are still neces-
sary when online visitors want to retrieve images from the digital museum.
Therefore, an efficient and effective technique to derive required information
automatically from the digital images for the image retrieval is needed.
To design a good image recognition system for automatic labelling, it is nec-
essary to analyse what kind of users are going to search within the digital
museum. This helps to choose the right image retrieval technique.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Solution Concept
Image retrieval techniques can be classified into three categories: text-based
image retrieval (TBIR), content-based image retrieval (CBIR), and semantic-
based image retrieval (SBIR). (Alkhawlani, Elmogy, and El-Bakry 2015)
The current solution NMD using is TBIR. The online collections have meta
data about date, location, text, label etc. which are all manually annotated by
museum sectors. Online visitors can search for collections by inserting queries
or choosing relevant categories in the selected filter. The searching engine will
compare these information with the meta data of the on-line collections and
propose the matching results. There are some drawbacks in this approach e.g.
it is impractical to manually annotate such a large image dataset, because
the annotator may give different descriptions to images with similar visual
content or because most images are rich in content that require more detail
annotations, or because textual annotations are language dependent.
CBIR and SBIR both search and analyses the contents and features of the
image. While CBIR focuses on interpreting the low-level features e.g. colours,
shapes, textures, or any other features that can be derived from the image
itself, SBIR is based on extracting high-level features of images to identify
meaningful and interesting regions or objects based on the similar character-
istics of the visual features.
This project focuses on semantic-based image retrieval system (SBIR) to sug-
gest labels on high-level representations that are close to how online visitors
perceive the images in order to suggest more precious search results.
3.1.2
Understanding of labelling
How to categorise images in a useful way (Rorissa and Iyer 2008) and what
range and type of image attributes to index is always a matter of discussion
(Laine-Hernandez 2006; Menard, Karantininis, and Nilsson 2007). The need
for effective indexing methods is critical because substantial resources are
spent on cataloguing (Calhoun 2006), and institutions providing collections
of digitalised images need to find the most effective and economical means to
provide access to images.
Despite its importance, the process involved in subject indexing is little un-
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Digitisation in National Museum of Denmark
35
derstood and there is a surprising lack of research to evaluate how it should
be done (Mai 2005). Art historical museum documentation is written by art
historians and is designed for professional needs. However, when viewing the
online collections, this information is less accessible to the public at large due
to the difference in the depth of knowledge in art, characteristics that are
deemed important and the language used (Trant 2009; Gunho Chae 2011).
An early study at the Metropolitan Museum of Art compare the difference
between the documentation of existing collections, stylistically description by
art historian as well as the the words that are supplied by public viewers when
they consider “terms I would enter if I were trying to find this image” (Trant
and Wyman 2006). Table 3.1 shows the description of the collection shown in
Figure 3.1. The result indicates a significant variation: public viewers tend to
describe more what it “literally” depicts in the image rather than the specific
data e.g. artist, date or iconography.
Figure 3.1: Alvin Langdon Coburn (British, born America, 1882–1966), The
Octopus, 1912. The Metropolitan Museum, New York (1987.1100.13). Ford
Motor Company Collection, Gift of Ford Motor Company and John C. Wad-
dell, 1987
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Solution Concept
Museum description
Art historian
Volunteer
Alvin Langdon Coburn
(British, born America,
1882–1966)
The Octopus, 1912
Platinum print; 41.8 x
31.8 cm
(16 7/16 x 12 1/2 in.)
Ford Motor Company
Collection, Gift of Ford
Motor Company and
John C. Waddell,
1987 (1987.1100.13)
Couched in the soft velvety
nap of the platinum paper,
composed in the languid
lines of Art Nouveau, and
softly focused, this photo-
-graph of New York’s
Madison Square employs
many elements of Picto-
-rialism at its best.
However, the dizzying effect
of Coburn’s aerial view and
his fascination with the
skyscraper are distinctly and
precociously modern. The
blend of Pictorialist technique
and fresh vision was characte-
-ristic of the transitional mom-
-ent when Alfred Stieglitz,
Coburn, Karl Struss, and
Paul Strand began to celebrate
contemporary urban
experience.
20th century,
abstract,
abstraction,
aerial,
aerial topography,
areal perspective,
black and white
contrast,
cities,
cityscape in winter,
coldness, contrasts,
empty park,
Flat Iron Building,
geography as art
landscapes,
Late 19th/early 20th
century,
Madison Square
Table 3.1: Different description of collection shown in Figure 3.1
This mismatch of information is called “semantic gap”. Social tagging is one
of the way to bridge the semantic gap between traditional index and new on-
line audiences. (Klavans, LaPlante, and Golbeck 2014) However it requires a
lot of man power when we are facing a huge amount of collections. Another
approach is to understand how the public interacts with the pictures and
translates that interaction into improved machine annotation mechanisms.
A study about social tagging has been done on subset from the “steve.museum
collection” of 100 representational images of paintings (Klavans, LaPlante, and
Golbeck 2014). The categories of the tags are shown in Figure 3.2. The re-
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Digitisation in National Museum of Denmark
37
Figure 3.2: Categorization of Social tag (Klavans, LaPlante, and Golbeck
2014)
sult shows that people tend to use the generic description about “who” and
“what” can be found in the image, such as “horse skull” or “rock”, “labor” or
“boat ride”, because of the lack of expertise about the collection. Apart from
the generic description, some may also use abstract tags e.g. “beauty” and
“meaning of life”. As Shatford(1986) notes, the abstract category captures
the different interpretations of images by individuals. Moreover, there is a
conclusion in the study that the less in depth of knowledge one has about
the collection, the less confident he/she is when describing the image using
abstract words or phrases to express emotions.
3.1.3
Label selection and ontology design
The findings from previous sections should be taken into consideration when
choosing and defining the labels in this thesis. It has been proven that public
users tend to use generic tags and describe what is “literally” depicted in the
image. Therefore, this project focuses on recognizing the basic objects con-
tained in the original art work from digital representation, in order to meet
user’s perception.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Solution Concept
When selecting labels, it is also important to define the relationship between
them. Ontology is the concept which relates to being, the basic categories of
being as well as their relations. When it comes to art, ontology considers the
matter, form, and mode in which art exists. More specifically, an art work can
be classified in terms of their media, their type, their styles or their contents
(Davies 2009).
Based on previous findings and the interest of NMD shown by Jacob Wang,
we decides to choose several labels based on the type of the collection (Photo,
Painting, Sculpture, Coin, Text/Document, Pottery) and several based
on the contents (Animal, People, Building, Vehicle, Landscape, City,
Crowd, Portrait).
One thing to note is that the type of the collection is mutually exclusive, this
means that one can not be both a painting and a coin. However the content
of collections can be compatible. A landscape photo can contain both people
and animal. Based on this difference, the ontology is designed into a two-levels
structure, multi-class single-label level and multi-class multi-label level.
It is decided to use a hierarchical ontology structure in order to customise the
second level classifier for different type of collections. Because, for example,
a photo of an animal can look very different compared to a sculpture of an
animal. Besides, when using a hierarchical structure, the classifiers can also
take advantage of the shared characteristics and exploit these relationships
when there is a big amount of label candidates. The ontology structure of this
thesis is shown in figure 3.3.
When preparing the training and validation set for both classifiers, images
need to be manually annotated - relevant labels need to be assigned to images.
The general public users can easily agree on the type of collections base on
their common sense. However, the content of the images can vary because of
different interpretation. Therefore, a definition of all the classes that can be
assigned to a photo, shown in Table 3.2, is needed as the rules for annotation
of training dataset for the Second Level Classification. This definition uses
WordNet, a large lexical database of English (Miller 1995), as a reference.
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Digitisation in National Museum of Denmark
39
Figure 3.3: Labels and ontology
Class
Definition
Animal
Depicts any group of animals
Building
Depicts the outside structure of any group of buildings
City
Depicts a large and densely populated urban area
Crowd
Depicts a large number of people
Landscape
Depicts an expanse of natural scenery
People
Depicts any group of human beings
Portrait
Depicts a person’s appearance
Vehicle
Depicts a conveyance that transports people or objects
Table 3.2: Definition of classes for the Second Level Classifier
To prepare our models for being robust under real time scenario, how to han-
dle the samples that do not belong to any of the classes needs to be taken into
consideration. A study shows that using large quantities of unlabelled data
to create an additional Dustbin class can not only solve the “None of above”
problem, but also improve the performance on the test sets (Xiang Zhang and
LeCun 2015). Therefore, “Other” class has been added into the training and
validation dataset for both classifiers. In the First Level Classifier, 1000 im-
ages which do not belong to any of the classes but belong to the same domain
have been added to the training set for “Other” class. During the testing pro-
cess, an image will be assigned to “Other” class if “Other” class achieves the
highest predicted probability. However, in the Second Level Classifier, there
is no image labelled as “Other” class. Unlabelled data join the training and
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Solution Concept
validation set as the additional Dustbin data. A test image will be assigned
to “Other” class if it can not be categorised into any of the multiple classes.
The dotted line shown in Figure 3.3 represents a parent-child hierarchy among
some of the labels in the second level. The hierarchy has been defined based
on common sense. Whether the model has detected the hierarchy throughout
the training will be analysed in Section 5.2.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Training base on Transfer Learning
41
3.2
Training base on Transfer Learning
Figure 3.4: Automatic annotation solution
The overview of an automatic annotation solution is demonstrated in Figure
3.4. It takes an image of the collection as an input, goes through the first
classifier for single-label classification, picks the class with highest predicted
probability as the result of the collection’s type and passes it through the
second classifier. Then the second classifier will predict multiple possible con-
tent of that image. The final result of the solution will propose the classes as
well as the probabilities from both classifiers. According to the interview with
Jacob Wang, the institution would like to have more flexibility to select the
useful labels themselves. Therefore, all the output from the second classifier
has been kept and presented in the final result regardless of the low probability.
Note that due to the inadequate time for implementation, the Second Level
Classifier can only recognise content from photos, therefore other results from
the First Level Classifier except “Photo” will not continue to the second classi-
fier. The implementation to recognise the content of other type requires more
data acquisition as well as more human annotation, which is considered to be
a plan for future work.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Solution Concept
3.2.1
First Level Classifier
Dataset
The First Level Classifier is trained on images downloaded from
NMD website and Google Images, with around 1000 images in one class. Im-
ages are resized, cropped, horizontal flipped and normalised during data aug-
mentation.
Transfer Learning
Data is trained on top of pre-trained models using trans-
fer learning. As introduced in Section 2.5, using transfer learning for initiation
is a good starting point for the model as it speeds up the training process. It
can also ensure a promising result even with a limited amount of dataset. Next
chapter introduces which particular pre-trained model is selected for this First
Level classification problem.
Activation Function
To translate the pre-trained models into our use case,
the last output layer has been reduced to 7 neurons. Softmax activation func-
tion has been used in the output layers, similarly as the famous deep learn-
ing architectures e.g. AlexNet, VGG and ResNet. After applying softmax,
the model returns probabilities range from 0 to 1, with the sum equals to
1 (Nwankpa et al. 2018). A test image is categorised to the class with the
highest probability.
Loss Function
Cross Entropy Loss is chosen to be the lose function because
it leads to faster convergence and better results in terms of classification prob-
lem (Golik, Doetsch, and Ney 2013).
Performance Measurement
After the training process, model with the
best validation accuracy is selected to be the final model. The details of the
implementation and experiment result are introduced in Chapter 4.
3.2.2
Second Level Classifier
Dataset
The Second Level Classifier is only trained on NMD dataset. The
data annotation process is more complicated so that each class contains less
amount of data compared to the First Level dataset. Moreover, the amount of
data in each class is imbalanced due to the hierarchical ontology. This could
be an issue to the model because the parameters are almost tuned specially
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Training base on Transfer Learning
43
for the majority classes and are drawn towards predicting the majority class
in order to optimise the loss. Therefore, the model would predict the majority
class with a very high probability in test data. Adding weight in Cross Entropy
loss function is a suggested way to approach this problem, more details are
introduced in Section 4.3.4.
Activation Function
The biggest difference between single-label classifier
and multi-label classifier is the output layer.
In multi-label classifier, the
classes are not mutually exclusive and independent from each other. Therefore
the activation function of the last layer is changed from softmax to sigmoid.
Loss Function
Cross Entropy Loss Function is also used in the Second
Level Classifier since is it a commonly used loss function for classification.
Performance Measurement
The Second Level Classifier uses F-score to
measure the performance of the model instead of test accuracy. The result
from a multi-label classifier, can not be simply categorised into “correct” or
“incorrect”. “Partially” correct should also be considered. F-score balances
between precision and recall so that one could know how many instances are
classified correctly as well as make sure that the classifier does not miss a
significant amount of instances.
Optimisation
Other technique to optimise the model performance e.g. reg-
ularization, threshold selection, and learning rate selection are also discussed
in Chapter 4.
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation and
Experimental Result
This chapter describes in details how the implementation of both the First
Level Classifier and the Second Level Classifier were done, following with
some optimization techniques to improve the model performance.
4.1
Platform and Libraries
The development of this project is done in DTU remote GPU cluster with 2
× Tesla V100 16 or 32 GB GPU in a Linux Environment. The programming
language used is Python because of the large amount of libraries it offers for
machine learning including torch and torchvision, which are used for handling
datasets and training models in this project (Paszke et al. 2017a). Additional
libraries, such as numpy and sklearn, are also used for data handling and
metrics evaluation.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
4.2
First Level Classifier
Figure 4.1: Visualization of the First Level Classifier
The illustration of the First Level Classifier is shown in Figure 4.3.
The
First Level Classifier is primarily aiming at separating the image according
to its types, while a collection can be classified as one and only one type.
Therefore, multi-class single-label classification is used as the classes are mu-
tually exclusive (Xinbin Zhang 2018). This classifier consist of 6 classes 1:
“Coin”, “Manuscript”, “Painting”, “Photo”, “Pottery” and “Sculpture” plus
an “Other” class. Image will be classified as “Other” if it does not belong to
any of the 6 classes.
If the image belongs to “Photo” class, it will then enter the Second Level
Classifier which is a multi-label classifier. This is to customise the Second
Level Classifier only for a certain type of collections with the aim of gaining
better accuracy on the Second Level Classifier under the assumption that
features in the same type of collections look similar.
4.2.1
Data acquisition, preprocessing, and annotation
The First Level Classifier is trained with a dataset of 7000 images from 7
classes with roughly 1000 images per class. By using the API provided by
NMD, a JSON file of each collection can be obtained. Images are downloaded
from the museum website if they contain the name of the class in either the
1Referred as “categories” or “art types” in previous sections
==PAGE:57==
4.2 First Level Classifier
47
“Title”, “Description”, or “Tag” field of the JSON file and are saved to the
respective folders of the class.
Afterwards, the images in each folder need
to be manually confirmed, deleted, or re-located according to the definition
of classes shown in Table 3.2. This process of assigning images to the right
classes is called data annotation.
However, acquiring images only from the museum website is not sufficient for
some art types, e.g. the “Painting” class. In this case, images scrapped from
Google are added to enlarge the dataset. However, Google Images join only
the training set but not the validation set in order to ensure the similarity
of validation data and real-life data from the museum. To understand how
involving Google Images affect the performance of the model, a test is done
by training two identical models with different training sets. One with only
museum data and one involves both Google Images and museum data. Figure
4.2 shows that adding Google Images not only enlarge the dataset, but also
increases the model performance, especially for the classes that already have
a good accuracy. Therefore, it was decided to involve Google Images in the
training set, in case the museum data in a class is insufficient
(a) Validation accuracy with only museum
data
(b)
Validation
accuracy
after
adding
Google image in training set
Figure 4.2: Accuracy model before and after adding Google Images to training
data
After acquiring images and saving them into folders, the data folders need to
be reformed to a certain format in order to fit in the data loading function,
ImageFolder, from the torchvision library. Figure 4.3 shows the structure of
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
the data folder. Data is separated into two sets: training set and validation
set with a ratio of 0.7 to 0.3.
Coin
Manuscript
Others
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Coin
Manuscript
Others
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
train
val
data
Figure 4.3: Data Folder Structure for Image Folder Function
4.2.2
Data Loader
Figure 4.3 shows the structure of the folders that stores images. Images are
loaded from folders while being augmented and sent to the neural network.
The ImageFolder function from torchvision is used in this case. It goes to the
folders of the two sets of data, loads the image data, transforms the data, and
pairs them with an integer corresponding to their class. Data Augmentation
in data-space with affine transformation (Wong et al. 2016) is only done in the
training set to increase the amount of data and thus increase the performance
of the model. Validation data should be in the original form because it aims
to estimate the performance on real-life data. Therefore, training data is aug-
mented by randomly resizing and cropping the images as well as normalizing
the images. These two transformation methods help to get rid of the frame
in the image and speed up the convergence when training the neural network.
Whereas validation data is just transformed to a fixed data shape as input to
the model. For both training set and validation set, loading an image with
class e.g. “Painting” will return image data of shape (224 × 224 × 3), and the
==PAGE:59==
4.2 First Level Classifier
49
number “3” which represents the “Painting” class. The difference between
loading training data and validation data is when a image is loaded as train-
ing data, its image data are different every time it is loaded in each epoch.
This is because of the random transformation. On the other hand, if a image
is loaded as validation data, the image data will be the same throughout all
epochs. It is to keep its similarity with real-life data and best estimate the
model performance in real-life.
Dataset
Augmentation
Training
RandomResizedCrop(224)
RandomResizedCrop(224)
RandomHorizontalFlip()
ToTensor()
Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
[0.229, 0.224, 0.225])
Validation
Resize(256)
CenterCrop(224)
ToTensor()
Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
[0.229, 0.224, 0.225])
Table 4.1: Data Transformation for training set and validation set
4.2.3
Loss Function Selection
The following formula shows how Cross Entropy Loss is calculated in the torch
nn library (Paszke et al. 2017b), where “x” is the output and “class” is the
integer representing the true label. This loss function combines softmax and
Cross Entropy in loss calculation.
loss(x, class) = −log
(
exp(x[class])
∑
j exp(x[j])
)
= −x[class] + log

∑
j
exp(x[j])


==PAGE:60==
50
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
4.2.4
Model selection
4.2.4.1
Transfer Learning
Since the First Level Classifier is used as the primary filter to recognise the
type of collection, it needs a promising performance in order to make sure
the image is passed correctly to the corresponding Second Level Classifier ac-
cording to its type, which in this case is “Photo”. With a limited dataset of
7000 images, training from scratch might not be able to obtain a satisfying
result. Therefore, transfer learning is considered as it solves the problem of in-
sufficient training data by transferring the knowledge from the source domain
to the target domain, if both domains have a similar data feature (Tan et al.
2018).
Table 4.2 shows the results of the models training from scratch along with the
result of a pre-trained model based on on ImageNet data. ImageNet consists
of 1.2 million images, which belongs to 1000 classes with mostly daily object
categories such as animal breeds, fruit, vehicles, etc. List of 1000 classes can
be found in Appendix A. ImageNet has become a reference in the field of com-
puter vision since most cutting-edge CNN architectures are pre-trained based
on ImageNet data and stand out from the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recog-
nition Competition (ILSVRC), the competition where software programs com-
pete to correctly classify and detect objects and scenes.
Model
Learning Rate
Validation Accuracy
Train from scratch
0.05
0.792157
Train from scratch
0.0005
0.803922
Pretrained with ImageNet data
0.0005
0.920261
Table 4.2: Results of ResNet18 trained from scratch and pre-trained with
ImageNet data
We decided to use models that are pre-trained on ImageNet dataset, not only
because of the accessibility and the high performance of these models proven
in the ILSVRC, but also because of the similarity shared between the classes in
ImageNet and the classes this thesis focuses on. Therefore, knowledge about
the pre-trained model learned from ImageNet can be transferred to the culture
heritage images domain.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 First Level Classifier
51
All of the models in Table 4.2 are using same architecture of ResNet18 trained
with the 7000 images and 100 epochs. It can be seen that when training on a
limited amount of data, using transfer learning gives a much better accuracy
than training from scratch.
4.2.4.2
Pre-trained Model Selection
It has been proven that transfer learning gives much better results in the
previous section. A question arises: which pre-trained model best suits our
target task?
This is tested by training with a small epoch number of 30
on the the same dataset for a fast overview of the performance of available
pre-trained models in the torchvision library. In the torchvision library, there
are multiple pre-trained models available including AlexNet, VGGNet, ResNet
and GoogLeNet, all pre-trained on ImageNet dataset. The result of all models
are shown in Table 4.3, VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) gives a better
performance on the museum data as it has a strong ability to learn features
and generalize well to other tasks (lu et al. 2017). In this case, VGG16 and
VGG19 gives the same result on 30 epochs training, so a prolonged training of
100 epochs is done on VGG16 and VGG19 to select the better network for this
classifier. Result shows VGG19 with 100 epochs gives a better performance
than that of VGG16. Therefore, VGG19 is selected, see Table 4.4 for the
results.
Model
Accuracy
AlexNet
0.9159
VGG16
0.9342
VGG16 with batch normalization
0.9216
VGG19
0.9342
VGG19 with batch normalization
0.9264
ResNet18
0.9107
ResNet34
0.9137
ResNet50
0.9272
ResNet101
0.9172
ResNet152
0.9185
GoogLeNet (inception v3)
0.9094
Table 4.3: Performance of pre-trained models with museum dataset in 30
epochs
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
Model
Accuracy
VGG16
0.9412
VGG19
0.9425
Table 4.4: Performance of VGG16 and VGG19 models in 100 epochs
4.3
Second Level Classifier
As mentioned above, the Second Level Classifier aims to give labels to a spe-
cific type of a collection, where an image has possibly more than one label.
Therefore, this classifier is a multi-label classifier in which an instance is asso-
ciated with a vector of outputs (Tsoumakas and Katakis 2007; Herrera et al.
2016). In this project, the type of collection focused in the Second Level Clas-
sifier is the “Photo” class, which gives labels based on the content of the image.
Classes included “Animal”, “Building”, “City”, “Crowd”, “Landscape”, “Peo-
ple”, “Portrait”, and “Vehicle”, class definition can be found in Table 3.2.
4.3.1
Data acquisition and preprocessing
The dataset consists of 1200 images downloaded from the NMD website. In
the First Level Classifier, it uses an integer to represent the class the image be-
longs to, but as the Second Level Classifier is a multi label classifier, a simple
integer is not able to represent all labels the image has. Therefore, other data
type is needed to represent all labels the image has. In this case, a binary list
is used with 1 indicating the presence of a label while 0 indicating the absence
of the corresponding label.
To generate such a list, images are put into folders of corresponding labels,
meaning if an image named A.jpg has labels “Animal” and “People”, it should
be present in both the “Animal” folder and the “People” folder with the same
file name, A.jpg. Then by running our tagging script, it loops through all
images, according to the folders they belong to, and add the label of the
images in the binary labelling list using image name as a key. The labelling
list for A.jpg is shown in Table 4.5. All the labelling lists for all images are
then stored in a pickle file in a dictionary format using file name as the key
and the binary labelling list as the value for easy loading in the later phase.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
53
Image Name
Binary Labelling List
A.jpg
[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0]
Table 4.5: Labelling List for A.jpg
4.3.2
Data Loader
ImageFolder, the data loading function used in the First Level Classifier, is
designed for single-label classification. When it comes to multi-label classifi-
cation, there are no available data loading functions in the torchvision library.
Therefore, a customised data loading function is needed to load the image
data and pair them with the corresponding labelling list.
To make a data loader there are two mandatory functions: “_init_” and
“_getitem_”. “_init_” is to initialize the dataset by setting its data path,
transform methods, image file name, and labelling list. “_getitem_” allows
the model to access the image by index, convert the image to tensor, trans-
form the image, and link the image with its corresponding label in the labelling
dictionary created before with its image name as the key. Script for the cus-
tomised data loader can be found in Appendix B. Therefore, the “_getitem_”
function takes index as reference and returns data as shown in Table 4.6 with
the data transform same as the First Level Classifier shown in Table 4.1.
Image Data Shape
Binary Labelling List
(224, 224, 3)
[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0]
Table 4.6: Image Data Structure
4.3.3
Model selection
As proven by the good performance of the First Level Classifier, transfer
learning greatly improves the performance of a model trained with a small
dataset. Because of the annotation difficulty, the dataset for the Second Level
Classifier is even smaller. Therefore, transfer learning was also used in training
the Second Level Classifier.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
4.3.3.1
Loss Function Selection
The result of the First Level Classifier shows Cross Entropy Loss performs well
in classification tasks. Therefore, it is continued to be used in the Second Level
Classifier. However, Cross Entropy Loss function in the nn library used in the
First Level Classifier can only feed one-digit labels for the true label which
makes it unusable in multi-label classification. A loss function for multi-label
classification should be able to calculate the Cross Entropy Loss for binary
predicted output and target. To solve this problem, BCELoss (Binary Cross
Entropy Loss) is considered, which has the following formula in the nn library
(Paszke et al. 2017b), where N is the batch size.
ℓ(x, y) = {l1, . . . , lN}⊤
,
ln = −wn[ynxn + (1 −yn(1 −xn)]
The main difference between single-label classification and multi-label classi-
fication is, multi label classification should be able to give high probabilities
on multiple labels instead of just one in single-label classification. Therefore,
instead of softmax which the probability of output sums to 1, sigmoid func-
tion is used as it squeeze the output to 0, 1 and not necessarily sums to 1.
BCE with Logits Loss function in the nn library is then used as it combines
a sigmoid layer and Binary Cross Entropy Loss into a single class and gives
a more numerically stable result than just using a plain sigmoid followed by
a Binary Cross Entropy Loss (Paszke et al. 2017b). The following equation
shows how BCE with Logits Loss is calculated in the nn library.
ℓ(x, y) = {l1, . . . , lN}⊤
,
ln = −wn[ynσ(xn) + (1 −yn(1 −σ(xn))]
4.3.3.2
Activation Function
The desired output of the model is the probabilities for labels. Therefore, an
activation function is needed to squeeze the output into a space of 0, 1. The
same as the calculation of loss, sigmoid function is used to activate the output
and covert it into probabilities.
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
55
4.3.3.3
Threshold
In single-label classification, the predicted output is always one and only one
label, the model only needs to select the class with the highest output. How-
ever, in the case of multi-label classification, it comes with a problem that the
model has no idea how many labels it should return for the image. Therefore,
a threshold is needed to compare with the output, so that if the output is
greater than or equal to the threshold, it means the model thinks the image
has such a label. On the other hand, if the output is less than the threshold,
it means the model does not think the image has such a label. This threshold
help in generating the predicted labels for the image, which can then be used in
the calculation of performance: F-score, Precision, and Recall for multi-label
classification models.
4.3.3.4
Network Selection
Similar with the First Level Classifier, to see which pre-trained model has the
best performance on our target task, all available pre-trained model in the
nn library is trained with the museum data with 50 epochs and the settings
shown in Table 4.7. This is to get an overview of model performance. From
the results shown on Table 4.8, it can be seen that VGG16 performs the best
with museum data which is then selected for further development.
Loss Function
BCEwithLogitsLoss
Activation Function
sigmoid
Threshold
0.5
Table 4.7: Model Settings
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
Model
F-score
AlexNet
0.7102
VGG16
0.7794
VGG16 with batch normalization
0.7483
VGG19
0.7342
VGG19 with batch normalization
0.7511
ResNet18
0.6843
ResNet34
0.7135
ResNet50
0.6841
ResNet101
0.6774
ResNet152
0.6904
GoogLeNet (inception v3)
0.6002
Table 4.8: Performance of models with museum dataset
4.3.4
Performance optimisation
After deciding the basic structure for the model, there is always rooms for
performance improvement. This section mentions different approaches that
have been tried, in order to improve the model.
4.3.4.1
Error Analysis
To identify the errors reducing the performance, the training and validation
accuracy is first analysed. Figure 4.4 shows the model has a higher precision
but lower recall. This means the model tends to give rather a negative predic-
tion than a positive one. It can be caused by the problem of the imbalanced
dataset. The class definition in Table 3.2 shows some classes have a higher
level hierarchy, which means an image belongs to its sub-class must as well be-
longs to the parent-class. Therefore, it is impossible to obtain a fully balanced
dataset. Some classes like “City”, “Crowd”, and “Portrait” will always have
less data than “Building” and “People”. Figure 4.5 shows the data distribution
for all the classes.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
57
Figure 4.4: Validation F-score, Precision and Recall of VGG16 model
Figure 4.5: Data Distribution of all labels
Positive Weight
It is not an uncommon problem in multi-label classifica-
tion that there are more negative samples than positive samples in a class.
When the model tends to give negative value, it results in a higher Precision
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
than Recall. Therefore, a way to trade of Precision and Recall is to add weights
in positive samples when calculating the loss. This can be done by assigning
positive weight in the BCEwithLogitLoss function in the nn library. If the
positive weight is larger than 1, it increases the Recall, otherwise increases
the Precision. The positive weight for a class is calculated by the number of
negative samples divided by the number of positive samples. With Positive
weight, the model treats the data as if they were balanced, the result can be
seen in Table 4.9. It shows that by adding positive weight, it increases Recall,
but at the same time decreases Precision.
Eventually results in balancing
both measures (Figure 4.6) and does not increase F-score. Therefore, positive
weight is useful when the task needs to focus on Recall or Precision. However,
it is not useful in optimising F-score.
Model
F-score
Precision
Recall
Before adding positive weight
0.7832
0.8221
0.8015
After adding positive weight
0.7827
0.8062
0.8214
Table 4.9: Result of adding positive weight
Figure 4.6: Validation F-score, Precision and Recall of VGG16 model with
positive weight
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
59
4.3.4.2
Hyperparameters Tuning
Hyperparameters are parameters that control the learning process of a model
and a model is not able to learn or change the hyperparameters through the
learning process. Therefore, hyperparameter tuning is an important part for
optimising of the performance of a model. This section talks about how the
hyperparameters was chosen.
Threshold Selection
As mentioned above, threshold is used as the cutting
point for positive and negative prediction in order to generate the predicted
labels. Because the values of Accuracy, F-score, Precision, and Recall are all
calculated by comparing the true labels and the predicted labels of an image.
Therefore, they are greatly impacted by the value of threshold. For this reason,
it is important to select a threshold that can optimise the performance.
There are two kind of thresholds, global threshold and multi-threshold. Global
threshold means that only one threshold applies for all labels, whereas multi-
thresholds can be equal to the number of labels (label-wise) or the number
of instances (instance-wise) (Al-Otaibi, Flach, and Kull 2014). Score-based
Method is a method that tunes the threshold based on a score produced by the
classifier for each instance-label pair (Al-Otaibi, Flach, and Kull 2014). This
is used here to select a fixed global threshold for the Second Level Classifier.
It is done by training the model with different fixed global threshold. The
one with the highest F-score will be chosen. As mentioned in Session 2.7, F-
score, the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, is used as the measure for
evaluating multi-label classifier (Godbole and Sarawagi 2004), at the aim of
seeking a balance between Precision and Recall. Table 4.10 shows the F-score
of models with the values of threshold from 0.3 and 0.7 with a interval 0.1.
Threshold
F-score
0.3
0.7793
0.4
0.7799
0.5
0.7832
0.6
0.7765
0.7
0.7729
Table 4.10: F-score of different global threshold values
Learning Rate Selection
Learning rate is one of the most important hy-
perparameters that needs to be tuned. This is because learning rate controls
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
the amount of weights updated during the training process through backprop-
agation, when the model learns and updates the weights in every node to
minimize the loss. Therefore, the value of learning rate decides how much
the model moves towards minima. A larger learning rate allows the model to
learn faster, but at the same time risks skipping the minima and resulting in
diverging instead of converging. Meanwhile, a small learning rate ensure the
model to converge but takes a longer training time and risk getting stuck in
a local minima (Md Zahangir Alom et al. 2019).
Because this project is using transfer learning, a large learning rate will make
the pre-trained model forget the knowledge transferred. Therefore, only fine
tuning the model with a small learning rate should be done (Li and Hoiem
2016). The starting learning rate is tuned by training identical models with
learning rate as the only variable.
This is done with different settings of
threshold, optimisation method used is Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
because it is faster and prevents overfitting (Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2015).
As shown in Table 4.10, performance reaches its optimal when threshold equals
0.5. Therefore, combination of learning rate and threshold with value close
to 0.5 is tested in order to find out the optimal settings for threshold and
learning rate. Table 4.11, Table 4.12 and Table 4.13 shows the performance
of models with different learning rate and threshold combination. The model
with 0.001 learning rate and 0.5 threshold gives the best performance and this
setting is then selected.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
61
Learning Rate
F-score
0.005
0.7805
0.001
0.7787
0.0005
0.7798
0.0001
0.7724
Table 4.11: Score of different learning rate with threshold of 0.45
Learning Rate
F-score
0.005
0.7852
0.001
0.7873
0.0005
0.7832
0.0001
0.7593
Table 4.12: Score of different learning rate with threshold of 0.5
Learning Rate
F-score
0.005
0.7775
0.001
0.7795
0.0005
0.7701
0.0001
0.7524
Table 4.13: Score of different learning rate with threshold of 0.55
4.3.4.3
Reduce Overfitting
Data Augmentation
The amount of data trained with the model are very
small with only 1200 images. Therefore, overfitting becomes a problem that
could influence models performance. Overfitting can be seen in Figure 4.7. It
shows that the model has a much higher F-score in the training phase than in
the validation phase.
A small dataset trained on a large network with a lot of parameters makes
the network overfit to the training set. To reduce overfitting, one solution
is to increase the dataset size. Because of the difficulty in acquiring and la-
belling new images from NMD website, data augmentation is used in order
to increase the size of the training set. Moreover, previous researches show
that, data augmentation can be used as a regularization method to regularize
the network and prevent overfitting (Hernández-García and König 2018; P. Y.
Simard, Steinkraus, and Platt 2003; Ciresan et al. 2010).
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
Figure 4.7: F-score in training and validation phases
This is done by using different data transformation methods in training set
to augment the data. The augmented data is then combined to form a larger
training set. Data augmentation should be done in a way that ensures all the
important features are kept in the augmented data. Therefore, apart from the
original training data, augmentation by flipping the image horizontally and
random affine transforming the image by a small rotation, translation and
scaling. See Table 4.14 for the details of data augmentation in training set.
Data augmentation is not done in validation set as it acts as the real-life input
to validate the model.
Transform 1
Transform 2
Transform 3
(Orignal)
(Horizontal Flipped)
(Affine Transform)
Resize(256)
RandomAffine(2,
trans-
late=0.2, scale=1.2)
CenterCrop(224)
RandomResizedCrop(224)
RandomResizedCrop(224)
RandomHorizontalFlip(p=1)
RandomHorizontalFlip()
ToTensor()
Normalize([0.485, 0.456, 0.406], [0.229, 0.224, 0.225])
Table 4.14: Data augmentation in training set
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
63
The results of models trained with data augmentation and without data aug-
mentation are shown on Table 4.15 and Figure 4.8. With data augmentation,
it improves the training accuracy while does not impact much on validation
accuracy. Therefore, it makes the model even more overfit to the training
data. This behaviour may due to the lack of data invariant. A study explains
that when data invariant is lacking, data augmentation may not be sufficient
enough for a network to learn invariance. (Azulay and Weiss 2019).
Model
F-score
Without data augmentation
0.7873
With data augmentation
0.7793
Table 4.15: Results of models with and without data augmentation
(a) Without data augmentation
(b) With data augmentation
Figure 4.8: Training and validation F-score of models with and without data
augmentation
Model
F-score before dropout
F-score after dropout
Without data augmentation
0.7873
0.7937
With data augmentation
0.7793
0.7810
Table 4.16: Results of models with and without data augmentation
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
Dropout
As the model becomes more overfit with data augmentation, an-
other regularization method, dropout, is tried to regularize the model. Dropout
is a simple way to regularize the model (Srivastava et al. 2014). It is done by
dropping out units with a dropout rate p to temporarily remove the units from
the model, along with all its incoming and outgoing connections. Previous
study shows a dropout rate of 0.5 is optimal in most of the cases (Srivastava
et al. 2014; Geoffrey E. Hinton et al. 2012). Therefore, a dropout rate of 0.5
is applied in the final connection layer. Table 4.16 and Figure 4.9 show the
results of applying dropout technique to both models with and without data
augmentation. The results show an improvement in the model performance
on validation data and increases the F-score from 78.73% to 79.37% with an
obvious reduction in overfitting.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Second Level Classifier
65
(a) F-score of model without data augmenta-
tion without dropout
(b) F-score of model without data augmenta-
tion after dropout
(c) F-score of model with data augmentation
without dropout
(d) F-score of model with data augmentation
after dropout
Figure 4.9: Training and validation F-score of models before and after applying
a dropout rate of 0.5 in models with and without data augmentation
With Figure 4.9 showing improvement in validation F-score, the model with
data augmentation still overfits to the training data.
Therefore, a higher
dropout rate of 0.8 is tested on the model with data augmentation. Result
in Figure 4.10 shows a further improvement over the validation F-score from
78.1% to 79.77%.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Implementation and Experimental Result
Figure 4.10: F-score of model with data augmentation and dropout rate of 0.8
4.4
Combination of Classifiers
After all settings of both classifiers are decided, the final step is to combine
the models.
Table 4.17 shows the final settings and Table 4.18 shows the
validation performance of both classifiers. The performance of the First Level
Classifier is indicated by its accuracy and that of the Second Level Classifier
is indicated by its F-score.
First Level Classifier
Second Level Classifier
Model Structure
VGG19
VGG16
Loss Function
Cross Entropy
Cross Entropy
Activation Function
softmax
sigmoid
Learning Rate
0.0005
0.001
Threshold
N/A
0.5
Data Augmentation
Table 4.1
Table 4.14
Dropout Rate
N/A
0.8
Table 4.17: Final settings for the classifiers
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Combination of Classifiers
67
First Level Classifier
Second Level Classifier
0.9425
0.7977
Table 4.18: Validation performance of the classifiers
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5
Evaluation and
Discussion
This chapter includes evaluation of the result and discussion of the used tech-
niques.
5.1
Evaluation
In this section, the dataset used for development and the final model perfor-
mance is evaluated. Performance of the models are compared with human’s
performance with confusion metrics.
5.1.1
Datasets
Most of the training data of the First Level Classifier and the training data
of the Second Level Classifier are from NMD. They ensure the deep learning
models are customised to the museum dataset. There are 542,788 pictures and
objects from NMD’s collection. It contains old and recent artefacts, sketches,
maps, photos, and films from Tranquebar and its nearby surroundings, as well
as numerous everyday items such as tools, utensils, jewellery and ritual equip-
ment (Nationalmuseet n.d.). However, only a small part of the collections
were selected because this project focuses only on 6 specific types of collec-
tions and 8 different contexts of photography.
Among the 7013 images for the First Level Classifier and the 1349 images for
the Second Level Classifier, the minimum dimension of the smallest image is
302 pixels. Therefore, all of the images are in acceptable quality and need to
be reshaped as 256 × 256 pixels to fit the requirement the classifiers. Images
vary from grayscale to RGB colour space. However, most of the photos are
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Evaluation and Discussion
following an identical style. As shown in Figure (5.1), the documentary photos
collected in NMD are mostly grainy with less color saturation. This is the
reason why models need to be trained specifically on museum dataset rather
than any online images.
(a) Photo, People, Crowd (b) Photo, People, Vehicle (c) Photo, Animal, Land-
scape, People
(d) Photo, People
(e) Photo, Building, People
(f) Photo, People
Figure 5.1: Examples of NMD’s photo collections
Limited amount of samples
The amount of samples we have for training
two neural networks is insufficient considering the number of output classes.
One reason behind is the big difference between our target classes and the
existing labels of the collections. This difference makes it very time consum-
ing to label all of the relevant data with the new standard. Therefore, the
performance of the final classifiers is limited by the insufficient training data.
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Evaluation
71
Several approaches have been tested and used to optimize the solution with
the limitation of the size of the dataset.
Difference between ImageNet and museum dataset
One of the ap-
proaches is using transfer learning. Instead of randomly initialising the models,
it starts with pre-trained models pre-trained with ImageNet data. This solu-
tion benefits from transferring knowledge of patterns learnt from pre-trained
data. This knowledge of the patterns helps solving general image recognition
problems and leveraging them. However, performance can be affected when
some of the classes that are in focus are not studied in ImageNet. An example
would be that there is no class specified for human detection within the 1000
classes in pre-trained ImageNet data. A list of the 1000 object categories of
ImageNet data is shown in Appendix A. Moreover, images in ImageNet have a
different styles compared to museum images which may affect the performance
of our models.
Human annotation
Apart from acquiring images, giving labels to the im-
ages, so called annotation, is also an essential step. The labels that are as-
signed to the training set are all given by the authors based on their general
perception. The authors do not have a background in culture heritage domain;
therefore, the annotations are close to how general users perceive the images.
However, during the annotation process, it is inevitable to have variances, er-
rors, and inconsistent standards, which could influence the performance of the
classifiers.
5.1.2
Evaluation of Models performance
A test dataset consisted of 184 images for the First Level Classifier and 106
images for the Second Level Classifier. Images were randomly selected and
downloaded from NMD website. In order to measure the performance, labels
were manually given by authors as the “Ground truth”. Confusion matrices
were used to measure the performance of models in comparison to labels pre-
dicted by the models and the “Ground truth” labels. The overall accuracy was
used to evaluate the performance of the First Level Classifier. The accuracy
of individual classes, as well as the overall Accuracy, F-score, Precision and
Recall were used to evaluate the performance of the Second Level Classifier.
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Evaluation and Discussion
5.1.2.1
First Level Classifier
To test the performance of the First Level Classifier, a test dataset of a size
of 184 was used. The result is shown in Figure 5.2 presented by a 7 × 7 sized
confusion matrix. The First Level Classifier shows 79.58% accuracy. The test
accuracy is much lower than the validation accuracy (94.24%). This can be
caused by the selection of test data. Training and validation data was gathered
and split randomly in the beginning of project while test data was gathered at
the end of project. This can cause difference of data in test set and validation
set, thus resulting in the lower test accuracy. Improvement can be done by
gathering all training, validation and test data together and split the datasets
randomly to ensure the data are from the same domain.
Figure 5.2: Multi-class confusion matrix for the First Level Classifier
5.1.2.2
Second Level Classifier
For testing the performance of the Second Level Classifier, 106 images from
the museum are used. Table 5.1 shows 8 binary confusion matrices for all
classes (Neg stands for Negative, Pos stands for Positive). Table 5.2 shows the
validation and test accuracy for each classes, and it can be seen that there is no
significant difference in the individual class accuracy in validation and testing.
However, as shown in Table 5.3, there is a drop in the overall performance
in testing compare to validation, especially in recall. A low recall means a
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Evaluation
73
high number of false negative according to the definition of recall mentioned
in Session 2.7.2. Therefore, such drop in recall shows that the model tends
to give a negative result instead of positive. This problem can be caused by
the imbalanced distribution of positive and negative samples in training and
validation set.
Predicted
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Actual
Class
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Neg
93
1
56
2
93
5
90
1
Pos
3
9
10
38
5
3
5
10
Class
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
Neg
83
5
40
2
92
3
65
9
Pos
4
14
15
49
1
10
11
21
Table 5.1: Confusion matrices of the Second Level Classifier for all classes
Class
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Val
95.04%
83.62%
92.31%
92.56%
Test
96.23%
88.68%
90.57%
94.34%
Class
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
Val
93.55%
88.34%
98.51%
89.08%
Test
91.51%
83.96%
96.23%
81.13%
Table 5.2: Validation and Test Accuracy of the Second Level Classifier for all
classes
Accuracy
F-score
Precision
Recall
Val
56.08%
79.77%
82.42%
83.00%
Test
46.15%
68.45%
79.69%
65.70%
Table 5.3: Validation and testing performance of the Second Level Classifier
5.1.2.3
Combined model performance
The final model is built with the First Level Classifier on top of the Second
Level Classifier.
Any image classified as “Photo” class by the First Level
Classifier is passed to the Second Level Classifier for labelling. As requested
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Evaluation and Discussion
by NMD, all labels are retained regardless of its probability. Therefore, an
output of class name and its corresponding probability is shown in the final
output in descending order.
Table 5.4 shows a few testing images and its
corresponding output according to NMD’s requirements.
Input image
Labels and probabilities
Photo:
0.9986
People:
1.0000
Landscape:
1.0000
Portrait:
0.1322
Building:
0.0007
Animal:
0.0002
Vehicle:
0.0001
Crowd:
0.0000
City:
0.0000
Photo:
0.9994
People:
0.9999
Crowd:
0.3497
Building:
0.3353
Vehicle:
0.2012
Animal:
0.0650
City:
0.0060
Portrait:
0.0001
Landscape:
0.0000
Photo:
0.9994
People:
1.0000
Vehicle:
1.0000
Building:
0.9997
City:
0.0303
Animal:
0.0215
Crowd:
0.0211
Portrait:
0.0000
Landscape:
0.0000
Table 5.4: Visualisation of test images and its probabilities to labels
==PAGE:85==
5.1 Evaluation
75
5.1.3
Comparison with human performance
To understand the performance of our solution comparing with human annota-
tion, 18 users were asked to label a test dataset based on their own perception.
The test dataset consists of 20 images for the First Level Classifier and 30
images for the Second Level Classifier, which are downloaded from NMD’s
website. The test was sent in the form of a website, with instruction: “Select
one class you think this collection belongs to” for the First Level Classifier
test and “Terms you would enter if you were trying to find this image?” for
the Second Level Classifier test. The interface of the websites are shown in
Appendix C.
5.1.3.1
Human performance against the First Level Classifier
Confusion matrix
In order to calculate the accuracy of human annotation,
the labels given by the author of the test images are chosen to be “the ground
truth”. A confusion matrix, as shown in Figure 5.3 is calculated based on all
the labels given by the users (described as predicted label) and labels given by
the author (described as true label). The highlighted blue colour in this matrix
represents true positive (TP) classification result, meaning the predicted label
is the same as the true label.
Differences in perceptual performance for individuals
It is interest-
ing to find out that individuals have various perception of some of the test
images. The culture background, the language they speak as well as the place
of attention they put on the image can all influence the labelling result (Partos,
Cropper, and Rawlings 2016). One of the most frequent miss-classified image
is shown in Figure 5.4. The benchmark label given by the author is “Other”
while many users classified it as “Pottery”. When interviewing the users who
did it, they claimed that they made the classification based on the majority
part of the image. Therefore even though there were some other items e.g.
anchors and stones in the picture, users still concluded this image into “Pot-
tery” class. Furthermore, it can be seen from Figure 5.3 that 7 images from
the photos have been classified into painting. It proves that “Photo” class and
“Painting” class have some shared similarities, which could sometimes confuse
humans. It is also learnt from the result that providing high quality label to
the dataset is important, because a wrong “Ground truth” can lead the model
into a wrong direction thus having worse performance.
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Evaluation and Discussion
Figure 5.3: Confusion metric of human annotation
Figure 5.4: True label: Other, Miss-classified label: Pottery
Human vs Model
To compare the performance between human and the
First Level Classifier, the overall accuracy of this two methods was calculated.
The accuracy of human classification is 87.77%, according to the confusion
matrix shown in Figure 5.2. However, compared to the 79.58% accuracy the
First Level Classifier achieved, our model is defeated by human performance.
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Evaluation
77
5.1.3.2
Human performance against the Second Level Classifier
Confusion matrix
8 binary confusion matrices for 8 classes measuring hu-
mans’ labelling performance are shown in Table 5.5.
Predicted
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Neg
Pos
Actual
Class
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Neg
467
1
214
20
418
68
346
68
Pos
0
72
35
271
0
54
18
108
Class
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
Neg
324
126
180
18
504
0
358
2
Pos
0
90
170
172
0
36
70
110
Table 5.5: Confusion matrices of manual labelling for all classes
Differences in perceptual performance for individuals
When humans
classify images into unlimited amount of classes, there are more variances in
the result.
For example, class “Landscape” and “City” have 0 false nega-
tive (FN) result but a high false positive (FP) result, indicating that all the
landscape and city photos have been classified correctly to its corresponding
classes. However, the images which are classified into “Landscape” and “City”
do not necessarily belong to that class. It can be concluded that users are
more sensitive to these two classes, and can, therefore, more easily interpret
an image as a “Landscape” photo and “City” photo. On the other hand, “Ve-
hicle” class has a low FP but high FN. One reason is that users have different
understanding of vehicles, some may only consider cars, ships, and airplanes
as vehicles, while the ground truth includes also baby carriages and trolleys.
The high FN of the “People” result compares with 100% accurate “Portrait”
result, is caused by the unclear parent-child hierarchies of “People” class and
“Portrait” class. The ground truth followed the hierarchy and classified all the
“Portrait” images also into “People” class, but some of the users skipped the
“People” class when they found out that “Portrait” can describe the image
more precisely.
Human vs Model
As shown in Table 5.6, accuracy of each class has been
calculated respectively from the result of users and the Second Level Classifier.
Model has better accuracy in “City”, “Crowd”, “Landscape”, “People” classes,
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Evaluation and Discussion
and in general good accuracy of all the classes. The performance of human
and model for individual classes can be considered as a tie.
Class
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Human
99.81%
89.81%
87.41%
84.07%
Model
96.23%
88.68%
90.57%
94.34%
Class
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
Human
76.67%
65.19%
100%
86.67%
Model
91.51%
83.96%
96.23%
81.13%
Table 5.6: Accuracy comparison of human and model performance for all
classes
Table 5.7 shows the overall performance of human and the model. The per-
formance was measured from four different perspective - Accuracy, F-score,
Precision and Recall. The low value of Accuracy and Recall in comparison
to humans means that the Neural Network models are not good at proposing
all the correct labels for each image such as humans do. However, the higher
value in Precision shows that in comparison to humans, the model proposes
a lower number of incorrect labels. For example, if the ground truth labels
of one image are “People”, “Building” and “City”, humans are likely to pro-
pose all of these labels and on top of those, they tend to propose extra labels
such as “Crowd” which should not be proposed according to the ground truth.
On the other hand, the model may not propose all the correct labels, in this
case “People”, “Building”, and “City”, but only e.g. “People” and “Building”.
Even though it is not as sufficient as the ground truth, but the two classes the
model predicted are correct. Therefore, it can be concluded that the Second-
Level Classifier is more likely to provide a safe choice and avoid risks when it
is proposing labels.
Accuracy
F-score
Precision
Recall
Human
86.20%
75.88%
77.97%
80.39%
Model
46.15%
68.45%
79.69%
65.70%
Table 5.7: Accuracy, F-score, precision, recall of human and model
==PAGE:89==
5.2 Discussion
79
5.2
Discussion
Various tools and techniques are used in this project, some goes well while
some do not. To sum up the findings we have discovered throughout the the-
sis, this section discusses what is recommended and what should be avoided.
Libraries used
Pytorch libraries including torch and torchvision were used
in this project for obtaining pre-trained models and building up the envi-
ronment to train the models. Pytorch is a well developed environment for
machine learning research, especially in the field of CNN researching in the
torchvision library, as it provides most of the tools needed to build a convolu-
tional neural network. However, it does not support multi-label classification
such as no data loader for multi-label classification. Moreover, as there are
limited number of evaluation tools available, sklearn library has been used to
evaluate the performance of models and compute measures including F-score,
Precision and Recall. It is also used for confusion matrix generation.
Finalise dataset
Having a sufficient dataset is important for deep learning
because the more data we have, the more dense our observations are; thus,
more insights that we trust can be extracted from the dataset. To acquire
this “perfect” amount of data, the authors spent a lot of efforts on data acqui-
sition and annotation before developing a prototype model. This strategy is
considered a wrong example, because in real life, data could never be enough.
The lesson learnt from this thesis is that a prototype solution should be firstly
implemented and tested on the data that are available at that point. After-
wards, technique such as error analysis could be used to target the problem
and improve the model and dataset based on the prototype solution.
Model regularization
Data augmentation and dropout were tested on the
models in order to reduce overfitting. Experiment shows that only doing data
augmentation does not do the trick, on contrary, models get more overfitted
after applying data augmentation technique.
This could be caused by the
lack of invariant in the original training set. However, after applying dropout
in the last classification layer, it combats overfitting. The final design of the
neural network uses both dropout and data augmentation techniques.
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Evaluation and Discussion
Imbalanced dataset
One classic problem in multi-label classification is an
imbalanced dataset. The training set and validation set used in the project
have this problem. It is because images are more likely to depicts some class
rather than the other, such as, the amount of photos of people is much more
than of the amout of animals. Moreover, some classes are the parents of a
hierarchy, making it hard to simply up-sample or down-sample the classes.
To optimise the imbalanced dataset problem, positive weight has been added
into loss function. Afterwards, the recall increases, however, it decreases the
precision as a trade-off. In our use case of the model, there is no preference
of either high recall or high precision. The overall performance of the model
measured by F-score is what matters the most. Adding positive weight into
loss function does not improve the F-score, on the contrary, it influences it
negatively. Therefore, we decided not to continue with this method.
Hidden hierarchical structure
In the labelling structure defined in Chap-
ter 3, Figure 3.3 shows a hierarchical structure. This hierarchical structure
is not hard coded in the network but is followed throughout the annotation
process. Therefore, it is not certain whether the hidden hierarchical struc-
ture is detected by the model. In order to detect if this hidden hierarchical
structure is learnt, we looked into the correlations between the hierarchical
classes. Figure 5.5 shows the correlation of “City” class with “Building” class,
“Crowd” class with “People” class and “Portrait” class with “People” class.
All higher level classes in x-axis and lower level classes in y-axis. This graph
can be divided into 4 parts with the threshold line 0.5.
Upper Left:
image with lower level label but without higher level label
Upper Right:
image with both lower level label and higher level label
Lower Left:
image with higher level label but without lower level label
Lower Right:
image without lower level label nor higher level label
It can be seen that there is no image that falls into the upper left corner, which
shows a primarily success of this hidden hierarchical structure. However, there
is an image with a higher probability to be labelled as portrait (0.3) than
people (0.0). This may worth being studied and analysed in the future. In
conclusion, Figure 5.5 shows the model learnt the hidden hierarchical structure
according to the labelling inputs.
==PAGE:91==
5.2 Discussion
81
(a) Correlation between city and
building
(b) Correlation between crowd
and people
(c) Correlation between portrait
and building
Figure 5.5: Correlations between hierarchical classes
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Future
Work
This chapter first concludes the project by answering the research questions
and summarising the result. Afterwards, it discusses what future works can
be done to continue and improve this project.
6.1
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis is to answer the research question: “How can machine
learning optimise the process of annotation in the National Museum of Den-
mark by automating labelling?”. To answer this question, the thesis follows
the process of acquiring data from NMD website and Google, annotating and
preprocessing the data, implementing two classifiers on top of the pre-tained
models, evaluating the performance of these two classifiers, improving the
performance, assembling the two classifiers, and testing the assembled model
performance.
Model is evaluated on a set of test data, the First Level Classifier achieved
79.58% Accuracy and the Second Level Classifier achieved 68.45% F-score.
Comparing with the 87.77% Accuracy and 75.88% F-score on human perfor-
mance, the model is defeated by human. However, this result is not unex-
pected considering the limited amount of data and time for development. It
also discovered that our model tends to propose a “safe choice” rather than a
“bold guess”. The final solution of this thesis is still worth to be proposed as
a useful tool to suggest quality labels for museum professionals.
==PAGE:94==
84
6 Conclusion and Future Work
6.2
Future Work
Expand the solution
It has been validated in the Section 5.1 that both
classifiers have promising results to automatically suggests high quality labels
for images. Because of the limited time to develop this solution, the First
Level Classifier only focuses on 6 classes, and the Second Level Classifier only
classifies the classified photos from the First Level Classifier. The result of
this assembled prototype model proved the usability of the solution, and the
potential to expend the solution into more classes.
Reducing overfitting
Data augmentation and dropout have been tested in
this thesis in order to reduce overfitting of the model. However, there is still
a room for improvement. There are some other techniques which are worth
exploring e.g. early stopping - stop training when performance on a validation
dataset starts to degrade.
Imbalanced multi-label dataset
It is always a real-life problem to have an
imbalanced dataset. In traditional single-label classification, there are many
approaches tickling the data imbalance problem such as over-sampling (Gar-
cía, Sánchez, and Mollineda 2012). However, because of the multi-label nature
in multi-label classification, simple over-sampling technique may not be appli-
cable. Therefore, different techniques can worth experimenting in handling
imbalanced multi-label dataset such as MLSMOTE (Multi-label Synthetic
Minority Over-sampling Technique) (Charte et al. 2015).
Enlarge and improve the quality of the dataset
One of the directions
to improve the solution is to improve the dataset. The current dataset is anno-
tated by the authors with inevitable human error, inconsistent standard, and
without culture heritage domain insights. This could influence the model per-
formance. An ideal annotation process should include advice and calibration
by museum sectors. Apart from that, acquiring more dataset would benefit
the model in all aspects - increasing the training dataset reduces overfitting, in-
creasing the validation dataset helps with selecting the best performing model
in real-life situation, and increasing the test dataset gives a more trust-worthy
evaluation.
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
ILSVRC image
classification object
categories
0: ’tench, Tinca tinca’,
1: ’goldfish,
Carassius aura-
tus’,
2: ’great white shark, white
shark,
man-eater,
man-
eating shark, Carcharodon
carcharias’,
3: ’tiger shark, Galeocerdo cu-
vieri’,
4: ’hammerhead,
hammer-
head shark’,
5: ’electric
ray,
crampfish,
numbfish, torpedo’,
6: ’stingray’,
7: ’cock’,
8: ’hen’,
9: ’ostrich, Struthio camelus’,
10: ’brambling, Fringilla mon-
tifringilla’,
11: ’goldfinch,
Carduelis
car-
duelis’,
12: ’house finch, linnet, Carpo-
dacus mexicanus’,
13: ’junco, snowbird’,
14: ’indigo
bunting,
indigo
finch, indigo bird, Passe-
rina cyanea’,
15: ’robin,
American
robin,
Turdus migratorius’,
16: ’bulbul’,
17: ’jay’,
18: ’magpie’,
19: ’chickadee’,
20: ’water ouzel, dipper’,
21: ’kite’,
22: ’bald
eagle,
American
eagle,
Haliaeetus
leuco-
cephalus’,
23: ’vulture’,
24: ’great grey owl, great gray
owl, Strix nebulosa’,
25: ’European fire salamander,
Salamandra salamandra’,
26: ’common
newt,
Triturus
vulgaris’,
27: ’eft’,
28: ’spotted salamander, Am-
bystoma maculatum’,
29: ’axolotl, mud puppy, Am-
bystoma mexicanum’,
30: ’bullfrog,
Rana
cates-
beiana’,
31: ’tree frog, tree-frog’,
32: ’tailed
frog,
bell
toad,
ribbed toad,
tailed toad,
Ascaphus trui’,
33: ’loggerhead,
loggerhead
turtle, Caretta caretta’,
34: ’leatherback
turtle,
leatherback, leathery tur-
tle, Dermochelys coriacea’,
35: ’mud turtle’,
36: ’terrapin’,
37: ’box turtle, box tortoise’,
38: ’banded gecko’,
39: ’common
iguana,
iguana,
Iguana iguana’,
40: ’American
chameleon,
anole, Anolis carolinensis’,
41: ’whiptail, whiptail lizard’,
42: ’agama’,
43: ’frilled
lizard,
Chlamy-
dosaurus kingi’,
44: ’alligator lizard’,
45: ’Gila monster, Heloderma
suspectum’,
46: ’green
lizard,
Lacerta
viridis’,
47: ’African
chameleon,
Chamaeleo chamaeleon’,
48: ’Komodo dragon, Komodo
lizard, dragon lizard, giant
lizard, Varanus komodoen-
sis’,
49: ’African
crocodile,
Nile
crocodile,
Crocodylus
niloticus’,
50: ’American alligator, Alliga-
tor mississipiensis’,
51: ’triceratops’,
52: ’thunder
snake,
worm
snake,
Carphophis
amoenus’,
53: ’ringneck
snake,
ring-
necked snake, ring snake’,
54: ’hognose snake, puff adder,
sand viper’,
55: ’green snake, grass snake’,
56: ’king snake, kingsnake’,
==PAGE:96==
86
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
57: ’garter snake, grass snake’,
58: ’water snake’,
59: ’vine snake’,
60: ’night
snake,
Hypsiglena
torquata’,
61: ’boa constrictor, Constric-
tor constrictor’,
62: ’rock python, rock snake,
Python sebae’,
63: ’Indian cobra, Naja naja’,
64: ’green mamba’,
65: ’sea snake’,
66: ’horned
viper,
cerastes,
sand
viper,
horned
asp,
Cerastes cornutus’,
67: ’diamondback,
diamond-
back rattlesnake, Crotalus
adamanteus’,
68: ’sidewinder,
horned
rattlesnake,
Crotalus
cerastes’,
69: ’trilobite’,
70: ’harvestman,
daddy
lon-
glegs, Phalangium opilio’,
71: ’scorpion’,
72: ’black and gold garden spi-
der, Argiope aurantia’,
73: ’barn spider, Araneus ca-
vaticus’,
74: ’garden spider, Aranea di-
ademata’,
75: ’black widow, Latrodectus
mactans’,
76: ’tarantula’,
77: ’wolf spider, hunting spi-
der’,
78: ’tick’,
79: ’centipede’,
80: ’black grouse’,
81: ’ptarmigan’,
82: ’ruffed
grouse,
partridge,
Bonasa umbellus’,
83: ’prairie
chicken,
prairie
grouse, prairie fowl’,
84: ’peacock’,
85: ’quail’,
86: ’partridge’,
87: ’African grey, African gray,
Psittacus erithacus’,
88: ’macaw’,
89: ’sulphur-crested
cockatoo,
Kakatoe galerita, Cacatua
galerita’,
90: ’lorikeet’,
91: ’coucal’,
92: ’bee eater’,
93: ’hornbill’,
94: ’hummingbird’,
95: ’jacamar’,
96: ’toucan’,
97: ’drake’,
98: ’red-breasted
merganser,
Mergus serrator’,
99: ’goose’,
100: ’black swan, Cygnus atra-
tus’,
101: ’tusker’,
102: ’echidna,
spiny
anteater,
anteater’,
103: ’platypus, duckbill, duck-
billed
platypus,
duck-
billed
platypus,
Or-
nithorhynchus anatinus’,
104: ’wallaby, brush kangaroo’,
105: ’koala,
koala
bear,
kan-
garoo
bear,
native
bear,
Phascolarctos cinereus’,
106: ’wombat’,
107: ’jellyfish’,
108: ’sea anemone, anemone’,
109: ’brain coral’,
110: ’flatworm, platyhelminth’,
111: ’nematode,
nematode
worm, roundworm’,
112: ’conch’,
113: ’snail’,
114: ’slug’,
115: ’sea slug, nudibranch’,
116: ’chiton,
coat-of-mail
shell, sea cradle, polypla-
cophore’,
117: ’chambered
nautilus,
pearly nautilus, nautilus’,
118: ’Dungeness
crab,
Cancer
magister’,
119: ’rock crab, Cancer irrora-
tus’,
120: ’fiddler crab’,
121: ’king
crab,
Alaska
crab,
Alaskan king crab, Alaska
king
crab,
Paralithodes
camtschatica’,
122: ’American lobster, North-
ern lobster, Maine lobster,
Homarus americanus’,
123: ’spiny
lobster,
langouste,
rock
lobster,
crawfish,
crayfish, sea crawfish’,
124: ’crayfish,
crawfish,
craw-
dad, crawdaddy’,
125: ’hermit crab’,
126: ’isopod’,
127: ’white stork, Ciconia cico-
nia’,
128: ’black
stork,
Ciconia
ni-
gra’,
129: ’spoonbill’,
130: ’flamingo’,
131: ’little blue heron, Egretta
caerulea’,
132: ’American
egret,
great
white
heron,
Egretta
al-
bus’,
133: ’bittern’,
134: ’crane’,
135: ’limpkin, Aramus pictus’,
136: ’European
gallinule,
Por-
phyrio porphyrio’,
137: ’American
coot,
marsh
hen, mud hen, water hen,
Fulica americana’,
138: ’bustard’,
139: ’ruddy turnstone, Arenaria
interpres’,
140: ’red-backed
sandpiper,
dunlin, Erolia alpina’,
141: ’redshank, Tringa totanus’,
142: ’dowitcher’,
143: ’oystercatcher,
oyster
catcher’,
144: ’pelican’,
145: ’king
penguin,
Apten-
odytes patagonica’,
146: ’albatross, mollymawk’,
147: ’grey
whale,
gray
whale,
devilfish, Eschrichtius gib-
bosus, Eschrichtius robus-
tus’,
148: ’killer whale, killer, orca,
grampus, sea wolf, Orcinus
orca’,
149: ’dugong, Dugong dugon’,
150: ’sea lion’,
151: ’Chihuahua’,
152: ’Japanese spaniel’,
153: ’Maltese dog, Maltese ter-
rier, Maltese’,
154: ’Pekinese,
Pekingese,
Peke’,
155: ’Shih-Tzu’,
156: ’Blenheim spaniel’,
157: ’papillon’,
158: ’toy terrier’,
159: ’Rhodesian ridgeback’,
160: ’Afghan hound, Afghan’,
161: ’basset, basset hound’,
162: ’beagle’,
163: ’bloodhound,
sleuth-
hound’,
164: ’bluetick’,
==PAGE:97==
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
87
165: ’black-and-tan
coon-
hound’,
166: ’Walker hound, Walker fox-
hound’,
167: ’English foxhound’,
168: ’redbone’,
169: ’borzoi,
Russian
wolfhound’,
170: ’Irish wolfhound’,
171: ’Italian greyhound’,
172: ’whippet’,
173: ’Ibizan hound, Ibizan Po-
denco’,
174: ’Norwegian
elkhound,
elkhound’,
175: ’otterhound, otter hound’,
176: ’Saluki, gazelle hound’,
177: ’Scottish deerhound, deer-
hound’,
178: ’Weimaraner’,
179: ’Staffordshire
bullterrier,
Staffordshire bull terrier’,
180: ’American
Staffordshire
terrier,
Staffordshire
ter-
rier,
American
pit
bull
terrier, pit bull terrier’,
181: ’Bedlington terrier’,
182: ’Border terrier’,
183: ’Kerry blue terrier’,
184: ’Irish terrier’,
185: ’Norfolk terrier’,
186: ’Norwich terrier’,
187: ’Yorkshire terrier’,
188: ’wire-haired fox terrier’,
189: ’Lakeland terrier’,
190: ’Sealyham
terrier,
Sealy-
ham’,
191: ’Airedale, Airedale terrier’,
192: ’cairn, cairn terrier’,
193: ’Australian terrier’,
194: ’Dandie Dinmont, Dandie
Dinmont terrier’,
195: ’Boston bull, Boston ter-
rier’,
196: ’miniature schnauzer’,
197: ’giant schnauzer’,
198: ’standard schnauzer’,
199: ’Scotch
terrier,
Scottish
terrier, Scottie’,
200: ’Tibetan terrier,
chrysan-
themum dog’,
201: ’silky
terrier,
Sydney
silky’,
202: ’soft-coated
wheaten
ter-
rier’,
203: ’West Highland white ter-
rier’,
204: ’Lhasa, Lhasa apso’,
205: ’flat-coated retriever’,
206: ’curly-coated retriever’,
207: ’golden retriever’,
208: ’Labrador retriever’,
209: ’Chesapeake
Bay
re-
triever’,
210: ’German
short-haired
pointer’,
211: ’vizsla,
Hungarian
pointer’,
212: ’English setter’,
213: ’Irish setter, red setter’,
214: ’Gordon setter’,
215: ’Brittany spaniel’,
216: ’clumber, clumber spaniel’,
217: ’English springer, English
springer spaniel’,
218: ’Welsh springer spaniel’,
219: ’cocker
spaniel,
English
cocker spaniel, cocker’,
220: ’Sussex spaniel’,
221: ’Irish water spaniel’,
222: ’kuvasz’,
223: ’schipperke’,
224: ’groenendael’,
225: ’malinois’,
226: ’briard’,
227: ’kelpie’,
228: ’komondor’,
229: ’Old
English
sheepdog,
bobtail’,
230: ’Shetland sheepdog, Shet-
land sheep dog, Shetland’,
231: ’collie’,
232: ’Border collie’,
233: ’Bouvier
des
Flandres,
Bouviers des Flandres’,
234: ’Rottweiler’,
235: ’German
shepherd,
Ger-
man
shepherd
dog,
Ger-
man police dog, alsatian’,
236: ’Doberman,
Doberman
pinscher’,
237: ’miniature pinscher’,
238: ’Greater
Swiss
Mountain
dog’,
239: ’Bernese mountain dog’,
240: ’Appenzeller’,
241: ’EntleBucher’,
242: ’boxer’,
243: ’bull mastiff’,
244: ’Tibetan mastiff’,
245: ’French bulldog’,
246: ’Great Dane’,
247: ’Saint
Bernard,
St
Bernard’,
248: ’Eskimo dog, husky’,
249: ’malamute,
malemute,
Alaskan malamute’,
250: ’Siberian husky’,
251: ’dalmatian, coach dog, car-
riage dog’,
252: ’affenpinscher, monkey pin-
scher, monkey dog’,
253: ’basenji’,
254: ’pug, pug-dog’,
255: ’Leonberg’,
256: ’Newfoundland, Newfound-
land dog’,
257: ’Great Pyrenees’,
258: ’Samoyed, Samoyede’,
259: ’Pomeranian’,
260: ’chow, chow chow’,
261: ’keeshond’,
262: ’Brabancon griffon’,
263: ’Pembroke,
Pembroke
Welsh corgi’,
264: ’Cardigan, Cardigan Welsh
corgi’,
265: ’toy poodle’,
266: ’miniature poodle’,
267: ’standard poodle’,
268: ’Mexican hairless’,
269: ’timber
wolf,
grey
wolf,
gray wolf, Canis lupus’,
270: ’white
wolf,
Arctic
wolf,
Canis lupus tundrarum’,
271: ’red wolf, maned wolf, Ca-
nis rufus, Canis niger’,
272: ’coyote, prairie wolf, brush
wolf, Canis latrans’,
273: ’dingo, warrigal, warragal,
Canis dingo’,
274: ’dhole, Cuon alpinus’,
275: ’African
hunting
dog,
hyena dog, Cape hunting
dog, Lycaon pictus’,
276: ’hyena, hyaena’,
277: ’red fox, Vulpes vulpes’,
278: ’kit fox, Vulpes macrotis’,
279: ’Arctic
fox,
white
fox,
Alopex lagopus’,
280: ’grey fox, gray fox, Uro-
cyon cinereoargenteus’,
281: ’tabby, tabby cat’,
282: ’tiger cat’,
283: ’Persian cat’,
284: ’Siamese cat, Siamese’,
285: ’Egyptian cat’,
==PAGE:98==
88
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
286: ’cougar, puma, catamount,
mountain
lion,
painter,
panther, Felis concolor’,
287: ’lynx, catamount’,
288: ’leopard,
Panthera
par-
dus’,
289: ’snow leopard, ounce, Pan-
thera uncia’,
290: ’jaguar, panther, Panthera
onca, Felis onca’,
291: ’lion, king of beasts, Pan-
thera leo’,
292: ’tiger, Panthera tigris’,
293: ’cheetah, chetah, Acinonyx
jubatus’,
294: ’brown bear, bruin, Ursus
arctos’,
295: ’American
black
bear,
black
bear,
Ursus
amer-
icanus,
Euarctos
ameri-
canus’,
296: ’ice bear, polar bear, Ur-
sus Maritimus, Thalarctos
maritimus’,
297: ’sloth bear, Melursus ursi-
nus, Ursus ursinus’,
298: ’mongoose’,
299: ’meerkat, mierkat’,
300: ’tiger beetle’,
301: ’ladybug, ladybeetle, lady
beetle, ladybird, ladybird
beetle’,
302: ’ground
beetle,
carabid
beetle’,
303: ’long-horned beetle, longi-
corn, longicorn beetle’,
304: ’leaf beetle, chrysomelid’,
305: ’dung beetle’,
306: ’rhinoceros beetle’,
307: ’weevil’,
308: ’fly’,
309: ’bee’,
310: ’ant, emmet, pismire’,
311: ’grasshopper, hopper’,
312: ’cricket’,
313: ’walking
stick,
walking-
stick, stick insect’,
314: ’cockroach, roach’,
315: ’mantis, mantid’,
316: ’cicada, cicala’,
317: ’leafhopper’,
318: ’lacewing, lacewing fly’,
319: ”dragonfly,
darning
nee-
dle,
devil’s
darning
nee-
dle, sewing needle, snake
feeder,
snake
doctor,
mosquito
hawk,
skeeter
hawk”,
320: ’damselfly’,
321: ’admiral’,
322: ’ringlet, ringlet butterfly’,
323: ’monarch,
monarch
but-
terfly, milkweed butterfly,
Danaus plexippus’,
324: ’cabbage butterfly’,
325: ’sulphur
butterfly,
sulfur
butterfly’,
326: ’lycaenid, lycaenid butter-
fly’,
327: ’starfish, sea star’,
328: ’sea urchin’,
329: ’sea
cucumber,
holothurian’,
330: ’wood
rabbit,
cottontail,
cottontail rabbit’,
331: ’hare’,
332: ’Angora, Angora rabbit’,
333: ’hamster’,
334: ’porcupine, hedgehog’,
335: ’fox squirrel,
eastern fox
squirrel, Sciurus niger’,
336: ’marmot’,
337: ’beaver’,
338: ’guinea pig, Cavia cobaya’,
339: ’sorrel’,
340: ’zebra’,
341: ’hog, pig, grunter, squealer,
Sus scrofa’,
342: ’wild
boar,
boar,
Sus
scrofa’,
343: ’warthog’,
344: ’hippopotamus,
hippo,
river horse, Hippopotamus
amphibius’,
345: ’ox’,
346: ’water buffalo,
water ox,
Asiatic
buffalo,
Bubalus
bubalis’,
347: ’bison’,
348: ’ram, tup’,
349: ’bighorn,
bighorn
sheep,
cimarron, Rocky Mountain
bighorn, Rocky Mountain
sheep, Ovis canadensis’,
350: ’ibex, Capra ibex’,
351: ’hartebeest’,
352: ’impala, Aepyceros melam-
pus’,
353: ’gazelle’,
354: ’Arabian
camel,
dromedary,
Camelus
dromedarius’,
355: ’llama’,
356: ’weasel’,
357: ’mink’,
358: ’polecat,
fitch,
foulmart,
foumart,
Mustela
puto-
rius’,
359: ’black-footed ferret, ferret,
Mustela nigripes’,
360: ’otter’,
361: ’skunk,
polecat,
wood
pussy’,
362: ’badger’,
363: ’armadillo’,
364: ’three-toed
sloth,
ai,
Bradypus tridactylus’,
365: ’orangutan,
orang,
orangutang,
Pongo
pyg-
maeus’,
366: ’gorilla, Gorilla gorilla’,
367: ’chimpanzee,
chimp,
Pan
troglodytes’,
368: ’gibbon, Hylobates lar’,
369: ’siamang,
Hylobates
syn-
dactylus,
Symphalangus
syndactylus’,
370: ’guenon, guenon monkey’,
371: ’patas,
hussar
monkey,
Erythrocebus patas’,
372: ’baboon’,
373: ’macaque’,
374: ’langur’,
375: ’colobus, colobus monkey’,
376: ’proboscis monkey, Nasalis
larvatus’,
377: ’marmoset’,
378: ’capuchin, ringtail, Cebus
capucinus’,
379: ’howler monkey, howler’,
380: ’titi, titi monkey’,
381: ’spider monkey, Ateles ge-
offroyi’,
382: ’squirrel monkey,
Saimiri
sciureus’,
383: ’Madagascar
cat,
ring-
tailed lemur, Lemur catta’,
384: ’indri, indris, Indri indri,
Indri brevicaudatus’,
385: ’Indian elephant, Elephas
maximus’,
386: ’African
elephant,
Lox-
odonta africana’,
387: ’lesser panda, red panda,
panda, bear cat, cat bear,
Ailurus fulgens’,
388: ’giant
panda,
panda,
panda
bear,
coon
bear,
Ailuropoda melanoleuca’,
389: ’barracouta, snoek’,
390: ’eel’,
==PAGE:99==
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
89
391: ’coho, cohoe, coho salmon,
blue
jack,
silver
salmon,
Oncorhynchus kisutch’,
392: ’rock beauty, Holocanthus
tricolor’,
393: ’anemone fish’,
394: ’sturgeon’,
395: ’gar, garfish, garpike, bill-
fish, Lepisosteus osseus’,
396: ’lionfish’,
397: ’puffer, pufferfish, blowfish,
globefish’,
398: ’abacus’,
399: ’abaya’,
400: ”academic gown, academic
robe, judge’s robe”,
401: ’accordion,
piano
accor-
dion, squeeze box’,
402: ’acoustic guitar’,
403: ’aircraft
carrier,
carrier,
flattop, attack aircraft car-
rier’,
404: ’airliner’,
405: ’airship, dirigible’,
406: ’altar’,
407: ’ambulance’,
408: ’amphibian,
amphibious
vehicle’,
409: ’analog clock’,
410: ’apiary, bee house’,
411: ’apron’,
412: ’ashcan, trash can, garbage
can, wastebin, ash bin, ash-
bin, ashbin, dustbin, trash
barrel, trash bin’,
413: ’assault rifle, assault gun’,
414: ’backpack,
back
pack,
knapsack, packsack, ruck-
sack, haversack’,
415: ’bakery,
bakeshop,
bake-
house’,
416: ’balance beam, beam’,
417: ’balloon’,
418: ’ballpoint,
ballpoint
pen,
ballpen, Biro’,
419: ’Band Aid’,
420: ’banjo’,
421: ’bannister,
banister,
balustrade,
balusters,
handrail’,
422: ’barbell’,
423: ’barber chair’,
424: ’barbershop’,
425: ’barn’,
426: ’barometer’,
427: ’barrel, cask’,
428: ’barrow, garden cart, lawn
cart, wheelbarrow’,
429: ’baseball’,
430: ’basketball’,
431: ’bassinet’,
432: ’bassoon’,
433: ’bathing
cap,
swimming
cap’,
434: ’bath towel’,
435: ’bathtub,
bathing
tub,
bath, tub’,
436: ’beach
wagon,
station
wagon, wagon, estate car,
beach waggon, station wag-
gon, waggon’,
437: ’beacon,
lighthouse,
bea-
con light, pharos’,
438: ’beaker’,
439: ’bearskin, busby, shako’,
440: ’beer bottle’,
441: ’beer glass’,
442: ’bell cote, bell cot’,
443: ’bib’,
444: ’bicycle-built-for-two, tan-
dem bicycle, tandem’,
445: ’bikini, two-piece’,
446: ’binder, ring-binder’,
447: ’binoculars,
field
glasses,
opera glasses’,
448: ’birdhouse’,
449: ’boathouse’,
450: ’bobsled, bobsleigh, bob’,
451: ’bolo tie,
bolo,
bola tie,
bola’,
452: ’bonnet, poke bonnet’,
453: ’bookcase’,
454: ’bookshop,
bookstore,
bookstall’,
455: ’bottlecap’,
456: ’bow’,
457: ’bow tie, bow-tie, bowtie’,
458: ’brass,
memorial
tablet,
plaque’,
459: ’brassiere, bra, bandeau’,
460: ’breakwater, groin, groyne,
mole,
bulwark,
seawall,
jetty’,
461: ’breastplate, aegis, egis’,
462: ’broom’,
463: ’bucket, pail’,
464: ’buckle’,
465: ’bulletproof vest’,
466: ’bullet train, bullet’,
467: ’butcher shop, meat mar-
ket’,
468: ’cab, hack, taxi, taxicab’,
469: ’caldron, cauldron’,
470: ’candle, taper, wax light’,
471: ’cannon’,
472: ’canoe’,
473: ’can opener, tin opener’,
474: ’cardigan’,
475: ’car mirror’,
476: ’carousel, carrousel, merry-
go-round,
roundabout,
whirligig’,
477: ”carpenter’s kit, tool kit”,
478: ’carton’,
479: ’car wheel’,
480: ’cash
machine,
cash
dis-
penser,
automated
teller
machine, automatic teller
machine, automated teller,
automatic teller, ATM’,
481: ’cassette’,
482: ’cassette player’,
483: ’castle’,
484: ’catamaran’,
485: ’CD player’,
486: ’cello, violoncello’,
487: ’cellular telephone, cellular
phone, cellphone, cell, mo-
bile phone’,
488: ’chain’,
489: ’chainlink fence’,
490: ’chain mail, ring mail, mail,
chain armor, chain armour,
ring armor, ring armour’,
491: ’chain saw, chainsaw’,
492: ’chest’,
493: ’chiffonier, commode’,
494: ’chime, bell, gong’,
495: ’china
cabinet,
china
closet’,
496: ’Christmas stocking’,
497: ’church, church building’,
498: ’cinema,
movie
theater,
movie
theatre,
movie
house, picture palace’,
499: ’cleaver,
meat
cleaver,
chopper’,
500: ’cliff dwelling’,
501: ’cloak’,
502: ’clog, geta, patten, sabot’,
503: ’cocktail shaker’,
504: ’coffee mug’,
505: ’coffeepot’,
506: ’coil, spiral, volute, whorl,
helix’,
507: ’combination lock’,
508: ’computer keyboard,
key-
pad’,
==PAGE:100==
90
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
509: ’confectionery,
confec-
tionary, candy store’,
510: ’container ship, container-
ship, container vessel’,
511: ’convertible’,
512: ’corkscrew, bottle screw’,
513: ’cornet,
horn,
trumpet,
trump’,
514: ’cowboy boot’,
515: ’cowboy
hat,
ten-gallon
hat’,
516: ’cradle’,
517: ’crane’,
518: ’crash helmet’,
519: ’crate’,
520: ’crib, cot’,
521: ’Crock Pot’,
522: ’croquet ball’,
523: ’crutch’,
524: ’cuirass’,
525: ’dam, dike, dyke’,
526: ’desk’,
527: ’desktop computer’,
528: ’dial
telephone,
dial
phone’,
529: ’diaper, nappy, napkin’,
530: ’digital clock’,
531: ’digital watch’,
532: ’dining table, board’,
533: ’dishrag, dishcloth’,
534: ’dishwasher,
dish washer,
dishwashing machine’,
535: ’disk brake, disc brake’,
536: ’dock, dockage, docking fa-
cility’,
537: ’dogsled,
dog
sled,
dog
sleigh’,
538: ’dome’,
539: ’doormat, welcome mat’,
540: ’drilling platform, offshore
rig’,
541: ’drum,
membranophone,
tympan’,
542: ’drumstick’,
543: ’dumbbell’,
544: ’Dutch oven’,
545: ’electric fan, blower’,
546: ’electric guitar’,
547: ’electric locomotive’,
548: ’entertainment center’,
549: ’envelope’,
550: ’espresso maker’,
551: ’face powder’,
552: ’feather boa, boa’,
553: ’file, file cabinet, filing cab-
inet’,
554: ’fireboat’,
555: ’fire engine, fire truck’,
556: ’fire screen, fireguard’,
557: ’flagpole, flagstaff’,
558: ’flute, transverse flute’,
559: ’folding chair’,
560: ’football helmet’,
561: ’forklift’,
562: ’fountain’,
563: ’fountain pen’,
564: ’four-poster’,
565: ’freight car’,
566: ’French horn, horn’,
567: ’frying pan,
frypan,
skil-
let’,
568: ’fur coat’,
569: ’garbage truck, dustcart’,
570: ’gasmask,
respirator,
gas
helmet’,
571: ’gas pump, gasoline pump,
petrol
pump,
island
dis-
penser’,
572: ’goblet’,
573: ’go-kart’,
574: ’golf ball’,
575: ’golfcart, golf cart’,
576: ’gondola’,
577: ’gong, tam-tam’,
578: ’gown’,
579: ’grand piano, grand’,
580: ’greenhouse,
nursery,
glasshouse’,
581: ’grille, radiator grille’,
582: ’grocery
store,
grocery,
food market, market’,
583: ’guillotine’,
584: ’hair slide’,
585: ’hair spray’,
586: ’half track’,
587: ’hammer’,
588: ’hamper’,
589: ’hand blower, blow dryer,
blow drier, hair dryer, hair
drier’,
590: ’hand-held
computer,
hand-held
microcom-
puter’,
591: ’handkerchief,
hankie,
hanky, hankey’,
592: ’hard disc, hard disk, fixed
disk’,
593: ’harmonica, mouth organ,
harp, mouth harp’,
594: ’harp’,
595: ’harvester, reaper’,
596: ’hatchet’,
597: ’holster’,
598: ’home theater, home the-
atre’,
599: ’honeycomb’,
600: ’hook, claw’,
601: ’hoopskirt, crinoline’,
602: ’horizontal bar, high bar’,
603: ’horse cart, horse-cart’,
604: ’hourglass’,
605: ’iPod’,
606: ’iron, smoothing iron’,
607: ”jack-o’-lantern”,
608: ’jean, blue jean, denim’,
609: ’jeep, landrover’,
610: ’jersey, T-shirt, tee shirt’,
611: ’jigsaw puzzle’,
612: ’jinrikisha,
ricksha,
rick-
shaw’,
613: ’joystick’,
614: ’kimono’,
615: ’knee pad’,
616: ’knot’,
617: ’lab coat, laboratory coat’,
618: ’ladle’,
619: ’lampshade, lamp shade’,
620: ’laptop, laptop computer’,
621: ’lawn mower, mower’,
622: ’lens cap, lens cover’,
623: ’letter opener, paper knife,
paperknife’,
624: ’library’,
625: ’lifeboat’,
626: ’lighter, light, igniter, igni-
tor’,
627: ’limousine, limo’,
628: ’liner, ocean liner’,
629: ’lipstick, lip rouge’,
630: ’Loafer’,
631: ’lotion’,
632: ’loudspeaker,
speaker,
speaker unit, loudspeaker
system, speaker system’,
633: ”loupe, jeweler’s loupe”,
634: ’lumbermill, sawmill’,
635: ’magnetic compass’,
636: ’mailbag, postbag’,
637: ’mailbox, letter box’,
638: ’maillot’,
639: ’maillot, tank suit’,
640: ’manhole cover’,
641: ’maraca’,
642: ’marimba, xylophone’,
==PAGE:101==
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
91
643: ’mask’,
644: ’matchstick’,
645: ’maypole’,
646: ’maze, labyrinth’,
647: ’measuring cup’,
648: ’medicine chest, medicine
cabinet’,
649: ’megalith,
megalithic
structure’,
650: ’microphone, mike’,
651: ’microwave,
microwave
oven’,
652: ’military uniform’,
653: ’milk can’,
654: ’minibus’,
655: ’miniskirt, mini’,
656: ’minivan’,
657: ’missile’,
658: ’mitten’,
659: ’mixing bowl’,
660: ’mobile
home,
manufac-
tured home’,
661: ’Model T’,
662: ’modem’,
663: ’monastery’,
664: ’monitor’,
665: ’moped’,
666: ’mortar’,
667: ’mortarboard’,
668: ’mosque’,
669: ’mosquito net’,
670: ’motor scooter, scooter’,
671: ’mountain bike, all-terrain
bike, off-roader’,
672: ’mountain tent’,
673: ’mouse, computer mouse’,
674: ’mousetrap’,
675: ’moving van’,
676: ’muzzle’,
677: ’nail’,
678: ’neck brace’,
679: ’necklace’,
680: ’nipple’,
681: ’notebook, notebook com-
puter’,
682: ’obelisk’,
683: ’oboe, hautboy, hautbois’,
684: ’ocarina, sweet potato’,
685: ’odometer,
hodometer,
mileometer, milometer’,
686: ’oil filter’,
687: ’organ, pipe organ’,
688: ’oscilloscope,
scope,
cathode-ray
oscilloscope,
CRO’,
689: ’overskirt’,
690: ’oxcart’,
691: ’oxygen mask’,
692: ’packet’,
693: ’paddle, boat paddle’,
694: ’paddlewheel,
paddle
wheel’,
695: ’padlock’,
696: ’paintbrush’,
697: ”pajama,
pyjama,
pj’s,
jammies”,
698: ’palace’,
699: ’panpipe,
pandean
pipe,
syrinx’,
700: ’paper towel’,
701: ’parachute, chute’,
702: ’parallel bars, bars’,
703: ’park bench’,
704: ’parking meter’,
705: ’passenger car, coach, car-
riage’,
706: ’patio, terrace’,
707: ’pay-phone, pay-station’,
708: ’pedestal,
plinth,
foot-
stall’,
709: ’pencil box, pencil case’,
710: ’pencil sharpener’,
711: ’perfume, essence’,
712: ’Petri dish’,
713: ’photocopier’,
714: ’pick, plectrum, plectron’,
715: ’pickelhaube’,
716: ’picket fence, paling’,
717: ’pickup, pickup truck’,
718: ’pier’,
719: ’piggy bank, penny bank’,
720: ’pill bottle’,
721: ’pillow’,
722: ’ping-pong ball’,
723: ’pinwheel’,
724: ’pirate, pirate ship’,
725: ’pitcher, ewer’,
726: ”plane, carpenter’s plane,
woodworking plane”,
727: ’planetarium’,
728: ’plastic bag’,
729: ’plate rack’,
730: ’plow, plough’,
731: ”plunger,
plumber’s
helper”,
732: ’Polaroid camera, Polaroid
Land camera’,
733: ’pole’,
734: ’police van, police wagon,
paddy
wagon,
patrol
wagon,
wagon,
black
Maria’,
735: ’poncho’,
736: ’pool table, billiard table,
snooker table’,
737: ’pop bottle, soda bottle’,
738: ’pot, flowerpot’,
739: ”potter’s wheel”,
740: ’power drill’,
741: ’prayer rug, prayer mat’,
742: ’printer’,
743: ’prison, prison house’,
744: ’projectile, missile’,
745: ’projector’,
746: ’puck, hockey puck’,
747: ’punching bag, punch bag,
punching ball, punchball’,
748: ’purse’,
749: ’quill, quill pen’,
750: ’quilt, comforter, comfort,
puff’,
751: ’racer,
race
car,
racing
car’,
752: ’racket, racquet’,
753: ’radiator’,
754: ’radio, wireless’,
755: ’radio telescope, radio re-
flector’,
756: ’rain barrel’,
757: ’recreational
vehicle,
RV,
R.V.’,
758: ’reel’,
759: ’reflex camera’,
760: ’refrigerator, icebox’,
761: ’remote control, remote’,
762: ’restaurant,
eating house,
eating place, eatery’,
763: ’revolver,
six-gun,
six-
shooter’,
764: ’rifle’,
765: ’rocking chair, rocker’,
766: ’rotisserie’,
767: ’rubber
eraser,
rubber,
pencil eraser’,
768: ’rugby ball’,
769: ’rule, ruler’,
770: ’running shoe’,
771: ’safe’,
772: ’safety pin’,
==PAGE:102==
92
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
773: ’saltshaker, salt shaker’,
774: ’sandal’,
775: ’sarong’,
776: ’sax, saxophone’,
777: ’scabbard’,
778: ’scale, weighing machine’,
779: ’school bus’,
780: ’schooner’,
781: ’scoreboard’,
782: ’screen, CRT screen’,
783: ’screw’,
784: ’screwdriver’,
785: ’seat belt, seatbelt’,
786: ’sewing machine’,
787: ’shield, buckler’,
788: ’shoe
shop,
shoe-shop,
shoe store’,
789: ’shoji’,
790: ’shopping basket’,
791: ’shopping cart’,
792: ’shovel’,
793: ’shower cap’,
794: ’shower curtain’,
795: ’ski’,
796: ’ski mask’,
797: ’sleeping bag’,
798: ’slide rule, slipstick’,
799: ’sliding door’,
800: ’slot, one-armed bandit’,
801: ’snorkel’,
802: ’snowmobile’,
803: ’snowplow, snowplough’,
804: ’soap dispenser’,
805: ’soccer ball’,
806: ’sock’,
807: ’solar dish, solar collector,
solar furnace’,
808: ’sombrero’,
809: ’soup bowl’,
810: ’space bar’,
811: ’space heater’,
812: ’space shuttle’,
813: ’spatula’,
814: ’speedboat’,
815: ”spider web, spider’s web”,
816: ’spindle’,
817: ’sports car, sport car’,
818: ’spotlight, spot’,
819: ’stage’,
820: ’steam locomotive’,
821: ’steel arch bridge’,
822: ’steel drum’,
823: ’stethoscope’,
824: ’stole’,
825: ’stone wall’,
826: ’stopwatch, stop watch’,
827: ’stove’,
828: ’strainer’,
829: ’streetcar, tram, tramcar,
trolley, trolley car’,
830: ’stretcher’,
831: ’studio couch, day bed’,
832: ’stupa, tope’,
833: ’submarine, pigboat, sub,
U-boat’,
834: ’suit, suit of clothes’,
835: ’sundial’,
836: ’sunglass’,
837: ’sunglasses,
dark
glasses,
shades’,
838: ’sunscreen, sunblock, sun
blocker’,
839: ’suspension bridge’,
840: ’swab, swob, mop’,
841: ’sweatshirt’,
842: ’swimming trunks, bathing
trunks’,
843: ’swing’,
844: ’switch,
electric
switch,
electrical switch’,
845: ’syringe’,
846: ’table lamp’,
847: ’tank, army tank, armored
combat vehicle, armoured
combat vehicle’,
848: ’tape player’,
849: ’teapot’,
850: ’teddy, teddy bear’,
851: ’television,
television sys-
tem’,
852: ’tennis ball’,
853: ’thatch, thatched roof’,
854: ’theater
curtain,
theatre
curtain’,
855: ’thimble’,
856: ’thresher, thrasher, thresh-
ing machine’,
857: ’throne’,
858: ’tile roof’,
859: ’toaster’,
860: ’tobacco shop, tobacconist
shop, tobacconist’,
861: ’toilet seat’,
862: ’torch’,
863: ’totem pole’,
864: ’tow
truck,
tow
car,
wrecker’,
865: ’toyshop’,
866: ’tractor’,
867: ’trailer
truck,
tractor
trailer,
trucking
rig,
rig,
articulated lorry, semi’,
868: ’tray’,
869: ’trench coat’,
870: ’tricycle, trike, velocipede’,
871: ’trimaran’,
872: ’tripod’,
873: ’triumphal arch’,
874: ’trolleybus,
trolley coach,
trackless trolley’,
875: ’trombone’,
876: ’tub, vat’,
877: ’turnstile’,
878: ’typewriter keyboard’,
879: ’umbrella’,
880: ’unicycle, monocycle’,
881: ’upright, upright piano’,
882: ’vacuum, vacuum cleaner’,
883: ’vase’,
884: ’vault’,
885: ’velvet’,
886: ’vending machine’,
887: ’vestment’,
888: ’viaduct’,
889: ’violin, fiddle’,
890: ’volleyball’,
891: ’waffle iron’,
892: ’wall clock’,
893: ’wallet, billfold, notecase,
pocketbook’,
894: ’wardrobe, closet, press’,
895: ’warplane, military plane’,
896: ’washbasin,
handbasin,
washbowl,
lavabo,
wash-
hand basin’,
897: ’washer, automatic washer,
washing machine’,
898: ’water bottle’,
899: ’water jug’,
900: ’water tower’,
901: ’whiskey jug’,
902: ’whistle’,
903: ’wig’,
904: ’window screen’,
905: ’window shade’,
906: ’Windsor tie’,
907: ’wine bottle’,
908: ’wing’,
909: ’wok’,
910: ’wooden spoon’,
911: ’wool, woolen, woollen’,
==PAGE:103==
A ILSVRC image classification object categories
93
912: ’worm fence, snake fence,
snake-rail fence,
Virginia
fence’,
913: ’wreck’,
914: ’yawl’,
915: ’yurt’,
916: ’web site, website, internet
site, site’,
917: ’comic book’,
918: ’crossword
puzzle,
cross-
word’,
919: ’street sign’,
920: ’traffic light, traffic signal,
stoplight’,
921: ’book jacket,
dust cover,
dust jacket, dust wrapper’,
922: ’menu’,
923: ’plate’,
924: ’guacamole’,
925: ’consomme’,
926: ’hot pot, hotpot’,
927: ’trifle’,
928: ’ice cream, icecream’,
929: ’ice
lolly,
lolly,
lollipop,
popsicle’,
930: ’French loaf’,
931: ’bagel, beigel’,
932: ’pretzel’,
933: ’cheeseburger’,
934: ’hotdog, hot dog, red hot’,
935: ’mashed potato’,
936: ’head cabbage’,
937: ’broccoli’,
938: ’cauliflower’,
939: ’zucchini, courgette’,
940: ’spaghetti squash’,
941: ’acorn squash’,
942: ’butternut squash’,
943: ’cucumber, cuke’,
944: ’artichoke,
globe
arti-
choke’,
945: ’bell pepper’,
946: ’cardoon’,
947: ’mushroom’,
948: ’Granny Smith’,
949: ’strawberry’,
950: ’orange’,
951: ’lemon’,
952: ’fig’,
953: ’pineapple, ananas’,
954: ’banana’,
955: ’jackfruit, jak, jack’,
956: ’custard apple’,
957: ’pomegranate’,
958: ’hay’,
959: ’carbonara’,
960: ’chocolate sauce, chocolate
syrup’,
961: ’dough’,
962: ’meat loaf, meatloaf’,
963: ’pizza, pizza pie’,
964: ’potpie’,
965: ’burrito’,
966: ’red wine’,
967: ’espresso’,
968: ’cup’,
969: ’eggnog’,
970: ’alp’,
971: ’bubble’,
972: ’cliff, drop, drop-off’,
973: ’coral reef’,
974: ’geyser’,
975: ’lakeside, lakeshore’,
976: ’promontory,
headland,
head, foreland’,
977: ’sandbar, sand bar’,
978: ’seashore, coast, seacoast,
sea-coast’,
979: ’valley, vale’,
980: ’volcano’,
981: ’ballplayer,
baseball
player’,
982: ’groom, bridegroom’,
983: ’scuba diver’,
984: ’rapeseed’,
985: ’daisy’,
986: ”yellow lady’s slipper, yel-
low
lady-slipper,
Cypri-
pedium
calceolus,
Cypri-
pedium parviflorum”,
987: ’corn’,
988: ’acorn’,
989: ’hip, rose hip, rosehip’,
990: ’buckeye,
horse
chestnut,
conker’,
991: ’coral fungus’,
992: ’agaric’,
993: ’gyromitra’,
994: ’stinkhorn,
carrion
fun-
gus’,
995: ’earthstar’,
996: ’hen-of-the-woods, hen of
the woods, Polyporus fron-
dosus, Grifola frondosa’,
997: ’bolete’,
998: ’ear, spike, capitulum’,
999: ’toilet tissue, toilet paper,
bathroom tissue’
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX B
Script for customised
data loader
1 import torch
2 import os
3 from PIL import Image
4 from torch.utils.data.dataset import Dataset
5 import pickle
6
7 # Load the labelling file
8 fm = open('name_to_label_8classes_museum.pckl','rb')
9 imgname_labels = pickle.load(fm)
10 fm.close()
11
12 def GetImageFilename(path):
13
names = []
14
for fname in sorted(os.walk(path)):
15
for fname in sorted(fname[2]):
16
names.append(fname)
17
return names
18
19 class DatasetProcessing(Dataset):
20
def __init__(self, root, data_folder , transform=None):
21
self.data_path = os.path.join(root, data_folder)
22
self.transform = transform
23
# reading img file names from data folder
24
self.img_filename = GetImageFilename(os.path.join(root,
data_folder))
25
# reading labels from file
26
self.labels = imgname_labels
27
28
def __getitem__(self, index):
29
img = Image.open(os.path.join(self.data_path , self.
img_filename[index]))
30
img = img.convert('RGB')
31
if self.img_filename[index] in self.labels.keys():
==PAGE:106==
96
B Script for customised data loader
32
label = torch.Tensor(self.labels[self.img_filename[index
]])
33
else:
34
label = torch.zeros(8)
35
filename = self.img_filename[index]
36
if self.transform is not None:
37
img = self.transform(img)
38
return img, label, filename
39
def __len__(self):
40
return len(self.img_filename)
appendices/dataset_processing.py
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Interface of user
annotation test
Figure C.1: Test for single label classification
==PAGE:108==
98
C Interface of user annotation test
Figure C.2: Test for multi-label classification
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D
User test result of
single-label
classification
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:110==
100
D User test result of single-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
2
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
5
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
9
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
15
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
3
19
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
4
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
4
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
4
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
4
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
4
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
4
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
4
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
5
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
5
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
5
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
5
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
5
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:111==
D User test result of single-label classification
101
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
6
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
6
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
6
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
6
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
6
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
6
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
6
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
6
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
6
16
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
6
19
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
6
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
7
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
7
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
7
9
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
7
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
7
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
18
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
8
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
8
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
8
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
8
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
8
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
12
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
8
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
8
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
8
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
8
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
8
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
9
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
9
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
9
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
==PAGE:112==
102
D User test result of single-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
9
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
9
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
9
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
9
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
9
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
9
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
13
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
9
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
9
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
9
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
9
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
9
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
10
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
10
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
10
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
10
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
10
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
10
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
10
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
10
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
13
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
10
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
10
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
10
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
10
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
10
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
11
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
11
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
11
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
11
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
11
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
11
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
11
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
11
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
11
15
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
11
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
11
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
11
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
12
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
12
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
12
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
12
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:113==
D User test result of single-label classification
103
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
12
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
12
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
12
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
12
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
12
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
14
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
12
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
12
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
12
18
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
12
19
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
12
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
13
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
13
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
13
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
13
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
13
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
13
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
13
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
13
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
13
19
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
14
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
14
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
15
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
14
19
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
15
5
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
15
8
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
15
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
==PAGE:114==
104
D User test result of single-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
15
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
12
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
15
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
15
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
15
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
15
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
15
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
16
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
16
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
16
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
16
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
5
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
16
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
16
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
16
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
16
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
16
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
16
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
16
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
13
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
16
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
16
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
16
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
16
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
17
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
17
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
17
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
5
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
17
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
17
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
17
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
17
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
17
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
17
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
13
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
17
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
17
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
17
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
17
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
18
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
5
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
18
6
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
18
8
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
18
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
18
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
11
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
12
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:115==
D User test result of single-label classification
105
UserID
ImgID
Coin
Painting
Photo
Pottery
Sculpture
Text/Doc.
Other
18
13
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
14
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
18
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
18
16
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
17
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
18
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
18
19
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
20
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:116==
106
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIXE
User test result of
multi-label
classification
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
3
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
6
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
9
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
10
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
11
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
12
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
13
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
14
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
15
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
17
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
20
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
21
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
22
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
23
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
24
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
25
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
26
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
27
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
28
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
29
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
30
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
2
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
2
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
2
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
==PAGE:118==
108
E User test result of multi-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
2
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
2
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
2
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
2
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
2
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
2
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
2
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
2
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
2
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
2
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
2
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
3
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
3
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
3
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
3
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
3
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
3
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
3
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
3
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
3
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
3
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
3
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
3
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
3
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
3
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
3
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
3
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
4
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
4
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
4
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
4
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
==PAGE:119==
E User test result of multi-label classification
109
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
4
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
4
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
4
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
4
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
4
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
4
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
4
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
4
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
4
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
4
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
4
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
4
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
4
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
4
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
5
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
5
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
5
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
5
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
5
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
5
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
5
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
5
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
5
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
5
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
5
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
5
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
5
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
5
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
5
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
5
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
5
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
5
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
5
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
5
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
5
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
6
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
6
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
6
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
6
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
6
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
6
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
6
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
6
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
==PAGE:120==
110
E User test result of multi-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
6
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
6
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
6
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
6
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
6
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
6
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
6
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
6
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
6
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
6
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
6
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
6
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
6
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
7
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
7
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
7
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
7
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
7
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
7
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
7
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
7
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
7
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
7
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
7
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
7
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
7
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
7
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
7
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
7
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
7
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
7
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
7
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
7
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
7
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
8
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
8
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
8
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
8
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
8
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
8
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
8
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
8
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
8
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
8
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
8
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
8
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
8
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
==PAGE:121==
E User test result of multi-label classification
111
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
8
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
8
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
8
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
8
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
8
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
8
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
8
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
8
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
8
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
8
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
8
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
9
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
9
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
9
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
9
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
9
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
9
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
9
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
9
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
9
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
9
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
9
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
9
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
9
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
9
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
9
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
9
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
9
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
9
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
9
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
9
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
9
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
10
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
10
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
10
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
10
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
10
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
10
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
10
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
10
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
10
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
10
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
10
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
==PAGE:122==
112
E User test result of multi-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
10
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
10
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
10
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
10
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
10
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
10
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
10
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
10
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
10
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
10
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
11
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
11
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
11
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
11
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
11
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
11
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
11
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
11
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
11
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
11
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
11
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
11
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
11
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
11
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
11
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
11
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
11
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
11
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
11
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
11
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
11
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
12
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
12
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
12
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
12
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
12
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
12
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
12
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
12
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
12
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
12
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
12
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
12
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
12
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
12
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
12
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
==PAGE:123==
E User test result of multi-label classification
113
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
12
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
12
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
12
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
12
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
12
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
12
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
12
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
13
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
13
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
13
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
13
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
13
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
13
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
13
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
13
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
13
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
13
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
13
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
13
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
13
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
13
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
13
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
13
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
13
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
13
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
13
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
13
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
13
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
13
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
13
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
14
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
14
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
14
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
14
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
14
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
14
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
14
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
14
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
14
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
14
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
14
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
14
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
14
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
14
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
14
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
14
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
==PAGE:124==
114
E User test result of multi-label classification
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
14
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
14
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
14
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
14
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
14
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
15
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
15
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
15
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
15
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
15
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
15
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
15
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
15
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
15
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
15
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
15
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
15
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
15
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
15
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
15
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
15
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
15
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
15
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
15
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
15
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
15
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
15
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
15
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
16
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
16
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
16
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
16
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
16
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
16
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
16
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
16
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
16
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
16
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
16
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
16
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
16
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
16
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
16
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
16
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
16
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
16
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
16
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
16
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
16
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
16
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
16
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
16
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
16
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
16
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
==PAGE:125==
E User test result of multi-label classification
115
UserID
ImgID
Animal
Building
City
Crowd
Landscape
People
Portrait
Vehicle
16
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
16
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
17
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
17
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
17
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
17
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
17
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
17
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
17
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
17
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
17
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
17
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
17
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
17
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
17
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
17
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
17
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
17
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
17
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
17
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
17
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
17
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
17
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
17
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
18
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
18
2
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
18
3
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
18
5
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
18
6
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
18
7
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
8
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
18
10
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
11
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
18
12
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
13
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
18
14
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
18
15
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
18
16
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
17
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
18
18
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
19
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
20
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
18
21
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
18
22
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
18
23
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
18
24
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
25
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
18
26
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
18
27
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
18
28
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
18
29
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
18
30
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
==PAGE:126==
116
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
Alkhawlani, Mohammed, Mohammed Elmogy, and Hazem El-Bakry (2015).
“Content-Based Image Retrieval using Local Features Descriptors and Bag-
of-Visual Words”. In: International Journal of Advanced Computer Science
and Applications 6, pp. 212–219. doi: 10.14569/IJACSA.2015.060929.
Alom, Md. Zahangir et al. (2018). “The History Began from AlexNet: A Com-
prehensive Survey on Deep Learning Approaches”. In:
Alom, Md Zahangir et al. (2019). “A State-of-the-Art Survey on Deep Learn-
ing Theory and Architectures”. In: Electronics 8.3. issn: 2079-9292. doi:
10.3390/electronics8030292. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-
9292/8/3/292.
Azulay, Aharon and Yair Weiss (2019). Why do deep convolutional networks
generalize so poorly to small image transformations? url: https : / /
openreview.net/forum?id=HJxYwiC5tm.
Bengio, Y (2009). “Learning Deep Architectures for AI”. In: Foundations 2,
pp. 1–55. doi: 10.1561/2200000006.
Bengio, Y., P. Simard, and P. Frasconi (1994a). “Learning long-term depen-
dencies with gradient descent is difficult”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks 5.2, pp. 157–166. issn: 1045-9227. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
— (1994b). “Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is diffi-
cult”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 5.2, pp. 157–166. issn:
1045-9227. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
Calhoun, Karen (2006). The Changing Nature of the Catalog and its Integra-
tion with Other Discovery Tools. doi: 10.1201/b13123-9.
Charte, Francisco et al. (2015). “MLSMOTE: Approaching imbalanced multil-
abel learning through synthetic instance generation”. In: Knowledge-Based
Systems 89, pp. 385–397. issn: 0950-7051. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.knosys.2015.07.019. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0950705115002737.
Chen, Shuxiao, Edgar Dobriban, and Jane H Lee (2019). “Invariance reduces
Variance: Understanding Data Augmentation in Deep Learning and Be-
==PAGE:128==
118
Bibliography
yond”. In: arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1907.10905, arXiv:1907.10905. arXiv: 1907.
10905 [stat.ML].
Ciresan, Dan Claudiu et al. (2010). “Deep Big Simple Neural Nets Excel on
Handwritten Digit Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1003.0358. arXiv: 1003.
0358. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1003.0358.
Clare, Amanda and Ross D. King (2001). “Knowledge Discovery in Multi-label
Phenotype Data”. In: Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.
Ed. by Luc De Raedt and Arno Siebes. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, pp. 42–53. isbn: 978-3-540-44794-8.
Dalal, Navneet et al. (2005). “Histograms of oriented gradients for human
detection”. In: In CVPR.
Davies, Stephen (2009). Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics - Ontology of Art.
Oxford University Press.
Deng, Jia et al. (2010). “What Does Classifying More Than 10,000 Image Cat-
egories Tell Us?” In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2010. Ed. by Kostas Dani-
ilidis, Petros Maragos, and Nikos Paragios. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 71–84. isbn: 978-3-642-15555-0.
Deng, J. et al. (2009). “ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database”.
In: CVPR09.
Denniss, Anthony (1995). “T. M. Lillesand, R. W. Kiefer, 1994. Remote Sens-
ing and Image Interpretation, 3rd ed. xvi + 750 pp. New York, Chichester,
Brisbane, Toronto, Singapore: John Wiley Sons. Price £67.00 (hard cov-
ers), £19.95 (paperback). ISBN 0 471 30575 8 (pb).” In: Geological Maga-
zine 132, pp. 248–249. doi: 10.1017/S0016756800012024.
Du, K.-L and M.N.s Swamy (2014). “Perceptrons”. In: pp. 67–81. isbn: 978-1-
4471-5570-6. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-5571-3_3.
E Hinton, Geoffrey (2002). “ARTICLE Training Products of Experts by Min-
imizing Contrastive Divergence”. In: Neural computation 14, pp. 1771–800.
doi: 10.1162/089976602760128018.
E Hinton, Geoffrey, Simon Osindero, and Yee-Whye Teh (2006). “A Fast
Learning Algorithm for Deep Belief Nets”. In: Neural computation 18,
pp. 1527–54. doi: 10.1162/neco.2006.18.7.1527.
Eiben, A and S.K. Smit (2011). “Parameter tuning for configuring and analyz-
ing evolutionary algorithms”. In: Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 1,
pp. 19–31. doi: 10.1016/j.swevo.2011.02.001.
Elgammal, Ahmed M. et al. (2018). “The Shape of Art History in the Eyes of
the Machine”. In: CoRR abs/1801.07729. arXiv: 1801.07729. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1801.07729.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
119
Flash, Peter (2018). “Performance Evaluation in Machine Learning: The Good,
The Bad, The Ugly and The Way Forward”. In:
García, V., J.S. Sánchez, and R.A. Mollineda (2012). “On the effectiveness
of preprocessing methods when dealing with different levels of class im-
balance”. In: Knowledge-Based Systems 25.1. Special Issue on New Trends
in Data Mining, pp. 13–21. issn: 0950-7051. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.knosys.2011.06.013. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0950705111001286.
Glorot, Xavier and Yoshua Bengio (2010). “Understanding the difficulty of
training deep feedforward neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the Thir-
teenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Ed.
by Yee Whye Teh and Mike Titterington. Vol. 9. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research. Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy: PMLR, pp. 249–
256. url: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/glorot10a.html.
Godbole, Shantanu and Sunita Sarawagi (2004). “Discriminative Methods for
Multi-Labeled Classification”. In: vol. vol. 3056. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-
24775-3_5.
Golik, Pavel, Patrick Doetsch, and Hermann Ney (2013). “Cross-Entropy vs.
Squared Error Training: a Theoretical and Experimental Comparison”. In:
pp. 1756–1760.
Goode, G. Brown (1895). “The Relationships and Responsibilities of Muse-
ums”. In: Science 2.34, pp. 197–209. issn: 00368075, 10959203. url: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/1622598.
Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville (2016a). Deep Learning.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press.
— (2016b). Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press.
Gunho Chae, Jungwha Kim (2011). “Can Social Tagging Be a Tool to Reduce
the Semantic Gap between Curators and Audiences? Making a Semantic
Structure of Tags by Implementing the Facetted Tagging System for Online
Art Museums”. In: Museums and the Web 2011: Proceedings J. url: https:
//www.museumsandtheweb.com/mw2011/papers/can_social_tagging_
be_a_tool_to_reduce_the_sem.html.
Hardt, Moritz, Benjamin Recht, and Yoram Singer (2015). “Train faster, gen-
eralize better: Stability of stochastic gradient descent”. In:
Hawkins, Douglas M. (2004). “The Problem of Overfitting”. In: Journal of
chemical information and computer sciences 44 1, pp. 1–12.
He, K. et al. (2015). “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level
Performance on ImageNet Classification”. In: 2015 IEEE International
==PAGE:130==
120
Bibliography
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1026–1034. doi: 10.1109/
ICCV.2015.123.
He, K. et al. (2016). “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 770–778. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Hernández-García, Alex and Peter König (2018). Data augmentation instead
of explicit regularization. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
ByJWeR1AW.
Herrera, Francisco et al. (2016). Multilabel Classification: Problem Analysis,
Metrics and Techniques. 1st. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated.
isbn: 3319411101, 9783319411101.
Hinton, Geoffrey E. et al. (2012). “Improving neural networks by preventing
co-adaptation of feature detectors”. In: CoRR abs/1207.0580. arXiv: 1207.
0580. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.0580.
Hussain, Mahbub, Jordan J. Bird, and Diego R. Faria (2018). “A Study on
CNN Transfer Learning for Image Classification”. English. In: UK Work-
shop on Computational Intelligence. Advances in Computational Intelli-
gence Systems. Germany: Springer, pp. 191–202. isbn: 978-3-319-97981-6.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-97982-3_16.
James, Gareth et al. (2014). An Introduction to Statistical Learning: With Ap-
plications in R. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated. isbn: 1461471370,
9781461471370.
Keene, S, A Stevenson, and F Monti (2008). “Collections for People: Museums’
Stored Collections as a Public Resource”. In: Keene, S. and Stevenson, A.
and Monti, F. (2008) Collections for people: museums’ stored collections as
a public resource. Research report. UCL Institute of Archaeology, London,
UK.
Kent, Allen et al. (1955). “Machine literature searching VIII. Operational
criteria for designing information retrieval systems”. In: American Docu-
mentation 6.2, pp. 93–101. doi: 10.1002/asi.5090060209. eprint: https:
// onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / asi . 5090060209.
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/asi.
5090060209.
Klavans, Judith, Rebecca LaPlante, and Jennifer Golbeck (2014). “Subject
Matter Categorization of Tags Applied to Digital Images From Art Muse-
ums”. In: Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technol-
ogy 65. doi: 10.1002/asi.22950.
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
121
Kohavi, Ron and Foster Provost (1998). “Glossary of Terms”. In: Machine
Learning 30.2-3, pp. 271–274. url: http://www.springerlink.com/
content/x105525142v51t20/.
Krizhevsky, Alex, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton (2012). “ImageNet
Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 25. Ed. by F. Pereira et al. Curran
Associates, Inc., pp. 1097–1105. url: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
4824-imagenet-classification-with-deep-convolutional-neural-
networks.pdf.
Kukačka, Jan, Vladimir Golkov, and Daniel Cremers (2017). “Regularization
for Deep Learning: A Taxonomy”. In:
Kuznetsova, Alina et al. (2018). “The Open Images Dataset V4: Unified image
classification, object detection, and visual relationship detection at scale”.
In: arXiv:1811.00982.
Laine-Hernandez, Mari (2006). “Image Semantics in the Description and Cate-
gorization of Journalistic Photographs, 2006”. In: Proceedings of the Amer-
ican Society for Information Science and Technology 43. doi: 10.1002/
meet.1450430148.
LeCun, Yann et al. (1998). “Efficient BackProp”. In: Neural Networks: Tricks
of the Trade, This Book is an Outgrowth of a 1996 NIPS Workshop. London,
UK, UK: Springer-Verlag, pp. 9–50. isbn: 3-540-65311-2. url: http://dl.
acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645754.668382.
Lecun, Y. et al. (1998). “Gradient-based learning applied to document recog-
nition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11, pp. 2278–2324. issn: 0018-9219.
doi: 10.1109/5.726791.
Li, Zhizhong and Derek Hoiem (2016). “Learning without Forgetting”. In:
CoRR abs/1606.09282. arXiv: 1606.09282. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1606.09282.
Lin, Tsung-yi et al. (n.d.). Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context.
Lowe, David G. (2003). Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Key-
points.
lu, Xiaojun et al. (2017). “Feature Extraction and Fusion Using Deep Convo-
lutional Neural Networks for Face Detection”. In: Mathematical Problems
in Engineering 2017, pp. 1–9. doi: 10.1155/2017/1376726.
M. Bishop, Ch (2005). Neural Networks For Pattern Recognition. Vol. 227.
Mai, Jens-Erik (2005). “Analysis in Indexing: Document and Domain Centered
Approaches”. In: Inf. Process. Manage. 41.3, pp. 599–611. issn: 0306-4573.
doi: 10.1016/j.ipm.2003.12.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.ipm.2003.12.004.
==PAGE:132==
122
Bibliography
Menard, Claude, Kostas Karantininis, and Jerker Nilsson (2007). “Coopera-
tives: Hierarchies or Hybrids?” In: pp. 1–18. doi: 10.1007/1-4020-5543-
0_1.
Miller, George A. (1995). “WordNet: A Lexical Database for English”. In:
Commun. ACM 38.11, pp. 39–41. issn: 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/219717.
219748. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/219717.219748.
Milletari, Fausto, Nassir Navab, and Seyed-Ahmad Ahmadi (2016). “V-Net:
Fully Convolutional Neural Networks for Volumetric Medical Image Seg-
mentation”. In:
Mirisaee, S. H., A. Douzal, and A. Termier (2015). “Selecting representative
instances from datasets”. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data
Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1109/DSAA.
2015.7344812.
Nationalmuseet (n.d.). Collections in the National Museum of Denmark. url:
https://en.natmus.dk/historical-knowledge/historical-knowledge-
the-world/asia/india/tranquebar/collections-in-the-national-
museum-of-denmark/.
Noy, Natalya F. and Deborah L. Mcguinness (2001). Ontology Development
101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology. url: http://protege.
stanford.edu/publications/ontology_development/ontology101.
pdf.
Nwankpa, Chigozie et al. (2018). “Activation Functions: Comparison of trends
in Practice and Research for Deep Learning”. In: CoRR abs/1811.03378.
arXiv: 1811.03378. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03378.
Al-Otaibi, Reem, Peter Flach, and Meelis Kull (2014). “Multi-label Classifica-
tion: A Comparative Study on Threshold Selection Methods”. In:
Pan, Sinno Jialin and Qiang Yang (2010). “A Survey on Transfer Learning”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 22, pp. 1345–
1359.
Partos, Timea, Simon Cropper, and David Rawlings (2016). “You Don’t See
What I See: Individual Differences in the Perception of Meaning from
Visual Stimuli”. In: PLoS ONE 11, e0150615. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0150615.
Pascanu, Razvan, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio (2013). “On the Diffi-
culty of Training Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing - Volume 28. ICML’13. Atlanta, GA, USA: JMLR.org, pp. III-1310–III-
1318. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3042817.3043083.
Paszke, Adam et al. (2017a). “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch”. In:
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
123
— (2017b). torch nn library. https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/nn.html.
Picard, D., P. Gosselin, and M. Gaspard (2015). “Challenges in Content-Based
Image Indexing of Cultural Heritage Collections”. In: IEEE Signal Process-
ing Magazine 32.4, pp. 95–102. issn: 1053-5888. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2015.
2409557.
Pretorius, A. Johannes (2004). “Ontologies - Introduction and Overview”. In:
Rorissa, Abebe and Hemalata Iyer (2008). “Theories of cognition and image
categorization: What category labels reveal about basic level theory”. In:
JASIST 59, pp. 1383–1392. doi: 10.1002/asi.20825.
Rosenblatt, F. (1958). “The Perceptron: A Probabilistic Model for Information
Storage and Organization in The Brain”. In: Psychological Review, pp. 65–
386.
Rumelhart, D. E. and J. L. McClelland (1987). “Learning Internal Repre-
sentations by Error Propagation”. In: Parallel Distributed Processing: Ex-
plorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foundations. MITP. isbn:
9780262291408. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6302929.
Rumelhart, David E., Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams (1988).
“Neurocomputing: Foundations of Research”. In: ed. by James A. Anderson
and Edward Rosenfeld. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press. Chap. Learn-
ing Representations by Back-propagating Errors, pp. 696–699. isbn: 0-262-
01097-6. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=65669.104451.
Russakovsky, Olga et al. (2015). “ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge”. In: International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) 115.3,
pp. 211–252. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
Samuel, A. L. (2000). “Some studies in machine learning using the game of
checkers”. In: IBM Journal of Research and Development 44.1.2, pp. 206–
226. issn: 0018-8646. doi: 10.1147/rd.441.0206.
Schuchert, Charles (1896). “Museum Methods: On the Arrangement of Great
Paleontological Collections”. In: Science 3.68, pp. 576–579. issn: 00368075,
10959203. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1624251.
Simard, P. Y., D. Steinkraus, and J. C. Platt (2003). “Best practices for convo-
lutional neural networks applied to visual document analysis”. In: Seventh
International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 2003.
Proceedings. Pp. 958–963. doi: 10.1109/ICDAR.2003.1227801.
Simonyan, Karen and Andrew Zisserman (2014). “Very Deep Convolutional
Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition”. In: arXiv 1409.1556. url:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1409.1556v6.pdf.
Sorokin, A. and D. Forsyth (2008). “Utility data annotation with Amazon Me-
chanical Turk”. In: 2008 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
==PAGE:134==
124
Bibliography
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1–8. doi: 10.1109/CVPRW.
2008.4562953.
Srinivas, Suraj et al. (2017). “An Introduction to Deep Convolutional Neural
Nets for Computer Vision”. In: pp. 25–52. isbn: 9780128104088. doi: 10.
1016/B978-0-12-810408-8.00003-1.
Srivastava, Nitish et al. (2014). “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural
Networks from Overfitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15,
pp. 1929–1958. url: http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.
html.
Szegedy, Christian et al. (2014). “Going Deeper with Convolutions”. In: CoRR
abs/1409.4842. arXiv: 1409.4842. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.
4842.
Tan, Chuanqi et al. (2018). “A Survey on Deep Transfer Learning”. In: CoRR
abs/1808.01974. arXiv: 1808.01974. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.
01974.
Thrun, Sebastian and Lorien Pratt, eds. (1998). Learning to Learn. Norwell,
MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. isbn: 0-7923-8047-9.
Torrey, Lisa and Jude Shavlik (n.d.). Transfer Learning.
Trant, J (2009). “Tagging, Folksonomy and Art Museums: Early Experiments
and Ongoing Research”. In: Journal of Digital Information 10.1. issn:
1368-7506. url: https://journals.tdl.org/jodi/index.php/jodi/
article/view/270.
Trant, J and Bruce Wyman (2006). “Investigating social tagging and folkson-
omy in art museums with Steve.Museum”. In:
Tsang, Sik-Ho (2018). Review: VGGNet — 1st Runner-Up (Image Classifica-
tion), Winner (Localization) in ILSVRC 2014. url: https://medium.
com / coinmonks / paper - review - of - vggnet - 1st - runner - up - of -
ilsvlc-2014-image-classification-d02355543a11 (visited on 08/22/2018).
Tsoumakas, Grigorios and Ioannis Katakis (2007). “Multi-label classification:
An overview”. In: Int J Data Warehousing and Mining 2007, pp. 1–13.
Van Rees, Reinout (2008). “Clarity in the usage of the terms ontology, taxon-
omy and classification”. In: Civil Eng. 20.
Vincent, Pascal et al. (2010). “Stacked Denoising Autoencoders: Learning Use-
ful Representations in a Deep Network with a Local Denoising Criterion”.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 11, pp. 3371–3408.
Wang, F. (1990). “Fuzzy supervised classification of remote sensing images”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 28.2, pp. 194–
201. issn: 0196-2892. doi: 10.1109/36.46698.
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
125
Wang, Jacob R. (n.d.). Digital cultural heritage. url: https://www.smk.dk/
en/article/digital-cultural-heritage/.
Wong, Sebastien C. et al. (2016). “Understanding data augmentation for clas-
sification: when to warp?” In: CoRR abs/1609.08764. arXiv: 1609.08764.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08764.
Zeiler, Matthew D. and Rob Fergus (2013). “Visualizing and Understanding
Convolutional Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1311.2901. arXiv: 1311 . 2901.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2901.
Zhang, Xiang and Yann LeCun (2015). “Universum Prescription: Regulariza-
tion using Unlabeled Data”. In: CoRR abs/1511.03719. arXiv: 1511.03719.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.03719.
Zhang, Xinbin (2018). “A New Structure and Criterion for Dataset of Image
Classification”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3107322.
==PAGE:136==
