==PAGE:1==
Semantic Segmentation for
Nutrition Content Estimation
from Food Images using Deep
Learning
Mia Sandra Nicole Siemon
s161119
August 06th, 2019
Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Given a dataset of images showing a variety of meals in diﬀerent arrangements,
the main objective of this project work will be to develop a procedure for pixel-
level classiﬁcation, also known as semantic image segmentation, aiming eventu-
ally at the implementation of a deep learning network to conduct this process
autonomously. For the purpose of this project this method should be as accurate
as possible, the output serving as a foundation for further analytical assessments
in terms of nutrition content.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Hovedformålet med dette projekt, er at udvikle en procedure til pixelniveau-
klassiﬁcering, også kendt som semantisk billedsegmentering, ud fra et datasæt
af billeder, der viser forskellige måltider i forskellige arrangementer. Formålet er
at implementere et netværk, hvorved denne proces foregår autonomt. Metoden
bør være så nøjagtig som mulig, hvor produktet danner fundament for yderligere
analytiske vurderinger med hensyn til næringsindhold.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
Lyngby, August 06th-2019
Mia Sandra Nicole Siemon
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
My greatest thankfulness goes to everyone who has supported me in any kind of
way during the journey of this project work. That applies especially to those who
involved me and/or let themselves be dragged into hot-headed but passionate
and eventually very fruitful discussions that provided me with the solid basis
for results shown in the following thesis report.
At this point I would also like to thank the creators of the UNIMIB2016 dataset
with all its extras thanks to which a very profound data analysis could be
performed during this project work.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Additional Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work and Available Datasets
5
2.1
Available Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmenta-
tion
21
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
VGG-16: Classiﬁcation Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
DeepLab: Semantic Segmentation Network
. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Feature-based Class Reduction - Two Proposals
33
4.1
Hierarchical Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Graph Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Implementation Details
41
5.1
Image Classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Semantic Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
5.3
Feature-based Class Reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Boundary Reﬁnement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Experimental Evaluation
67
6.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2
Training and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3
Final Segmentation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Discussion and Future Work
91
Bibliography
105
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
As depicted by nearly every article related to general Food Computing, food
constitutes one of the key aspects building the crucial foundation which enables
our all survival. Over the past decades it has, however, become a lot more than
this. According to the authors of the very extensive survey paper [MJL+19] in
this ﬁeld,
"[Food] plays an important role in deﬁning our identity, social status,
religious signiﬁcance and culture." ([MJL+19])
referring in this regard to the two external sources [SH87] and [Kha09].
The term Food Computing summarizes the application of techniques and al-
gorithms from the ﬁelds of Computer Science and Statistics required to create
mathematical models mimicking how food is perceived, recognized, localized
etc. by humans in order to provide a solid basis for more in-depth analysis and
(automatic) computer-aided pipelines.
Recently, great focus was put especially on the area of dietary health manage-
ment in terms of personal food intake journaling. Based on such monitoring
of nutritional contents, the idea evolved to step away from traditional meth-
ods involving mainly manual reporting and develop systems which would be
able to automatically predict the amount of carbohydrates, sugars, calories etc.
contained in a meal shown in a single image instead.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
The necessity of such systems becomes very apparent if certain related articles
are considered that underline the impact appropriate food intake has on the
human health, especially in hospitals and elderly homes. Haboubi reports in
[Hab10] for example, that elder people are confronted with a signiﬁcantly higher
risk of experiencing inadequate diets and general malnutrition due to diﬀerent
aging-related factors such as the lack of appetite, compared to younger parts of
the population which is directly linked to the emergence of a large variety of
diseases and a rapid decline in fundamental functions of certain organs.
When it comes to the impact that improper nutrition has on patients in hospitals
and clinical costs, Lim et al. have shown in [LCBOC+11] based on the case of a
tertiary hospital in Singapore that malnutrition is a signiﬁcant reason for poor
hospitalization outcomes and additional costs related to care. This originated
from the fact that patients who experienced inadequate dietary intakes had to
be treated for a longer period of time in the hospital being at the same time
more likely to be admitted shortly afterwards.
Yet another study conducted by Kruizenga et al. in [KVKW+16] on over half
a million patients which were admitted and treated in a total of 13 hospital in
the Netherlands during the years 2007-2014, investigating on the impact that
undernutrition has on the general hospital stay outcome. The researchers found
out that hospital stays could be shortened by an average of 1.4 days provided
that the patient was considered well-nourished.
All of the above ﬁndings constitute the main motivation for the development
of a fast and reliable food intake registration system called Danish Hospital
Dietary Intake Tool (DHDITool). The underlying hypothesis of this general
project is that the nutritional content of food objects can be estimated by means
of single photographs. Being part of this project, the main goal of this thesis
work will be to address the step of Semantic Image Segmentation such that
the outcome can serve as potential input to the consecutive step of Volume
Estimation.
With respect to pursuing this goal, the established project plan will be presented
in the following section of this chapter.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Project plan
3
1.1
Project plan
Problem Formulation
Diﬀerentiating between diﬀerent types of food is a
very challenging task requiring the analysis of more than just one aspect, such
as for instance color(saturation, lightness), texture and other object dependent
features. This holds especially if the meal is not arranged in a somewhat discrete
manner on the plate separating the diﬀerent foods it consists of as it is in the
case of vegetable mixes or salads. A possible approach would be to ﬁrst segment
global food regions out declaring them as main regions of interest and further
conducting detailed analysis based on local feature extraction.
There exists a multitude of possibilities to approach the underlying problem.
Some involve the application of deep learning during the actual segmentation
process (1) and some do so post-hoc (2). This constitutes a major diﬀerence
due to the fact that deep learning networks can reliably predict the presence
of an object including a rough estimation of its localization, lacking however
signiﬁcant segmentation accuracy. Choosing option one would therefore involve
modifying the framework accordingly in order to address this boundary local-
ization challenge. Option two on the other hand would be applicable if it was
chosen to follow the global and local approach roughly described at the end of
the previous paragraph. A careful assessment of both possibilities will have to
be carried out during an extensive research phase on already existing methods
in order to make a ﬁnal decision.
Figure 1.1: Project Plan - Final Version
Risk Analysis
The overall Project Plan was created in a way that a bit more
than
2
3 of the total amount of available weeks was fully planned leaving the
remaining time as a buﬀer. These weeks (6) are meant to serve as emergency
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
time for the phase which bears most likely the highest risk: the implementation,
testing and ﬁxing period. It is also not possible to precisely estimate whether
additional time will be required for the technical review. The remaining time
will be then dedicated to ﬁnal completion and review of the thesis itself.
1.2
Additional Documents
Throughout the entire project phase, a diary was kept containing all crucial
steps, thoughts, ideas, successes and failures from which two versions will be
attached to this document: A short and a long version where the former one
essentially constitutes a monthly-based summary of the latter which on the other
hand contains a lot more thoughts and personal comments.
In addition to this, another document will be uploaded containing the original
and revised project plan including a brief self-evaluation.
1.3
Thesis Structure
This thesis work report will begin with a thorough literature review following
in the next chapter in which most recent and well-known approaches in deep
learning addressing dietary health management in the ﬁeld of food computing
will be presented and assessed. In Chapter 3, a general introduction to Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN) and the underlying model architecture
will be given with further speciﬁc focus on a particular case in which an existing
pre-trained DCNN initially meant for classiﬁcation purposes is converted into
a (Deep) Fully-Convolutional Neural Network (FCNN) based on a few simple
transformation steps. Using these two network models as a basis Chapter 4
contains the theoretical background for two proposals targeting general class
reduction based on in-depth analysis of extracted network features. All imple-
mentation details are described in Chapter 5 with more technical information
regarding the actual training, related prerequisites and preparations, and a ﬁnal
evaluation of the obtained results following in Chapter 6. Last but not least, a
summarizing discussion including potential perspectives for future work will be
covered in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Related Work and Available
Datasets
With the growing demand of software which can be used for simple, fast and
cheap monitoring of dietary intake, an increasing amount of concepts has been
evolving especially since the beginning of this decade in response. The gen-
eral tasks these concepts have to handle in the area of Food Computing are
related to Multi-class Food Recognition, Detection, Localization and Segmenta-
tion. Broadly speaking, there exist two alternative approaches that have been
proposed to dealing with the key aspect that all of these tasks have in common:
The detection, extraction and analysis of existing features.
Most commonly, features of images are expressed by means of so-called visual
descriptors. The ﬁrst alternative methods proposed which were mainly designed
to handle pure classiﬁcation problems were making use of hand-crafted tradi-
tional visual descriptors that were used in combination with classifying units
such as linear Support Vector Machines (SVM), for instance. As an example, a
very deep insight into how SVMs can be used for pattern recognition is given
by J.C. Burges in [JB09]. The second approach on the other hand, proposed
the usage of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for the generation of cus-
tom visual descriptors that would match the underlying problem up to a very
accurate degree.
A very early attempt to classiﬁcation of diﬀerent food objects in an image was
proposed by Zhu at al. in [ZBS+11]. The aim of the authors was to design and
==PAGE:18==
6
Related Work and Available Datasets
implement a food recognition system which performs automatic segmentation
of food regions based on local image features and further conducting region-
dependent classiﬁcation, given a single image acquired with a smartphone.
Coming to the conclusion that it would be more eﬃcient to apply segmentation
techniques to actual regions of interest that potentially contain food objects
instead of doing so to the entire image without any pre-processing step, Zhu et
al. propose a pipeline in their paper that can be split into the following major
components: Identiﬁcation of Regions of Interest (ROI) - Food Segmentation
based on extracted ROIs - Food Classiﬁcation based on previously obtained
segmentations. A general outline of the pipeline that was presented in their
paper is given in Figure 2.1.
The ﬁrst step in this pipeline, i.e. the detection of regions of interest, is es-
sentially based on the generation of a main binary mask as union of two other
binary masks which were created in the following ways: While the ﬁrst one
is categorizing most frequently occurring pixels in the image after it has been
converted into Lab color space as background and the remaining ones as fore-
ground, the second case localizes most signiﬁcant edges in the combined RGB
channels of each image. Both approaches are only possible because of the crucial
preliminary assumptions the authors have made in advance facilitated by the
general dish serving circumstances, namely that all plates, bowls and glasses are
placed on a relatively large table that is covered with a uniform table cloth that
remains constant throughout the entire experimental phase.
For the purpose of providing a solution to the segmentation task of the extracted
ROIs, the authors make use of so-called Normalized Cuts as it has been proposed
by Shi et al. in [SM08]. In this setup image pixels are essentially mapped to
Graph Theory space which consists of nodes (pixels) and vertices depicting the
similarity between two neighboring pixels, such that the initial segmentation
problem can be expressed as a graph partitioning problem.
Last but not least, the ﬁnal crucial step related to actual classiﬁcation of the
segmented regions is performed through the extraction of visual descriptors of
these reﬂecting precise color and texture information. The former one is in this
case depicted by the 1st and 2nd moment statistics estimates that are based on
information obtained through conversion to diﬀerent color spaces. The latter
case on the other hand, is making use of so-called Gabor ﬁlter banks which are
explained in more details in [JF91]. Both visual descriptors are further learned
by an SVM that is basically responsible for the construction of a statistical
model by ﬁtting a multi-dimensional hyper-plane to the underlying data such
that it is divided into respective categories in the most optimal way.
The authors of [ZBS+11] report an overall test set classiﬁcation accuracy of
==PAGE:19==
7
56.2% based on the incorporation of the proposed segmentation pre-processing
step. If, however, the ground truth segmentations were used instead, this accu-
racy increases to 95.5%.
Figure 2.1: [ZBS+11]: Proposed pipeline for segmentation assisted food clas-
siﬁcation. The image has been taken from the original paper.
Ciocca et al. present a comparison of a multitude of diﬀerent feature descriptors
in their paper [CNS17a] particularly targeting the task of food object classiﬁ-
cation in which they distinguish between a local patch-based and a global repre-
sentation suggestion of the food images serving as the basis for further feature
analysis (see Figure 2.2c). Generally, the authors come to the conclusion that
traditional descriptors work best for classiﬁcation purposes when coupled with
the local patch-based approach and SVM as classiﬁer unit. Nevertheless, what
outperforms all other proposals by far in the underlying setup is the usage of a
4096 classiﬁer extracted from the AlexNet network model [KSH12] combining
both, global and local patch-based inputs.
[CNS17a] is a general introduction of a new pipeline proposal incorporating
diﬀerent image analysis steps to achieve food recognition in terms of object
classiﬁcation. The authors also present a new dataset they created with images
showing real canteen trays containing diﬀerent meals on one or more plates. The
pipeline, as it is shown in Figure 2.2a, can be split into two major phases. Due
to the fact that only features of actual food regions are relevant to be learned,
the ﬁrst phase depicts steps to achieve tray segmentation and therefore the
detection and localization of regions of interest. This is achieved by exploiting
the simplicity of the food serving conditions: dishes are served on plain white
plates which are put on plain beige trays which oﬀers the great opportunity to
conduct a series of color analysis steps in order to create a segmentation mask
which is limited to food areas on the image only. These steps are outlined in
the pipeline shown in Figure 2.2b.
Simultaneously, the input image traverses two distinct pre-processing steps, one
==PAGE:20==
8
Related Work and Available Datasets
related to the saturation level of the image and the second one related to colors
and general texture contained in the image which can be analyzed by means of
the JSEG segmentation algorithm which was proposed in [DM01] as it can be
seen in Figure 2.2b. While the former step is mainly dealing with the extraction
of the saturation channel of the image in HSV color space convention, the second
one consists of a color quantization step and a segmentation step.
This kind of pre-processing is a crucial step in order to determine the bounding
box coordinates around each segmented region of interest. Here, it is crucial
to note that is not yet known what kind of food is actually shown in within
the borders of these bounding boxes. This task is being tackled in the second
phase of the overall pipeline in Figure 2.2a based on these extracted patches
containing the food objects of interest leading to a general accuracy of about
79% in terms of food recognition in the test set.
Categorizing the overall approaches in [ZBS+11] and [CNS17a] as patch-based
due to the fact the visual descriptors based on which the classiﬁcation decision
was made were trained using local regions of interest in the image only, presents
an alternative to a more general attempt to food recognition using CNNs, en-
abled by continuously increased hardware power, that is proposed by Meyers
at al.
in [MJR+15].
Instead of focusing on the detection and extraction of
regions of interest in the image at ﬁrst, the authors of this paper feed entire
food images which can possibly contain multiple dishes, into two diﬀerent kinds
of networks, one for classiﬁcation purposes (GoogleLeNet from [SLJ+15]) to
check if the images contain food objects at all down-scaling the problem from
multi-class to binary, and the other one (DeepLab from [CPK+16]) to conduct
straight semantic image segmentation, also known as pixel-level classiﬁcation.
The general goal of [MJR+15] was to design and implement a system deployable
to smartphones that would be capable of predicting food content and its nutri-
tional values in terms of calories, based on a single image of the plate. To do
so, the researchers make partially use of restaurant-speciﬁc information about
in the current menu available dishes in order to restrict the overall number of
classes that can be potentially predicted. Another advantage of this approach,
as it has been already found out by Beijbom et al. in [BJM+15] before, is that
serving of meals are typically of standard sizes allowing for a rough estimate
of à priori knowledge with respect to expected nutritional contents related to a
certain dish.
The proposed pipeline consists fundamentally of the following steps, which are
all included in the system illustration in Figure 2.3 that is contained in the paper
itself: Restaurant Localization - Food Detection - Food Classiﬁcation - Volume
Estimation. While the ﬁrst task was accomplished, inter alia, by means of the
Google Places API [LLC] the remaining tasks were all solved by means of three
==PAGE:21==
9
(a) Tray analysis pipeline
(b) Segmentation pipeline using the saturation level of the image in combination with
the output of the JSEG algorithm
(c) Classiﬁcation pipeline conducting training of visual descriptors coming from the
segmented regions of interest as a whole (upper path) and after subdivision into
local patches (lower path)
Figure 2.2: [CNS17a]: Presented food recognition process. All subﬁgures have
been extracted from the original paper.
diﬀerent types of ﬁne-tuned CNNs. The foundation for all related trainings was
given by a set of diﬀerent datasets from which the majority originated from
the original Food-101 dataset [BGVG14].
Two of the three custom datasets
which constitute modiﬁcations of Food-101 were created with the help of crowd-
sourcing platforms where registered raters were asked to manually identify and
annotate labels and semantic segmentation areas occurring in the images to
tackle the multi-class and segmentation tasks, respectively.
==PAGE:22==
10
Related Work and Available Datasets
When it comes to the detection task it has to be noted that the problem was
down-scaled to a more simpliﬁed binary recognition task in order to detect
the pure presence of any type of food in the image.
For this purpose, the
authors took a subset from Food-101 and merged it with a subset of non-food
images from the ImageNet dataset [RDS+14] labelling pictures contained by
the former as foreground and those in the latter as background. Accordingly,
the created datasets were called Food201-MultiLabel, Food201-Segmented and
Food101-Background.
While the detection and multi-class classiﬁcation tasks were handled through
ﬁne-tuning the GoogleLeNet model on the corresponding dataset, the segmenta-
tion problem was solved by means of the DeepLab system, a Fully-Convolutional
Neural Network (FCNN), which includes the utilization of fully-connected Con-
ditional Random Fields (CRF) in combination with the network predictions as
post-processing step to provide a robust framework for precise boundary reﬁne-
ment.
The volume estimation task which is primarily needed for use-cases outside
of restaurants in order to facilitate the approximation of nutritional contents,
is approached by generating depth maps of images using the multi-scale deep
network proposed by Eigen et al. in [EF15], mapping these into their respective
voxel representations which combined with corresponding segmentation masks
can be used to generate volume estimates of the dishes.
The authors of [MJR+15] report a segmentation accuracy of 76% with only 25%
of Intersection over Union (IoU) on the test set. Despite the very low IoU score
which originates from multiple reasons as depicted by the authors, the paper
gives a very good insight into how a subset of tasks related to the nutritional
content estimation from a single image can be approached and solved by means
of Deep Learning techniques.
Nevertheless, it is important to point out that the ﬁrst part of [MJR+15] heavily
relies on restaurant-speciﬁc information and that the implemented segmentation
algorithm does not perform so-called instance segmentation which is capable of
diﬀerentiating between diﬀerent instances of the same class providing a general
hint on its possible count.
Recently, Aguilar et al. proposed yet another but in its core very similar ap-
proach to food image analysis in their publication [ARBR17] targeting self-
service food-providing environments such as smart restaurants and canteens
introducing a system operating on the combined output of diﬀerent Neural Net-
work models in order to provide an eﬃcient solution to automatic tray analysis.
==PAGE:23==
11
Figure 2.3: [MJR+15]: Proposed pipeline targeting the task of calorie estima-
tion based on single food images. Image taken from the original
paper.
The authors introduce a framework which they refer to as Semantic Food De-
tection that incorporates all image analysis tasks discussed so far and related
to food images: Detection - Recognition - Localization and Segmentation. In
general, the system consists of two separate but inter-dependent modules. The
ﬁrst module which down-scales the dimensionality of the underlying problem to
a binary setup, is responsible for general segmentation and localization purposes
looking for potential food areas in the image without distinguishing between dif-
ferent food classes yet. The second unit on the other hand provides the means
for the detection of individual food objects including the recognition of their
respective classes. Also is this latter module responsible for localization.
In order to achieve their goal, Aguilar et al. use a FCNN for the task of semantic
image segmentation which is handled by the ﬁrst module in binary mode, called
Tiramisu [JDV+17]. Tiramisu was inspired by a novel CNN architecture model
also known as Densely Connected Convolutional Networks (DenseNets) which
was adapted to solve image segmentation tasks.
When it comes to the latter unit, dealing with general food detection including
its localization in a multi-class setup, YOLOv2 [RDGF16] was chosen to be
implemented. The main advantage and novelty of the YOLO network model in
general is, that it is capable to conduct global reasoning about all objects shown
in an image including their individual class and bounding box, respectively.
This is achieved by the fact that the detection task is modelled as a regression
problem in way that it splits the entire image uniformly into separate grid cells.
==PAGE:24==
12
Related Work and Available Datasets
For each such cell bounding boxes with their individual conﬁdence and class
scores of classes are calculated simultaneously. The ﬁnal predictions output by
the model are therefore consisting of a class including a bounding box of speciﬁc
conﬁdence score which depicts the area the object is likely to be located in.
As it can be seen in Figure 2.4, the segmentation and detection units are followed
by the actual Semantic Food Detection block in the general pipeline. This block
essentially consists of two post-processing steps which take crucial information
from their preceding modules, namely location and conﬁdence scores of detected
bounding boxes, as input. The ﬁrst step is referred to as Background Removal
as it is responsible for the rejection of bounding boxes which contain only small
parts of food objects or more background than the object of interest itself.
The second step on the other hand focuses on the assessment of conﬁdence
scores of all bounding boxes showing the same class applying Non-Maximum
Suppression as it has been already proposed in [FFBGMR10] and consequently
eliminating duplicate detections in this way. As a logical consequence, such as it
was the case in [MJR+15], this system is not capable of performing instance-level
segmentation either due to this last post-processing step.
Conducting model training and evaluation on the UNIMIB2016 dataset [CNS17a],
Aguilar et al. were able to achieve approximately 90% of accuracy in terms of
F-measure on the test set after comparing diﬀerent implementation types of the
Tiramisu network model.
Figure 2.4: [ARBR17]: Proposed pipeline to automatic food tray analysis.
All in all, a very evident trend towards the usage of diﬀerent (F)CNN models
has become apparent over the past years in the domain of image analysis in
terms of object detection, recognition, localization and segmentation, based on
the results that have been achieved with them. Availability of a multitude of
such existing and very powerful models, pre-trained on enormous amounts of
pictures, which were made publically accessible deﬁnitely bears great potential
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Available Datasets
13
for tackling nearly any kind of image recognition task.
The only additional
thing needed to achieve this goal, besides reasonably performing hardware, is a
suitable dataset that can be used for both, training and testing purposes. For
this reason, the next section will be dedicated to a quality analysis of existing
and publically available datasets that could potentially match the underlying
problem of this thesis work.
2.1
Available Datasets
In their survey paper [MJL+19] the authors provide the readers as well with a list
of currently existing benchmark food datasets that are of a very broad variety in
terms of cuisines they represent. Due to the fact that the paper was released this
year, it is assumed that it contains the most updated information in this regard
and is therefore used for main orientation purposes. An excerpt of all food-
related datasets is presented in Figure 2.5. Thanks to the chronological order
in which the list records are sorted, it becomes very clear that the accelerating
development of social media and all devices with image-capturing capabilities
have a signiﬁcant impact on the evolution of new food image sources of greatly
growing sizes. Starting with an exemplary dataset size of 4.545 images à 101
diﬀerent categories in 2009 called PFID the number increased drastically to
4.748.044 in the Cookpad dataset as of 2017. We are currently experiencing
times in which hardware does barely impose storage limitations both in terms of
technical possibilities and costs, hence, data gathering in combination with web-
enabled platforms which allow crowds of people to work together on centralized
data does not constitute big problems anymore.
What can be also seen on the second list presented in the paper, is that the
complexity of tasks to solve is steadily increasing without only plain single im-
ages serving as data source but actual videos from which cooking activities are
to be recognized. Another task that has experienced great attention last year
was yet related to the retrieval of recipes based on meal images. This list is
however not shown here as the complexity of these tasks is exceeding the overall
goal of this project work.
When conducting a general assessment of all available food datasets presented
in Figure 2.5 main attention was put on the following characteristics candidate
sets should contain:
• Information about the ground truth in the form of masks and not only
single labels.
==PAGE:26==
14
Related Work and Available Datasets
• Resemblance to the underlying circumstances in which the task should be
solved, i.e. matching cuisine type, similar food serving conditions
• Additional information about all food classes contained enabling further
in-depth data analysis
• Easy access to the data source
• Reasonable dataset size and number of classes to match the given hardware
capabilities
Figure 2.5: An excerpt from [MJL+19] showing a general list of publically
available food datasets mainly targeting the task of object recog-
nition.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Available Datasets
15
At ﬁrst glance most suitable candidates with respect to the above pre-requisites
are presented in Table 2.1 with the name of the ﬁnal choice highlighted with
bold text font and a preceding asterisk.
Name
Paper title & Description, Comments
UNICT-FD889
"A Benchmark Dataset to Study the Representation of Food Images"
(2014) - Diverse range of dish setups with a multitude of diﬀerent light
conditions. Suitable candidates would have to be ﬁltered out and
individually labelled. [3.583 images] [FAS15]
Menu-Match
"Menu-Match: Restaurant-Speciﬁc Food Logging from Images" (2015)
Images of meals served in three diﬀerent restaurants: Italian, Asian
and Soup. Served on diﬀerently sized plates and in take-away containers.
Dataset includes the name of the dishes, a list of components and
respective calorie information. [646 images] [BJM+15]
UNICT-FD1200
"Retrieval and classiﬁcation of food images" (2016)
Images show food objects occurring in a large range of dishes from
diﬀerent cuisines. Not always are the entire plates shown but single
food instances on them. [4.754 images] [FAM+16]
*UNIMIB2016
"Food recognition: a new dataset, experiments and results" (2016)
Images of real canteen trays with dishes and foods of diverse categories
arranged in diﬀerent ways. Annotations to all images and a demo
function for visualization is included. [1.027 images] [CNS17a]
Food524DB
"Learning CNN-based Features for Retrieval of Food Images" (2017)
The dataset consists of multiple existing food datasets that are merged
together encapsulating a total of 524 classes and covering a broad
range of cuisines. [247.636 images] [CNS17b]
Table 2.1: Potential Dataset Candidates taken from the table in Figure 2.5 in
chronological order of release
For visualization and better comparison opportunities, excerpts from all 5 datasets
listed in Table 2.1 will be presented in Figure 2.6. All images are taken straight
from the respective paper except for the last case, Food524DB, for which due
to the lack of an overview of the dataset in the paper small subsets from some
of the datasets it is composed of, that are accessible, were extracted.
Most of the records in this table represent cases in which the actual amount of
distinct plates of food is signiﬁcantly smaller than the ﬁnal number of images
contained in the dataset. This originates in the fact that the authors of UNICT-
FD889 and UNICT-FD1200 acquired images from the same plate multiple times
in order to introduce photometric and geometric variability to the dataset. In
this way an overall augmentation by the factors 6 and 4 were accomplished
respectively. Unfortunately, with the ﬁrst of these two datasets being mainly
dedicated to address the task of Near Duplicate Image Retrieval (NDIR) which
does not require any information about food class labels per image as proposed
solutions are based on the comparison of pure feature descriptors in images, this
dataset can not be used for the purpose of this project work. The same applies
to the second dataset, as even though this one does include labels with respect
==PAGE:28==
16
Related Work and Available Datasets
to individual categories, they only a very small and broad range of 8 classes:
Appetizer, Main Course, Second Course, Single Course, Side Dish, Breakfast,
Dessert, Fruit. Moreover, the link to the dataset source provided in [MJL+19]
did, unfortunately, not work.
The Food524DB dataset on the other hand because the overall amount of im-
ages and classes was considered too large for the underlying problem which has
to solved. In addition to this, since all of the four included datasets Food-50
[JY09], Food-101 [BGVG14], UECFOOD-256 [KY15] and VIREO [CN16] con-
tained only extra information about the existing labels but not the actual masks
representing the ground truth areas of food objects in the images which is cru-
cial to perform semantic image segmentation. Also, was it not possible to ﬁnd
the dataset itself on the oﬃcial website1 provided by the authors.
The reason for which the Menu-Match dataset was rejected as well, was mainly
related to the fact that the existence of Asian cuisine came with a signiﬁcant
increase of complexity in terms of using them segmentation tasks because the
majority of meals consists of Wok dishes which represent mixes of a large variety
of ingredients such as vegetables, meat and seafood. The generation of matching
masks which depict all of these ﬁne details would have been too excessive in
terms of required time that is generally available.
After all, the last remaining dataset in Table 2.1 is the UNIMIB2016 dataset
which was therefore chosen as foundation for this project work. The main rea-
son for this is the fact that the set of images it contains matches as the only
one all of the depicted favorable pre-requisites: Its authors provide the rest of
the community not only with the images but also with their respective ground
truth annotations including a demo script showing how to use the data where
the ground truth annotations include single labels but also masks that were gen-
erated by means of manually drawn freehand shapes that were further automat-
ically approximated to polygons using the Ramer-Douglas-Peucker algorithm
[DP11] which was originally published in 1973. Additionally, even though the
Italian cuisine might not resemble the Danish one the most, it still is European
bearing therefore less risk of having the same segmentation complexity as in
the case of Asian dishes. And last but not least and maybe most importantly
are the simplistic food serving circumstances with meals served on white plates
arranged on a tray that appear to be the perfect match to reﬂect the meal serv-
ing conditions in a hospital. Figure 2.7 and Table 2.2 visualize all existing 65
classes of the dataset by means of a randomly picked image from each one in the
former and the respective labels in the latter. Since the dataset was created by
Italian researchers, the naming convention is in Italian. For simplicity reasons
a translation to English was skipped.
1http://www.ivl.disco.unimib.it/activities/food524db/
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Available Datasets
17
(a) UNICT-FD889 Dataset samples
(b) Menu-Match Dataset samples
(c) UNICT-FD1200 Dataset samples
(d) Food524DB Dataset samples
(e) UNIMIB2016 Dataset samples
Figure 2.6: Sample images from all candidate datasets presented in Table 2.1.
(d) contains examples from the Food-50 dataset to the left and
from the Food-101 dataset to the right. (e) additionally contains
the ground truth annotations in the form of black polygons.
==PAGE:30==
18
Related Work and Available Datasets
Figure 2.7: An overview of exemplary patches from all 65 classes in the
UNIMIB2016 dataset.
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Available Datasets
19
01
arancia
34
pasta_sugo_pesce
02
arrosto
35
pasta_sugo_vegetariano
03
arrosto_di_vitello
36
pasta_tonno
04
banane
37
pasta_tonno_e_piselli
05
bruscitt
38
pasta_zaﬀerano_e_piselli
06
budino
39
patate/pure
07
carote
40
patate/pure_prosciutto
08
cavolﬁore
41
patatine_fritte
09
cibo_bianco_
42
pere
non_identiﬁcato
43
pesce_(ﬁletto)
10
cotoletta
44
pesce_2_(ﬁletto)
11
fagiolini
45
piselli
12
ﬁnocchi_gratinati
46
pizza
13
ﬁnocchi_in_umido
47
pizzoccheri
14
guazzetto_di_calamari
48
polpette_di_carne
15
insalata_mista
49
riso_bianco
16
lasagna_alla_bolognese
50
riso_sugo
17
mandarini
51
roastbeef
18
medaglioni_di_carne
52
rosbeef
19
mele
53
salmone
20
merluzzo_alle_olive
54
scaloppine
21
minestra_lombarda
55
spinaci
22
orecchiette_(ragu)
56
stinco_di_maiale
23
pane
57
torta_crema
24
passato_alla_piemontese
58
torta_crema_2
25
pasta_bianco
59
torta_salata_(alla_valdostana)
26
pasta_cozze_e_vongole
60
torta_salata_3
27
pasta_e_ceci
61
torta_salata_rustica_(zucchine)
28
pasta_e_fagioli
62
torta_salata_spinaci_e_ricotta
29
pasta_mare_e_monti
63
yogurt
30
pasta_pancetta_e_zucchine
64
zucchine_impanate
31
pasta_pesto_besciamella_
65
zucchine_umido
e_cornetti
32
pasta_ricotta_e_salsiccia
33
pasta_sugo
Table 2.2: A list of all classes with the corresponding food labels in the dataset.
Due to the fact that the dataset was created by a research team from
Italy all labels are in Italian.
==PAGE:32==
20
Related Work and Available Datasets
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks for Semantic
Segmentation
Such as it is explained in a very neat and comprehensive way by Altenberger
and Lenz in [AL18], from a high-level perspective and trying to mimic the
recognition functionality in the human brain in a very simpliﬁed and abstract
manner, Neural Networks are known to be comprised of an input, output and
a set of hidden layers which are all carrying a multitude of neurons.
Connections between neurons, also called synapses, are each of a diﬀerent weight
reﬂecting the importance of the output coming from a lower-level neuron to its
successor(s) in the subsequent layer. Moreover, all neurons are equipped with
a bias value which determines the likelihood of the presence of a particular
pattern.
When an image is thus fed into such a network traversing one hidden layer at a
time its overall set of pixels is successively broken down into smaller and smaller
subsets of features by all layers that are encountered. In this way, pixel/feature
subsets always constitute outputs from one hidden layer and inputs into the
following one at the same time so that they can be as well deﬁned as intermediate
activations. The weight matrix of a speciﬁc neuron, i.e. the set of weights from
all of its outgoing synapses, decides which features are more signiﬁcant in terms
==PAGE:34==
22
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
of solving the given problem than others and therefore enhances these.
Both, bias and values contained in each neuron’s weight matrix are representing
the parameters of the underlying network whereas all remaining properties that
have to be set manually and which will be described later in the next section,
are called hyperparameters.
In the following section particular focus will be placed on the introduction of
a speciﬁc group of neural networks, i.e. on so-called Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNN) along with their key components and hyperparameters. More-
over, it will be shown how a neural network for semantic image segmentation
can be deployed using main architectural characteristics of deep neural networks
which were initially designed for image classiﬁcation purposes. Doing so will be
achieved by ﬁrstly introducing the target Deep Convolutional Neural Network
(DCNN) model VGG-16 and secondly the transformed network model version
for semantic segmentation DeepLab, a Fully-Convolutional Neural Network
(FCNN), in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
23
3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
CNNs represent a particular subset of the group of Feedforward Neural Networks
(FNN), in which, opposed to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) where neurons
can transmit signals to their neighbors residing in the same layer, themselves or
even to neurons in previous layers, signal transfer is performed in a straightly
forward manner, meaning that a neuron’s output is solely sent to neurons of
successive layers. They employ an iterative learning mechanism which occurs
essentially in two major phases:
1. The underlying problem is continuously expressed and handled in terms
of a statistical model achieved through the application of a non-linear
transformation function in the majority of the network’s hidden layers.
Such a function is also known as activation function.
2. Model improvement is accomplished based on the evaluation of the deriva-
tive of an overall loss metric. This evaluation data is further sent back
through the network to conduct the necessary updates in the model (back-
propagation).
Now, what a CNN essentially does during training phase is learning which val-
ues, i.e. network parameters, are most well-suited for all biases and weights
(ﬁlter elements) in each hidden (convolutional) layer, according to the impor-
tance of particular features, in order to get from the given input image to the
desired output that could, for example, be either a single value describing a label
(classiﬁcation) or a mask in 2D (segmentation). CNNs are therefore known to
incorporate a supervised learning technique.
Convolutions in 2D
The essence of CNNs is, as the name already says,
the convolutions they are comprised of. Since images appear as nothing else
than numerical matrices to computers, convoluting an input image means in
diﬀerent words that a (square) ﬁlter of some speciﬁc width and height is applied
to such an input matrix by means of the dot product traversing the image
entirely, conventionally, in a row-wise manner starting from the upper left corner
and ending in the lower right one. In such a way, the initial input image is
transformed into a feature map which incorporates information about particular
characteristics in the image such as straight edges, curves or even simple colors.
This feature map is sometimes also called activation map as it reﬂects the ﬁlter
response rate in all areas in the image plane. Consequently, if a given region
consists of relatively large activation levels, the respective ﬁlter identiﬁed here
features it was speciﬁcally designed for to detect. Instead of using one ﬁlter
==PAGE:36==
24
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
only, it is also possible to use a set of ﬁlters which, however, will not result in
a single matrix as output but alternatively in a stack of matrices, i.e. one per
applied ﬁlter.
Evidently, diﬀerently sized ﬁlters are responsible for the detection of diﬀerent
kinds of features. Such as smaller ﬁlter dimensions are capable of capturing
ﬁne details in the image, larger ones perform better in terms of coarse image
characteristics.
Since convolutions lead to reduction of the initial input image size in terms of
its width and height, the general convention to counteract this loss is to add
a frame of certain width containing zeros only around the input patch, also
known as (zero-) padding, before the dot product is computed.
It is crucial
that the thickness of this padding is directly related to the ﬁlter size, i.e. if the
convolution resulted in a reduction of the input from (8 × 8) to (6 × 6) at the
output, the initial input patch is zero-padded with a boarder of width 1 such
that the input image dimensions are artiﬁcially increased to (10 × 10). Because
of the computational nature of convolutions adding zeros around the image will
not have any eﬀect on the output but instead ensure that every element in the
input matrix is given equal opportunity to contribute to the activation map. It
is important to note, that this would not be the case if the ﬁlter was applied to
the plain image itself as the boarder pixels would never occur in the center of
the ﬁlter.
Another important property of convolutional layers in a neural network refers
to the actual movement behavior of ﬁlters. The so-called stride dictates the
amount of pixels the ﬁlter is shifted by in a horizontal and vertical fashion. In
most two-dimensional cases, its value is set to (1, 1) meaning that for each hori-
zontal/vertical movement the ﬁlter shifts straight to the adjacent elements to the
left/down. Incrementing it to larger values consequently results in larger gaps
between consecutively applied ﬁltering steps which in turn leads to compression
of the generated feature map, i.e. down-sampling.
The overall number of parameters which has to be learned by the network in
each convolutional layer is equal to the number of channels/depth of its input
multiplied by the amount of ﬁlters in the current layer and the ﬁlter size plus one
unit of bias per ﬁlter. Taking a direct example this implies that a convolutional
layer comprising of 64 ﬁlters each of size (3 × 3) into which an RGB image with
3 channels is fed imposes a total of 3 · 64 · (3 · 3) + 64 = 1792 parameters in this
speciﬁc layer that the network has to learn.
For better understanding purposes, a visualization of how convolutions are ex-
actly computed in practice is presented in Figure 3.1. In this speciﬁc case no
padding is applied prior to the convolution itself such that none of the border
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
25
pixels in the input image can serve as source/center pixel to the ﬁlter. Moreover,
it becomes apparent how the border in the output image remains blank after
convolution.
Figure 3.1: 2D Convolution applied in practice with a conventional ﬁlter size
equal to (3 × 3). The utilized ﬁlter called Sobel Gx is responsible
for the detection of horizontal edges (in x-direction) in an image.
If the goal was to detect vertical edges (in y-direction), the ﬁlter
matrix would have to be transposed before application.
Image source: https://towardsdatascience.com/applied-deep-learning-part-
4-convolutional-neural-networks-584bc134c1e2
Pooling in 2D
As a general convention, convolutional layers are usually fol-
lowed by so-called pooling layers. This particular component of a convolutional
neural network is responsible for the compression of the generated activation
map and reducing it to its most signiﬁcant features.
This can be achieved
in diﬀerent ways either by means of identifying local or global maxima (max-
pooling), averages (average-pooling) or even minima (min-pooling). Advantages
of pooling are therefore shorter training times, for instance, due to a smaller
amount of parameters that have to be learned by the entire network. Pooling
layers are very similar to convolutional ones since they also rely on the previ-
ously described sliding window technique, i.e. they require pre-deﬁned values
for window size and stride that are most commonly set to (2, 2) and 2, respec-
tively. Given such a window patch, the underlying algorithm then identiﬁes the
local minimum/maximum/average and assigns it to the respective location in
the reduced feature map in each iteration (after every shift of the window). As
a logical consequence and as opposed to its predecessor, a pooling layer itself
==PAGE:38==
26
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
does not incorporate any parameters that have to be learned. One particular
example of max-pooling is drawn in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: 2D Max-Pooling applied in practice with a conventional window
size and stride equal to (2 × 2) and 2, respectively.
Image source: https://towardsdatascience.com/applied-deep-learning-part-
4-convolutional-neural-networks-584bc134c1e2
Activation function
Non-linearity is injected into the overall network model
in stages by means of activation functions which are applied to the outputs
of single neurons.
The one that is used in both networks presented in the
following two sections passes these outputs through so-called Rectiﬁed Linear
Units (ReLUs) converting them by means of a non-linear function fa such that
fa(x) = max(0, x). First demonstrations of this kind of rectifying modules yield-
ing a signiﬁcantly better alternative to other modelling techniques, such as the
famous hyperbolic tangent and the logistic sigmoid, used for biological neurons
in deep neural networks were given by Krizhevsky et al. in [KSH12], report-
ing a signiﬁcant speed-up in terms of training time and later by the authors
of [GBB11]. According to Ramachandran et al. in [RZL17], ReLU is therefore
"the most successful and widely-used activation function"[RZL17] as of 2017.
Backpropagation
Similar to feedback systems in the ﬁeld of Automatic Con-
trol, this learning process is guided by means of so-called backpropagation which
in its core is a backward propagation of errors. Errors that were calculated based
on the gradient of a particular loss-function evaluated with respect to all existing
weights in the network at the end of every training iteration, known as epoch.
Serving as a regulation metric based on which all weights in the network are
being updated, this feedback concept is further expected to iteratively converge
to the smallest training error and highest accuracy possible.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 VGG-16: Classiﬁcation Network
27
3.2
VGG-16: Classiﬁcation Network
Tasks related to Image Classiﬁcation describe the goal of categorizing given
images into speciﬁc classes by means of labels that reﬂect what particular class
is prevalently present in the picture. The desired output of a simple CNN would
therefore be one label per image. From a technical point of view, this is realized
in the following way: Given a total number of N possible classes, the last layer
in the underlying network, i.e. the output layer, is consisting of N neurons all
of which contain their individual class score values. These scores can be further
ﬁtted to a certain score distribution function causing them to fall within a range
from 0 to 1, for example, such that their ﬁnal output values can be interpreted
as individual class probabilities directly linked to the likelihood of occurrence
in the given image. In terms of implementation, this is achieved by adding a
module of so-called fully-connected layers to the end of the convolutional core
in a CNN. More details in this regard based on the particular case of VGG-16
are given further below and in Section 5.1.
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, the authors of [SZ15] and members of the Visual
Geometry Group at University of Oxford at that time, decided to propose an al-
ternative design approach to existing convolutional neural network architectures
by addressing one of their key aspects related to the amount of convolutional
layers residing in the network, i.e. their depth. As a matter of fact, increas-
ing the depth of a CNN implies scientiﬁcally that more high-level features can
be extracted by hidden layers that are close to the output layer resulting in the
achievement of a lot more accurate predictions. Nevertheless, a limit to a CNN’s
depth is imposed by the hardware used during the network training phase as an
increased number of layers also implies a signiﬁcantly increased number of pa-
rameters that have to learned and computationally optimized. As it can be later
seen in Figure 5.1 the implementation of the VGG-16 network model demanded
a total of 138, 357, 544 parameters that had to be optimized during training.
A similar attempt was already presented four years earlier by Cireşan et al. in
[CMM+11], however, this time, the concept was taken one step further retrieving
signiﬁcant inspirations from the AlexNet architecture presented by Krizhevsky
et al. in [KSH12], introducing a total number of 16 weight layers, including
13 convolutional ones. In their paper, the authors assess the performance of a
multitude of diﬀerent CNN conﬁgurations, all diﬀering mainly in depth. VGG-
16 is not the deepest conﬁguration proposal. It is VGG-19 that incorporates
3 additional layers compared to VGG-16 that are distributed among the last
three convolutional blocks, totalling in 19 parametrized layers. The proposal
of a network of such depth was mainly possible thanks to the very small ﬁlter
size that all convolutional layers are equipped with. In this regard, the smallest
possible dimension essentially needed to grasp notions of distinct basic directions
==PAGE:40==
28
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
(center, up/down and right/left) was chosen, equalling to a (3×3) window patch.
All convolutions are carried out such that the height and width of the input to
the respective layer is preserved at its output, i.e. potential loss with this respect
is compensated for by means of zero-padding.
The ﬁnal module in the proposed network architecture consists of a stack of
three fully-connected layers out of which the ﬁrst two carry 4096 channels each
and the last one 1000 channels for ﬁnal classiﬁcation. The reason for choosing
this 1000-way classiﬁer will become apparent in the following paragraph.
The team decided to participate in the famous ImageNet Large Scale Visual
Recognition Competition (ILSVRC)[RDS+14], facilitated since 2010 by Stan-
ford, Princeton and Columbia University scientists, in 2014. That year’s com-
petition involved two separate tasks, one related to object detection (providing
labeled data for 200 object categories) and the second one related to classi-
ﬁcation including actual localization (providing labeled data for 1000 object
categories). The team scored winning results in the category of classiﬁcation
and localization task based on provided training data with a combination of
CNNs by averaging and 7th place with their VGG-16 network model1. Despite
the fact that a network’s depth is still limited by hardware for all the rapidly
accelerating technical possibilities, the VGG team had a signiﬁcant impact with
their discoveries on the deep learning scene which is still apparent nowadays.
Both best-performing models, VGG-16 and VGG-19, have been made publically
available for further research activities including the weights that were computed
during the ILSVRC challenge on the ImageNet classiﬁcation task dataset which
in 2014 comprised of "150,000 photographs, collected from ﬂickr and other search
engines, hand labeled with the presence or absence of 1000 object categories."2.
An outline of the VGG-16 architecture is drawn in Figure 3.4.
Even though models of CNNs excel in tasks regarding classiﬁcation and detec-
tion tasks, they perform very poorly in terms of precise object localization. The
reason for this is that when the image is fed into such a network the depth of this
network model causes a drastic reduction of the initial signal resolution mainly
because of all the introduced pooling layers. Classiﬁcation networks develop
therefore a signiﬁcant spatial insensitivity which is followed by the inevitable
loss of knowledge concerning exact outlines of objects. If it was, however, pos-
sible to transform existing classiﬁcation network architectures into models with
increased spatial resolution and wider receptive ﬁelds, this would be the ﬁrst
step towards an approach to conduct semantic segmentation. This opportunity
1http://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2014/results#clsloc
2http://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2014/index
==PAGE:41==
3.3 DeepLab: Semantic Segmentation Network
29
constitutes a major part of the motivation for using the concept of the next
section as backbone for the rest of the project work.
3.3
DeepLab: Semantic Segmentation Network
In contrast to classiﬁcation network models, semantic segmentation networks do
not have a module with fully-connected layers at their end. They consist purely
of convolutional blocks which is why they are also often referred to as Fully-
Convolutional Neural Networks.
As a logical consequence, they furthermore
do not output one prediction label per image, instead performing pixel-level
classiﬁcation, or putting it in diﬀerent words, they are predicting one class for
each individual pixel in the image, respectively. The output of such a network
model is therefore not a one-dimensional score vector from which the position
with the maximum value is identiﬁed to obtain the predicted class label but an
actual stack of dense score matrices in 3D composed of one matrix per class
which are all reﬂecting the pixel-wise scores in the image with respect to the
corresponding class. If, hence, the predicted class indices are meant to be re-
trieved, the network output is collapsed into a two-dimensional segmentation
mask by determining the arguments of depth-wise maxima behind each pixel
such that each element in this mask will represent the predicted class label for
a given pixel. Naturally, this has consequently also an impact on the training
phase of the network as it requires the presence of image-mask pairs, contrary
to image-label pairs, with the masks, either being binary to distinguish between
back- and foreground or categorical to express the problem by means of more
than two classes, representing the ground truth segmentation for each training
image.
Based on the previous intelligence and using an existing DCNN as foundation
with all fully-connected layers replaced by convolutional ones forcing the network
output to be multi-dimensional, most probably the easiest approach to tackle the
previously described problem regarding the signiﬁcant loss of image resolution
would be to set the stride of all convolutional layers to 1 and to remove all
pooling layers. Doing so, is, however, computationally very expensive due to
the exploding number of parameters which have to be learned by the network
at this point bearing additionally the danger of overﬁtting the model. For this
reason, Chen et al. proposed an alternative solution to increase spatial resolution
of the image in [CPK+16]. The approach they use was developed initially by
Mallat in [Mal99] targeting the ﬁeld of signal processing and will be further
explained in the following paragraph.
==PAGE:42==
30
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Dilated Convolutions
Sometimes also known as the hole algorithm or atrous
convolutions, the main motivation behind this method is to increase the recep-
tive ﬁeld of a convolutional ﬁlter by transforming it into a larger sparse kernel
through the introduction of zeros between actual ﬁlter values. The resulting
ﬁlter is thus an up-sampled version of its former self with a broader ﬁeld of
view while the full spatial dimension remains still preserved without imposing
a greater number of parameters to be learned by the network. The expansion
rate of the ﬁlter is represented here as the dilation rate. It is a positive integer
value whose impact on the ﬁlter size is illustrated based on a few examples in
Figure 3.3. According to [YK16], in terms of an accurate mathematical formu-
lation, the augmented ﬁlter size of a ﬁlter F with applied dilation rate i can be
calculated in the following way: Fi = (2i+1 −1) × (2i+1 −1).
Figure 3.3: Exemplary ﬁlters used in dilated convolutions of dilation rate 1 in
(a), 2 in (b) and 3 in (c), respectively.
Image source: [YK16]
Incorporating atrous convolutions into their semantic segmentation network
model proposal called DeepLab enabled Chen et al. to successfully "localize seg-
ment boundaries at a level of accuracy which is beyond previous methods"[CPK+16].
The ﬁnal model proposal includes, however, the addition of a post-processing
module that is mainly responsible to capture ﬁne segmentation details utilizing
a Fully-Connected Conditional Random Field (CRF) in combination with the
computed class scores of the FCNN, permitting the researchers to reach 71.6%
Intersection over Union (IoU) accuracy in the test set of the semantic segmen-
tation task from the PASCAL VOC-2012 challenge3 containing a total of 9, 993
training images with their respective masks. A more detailed description of the
PASCAL VOC challenge in general including the dataset itself and the under-
lying evaluation procedure is given by Everingham et al. in [EVGKIW+10].
As it can be seen in Figure 3.4 the total conversion from VGG-16 to the DeepLab
3http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2012/
==PAGE:43==
3.3 DeepLab: Semantic Segmentation Network
31
model is achieved by the following set of steps, with a more detailed elaboration
on the exact implementation steps regarding both networks given in Chapter 5:
1. Drop all max-pooling layers at the end of the fourth and ﬁfth convolutional
block.
2. Replace the last two fully-connected layers by simple convolutions of ﬁlter
sizes (1 × 1) and stride 1, respectively.
3. Replace the remaining fully-connected layer by a dilated convolution of
ﬁlter size (7 × 7), dilation rate 4 and stride 1.
4. Replace the three convolutional layers in block 5 by three dilated convo-
lutions each of ﬁlter size (3 × 3), dilation rate 2 and stride 1.
5. Add additionally, a ﬁnal layer to the network to perform bilinear up-
sampling of the prediction.
Introducing a ﬁlter of size (1×1) is generally a method to increase non-linearity
of the predictive decision function.
Even though, in essence, it only creates
a projection of its input onto a space of equal dimensionality, the predeﬁned
non-linear activation function is still applied afterwards.
During the next steps in the progress of this project work both network archi-
tectures, VGG-16 and DeepLab, will serve as crucial basis for in-depth data
analysis that will be conducted on extracted features which are computed by
both models prior to the ﬁnal prediction output.
==PAGE:44==
32
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Figure 3.4: DeepLab: Transformation of the VGG-16 classiﬁcation network
into a fully-convolutional semantic segmentation network.
The
input image size of the DeepLab model was changed from
(224 × 224 × 3) to (352 × 352 × 3) to increase performance.
Image
source:
https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~yjlee/teaching/ecs289g-
winter2018/DeepLab.pdf
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Feature-based Class
Reduction - Two Proposals
The idea of reducing the overall amount of classes contained in the dataset as
grouping very similar ones together evolves naturally when a closer look is taken
at the images in the chosen data source. The excerpt from the dataset which was
shown in Figure 2.7 is making it particularly apparent that some of the classes
are visually highly correlated. Potential candidates to be summarized at ﬁrst
glance into single sets could be, for instance, inter alia {30, 31} and {21, 27}.
In order to provide a solid basis for grouping criteria for all classes, two ap-
proaches will be proposed.
Both are based on features extracted from two
distinct networks before the actual prediction step. The goal will be to compare
these two scenarios:
1. Classiﬁcation Network: The last layer of a conventional Neural Net-
work which is used for classiﬁcation purposes typically consists of an N-
way classiﬁer which outputs predictions in the shape of an one-dimensional
vector of length N, where N corresponds to the overall number of classes.
Such a vector would therefore contain probabilities which describe how
likely it is that a particular class is present in the given image. It is usually
one layer before where the network holds a vector containing all extracted
features based on which it performs its ultimate decision. This vector is
==PAGE:46==
34
Feature-based Class Reduction - Two Proposals
consequently of a yet greater length equalling in case of the VGG-16 clas-
siﬁcation network to 4096 as it can be seen in the upper half of Figure
3.4. This 4096-way classiﬁer shall be the basis for further data analysis in
terms of intra- and inter-class similarities.
2. Fully-Convolutional Neural Network: Compared to classiﬁcation net-
works, features that are operated on in FCNNs are of a higher dimension-
ality, namely instead of a simple one-dimensional vector they come in the
shape of a 3D-matrix. The reason for this is the fact that the ﬂatten-
ing step is omitted in this network architecture, i.e. FCNNs do not have
any fully-connected layers and hence their ﬁnal output is a 3D-matrix of a
depth equal to N, where N is again equal to the total number of classes the
network should distinguish between. Consequently, the layer of interest
for further data analysis outputs a 3D-matrix which consists depth-wise
of 4096 channels.
The signiﬁcant diﬀerence in terms of data dimensionality imposes the need for
two distinct approaches of analyzing the extracted features. The ﬁrst one, based
on the VGG-16 architecture, will involve general Cluster Analysis whereas the
second one, based on the DeepLab model, will cover areas of Graph Theory.
The main hypothesis in both cases is that dissimilarities between classes are
proportional to distances between them. In other words, the more (visually)
alike two given classes are the smaller is the diﬀerence between their respective
features. For this purpose, intra-class distances will be analyzed as well as they
are expected to remain rather small compared to (some) inter-class distances.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Hierarchical Clustering
35
4.1
Hierarchical Clustering
Given is a matrix consisting of observations as rows and columns as single fea-
tures. Observations are generated by feeding a subset of training patches into
the classiﬁcation network with ﬁnetuned weights extracting the feature vectors
based on which the network outputs its ﬁnal predictive decision, i.e. the output
of the second last layer which is a 4096-way classiﬁer. In general, the average
feature vector over three randomly chosen patches per class is stored in the
matrix as one observation.
4096 features constitute a substantial amount of variables compared to the rela-
tively small amount of samples which will have to be summarized in a way that
will enable neat visualization and a more detailed analysis in terms of patterns
in the data. For this purpose, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is applied
as it simpliﬁes the underlying problem by identifying most expressive variables
in the data set and potentially grouping those with equal driving mechanisms
into so-called principal components which are nothing less than linear combina-
tions of the original variables. The underlying orthogonality between all such
principal components ensures not only that all redundant variables are omitted
but also that the data is translated into a new space with orthogonal axes such
that it can be easily visualized in 2- or 3-D by means of conventional plots.
Particular relations between observations can hence be derived from spatial re-
lationships that are for instance analyzed by means of appropriate clustering
techniques.
In this particular case, the goal is to identify observations which indicate very
high similarity in order to further reduce the overall amount of classes. Conse-
quently, it will be very interesting to look into actual distances, i.e. (dis)simila-
rities, between all observations and partition the data accordingly into clusters.
The most suitable technique in this respect would be Hierarchical Clustering.
As opposed to the partitioning algorithm k-Means Clustering which is usually
more suitable for larger amounts of data requiring à priori knowledge about the
number of clusters the data should be divided into, this technique performs a
proximity-based grouping of observations at multiple scales forming a so-called
dendrogram, i.e. a binary hierarchical cluster tree. The links and heights such
a tree consists of indicate binary clusters and distances between them, respec-
tively. Links are hereby created in an agglomerated bottom-up manner starting
with pairs of observations at ﬁrst and successively forming more general super-
clusters until an overall split into two clusters is reached. Cutting a dendrogram
at diﬀerent (horizontal) levels at a time can therefore result in diﬀerent numbers
of clusters, i.e. groupings.
Such a tree visualizing distance-based dependencies between observations, i.e.
==PAGE:48==
36
Feature-based Class Reduction - Two Proposals
in this particular case classes, among which some objects are expected to be
(spatially) densely packed provides the means for identifying clusters in two pos-
sible ways. Both are aiming at the identiﬁcation of a cut-oﬀvalue which would
lead to naturally well-separated clusters without imposing a speciﬁc number of
groupings à priori and ﬁtting the data accordingly.
The ﬁrst method uses the so-called inconsistency coeﬃcients between links as
criterion for deﬁning clusters. These coeﬃcients express the relation between
the height of each link and the average height of its neighboring links in the
tree giving information about whether the linked binary clusters are of distinct
or somewhat connected nature, i.e. high inconsistency coeﬃcients indicate in-
stinctive cuts whereas low inconsistency coeﬃcients represent rather atypical
cuts.
The second approach would be to specify a cut-oﬀvalue that relates to the actual
distance between observations. Experiments have shown that this is the criterion
by means of which most eﬃcient groupings are obtained, meaning that the
number of observations that could potentially belong to a single cluster is being
maximized based on distances between them. The inconsistency coeﬃcient on
the other hand does not take into account distances between observations but
instead between binary clusters. In other words, it starts oﬀwith grouping all
observations into binary pairs, but further continues to group pairs of clusters.
This would indeed lead to satisfying clustering results provided that the elements
of the dataset can be summarized into clusters which can be easily separated
as by means of straight lines (2D) / planar surfaces (3D). As it will become
apparent in Chapter 5, this is not the case in this project since potential cluster
candidates can be rather categorized as nested.
An overview of the general pipeline of steps performed in this proposal is pre-
sented in Figure 4.1. More details on the implementation including actual group-
ing results will follow in Chapter 5.
Figure 4.1: Proposed pipeline for Hierarchical Clustering to class reduction
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Graph Theory
37
4.2
Graph Theory
The main motivation for choosing Graph Theory as a tool for data analysis
was to cope with the problem which arose from the high dimensionality of fea-
tures extracted from the DeepLab network. After rearranging the 3D-matrix of
depth 4096 into a 2D matrix of suitable sizes (with 4096 columns) that would
still allow conducting computational operations on it without draining the avail-
able hardware memory, it was still not possible to apply a variable-reduction
algorithm such as PCA to the problem in a straight-forward fashion. Neither
features nor distances between them could be represented by means of points
in space anymore. Instead, pair-wise (as of pairs of rows) distances between
feature maps (derived from the fact that features were now described as 2D
matrices) have become one-dimensional vectors which, plotted as 2D curves,
happened to cover a certain area on the plane due to their at high frequency
oscillating behavior. The latter can be explained based on the speciﬁc way of
how the feature maps are exactly obtained characterized by the initial shape of
the network extractions. For simplicity reasons a more technical description of
how this was achieved will be presented in Chapter 5.
The overall hypothesis at this point is that multiple such distance vectors of
classes sharing similar features will draw very much comparable curves on the
plane covering areas that share a large intersecting region whereas the introduc-
tion of a highly dissimilar class that is compared to one of the previous ones
would lead to a curve of smaller intersection if not to none at all. More generally
speaking, a valid inference would be that curves of intra-class distance vectors
share a greater intersecting area on the plane than inter-class distance vectors
which were derived from the comparison of classes that are less related.
When (dis)similarities are described in terms of distance vectors it could be
argued that at this point it would be ﬁnally possible to reduce the amount of
variables, i.e. the vector length, by means of PCA, for instance, and represent
them as points in a newly deﬁned space. Clusters, however, which could become
apparent in such a scenario would not express the information needed for ex-
plicit class grouping but instead they would only indicate which pairs of classes
(points in space) are of similar distances, i.e. which pairs diﬀer comparably
to others. Consequently, another solution is required in which (dis)similarities
between classes will yet again be deﬁned in a new way based on the assumption
described in the preceding paragraph. Namely, having in mind that intersecting
areas of distance vectors drawn as curves in two-dimensional space also provide
a signiﬁcant potential to explain how alike two distinct classes are, this par-
ticular knowledge oﬀers the opportunity of actually describing visual inter-class
correlations in terms of single values. For this purpose, every class is represented
by a distance vector which describes the overall intra-class similarity of features.
==PAGE:50==
38
Feature-based Class Reduction - Two Proposals
And furthermore, considering the Intersection over Union (IoU) instead of the
pure intersection area, it is now possible to assign a certain percentage to each
pair of classes that describes how alike each of them are. Taking this as a foun-
dation in which distances, i.e. (dis)similarities, between classes are deﬁned in
terms of likelihood, to some extend, it seems intuitive to visualize these relations
by means of weighted (undirected) graphs with classes equalling to nodes and
edges to distances, i.e. similarities, expressed as probabilities.
The last step to successful class reduction using this approach is now to ﬁnd
potential candidates that can be grouped and summarized in the graph, and to
extract them. For this purpose, it is crucial to analyze the degree of each node,
i.e. the number of edges originating from it, and to further detect so-called
cycles. A cycle of a graph is hereby deﬁned as a path formed by a subset of
the entire edge set such that the starting node simultaneously corresponds to
the last one. The underlying problem imposes, however, that only a particular
type of cycles is of interest. For a cycle to represent a group of classes to be
potentially summarized as one, the following conditions have to be met:
1. Each individual cycle should consist of three nodes only.
This is to ensure suﬃcient inter-dependency within the group. For ex-
ample, a closer look at Figure 4.2 should be taken in which the case of
having more than 3 nodes in a cycle is illustrated. It is clearly visible
that classes {1, 6, 9, 20} form a cycle being to some extent similar in terms
of their features. This instance does, however, not ensure that there ex-
ists a (solid) and direct correlation between classes {1, 9} and/or {6, 20}.
In fact, these pairs might be substantially diﬀerent despite the fact that
they belong to the same cycle. Hence, this condition is meant to ensure
triangular dependencies.
2. Independent cycles of length 3 which have nodes in common
should be merged into triangle mesh(es).
The main motivation for this condition is that it ensures that the total
number of classes to be grouped as one is being maximized.
Evidently, the considerations made above do not include the case in which there
exist two classes linked by one edge, i.e. each node is of degree 1, even though
these two classes deﬁnitely bear the potential of being grouped as one. The
reason for this will become obvious in Chapter 5 where it will be possible to
see, for instance in Figure 5.11a, that the overall problem is being reduced to a
graph in which nearly all nodes are linked to each other with only a few nodes
which actually form their own independent cycle, i.e. no islands exist which
consist of only two vertices connected by one edge.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Graph Theory
39
Figure 4.2: An exemplary cycle of length 4. Numbers in each node represent
indices of classes. Edge weights are omitted for simplicity reasons.
In order to visualize inter-dependencies between nodes in a cycle,
it is mainly of importance whether two nodes are connected or
not. Due to the fact that not all nodes are connected with each
other summarizing all of them into one and the same class might
lead to incorrect results.
Nevertheless, all in all, results in Subsection 5.3 will demonstrate that the pro-
posed method for feature-based reduction of classes using Graph Theory to cope
with the high dimensionality of features imposed by the FCNN architecture is
leading indeed to very satisfying results.
Figure 4.3 gives an overview of the general pipeline of steps performed in this
proposal. As it was the case in the previous section, more details on the imple-
mentation including actual grouping results will follow in Chapter 6, including
a comparison of both approaches.
==PAGE:52==
40
Feature-based Class Reduction - Two Proposals
Figure 4.3: Proposed pipeline for Graph Theory to class reduction
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Implementation Details
Because this project consists of two major parts, one related to deep learning and
the other one to pure data analysis, two separate computing environments were
chosen. Using the open-source neural network library Keras v2.2.2 with Tensor-
ﬂow v1.12 as backend module enabling data-ﬂow programming, facilitated the
implementation of all necessary Deep Learning components in the high-level
programming language Python. Pure data analysis on the other hand was con-
ducted in Matlab vR2018b providing the means for multi-paradigm numerical
computations. Consequently, Sections 5.1 and 5.2 will show implementations in
Python whereas Sections 5.3 and 5.4 are based on computations performed in
Matlab.
The main motivation for using these two environments is that ...
1. ... Keras in Python allows for fast prototyping and realization of deep
learning concepts based on already exiting network models and mecha-
nisms.
Unless cutting-edge research gets involved requiring the imple-
mentation of novel theories, all fundamental building blocks are already
provided by this library.
2. ... Matlab on the other hand provides preview and instant manipulation
functionalities in its interface which makes it easier to conduct thorough
analysis and spot errors or deviations in the data.
==PAGE:54==
42
Implementation Details
5.1
Image Classiﬁcation
The VGG-16 network model for image classiﬁcation tasks proposed in [SZ15] is
implemented in a straight-forward fashion based on the architecture shown in
the upper half of Figure 3.4. To start oﬀ, the model is initialized as a linear
stack of layers using the Sequential() class to which all layers will be added
in a sequential manner utilizing the add() function. As stated by the authors
of the paper, the input to the model should be an RGB image of ﬁxed size
(224 × 244 × 3). This information is passed to the network model in its ﬁrst
layer by means of the input_shape attribute such that all following layers can
inherit that knowledge.
Generally, the network can be split into two major blocks, one consisting of a
stack of convolutional layers and the other one containing fully-connected layers
only. As for the former part, the model begins with two blocks of two consecutive
convolutional layers (Conv2D()) followed by one max-pooling layer. Lines 3 −9
in Listing 5.1 additionally show that here the convolutional layers in both blocks
have 64 and 128 ﬁlters respectively. The third, fourth and ﬁfth block on the
other hand have three convolutional layers followed by one max-pooling layer
each with the amount of convolutional ﬁlters increasing from 256 in the third
up to 512 in the second and third block as it can be seen in lines 11 −24 in
Listing 5.1. This results in an overall reduction of the initial input image size
from (224 × 224 × 3) to (7 × 7 × 512) depicted by Figure 5.1.
In order for the network to be able to output the ﬁnal classiﬁcation prediction
in terms of a one-dimensional vector of length equal to the amount of all classes
contained in the training set, the three-dimensional output of the last max-
pooling layer serves as input into a layer called Flatten() that is responsible
for the re-arrangement of these features into a vector with 7 · 7 · 512 = 25088
elements. Such as it is the case in all max-pooling layers, the Fatten() layer
does not contribute at all to the overall number of parameters that have to be
learned by the network since all it does is essentially re-formatting the data.
After ﬂattening the features, they are forwarded in their new shape to the last
block of the network model which in essence consists of three fully-connected
layers implemented by means of the Dense() class. These are the layers respon-
sible for the application of the speciﬁed activation function in an element-wise
manner using a pre-deﬁned number of channels. In the ﬁrst two layers of this
block the number of channels is equal to 4096 resulting in a feature vector of
length 4096 at the output while the last, and most meaningful layer incorporates
the actual number of classes to produce a vector of elements which all repre-
sent a certain activation level for the respective classes. Choosing softmax as
activation function in the last layer converts these 66 activation levels into prob-
abilities by essentially normalizing them into a probability distribution which
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Image Classiﬁcation
43
consists of 66 probabilities.
The second component of the last block, besides the fully-connected layers, is
providing a regularization mechanism to the network addressing the problem of
overﬁtting, which is very common in deep neural networks. The cause for this
particular phenomenon lays in the observation that neighboring neurons tend
to adapt according to the specialization of their neighbors, i.e. they begin to
heavily rely on each other called co-adapting, which as a result leads to the net-
work being too specialized to the training data and performing poorly on unseen
data. The mechanism is known as Dropout and was introduced by the authors
of [SHK+14]. It is only active during the training phase, essentially ignoring a
randomly chosen subset of neurons, i.e. dropping them out. As a logical conse-
quence, if suddenly neurons have to become involved in the handling process of
generating predictions made usually by the missing neurons, results have shown
that the network shows great capability to improved generalization. The subset
size of dropped neurons is passed to the class instance Dropout() as a fraction
equalling to 0.5 in this setup which means that the impact of 50% of neurons
to the overall learning process is temporarily removed resulting in the exclusion
of any weight updates to these speciﬁc neurons during backpropagation.
Due to reasons that have been already mentioned in Section 3.2, all convo-
lutional layers in the VGG-16 network use ﬁlters that cover only very small
receptive ﬁelds of size (3×3) whereas max-pooling is always accomplished using
pooling windows of size (2×2) and a down-scaling factor equal to stride 2 which
halves the input. The initial value for padding in max-pooling is by default set
to valid which means that no padding is applied to compensate for the reduc-
tion of the input in terms of its size. This stands in signiﬁcant contrast to the
padding technique applied in the convolutional layers that is same and causing
the output to be of the same length as the original input.
Another property which is the same across multiple hidden layers is the ac-
tivation function applied in all convolutional layers and the ﬁrst two densely-
connected layers which was by the authors chosen to be the rectiﬁcation non-
linearity.
==PAGE:56==
44
Implementation Details
Listing 5.1: VGG-16 network model architecture implemented in Keras with
Tensorﬂow backend (Python)
1
def VGG_16__original(weights=None, num_classes=66):
2
conv_model = tf.keras.Sequential()
3
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(64, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu, ...
input_shape=(224,224,3)))
4
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(64, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
5
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
6
7
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(128, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
8
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(128, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
9
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
10
11
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(256, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
12
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(256, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
13
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(256, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
14
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
15
16
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
17
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
18
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
19
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
20
21
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
22
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
23
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
24
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
25
26
conv_model.add(layers.Flatten())
27
conv_model.add(layers.Dense(4096, activation=tf.nn.relu))
28
conv_model.add(layers.Dropout(0.5))
29
conv_model.add(layers.Dense(4096, activation=tf.nn.relu))
30
conv_model.add(layers.Dropout(0.5))
31
conv_model.add(layers.Dense(num_classes, ...
activation=tf.nn.softmax))
32
33
if weights:
34
conv_model.load_weights(filepath=weights, by_name=True)
35
36
return conv_model
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Image Classiﬁcation
45
Figure 5.1: Terminal output of the original VGG-16 network for classiﬁcation
purposes
==PAGE:58==
46
Implementation Details
5.2
Semantic Segmentation
In order to transform the VGG-16 classiﬁcation network into a fully-convolutional
one inspired by the DeepLab model and in accordance to Figure 3.4 keep-
ing the original number of blocks, the crucial step is to ﬁrstly map all fully-
connected layers to convolutional ones. Secondly, the last max-pooling layer in
the forth block is removed while all following blocks containing conventional two-
dimensional convolutions are converted into dilated convolutions. This can be
easily achieved by passing an additional parameter to the Conv2D() constructor
that is called dilation_rate and setting it equal to 2 and 4 in all convolutional
layers in block 5 and only in the ﬁrst one in block 6, respectively. The second-
last and ﬁnal convolutional layers remain of traditional nature whilst having
4096 and 66 ﬁlters, respectively, each of size (1 × 1) and stride 1.
Since compared to the initial input image size the resolution is reduced from
(352 × 352) to (44 × 44) because of the max-pooling layers, the network model
for semantic segmentation requires an additional layer that will convert the
predictions back to the original size. As it can be seen in Figure 5.2 and Listing
5.2, the corresponding layer is of type UpSampling2D and takes in this setup
the up-sampling size and interpolation method as input arguments. Due to the
fact that the network contains three max-pooling layers with a (2 × 2) ﬁlter
size and stride 2, the overall resolution of the training patches is reduced by a
factor of 23 = 8 in which the chosen interpolation method is set to be nearest.
As opposed to the other possible choice for interpolation1 that is the bilinear
one, nearest interpolation is performed by applying zero-padding of a given size
around the image and inpainting all elements in this bounding box by copying
the value of its nearest known neighbor. Bilinear interpolation, on the other
hand, is using the information of 4 nearest known neighbors of a given pixel
and assigning their weighted average to it.
The reason for not choosing the
latter mode is that it can result in the assignment of a ﬂoating-point value to
a pixel which is not consistent with any of the existing class indices which are
represented as integer values.
1https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/keras/layers/UpSampling2D
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Semantic Segmentation
47
Listing 5.2: DeepLab network model architecture implemented in Keras with
Tensorﬂow backend (Python)
1
# As of DeepLab proposal from 2017
2
def VGG_16__deep_lab(img_shape, weights, num_classes):
3
conv_model = tf.keras.Sequential()
4
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(64, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu, ...
input_shape=(img_shape[1],img_shape[0],img_shape[2])))
5
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(64, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
6
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
7
8
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(128, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
9
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(128, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
10
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
11
12
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(256, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
13
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(256, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
14
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(256, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
15
conv_model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2), strides=(2,2)))
16
17
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
18
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
19
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
20
21
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), dilation_rate=2, activation=tf.nn.relu))
22
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), dilation_rate=2, activation=tf.nn.relu))
23
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(512, (3,3), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), dilation_rate=2, activation=tf.nn.relu))
24
25
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(4096, (7,7), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), dilation_rate=4, activation=tf.nn.relu))
26
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(4096, (1,1), padding='same', ...
strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.relu))
27
conv_model.add(layers.Conv2D(num_classes, (1,1), ...
padding='same', strides=(1,1), activation=tf.nn.softmax))
28
29
conv_model.add(tf.keras.layers.UpSampling2D(size=8, ...
interpolation='bilinear')) # interpolation='bilinear'
30
31
if weights:
32
conv_model.load_weights(filepath=weights, by_name=True)
33
34
return conv_model
==PAGE:60==
48
Implementation Details
Figure 5.2: Terminal output of the original DeepLab model for semantic seg-
mentation purposes
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
49
5.3
Feature-based Class Reduction
Hierarchical Clustering
As it has been already brieﬂy touched upon in
Chapter 4, hierarchical clustering is being performed on feature vectors that are
extracted from the VGG-16 classiﬁcation network. A more detailed description
of how the weights of the network were ﬁnetuned for this purpose including an
overview of the overall training history can be found towards the end of the next
chapter in Section 6.2.
In order to retrieve the feature vectors of all classes from the network, the model
itself has to be ﬁrst of all truncated by the last two layers, one of which is holding
the ﬁnal 65-way classiﬁer whereas the other one is an additional Dropout layer.
The layer of interest in this setup carries the name dense_1 and holds the
last feature vector consisting of 4096 elements prior to the ﬁnal classiﬁcation
decision. Figure 5.3 visualizes the cropped version of the VGG-16 network.
Figure 5.3: Truncated VGG-16 model to facilitate the extraction of feature
vectors for a more detailed data analysis.
==PAGE:62==
50
Implementation Details
Secondly, three sample images from each class are being randomly chosen and
fed consecutively into the network. The average feature vectors over all three
samples per class are then being saved in an overall feature matrix F in which
each row is dedicated to store the average feature vector of one particular class,
i.e. the size of that matrix is equal to (65 × 4096).
After normalization of the feature values contained in F to fall in the interval
[0, 1] Matlab’s implementation of PCA is being applied. The reason for not
centering the data in addition to scale adjustment is that this step is already
executed by the algorithm itself according to the documentation2. Along with
the principal component scores for each observation and coeﬃcient, the imple-
mentation also provides the user with a variable called explained which holds
the percentage of the absolute variance explained by every principal component.
The latter output argument can be very useful due to the fact that it assigns
a certain importance in terms of expressiveness to each principal component
indicating which of the variables can be neglected without any signiﬁcant con-
sequences. How these values look in practice in this particular example for the
ﬁrst 20 components is shown in Table 5.1 which generally states that if only
these ﬁrst 20 components are used for further analysis around 98.89% of the
total variance in the data can be preserved.
Component
1
2
3
4
5
Explained
11.45
7.83
7.54
7.05
5.40
Component
6
7
8
9
10
Explained
5.11
4.08
3.68
3.28
2.63
Component
11
12
13
14
15
Explained
2.46
2.21
1.81
1.63
1.47
Component
16
17
18
19
20
Explained
1.42
1.32
1.27
1.21
1.11
Table 5.1: Principal Component Analysis: An overview of absolute variance
explained by each of the components ordered with respect to de-
creasing importance, i.e. the ﬁrst/last one is the most/least expres-
sive one.
Plotting only the ﬁrst two, for simpler visualization purposes, in 2D results in
Figure 5.4 where it can be seen that a few clusters are indeed becoming already
apparent.
Now, in pursuance of identifying reasonable clusters, it is important to keep
the scores of most expressive principal components for further analysis and
calculations while rejecting the rest of them. Therefore, guided by the values
2https://www.mathworks.com/help/stats/pca.html#bth9ibe-Centered
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
51
Figure 5.4: First step to Hierarchical Clustering: Variable reduction of feature
vectors based on Principal Component Analysis. Plotting the ﬁrst
two components only gives already a hint of potential reduction
candidates.
recorded in Table 5.1, the ﬁrst 20 components are being kept due to the fact
that they retain nearly 99% of the initial variance which results in a score
matrix taking the size equal to 65 × 20, i.e. with 20 components for each of the
65 observations. This score matrix is representing the previous feature matrix
consisting of 65 observations (rows) and 4096 features (columns) mapped into
a more simpliﬁed space of signiﬁcantly lower dimensions.
Driven by the motivation of deﬁning clusters in a dataset without knowing the
speciﬁc number of groupings beforehand leads to the choice of applying Hierar-
chical Clustering at this point. Before the actual distances between observations
are calculated, however, it will yet again be crucial to normalize the data con-
tained by the score matrix such that it only ranges between 0 and 1, and for all
distances to be calculated without the presence of any bias. Matlab’s function
pdist() which is responsible for the calculation of pair-wise distances provides
many diﬀerent distance metrics. Nevertheless, due to the rather uncomplicated
nature of the underlying problem, the default metric, namely the Euclidean dis-
tance, is chosen. The remaining two functions provided by Matlab needed are
linkage(), cluster() and dendrogram() as it can be seen in the short code
snippet in Listing 5.3.
==PAGE:64==
52
Implementation Details
Listing 5.3: Hierarchical Clustering conducted in Matlab based on Features
extracted from VGG-16 network
1
%%
2
%
Hierarchical Clustering based on PCA scores to achieve ...
class reduction
3
4
fmap_norm = normalize( features_map, 'range' );
5
[ ~, score, ~, ~, explained, ~ ] = pca( fmap_norm, ...
'NumComponents', 20 );
6
scores = score( :, 1:15 );
7
dist_scores = normalize( pdist( scores ), 'range' );
8
dist_squared = squareform( dist_scores );
9
10
btree = linkage( dist_squared );
11
12
cutoff = 0.3;
13
clusters = cluster( btree, 'cutoff', cutoff, 'Criterion', ...
'distance' ); % Uses distance as grouping indicator
14
num_clusters = length( unique( clusters ) ); % Reduced number of ...
clusters
15
16
cutoff = median( [ btree( end - num_clusters - 1, 3 ) btree( end ...
- num_clusters - 2, 3 ) ] ); % The cut is halfway between ...
the num_clusters-last and (num_clusters - 1)-last linkages
17
D = dendrogram( btree, 0, 'ColorThreshold', cutoff );
18
set( D, 'LineWidth', 1.5 )
Using the proximity information between observations as input linkage() gen-
erates the actual binary hierarchical cluster tree which is further pruned by
cluster() at a speciﬁc link level to form ﬁnal groupings of classes with all ob-
jects below that cut falling into their respective clusters. Serving as ﬁnal step,
dendrogram() visualizes this binary hierarchical cluster tree with the possibil-
ity to highlight the cut level and the resulting clusters such as it is presented in
Figure 5.5.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to ﬁnd a way of automatically determining
the most suitable cut-oﬀvalue which is why it is set to 0.3 in this scenario as
it leads to most satisfying groupings of classes. Choosing a higher value would
result in the introduction of less similar classes to existing clusters whereas a
lower value would mean that existing clusters are further broken up into smaller
ones which would have a reversed eﬀect of one of the major goals that is aimed
at: maximizing the amount of similar classes in a single cluster.
All in all, Figure 5.6 shows speciﬁc subsets of images belonging to classes that
were summarized. i.e. the ﬁnal result of applying the concept of hierarchical
clustering for the purpose of class reduction by means of which the overall
number of classes was (mostly) successfully reduced from 65 to 50. For humans,
it is very easy to spot that clusters in Figures 5.6b, 5.6f and 5.6g might not
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
53
depict the best groupings despite the fact that respective images still share very
similar optical features. This is yet the cost for obtaining one cluster of size 7
(Figure 5.6d) with evidently very highly correlated classes. Most probably, it
would be possible to eliminate the false grouping candidates without aﬀecting
such bigger clusters of maximized size by a more excessive network training or
by ﬁnding a better way of identifying a well-suited cut-oﬀvalue for the binary
tree.
==PAGE:66==
54
Implementation Details
Figure 5.5: Binary Hierarchical Cluster Tree: Clustering results using a cutt-
oﬀvalue equal to 0.3. The overall number of classes was reduced
from 65 to 50 (6 × (2 into 1), 1 × (7 into 1) and 1 × (4 into 1)).
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
55
(a) Cluster 1:
Class 2 and 54
(b) Cluster 2: Class 30, 31, 49 and 58
(c) Cluster 3:
Class 21 and 27
(d) Cluster 4: Class 26, 29, 32, 34-37
(e) Cluster 5:
Class 5 and 28
(f) Cluster 6:
Class 56 and 64
(g) Cluster 7:
Class 53 and 57
(h) Cluster 8:
Class 60 and 61
Figure 5.6: Individual clusters as a result of hierarchical clustering applied
with a cut-oﬀvalue equal to 0.3. Each class is represented as a
randomly drawn subset of three training patches belonging to it.
Class indices are given from left to right.
==PAGE:68==
56
Implementation Details
Graph Theory
In contrast to the Hierarchical Clustering approach to class
reduction features extracted from the DeepLab model are of signiﬁcantly higher
dimensionality. Obtained by means of a cropped version of the DeepLab network
as it can be seen in Figure 5.7 features of a single input image patch of size
352 × 352 are stored in a 44 × 44 × 4096 matrix.
As it has been already roughly visualized in the overall pipeline in Figure 4.3,
each such 3D-matrix is reduced to a 2D-matrix in a depth-wise manner. To
put it in diﬀerent words, accessing elements from the perspective of the 44 × 44
plane row-wise from left to right, traversing 44 · 44 = 1936 positions, features
are rearranged into a 2D matrix by selecting 1936 1D feature vectors of length
4096 and stacking them one after another in a 1936 × 4096 feature map. An
illustration of this process follows in Figure 5.8. Having three randomly chosen
training patch samples per class a total of 65·3 = 195 feature maps is generated
which will serve as the basis for all following computations.
Firstly, to get an idea of how much the feature maps are diﬀering within each
class the average intra-class pair-wise Hamming distance between all three ma-
trices, i.e. their respective rows, are calculated.
Figure 5.7: Truncated DeepLab model to facilitate the extraction of feature
matrices for a more detailed data analysis.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
57
Figure 5.8: Re-arrangement process to reduce the dimensionality of extracted
features from 3 dimensions to 2.
The output is a (ﬂuctuating) distance vector which covers a certain area in 2D.
These oscillations ﬁnd their origin in the fact that each 2D feature map is cre-
ated by traversing the initial stack of 44 × 44 features in a row-wise fashion.
Each such 44 × 44 matrix is basically nothing else then a (because of the con-
volution and pooling layers) shrunken version of the original 352 × 352 training
patch that was fed into the network that are reﬂecting all features found in the
entire image patch. Since all quadratic patches are very similar towards the
borders as meals are usually served centered on a (white) plate, the percentage
of features that diﬀer here is relatively small compared to the region of where
the actual object of interest is located. Therefore, it is the local minima in the
graph which are distances at the edges of the images and local maxima that re-
ﬂect (dis)similarity within the food regions. Additionally, if the training patches
happen to contain equally uniform background across all samples, in the ﬁrst
and/or last rows ﬂuctuation in the Hamming distance vector is signiﬁcantly
reduced at the beginning and/or end of it. This phenomenon can be directly
observed in Figure 5.9c. As opposed the orange class in which the image back-
ground is not uniform across samples, i.e. some contain shadows as it can be
seen in Figure 5.9a, the background in all pasta patches is much more similar
over all samples except for a few light reﬂections.
Secondly, inter-class (dis)similarities are assessed. This is done in a somewhat
identical way as the intra-class case in the preceding paragraph with the only
diﬀerence that the average distance vector between two distinct classes is created
by calculating pair-wise distances between all possible combinations of in class
diﬀering patches, i.e. 3! = 6 pairs, using yet again Hamming distance as metric.
Following this approach, the hypothesis is that comparing a reference class to
another one that is visually substantially diﬀerent will result in two distance
vectors, one intra- and one inter-class, which when plotted as curves in 2D have
nearly no up to no intersection area at all in common. The more alike two such
classes are, however, the greater will the intersection of the curves be.
==PAGE:70==
58
Implementation Details
An example supporting this assumption is presented in Figure 5.9. Here, given
one particular Pasta class as reference (ﬁrst row in Figure 5.9a), two diﬀerent
plots show its comparison with another to a very high degree similar and yet
distinct class 5.9b and with one representing oranges 5.9c, that is without doubt
entirely diﬀerent, respectively. Evidently, similarity which is expressed as the
Intersection over Union (IoU) is signiﬁcantly greater in the case of the two
Pasta classes. Additionally, these observations also make the main motivation
for choosing Hamming distance as metric very apparent as it was the only one
provided by Matlab’s pdist() function which resulted in these overlapping
areas. None of the remaining ones3 allowed a comparable approach, mostly,
due to the complete lack of intersecting areas which, for instance, in the case of
the Euclidean distance is indeed reasonable because the diﬀerence between two
similar feature maps would result in values close to 0 whereas the comparison
of two contrasting classes would lead to rather large diﬀerences.
3https://www.mathworks.com/help/stats/pdist.html#mw_39296772-30a1-45f3-a296-653c38875df7
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
59
(a) Sample images (row-wise) from all three classes. Class c29
will serve as reference with which the remaining two are going
to be compared with in terms of distances between respective
feature maps.
(b) Comparing the two very akin Pasta classes c29 and c26 leads
to an overall similarity of 76.2%.
(c) Comparing the Pasta class c29 with the orange class c01
results in an overlap of only 3.0%.
Figure 5.9: Overlapping areas between distinct intra-class (Hamming) dis-
tance vectors. The bigger the intersection area, the more similar
the two underlying classes are and vice versa. Overlapping areas
are highlighted in green.
==PAGE:72==
60
Implementation Details
Further following this methodology, the next step in the pipeline is to create a
3D similarity matrix which contains all inter-class correlations between pairs of
distinct classes expressed as percentages of overlapping areas. x−and y −axis
cover all class indices respectively whereas the correlation factor is given by the
z −axis such that the matrix (reduced to 2D) is of a triangular shape in order
to cover all possible combinations of class pairs. Towards ﬁltering out most akin
class pairs a threshold of 70% is additionally applied, all of which is visualized
from diﬀerent perspectives in Figure 5.10.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: Similarity matrix consisting of correlations between all possible
pairs of distinct classes in 3D and 2D (bird perspective) with
a threshold equal to 70% applied in order to depict most alike
pairs.
Utilizing all pairs of classes which fall above the given threshold, the ﬁnal step
is to visualize inter-class similarity dependencies by means of an undirected
weighted graph in which nodes correspond to class indices and edges to percent-
ages of aﬃnity such that last but not least subsets of connections, i.e. cycles,
forming triangle meshes can be extracted. These subsets can be seen as indi-
vidual abstractions of the particular classes they contain.
Before a suitable algorithm for the identiﬁcation of cycles is applied, however,
a pre-processing step is included in the pipeline which removes all tailing edges
and vertices, i.e. nodes which are of degree less than 2. This step can be seen
as optional being mainly of advantage for visualization purposes.
Disadvan-
tages resulting from this and the general triangularity condition of cycles will
be discussed towards the end of this thesis report in the Chapter 7.
For the detection of cycles an external Matlab package called grTheory -
Graph Theory Toolbox4 available on Matlab Central File Exchange was
4https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/
4266-grtheory-graph-theory-toolbox
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
61
downloaded. Since the main focus is laying on cycles of length 3, as it has been
mentioned in Section 4.2 already, only these speciﬁc ones are kept and merged
into larger triangle meshes where cycles have adjacent edges. Nonetheless, be-
cause the function grCycleBasis() is only extracting independent cycles, i.e.
the implemented algorithm ﬁnds the fundamental set of cycles, it omits certain
nodes which according to the assumptions about triangular dependencies made
in this solution proposal might still belong to one of the cycles. In order to cope
with this issue, a second function called findMissedCycleNodes() needed to
be implemented which iterates through all vertices of the graph which do not
belong to any cycle identifying those which are connected to at least two nodes
belonging to one of the previously depicted cycles. If such a node is found, it is
added to the corresponding cycle.
The following code snippet in Listing 5.4 visualizes how the most relevant steps
related to Graph Theory were implemented in Matlab.
Listing 5.4: Implementation of techniques from Graph Theory in Matlab to
reduce the overall number of classes
1
%%
2
%
Elements from Graph Theory to achieve class reduction
3
4
% Load the matrix which contains all inter-class distances
5
load('dist_matrix__overlap_perc.mat')
6
threshold = 0.70;
7
8
indices = find( dist_matrix__overlap_perc >= threshold );
9
[ s,t ] = find( dist_matrix__overlap_perc >= threshold );
10
11
nodes = unique( [ s;t ], 'sorted' );
12
weights = dist_matrix__overlap_perc( indices );
13
nodenames = cellstr( num2str( nodes ) );
14
15
[ G, s, t ] = rmSingularNodes( plainG, nodenames ); % plainG and ...
nodenames are passed separately in order to preserve the ...
node index - node name relations
16
17
% Extraction of independent cycles
18
cycles = logical( grCycleBasis( [ s,t ] ) );
19
% Finds cycles of length 3 and merges those with adjacent edges ...
into triangle meshes
20
cycles = merge2TriangleMesh( cycles );
21
cycles = findMissedCycleNodes( G, cycles );
Figure 5.11 reﬂects all existing inter-class similarity dependencies which are
above 70%, extracted cycles and the ﬁnal groupings they represent in individual
subﬁgures, respectively.
==PAGE:74==
62
Implementation Details
(a) Complete weighted undirected graph
reﬂecting calculated inter-class similar-
ities above a threshold of 70% corre-
spondence.
(b) Reduced weighted undirected graph re-
ﬂecting calculated inter-class similar-
ities above a threshold of 70% corre-
spondence.
(c) Extracted cycles merged into triangle meshes forming overall abstractions of akin
classes.
(d) Grouping 1:
Class 30, 31 and 49
(e) Grouping 2:
Class 9, 14, 26, 29, 32, 34-35
Figure 5.11: Graph Theory applied to class reduction.
Node labels in all
graphs are representing individual class indices which can be
looked up in Table 2.2 and Figure 2.7 to identify the correspond-
ing label and visual representation, respectively. In (d) and (e)
each class is represented as a randomly drawn subset of three
training patches belonging to it.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Feature-based Class Reduction
63
Due to the complexity of the proposed solution, all steps are once again sum-
marized in Listing 5.5.
Listing 5.5: Encapsulation of all essential steps performed to accomplish class
reduction based on Graph Theory
1
2
set num_classes: 65
3
set train_sample_set: choose 3 random samples of training ...
patches from each class
4
set distance_matrix: zeros(num_classes, num_classes)
5
6
for each image_patch in train_sample_set:
7
predict its features by feeding it into the FCNN (DeepLab)
8
re-arrange the (44 x 44) x 4096 matrix depth-wise into a ...
(1936 x 4096) feature map
9
10
for each class in class_set:
11
calculate pair-wise distances between rows of all 3 feature maps
12
set ref_distance: generate the average intra-class distance ...
vector
13
14
for each consecutive_class in class_set:
15
calculate pair-wise distances between rows of all 6 ...
(class,consecutive_class) combinations
16
set sub_distance: generate the average inter-class ...
distance vector
17
18
calculate the intersection area between the plotted ...
ref_distance and sub_distance
19
store intersection percentage in distance_matrix
20
21
22
set cluster_candidates: apply a minimal threshold to distance_matrix
23
generate an undirected weighted graph based on relations in ...
cluster_candidates
24
25
remove tailing vertices and edges
26
set final_clusters: extract cycles of length 3 and merge ...
potential ones into triangle meshes
Comparison
Results given by the latter approach are indeed comparable to
the ones seen after the application of Hierarchical Clustering.
Nevertheless,
it contains one essential deﬁciency because it ignores cases in which only two
classes are summarized as one because of the way the algorithm has been imple-
mented, whereas Hierarchical Clustering proposed yet 6 such cases. One possible
improvement could be to not just simply remove tailing edges but actually take
its weight into consideration by analyzing it in comparison to all other out-going
edges of one of its vertices, i.e. assessing its importance.
==PAGE:76==
64
Implementation Details
5.4
Boundary Reﬁnement
The main motivation for proposing the following approach of boundary reﬁne-
ment is to overcome the inaccuracies at the segmentation boundaries of food
objects resulting from the up-sampling step in the ﬁnal layer of the DeepLab
network model.
Final segmentation results are fairly pixelated and in order to smoothen the seg-
mentation boundaries out to the greatest extent possible the network prediction
is merged with a binary mask that is generated based on a general analysis of
the colors occurring in the image patch itself before it is shown to the network.
Taking the b-channel of the patch once converted to LAB color space serves as
the main foundation for binarization. In this particular problem advantage can
be taken from the fact that most of the food objects are served on white plates
which results in a signiﬁcant contrast between food object and background,
i.e.
plate, in the third channel of the LAB color space expressing the blue-
yellow color dimension. Actual binarization is achieved by means of standard
thresholding using Otsu’s method to automatically detected the threshold value.
The ﬁnal merge with smoothed segmentation boundaries is a result of concate-
nating both the network prediction and the binary mask. Choosing to do so was
mainly motivated by the observation that even though preferably 100% of the
region of interest on the plate should be mapped to 1 in the binary mask with
the threshold value determined by Otsu’s method this is not always achieved, in
the majority of cases because of light reﬂections and/or big diﬀerences in con-
trast between food objects, resulting in a to some extent incomplete mask with
punctures and/or larger holes. Concatenating therefore the binary mask with
the network prediction solved this issue correcting inaccuracies at the object’s
boundaries at the same as it is depicted by Figure 5.12.
The arising problem of having unclassiﬁed pixels as a consequence of this merge
is tackled by an inpainting algorithm which was inspired by kNN classiﬁcation.
For this purpose each such pixel gets the value which is most frequently occurring
in its local neighborhood assigned to it. The neighborhood is hereby deﬁned as
window patch of size (5, 5) that is centered at the particular pixel which is to be
classiﬁed. It traverses the image in all 4 possible directions: row-wise from left
to right and right to left, and column-wise from left to right and right to left.
From all of the 4 candidate classiﬁcation labels per pixel the one that occurs
most often is chosen. If it happens to be a draw, the label is picked at random
from the ones in the draw.
All steps described above are once again summarized in the pipeline shown in
Figure 5.13.
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Boundary Reﬁnement
65
Figure 5.12: Performed boundary reﬁnement based on an explicit example.
It is crucial to note that the yellow colour occurring in images
2 −4 (Matlab numbering convention) does not describe the
same thing. In the ﬁrst and last case it represents the predicted
class index, in the second one it corresponds to the binary value
1 whereas in the third one (for better emphasis) it is equal to
−1, i.e. meaning the pixel is unclassiﬁed.
Figure 5.13: Proposed pipeline to Boundary Reﬁnement
==PAGE:78==
66
Implementation Details
It is important to mention that image pre-processing techniques regarding the
overall contrast were not applicable in this set-up due to the fact that their
inﬂuence would only be reﬂected in the ﬁrst channel of the LAB color space
which is known to represent the lightness dimension. This channel is, however,
not further used in the pipeline.
Another aspect worth discussing is related to the prediction accuracy. Most
probably, there exist more suitable/eﬃcient techniques than the implemented
inpainting algorithm.
Nevertheless, given very high network performance in
terms of segmentation accuracy kNN is shown to give very suﬃcient and satis-
fying ﬁnal results. This relates especially to the step in which binary mask and
network prediction are merged. The more precise the network output is, the less
relevant ﬂaws in the binary mask become such as the inclusion of many back-
ground pixels, for instance, because the merge is the basically the concatenation
of both. Unclassiﬁed pixels which are thus greatly surrounded by background
in the merge will become background as well based on the inpainting algorithm.
One such example is shown in Figure 5.14.
Figure 5.14: Performed boundary reﬁnement based on an explicit example in
which one advantage of the implemented inpainting algorithm
becomes apparent, namely that is eﬀectively eliminates incor-
rectly masked pixels which are not part of the food object but
further away from it as background.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Experimental Evaluation
The following chapter will be dedicated to the description and the assessment
of the overall training processes of both, the DeepLab and the VGG-16 network
model including some crucial technical implementation details.
Towards the
end, a formal evaluation of the models in terms of performance on an unseen
test set will be presented including the assessment of the impact of the proposed
boundary reﬁnement step on the ﬁnal image segmentation results.
All experiments, including network training and testing, were conducted on a
NVIDIA GPU hosted in one of the cluster units from the High-Performance
Computing (HPC) section of DTU Compute. Its properties are captured in the
tabel shown in Figure 6.1:
Figure 6.1: Technical details about the hardware used during network training
and testing phase.
Source: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=2129
==PAGE:80==
68
Experimental Evaluation
6.1
Data Preparation
Before the actual training and testing of the network can be instantiated all the
necessary data needs to be prepared and adapted in accordance to the problem.
Taking hence a closer look at the UNIMIB2016 dataset annotations it turns
out that they come in the form of a map structure in Matlab where each
element’s key is the image name with its corresponding value consisting of a
two-dimensional cell array containing the following 6 components as columns:
1. Category
2. Food Class
3. Name
4. Boundary Type
5. Boundary Coordinates
6. Bounding Box
Each row in the cell array represents one particular food object, i.e. the total
number of rows depicts the amount of distinct food objects shown in the image.
An exemplary case of an image containing two diﬀerent food classes is shown
in Figure 6.2. As a logical consequence, the corresponding value in the map
consists of a (2 × 6) cell array.
It is important to note, that for simplicity and time-saving reasons the deep
learning network will not be faced with the whole images of trays as such but
instead with single patches matching the exact areas deﬁned by the shipped
coordinates of the bounding boxes. This implies that during training and testing
phase image patches will be used which are showing one single class only. If it
happens that the bounding box also includes parts of diﬀerent classes, these
areas will be categorized as background.
Overall, it will be distinguished between two diﬀerent scenarios, the ﬁrst one
with a binary and the second one with a multi-class setup. The reason for this
will become apparent in the next section of this chapter. The former case implies
that all generated masks come in binary form which enables the diﬀerentiation
between fore- and background solely, i.e. between objects which are known to
belong to any kind of food class and everything else. Areas containing food
objects will be therefore represented by the value 1 and the rest with 0.
The latter case, on the other hand, is of slightly increased complexity as it
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Data Preparation
69
(a) The image itself including information contained in
the annotations ﬁle, i.e. class, polygon boundary and
bounding box of each object of interest.
(b) An excerpt from Matlab’s panel of variables showing actual values of
annotations for this particular example.
Figure 6.2: A randomly selected example image from the UNIMIB2016
dataset visualizing the corresponding shipped ground truth an-
notations of the objects’ boundaries.
involves the inclusion of distinction between all available food classes.
This
means, that instead of the foreground pixels being identiﬁed by 1’s only, each
pixel gets the integer of the class index it represents assigned. Hence, due to the
fact that the overall number of classes in the utilized data set equals to 65, the
network will have to learn how to distinguish between 66 in total including the
background class which, as in it was in the binary case, is assigned the value 0.
Summarizing the information above results in two training, validation and test
sets which are comprised of image patch-mask pairs that show one particular
class only. Masks are abstractions of the corresponding images on which food
objects are either identiﬁed as plain foreground, i.e. the numeric value 1, or as
==PAGE:82==
70
Experimental Evaluation
the class index of the category they belong to. Split ratios of the overall dataset
into a training and test set are also included in the annotations ﬁle such that
both contain 70% and 30% of all instances, respectively, in theory giving 650
and 360 images per set. However, because of a few faulty annotations in regard
to ﬁle names, these numbers have to be corrected to 637 and 352, respectively.
All data pre-preprocessing described until here was conducted in Matlab
vR2018b.
Data augmentation
Taking all 637 training images results in 2255 cropped
training image patches which are all showing one class at a time. The training
set is additionally augmented by means of two diﬀerent image manipulation
functions provided by Tensorﬂow:
tf.image.flip_up_down() and tf.image.flip_left_right()
Both ﬂip the image patch-mask pairs along the vertical and horizontal axis,
respectively. Applying them individually to the initial training set at ﬁrst and
secondly using a combination of both results in an expanded dataset of 4·2255 =
9020 image patch-mask pairs.
Image pre-processing
Each image patch-mask pair has to undergo several
pre-processing steps before it can be utilized for training and testing purposes
which is mainly imposed by the original implementation of the network model
that is used as basis for this project, VGG-16. As stated by the authors in
[SZ15], the input to their network is a ﬁxed-size RGB image where the mean
color value for each of the three channels, computed on the training set, was
subtracted from every pixel. Since the UNIMIB2016 dataset is very speciﬁc in
terms of categories it contains, this mean-value vector is updated accordingly
from
 B: 103.939
G: 116.779
R: 123.680
!
to
 B: 92.878
G: 115.262
R: 129.167
!
.
The order of the color channels is in this case crucial to be noted due to the fact
that the initial implementation of the VGG-16 network was derived from the
publically available Caﬀe framework in C++ [JSD+14]. In one of their Jupyter
Notebook examples found on their website, the authors Jia et al. speciﬁcally
state that the "(...) default CaﬀeNet is conﬁgured to take images in BGR for-
mat.".1 This implies that if any model, the weights originating from this frame-
1https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/BVLC/caffe/blob/master/examples/
00-classification.ipynb
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Data Preparation
71
work are to be loaded into for ﬁne-tuning purposes, is built from scratch such
as it is the case in this project, all images have to be pre-processed accordingly
to match this standard. Since Tensorﬂow’s function tf.image.decode_jpeg()
outputs the read image in RGB convention2, the order of the color channels has
hence to be re-arranged.
Moreover, in order to ensure that all class indices are treated as unique labels,
so-called one-hot encoding of the masks has to be performed which means that
the values are mapped from sparse space into a more dense one-hot, i.e. binary,
representation. For example, if there existed only three diﬀerent classes 1, 2, 3,
they would be encoded into (0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 0) and (1, 0, 0), repsectively.
All of these pre-processing steps are implemented by means of a function called
read_and_preproc_images() which is shown in Listing 6.1.
Listing 6.1: Dataset pre-processing function
1
def read_and_preproc_images(file_img, file_mask, ...
flip_horizontal=False, flip_vertical=False):
2
f_img = tf.read_file(file_img)
3
img = tf.image.decode_jpeg(f_img, channels=3)
4
R_ch, G_ch, B_ch = tf.split(axis=2, num_or_size_splits=3, ...
value=img)
5
img = tf.cast((tf.concat(axis=2, values=[B_ch, G_ch, ...
R_ch])), dtype=tf.float32) # Conversion to BGR convention
6
img -= IMG_MEAN
7
img = tf.image.resize_images(img, IMG_SIZE)
8
9
f_mask = tf.read_file(file_mask)
10
mask = tf.image.decode_png(f_mask, channels=1)
11
mask = tf.squeeze(mask, axis=2)
12
mask = tf.one_hot(mask, depth=N, on_value=1, off_value=0)
13
mask = tf.image.resize_images(mask, IMG_SIZE)
14
15
if flip_horizontal:
16
img = tf.image.flip_left_right(img)
17
mask = tf.image.flip_left_right(mask)
18
19
elif flip_vertical:
20
img = tf.image.flip_up_down(img)
21
mask = tf.image.flip_up_down(mask)
22
23
return img, mask
2https://www.tensorflow.org/versions/r1.12/api_docs/python/tf/image/decode_
jpeg
==PAGE:84==
72
Experimental Evaluation
6.2
Training and Validation
DeepLab
The DeepLab model network is trained through successive ﬁne-tuning of the
already existing weights that were made publically accessible by the VGG-16
research team which was enabled by the fact that both networks start with the
same layers up until the fourth convolutional block, as it can be seen in Figure
3.4. For compatibility reasons with Tensorﬂow as backend, the initial weights
were downloaded from this source3.
Training the network in a successive manner implies that focus is put primarily
on layers which are diﬀerent from the VGG-16 architecture, successively in-
creasing the number of trainable parameters, i.e. layers, which means that the
training is performed in phases. Each such phase consists of a certain number
of parameters that will depend on the general training performance, i.e. if a
convergent behavior of accuracy and loss is being observed towards the end of
one phase, the training is continued on the consecutive one. This is to ensure a
smooth adaptation of already existing weights avoiding unnecessary but possible
destruction of work that has been already accomplished in previous trainings.
Consequently, the following schedule is proposed:
Multi-Class Setup
• Phase 1: Only the last layer, containing the 66-way classiﬁer, is trained
at a learning rate 0.01
• Phase 2: Keeping the ﬁrst 13 layers ﬁxed, the remaining part of the
network is trained at learning rate 0.001
• Phase 3: All layers are trained at learning rate 0.0001 (total ﬁne-tuning)
A training patch size of (352, 352) is used along with a batch size equalling to
20 for each phase due to memory (and time) limitations.
Following the proposal of the authors of [CPK+16], the optimizer module over
the categorical cross-entropy loss function was chosen to be the Stochastic Gra-
dient Descent (SGD) with momentum 0.9 and weight decay 0.0005. The usage
of other existing loss functions such as the Jaccard or Dice loss was considered
and assessed, though, according to multiple sources [Ave18][Chl18][Gó18], due
3https://github.com/fchollet/deep-learning-models/releases
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Training and Validation
73
the comparably small complexity of the underlying recognition task the initial
choice remained unchanged. Given the number of channels c, the overall number
of pixels in all channels N and yj
i and ˆyj
i denoting the output prediction and
ground truth of pixel j in channel i, respectively, after softmax activation, the
categorical cross-entropy loss can be deﬁned as:
cce = −
c
X
i
N
X
j
yj
i log ˆyj
i
Model compilation and training
Before the actual training begins, the
DeepLab model as it is shown in Listing 5.2 and Figure 5.2 needs to be loaded
and compiled with the corresponding loss function, accuracy metric and opti-
mizer which were described earlier. Additionally, the learning rate needs to be
set in accordance to the corresponding phase. This part is depicted by Listing
6.2.
Listing 6.2: Model Compilation
1
N = 66
2
IMG_SHAPE = (352,352,3)
3
4
model = models.VGG_16__deep_lab(IMG_SHAPE, WEIGHTS_PATH, N)
5
sgd = optimizers.SGD(lr=LEARNING_RATE, momentum=0.9, decay=0.0005)
6
7
model.compile(optimizer=sgd, ...
loss=tf.keras.losses.categorical_crossentropy, ...
metrics=[tf.keras.metrics.categorical_accuracy])
Moreover, prior to model training, all training patch-mask pairs are randomly
shuﬄed after which 20% of pairs, i.e. 1804, is taken aside and assigned to the
validation set. Elements from this set will not be included during the training
phase but instead they are separately evaluated in terms of loss and accuracy
at the end of each epoch for validation purposes serving as an indicator for the
potential occurrence of overﬁtting. In such a case, the accuracy of the validation
set would be signiﬁcantly lower compared to the one evaluated on the training
set.
Instantiation of the training is achieved by the function model.fit() with all
the necessary parameters as shown in Listing 6.3.
==PAGE:86==
74
Experimental Evaluation
Listing 6.3: Actual Network Training
1
history = model.fit(
2
3
training_set,
4
epochs=num_epochs,
5
shuffle=False,
6
steps_per_epoch=int(np.ceil(num_patches_train / ...
float(batch_size))),
7
validation_data=validation_set,
8
validation_steps=int(np.ceil(num_patches_val / ...
float(batch_size))),
9
use_multiprocessing=True
10
11
)
Both, the training and the validation set, are of type tf.data.Dataset which
requires the introduction of the amount of steps per epoch with the number of
validation steps and therefore imposing to set the shuffle ﬂag which performs
random shuﬄing of the data prior to every epoch to False since according to
the documentation4 it would have no eﬀect otherwise.
The ﬁrst attempt of executing the training as it was proposed in the beginning
of this section did unfortunately not lead to satisfying results. The network’s
performance in terms of learning improvement was slowed down signiﬁcantly at
a learning accuracy and loss of 0.65 and 25.5, respectively, as it can be seen in
Figure 6.3. It shows a total of 30 epochs out of which the ﬁrst 20 were focusing
on training the last network layer only whereas the remaining 10 were assigned
to the second training phase. This transition is particularly apparent in case of
training accuracy and loss in both subﬁgures. The training was aborted right
afterwards.
4https://www.tensorflow.org/versions/r1.12/api_docs/python/tf/keras/models/
Model#fit
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Training and Validation
75
Figure 6.3: Training progress of the ﬁrst, unsuccessful, attempt of ﬁne-tuning
all existing weights in the DeepLab model. Despite approximately
15h of training, the network’s performance only improves at a very
slow pace.
After attempting to tweak some of the optimizer parameters without success,
one additional step was introduced to the training pipeline: Prior to training
the multi-class setup, a binary scenario is introduced in which the network is
supposed to be made sensitized for food objects in general. Loss function and
accuracy metric used are changed accordingly to
tf.keras.losses.binary_crossentropy
and tf.keras.losses.binary_accuracy, respectively.
Also, the number of
classes is updated to 2.
Training the binary case is conducted in a very similar way to the multi-class
scenario:
Binary Setup
• Phase 1: Keeping the ﬁrst 13 layers ﬁxed, the remaining part of the
network is trained at learning rate 0.001. This is yet again due to the fact
that up until layer 13, the DeepLab model does not diﬀer from the VGG16
network (layer 14 is the ﬁrst 2D atrous convolution).
• Phase 2: All layers are trained at learning rate 0.0001 (total ﬁne-tuning)
==PAGE:88==
76
Experimental Evaluation
The exact amount of epochs in both cases will yet again depend on the training
performance. All other settings regarding training patch and batch size remain
the same.
As it turned out, the incorporation of the binary setup did not only lead to a
smoother learning behavior in the multi-class setup but also was it conducted
considerably fast with 8−9 minutes per epoch without imposing large additional
expenditure. For comparison, the multi-class training phase requires 1.5 hours
per epoch on the available HPC hardware. Figure 6.4 visualizes the training
history in terms of training accuracy and loss, and validation accuracy and loss
for both, the binary and the multi-class scenario. The ramp-like behavior of the
graphs after epoch 10 and 20 in Figure 6.4b can be once again explained by the
incorporation of the diﬀerent training phases enabling successive optimization
of all weights in the network.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Training and Validation
77
(a) Summary of the overall training progress for the binary setup. Firstly, the
last 6 layers are trained for 10 epochs and secondly, all layers are trained
for 7 epochs.
(b) Summary of the overall training progress for the multi-class setup. Based
on the ﬁnal model weights computed by means of the binary setup, ﬁrstly,
the last layer is trained for 10 epochs, secondly, the last 6 layers are trained
for another 10 epochs and thirdly, all layers are trained for 40 epochs up
until a training and validation accuracy above 0.9 is achieved.
Figure 6.4: Overall training progress of the second, successful, attempt to
successfully ﬁne-tune/train the DeepLab network weights.
The
training pipeline is divided into two separate stages, utilizing the
proposed binary setup prior to the actual multi-class case.
==PAGE:90==
78
Experimental Evaluation
VGG-16
The training set for the classiﬁcation case is evidently created diﬀerently from
the previous one. Instead of generating a set of image patch-mask pairs it is
required to train the network using image patch-label pairs.
Yet again, the
validation set is a 20% subset of this training set.
In opposition to the DeepLab case, ﬁne-tuning the weights of the VGG-16 net-
work was performed in a very straight-forward fashion using very similar set-
tings. While loss function, accuracy metric and batch size are still the same as
in the previous scenario regarding the multi-class setup, the SGD optimizer is
used solely with the learning rate parameter whereas the training patch size is
reduced to (224, 224). Additionally, successive training is skipped such that all
existing weights are ﬁne-tuned at learning rate 0.0001. In total, 40 epochs, each
of less then 5 minutes duration, were needed until convergence towards 0.9338
training and 0.9879 validation accuracy was achieved. A visualization of this
training run is given in Figure 6.5.
Fluctuations during validation phases can be explained by the lack of momentum
and decay in the optimizer module which are known to reduce this phenomenon
to a certain extent. Other than that, the graph shows expected behavior indi-
cating the completion of a successful training run.
Figure 6.5: Summary of the overall training progress of ﬁne-tuning the VGG-
16 model to adapt it to the given problem. Successful weight opti-
mization was achieved by means of a single training run consisting
of 40 epochs à 3 minutes in total.
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Final Segmentation Results
79
6.3
Final Segmentation Results
From the initial 352 test images 1222 cropped test image patches are being
extracted equally as in the case of the training set. They are used to create
three diﬀerent test sets being either paired with their corresponding labels only
or with their mask counterpart represented in binary or with multiple classes,
respectively.
In addition to the evaluation of the performance of all three network models, the
impact of the boundary reﬁnement step on the ﬁnal multi-class predictions is
being assessed. In general, 4 diﬀerent accuracy metrics which are all depending
on the respective model that is under evaluation are being used to accomplish
this:
1. Binary accuracy5: Given as the mean of according to the ground truth
correctly classiﬁed pixels assuming they are either of value 0 or of value 1.
Used for the DeepLab model in binary mode.
2. Categorical accuracy5: Almost identically as in the previous case, given
as the ratio of according to the ground truth correctly classiﬁed pixels
assuming the existence of multiple classes and also accounting for misclas-
siﬁed pixels. Used for the DeepLab model in multi-class mode and the
VGG-16 network.
3. Mean IoU: Deﬁned as the intersecting area of prediction and ground
truth divided by the union of both.
This metric is also known as the
Jaccard coeﬃcient and is of particular importance in case of great class
imbalance in the image such as, for instance, having a signiﬁcantly larger
amount of background pixels than actual regions of interest. Used for both
semantic image segmentation models.
4. Mean Intersection over Prediction (IoPred): This custom metric
is deﬁned as the percentage of correctly classiﬁed pixels over all classi-
ﬁed ones in the prediction itself.
Such as the IoU, it is used for both
segmentation network models.
Regarding the ﬁrst two cases, the same Keras implementations that have been
already utilized during the training phase are used in combination with the
function tf.keras.model.evaluate(). For the remaining two metrics, custom
implementations have been created in Matlab which also take the by the given
5https://github.com/keras-team/keras/blob/master/keras/metrics.py
==PAGE:92==
80
Experimental Evaluation
network generated predictions in combination with their respective ground truth
as input arguments as it can be seen in Listing 6.4.
Listing 6.4: Custom implementations of the two accuracy metrics IoU and
IoPred written in Matlab. Mean values are computed over the
entire set of prediction-ground truth pairs.
1
function [ iou ] = IoU( pred, mask )
2
%IoU Calculates the Jaccard index between two images
3
%
Both images are masks with one channel out of which one is the
4
%
prediction and the other one being the ground truth.
5
%
Both are assumed to be of equal size.
6
pred = im2double( pred );
7
mask = im2double( mask );
8
9
union = nnz( pred + mask );
10
intersection = length( find( pred - mask == 0 ) ) - ...
11
nnz( logical( pred + mask ) - 1 );
12
iou = intersection / union;
13
14
end
15
16
function [ iopred ] = IoPred( pred, mask )
17
%IoPred Calculates the Intersection over the actual Prediction ...
between two images
18
%
Both images are masks with one channel out of which one is the
19
%
prediction and the other one being the ground truth.
20
%
Both are assumed to be of equal size.
21
pred = im2double( pred );
22
mask = im2double( mask );
23
24
iopred = ( length( find( pred - mask == 0 ) ) - ...
25
nnz( logical( pred + mask ) - 1 ) ) / nnz( pred );
26
27
end
All results are presented in the table in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Performance of all presented network models on the unseen test
set. Results of cells in grey are not applicable and therefore left
blank.
==PAGE:93==
6.3 Final Segmentation Results
81
Best segmentations were evidently achieved in the binary setup which is not
unexpected due to the fact that the network only has to learn to distinguish
between two diﬀerent classes, namely fore- and background. It is therefore a
very simpliﬁed version of the considerably more complex multi-class scenario.
While the VGG-16 classiﬁcation network model leads to satisfying results as
well, this is not the case anymore when it comes to the DeepLab model with
the multi-class setup.
Here, it can be easily said in general that the network performs rather poorly
on a never seen test set compared to the accuracies that were reached during
training. The fact that it reaches 0.8188 in terms of categorical_accuracy is
rather unexpected but might be caused by the fact that this metric is not the
most suitable for this problem after all. That is also supported by the overall
achieved segmentation results out of which a subset is shown in Figure 6.8:
Clearly, the ﬁnal DeepLab model has some very satisfying results to oﬀer when
it comes to classes that occur very often in the dataset such as it is the case
in diﬀerent pasta classes, for example.
The issue of class imbalance will be
therefore addressed in more details in the ﬁnal chapter of this thesis as it was
unfortunately noticed at a very late point in time.
However, another possible explanation could have potentially become already
apparent during the validation phases of the network training, being strongly
related to overﬁtting. In such a scenario, the training progress graphs would
have evidently outperformed the validation graphs, meaning in other words,
that the network performs great on data that has been already seen before but
badly on unknown data. This was, however, not the case and the only possible
explanation for this is that a fundamental mistake has been made during the
preparation of the training and validation sets. As it has been already mentioned
in the beginning of this chapter, ﬁrstly, all the training image patch-mask pairs
are randomly shuﬄed before the validation set gets extracted from it and prior to
each training run. Secondly, the overall training is being conducted in multiple
separate phases. As a logical implication, the validation data will at some point
look very familiar to the network.
One very straight-forward solution to this problem would be to include the
validation part into the overall split of the dataset that was shipped from the
very beginning. Random shuﬄing of the training and validation data could be
hence still performed prior to each training phase but separately.
To gain a deeper insight into the DeepLab network performance in the multi-
class scenario, a few exemplary predictions, two randomly chosen samples per
class, are being analyzed. The result is a reduced test set containing 130 test
==PAGE:94==
82
Experimental Evaluation
image patches which are being assigned to one of two possible categories in
terms of their individual performance in the following way: Given the expected
target class index, it is being checked how often it actually occurs in the net-
work prediction and which other classes were incorrectly identiﬁed in addition
to it. Therefore, the ratio of correctly classiﬁed pixels over the total amount of
generally predicted ones serves as foundation for the decision making process
below and will further be referred to as general class recognition capability/ac-
curacy, considering each patch globally and not in terms of actual (local, i.e. on
a pixel-level basis) segmentation eﬃciency:
• Category "Good": A given class patch is categorized as good if the pre-
viously deﬁned ratio is greater or equal to 75%.
• Category "Bad": All remaining cases result in the bad category.
It is important to state here that the amount of additionally predicted classes
is not taken into account during this decision.
Results will show, however,
that with decreasing class recognition capability of the network the number of
wrongly identiﬁed classes will increase except for a few special cases which will
be addressed in more details a bit further below.
Overall, from the predictions of all 130 test patches 83 are being assigned to
the category "bad" whereas only 47 are considered to belong to "good". Both
groupings include 17 classes which occur in both categories. These particular
cases are being called split classes. For obvious reasons, it is very diﬃcult to
mark particular classes as split cases taking only 10% of the entire test set
into consideration which is why this term has to handled with slightly bigger
caution as the actual split ratio in terms of analyzing the entire test set would
be signiﬁcantly more expressive. In summary, this results in 33 classes being
marked as "bad" and 15 as "good".
The table in Figure 6.7 reﬂects the class recognition capabilities of all 30 patches,
i.e. 15 classes, that belong to the category "good", excluding the split cases.
The best performing ones, with mean accuracy above a threshold of 95% and
therefore highlighted with green background color are given explicitly in Figure
6.8 including their respective segmentation accuracy, comparing them to the
corresponding ground truth, expressed in terms of the custom implementations
of IoU and IoPred.
There exist three records in the table in Figure 6.7 that are very unexpected,
namely because results from Section 5.3 which was dealing with the topic of
feature-based class reduction are implying that Classes 5, 48 and especially 35
are very recommended candidates to form summarized classes. They would have
==PAGE:95==
6.3 Final Segmentation Results
83
Figure 6.7: General class recognition capabilities / accuracies of all classes
contained solely in category "good". The top performing ones are
highlighted with green background color along with the better per-
forming prediction patch within each class with bold font weight.
therefore been rather expected to belong to the group of split cases if not even
fully to the category "bad". This only shows, as a logical consequence, that the
chosen 10% of test patches does not represent the most expressive samples.
Nevertheless, with Class 23 clearly outperforming the remaining candidates,
which can be attributed to the fact that this class contains by far the greatest
amount of training patches as it will be depicted later by Figure 7.1, Figures
6.8c and 6.8d make it very apparent that actual segmentation accuracy does
not have any impact on the ordering in this setup such as it is the case with
wrongly identiﬁed classes in Figures 6.8b, 6.8e and 6.8f.
An extract of worst performing classes on the other hand is presented in Figure
6.9. It is worth noticing that some severe misclassiﬁcations have occurred due to
very high correlation in terms of similarity between the respective classes. This
becomes particularly apparent in the case of certain pasta classes as depicted
by Figures 6.9a-6.9b and 6.9c-6.9d. Nevertheless, especially the two latter cases
show that this behavior does not have to be necessarily equally mutual. This
assumption is also enhanced by the sample of Class 28 shown in 6.9e which has
been clearly confused by the network with the previously mentioned Class 5
which appeared in Figure 6.8f.
==PAGE:96==
84
Experimental Evaluation
(a) Class 23: pane,
with IoU = 0.9554 and IoPred= 0.9770
(b) Class 17: mandarini,
with IoU = 0.9329 and IoPred= 0.9479
(c) Class 55: spinaci,
with IoU = 0.7724 and IoPred= 0.9042
(d) Class 63: yogurt,
with IoU = 0.8744 and IoPred= 0.6497
(e) Class 46: pizza,
with IoU = 0.9378 and IoPred= 0.9703
(f) Class 5: bruscitt,
with IoU = 0.9004 and IoPred= 0.9428
Figure 6.8: Top 6 performing classes in terms of general class recognition capa-
bility, represented by the best sample out of two in total, respec-
tively.
The respective segmentation accuracy expressed as IoU
and IoPred are given in the corresponding subtitles. The samples
are sorted with respect to class recognition accuracy in descending
order, row-wise from left to right starting in the upper left corner.
Blue text boxes below some of the predictions contain information
about percentages of the top 3 wrongly identiﬁed classes.
==PAGE:97==
6.3 Final Segmentation Results
85
(a) Class 29: pasta mare e monti,
with IoU = 0.0 and IoPred= 0.0
(b) Class 29: pasta mare e monti,
with IoU = 0.0194 and IoPred= 0.0202
(c) Class 30: pasta pancetta e zucchine,
with IoU = 0.4150 and IoPred= 0.4412
(d) Class 31: pasta pesto e besciamella e
cornetti,
with IoU = 0.1241 and IoPred= 0.1271
(e) Class 28: pasta e fagioli,
with IoU = 0.2414 and IoPred= 0.2443
(f) Class 27: pasta e ceci,
with IoU = 0.0 and IoPred= 0.0
Figure 6.9: 6 examples of test samples with very low general recognition ca-
pability. The respective segmentation accuracy expressed as IoU
and IoPred are given in the corresponding subtitles. Blue text
boxes below some of the predictions contain information about
percentages of the top 3 wrongly identiﬁed classes.
==PAGE:98==
86
Experimental Evaluation
Boundary Reﬁnement
As it has been already depicted by the values in the
table contained in Figure 6.6, incorporation of the boundary reﬁnement seems
to have a negative impact on the segmentation results at ﬁrst glance. This is,
however, only partially true if a closer look is taken at some particular exam-
ples. For this purpose, the same 15 samples, one per class, which were showing
best general recognition capability (see the table in Figure 6.7) are taken and
evaluated in terms of the segmentation accuracy metrics IoU and IoPred after
applying the proposed concept of boundary reﬁnement. Results are presented
in the table shown in Figure 6.10 below. It additionally contains the values of
both metrics before boundary reﬁnement to facilitate easier comparison. The
records are yet again sorted in descending order according to the mean of all 4
accuracy values per sample in order to obtain a general picture of the achieved
segmentation accuracy. Moreover, font colors of values in the last two columns
before the mean are indicating whether the boundary reﬁnement step has actu-
ally led to some improvement in terms of segmentation accuracy (green) or not
(red).
Figure 6.10: Segmentation results of the ﬁnal DeepLab model in its multi-class
setup based on images showing best general recognition capabil-
ity per class given in the table in Figure 6.7, expressed by means
of IoU and IoPred before and after the boundary reﬁnement step
was applied. Font colors green and red in the last two columns
describe whether this step has led to certain segmentation accu-
racy improvement or not, respectively.
As it could have been already expected in advance, the order of the classes diﬀers
this time compared to the one in the table in Figure 6.7. The main reason for
this, as it has been already roughly mentioned earlier in this section, is that
the general recognition capability does not reﬂect the segmentation accuracy
as such. It only states how many of the predicted pixels belong to the target
==PAGE:99==
6.3 Final Segmentation Results
87
class. Given for instance the example, in which only pixels outside of the area
of interest have been (wrongly) classiﬁed as the given target class, the general
recognition competence would equal to 1 with actual segmentation accuracy
being, however, equal to 0.0.
A new observation is nevertheless made when it comes to the assessment of indi-
cations about whether the boundary reﬁnement step had a positive or negative
impact on the segmentation results. Here it can be seen that there exists evident
improvement in terms of segmentation accuracy if it was measured by means of
IoPred (9 out of 15 cases). When the IoU was used, however, a rather negative
impact can be noted on average (5 out of 15 cases). A possible explanation for
this would be that the intersection of reﬁned prediction and ground truth did not
increase to the same extent as their union forcing their quotient to be (slightly)
smaller than before. It has to be kept in mind that ground truth masks are
not perfect abstractions of the food objects but approximated polygons instead.
Hence, there exists the possibility that the boundary reﬁnement step leads to
more precise masks than the actual ground truth that won’t be captured by the
accuracy metric but treated as negative impact instead.
The ﬁrst 3 records, highlighted with green background color again due to the
fact that their mean segmentation accuracy is greater or equal to 95%, are
visualized in the boundary reﬁnement pipeline in Figure 6.11.
Evidently, there exist also cases in which this technique leads to very unsat-
isfying results which mainly originate from misleading binary masks in which
background pixels that were falsely masked as 1 are spatially very close to actual
predictions. Consequently, the inpainting algorithm will not have a correcting
eﬀect but an enhancing one instead by classifying these pixels as certain food
objects instead of background. In relation to this, it is, however, also possible to
notice a very similar observation which has the exact opposite eﬀect, i.e. when
the binary mask includes parts of the food object that weren’t recognized by
the network. Both cases are shown in Figure 6.12.
In both scenarios, the importance of a well-performing network becomes yet
again very apparent, i.e. including this boundary reﬁnement procedure in the
overall image segmentation pipeline causes the network results to be of higher
value if some pieces of the food are falsely categorized as background rather
than having actual background pixels incorrectly classiﬁed as food. Also is it of
disadvantage if the network’s predictions are of very dispersed nature.
Summarizing the above, therefore leads to the conclusion that despite the low
accuracy score, this proposed method for boundary smoothing can indeed lead
to compelling improvements.
==PAGE:100==
88
Experimental Evaluation
(a) Class 23: pane
(b) Class 1: arancia
(c) Class 35: pasta sugo vegetariano
Figure 6.11: Top 3 predicted classes before and after boundary reﬁnement
in terms of segmentation accuracy. All subﬁgures visualize the
boundary reﬁnement pipeline with respect to the given image
patch.
==PAGE:101==
6.3 Final Segmentation Results
89
(a) Example of background pixels falsely categorized as foreground
in the binary mask which are spatially too close to actually pre-
dicted food objects.
(b) Example of a piece of food which was captured by the binary
mask threshold but not by the network. The inpainting algo-
rithm is now even more depending on accurate predictions of
maximal accumulation which is not the case here leading to in-
correct classiﬁcation.
Figure 6.12: Boundary Reﬁnement: Two cases presenting the advantage and
disadvantage of the automatically generated binary mask.
==PAGE:102==
90
Experimental Evaluation
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Future Work
In summary, it can be said that results achieved with this project work conﬁrm
the assumption that state-of-the-art deep learning models are capable of per-
forming semantic segmentation through ﬁne-tuning pre-trained weights, given
a suﬃcient amount of background knowledge, data and training time. Further-
more, their output in connection with the boundary reﬁnement post-processing
step bears deﬁnitely great potential to be used for further food volume esti-
mation methods providing à priori knowledge about precise boundaries of food
objects.
Nevertheless, the remaining few aspects which are worth to be focused on, shall
be presented in the following paragraphs.
Comparison with state-of-the-art results
Unfortunately, the comparison
of the achieved results with other papers is very diﬃcult for multiple reasons:
• The very simplistic nature of the underlying dataset which has very little
variety in terms of camera angles, lighting conditions, serving circum-
stances and so on, to oﬀer. Also is the dataset very speciﬁc when it comes
to the cuisine. Introducing some meals from the Asian continent would
profoundly increase the semantic segmentation diﬃculty due to the fact
that they tend to contain many diﬀerent ingredients mixed together such
as it is the case in Wok dishes.
==PAGE:104==
92
Discussion and Future Work
• Semantic image segmentation was not performed on the entire image itself
but instead on signiﬁcantly smaller bounding boxes which were extracted
beforehand knowing that they contain the particular regions of interest
already.
• The authors of the UNIMIB2016 dataset make use of diﬀerent evaluation
benchmarks due to the fact that they do not perform pixel-level classiﬁ-
cation per se but image patch classiﬁcation. Here, they refer to measure
metrics which were initially proposed by Arbeláez et al. in [AMFM11],
also called covering of ground truth, the Probabilistic Rand Index (PRI)
and the Variation of Information (VI).
Choice of the network model
The main motivation for choosing a deep
neural network consisting of a relatively large stack of convolutional layers with
ﬁlters of very small receptive ﬁelds as basis originated from the composition
of the underlying dataset itself and the actual problem that was chosen to be
solved. Due to the fact that the network was trained by means of image patches
showing mainly single food objects only, the goal was to focus primarily on ﬁne
details of regions of interest to be able to distinguish between all of the diﬀerent
meals some of which turned out to be very similar even according to human
perception. Nevertheless, it would have been very interesting to compare results
based on this approach to predictions from other networks such as one of the
existing Residual Network (ResNet) proposals or even Regional Convolutional
Neural Networks (R-CNN) such as Mask R-CNN which will be left to future
experiments.
Bounding box detection
Since the detection phase of the regions of interest
is missing, it is also being left for potential future improvement. A major inspi-
rational source for this particular purpose can be found in [HGDG17]. Slightly
diﬀerent from the goal of this project work, the authors He et al. propose a ﬂex-
ible network to object instance segmentation. They do, however, incorporate an
object detection module into their pipeline allowing them to successfully detect
distinct instances of diﬀerent and/or equal classes in the image. Even though,
their approach constitutes an extension to the Faster R-CNN architecture, the
inclusion of such an object detection module is deﬁnitely also possible, and ac-
tually crucial in this setup, unless the training will be conducted in a way that
instead of single patches, entire tray images are shown to the network. This
would, nevertheless, have a serious impact on the boundary reﬁnement proposal
which would have to be adapted accordingly.
Another very attractive network architecture which could be used for both,
bounding box detection and class prediction, at the same time, would be the
==PAGE:105==
93
YOLO model [RDGF16] that was already brieﬂy touched upon in Chapter 2.
Such as the DeepLab model was derived from VGG-16, it might be also possible
to transform YOLO such that the classiﬁcation module could perform actual
semantic image segmentation.
Class imbalance
It has unfortunately become apparent only towards the end
of this project work that the dataset chosen as foundation for all analysis and
computations is suﬀering a lot from class imbalance. The reason for this late no-
tice was ﬁrst of all honestly naivety mainly due to the fact that the paper which
was based on the same dataset had still reported promising results without pro-
viding any indications with respect to this issue. Secondly, it is in retrospect
very interesting to mention that according to the obtained segmentation results
the problem of some classes being very much under-/ over-represented in the
training set did not seem to have that much of a bad inﬂuence.
Neverthe-
less, taking a closer look at Figure 7.1 makes it very interesting to investigate
more in this regard, ﬁnding potentially out how much the current results could
actually improve if this problem is resolved, either by means of class speciﬁc
data augmentation/reduction manipulating the patches in terms of their con-
trast or scale, for example, or with the help of Keras’s implementation of the
class_weight attribute in the model.fit() function thanks to which a dictio-
nary can be passed to the training process indicating which classes should be
considered more during the calculation of weights.
Yet a diﬀerent approach constitutes the implementation of the technique called
Hard negative mining in which images from the test set with a signiﬁcant amount
of falsely predicted classes are explicitly converted into negative samples and
added to the training set to improve the networks performance. Before these
negatives are however added to the training set, they should be slightly manipu-
lated in order to make sure that the images contained in the test set still remain
new to the network.
Class Reduction
When it comes to the implementation of elements taken
from Graph Theory for the purpose of class reduction, things could have been
as well done in a diﬀerent way.
Instead of choosing the Hamming distance
metric for the calculation of pair-wise distances between rows of feature maps it
would have also been possible to use something simpler such as the Euclidean
distance, for example. In this scenario degrees of similarity could have been
derived straight from the distance vector, i.e. the closer its values were to 0
the more alike two classes would be. Mapping this degree further to a numeric
value, for instance the average of the distance vector itself, would then make
the need for calculating intersection percentages redundant.
==PAGE:106==
94
Discussion and Future Work
Figure 7.1: Distribution of Training Patches with respect to individual
Classes. In a perfect scenario all 2255 patches would be distributed
evenly over all classes, i.e. around 35 per class. Even after an up-
per and a lower tolerance margin of 25% is added, only 17 of 65
classes are actually falling in this range depicted with blue color
in the bar chart.
Also, besides displaying all weights on their corresponding edges they have not
been further taken into account after the actual thresholding had taken place.
They could however come in very handy in terms of the detection of binary
clusters, as it has been already mentioned in Paragraph 5.3 containing the com-
parison of results from the Hierarchical Clustering and Graph Theory approach.
==PAGE:107==
List of Figures
1.1
Project Plan - Final Version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
[ZBS+11]: Proposed pipeline for segmentation assisted food clas-
siﬁcation. The image has been taken from the original paper. . .
7
2.2
[CNS17a]: Presented food recognition process.
All subﬁgures
have been extracted from the original paper.
. . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
[MJR+15]: Proposed pipeline targeting the task of calorie estima-
tion based on single food images. Image taken from the original
paper. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
[ARBR17]: Proposed pipeline to automatic food tray analysis.
.
12
2.5
An excerpt from [MJL+19] showing a general list of publically
available food datasets mainly targeting the task of object recog-
nition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Sample images from all candidate datasets presented in Table 2.1.
(d) contains examples from the Food-50 dataset to the left and
from the Food-101 dataset to the right. (e) additionally contains
the ground truth annotations in the form of black polygons. . . .
17
2.7
An overview of exemplary patches from all 65 classes in the
UNIMIB2016 dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
==PAGE:108==
96
LIST OF FIGURES
3.1
2D Convolution applied in practice with a conventional ﬁlter size
equal to (3 × 3). The utilized ﬁlter called Sobel Gx is responsible
for the detection of horizontal edges (in x-direction) in an im-
age. If the goal was to detect vertical edges (in y-direction), the
ﬁlter matrix would have to be transposed before application. Im-
age source: https://towardsdatascience.com/applied-deep-learning-part-4-
convolutional-neural-networks-584bc134c1e2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
2D Max-Pooling applied in practice with a conventional win-
dow size and stride equal to (2 × 2) and 2, respectively.
Im-
age source: https://towardsdatascience.com/applied-deep-learning-part-4-
convolutional-neural-networks-584bc134c1e2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Exemplary ﬁlters used in dilated convolutions of dilation rate 1
in (a), 2 in (b) and 3 in (c), respectively. Image source: [YK16] . .
30
3.4
DeepLab: Transformation of the VGG-16 classiﬁcation network
into a fully-convolutional semantic segmentation network. The
input image size of the DeepLab model was changed from (224 ×
224×3) to (352×352×3) to increase performance. Image source:
https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~yjlee/teaching/ecs289g-winter2018/DeepLab.pdf
32
4.1
Proposed pipeline for Hierarchical Clustering to class reduction .
36
4.2
An exemplary cycle of length 4. Numbers in each node represent
indices of classes. Edge weights are omitted for simplicity reasons.
In order to visualize inter-dependencies between nodes in a cycle,
it is mainly of importance whether two nodes are connected or
not. Due to the fact that not all nodes are connected with each
other summarizing all of them into one and the same class might
lead to incorrect results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Proposed pipeline for Graph Theory to class reduction . . . . . .
40
5.1
Terminal output of the original VGG-16 network for classiﬁcation
purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Terminal output of the original DeepLab model for semantic seg-
mentation purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Truncated VGG-16 model to facilitate the extraction of feature
vectors for a more detailed data analysis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:109==
LIST OF FIGURES
97
5.4
First step to Hierarchical Clustering: Variable reduction of fea-
ture vectors based on Principal Component Analysis. Plotting
the ﬁrst two components only gives already a hint of potential
reduction candidates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Binary Hierarchical Cluster Tree: Clustering results using a cutt-
oﬀvalue equal to 0.3. The overall number of classes was reduced
from 65 to 50 (6 × (2 into 1), 1 × (7 into 1) and 1 × (4 into 1)).
.
54
5.6
Individual clusters as a result of hierarchical clustering applied
with a cut-oﬀvalue equal to 0.3. Each class is represented as a
randomly drawn subset of three training patches belonging to it.
Class indices are given from left to right. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.7
Truncated DeepLab model to facilitate the extraction of feature
matrices for a more detailed data analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.8
Re-arrangement process to reduce the dimensionality of extracted
features from 3 dimensions to 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.9
Overlapping areas between distinct intra-class (Hamming) dis-
tance vectors. The bigger the intersection area, the more similar
the two underlying classes are and vice versa. Overlapping areas
are highlighted in green. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.10 Similarity matrix consisting of correlations between all possible
pairs of distinct classes in 3D and 2D (bird perspective) with a
threshold equal to 70% applied in order to depict most alike pairs. 60
5.11 Graph Theory applied to class reduction.
Node labels in all
graphs are representing individual class indices which can be
looked up in Table 2.2 and Figure 2.7 to identify the correspond-
ing label and visual representation, respectively. In (d) and (e)
each class is represented as a randomly drawn subset of three
training patches belonging to it. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.12 Performed boundary reﬁnement based on an explicit example.
It is crucial to note that the yellow colour occurring in images
2−4 (Matlab numbering convention) does not describe the same
thing. In the ﬁrst and last case it represents the predicted class
index, in the second one it corresponds to the binary value 1
whereas in the third one (for better emphasis) it is equal to −1,
i.e. meaning the pixel is unclassiﬁed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:110==
98
LIST OF FIGURES
5.13 Proposed pipeline to Boundary Reﬁnement
. . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.14 Performed boundary reﬁnement based on an explicit example in
which one advantage of the implemented inpainting algorithm be-
comes apparent, namely that is eﬀectively eliminates incorrectly
masked pixels which are not part of the food object but further
away from it as background. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.1
Technical details about the hardware used during network train-
ing and testing phase. Source: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=2129
67
6.2
A randomly selected example image from the UNIMIB2016 dataset
visualizing the corresponding shipped ground truth annotations
of the objects’ boundaries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.3
Training progress of the ﬁrst, unsuccessful, attempt of ﬁne-tuning
all existing weights in the DeepLab model. Despite approximately
15h of training, the network’s performance only improves at a
very slow pace. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.4
Overall training progress of the second, successful, attempt to
successfully ﬁne-tune/train the DeepLab network weights. The
training pipeline is divided into two separate stages, utilizing the
proposed binary setup prior to the actual multi-class case. . . . .
77
6.5
Summary of the overall training progress of ﬁne-tuning the VGG-
16 model to adapt it to the given problem.
Successful weight
optimization was achieved by means of a single training run con-
sisting of 40 epochs à 3 minutes in total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.6
Performance of all presented network models on the unseen test
set. Results of cells in grey are not applicable and therefore left
blank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.7
General class recognition capabilities / accuracies of all classes
contained solely in category "good". The top performing ones are
highlighted with green background color along with the better
performing prediction patch within each class with bold font weight. 83
==PAGE:111==
LIST OF FIGURES
99
6.8
Top 6 performing classes in terms of general class recognition
capability, represented by the best sample out of two in total,
respectively. The respective segmentation accuracy expressed as
IoU and IoPred are given in the corresponding subtitles. The
samples are sorted with respect to class recognition accuracy in
descending order, row-wise from left to right starting in the upper
left corner. Blue text boxes below some of the predictions contain
information about percentages of the top 3 wrongly identiﬁed
classes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.9
6 examples of test samples with very low general recognition ca-
pability. The respective segmentation accuracy expressed as IoU
and IoPred are given in the corresponding subtitles. Blue text
boxes below some of the predictions contain information about
percentages of the top 3 wrongly identiﬁed classes. . . . . . . . .
85
6.10 Segmentation results of the ﬁnal DeepLab model in its multi-class
setup based on images showing best general recognition capabil-
ity per class given in the table in Figure 6.7, expressed by means
of IoU and IoPred before and after the boundary reﬁnement step
was applied. Font colors green and red in the last two columns de-
scribe whether this step has led to certain segmentation accuracy
improvement or not, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.11 Top 3 predicted classes before and after boundary reﬁnement
in terms of segmentation accuracy. All subﬁgures visualize the
boundary reﬁnement pipeline with respect to the given image patch. 88
6.12 Boundary Reﬁnement: Two cases presenting the advantage and
disadvantage of the automatically generated binary mask. . . . .
89
7.1
Distribution of Training Patches with respect to individual Classes.
In a perfect scenario all 2255 patches would be distributed evenly
over all classes, i.e. around 35 per class. Even after an upper and
a lower tolerance margin of 25% is added, only 17 of 65 classes
are actually falling in this range depicted with blue color in the
bar chart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
==PAGE:112==
100
LIST OF FIGURES
==PAGE:113==
List of Tables
2.1
Potential Dataset Candidates taken from the table in Figure 2.5
in chronological order of release . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
A list of all classes with the corresponding food labels in the
dataset. Due to the fact that the dataset was created by a re-
search team from Italy all labels are in Italian.
. . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1
Principal Component Analysis: An overview of absolute variance
explained by each of the components ordered with respect to
decreasing importance, i.e. the ﬁrst/last one is the most/least
expressive one.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:114==
102
LIST OF TABLES
==PAGE:115==
Listings
5.1
VGG-16 network model architecture implemented in Keras with
Tensorﬂow backend (Python) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
DeepLab network model architecture implemented in Keras with
Tensorﬂow backend (Python) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Hierarchical Clustering conducted in Matlab based on Features
extracted from VGG-16 network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Implementation of techniques from Graph Theory in Matlab to
reduce the overall number of classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.5
Encapsulation of all essential steps performed to accomplish class
reduction based on Graph Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.1
Dataset pre-processing function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Model Compilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.3
Actual Network Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.4
Custom implementations of the two accuracy metrics IoU and
IoPred written in Matlab. Mean values are computed over the
entire set of prediction-ground truth pairs. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:116==
104
LISTINGS
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[AL18]
Felix Altenberger and Claus Lenz. A non-technical survey on
deep convolutional neural network architectures. page 17, 2018.
[AMFM11]
Pablo Arbeláez, Michael Maire, Charless Fowlkes, and Jiten-
dra Malik. Contour detection and hierarchical image segmen-
tation. Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence, 33(5):5557884, 898–916, 2011.
[ARBR17]
Eduardo Aguilar, Beatriz Remeseiro, Marc Bolaños, and Petia
Radeva. Grab, pay and eat: Semantic food detection for smart
restaurants. 2017.
[Ave18]
Michael
Avendi.
randomai:
Playing
with
loss
func-
tions in deep learning.
https://medium.com/randomai/
playing-with-loss-functions-in-deep-learning-26faf29c85f,
5 2018. Accessed: 2019-07-16.
[BGVG14]
Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-
101 - mining discriminative components with random forests.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfor-
matics), 8694(6):446–461, 2014.
[BJM+15]
Oscar Beijbom, Neel Joshi, Dan Morris, Scott Saponas, and
Siddharth Khullar. Menu-match: Restaurant-speciﬁc food log-
ging from images. Proceedings - 2015 Ieee Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision, Wacv 2015, pages 7045971,
844–851, 2015.
==PAGE:118==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Chl18]
Grzegorz Chlebus. Grzegorz chlebus blog: Loss functions for
semantic segmentation. https://gchlebus.github.io/2018/
02/18/semantic-segmentation-loss-functions.html,
2
2018. Accessed: 2019-07-16.
[CMM+11]
Dan C. Cireşan, Ueli Meier, Jonathan Masci, Luca M. Gam-
bardella, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Flexible, high performance
convolutional neural networks for image classiﬁcation. Ijcai In-
ternational Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages
1237–1242, 2011.
[CN16]
Jingjing Chen and Chong Wah Ngo.
Deep-based ingredient
recognition for cooking recipe retrieval. Mm 2016 - Proceedings
of the 2016 Acm Multimedia Conference, pages 32–41, 2016.
[CNS17a]
Gianluigi Ciocca, Paolo Napoletano, and Raimondo Schettini.
Food recognition: a new dataset, experiments and results. IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 2017.
[CNS17b]
Gianluigi Ciocca, Paolo Napoletano, and Raimondo Schettini.
Learning cnn-based features for retrieval of food images. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
10590:426–434, 2017.
[CPK+16]
Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos,
Kevin Murphy, and Alan L. Yuille. Semantic image segmen-
tation with deep convolutional nets and fully connected crfs.
page 14, 2016.
[DM01]
Yining Deng and B. S. Manjunath. Unsupervised segmentation
of color-texture regions in images and video. Ieee Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 23(8):800–810,
2001.
[DP11]
David H. Douglas and Thomas K. Peucker. Algorithms for the
reduction of the number of points required to represent a digi-
tized line or its caricature. Classics in Cartography: Reﬂections
on Inﬂuential Articles From Cartographica, pages 15–28, 2011.
[EF15]
David Eigen and Rob Fergus. Predicting depth, surface normals
and semantic labels with a common multi-scale convolutional
architecture. 2015.
[EVGKIW+10] Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn,
and Andrew Zisserman. The pascal visual object classes (voc)
challenge. 2010.
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[FAM+16]
Giovanni Maria Farinella, Dario Allegra, Marco Moltisanti, Fil-
ippo Stanco, and Sebastiano Battiato. Retrieval and classiﬁ-
cation of food images.
Computers in Biology and Medicine,
77:23–39, 2016.
[FAS15]
Giovanni Maria Farinella, Dario Allegra, and Filippo Stanco. A
benchmark dataset to study the representation of food images.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinfor-
matics), 8927:584–599, 2015.
[FFBGMR10]
Pedro F. Felzenszwalb, Ross B. Girshick, David McAllester, and
Deva Ramanan. Object detection with discriminatively trained
part based models. 2010.
[GBB11]
Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio.
Deep
sparse rectiﬁer neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 15:315–323, 2011.
[Gó18]
Raúl Gómez.
Raúl gómez blog: Playing with loss functions
in deep learning.
https://gombru.github.io/2018/05/23/
cross_entropy_loss/, 5 2018. Accessed: 2019-07-16.
[Hab10]
Nadim Haboubi. Assessment and management of nutrition in
older people and its importance to health. Clinical Interventions
in Aging, page 207, 2010.
[HGDG17]
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick.
Mask r-cnn. Proceedings of the Ieee International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2017-:8237584, 2980–2988, 2017.
[JB09]
Christopher J.C. Burges. A tutorial on support vector machines
for pattern recognition. 2009.
[JDV+17]
Simon Jégou,
Michal Drozdzal,
David Vazquez,
Adriana
Romero, and Yoshua Bengio. The one hundred layers tiramisu:
Fully convolutional densenets for semantic segmentation. 2017.
[JF91]
AK JAIN and F FARROKHNIA. Unsupervised texture seg-
mentation using gabor ﬁlters. Pattern Recognition, 24(12):1167–
1186, 1991.
[JSD+14]
Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, JeﬀDonahue, Sergey Karayev,
Jonathan Long, Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor
Darrell.
Caﬀe.
Proceedings of the Acm International Con-
ference, pages 675–678, 2014.
Webpage:
http://caffe.
berkeleyvision.org/, accessed: 2019-07-29.
==PAGE:120==
108
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[JY09]
Taichi Joutou and Keiji Yanai. A food image recognition sys-
tem with multiple kernel learning. 2009 16th Ieee International
Conference on Image Processing, Vols 1-6, pages 285–288, 2009.
[Kha09]
Sunil K. Khanna. Food and culture: A reader (2nd ed.), by
carole counihanand penny van esterik.
Ecology of Food and
Nutrition, 48(2):157–159, 2009.
[KSH12]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E. Hinton. Im-
agenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2:1097–
1105, 2012.
[KVKW+16]
Hinke Kruizenga, Suzanne Van Keeken, Peter Weijs, Luc
Bastiaanse, Sandra Beijer, Getty Huisman-De Waal, Harriët
Jager-Wittenaar, Cora Jonkers-Schuitema, Mariël Klos, Wineke
Remijnse-Meester, Ben Witteman, and Abel Thijs. Undernu-
trition screening survey in 564,063 patients: Patients with a
positive undernutrition screening score stay in hospital 1.4 d
longer. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 103(4):1026–
1032, 2016.
[KY15]
Yoshiyuki Kawano and Keiji Yanai. Automatic expansion of a
food image dataset leveraging existing categories with domain
adaptation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Sub-
series Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes
in Bioinformatics), 8927:3–17, 2015.
[LCBOC+11]
Su Lim, Kian Chung Benjamin Ong, Yiong Chan, Wai Chiong
Loke, Maree Ferguson, and Lynne Daniels. Malnutrition and
its impact on cost of hospitalization, length of stay, readmission
and 3-year mortality. Clinical nutrition (Edinburgh, Scotland),
31:345–50, 11 2011.
[LLC]
Google LLC. Google maps platform: Places. https://cloud.
google.com/maps-platform/places/. Accessed: 2019-08-04.
[Mal99]
Stephane Mallat. A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing. 1999.
[MJL+19]
Weiqing Min, Shuqiang Jiang, Linhu Liu, Yong Rui, and
Ramesh Jain. A survey on food computing. 2019.
[MJR+15]
Austin Myers, Nick Johnston, Vivek Rathod, Anoop Korat-
tikara, Alex Gorban, Nathan Silberman, Sergio Guadarrama,
George Papandreou, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy.
Im2calories: Towards an automated mobile vision food diary.
Proceedings of the Ieee International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2015:7410503, 1233–1241, 2015.
==PAGE:121==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
109
[RDGF16]
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali
Farhadi.
You only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object de-
tection. Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016-:779–788,
2016.
[RDS+14]
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev
Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Michael
Bernstein, Li Fei-Fei, Alexander C. Berg, and Aditya Khosla.
Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. 2014.
[RZL17]
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching
for activation functions. 2017.
[SH87]
Stephen K. Sanderson and Marvin Harris. Good to eat: Riddles
of food and culture. Contemporary Sociology, 16(3):400, 1987.
[SHK+14]
Nitish Srivastava, Geoﬀrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A simple way
to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 15:1929–1958, 2014.
[SLJ+15]
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet,
Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Van-
houcke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolu-
tions. Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 07-12-:7298594, 1–9,
2015.
[SM08]
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik.
Normalized cuts and image
segmentation. 2008.
[SZ15]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolu-
tional networks for large-scale image recognition. 2015.
[YK16]
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation
by dilated convolutions. 2016.
[ZBS+11]
Fengqing Zhu, Marc Bosch, Tusa Rebecca Schap, Nitin Khanna,
David S. Ebert, Carol J. Boushey, and Edward J. Delp. Seg-
mentation assisted food classiﬁcation for dietary assessment.
Proceedings of Spie - the International Society for Optical En-
gineering, 7873(1):78730B, 2011.
