==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Monitoring the well-being of horses
A hardware- & software-infrastructure for tracking
horses and their daily care
Anne-Katrine Thisted Binder
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis I will provide a suggested architecture and prototype of a management
system for large equestrian stable, that enables them to monitor the well-being fo
their horses.
This is done to improve the customers’ trust in the stable and the
management’s trust in the stable personnel.
A detailed analysis of the requirements has been made based on the problem
description and the domain analysis.
Based on this requirement analysis, it has
been decided that the best solution is to use RFID tracking of the horses, with
sensors distributed at tactical positions across the premises.
A sensor network is
responsible for transmitting the data between the sensors towards a hub, responsible
for transmitting the data to a cloud service.
The users of the system can view the data through a user interface developed
in this thesis. This user interface allows the user to view the details on the horses,
stables, arenas, paddocks and RFID readings.
In the end an evaluation has been made which concludes, that there either have to
made some changes to the the way the RFID chips are tracked, or some improvements
to the sensors’ ability to correctly detect the chips.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, August 16, 2019
Anne-Katrine Thisted Binder
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition and solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Domain Analysis
5
2.1
Knowledge about the domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Customers and users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
The Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Competing Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Requirement Analysis
15
3.1
Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
MoSCoW Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Domain Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Domain challenges and their solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Design
27
4.1
System Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Front-end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Realization
37
5.1
Selection and discussion of Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Languages and software for the hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Implementation
45
6.1
Hardware applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Caballo Manager dashboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Remote server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.4
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
7
Caballo Manager Dashboard
57
8
Evaluation of the Project
61
8.1
Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2
Evaluation of the methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9
Conclusion
63
A Detailed use case descriptions
65
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The equestrian industry in Denmark is based on manual labour. Information on the
horses’ daily routines and future activities is mainly kept on whiteboards. Sometimes
it might be written down in a notebook, and occasionally nothing is documented at
all except for the bills on food, farrier and veterinarian visits. The biggest professional
stables in Denmark, holding hundreds of horses at any time of the year, sees this as
a growing problem. The lack of documentation makes it hard for the management
to maintain a good overview of the work done on the premises. Furthermore the
management wants to be able to provide documentation to customers about when
and for how long their horses are ridden, in the paddock, seen to by a farrier or a vet
and similar activities.
Caballo Manager is a prototype of my suggested solution to this problem. This
system allows the stables to keep a structured overview of the horses and receive
automatic data on where the horses are and for how long. This positioning data
allows the user to see how many hours the horse has been in training arenas, in
transit between buildings, in the paddock, in the stables, etc.
Caballo Manager consists of a user interface and a hardware setup. The hardware
is a network of sensors. The sensors are positioned at strategically selected places
around the premises so that all entries to all areas (arenas, paddocks stables, etc)
are covered. All horses are equipped with a chip that can be read by the sensors.
Whenever a horse passes a sensor, information about this event is sent to a server for
storage. The user is able to view this information via the user interface in the form of
a webapplication. The webapplication displays the whereabouts of the horses to the
users. This allows the management to view previous and ongoing activities around
the premises from any computer, tablet or smartphone.
My solution allows the management to maintain documentation on the where-
abouts of the horses. This can deepen their understanding of whether the horses
are handled correctly and help maintain a streamlined work environment across the
company.
The information is automatically collected which increases the stable’s credibility in
the eyes of the customers. Automatically collected data makes it easier for the man-
agement to get an overview of what has happened on the premises, whilst being away
to different event.
In this thesis relevant tracking technologies will be highlighted and an approach
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
will be chosen based on a list of requirements from the users (stable management).
Existing solutions to similar problems will be discussed in the analysis section as
well as their limitations. A prototype is built consisting of 3 parts: hardware, front-
end and server. The hardware consists of a sensor network that detects the horse’
whereabouts and transmits the data to a hub.
A specific type of communication
protocol and transmission modules will be determined based on accessibility and
range. Furthermore it has to be implementable with the rest of the hardware. The
hub will connect to the server where the data will be analyzed and stored in a database
along with any static data that comes from the user through the front-end. The front-
end will consists of minimalistic management system which allows for visualization
of the data for the user. The front-end - called Caballo Manager dashboard - will be
web-based.
1.1
Problem definition and solution
Due to the large amount of horses in large professional stables in Denmark, it is
necessary to have an easy way to document their whereabouts and handling that
can be shared and accessed by any relevant party in the company. The management
requires an overview of the stable purely for the purpose of verifying event with the
horses and being able to document it to their customers. Today what is done with
and planned for the individual horse is written down on whiteboards in codes that
only the few people handling the horse knows. This creates an unwanted gap between
the management and the handlers. The management has no overview of the previous
work, current status and upcoming plans of all the horses. All information is given
orally or in text when requested, which is an unreliable solution as some information
might get lost in the process due to misunderstandings or details left out.
In order for this problem to be solved, two main goals have been defined based on
the problem definition. These goals aims to clarify the needs of the system in a more
direct manner.
• It should be possible to track the whereabouts of the horses.
The tracking
doesn’t have to be live, but should be updated at least every 10 minutes to
ensure that the current data is a close representation of what is currently hap-
pening in the world.
• A user-interface should be provided.
Here basic information as well as the
tracked data should be accessible. Furthermore it should be possible to add
some data to the system through the front-end.
The first goal is achieved by using a combination of IoT (Internet of Things) and
RFID (Radio-frequency Identification) technologies. A sensor network with an RFID
sensor on each node allows the system to detect whenever a horses passes by. By
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Methodology
3
transmitting this data to a server for storage and processing, it can later be displayed
to the user if requested.
The second goal is achieved by developing a webapplication. This will allow for
easy access to the system for all parties. Instead of a whiteboard, a computer, tablet
or a simple smartphone can be positioned in the stable to allow the handlers to
document everything directly into the system that is not automatically detected by
the sensors. This can be farrier or vet visits, health status, training status and more.
Besides solving those goals, some criterias have been defined based on the feedback
from a large equestrian stable in Denmark - Helgstrand Dressage.
• The tracking must be low maintenance. This means it should be easy to attach
the chips to the horses, and it should require very little or no maintenance to
keep them there.
• Reliable results. The goal is to achieve a better overview of the stables and an
increase in trust from the customers. To achieve this, misreadings should be
kept to a minimum and it should be close to impossible for a horse to be missed
by a sensor when it’s not supposed to. In both events it should be possible for
personnel to fill in the gaps in the information.
• The horses must not be harmed by any part of the system.
• Any device that must be attached to the horse should be small and preferably
completely concealed.
For this prototype it is not required to be easily set up. It is expected that an
installation of the hardware will be done by or with great help from the provider
(me). Furthermore, it is out of scope to evaluate the lifetime and maintenance of the
sensors. As this is only a proof-of-concept prototype many of the modules might be
changed for smaller, faster or less maintainable units in a final solution. Therefore, it
would be pointless to estimate lifetime and maintenance requirements for the current
system.
1.2
Methodology
The data collection for this thesis has been done through interviews with current
actors in the professional stable domain.
A survey was carried out and the data
was collected and used to obtain information of the domain and the requirements
for the system. The survey was built as a multiple choice with a single comment
question regarding what functionalities the user most needed in such a system as
Caballo Manager. The survey was anonymous, but contained information on their
work position in the stable.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
This data was held up against my own knowledge of the domain as well as the
specific request from the management, that assigned me with the task of building
this project. This way the requirements were established and categorized on their
relevance.
Existing solutions and knowledge is considered and related technologies will be
applied for the artefacts produced by this system as well.
Caballo Manager is a
prototype that is made to showcase the proposed architecture.
The produced artefacts for Caballo Manager are based on the requirements stated in
the Chapter 3 section and consists of a dashboard, remote server and hardware setup.
The artefacts’ intended use are in large professional stables with at least 50 horses at
any time of the year.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Domain Analysis
This chapter analyzes the domain in which the system is to be used. It describes
the domain and its current workflow, what this project strives to solve in the current
solution, which competing technologies there exist and why this solution sets itself
apart from those.
As I am deeply engaged in the world of horse riding a lot of the knowledge and
information stems from personal experience. However as I haven’t worked in a profes-
sional stable I have sought the expertise and experience from people who are working
there. I have cooperated with Helgstrand Dressage to obtain a proper foundation for
the domain analysis. 1
Throughout this chapter many domain specific terms will be used. A description
can be found in the margin at the first appearing of such words and following this
chapter a domain-specific glossary can be found.
2.1
Knowledge about the domain
In the professional sales and training stables domain each horse has an assigned groom
and rider who handles their daily care and training. Whether the horse is to be sold
or to be trained its everyday life is much the same, however, foals, colts and fillies are
not to be trained before age 3 at the earliest. A horse needs time in paddocks and, if
in training, it has to be groomed and ridden. When necessary it has to be attended
to by a farrier and a veterinarian. If any documentation on the everyday work on the
horses is provided, it is done so by the groom and the rider. Most of the time the
details of the work done are never provided to the management of the stables and
therefore the customers. Currently if things are documented it is done so over text
messages, notebooks or on whiteboards. All of those methods of documentation lacks
structural overview and are prone to human errors and loss of data. 2
1Helgstrand Dressage, is run by Andreas Helgstrand and is located in the northern part of
Jutland. It is one of the largest training stables in Denmark with over 350 horses on premises at any
given time of the year.
2The management refers to all chief positions, well as anyone in a position that would require
for them to have an overview of the situation in the stables. This includes, but is not limited to
Head of Operations, General Manager and Stable Manager.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Domain Analysis
The stables want to provide documentation that should cover the following areas:
Paddock The amount of time each horse spends in the paddock every day.
Training Details on the training sessions with the horse. This covers time spent and
details on what kind of exercises were done (jumping, longing, dressage, etc.).
Farrier & Veterinarian When the horse is seen to by a farrier or a vet and what
is done during the visit.
These three areas of documentation are relevant for different reasons. The time
the horse spends in the paddock is of high relevance to the owner. According to
Article 17 in the Law on Keeping Horses3 horses must be exercised or have access to
a paddock at least 2 hours 5 days a week.[2] Documentation on paddock times will
show the customer, that the stables comply to the law. Furthermore, the customer
might have an agreement on the amount of time in the paddock the horse should
have, and the documentation will function as a way for the customer to check the
agreement is upheld.
The documentation on the training details will help ensure the horse is trained as
planned both in regards to time and type of exercise. There may be training schedules
to be upheld in order for the horse to be at a certain level at specific times. In this
thesis only the first part of the training details will be included in the requirements.
This means that the system will be able to detect the time spent on training, but not
details on what is being done with the horse during that time. This choice was made
as it is out of scope considering the time allotted for this thesis.
Documentation on vet and farrier visits are important to keep track of in order
to ensure the hooves and the health of the horse is maintained. Horses in Denmark
must be given a flu shot once a year if they are to take part in any competitions.
They must also be attended to by a farrier every 6-10 week depending on the horse
and how much it’s ridden.
Some documentation on the farrier and vet visits is already provided. The bills for
their services provide documentation on how often the horse is attended to and what
is done. However, it is requested for this documentation to be part of a full stable
management system as well, as it is relevant to the horse owner and to the overview of
each individual horse. For this thesis this will not be included, but it will be discussed
how the system could be further developed to include this feature. Furthermore, the
database diagram presented in Chapter 4.
3Danish title Lov om hold af heste
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Customers and users
7
2.2
Customers and users
In this domain the ones to buy the system will be the management of the stables.
The users of the system will be the management, grooms, riders and customers. 4 In
the following it is described how each user role can utilize the system. Not all of the
following features will be included in the prototype, however, they will be discussed
as possible future work. Furthermore, the database structure for supporting such
features can be seen in the full database schema in Chapter 4.
Management gains a collected overview of the daily routines of the horses. This
will enable them to analyze the data and possibly improve productivity in the stables
or address problems. It is possible for them to verify the whereabouts of the horses
after having been off premises for days. This will give the management a way of
monitoring that everything went on as planned on premises while they were away.
Furthermore, they will be able to check up on the routines back home whilst being
away. The management leaves the premises for the big competitions and shows to
improve their brand.
Grooms and riders use the system to input data about the horses and their where-
abouts. This can be data that the system isn’t built to detect like feeding plans,
details about a vet visit or illness notice. However, they may also use the system to
correct faulty or lacking sensor data. The groom can also input information about
upcoming competitions, shows and training sessions. Many of those scenarios are not
part of the use cases for this thesis, however, they are relevant to an full potential
system. Inputting this information in a management system will make it possible to
track historical data and make the information on each horse very transparent.
Customers will use the system as documentation of what is happening to their
horse. In this thesis the term customer refers to the owner of the horse. There are
other customers, however, for the sake of simplicity it is always assumed to be the
owner in this thesis. The use cases for all types of customers are very similar to each
other, which is why no distinction is made between them here.
By being able to view the tracked data of their horse the customer may gain increased
trust in the stable.
2.3
The Environment
The areas and the equipment of the equestrian stables are important variables in
the analysis of this system. They will define where to position sensors around the
4A groom is responsible for the everyday care of the horse such as brushing, feeding, mucking
out stalls, administering basic first aid, ensuring the horse sees a farrier or a vet, etc. A rider trains
the horse and rides it in competition or shows if needed.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Domain Analysis
premises in order to cover all areas and where and how to attach the chips to the
horses. Following this, are descriptions of areas and equipment in stables. It is limited
to relevant subjects which will have an impact on the understanding of the system
design and implementation choices later on.
2.3.1
Areas
Horses in an equestrian stable generally fare in five areas - paddocks, stables, treat-
ment, arenas and transit. Furthermore a horse can be taken off-premises for multiple
purposes.
Paddocks are fields and enclosures where the horse is kept when not handled or in
their stall. Paddocks allow the horse to build muscle, strengthen tendons and fulfill
their natural instincts of running, grazing and interacting with other horses. It varies
greatly from stable to stable, how many hours a day the horses are in the paddocks.
When in them horses often wear halters, depending on the weather they might wear
rugs and sometimes they wear leg protection such as bell boots. 5
The stable is where the horse have its stall, and where grooming and treatment of
the horse is handled. Treatments can be massage, chiropractor and similar things.
Furthermore, it is also in the stable that the farrier and vet attends to the horse. In
large equestrian stables there are often multiple disconnected stables. Some stables
contains what is called loose housing. Those are special stables with no stalls. Multi-
ple horses live together in a big indoor area with bedding equal to that in stalls. The
stable is directly connected to paddocks through a large open gate, which is some-
times covered by plastic curtains to shield the horses from the weather whilst enabling
them to pass through freely. Loose housing enables the horse to freely choose when
it wants to be indoor and outdoor and is seen by some as a more natural way to keep
horses. In many places foals, colts and fillies are kept in loose housing along with
mares meant for breeding. This is often the case as it’s a cheaper and easier way of
keeping horses that doesn’t require daily handling such as training.
A stall is the home of the horse when not kept in loose housing. Each horse has
a designated stall in one of the stables and this is where it spends most of its time.
There is made no distinction between when the horse in the stable in general and
when it’s in the stall. Therefore there is no separate area defined as stall. However,
as this is where the horse is when it’s not in the paddocks or being handled it is a
big part of the horse’s life and therefore needed mentioning here.
5A halter is headgear used to lead horses. A rope may be easily attached to the halter in order
to tie it up.
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Competing Software
9
Treatment is an area inside the stable that is surveilled by sensors. This area is
where the horse is during farrier, veterinarian and other treatment visits. It is also
where the horse is washed down and sometimes groomed.
Arenas are where the horses are trained. The only other place training may occur
is in the terrain which is either off-premises or in large dedicated areas.
Transit are the areas on the premises that are mainly used to transport the horse
from one area to another. An example is the path from the stables to the paddock.
Off-premises are all areas that are not part of the professional stable. A horse may
go off-premises for shows, competitions, vet checks or because they are being sold or
sent home.
2.3.2
Equipment
A lot of equipment is used to care for horses on a daily basis. However, here the
focus will be on equipment that is related to the system implemented in this project.
The equipment is important as there will be a need to attach the chips to the horse.
This will be discussed later, but for that purpose it is important to have a basic
understanding of what the equipment is used for. A description of terms specific to
horse riding can be found in the domain-specific glossary which can be found after
this chapter.
Horse tack includes all equipment worn by horses in their use as domesticated
animals. This includes, but is not limited to, saddles, bridles and halters. Those
three are the only ones I will be referring to later in this project. This equipment is
used to guide and ride the horse every day and therefore is a vital part of the horse’s
routines.
Horse shoes are worn by horses if required. Most horses in training wear shoes on
all four legs as the wear from daily training is too much compared to how much the
hoof grows. The shoes protect the hooves from wear and tear, but must be changed
on a regular basis and the hooves filed down so they don’t overgrow. Regardless of
whether the horse wears shoes or not it must be attended to by a farrier on a regular
basis. If left unattended it may be damaging not just to the hoof, but to the horse’s
muscles and tendons as they may be strained from not walking properly.
2.4
Competing Software
Currently no full solution exists that can track the daily whereabouts of the horses
and provides a user-interface that functions as a management system as well. How-
ever management systems for equestrian stables and livestock tracking system exists
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Domain Analysis
separately. In this section, existing solutions within both fields will be discussed, and
it will be clarified how this system differentiate itself from them.
2.4.1
Tracking systems
Multiple horse tracking systems already exists. Two examples are Minifinder and
Trackener Life. Minifinder is a GPS transmitter that is attached to the horse and
allows the user to know exactly where the horse is. Trackener Life is a health tracking
system that provides a live feed of the horse’s health no matter where you are.
However, they both have the same draw-back, they are battery-driven and have
a high cost per unit. The batteries must be recharged and according to the second
criteria of the problem definition, the system must be low maintenance. Changing
the batteries every other day on 100+ horses is high maintenance. Furthermore there
would have to be spare batteries for all horses in order to maintain a high up-time.
Also it must be considered that faulty devices will occur occasionally.
When looking at livestock solutions for other animals it is closer to our criterias.
Many farmers today use RFID chips on their livestock to easily track them. Their
tags are most often fastened to their ears and a variety of systems can read those tags.
All tags are individual as long as they follow the same ISO standard. An example of
their use is milking stations for cattle. When a cow enters a milking station its tag is
scanned and the data from the milking process is saved and cross-referenced to the
cow’s ID.
The drawbacks to applying the livestock solution to equestrian stable management
systems is the fact that no harm must come to any of the horses. This makes the ear
tag solution non-applicable for this system. The readers would have to be positioned
differently, and the data that must be collected differs as the equestrian solution
would need less data.
However, if the RFID tags could be applied to the horse without doing any harm
to it, this could be a possible solution. This is also the solution I’ve decided to go
with. The chips are very low maintenance, the readings are reliable and the technology
has been applied to multiple industries already. Furthermore the chips themselves
are small and can be concealed in the items that the horse is handled with on an
everyday basis.
2.4.2
Management systems
There exist several management systems specifically developed for equestrian stables.
However, for this project a prototype have been developed that supports the bare
minimum of managing features required as well as the capability to visualize the sensor
data. This has been done for the sake of simplicity. Existing management systems
don’t have features that support data on the different areas on the premises (paddocks,
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Competing Software
11
stables, arenas, etc), and they don’t have the features to support visualization of the
sensor data. Those are the two main features of the user interface that is required
for this system. Therefore a prototype of a new system has been made.
However, for future development it should be considered if a partnership with an
existing actor on the market would be beneficial.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Domain Analysis
==PAGE:21==
Domain-specific
Glossary
groom A groom is responsible for the everyday care of the horse such as brushing,
feeding, mucking out stalls, administering basic first aid, ensuring the horse sees
a farrier or a vet, etc. 5, 7
halter Headgear used to lead or tie up horses. 8
Helgstrand Dressage One of the biggest professional sales and training stables in
Denmark with departments in Germany and USA as well. The danish depart-
ment is located in the northern part of Jutland. 3, 5, 17
management The management of a stable consists of the ones responsible for the
current status in the stables. This often includes, but is not limited to, the
CEO, Managers and Head of Operations. 7
rider A rider trains the horse and rides it in competition or shows if needed. 5, 7
==PAGE:22==
14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Requirement Analysis
Requirement elicitation was done by combining my previous knowledge of equestrian
stables with the goals and criterias set forth by the management at Helgstrand Dres-
sage. To summarize:
• The system must be able to automatically track the whereabouts of the horses
– The tracking must be low maintenance
– The tracking should be reliable
– The horses must not be harmed
– Device, attached to the horse, should be small/concealed
• A user-interface should be provided, through which the user can interact with
the system and view the collected data on the horses
Beyond my own knowledge and the goals set forth by the management, I was
given tours around the premises and introduced to their work routines and methods.
During those tours I was able to gather a lot of intel on what the different roles
would require from a combined management and tracking system.
Based on this
information, multiple use cases were created and from those, a list of features were
derived. Those features have bene prioritized using the MoSCoW method. 1
3.1
Functional Requirements
In Figure 3.2 and Table 3.1 the requirements for the system are visualized in a use
case diagram and a functional requirement table.
There are three access levels in this domain: Customer, Handler & Admin. The
customer is the owner of the horse, the handler is either the groom or the rider and
the admin is anyone working in the management of the stables. In this prototype,
access levels and roles are not implemented, however, they are presented in the use
1The MoSCoW method is a prioritization technique used by developers to reach a common
understanding with the customers (here: stables) on the importance of each feature in a delivery.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Requirement Analysis
case diagram, included in the detailed use case descriptions and are relevant to the
development of the system. The distribution of permissions on each access level can
be seen in Figure 3.1. The handler has permission to all customer actions, and the
admin has permission to all handler and customer actions. Each action represents a
use case and they can all be seen in the use case diagram.
Figure 3.1: An overview of the access levels and what permissions each level have.
Figure 3.2 contains the use case diagram. Some use cases have been merged to
conserve space, e.g.Add/edit stable, but each use case has its own detailed use case
description.
Login, logout and register user is quite self-explanatory use cases. The user needs
a way to access the webapplication and to avoid anybody having unlimited access to
everything, each user must be identified. Once a user logs out of the system he has
no access to any of the user-interface except for the login page.
Aside from those use cases the customer should also have access to readings and
information on his horses. In order for the readings to make sense, the area informa-
tion must be available to him as well. This means he must have access to view the
paddocks, stables and arenas, however, he is not required to view readings on other
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Functional Requirements
17
Figure 3.2: Use case diagram
peoples horses. Therefore, the readings he is allowed to see is limited to the ones on
his horse(s).
The handler should be able to input information regarding the welfare and where-
abouts of the horses. The handler has access to all horses, and he is able to edit
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Requirement Analysis
their information and add and remove chip IDs mapped to their ID. By editing they
are also able to delete the horses from the system all together. Furthermore, the
handler is able to view existing readings, add missing readings and remove incorrect
ones. This functionality is required in order to make it possible for the stables to
correct possibly incorrect readings. However, it also has the drawback of making the
system less trustworthy, as the values can be manipulated. In order to make up for
this drawback, history is kept on all readings. If a reading is removed, it will still be
visible, however it will be apparent, that it has been ”removed” by the a user. The
reading will no longer be counted along in any statistics either. On a technical level,
this is done by flagging the reading as deleted in the database.
The admin is able to add and edit arenas, stables and paddocks. This is informa-
tion that should rarely be changed after being registered at the initial setup of the
hardware. Aside from that the admin should be able to edit the sensor details such
as visible names of the sensor, which area it belongs to and similar. The admin is not
able to modify anything on the physical sensor.
In Table 3.1 the functional requirements can be seen. Each functional requirement
has an ID and one or more use case ID’s that identifies the use case descriptions
that covers this functional requirement. The use case descriptions can be found in
Appendix A, however, as an example the use case description for User login can also
be found in Table 3.2.
Aside from the identification columns in Table 3.1, there is also a short description of
the requirement, a MoSCoW column showing the result of the analysis performed in
the following section, and a status column stating whether the requirement has been
implemented or not.
The description states the lowest access level the action can be performed on,
e.g.login and logout is described as being done by the customer. This means that
any user with an access level of at least a customer can perform that action. In this
example it means that both the handler and the admin can perform the login and
logout actions as well.
3.2
MoSCoW Analysis
The MoSCoW method is commonly used in software technology and other fields to pri-
oritize product requirements. It divides the requirements into four categories: Must
have, Should have, Could have, Won’t have. Must have’s are requirements
that are required for the core system to function. Should have’s is everything that
should be in the system, but isn’t absolutely necessary. Could have’s are the things
that would be nice to have, but aren’t high on the priority list. Won’t have’s are
requirements that won’t be implemented in this version of the system. It should be
seen as a to-do list for future implementations.
Using the MoSCoW method the functionalities in the system have been derived
==PAGE:27==
3.2 MoSCoW Analysis
19
FR
UC
Description
MSCW
Status
FR1
UC4
A customer can view all information on a horse ex-
cept for chip readings
M
FR2
UC5
A customer can view the chip readings belonging to
their horses
M
FR3
UC15, UC16
A handler can add and remove chip ID’s from horses
in the system
M
FR4
UC9, UC10
A handler can add horses, edit their information and
delete them
M
FR5
UC11
A handler can view all sensors
S
FR6
UC12
A handler can view all chip readings from the sensors
S
FR7
UC17, UC18,
UC19, UC20,
UC21, UC22
An admin can add, edit and remove stables, arenas
and paddocks
S
FR8
UC6, UC7,
UC8
A customer can view all information on the stables,
arenas and paddocks except for sensor readings
S
FR9
UC3
A customer can register a user
C
FR10
UC1, UC2
A customer can log in and out of the system
C
FR11
UC13, UC14
A handler can add and remove chip readings from
the system
C
X
FR12
UC23
An admin can edit the details of sensors in the system
W
X
FR13
UC23
An admin can add additional sensors to the system
W
X
Table 3.1: Functional requirements for the user of the Caballo Manager system.
and listed in the MoSCoW column in table 3.1. The use cases are prioritized based
on the assumption that the initial installation of sensors around the premises is done,
and that almost all changes and maintenance to the hardware will be performed by an
external company. This also explains why no requirements, except for FR13, involves
the user performing any actions with the hardware.
Must have
As the core functionalities of the Caballo manager system, the must haves must cover
enough for the system to be functional and running and allow the users to perform
the most basic tasks.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Requirement Analysis
ID
UC1
Use case
User login
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is on the initial page of the user-
interface.
Main flow
The user clicks login. The user logs in using
any available method. The user is redirected
to the application.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks login. The login fails due to
wrong credentials. The user is returned to the
login screen.
Table 3.2: Detailed use case description of the Login case
The most important aspect of the system is the ability to view the horses whereabouts.
In order to do this, it must be possible to view the chip readings on each horse.
Furthermore, as adding horses is not a part of the initial setup, it must be possible to
add new horses. In order for the system to be able to collect data on them, it must
therefore also be possible to add ID’s to a horse.
Should have
For the user to have a decent experience of the system, the should haves should
be implemented. It is important for the handler and the admin to be able to view
the sensors as well as the readings from all of them. Even though the data on the
individual horse is shown, it may be necessary to see readings from specific sensors
or areas. For a better overview of readings in each area, it is necessary to be able to
view them independently. Therefore, the ability to view stables, arenas and paddocks
should also be made possible here, along with the ability to add, edit and delete them.
Could have
These features are concerned with the security of the system, and the ability to correct
faulty data. The functionality of logging in and out of the web application makes it
possible to only show the content to registered users. This is a priority, but it is not
essential to the functionality of the system, nor is it something that is deemed as high
value to the customer.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Domain Model
21
To be able to add and remove chip readings from the system, is something that is only
needed when the readings contain faulty data, misses a chip reading or if a horses
loses all its chips. Therefore, those requirements are prioritized as could have.
Won’t have
As the initial setup of the system should have made sure all the sensors are in the
system, the ability to add new sensors is not something that will be in scope for this
delivery.
3.3
Domain Model
In Figure 3.3 the domain model for the implementations can be seen. It displays the
model of implementations on the Caballo Manager system that have been successfully
completed.
A minimal amount of data is kept on the horse.
In the domain model for a
full scale management system things such as description, medical history, farrier and
veterinarian vists, family tree, etc. could be stored on the database as well. A domain
model for this full scale system can be seen in the full-domain-model.png file, that
can be found on the USB.
All parts of the system has a deleted, created_at and id field. The id field makes
it possible to distinguish each entry from each other, the deleted field enables us to
track deleted records and the created_at enables us to add a timestamp for all entries.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Requirement Analysis
Figure 3.3: Domain model of the system
3.4
Domain challenges and their solutions
The purpose of this section is to reveal what challenges there might be in this domain.
3.4.1
Domain Challenges
In order to provide a viable solution for managing and automatically monitoring
horses, certain challenges must be overcome. The ideal system overcomes the follow-
ing challenges:
• Automation - Automatic tracking of the horses’ whereabouts on the premises
with no need for interference from users.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Domain challenges and their solutions
23
• Scalability - The system will remain efficient if a significant increase in traffic
and users occurs.
• Flexibility - The software and the hardware could potentially be used sepa-
rately. Furthermore, the hardware could be adjusted to allow it to function
with other front-end systems.
• Security - The data in the system should be securely stored.
Automation
The tracking of the horses should be automated to a degree that requires a minimum
level of interference from personnel. The automation is supposed to replace time that
would be required for the personnel to type in the details of the horses’ day themselves.
Furthermore it is made to increase the trust of the managers and customers of the
company as they can monitor the everyday life of the horses. The automation is
central to the project and is where the Caballo Manager have a chance to gain a
competitive advantage over the competitors.
Importance: High
Scalability
It is essential for the system that it scales well, as it aims purely for the large profes-
sional training and sales stables in Denmark. A large professional stable in Denmark
can be defined by having at least 50 horses at all times throughout the year.
The customer claims that the management systems they have previously tried to
implement could not handle their amount of data. Therefore, this solution must be
able to do so.
Importance: High
Flexibility
The flexibility of the system reflects how well the UI functions without the hardware,
and how well the hardware would function with another UI.
This is important for the sake of acquiring a larger customer base. Some customers
might already use management systems, but wants the automation, where others
might just be interested in the software without the automated tracking.
Importance: Low
Security
Security of personal data is always important. Furthermore it essential to maintain a
high level of security to avoid loss of data and performance. This system doesn’t store
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Requirement Analysis
personal data in the database as all authentication goes through a third-party tool.
However, it is important to secure the data to ensure data integrity and maintaining
the trust of the users.
Importance: Low
3.4.2
Domain Challenges Solution
In this section solutions for the above mentioned problems will be discussed. Some
of the issues have already been addressed in the implementation and the rest is for
future implementations.
3.4.2.1
Automation
The automation issue is handled by ensuring that the horses whereabouts are tracked
automatically. It is necessary for the personnel to attach chip’s to the horse’s tack or
shoes and to check during the daily handling of the horse if some are still attached.
Occassionally, the sensors must be repaired, exchanged or otherwise serviced in order
to ensure a stable system. However, it is not expected for the personnel in the stables
to handle this.
Beyond this the system shouldn’t require much interference from the personnel.
Until the system is fully implemented there might be a higher failure margin on wrong
readings, as the sensistivity of the sensors must be adjusted. However, this is an issue
that will be resolved through testing and optimization in the correct environment.
3.4.2.2
Scalability
Scaling of the system has been thought into all aspects of the project. Throughout
this thesis, whenever a non-scalable solution has been selected it will be explained
why, and scalable alternatives will be suggested. The scalability solutions will not
be discussed in details here, as they are addressed in the design, realization and
implementation chapters.
3.4.2.3
Flexibility
The flexibility of the system represents how easily the hardware might be integrated
with different UI and how well the UI performs as a stand-alone solution.
Currently nothing has been done to improve the situation of either scenario. How-
ever, the front-end can function without the hardware without any issues. The current
state of the UI means that not much will be possible to do with the front-end, but it
is not tied up on requirements of the data from the hardware to be present.
The hardware can function without the UI, but the data cannot be presented to
the user. Furthermore, the system is not optimized for a different UI to connect to
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Domain challenges and their solutions
25
the hardware, nor is the hardware built to automatically or easily be able to connect
to a different server. One way to improve on this would be to separate the hardware
and the front-end databases. Then an API pointing towards the hardware database
could be made which could allow for other management systems to fetch data from
it without directly interacting with the database to Caballo Manager dashboard.
3.4.2.4
Security
As this project focuses on providing the users with data on horses and stables, no
essential personal information (e.g. financial documents or CPR-numbers) is available.
Therefore security has been regarded as a secondary objective.
However, the integrity of the data also relies on the security of the system. In
order to avoid loss of data and performance the connections to the database must
be secure.
Authentication of the users is performed before the connection to the
database is established. This minimizes the risks of a security breach through the
user interface.
==PAGE:34==
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Design
This chapter covers the design of the system.
An overview of the overall system
structure is given along with a description of the architecture. The design described
in this section supports the features planned in Chapter 3 as well as the problem
definition.
4.1
System Design
The goal of the system is to be able to track the horses’ whereabouts on the premises
of large equestrian stables. Furthermore, it is necessary to have access to a front-end,
which can provide the user with a way to visualize the tracking.
In Figure 4.3 the overall design of the system has been visualized. In order to
conserve some space two excerpts can be seen in Figure 4.1 and 4.2. The excerpts
show the setup in the sensor nodes and hub respectively. In the following, abstract
descriptions will be given for each element in the system. More thorough explanations
Figure 4.1: System design of the sensor node.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Design
Figure 4.2: System design of the hub.
of the setup will be given in Chapter 5 & 6, however, to understand each element’s
role in the system a brief explanation is given here.
A sensor node consists of an antenna, an RFID reader, an Arduino and an XBee.
The antenna amplifies the signal of the RFID reader, which reads data from passing
RFID chips. The chips are attached to the horses’ tack or shoe.
The Arduino receives the data from the RFID chips, parses it into a message that can
be understood by the Raspberry Pi and transmits through the XBee. An XBee is a
transmission module that can communicate with other XBees on the same network.
The XBees in the system passes the message on until they reach the hub, which
is the creator of the network and the destination address. The hub consists of the
receiving XBee module and a Raspberry Pi. The Raspberry Pi is connected to the
internet and hosts a local SQLite database. Here the data, received from the XBee
network, is stored until it has been sent to the Postgres database on the cloud platform
Heroku. The data is sent to the cloud database by sending GraphQL queries from
the Raspberry Pi to the GraphQL engine Hasura.
Hasura is the entry point for all data both from the hardware and the front-end
into the postgres database. Before access is granted into the database, the user is
authenticated externally through the authentication service Firebase. After authen-
tication of the user has been done, access to the database is allowed through role
based access control. This restricts the access and actions the users can perform on
the database.
The front-end is built using the ReactJS library, which splits the creation of a web
application into components and makes it a faster and more modular task. Apollo
Client is a state management library written in Javascript. It handles requesting the
GraphQL queries, caching the data and updating the UI accordingly. Apollo is well
integrated with React which makes the creation of queries a lot simpler. Both those
libraries will be explained in more details in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 System Design
29
Figure 4.3: The proposed architecture of the complete system.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Design
4.1.1
Positioning of sensors in the network
The positioning of the sensors can be deducted from the analysis of the areas. All
entrances to areas must be covered by a sensor in order to be able to track the horse
wherever it goes. In the following a description of the position of sensors in each area
will be given.
Paddocks
In Figure 4.4 two examples of paddock layouts are shown.
The examples can be
extended to cover many situations with either one of them in use or a combination
of the two.
In example A the paddocks are linked together by a connection area. As it is
not necessary to record which exact paddock the horse is in, it will be sufficient to
position readers at the entrances to the connection area. This will reduce the amount
of sensors required for the setup which will decrease the cost of the system for the
stables. Example B shows a situation where the paddocks have no connection area.
Here a sensor is required for each gate, which increases the cost of the setup.
Stables
An example of a stable can be seen in Figure 4.5. Stables comes in all shapes and
sizes and with many different features, so this should merely be seen as a guideline
to how it can be designed.
As can be seen in the figure, it is necessary to position sensors by the entrances
to the stables. In this example, there are two entrance each covered by sensors.
The treatment areas represent areas specifically designed for tying up the horses.
They are often used for treatments whether it being a farrier, vet, chiropractor, etc.
Often one or more of these spaces have access to running water making it possible to
hose the horse down, fill buckets with water, etc.
Each space has a sensor attached to detect when and how long a horse has been tied
up there. This data can be used to verify farrier and vet visits as the horse would be
required to stand there for such visits.
The stalls are not covered by sensors. This is because such detailed data is not
required. It is assumed that if the horse is not present in any other area and was last
detected entering the stables, then it is resting in the stall. As it is not part of the
criterias for this system to detect when the horse is resting in its stall, this will not be
included in the horse overview of the management system. If it were to be included
it would not be a precise representation of the time the horse spent in its stall. The
resting time would include any time spent traveling from the stall to other areas
covered by sensors and other activities that might be done in the hallway between
==PAGE:39==
4.1 System Design
31
Figure 4.4: Examples of sensor positions in different paddock layouts.
the stalls. Those activities could be grooming or saddling up, but other things might
be done as well.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Design
Figure 4.5: An example of an equestrian stable layout.
Arenas
Arenas are assumed to always be fenced as this is almost always the case in large
equestrian stables. The sensors will be positioned at the gates. In situations where
the arenas are not fenced, e.g.a cross-country track, it will be necessary to position
sensors on the way to the arena so that it is almost guaranteed that the rider and
horse will pass them.
Transit
There are no sensors that detect transit areas. When a horse passes a sensor it is
deducted from previous readings whether it is now in transit or not. e.g.When a
horse passes a paddock sensor, it is checked whether the horse went past a paddock
sensor the last time a reading was made on that particular horse. If the last reading
was from a paddock, it will check what the reading before that was. Once it finds a
reading not from a paddock, it will decide whether the horse was entering or exiting
just now. This is done be checking if the amount of times it has passed a sensor is
divisible by two. If it is not, then it must have entered then, and must now be exiting.
This is also the reason why this system only functions if only actual exits of areas are
covered by sensors.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 System Design
33
Off-premises
To detect when horses leave the premises is in some cases nearly impossible. However,
if there are dedicated exits, sensors should be placedthere.
When horses are taken to shows, competitions or other activities off-premises they
are often brought in a transporter of some sort. This means they will not be detected
by the sensors by the exits. As it is out of scope for this thesis to detect when the
horses are off-premises this is not done here. However, a solution could be to scan
the horses by hand to set them as off-premises. They will be automatically detected
by the system upon their return as they will at some point pass a sensor.
Overview
In Figure 4.6 and 4.7 two examples of complete setups in stables can be seen. In
Example 1 all areas are set apart by transit areas. This makes it possible to detect
where the horse is even if a reading is missing from the system. This functionality
will not be implemented in this thesis, but it is possible for future implementations.
It can be done in the following way: When determining the horse’s current position
(this is covered in Chapter 6), the system should take into consideration where the
horse was previously seen. If it was last seen entering a stable, but it’s now seen
entering a paddock, then it only makes sense, that a reading of the horse leaving the
stable is missing.
This can be done in Example 2 as well, but it is a bit more complicated and in the
wrong setup it will be impossible to detect which one of multiple areas the reading is
missing from.
Attaching chips
The chips, that identify the horse to the sensor, should be attached to the horse. This
can be done several ways. One way would be to attach the chips to the horse tack.
Adhesive chips can be bought, which makes them easy to apply to the tack. This
solution assumes that each horse has its own tack. This will be the case most of
the time, but there may be situations where horses share tack. Therefore, another
solution must be available.
Such a solution, could be to attach the chip between the hoof and the horse shoe.
It could be fastened either with glue to the shoe or by the nails that keep the shoe in
place. The nails could be hammered through the plastic surrounding the chip, holding
it in place. If the chip were to be nailed on, it would need to be made specifically for
this purpose in order to make room for the nails. It would also have to be tested if
the shoe would limit the range of detection for the chip.
For this project, the chips have been attached to the tack of the tested horses.
This was the easiest way of testing the system whilst being an applicable use case.
For future work, it would be relevant to look into whether or not it could be possible
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Design
Figure 4.6: Example 1 of a sensor setup in the domain.
to inject a chip with long enough frequency into the horses. Another solution could
be to attach the chip directly to the horse in areas with minimal or no hair. Both of
those solutions requires looking into the possible health complications that may occur
when injecting and applying things directly on animals. This is why those solutions
were not investigated further in this thesis.
4.2
Front-end
The technical design of the Caballo Manager dashboard is closely tied to the tech-
nologies used to developed it. Those are explained in Chapter 5, but an overview of
the technical design choices will be given here.
Each page that is rendered to the user is represented by a component. Pop-ups
and drawers have their own components as well. An example of a drawer can be seen
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Front-end
35
Figure 4.7: Example 2 of a sensor setup in the domain.
in Figure 4.8. The drawer is the overlay in the right side of the image. The purple
bar in the top is the header and the greyed out area is the actual page the user is
currently on.
When the data changes on the server, the user can instantly see the changes on
the dashboard. This is due to some of the technologies used and the way the data is
fetched from the server. This is explained in details in Chapter 5.
The visual design of the front-end is rough and unpolished as the goal of this
project is to make a proof-of-concept prototype. However, some design choices have
been made which will be described in further details here.
Google has developed a visual language called Material Design. It aims at offering
bold, intuitive designs that work cross-platform with high customization possibilities.
Material Design can act as guidelines for colors, fonts and user friendly designs or
one can implement the design solutions they offer. As their solutions are accessible,
multiple of their solutions can be seen throughout the dashboard.
Material Design focuses on simple user friendly designs that are appealing to the
eye without too many irrelevant animations or fillings. All pages are built using those
component. They follow theming principles that will make it easy to change the color,
font and similar things in the future.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Design
Figure 4.8: An example of a drawer.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Realization
This chapter describes the technologies and how they are used to build the Caballo
Manager system. The technologies are selected based on the design mentioned in
Chapter 4 and the feature requirements stated in Chapter 3.
5.1
Selection and discussion of Technologies
This project uses a wide range of technologies. In this section the selected technologies
are presented, described and discussed.
5.1.1
Presentation layer
The presentation layer is built using the following technologies:
– ReactJS
– Apollo Client
– HTML
– CSS
– SASS
It was decided for the front-end to consist of a webapplication as this provides
access to the system from many different platforms and devices. All devices with
internet access and a browser will have access to a webapplication and it is not limited
by the operating system the device is running on.
Furthermore, I have previous
experience in the development of webapplications, which minimizes the learning curve.
The application is built using the ReactJS library. React is a user interface library,
which enables the developer to split the website into components. Each component
is a self-contained module which renders some output.
Instead of operating directly on the browser’s Document Model Object (DOM) imme-
diately after each change in the data on the page, React resolves changes on a virtual
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Realization
DOM. After comparing the changes to the previous version of the virtual DOM, it
determines the most efficient way to perform the changes in the actual DOM and
applies them. This is a faster approach than operating directly on the DOM and can
drastically improve performance if many UI elements are present.
The improved performance combined with the component based development and
my previous experience with using React is was made the decision fall on React for
developing the front-end.
All output of the React components is in the form of HTML, which is styled ac-
cording to the CSS files. The CSS files are generated from the SASS (Syntactically
Awesome StyleSheets) files. SASS is a CSS preprocessor that enables the developer
to create variables, nested rules, inline imports and more. SASS offers two syntaxes -
SASS and SCSS (Sassy CSS). SCSS is a ”... superset of CSS which means essentially
all CSS is valid SCSS”[5], whilst still offering the same advancements as mentioned
above.
The seamless transition from CSS to SASS whilst obtaining ways of sim-
pler development through the advancements, is the reason why SASS was chosen for
designing the style of the front-end.
Apollo Client is a javascript library for state management. It enables the developer
to seamlessly create GraphQL queries, mutations and subscriptions whilst handling
the requests and caching of data. In this application it is used for exactly that. Apollo
handles the connection to Hasura and is responsible for parsing the correct headers
and queries. Furthermore, it offers great integration with React making the structure
of the code predictable and declarative.
Mostly due to its great integration with both Hasura and React, Apollo was chosen
as the link between the GraphQL engine and the front-end.
5.1.2
Data access layer
GraphQL
For data access GraphQL was chosen as the query language for this project. It is
a fast query and manipulation languages which allows access to multiple tables in a
database whilst avoiding multiple roundtrips and minimizing over- and underfetching.
When considering how to access the data REST and GraphQL was taken into
consideration. REST focuses on reliability whereas GraphQL focuses on performance.
When making a REST call, multiple round-trips will have to be made if you want to
fetch related data in different tables. An example could be the user data and data of
all the horses belonging to that user. In a REST service two calls would have to be
made sequentially to the database. One to the user table and one to the horse table.
In GraphQL everything is regarded as a graph and therefore is connected and can
potentially be fetched in query as long as it is connected to each other. Furthermore
GraphQL allows for an easily obtainable high degree of tailored queries.
In the domain model on page 22 it can be seen, that all tables have relations
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Selection and discussion of Technologies
39
to each other. In the relatively small implementation that has been made in this
prototype, 9 tables exist with 8 relationships between them. The information we
need most often as it’s high on the requirements list are the readings. In order for
the readings to make any sense, we need information on the chip, sensor, location
and horse. Based on this information it makes sense to choose a GraphQL setup, as
it would only require less round-trips in this datamodel than REST.
GraphQL operations
GraphQL offers three types of requests: Query, Subscription and Mutation.
The
query fetches data once from the server and is the equivalent to a GET request in
REST. In Listing 5.1 an example of the query syntax an be seen. The variable id is
passed to the query. Then, the name and ID of the horse with that ID is returned
from the horse table, along with the ID’s of all chips mapped to that horse ID. If
no horses exists with the parsed ID, nothing is returned. Note that the type of the
passed variable is defined as being bigint.
Listing 5.1: GraphQL query for fetching horse information.
`query horseDetails ($id: bigint!) {
horse (where: {id: {_eq: $id}}) {
id
name
chip {
id
}
}
}`;
Mutations are used for deleting, inserting or updating data in the database. All
mutations must return something from the database and this can be nested objects
like in the query. An example of a mutation can be seen in Listing 5.3.
In the example, a mutation for adding a horse to the system is shown. The mutation
takes 3 arguments: birthday, gender and name. The mutation return the total number
of rows affected as well as the ID that is given to the inserted horse. The id is here
auto generated by the database.
Listing 5.2: GraphQL mutation for adding a horse to a database.
`mutation addHorse ($birthday: date!,$gender: String!,$name: String! ) {
insert_horse(objects: {birthday: $birthday, gender: $gender, name: $name}) {
affected_rows
returning {
id
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Realization
}
}
}`;
Subscriptions enables the server to push data to the client. ”Subscriptions are
similar to queries in that they specify a set of fields to be delivered to the client,
but instead of immediately returning a single answer, a result is sent every time a
particular event happens on the server”[1].
This is useful for automated updates
of the view, e.g.when new sensor readings come in. In Listing ?? an example of a
subscription can be seen. The subscription makes it possible to automatically receive
all new readings from the database when they are added to the system.
Listing 5.3: GraphQL subscription for sensor readings.
`subscription subscribeReadings {
reading {
chip_id
id
sensor_id
}
}`;
Hasura
Hasura is a GraphQL server that offers integration with cloud platforms as a service
such as Azure and Heroku. Hasura is free to use and offers a wide range of features
such as bulk actions, built-in filtering and subscriptions.
”Given a Postgres database, Hasura GraphQL engine can automatically generate
a GraphQL schema and process GraphQL queries, subscriptions and mutations.”[3]
Hasura tracks the postgres database and allows for manipulation of the tables
in it directly through its user interface. The user interface is used by the developer
when developing the application, and is not something that should be accessible
by the users of the system.
SQL queries can be run in hasura that manipulates
the database accordingly. Relationships between tables viewed and created as well
and the UI allows for easy creation and testing of GraphQL queries, mutations and
subscriptions.
Hasura is the only GraphQL server that offers that level of features and integration
with existing cloud platforms, and that is why the choice fell on Hasura as GraphQL
server.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Selection and discussion of Technologies
41
Data storage
When deciding on the data storage two possibilities were considered - SQL and NoSQL.
SQL databases are primarily known as relational databases whereas NoSQL databases
are primarily called distributed databases. SQL is good for databases with a prede-
fined structure. NoSQL is good for data structures of varying or unknown sizes with
no predefined schemas. As the structure of our database is well-defined and the data
is highly related SQL seems like the best choice for this.
To begin with Azure was chosen as cloud service to host the database. Azure could
potentially handle user authentication and postgres server hosting in one. However,
due to instability on the data access and pricing on Azure’s subscription an alternative
had to be found halfway through the thesis.
An alternative would have to be cheap, able to host an SQL database and have
good integration with Hasura as this had already been implemented on Azure.
The choice fell on Heroku, which is a cloud platform as a service. It offers a free
package with some limitations. It works for prototyping and testing, but for further
development it would be necessary to move to their paid packages.
Heroku has seamless integration with postgres database and the Hasura GraphQL
engine. In this solution Heroku hosts the postgres database and Hasura.
Firebase
Firebase is used for user authentication. Whenever a user logs in through the dash-
board, they are either registered or verified through Firebase before gaining access
to the web application database. It has a seamless integration with multiple ways of
verifying a user and one can freely choose between the options.
The free package on Firebase makes it viable for prototyping and as it can be
upgraded it will work for bigger systems as well.
5.1.3
Data transmission
Data transmission between the sensor nodes in the system are handled by XBee
modules. XBee modules uses the Zigbee protocol for communication between each
other. For this project XBee 3 modules with PCB antennas have been chosen. They
have a range of approximately 60 metres indoor and 1200 metres outdoor1. Further
details about the XBee network can be found in Chapter 6.
5.1.4
Sensor nodes
The sensor nodes consists of four parts: antenna, RFID reader, Arduino and XBee.
1Range as defined by the manufacturer
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Realization
RFID reader
The RFID reader is the M6E Nano UHF RFID Readers. It can read multiple tags
simultaneously and up to 150 tags per second. The RFID reader is mounted on a
board with adjustable power output from 0 dBm to 27 dBm. With a proper antenna
and power source this means it has the capability to read tags up to 5 metres away.
However, the antenna integrated in the board only allows tag readings up to half a
metre away.
Antenna
For antenna a UHF RFID Antenna with a gain of 6 dBi was chosen. This antenna
is powerful enough to fully exploit the power of the RFID reader with a powerful
enough powersource.
Arduino
Arduino is used to start the data collection of the RFID reader, temporarily hold the
data and transmission of the data via the XBee module. Arduino was chosen as it’s
easy to program and modify the code and it works well with all the modules used in
this project.
In further development it should be considered if the Arduino should be replaced
by smaller and less featurerich solution. However, for prototyping purposes the Ar-
duino works great as it’s easy to customize, program and wire to shields and bread-
boards. Furthermore, many libraries have been developed for the Arduino including
libraries specifically for the RFID sensor and the XBee module that’s being used in
this project. This made the Arduino the ideal choice.
XBee
For XBee modules the XBee 3 was chosen. This is the latest version of the XBee’s
and it offers multiple communication protocols as well as a 61 meter indoor range
and a 1.2 km outdoor (line-of-sight) range. As I have previously worked with the
combination of XBee and Arduino modules and XBee lives up to the requirements of
this project, those were chosen for data transmission in this project.
5.2
Languages and software for the hardware
Here a short description and the reasoning behind the languages and the software
used on the hardware will be given.
For the Raspberry Pi the scripting language Python is used to fetch the incoming
transmissions from the XBee, store the data and transmit it to the server. On the
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Languages and software for the hardware
43
Raspberry Pi an called Raspbian is running. This is one of the recommended and
default ’ for Raspberry Pi and there was no reason to change it.
The program that is running on the Arduino is written in C++. The libraries
that exists for Arduino is mostly written in C++, however the most of the underlying
system on Arduino is not object oriented.
==PAGE:52==
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
This chapter describes the complete implementation of the proposed architecture from
Chapter 4 through the use of the technologies described in Chapter 5.
This project has three implementation areas.
• Hardware applications
• Remote server
• Caballo Manager dashboard
In Figure 4.3 on page 29, an overview of the implementation can be seen as well
as the three areas’ interconnection. Further details can be seen in the excerpts in
Figure 4.1 and 4.2 on page 27.
In the following sections the three areas will be elaborated further and each part
of the implementation overview will be discussed separately.
6.1
Hardware applications
There are two areas in the hardware applications: The sensor nodes and the hub. In
the following the implementation of both areas will be elaborated on.
6.1.1
Sensor nodes
The sensor nodes are responsible for collecting incoming data from the RFID reader,
route incoming XBee transmissions towards their final goal and send collected data
towards the hub.
Setup and configuration
As discussed in Chapter 5 a sensor node consists of an RFID reader[8], an antenna[9],
an Arduino[7] and an XBee[10] module. In Figure 6.1 the setup of the sensor node
can be seen.
==PAGE:54==
46
6 Implementation
Figure 6.1: The layout of the sensor node setup.
The RFID reader is connected to the Arduino through a shield. A shield is a piece
of hardware that you can mount on the Arduino to easier expands its capabilities. The
RFID reader mount fits perfectly on top of the Arduino, making it easy to connect
the two parts. A powerful antenna is soldered to the reader and amplifies the signal
significantly. It is not displayed in the diagram as the antenna connector on the RFID
reader is not displayed. However, it is connected and offers a range of up to up to
4.9 metres away according to the manufacturer. For this project the maximum range
needed is 3.4 metres and tests have been successfully run at this range.
The RFID reader sends data to the Arduino over pin 2 and receives data from the
Arduino over pin 3. The XBee module sends data over pin 4 and receives data over
pin 5. This can also be seen from the code snippet in Listing 6.1.
The XBee module is mounted on an XBee regulated explorer board[11]. This
allows it to be wired directly to 5V without frying the XBee. The XBee on the sensor
node is configured as a router with custom configuration as seen in Table 6.1. It
connects to the network with PAN ID 3333 if it’s within range, and transmits all mes-
sages towards the destination address which is set to the address of the Coordinator.
The Coordinator is the XBee that creates the network. In this setup, it is the XBee
connected to the Raspberry Pi and it will be explained further in the Hub section.
The serial number has a high and a low value which has been combined in Table 6.1.
The two values are separated by a space. Serial Number High of the Coordinator
matches the Destination Address High of the Router. Likewise, Serial Number Low
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Hardware applications
47
of the Coordinator matches the Destination Address Low of the Router.
Router
Coordinator
PAN ID
3333
3333
Serial Number 0013A200 4193A51B
0013A200 4192DB4A
Destination Address
0013A200 4192DB4A
0
Table 6.1: The configurations of the two types of XBee units in this system.
This proof-of-concept sensor node prototype runs on the power output of a com-
puter USB port or the plugged connection to a wall outlet. However, further develop-
ment and actual production will require a different power source for all sensor nodes.
This power source could vary, but would most likely consist of a battery with the
possibility of solar cells connected to outdoor nodes. The voltage output should be
at least 5V.
A concern from the users were if the use of the RFID reader is damaging to humans
or animals. According to the French National Institute for Research in Computer
Science and Automation (Inria) as long as a minimum distance of 20 cm is maintained
from the readers there should be no danger involved. ”...for individuals who are only
sporadically exposed to waves emitted by RFID readers, the risk is low. However, in
the event of continued exposure, even if radiation levels are low, AFSSET recommends
maintaining a minimum distance of around 20cm from the readers at all times.”[6].
As a result thereof the readers are positioned at least 20 cm from gate opening. This
also increased the minimum range needed with 40 cm. As the widest doorway is 3
metres wide this gives a total of 3.4 metres, which is maximum tested range.
Code
The Arduino scans for chip data twice every second. If the scanning was performed
continuously a lot of redundant data would be collected, causing a lot of traffic on
the XBee network. The data is filtered on the Raspberry Pi, which means that all
valid readings are transmitted over the network. The filtering is performed by the
Raspberry Pi as it has more power to do so and because some of the filtering done
can potentially be based on readings from other sensors as well. This is described in
further details in the following section about the Hub.
The network has not been stress tested. As only two XBee devices have been
available it has been impossible to produce enough traffic over the network to perform
a valuable stress test.
There are three types of information needed by the system from the data readings:
• Chip IDs - the IDs of the detected chip.
• Sensor ID - which sensor detected the chip.
==PAGE:56==
48
6 Implementation
• Timestamp - when was the chip detected.
Listing 6.1: Arduino code for packaging and sending the data. The code can be found
in the .ino file.
1
//Get the number of bytes of EPC from response
2
byte tagEPCBytes = nano.getTagEPCBytes();
3
4
String sensorID = String("0013A2004192DB4A");
5
String stringTag = String(tagEPCBytes);
6
String package = String("["+stringTag+","+sensorID+"]");
7
8
XBee.print(package);
In Listing 6.1 the process of collecting, packaging and sending the data is shown.
In line 2 the tag’s is read EPC bytes are read. They are then cast to a string and
packaged along with the sensor ID.
The sensor ID is defined by the serial number of the XBee module. For this prototype,
the serial number is known, as the XBee has been setup through XCTU1. XCTU reads
all configurations from the XBee, including its serial number. However, for further
development it would be necessary to automatically fetch the data from the XBee
during the initial setup of the Arduino. This can be done by forcing the XBee into
command mode and collecting the data directly from it.
The idea of using the serial number origins from the goal of having a distinguish
ID for each sensor node.
An automatically generated ID would be good, but as
each sensor must be mapped to a location it is necessary to be able to distinguish
each physical device with a permanent corresponding ID. In a final product each
sensor node should be marked with an identification number.This allows the user to
distinguish it from the others.
Aside from sensor and chip ID’s the system also requires a timestamp on the
readings. The timestamp provided by the Arduino is defined in milliseconds since
the program was initialized. This is used to figure out how close to each other the
readings were read.
6.1.2
The hub
In Figure 6.2 the setup of the hub can be seen. It consists of a Raspberry Pi and an
XBee module. The hub is connected to a permanent power source and a WiFi router
either through cable or wireless.
1XCTU is a program, developed by the makers of the XBee, that allows the user to easily
configure and test XBee modules that are connected to it.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Hardware applications
49
Figure 6.2: Hardware overview of the Hub.
The XBee module is configured as the coordinator of the network. The coordinator
is responsible for starting the network selecting channel and PAN ID 2. The PAN ID
is used for identifying all modules that belong to a specific network. This allows for
multiple ZigBee networks to operate within range of each other without interference
as long as they have different PAN ID’s. The coordinator distributes addresses which
allows for other XBee modules to join the network. This device can never sleep and
must always be connected to a power source as it defines, secures and keeps the
network healthy.
In this system the coordinator is also the only end device. All data is transmitted
from other XBee modules to this one. The received data is then handled by scripts
running on the Raspberry Pi.
The first script is the filtering of the sensor data. It is set to filter out data from the
same chip on the same sensor, if it’s within a 2 second interval from the last reading,
and the chip has not been detected by any other readers in the meantime. In most
cases the horses will pass through and walk far away from the sensor, resulting in no
or few extra readings depending on the pace. If the horse stops in front of the sensor
2A 16-Bit or 64-Bit identifier.
==PAGE:58==
50
6 Implementation
multiple readings will be temporarily saved, but filtered away on the Raspberry Pi.
However, if the horse turns around when passing by a sensor multiple readings will
be made in a row, and the system will read it as if the horse passed through, but not
that it turned around. This will position the horse in the wrong place, causing the
system to contain faulty data.
In Figure 6.3 this scenario is represented. The horse turns around in range of the
sensor, which makes the system believe that it is currently in the stable, when it’s
really in transit.
Figure 6.3: A single sensor setup.
A way to make up for this is to position two readers close to each other as demon-
strated in Figure 6.4. By comparing the two sensor readings and detecting which was
detected first and last it’s possible to almost guarantee the direction the horse took.
The only catch is if the horse moves too fast so one of the sensors misses a reading.
This should not be relevant as horses are handled in walking pace and 2 readings
every second in a cone in front of the reader leaves enough time for detection of the
chips. As the Arduinos do not have an internal clock, it is necessary to either provide
the two sensors in a multi sensor setup with another way to compare readings based
on a measurement time.
As only one RFID reader was available for this thesis tests containing more than
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Hardware applications
51
Figure 6.4: A multi sensor setup.
one sensor have not been performed.
Another script the Raspberry Pi runs is the one that constantly listens to incoming
XBee messages. When the messages are received, the data is saved to a local SQLite
database. The chip ID and sensor ID are received via the XBee from the sensor nodes.
Once an XBee message is received it is given a timestamp and an ID. This enables
the users to identify individual data points if necessary. The ID is an automatically
generated UUID. If - by chance - and existing UUID is generated it will be discovered
on transmission to the remote server, the UUID will be recalculated and it will be
sent to the server again.
When the XBee message is first received all data is sent to the local SQLite database.
Here, it is stored in a single table containing 4 columns - one for each data point
detail.
The data is continuously sent to the remote server in this proof-of-concept proto-
type. Depending on the amount of traffic in a full scale system, it may be necessary to
constraint the data requests to the server to be sent in 10 min intervals. The intervals
can be smaller, but this is the maximum delay per the criterias stated as goals. This
could be set up using cron jobs. ”..cron is a time-based job scheduler in Unix-like
computer operating systems”[4]. Cron is easy to use and setup and is therefore ideal
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Implementation
for this purpose.
Like requests made from the front-end, and as can be seen in Figure 4.3 on page
29, all requests to the server is handled by Hasura. If the data didn’t reach the server,
no data is deleted from SQLite database. Depending on the exact response code, the
Raspberry Pi may recalculate the UUID of a reading, if the issue was a duplication
of id, before retrying.
When the data is successfully sent to the server, the entries in the database corre-
sponding to the sent data is dropped from the table.
This pattern allows for an endless cycle where no data is sent if the script contin-
uously experiences issues with the connection to the database. However, the data is
safely stored on the local SQLite database and will be kept there until its limits have
been reached. If the limits of the database is reached old data will be dropped from
the table to make way for new data. However as there are 64GB of space on the SD
card in the Raspberry Pi it is highly unlikely that this limit will be reached. As a
safety measure a notification system could be made that warns the user through the
front-end if no recent data is found in the cloud database.
6.2
Caballo Manager dashboard
In this section the implementation of the dashboard will be described. The function-
ality and use of the dashboard will be showcased in Chapter 7.
The dashboard functions as the access point for the user to the system. It is a
webapplication built on the ReactJS framework, and it communicates with the cloud
database using GraphQL queries, mutations and subscriptions as describes in Chapter
5.
The web application has been built from scratch for this project. As with the
rest of the system it is proof-of-concept, which means that it lacks some fundamental
capabilities as a management system for stables.
However, it fulfills it’s task of
showing the data from the sensors as well as the required information on the horses.
Furthermore, it is possible to get an overview of the stables, arenas and the paddocks
connected to the system.
The dashboard is a single-page application, but as it is utilizing a routing library
for React it appears to the user as if the website has multiple subfolders.
It is
possible to load directly onto specific pages as well as going back and forth using the
browser’s back functionality. Each page has it’s own javascript and sass file. Here
the functionality and design of the page is defined. Furthermore utility functions are
kept in a utility file which is imported when necessary.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Remote server
53
6.2.1
Authentication
The dashboard is only accessible for registered users. In the case where a user tries
to access the webapplication by direct link to a subdirectory without having logged
in he will be redirected to the login page. For the prototype it’s only possible to login
using Google Sign-in. However this can easily be expanded by utilizing the flexible
possibilities in Firebase Authentication.
Further details on the authentication is given in Caballo Manager server section.
Apollo Client
Apollo Client is used in the webapplication in order to easily implement the GraphQL
functionality. Apollo is built for ReactJS, but works just as well with many other
javascript frameworks such as Vue and Angular. Apollo allows for declarative data
fetching. This makes it very easy to integrate the GraphQL queries in the React com-
ponents. Furthermore, Apollo offers query, mutation and subscription components
specifically for React. An example of a Query component can be seen in Listing 6.2.
The parameters of the Query component are query and variables. The variables are
passed to the query and must match the requirements of the arguments in the query.
If an error is thrown, the component will show the error message.
If the data is
successfully fetched this will be displayed in the component.
Listing 6.2: An example of the Query component from Apollo used to fetch data on
a horse with id 1234
<Query
query={getHorse}
variables={{id:1234}}
>
{({ data, loading, error }) => {
if (loading) return "loading...";
if (error) return <div>error.message</div>;
console.log(data);
return <div>Data fetched successfully</div>
}}
</Query>
6.3
Remote server
In this section the implementation of the Caballo Manager server is described. The
GraphQL Engine Hasura runs on the Cloud service Heroku which hosts the Postgres
Database where all data is stored. Firebase is used for user authentication and Hasura
handles the authorization.
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Implementation
6.3.1
Authorization
No role-based access control is implemented in this project as it is out of scope.
However, Hasura offers easy setup to avoid undesirable changes to the system made
by the client.
In Figure 6.5 the permissions for the horse table can be seen. There are two actors
registered: Admin and User. Roles are being defined when the connection to Hasura
is established. To be recognized as an admin the system must receive a header with
the key X-Hasura-Admin-Secret and the value that is mapped to the admin secret.
This value is defined in the config variables of the database. The admin secret secures
the Hasura endpoint on the server and must also be entered when trying to access
the user interface of Hasura. In order to be recognized as a User, a header with key
X-Hasura-Role and value User mused be sent with the requests.
In this implementation all requests to the server are handled by Apollo. Apollo
holds the URL and all required authorization headers and parses them with each
request.
6.3.2
Database
Heroku is a cloud platform as a service (PaaS). The web application is not run or
managed through Heroku, however the Postgres database is hosted there. The free
plan at Heroku sleeps after 30 mins of inactivity and has a limitation to how much
traffic is allowed a month. However, the plan is sufficient for the purpose of this
proof-of-concept system.
6.4
Tests
Integration tests, regression tests (could have been easier with unit tests) and ad-hoc
testing.
Figure 6.5: Permission table for the horse table in Hasura.
==PAGE:63==
6.4 Tests
55
When developing this system several types of tests have been done regularly. The
focus have been on integration, regression and ad-hoc tests. In this section the testing
of the front-end, server and hardware will be described separately.
6.4.1
Hardware
Testing of the hardware has all been done manually. Automated tests are difficult
and costly to perform and for the limited code base on the hardware, I decided that
the best way to test it was manually.
Integration tests have been made on the sensor nodes and the hub. Regression tests
have been run on the system as a whole upon when new implementation were made.
If an issue occurred, regression tests would be run on the individual scripts to identify
the source of the problem.
Sensor node
The initial integration tests of the sensor node was done by connecting the Arduino
to a computer and monitoring the output on the serial connection. This how the code
for reading chips were tested. When the XBee module had been connected, and it
was verified that it could communicate with the XBee in the hub, the computer was
no longer needed for the tests. From here all tests were performed via the Raspbery
Pi, by checking the correct data was being received.
As only one program can run on the Arduino at a time, it was enough to test
the integrity of the implementation to see stable and correct messages received at the
hub.
The collection of data has been tested in the domain environment. I have been
able to test it on premises in a stable, who has asked to remain anonymous and is
therefore not included by name in this thesis. The testing was done in a small stable,
but the sensors were positioned as suggested in Chapter 4. The range of the sensors
were tested as well. It has no been tested how the system functions if the chip is
attached between the hoof and the horse’s shoe. This is due to the fact that it would
require a farrier to attach a new shoe before my test and remove and reattach it
again after my test. This would have been a costly affair and has therefore not been
included in the testing.
Hub
Integration tests were also done manually on the Raspberry Pi. It would have been
beneficial to use automated tests on the scripts, as it would be a lot easier than on
the Arduino. Furthermore, this would have made regression testing easier as well.
Each script on the Raspberry Pi has been integrity tested by checking the desired
outputs. Each script has very few tasks making it easy to test the integrity of each
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Implementation
one. Ad-hoc testing was performed on the filtering script to verify its behaviour if
faulty data was received by the XBee.
6.4.2
Remote server
The server has not been tested except for the connection to Hasura from both the
front-end and the hardware. Other than that all testing of queries and similar things
have been done from the front-end.
6.4.3
Front-end and overall system
The front-end has been tested integrity tested based on the detailed use case de-
scriptions. Whenever a functional requirement has been implemented the use cases
belonging to that requirements have been run. Beyond that ad-hoc testing has been
performed to find defects.
Whenever a new feature has been implemented, regression tests on existing use
cases have been made. As the functional requirement table in Chapter 3 displays
the status of each requirement, this has been used to find the use cases that should
already be working and run regression tests on them.
Regression testing could have been a lot easier if they had been automated, e.g.by
using unit tests. This was not done in this implementation, but it is something that
should have been done to make the process of regression testing more reliable and
quicker.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Caballo Manager
Dashboard
In this chapter some of the pages in the Caballo Manager dashboard will be showcased.
In Figure 7.1 the front page of the application can be seen. This is the first page
the user sees, when he wants to access the dashboard. The only action the user can
perform here is the login action by clicking the Sign in with Google button.
Figure 7.1: The front page of the Caballo Manager dashboard.
In Figure 7.2 the home page of the application can be seen. I distinguish between
the front and home page here even though they are ordinarily used about the same
thing. The front page is only accessible when not logged in. The home page is only
accessible when logged in. From the homepage the user can perform the action Sign
out. Furthermore, he can be redirected to some other pages on this site: the stables,
readings, arenas and paddocks. There are no treatment page, as they are part of the
stables and will be registered there.
In Figure 7.3 the horses can be seen. Each horse has a designated card, that can
be clicked and will redirect the user to the corresponding horse’s page. The plus sign
in the lower right corner allows the user too add a horse to the system through the
==PAGE:66==
58
7 Caballo Manager Dashboard
Figure 7.2: The home page of the Caballo Manager dashboard.
add horse drawer seen in Figure 7.4.
The add horse button in the upper left corner can be clicked to add a stable to
the system. The layout of paddocks and arenas are the same and are therefore not
showcased here.
Figure 7.3: The stables page of the Caballo Manager dashboard.
In Figure 7.5 the horse page is shown. From this page you can see all readings
belonging to the horse at the bottom. This will become a scrollable area, when the
readings start to overflow. To the right, the chip are shown. This is a list of all chips
that belong to that horse. This list will also become scrollable, when it starts to
overflow. Each chip can be deleted by clicking the delete icon. Chips can be added
by inputting a chip number in the Add chip ID field. A check will be made to verify
==PAGE:67==
7 Caballo Manager Dashboard
59
Figure 7.4: The add horse drawer.
the inputted data is a number. If it’s not a number the delete button is greyed out.
To the right, the base data on the horse is shown. It is also here you are able to edit
the base data, but clicking the edit icon and delete the horse by clicking the trash can
icon.
==PAGE:68==
60
7 Caballo Manager Dashboard
Figure 7.5: The horse page
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation of the
Project
Here an evaluation of the system and the methods used is given.
8.1
Issue
The current prototype of Caballo Manager is able to detect horses entering and exiting
areas, visualize the data to the user and allow some level of manipulation by the user
on the data. However, the suggested architectural solution has proven to have some
caveats, that may prove fatal to a possible full scale implementation of the project.
One of them is the distance of reading, the antennas can provide. Even though
the distance of the antenna can be set, it is very difficult to limit the readings to
something close to a straight line. This means, that if horses passes by close to a
sensor, they might be detected by it, even if they don’t pass through the opening.
This can place the horse in areas it hasn’t been which is very damaging to the docu-
mentation of the system. The readings can be deleted manually, however as one of
the requirements of the system is that it should be automatic, this could prove to be
a problem. Furthermore, it is damaging to the credibility and integrity of the data.
This is especially an issue in the current prototype, as the user has no way of noticing
if a wrong reading has been made on a horse. Another part of this issue is, if the
width of the sensor’s reading area becomes limited, it may have a hard time detecting
all chips that passes by.
Before continuing working on this prototype an assessment of the precision of the
readers would have to be made. This would have to be done in an environment that
reflects the domain and it would require multiple readers. It would be necessary to
allow such a test to run for several days, to assess the probability of faulty data,
and from there an analysis would have to be made. This analysis should determine
whether the architecture suggested in this thesis would be viable for production pur-
poses or not. This has not been done in this thesis due to lack of time and resources.
An alternative solution to the problem is, instead of UHF readers that automat-
==PAGE:70==
62
8 Evaluation of the Project
ically detects the horses at each gate, a handheld low frequency reader could be
positioned by the gates. A low frequency reader could be used here, as the identifi-
cation chips that must be injected in all horses in Denmark, is a low frequency one.
This cannot be detected more than a maximum of up to 20 centimeters away, which
makes it inapplicable on the fully automated solution.
This solution would compromise the automation requirement a bit however, the doc-
umentation and the transferring of data to the management system would still be
automated. The only action that would require manual actions is to scan the horse
at the gates.
It would have to be up to the stables if this solution is a viable alternative.
8.2
Evaluation of the methods
For this project the data collection for the requirements was done by collecting data
from a single survey send out to one company. In total, 25 responses came in.
In order for this system to take the next step further investigation in the domain
should be done. As the number of large equestrian stables are very limited in Den-
mark it might be necessary to do some research in Germany, Sweden or the UK as
professional riding is much bigger and lucrative there. I have had some issues finding
stables that fit the description, that had the will to cooperate in this thesis. This
limited my possibilities for datacollections within the danish borders.
In regards to the dashboard it may be very beneficial to contact companies who
have developed good functional solution for general management in stables. As this
prototype only provides functionality on the Caballo Manager dashboard that is
related to the readings and sensor positioning, the dashboard was developed from
scratch. However, if this system is to go into production, a full scale management
system must be provided. Instead of creating a new system an existing one such as
Equicty1 could be expanded to contain the information required by this system. In
this process it would make sense to aim the readings, sensor and location data towards
its own database. By creating an API it would be possible to keep the management
and hardware related parts separated, and could possibly allow other management
system companies to implement support for the Caballo Manager hardware.
1https://www.equicty.com/
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this project, I have successfully developed Caballo Manager, which is a prototype
of a system designed to automatically track and document the whereabouts of the
horses.
The system is able to track the whereabouts of the horses through the use of RFID
sensor strategically positioned throughout the premises of a large equestrian stable.
A user interface (Caballo Manger dashboard), a remote server and a hardware setup
has been produced. Combined they enables the user to track whenever a horse passes
a sensor as long as the horse has an RFID chip attached to it.
The process of distributing the data from the hub to the server and further on to
the user interface works without issues. The connection is stabile as long as all parts
have an internet connection, and overall this part of the solution is sound.
However, an issue arises regarding the integrity of the data. The system has some
drawbacks in form of risk of integrity loss on the data which can potentially heavily
affect a solution in production. Data points might be missing or multiple datapoints
might exist that represents the same action. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the
prototype further by producing multiple sensors and collecting data from them over
the course of multiple days.
It is indeed possible to monitor the horses whereabouts using the artefacts produced
in this thesis. However, further investigations will have to be made to ensure that they
fulfill the requirements - especially the requirements of reliability and automation of
the results.
As a result, the architectural solution suggested here, is one that could potentially
be good. If it is possible to keep the readers from reading data at the wrong times by
optimizing the antenna and the signal used, this solution is otherwise very reliable.
Otherwise, an alternative solution that compromises the need for automation has
been suggested. This is a very reliable solution that ensures that the horse is detected
correctly every time, unless the handler forgets to scan it.
Overall, much of this thesis can be used for a possible future implementation. The
only part that requires further analysis and investigation is automatic collection of
data performed by the RFID readers.
==PAGE:72==
64
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Detailed use case
descriptions
ID
UC1
Use case
User login
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is on the initial page of the user-
interface.
Main flow
The user clicks login. The user logs in using
any available method. The user is redirected
to the application.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks login. The login fails due to
wrong credentials. The user is returned to the
login screen.
Table A.1: Detailed use case description of the Login case
==PAGE:74==
66
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC2
Use case
User logout
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is logged into the application.
Main flow
The user clicks logout. The user is logged out
and returned to the initial page of the user-
interface.
Table A.2: Detailed use case description of the Log out use case
ID
UC3
Use case
Register user
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is on the initial page of the user-
interface.
Main flow
The user clicks a button to register a user. Us-
ing any available method the user registers a
new user. The user is logged in and redirected
to the application.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks a button to register a user. Us-
ing any available method the user tries to reg-
ister a new user. The registration fails and a
message telling the user what went wrong is
shown. The user is still on the register user
view.
Table A.3: Detailed use case description of the Register user use case
==PAGE:75==
A Detailed use case descriptions
67
ID
UC4
Use case
View horse
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on an existing horse and is redi-
rected to the its information view.
Alternative flow 1
No horses are currently added to the system
and the user must add one before being able
to view it’s information.
Table A.4: Detailed use case description of the View horse use case
ID
UC5
Use case
View readings for horse
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on a horse and is redirected
to its information view. All readings for that
horse is shown.
Table A.5: Detailed use case description of the View readings for horse use case
==PAGE:76==
68
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC6
Use case
View stable
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is logged into the application.
Main flow
The user clicks the Stable menu item and is
redirected to the stable view.
Table A.6: Detailed use case description of the View stable use case
ID
UC7
Use case
View paddock
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is logged into the application.
Main flow
The user clicks the Paddock menu item and is
redirected to the paddock view.
Table A.7: Detailed use case description of the View paddock use case
ID
UC8
Use case
View arena
Actor level
Customer
Precondition
The user is logged into the application.
Main flow
The user clicks the Arena menu item and is
redirected to the arena view.
Table A.8: Detailed use case description of the View arena use case
==PAGE:77==
A Detailed use case descriptions
69
ID
UC9
Use case
Add horse
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks a button to engage in the Add
Horse flow.
An overlay requesting informa-
tion from the user on the horse is shown. The
user inputs the required information and clicks
Save. The user is redirected to the Stable page
and the new horse is shown among the existing
ones.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks a button to engage in the Add
Horse flow. An overlay requesting information
from the user on the horse is shown. The user
inputs wrong values in the fields. Errors are
shown by the fields containing wrong values.
The user corrects the input to valid values and
clicks Save. The user is redirected to the Sta-
ble page and the new horse is shown among
the existing ones.
Table A.9: Detailed use case description of the Add horse use case
==PAGE:78==
70
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC10
Use case
Edit horse
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user selects an existing horse and is redi-
rected to the information view of that horse.
The user clicks the Edit button. All editable
fields on the horse changes form so the user
can edit their values. When finished entering
valid values the user clicks Save. The editable
fields goes back to being uneditable.
Alternative flow 1
The user selects an existing horse and is redi-
rected to the information view of that horse.
The user clicks the Edit button. All editable
fields on the horse changes form so the user
can edit their values. The user enters invalid
values in the fields and errors are shown. After
correcting them to valid values the user clicks
Save. The editable fields goes back to being
uneditable.
Table A.10: Detailed use case description of the Edit horse use case
ID
UC11
Use case
View sensor
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sen-
sor page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on a sensor and is redirected
to its information view.
Table A.11: Detailed use case description of the View sensor use case
==PAGE:79==
A Detailed use case descriptions
71
ID
UC12
Use case
View all readings
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged into the application.
Main flow
The user clicks the Sensor menu item and is
redirected to the sensor page. An overview of
all sensors in the system along with all recent
readings from them is shown.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks the Sensor menu item and is
redirected to the sensor page. The user clicks
on a sensor and is redirected to its information
view. All recent readings from the sensor is
shown.
Table A.12: Detailed use case description of the View recent readings use case
==PAGE:80==
72
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC13
Use case
Add reading
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sen-
sor page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks the Add reading button.
A
view is shown where the user inputs valid infor-
mation into the required fields. The user clicks
Save and is redirected to the Sensor page.
Alternative flow
The user clicks the Add reading button.
A
view is shown where the user inputs invalid
information into the required fields.
Errors
are shown where invalid input is present and
the user corrects the input. The user clicks
Save and is redirected to the Sensor page.
Table A.13: Detailed use case description of the Add reading use case
ID
UC14
Use case
Remove reading
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sen-
sor page of the application.
Main flow
The user localizes the incorrect reading and
clicks delete. The user is prompted to verify
the action and clicks Yes. The user is returned
to the Sensor page where the reading has now
been removed from.
Table A.14: Detailed use case description of the Remove reading use case
==PAGE:81==
A Detailed use case descriptions
73
ID
UC15
Use case
Add chip
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and is currently on the
Stable page of the application. The user has a
valid chip ID he wants to assign to a horse.
Main flow
The user clicks on the horse he wants to add
a chip ID to and is redirected to its view. The
user clicks the Add chip button, fills in the
ID of the chip in fields and clicks Save. The
horse’s information view is updated so the new
chip ID is shown along with existing chip ID’s.
Alternate flow 1
The user clicks on the horse he wants to add
a chip ID to and is redirected to its view. The
user clicks the Add chip button, fills in an in-
valid chip ID and clicks Save.
An error is
shown telling the user to input a valid ID. The
user changes the ID to a valid one and clicks
Save. The horse’s information view is updated
so the new chip ID is shown along with exist-
ing chip ID’s.
Table A.15: Detailed use case description of the Add chip use case
==PAGE:82==
74
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC16
Use case
Remove chip
Actor level
Handler
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on the horse he wants to re-
move a chip ID from and is redirected to its
information view. The user clicks the Edit but-
ton and clicks the Delete button next to the
chip ID he wants to remove. A prompt pops
up asking if he is sure he wants to delete the
ID, the user clicks Yes, the prompt disappears
and the user clicks Save. The horse’s informa-
tion view is updated and is no longer showing
the chip ID.
Alternate flow 1
The user clicks on the horse he wants to re-
move a chip ID from and is redirected to its
information view. The user clicks the Edit but-
ton, clicks the Delete button on the wrong ID.
A prompt pops up asking if the user is sure he
wants to delete the ID and the user clicks No.
The user deletes the correct ID, clicks Save
and the horse’s information view is updated
to no longer showing the deleted chip ID.
Table A.16: Detailed use case description of the Remove chip use case
==PAGE:83==
A Detailed use case descriptions
75
ID
UC17
Use case
Add stable
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on the Add stable button. A
view is shown where the user inputs valid in-
formation into the required fields. The user
clicks Save and is redirected to the Stable view
where the new stable is shown among the ex-
isting ones.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on the Add stable button. A
view is shown where the user inputs invalid
information into the required fields.
Errors
are shown by the fields containing invalid val-
ues. The user corrects the values to valid in-
put. The user clicks Save and is redirected to
the Stable view where the new stable is shown
among the existing ones.
Table A.17: Detailed use case description of the Add stable use case
==PAGE:84==
76
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC18
Use case
Edit stable
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sta-
ble page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on a stable’s information but-
ton and is redirected to its information view.
The user clicks the Edit button and all editable
fields changes form. The user changes the de-
sired fields to valid values and clicks the Save
button. The fields goes back to being uned-
itable containing the new values.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on a stable’s information but-
ton and is redirected to its information view.
The user clicks the Edit button and all editable
fields changes form. The user changes the de-
sired fields to invalid values. Errors are shown
in all places where invalid values are written.
The user corrects the fields to contain valid
values and clicks the Save button. The fields
goes back to being uneditable containing the
new values.
Table A.18: Detailed use case description of the Edit stable use case
==PAGE:85==
A Detailed use case descriptions
77
ID
UC19
Use case
Add arena
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the
Arena page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on the Add arena button. A
view is shown where the user inputs valid in-
formation into the required fields. The user
clicks Save and is redirected to the Arena view
where the new arenais shown among the exist-
ing ones.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on the Add arena button. A
view is shown where the user inputs invalid
information into the required fields.
Errors
are shown by the fields containing invalid val-
ues. The user corrects the values to valid in-
put. The user clicks Save and is redirected to
the Arena view where the new arena is shown
among the existing ones.
Table A.19: Detailed use case description of the Add arena use case
==PAGE:86==
78
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC20
Use case
Edit arena
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the
Arena page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on a arena and is redirected to
its information view. The user clicks the Edit
button and all editable fields changes form.
The user changes the desired fields to valid
values and clicks the Save button. The fields
goes back to being uneditable containing the
new values.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on an arena and is redirected to
its information view. The user clicks the Edit
button and all editable fields changes form.
The user changes the desired fields to invalid
values. Errors are shown in all places where
invalid values are written. The user corrects
the fields to contain valid values and clicks the
Save button.
The fields goes back to being
uneditable containing the new values.
Table A.20: Detailed use case description of the Edit arena use case
==PAGE:87==
A Detailed use case descriptions
79
ID
UC21
Use case
Add paddock
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Pad-
dock page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on the Add paddock button.
A view is shown where the user inputs valid
information into the required fields. The user
clicks Save and is redirected to the Paddock
view where the new paddock is shown among
the existing ones.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on the Add paddock button. A
view is shown where the user inputs invalid
information into the required fields.
Errors
are shown by the fields containing invalid val-
ues. The user corrects the values to valid in-
put. The user clicks Save and is redirected to
the Paddock view where the new paddock is
shown among the existing ones.
Table A.21: Detailed use case description of the Add paddock use case
==PAGE:88==
80
A Detailed use case descriptions
ID
UC22
Use case
Edit paddock
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Pad-
dock page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on a paddock and is redirected
to its information view. The user clicks the
Edit button and all editable fields changes
form. The user changes the desired fields to
valid values and clicks the Save button. The
fields goes back to being uneditable containing
the new values.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on a paddock and is redirected
to its information view. The user clicks the
Edit button and all editable fields changes
form. The user changes the desired fields to
invalid values. Errors are shown in all places
where invalid values are written.
The user
corrects the fields to contain valid values and
clicks the Save button. The fields goes back to
being uneditable containing the new values.
Table A.22: Detailed use case description of the Edit paddock use case
==PAGE:89==
A Detailed use case descriptions
81
ID
UC23
Use case
Edit sensor
Actor level
Admin
Precondition
The user is logged in and currently on the Sen-
sor page of the application.
Main flow
The user clicks on a sensor and is redirected to
its information view. The user clicks the Edit
button and all editable fields changes form.
The user changes the desired fields to valid
values and clicks the Save button. The fields
goes back to being uneditable containing the
new values.
Alternative flow 1
The user clicks on a sensor and is redirected to
its information view. The user clicks the Edit
button and all editable fields changes form.
The user changes the desired fields to invalid
values. Errors are shown in all places where
invalid values are written. The user corrects
the fields to contain valid values and clicks the
Save button.
The fields goes back to being
uneditable containing the new values.
Table A.23: Detailed use case description of the Edit sensor use case
==PAGE:90==
82
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Apollo Docs. Subscriptions. url: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/
react/advanced/subscriptions/ (visited on August 15, 2019).
[2]
Miljø og Fødevareministeriet. Bekendtgørelse af lov om hold af heste. 2017.
url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=188487#
idfb5d3d8d-0c80-4ce0-8f9c-9c49dc6011b2.
[3]
Hasura. How Hasura GraphQL engine works. url: https://docs.hasura.io/
1.0/graphql/manual/how-it-works/index.html.
[4]
NA. Cron. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron (visited on August 15,
2019).
[5]
Team SASS. Sass Documentation. url: https://sass-lang.com/documentation/
syntax.
[6]
David Simplot-Ryl, National Institute for Research in Computer Science Nathalie
Mitton 2011, and Automation. Is RFID dangerous? url: https://www.inria.
fr/en/centre/lille/news/is-rfid-dangerous.
[7]
SparkFun. SparkFun RedBoard - Programmed with Arduino. url: https://www.
sparkfun.com/products/13975 (visited on August 15, 2019).
[8]
SparkFun. SparkFun Simultaneous RFID Reader - M6E Nano. url: https:
//www.sparkfun.com/products/14066 (visited on August 15, 2019).
[9]
SparkFun. UHF RFID Antenna. url: https://www.sparkfun.com/products/
14131 (visited on August 15, 2019).
[10]
SparkFun. XBee 3 Module - PCB Antenna. url: https://www.sparkfun.com/
products/15126 (visited on August 15, 2019).
[11]
SparkFun. XBee Explorer Regulated. url: https : / / www . sparkfun . com /
products/11373 (visited on August 15, 2019).
==PAGE:92==
