==PAGE:1==
Strategic Alignment for Technology
Ventures within the Manufacturing
Industry in an Industry 4.0 Context
How to align high technology ﬁrms’ innovation with the
manufacturing industry
Danish Technical University
Department of Management Engineering
Master thesis written by
Diego Olivares Garc´ıa
Supervision
Ph.D. Frank Ulrich
Ph.D. Lars Alkærsig
Date of submission
20 August 2019
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would ﬁrst like to thank my thesis supervisors Frank and Lars. Not just for guiding
me during this research, but also for encouraging my creativity. They consistently
allowed this paper to be my own work, but steered me in the right the direction when-
ever they thought I needed it.
I would also like to thank the experts who were involved in the research inter-
views for this project. Without their passionate participation and input, this research
would not the same meaningful and relevant results.
I would like to acknowledge Matti and Maj, I am gratefully indebted to them for
their valuable comments on this thesis.
Finally, I will like to thank FUNED and CONACyT for funding my studies.
Special thanks to Julio for his unconditional support which allowed me to continue
my studies. Thanks Claudia and Regnar. I must express my very profound grati-
tude to my parents and to my brothers for providing me with unfailing support and
continuous encouragement throughout my years of study and through the process of
researching and writing this thesis. This accomplishment would not have been pos-
sible without them.
Thank you all.
Diego Olivares Garc´ıa
“Por mi raza hablar´a el esp´ıritu”
Jos´e Vasconcelos
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Acronyms
4
1
Introduction
6
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
The Fourth Industrial Revolution - Opportunities and Challenges
. .
6
1.3
The challenges and the IIoT ﬁrms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Readiness and maturity of I4.0 in Manufacturing
. . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Theoretical Framework
14
2.1
Alignment formal deﬁnition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Misalignment between Industry 4.0 and technology ﬁrms . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Strategic alignment: The traditional approach . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Internal vs External alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Inside-out alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Outside-in alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.7
The gap in the research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.8
New research question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Research Approach
29
3.1
Research design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.1
Predictive maintenance project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2
Edge analytics Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.3
Cases relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4
Data collection and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.5
Theory building and modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Analysis I: Understanding and Communicating I4.0
43
4.1
Relation with the literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Analysis II: Capability Assessment
48
5.1
Relation with the literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Theory building
52
6.1
The Needs level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
The People level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
The Strategic level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
The OiA model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Discussion
63
7.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
Practical implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.3.1
Limitations in the methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
2
==PAGE:4==
8
Conclusion
70
9
Further work
70
References
75
A Appendix
76
A.1 Interview guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.2 Additional ﬁgures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3 Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
3
==PAGE:5==
Acronyms
AIS Association of Information Systems. 32
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning. 21
I4.0 Industry 4.0. 5, 7, 8, 10–13, 15, 16, 19, 23–25, 27–32, 34, 38, 43, 48, 52, 57,
63, 64, 67, 68, 70
IERC European Research Cluster on the Internet of Things. 8
IIoT Industrial Internet of Things. 2, 7–10, 24, 25, 33, 44, 56
IoA Inside-out Align. 19, 20, 27
IoT Internet of Things. 7, 9, 11, 12, 21
IS Information Systems. 11, 14, 15, 18, 47, 53, 57, 59
IT Information Technologies. 5, 14, 17, 18, 21, 27, 53, 57, 59, 64
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer. 9
OiA Outside-in Align. 24, 26, 27, 52, 59, 63–65, 67, 68, 70
R&D Research and Development. 45, 54–58, 62, 63, 65
ROI Return of investment. 26
SAM Strategic Alignment Model. 14–17, 24, 67
SOSAM Service Oriented Strategic Alignment Model. 25
TSAM Translated Strategic Alignment Model. 22, 23, 52, 55, 58
VDMA IMPULS Foundation of the German Engineering Federation. 11, 12
VP Vice President. 37
4
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This research aims to tackle the barriers manufacturing companies face
to implement industry 4.0 projects, by creating a new framework that allows
technology ﬁrms to go from the identiﬁcation of a need to a concrete imple-
mentation of a strategy. Research into the strategic alignment ﬁeld of the past
15 years is presented and extended to focus on diﬀerent stakeholders within
a technology venture. The point being that technology ﬁrms can asses the
accuracy of their products/services against the customer needs, and asses the
eﬀectiveness of their strategy; empowering them to maximize the use of their
resources.
Strategic alignment theory has been seen as a ﬁeld to merge business
and IT. However, this inquiry proposes an alternative usage of the strategic
alignment theory, applying it to align the needs of the groups present in a
technology venture in an I4.0 context. In the overall picture, strategic align-
ment theory suggests that ﬁrms cannot be competitive if their business and
IT strategies are not aligned (Campbell, 2007).
The argument of this in-
quiry is that while adopting Industry 4.0 trends, the manufacturing industry
is suﬀering from big miss-alignment towards technology companies, which is
obstructing them from thriving. Yet, in the view of the author, alignment lit-
erature has the potential to tackle this problem. Although strategic alignment
literature has demonstrated to have conceptual and practical value, there is
very little work done in regards to practical tools to adopt alignment strate-
gies. Furthermore, there is no alignment research done to speciﬁcally tackle
miss-alignment in the I4.0 context. Providing alignment tools speciﬁcally for
I4.0 will most likely allow technology ﬁrms and industry to overcome the big
challenges they are facing.
This thesis creates a new framework combining the strengths of the strate-
gic alignment models with a strong internal focus, and the (few) existing
strategic alignment frameworks with a strong external focus, and then reﬁn-
ing it with empirical evidence within a case study. The outcome is a model
inspired by strategic alignment literature which allows technology ventures
targeting industries like IIoT to organize their operations by designing pro-
cesses where communication between the relevant actors is eﬀective and lead
to strategic innovation.
5
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
I started my professional career in a small technology venture. Two years later in
my career, I started working as a ﬁeld application engineer in the factory automa-
tion industry, for an international corporation leader of the Industrial Automation
sector. Now it has been ﬁve years where I have been working within the industry, for
diﬀerent companies in diﬀerent countries. Since the beginning, I have experienced
miss-communication and miss-understandings once and again regardless of the size
and experience of the companies. I have seen people selling projects that they can-
not develop and I have seen people rejecting projects they can easily develop. I have
worked months on projects which have more negative consequences than positive
ones. I have had long conversations along the way with colleagues, suppliers, and
customers; always sharing similar experiences about these problems. When looking
at the problem, I just had one question: why, after so many years of experience,
do companies keep falling into this problem once and again? Maybe it is because
of the complexity of the industry and the diﬃculty to make decisions with a wide
perspective. Factories are complex places, and it is easy to get overwhelmed by
the amount of knowledge needed to understand every single piece of them; I have
experienced that problem myself. Maybe one of the biggest challenges I have ob-
served is to match the expectations between technical and commercial people, which
ends up aﬀecting the customer’s satisfaction. I have seen so many times projects
that have been delivered with lots of complications, same complications that could
have been easily avoided. Perhaps the reason behind all of this is the diﬃculty to
have a holistic perspective and the lack of communication strategies. Now it has
been one year since I have been working closely with Industry 4.0 projects. I think
that it is a great moment to start developing management strategies to overcome
the challenges industrial applications are always facing, allowing new industries like
Industry 4.0, to start with the right foot. In this digital era, I believe it is time to
develop innovative management strategies that fully exploit the potential of digital
technologies.
1.2
The Fourth Industrial Revolution - Opportunities and
Challenges
In the late 18th and the early 19th centuries, technology changed in an unprece-
dented way the human lifestyle.
The development of manufacturing technology
allowed humans to go from handcrafted products to machine manufactured prod-
ucts. Since then, a big shift in the activities of everyday life has happened. The ﬁrst
industrial revolution is an inﬂection point in human history. Hard physical work has
been transformed into machine maintenance and supervision. Today, we are in the
midst of a new industrial revolution, where human intervention in the manufacturing
processes is decreasing at every moment. With the available technology, a future
where manufacturing is a completely automated process can be envisioned. This
revolution is commonly referred to as the fourth industrial revolution,1 which has
1 The other three are: 1) Mechanization, water power, steam power and 2) Mass production,
assembly line, electricity, and 3) Computer and Automation (Hermann et al., 2016)
6
==PAGE:8==
been divided into three key components: Internet of things (IoT), Cyber-Physical
Systems and Smart Factories (Hermann et al., 2016). The term Industry 4.0 (I4.0)
is usually used to refer to the fourth revolution. I4.0 and surrounding trends like
remote monitoring and predictive maintenance, have become widely popular in the
last decade. One of the main reasons behind this fact is the huge potential it entails
which will be described in detail.
Maybe the most popular component within industry 4.0 is the IoT. IoT is an
ambitious trend which aims to make a big shift in the way the industry planning
and operation is done. Although the term IoT was ﬁrst introduced in 1999 (Ashton,
2009), there is still not a unique formal deﬁnition of it. The scope of the term has
been changing with the emerging technologies, where maybe the most relevant are
the low powered wireless sensors and devices. The IoT term, in essence, describes
the next generation of Internet where the physical things could be accessed and iden-
tiﬁed through the Internet and they can exchange data regardless of the leveraged
technology (Shancang Li, 2003). IoT allows the creation of smart buildings, smart
automobiles, smart factories, etc. When the term refers to industrial applications it
is commonly known as Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT).
Wirtz (2017) presents IIoT divided into four key components: information proto-
cols & middleware, sensors, actuators and IT-driven services. Sensors and actuators
represent the things or physical devices and generate all the data from the industrial
processes in the factory ﬂoor, being at one edge of the system. IT-driven services
place the outcome at the other edge of the system, they process the data and present
a solution to the users, where the beneﬁts of IIoT can be obtained by means of in-
formation, results or actions which predict or optimize industrial processes. Finally,
information protocols and middleware are the path for information to ﬂow from one
edge to the other (Wirtz, 2017).
The amount of data available in industrial devices is enormous. Today sensors,
controllers, actuators and machines; generate an immense amount of data every
minute and most of it is just used locally by industrial devices to control their iso-
lated processes. However, a lot of the data can be used for optimizing operations
as well. Maybe the most promising trend associated with IIoT, which can make use
of the generated data, is the predictive maintenance. Predictive maintenance is the
capability to know when and where a machine will fail, this means that industrial
enterprises can schedule the maintenance of the machinery on time. Thus, enter-
prises can avoid breakdowns and generate huge cost savings, preventing unexpected
failures in the production lines.
The estimated market value only of the IoT industry by 2025 is up to 933.62
billion USD (Million Insights, 2017) and most of the estimations are over 200 billion
USD. The reason behind these astonishing numbers are the promises on cost reduc-
tion, quality improvement, elimination of production breakdowns, fully automated
processes, etc. However, the status of the installed base of devices and software in
the industry is immense, and for the great majority integrating all the systems to
obtain the beneﬁts mentioned above is still far into the future.
7
==PAGE:9==
IoT has caught big attention today and not only private organizations are in-
vesting in it. Governments like the UK, China, and the USA; represent examples
of public organizations funding programs to develop IoT technologies (Zhou, 2013).
Also, international actors such as the EU created the European Research Cluster
on the Internet of Things (IERC), whose aim is to exploit the potential of IoT. The
IERC deﬁnes the term IoT as a global infrastructure for the information society,
enabling advanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based
on existing and evolving interoperable information and communication technologies.
2 Interoperability is the capability to use data from diﬀerent kind/format combined
to do the required operation/calculations into the same process/application to solve
a speciﬁc problem. Interoperability represents one of the top obstacles for I4.0 adop-
tion (Schallehn et al., 2019).
1.3
The challenges and the IIoT ﬁrms
Today, there are hundreds of companies trying to use the available data in the facto-
ries to take advantage of the I4.0 potential. Such companies are often limiting their
solutions to the sections on the factories where the information is already extracted
and centralized by industrial gateways. The reason behind that, is the technical
challenges that integration entangles. If companies want to integrate all the systems
of a factory in their solution, they should have huge knowledge in communication
standards, industrial devices, industrial safety, software, etc.
Several surveys have been conducted about the challenges of the I4.0 and most
of them conclude that the challenges are still big. Although companies are aware
of the potential of trends like IoT, they struggle to have a clear vision of how to
incorporate it into their business strategy. After researching the former, Selim Erol1
(2016) created a three-stage model for I4.0 transformation, which was tested in co-
operation with the Austrian government and local industry leaders. They concluded
that co-innovation involving multiple stakeholders is beneﬁcial for everyone and fa-
cilitates I4.0 adoption (Selim Erol1, 2016). Hence, to develop an eﬀective strategy,
cooperation between the stakeholders and the alignment of needs and resources be-
tween them is crucial.
Andreas Schumacher a (2016) conducted extensive research of the I4.0 challenges
and then interviewed experts regarding the challenges of implementation of Industry
4.0 and found the following three challenges:
2Figure 14 on the Appendix 2
8
==PAGE:10==
Table 1: Industry 4.0 challenges (Andreas Schumacher a, 2016)
Challenges
1)
Companies perceive the concepts of Industry 4.0 as highly
complex with no strategic guidance oﬀered;
2)
Companies lack a clear idea of Industry 4.0, resulting in
uncertainty regarding beneﬁts and outcomes;
3)
Companies fail to assess their own capabilities in Industry 4.0,
which restrains from taking any coordinated measures.
As mentioned before, one of the most promising applications of IIoT is predictive
maintenance. Companies are investing in proof of concept projects, ﬁnding predic-
tive maintenance applications more challenging than anticipated. Thus, adoption
expectations had decreased in the short term (Schallehn et al., 2019). This means
that enterprises are postponing their adoption plans due to technical expertise; how-
ever, in the long run, adoption expectations remain the same, which means that a
huge market is still out there (Schallehn et al., 2019). From 2016 to 2018, security
and integration were still top concerns, indicating that tech vendors have not made
much progress in addressing these. However, fewer customers are concerned about
Returns of Investment (ROI) than two years ago, perhaps because they have been
satisﬁed and implementations are beginning to deliver vendors’ promises (Schallehn
et al., 2019). 3
But why is integration so challenging? Unfortunately, but perhaps not surpris-
ingly, the majority of the installed base4 in the factories was not born for the IoT
era. It is very hard to extract data and use the data for the promises that IIoT
has made. One of the big challenges of IoT is interoperability. As mentioned be-
fore, interoperability is the capability to use data from diﬀerent nature combined to
solve a speciﬁc problem. But why is that so diﬃcult? In the last 50 years, several
communication standards and protocols have been developed. These standards and
protocols can considerably diﬀer with regards to physical media, application and,
most importantly, the structure of the transmitted data. However the success of
IoT depends on the standardization, which provides interoperability, compatibility,
reliability, and eﬀectiveness of the operations on a global scale (Shancang Li, 2003).
There are more than 100 communication standards, which may diﬀer signiﬁcantly
between one another. They can diﬀer from the physical media (wired or wireless)
but also in the philosophy of the communication process. Furthermore, due to the
amount and diversity of Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), engineers may
ﬁnd one communication protocol more useful than another, one speciﬁc kind of data
and, in many cases, they may even ﬁnd it easier to simply create a new protocol,
kind of data or a variant of the existing ones.
The communication protocol war has not been won by anyone, although some
protocols have become more popular than others and organizations are trying to
tackle this problem by creating universal standards. Every year, new protocols are
3For more details see the ﬁgure 17 on appendix 2
4The term installed base refers to the devices and software that have been installed in the
factories and are running the industrial processes.
9
==PAGE:11==
emerging, something which arguably increases the challenges connected with in-
teroperability. On top of that, big enterprises leverage a big amount of diﬀerent
software for their operations and some of them could be completely closed, i.e. that
can only be accessed and adapted by the owners of the technology and therefore,
hard to integrate into the operations as a whole. Finally, the challenge becomes
bigger when the integration needs to be extended towards a bigger section of value
chain.
The devices (things) are the controllers and sensors on the machines that are
running processes in the factories. Every time more data is needed, experts need
to access the controllers and develop or update the programs on them. These tasks
always imply a risk of malfunctioning due to bugs in the new programs or damage
that could have been inﬂicted during the intervention. In general, all these updates
need to be scheduled during a time where the factories can stop the production,
which could be from a gap of 30 minutes to a maximum of a few weeks. As for the
great majority of manufacturing companies, a break longer than a week happens in
very few cases during a year and it is normally when major changes or maintenance
need to be done. The short time limits and high implementation risks, increase
considerably the implementation challenges. It needs to be stressed that a stop in
production is one of the most severe situations in the manufacturing industry. For
example, a break in the line of an automotive factory, costs in average 22,000 USD
per minute (Vadala and Graham, 2006).
New technologies indeed incorporate more and more communication capabilities
that enable them to be integrated into IoT applications. Nevertheless, it is unreal-
istic to think about projects where the whole factory is retroﬁtted. Even in such a
case, the great majority of the industrial software/devices are still not born to easily
share the data for IoT applications; their main purpose is to share data with the
controllers or devices needed to control their isolated processes.
It is important to mention that several diﬀerent companies will enable I4.0 in
the near future, but essentially these can be divided into four categories: 1) cloud
service providers, 2) network and hardware providers, 3) analytics vendors and 4)
device/equipment makers (Schallehn et al., 2019) 5 . An application like predictive
maintenance will involve all of these companies to a high degree. Of course, this is
an ambitious skill set for one company. In a future where I4.0 is fully implemented,
perfect alignment between the four categories would exist. Such alignment would
enable interoperability between any kind of devices and software. Then, no restric-
tion would exist to acquire the beneﬁts of I4.0. To achieve that level of alignment
between big and complex enterprises is unreal. For this reason, project managers
and/or system integrators need to claim the role of alignment enablers. To do so,
they will need to have a clear picture of the status of manufacturers needs and re-
strictions, then develop business relationships with the four kinds of IIoT ﬁrms and
ﬁnally, adjust their resources to eﬀectively fulﬁll those needs.
In summary, the curve of I4.0 implementation is going up and companies that
are taking part in this, need to develop the right capabilities, at the right moment,
5Showcased in the ﬁgure 15 of the appendix 2
10
==PAGE:12==
to ﬁt into the I4.0 road map. Not being able to quickly identify, deﬁne and adapt
to the industry needs will result in an abrupt bankrupt. To ﬁnd a midpoint be-
tween the I4.0 promises and feasibility is mandatory, such point should primarily
bring a short term improvement on cost, eﬃciency and/or value. Therefore, key
partial integration of systems (software, processes and things/devices) need to be
implemented, but such integration should be a stepping stone and lead towards full
integration of I4.0.
1.4
Readiness and maturity of I4.0 in Manufacturing
In an extensive study of maturity models in the areas of business, information sys-
tems (IS) and computer science made by Kohlegger et al. (2009), they selected the
16 more cited maturity models to ﬁnd a common deﬁnition of the term.
They
concluded the following: maturing means a change on formality, distribution, com-
mitment, legitimization, understandability, and teachability of the maturing subject.
Hence, the more a subject is spread, studied, tested or even taught from one entity
to another, the more mature the subject is. The maturing subject was deﬁned as
a knowledge domain about a topic, where the knowledge elements change in na-
ture while they advance through the knowledge maturing process (Kohlegger et al.,
2009). In summary, knowledge plays a main role in maturity and the bigger the
knowledge in a certain topic (or industry), the more mature that topic (or industry)
is.
A maturity model is a very useful tool for young industries, which tend to have
a lack of knowledge, undeﬁned scope, and high uncertainty. By applying a maturity
model and gathering information from the diﬀerent players of a speciﬁc industry, a
clear picture of the current state of the industry can be obtained, and to deﬁne a
strategy to target the market becomes more evident. Then, ﬁrms can develop clear
technology road-maps and deﬁne milestones to drive the industry towards maturity.
Technology ﬁrms should consider important the maturity of the industry since it
will allow them to identify opportunities, build an eﬀective strategy and apply it at
the correct timing.
Production technology is widely spread today, in a general context we can con-
sider it as highly mature and mainly driven by increasing eﬃciency in the manufac-
turing processes (Andreas Schumacher a, 2016). Certainly, I4.0 and IoT are becom-
ing major players in this matter; unfortunately, when we talk about the maturity of
both, we see a very diﬀerent picture. To depict the state of IoT in manufacturing,
a study by IMPULS Foundation of the German Engineering Federation (VDMA)
brings some valuable insights (Lichtblau et al., 2015). VDMA developed a readiness
model for I4.0 and applied it to 289 companies from the German manufacturing
industry6.
6It is also important to mention that maturity and readiness can be understood as synonyms,
however a readiness assessment takes place before starting a maturity strategy, whereas a maturity
assessment aims to capture the current state in the maturity process (Andreas Schumacher a,
2016).
11
==PAGE:13==
VDMA found that just in the mechanical sector, 42.8% of the companies are not
involved at all in I4.0 and if we take the whole manufacturing industry, the number
increases up to 54.2%. On the other hand, the percentage of companies which have
integrated I4.0 heavily, decreases from 22.3% to 10%.
In the study conducted by VDMA, companies with a high level of I4.0 adoption
were rated as leaders. This does not mean that all companies heavily involved in
I4.0 are getting huge beneﬁts from it, but that they have identiﬁed it as a way of dif-
ferentiation, keeping or gaining leadership in their market. In the results presented,
just 8.6% of the leaders have a lack of clarity of the economic beneﬁt, whereas,
for learners and newcomers, the numbers are signiﬁcantly higher; 63.6% and 78.8%
respectively. Furthermore, just 1.8% of leaders considered that there is a lack of
market for I4.0 adoption, whereas, for learners and newcomers, the numbers were
15.7% and 37.9% respectively. Finally, when it comes to lack of norms and stan-
dards, all of them scored above 40%, which is not very surprising after the discussion
above where interoperability was considered a major barrier.
VDMA study shows that manufacturing industry is not ready for I4.0, neverthe-
less, the amount of companies trying to get on board is increasing and more projects
are popping up. Someone would need to step in and carry out these projects. Tech-
nology companies must develop precise product/technology road-maps to match
their solution with the needs of I4.0. By doing this, ﬁrms can obtain a sustainable
competitive advantage and achieve a leadership position at the time the industry
reaches maturity. Technology ﬁrms need to develop strategies that allow them to
create value from the short term and pursue radical innovation in the mid/long term.
Technology ﬁrms developing I4.0 projects should be able to align their operations
and resources with the manufacturing project managers who own I4.0 projects, to
develop products, services or tools to overcome the challenges.
It is clear that companies heavily involved in I4.0 implementations have seen
that there is a big economic beneﬁt and the great majority have experienced the
existence of a big market for it. Yet, these companies represent just 10% of the
manufacturing industry, which means that there is big unexplored potential for the
remaining 90% of the industry. It is also clear that standardization and cooperation
between the four categories of IoT ﬁrms and system integrators7 is crucial to remove
the big barrier of interoperability and increase the percentage of adoption. Last but
not least, big companies need vast knowledge to integrate all existing systems, which
means that they need to grow their knowledge and acquire new capabilities or fulﬁll
these gaps with system integrators, partners or new technology ventures. A tech-
nology venture is any technology project pursued by organizations which intend to
discover a new solution or technology; it could be an arisen project from a big or-
ganization or a technology development done by a start-up company. In the study
case presented in this inquiry, both of the previously mentioned technology ventures
can be identiﬁed; however, the case study focuses on a technology venture from the
7System integrators are companies which have the knowledge to implement the technology
produced by diﬀerent companies into a single application, e.g. a system integrator could be a
company which integrates the analytics software with the devices installed in the factory ﬂoor, to
do so the system integrator needs to know how to use both, the analytics software and the devices.
12
==PAGE:14==
perspective of a start-up technology company.
1.5
Research question
It is a fact that companies perceive I4.0 as highly complex, have not a clear idea of
its beneﬁts and ignore if they have the capabilities to embrace it. However, it should
be a way to overcome these challenges and increase the percentage of adoption of
manufacturing industry; to do so, it is necessary to solve the following question:
How can technology ventures overcome the challenges of I4.0 in manufacturing?
1.6
Thesis structure
This document has the following structure: First, the theoretical framework will
be presented and a gap in the literature will be pointed out; with the ﬁndings
and limitations of the literature, the research question will be reﬁned.
Second,
the research design, methodology and case studies will be introduced. Third, two
analysis are presented, the ﬁrst one will focus on the communication processes in a
technology venture; the second one will analyze their capability assessment process.
Both analyses are done within the case studies. Then, with the ﬁndings of both
analysis and with the aid of the literature, a set of propositions are presented to build
a new strategic alignment framework for practitioners. Lastly, the contributions and
limitations are discussed and the conclusions are presented.
13
==PAGE:15==
2
Theoretical Framework
2.1
Alignment formal deﬁnition
The Oxford dictionary deﬁnes alignment as a position of agreement or alliance (ali,
2019). In a general context, organizational alignment has been deﬁned as the de-
gree in which companies thrive to match, align or ﬁt their organizational resources,
goals, structure and needs (Baker et al., 2011). Strategic alignment is deﬁned as the
need for any strategy to address both external and internal domains (Henderson and
Venkatraman, 1993). The external domain is product/market-driven and includes
partnerships and alliances. The internal domain is the administrative structure,
the design of business processes and the acquisition and development of human re-
sources.
Henderson and Venkatraman (1993) introduced maybe the most representative
strategic alignment model (SAM), the SAM states that internal and external do-
mains are divided into two diﬀerent categories, business and IT. Thus, the model
aims to remove the gap between external and internal domains, as well as the busi-
ness and IT gap (Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993). The former implies that the
success of any business needs to have a complete merge between the business pro-
cesses and strategy with IT; internally to support processes and externally to drive
strategy and enable new businesses.
IT are all digital technologies leveraged to support the operation of enterprises;
e.g. electronic imaging, local and wide area networks, software, robotics, etc. (Hen-
derson and Venkatraman, 1993).
In more recent research it has been argued that no size ﬁts all in the adoption
of IT technologies (Weiss et al., 2006). Successful companies not necessarily have
implemented a formal IT strategy (Weiss et al., 2006). Nonetheless, it has been
acknowledged that full integration of IT (internal and external) can be used as a
weapon to transform business and attain a leadership position in the market (Weiss
et al., 2006).
Since the beginning, alignment has been considered a dynamic attribute (Hender-
son and Venkatraman, 1993) and further work has been done to integrate dynamic
capabilities when implementing strategic alignment, seeing that they will lead to
achieving a sustained alignment. Sustainable alignment should lead to sustainable
competitive advantage (van de Wetering et al., 2018; Baker et al., 2011; Sun and
Chen, 2006; Al-majali and Md. Dahalin, 2014). Considering that IT and markets are
changing environments, the dynamic strategic alignment literature provides guide-
lines to build iterative processes, where strategy and processes are always monitored
to develop resilient organizational structures. Then, alignment has become an ongo-
ing process and can be measured and improved continuously. To achieve a dynamic
alignment, Information Systems (IS) need to be designed in a way where reconﬁgu-
ration is easy (Sun and Chen, 2006, 2008).
Strategic alignment has been heavily studied for almost 40 years since Hender-
son and Venkatraman (1993) developed the SAM. After that, Information Systems
14
==PAGE:16==
and IT, in general, have been seen as necessary when it comes to both, adminis-
trative processes and strategy. The concept of alignment proposed by Henderson
and Venkatraman (1993) looks for achieving a ﬁt between the external and internal
elements of a company and a ﬁt between business and IT. After the introduction of
the SAM, big contributions have been made into the strategic alignment ﬁeld.
When the term strategic alignment was coined in the 1980s, it treated business
and IT as separate entities. Today the adoption and reliability of IT have increased
signiﬁcantly, and to see business and IT as a diﬀerent thing may not be as useful as
before. Some research suggests that IT and business should be understood as one
entity (Smaczny, 2001; Avison et al., 2004). This inquiry adopts the former idea but
also that alignment should match organizational resources (including IT/IS) with
environmental threats and opportunities (Avison et al., 2004).
Some researchers, have proposed the environment and customer segment, to play
the central role when leveraging an alignment strategy. The former approach will
help technology ventures to pay more attention to the manufacturing customers
(Khan et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2007).
In the entrepreneurial processes, where IT capabilities are usually on an im-
mature state (Sun and Chen, 2008), the IT capability development is critical for
alignment (Sun and Chen, 2008). The former is of big relevance for this research
since it has a big focus on alignment between the manufacturing industry and new
technology ventures.
Walsh et al. (2010) shifted the SAM model and proposed a three-level network:
main actants, delegates, and intermediaries; this means that in a single model strate-
gical and tactical activities are present. Thus, a linkage is created between tangible
things like people and intangible things like strategy. Walsh et al. (2010) broke the
SAM into pieces and redeﬁned the structure and elements of alignment, concluding
that alignment should ﬁt the needs of the diﬀerent parties involved in the imple-
mentation of IT.
Finally, this research will deﬁne alignment as the degree that resources, structure,
and needs from diﬀerent elements of a company support each other. These elements
can be internal or external to a company.
The research also acknowledges that
alignment is a dynamic process with an iterative nature and can be embraced with
a combination of administrative processes and IS infrastructure.
2.2
Misalignment between Industry 4.0 and technology ﬁrms
After presenting the challenges of I4.0 in section 1.3 and the deﬁnition of alignment
in section 2.1, it can be established that a big misalignment exists between existing
technology and the needs of the manufacturing industry. There is misalignment be-
tween the OEMs, analytics vendors, cloud services providers, and network hardware
ﬁrms in regards to interoperable communication. There is also a big misalignment
between the potential of I4.0 and the beneﬁts perceived by manufacturing compa-
nies. Lastly, there is misalignment between the skills of manufacturing companies
15
==PAGE:17==
and the I4.0 projects desired by them.
When misalignment exists, some of the work developed by technology ﬁrms is
wasted developing unnecessary features or pursuing the wrong solution. Therefore,
the bigger the misalignment, the longer projects will take and the more expensive
solutions will be (Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007).
This inquiry aims to ﬁnd a model to help technology ﬁrms targeting immature
industries like I4.0 in the adoption of eﬀective strategies to develop the right pro-
duct/service at the right time, utilizing strategic alignment.
To address the challenges of I4.0 with the aid of strategic alignment theory, in
the following sections strategic alignment models have been selected and analyzed.
First, this thesis starts analyzing the traditional approach and then models with
relevant additions; to enlarge the scope of the elements to align, add ﬂexibility for
dynamic environments and to integrate the customer/market needs considering the
market maturity.
2.3
Strategic alignment: The traditional approach
Maybe the most accepted model for strategic alignment (SAM) is the one pro-
posed by Henderson and Venkatraman (1993), which subdivides a company into
four main categories; two internal and two external: organizational infrastructure
and processes (internal), information systems infrastructure and processes (inter-
nal), business strategy (external) and IT strategy (external).
The SAM is based on two fundamental assumptions: 1) economic performance
is directly related with the ability of management to create a strategic ﬁt between
the position of a ﬁrm in the market and the design of an appropriate administrative
structure to support its execution. 2) the strategic ﬁt is inherently dynamic (Hen-
derson and Venkatraman, 1993).
The main contribution of the SAM is a fundamental change in the role of IT
in organizations. Since the model was presented the ﬁrst time, a huge shift has
been made in the integration of IT in businesses (Avison et al., 2004) and today
IT is heavily integrated into the operation of every business. Strategic alignment
literature has been a huge aid for this to happen (Doumi et al., 2011).
Figure 1 shows two key points of the SAM model, the strategic ﬁt and the
functional integration. The strategic ﬁt needs to be done to align the internal and
external operations so that the strategy of a company should be coherent with the
structure, processes, and skills of it (Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993). For exam-
ple, a software company with a limited amount of developers, will have a hard time
trying to develop projects directly for several customers and give them technical
support at the same time; it will be more coherent to target fewer customers or use
partners to be able to serve all of them. The functional integration should be done
to align the operation of the company with IT, so that the current and future IT
16
==PAGE:18==
technologies fully support and enhance the operations (Henderson and Venkatra-
man, 1993). In the software company example mentioned above, to achieve better
functional integration, the software company can implement a customer interface
functionality, then the customer can customize their solution, releasing the software
company from the technical support responsibility.
Figure 1: J. C. Henderson and N. Venkatraman, strategic alignment model (Hen-
derson and Venkatraman, 1993)
.
To have a common understanding of strategic alignment, the deﬁnition of the
elements in the SAM will be used to deﬁne such elements during this thesis:
IT strategy: The SAM deﬁnes the IT strategy in three main elements: infor-
mation technology scope (speciﬁc technologies to support business initiatives), sys-
temic competencies (attributes to support business initiatives) and IT governance
17
==PAGE:19==
(selection and use of mechanisms to obtain the required IT competences respec-
tively)(Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993).
IS infrastructure and processes: The SAM deﬁnes the IS infrastructure and
processes in three main elements: IS architecture (deﬁnition of hardware and soft-
ware architecture), IS processes (operation of the IS systems, e.g. monitoring and
maintenance) and IS skills (acquisition, training, and development of individuals to
manage and operate IS infrastructure) (Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993).
Henderson and Venkatraman (1993) presents four diﬀerent perspectives for align-
ment. For the matter of this inquiry, the author will introduce just only the service
level perspective due to the relevance to tackle the challenges of I4.08. The service
level perspective states that the IT strategy should drive the company, therefore
IS and resources should adapt to meet the customer needs (Henderson and Venka-
traman, 1993). This perspective of alignment allows fast response to change and
enable managers to allocate scarce resources best within the organization and IT
marketplace (Henderson and Venkatraman, 1993).
Later on, Luftman (2000) created one of the most elaborated models for strate-
gic alignment (El Mekawy et al., 2009). The model presented by Luftman (2000)
states six criteria that need to be considered to mature and sustain alignment:
communication, competency/value measurements, governance, partnership, scope
& architecture and skills. Luftman (2000) proposed six diﬀerent levels of strategic
alignment maturity; when a process attains the highest level of maturity (optimized
process), six things should happen:
Table 2: Optimized process characteristics (Luftman et al., 2008).
Optimized process
1)
Communication between business and IT is informal and under-
standing is high,
2)
competencies and value, are extended to external partners,
3)
governance is integrated across the organization and partners,
4)
IT and business fully support each other,
5)
the scope and architecture evolves with partners and
6)
education, career plan and rewards for skills exist across the orga-
nization.
2.4
Internal vs External alignment
In the last 15 years, several additions have been made to the traditional alignment
models. Extensive research has been done to describe in-depth each of the elements
of the traditional models and great work has been made to unify the terminology and
8 The other three are: Strategy execution: business strategy drives the choices. Technol-
ogy transformation: identiﬁes the best IT competencies to position in the IT market place.
Competitive potential: exploitation of emerging IT capabilities
18
==PAGE:20==
the models itself (Vargas et al., 2010). Also, useful extensions have been made to
thrive in alignment when diﬀerent business strategies are pursued. Factors like orga-
nizational culture, have shown to have a key role (Fattah and Arman, 2014). Some
strategic alignment literature shows how to approach speciﬁc kind of customers and
to optimize and align processes and people (Cuenca et al., 2010). Yet, little research
(although relevant) has been made to concretely address external alignment, i.e. to-
wards the customer and the value chain (Khan et al., 2012; Cuenca et al., 2014; Ho
et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2007). This section aims to highlight the relevant additions
to strategic alignment which have huge potential to solve the misalignment between
technology ﬁrms and the relevant stakeholders within I4.0.
We would deﬁne Inside-out Alignment (IoA) to the alignment which has a strong
focus on the internal processes and infrastructure. IoA models include all the exter-
nal elements of a company inside the business and IT strategies, therefore there is
no need to consider individual blocks for external elements when deﬁning a strate-
gic alignment framework.
We would deﬁne Outside-in Alignment (OiA), to the
alignment which main focus is on the external elements of a company; i.e. that
the structure, processes, strategy, and infrastructure are mainly driven by the mar-
ket/customer needs and the relationship with suppliers and partners (service level
perspective). An IoA alignment model would describe how to achieve a strategic ﬁt
and a functional integration from the inside of a company; this means that its main
focus would be on how the employees and processes of a company interact between
one another. e.g. Vargas et al. (2010) uniﬁes several strategic alignment models
to achieve a common deﬁnition of all the elements deﬁned in the traditional model
and their variations or contributions over time, however, there is no detailed focus
on how a company relates to external elements like customer or partners. An OiA
model would describe ﬁrst, how do certain employees/systems align with external
entities and subsequently with the internal personal/processes of a ﬁrm. e.g. Lee
et al. (2007) proposes an extension to the SAM, where the market segment plays a
key role. Table 3 shows the diﬀerent focus that strategic alignment models found in
the literature review pursue and classiﬁes them into IaO and OiA.
19
==PAGE:21==
Table 3: Focus of the diﬀerent alignment models
Focus
Reference
Business processes and its rela-
tion with structure/people.
Bhattacharya (2018),Lewis
(2012)
How IT technologies should sup-
port business plans.
Fattah
and
Arman
(2014),Masa’deh
and
Kuk
(2007),Sun
and
Chen (2008),Cuenca et al.
(2010),Asoh et al. (2007)
Automation and digitization of
processes
Azedine et al. (2012)
Inside-out
Uniﬁcation of concepts and ter-
minology of strategic alignment
models.
Vargas et al. (2010)
Strategic Alignment redeﬁnition
- focus on the relation between
strategy and people.
Walsh et al. (2010)
Monitor and/or optimization of
business performance.
Damiani
et
al.
(2008),
Thevenet
(2008),
Jadda
and Janati Idrissi (2015),
Kimble et al. (2009)
IT implementation planning - im-
plementation phases and consid-
erations for smooth and eﬀective
implementation.
Maksim et al. (2018),Beﬀers
and de Waal (2018)
Alignment driven by market/ en-
vironment - alignment for prod-
uct development with external
environment considerations.
Khan et al. (2012),Cuenca
et
al.
(2014),Lee
et
al.
(2007), Goepp and Avila
(2015)
Outside-in
Customer perspective and busi-
ness value .
Asli et al. (2013)
Evaluation
of
capabilities
-
Outsource/In-source
develop-
ment.
Ho et al. (2015)
2.5
Inside-out alignment
If technology ventures want to take coordinated measures, regardless of the kind of
alignment strategy they adopt, the boundaries of the diﬀerent elements of a com-
pany must be smoothly merged. Organizational skills, structure, infrastructure, and
processes need to be coherently linked and designed to support the present activities
and plans of a business (Vargas et al., 2010). The IoA alignment has been exten-
sively researched and several approaches exist to merge operation and the software
tools. Maybe one of the most powerful of these tools is the ERP software, which
is an enterprise software divided by modules, each module should automate and
support the operation of each of the areas of the company and the linkage between
the modules should be correct to achieve a ﬁt into operations. By doing this ﬁrms
20
==PAGE:22==
can increase signiﬁcantly their performance (Presley, 2006; Luftman et al., 2008).
Although software tools like ERP are powerful, they should be designed under
the proper alignment between the business strategy and operations (Presley, 2006).
Some researchers have developed diﬀerent models to rate the alignment between
processes and people in operations (Kimble et al., 2009; Jadda and Janati Idrissi,
2015; Damiani et al., 2008), by using them to diagnose alignment problems is possi-
ble and corrective strategies can be implemented. From an internal perspective, the
alignment between processes and people should facilitate the assessment of ventures’
capabilities. Technology ﬁrms should use alignment frameworks to design and con-
ceptualize processes beforehand. To identify, conceptualize, deﬁne and plan each of
the processes, would have as a result aligned and eﬃcient operations (Cuenca et al.,
2010). Not assessing properly implementation of systems like ERP software in re-
gards to alignment, can have several economic consequences (Kimble et al., 2009).
From an IoA perspective, a lot of research has been done on the integration
between IT and business strategy.
One of the main goals to achieve alignment
between business and IT strategy may be strategic innovation since strategic in-
novation should drive ﬁrms to signiﬁcantly outperform their competitors (Kimble
et al., 2009). Strategic innovation is the successful introduction of a radically new
business model (Kimble et al., 2009). Technology ﬁrms can embrace strategic inno-
vation by understanding the needs of the manufacturing industry. Understanding
those needs is the ﬁrst step to adopt the proper IT technologies that will support
the business during the strategy execution.
Researchers have identiﬁed diﬀerent key capabilities to thrive when aligning busi-
ness and IT strategy. Masa’deh and Kuk (2007) proposed a casual model for strate-
gic alignment and business performance, which aims to ﬁt the IT and business
strategy, where communication, connection, and shared knowledge; play key roles
in alignment success. Communication and shared knowledge are essential for fast
and eﬀective product/technology development. Technology ﬁrms need to implement
internal processes where knowledge is always available to everyone; common under-
standing is easier to get if everyone has access to the same source of knowledge
(Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007). When knowledge is transmitted through diﬀerent lev-
els through an organization, it is more likely to be changed by interpretation; then
the longer the communication chain, the bigger the misalignment will be (Masa’deh
and Kuk, 2007). Cross communication between the diﬀerent groups of a technology
ﬁrm will keep objectives aligned and decisions taken between the diﬀerent groups
will, more likely, support each other. IT is a key enabler of shared knowledge and
cross-communication.
The model proposed by Masa’deh and Kuk (2007) states that alignment should
lead to an IT business value, i.e. that all the activities developed by IT can directly
be related to its eﬀect on company goals or performance (Masa’deh and Kuk,
2007). In the speciﬁc case of the IoT industry, IT not only has great value for the
operations, but it also is the solution itself. IoT ﬁrms have the biggest potential to
fully merge IT into their operations.
21
==PAGE:23==
Fattah and Arman (2014) argue that organizational culture is a key success fac-
tor to achieve alignment between business and IT, through communication. Fattah
and Arman (2014) proposed to add an extra block for organizational culture to the
SAM model. Technology ﬁrms should not underestimate the role of communication
and culture while pursuing a strategic alignment strategy. Eﬀective communication
between partners, manufacturers and the diﬀerent groups of a technology venture;
is necessary to address the research question.
The integration between business and processes has been constantly related to
performance (Luftman et al., 2008). Processes and its integration with IT are a
major factor in performance since the nature of this integration is to automate pro-
cesses. If technology ventures want to attain superior performance, they should be
able to rate the eﬀectiveness of the integration of IT and processes (Damiani et al.,
2008). Asoh et al. (2007) developed a model where alignment should be done be-
tween business strategy, knowledge strategy and organizational performance. Asoh
et al. (2007) model leaves out IT as such, but it turns out obvious that IT is a key
enabler of all the elements of the model. IT doubtlessly plays one of the main roles
in organizational performance, however, it is important to highlight that the proper
design of an IT infrastructure might be even more important. To keep in mind the
available research in the strategic alignment ﬁeld should be a major concern while
implementing IT into operations.
In this research, one of the most challenging tasks that organizations face during
alignment is the proper classiﬁcation of a need. The former would allow technol-
ogy ventures to identify the owner of such need and its relationship not only with
the rest of the people but also with the systems of the company. Technology ﬁrms
should be able to accurately identify the needs inside and outside the company, and
also the owner of those needs. This way a path to implement alignment strategies
can be envisioned. Walsh et al. (2010) introduced a SAM model extended with the
translation theory (TSAM) (ﬁgure 2). The model shows a clear picture of people,
needs, structure, and strategy. From our perspective, the model presented by Walsh
et al. (2010) is a powerful tool since it gives the user which questions needs to be
asked and to whom, the model linkages show a coherent relation and the ﬁt between
them gives a practical guide for implementation.
Walsh et al. (2010) transformed the strategic ﬁt and functional integration by
introducing 7 diﬀerent ﬁts that can be seen in ﬁgure 2, which give a much more
concrete path to implement an alignment strategy. The seven ﬁts match diﬀerent
needs into an organization, those needs could be contextual, situational or global;
which means that the needs are perceived depending on the individual’s environ-
ment or socialization (Walsh et al., 2010). In the framework proposed by Walsh
et al. (2010) communication and a smooth integration of IT during the execution
of projects, make a huge diﬀerence in the context perceived by the users of IT,
which will change their (contextual/situational) needs; this means that employees
can have a much higher acceptance of the IT into their daily tasks, as well as a
better understanding of the importance of integration (Walsh et al., 2010).
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2: Walsh et al. (2010) translated strategic alignment model.
The concept of a translator (project manager) could be extrapolated to the
project managers of the I4.0. Thus, project managers should be able to balance the
needs of the relevant actors throughout an organization. Listening to the customers
and job experts point of view will ﬁt the selected technology with the customer’s
needs. The TSAM empowers companies to depict alignment strategies at three dif-
ferent levels, actants (strategic and organizational level), intermediaries (needs level)
and intermediaries (people level). The translated strategic alignment model has a
strong internal perspective, but can be used as a basis to achieve an OiA alignment,
by extending it to the market or customers needs. Furthermore, partners and sup-
pliers might be involved to achieve a strong alignment in a larger section of the value
chain. Some research has been done to address the former, and before extending
the mentioned model, it is worth to mention the relevant additions to the strategic
alignment world which have an OiA perspective.
2.6
Outside-in alignment
Most of the models and frameworks for strategic alignment, have a strong focus on
internal structure and processes and take for granted that the external environment
will be managed by the strategy, however the assumption of this paper is that: in an
23
==PAGE:25==
I4.0 context, the main driver of alignment should come from outside of the company;
thus, companies should align their strategy and structure according to the needs of
the industry. In an OiA perspective, successful development happens when internal
processes are tailored with a customer perspective (Asli et al., 2013). Once a need is
identiﬁed, everything should be aligned to eﬀectively cover that need. The challenge
in new industries like IIoT, is that the scope of a need could be diﬃcult to depict,
and may take several iterations until technology companies ﬁnd feasible solutions
where the customer is satisﬁed. The environment is constantly changing and it is
necessary that strategy changes accordingly to ﬁt with the external environment
(Lee et al., 2007).
Khan et al. (2012) added to the SAM model an environment block, which is con-
nected to the business and IT strategy. This led to 2 main statements: (1) Changes
in environmental factors aﬀect business strategy and (2) environmental change in-
ﬂuences IS strategy of a ﬁrm (Khan et al., 2012).
Understanding the environment and external elements is necessary to transmit
the value of I4.0 towards the customer. Lewis (2012) found that strategic alignment
allows companies to identify speciﬁc training investments, that should be done to
spread goals and vision across companies. In industries as undeﬁned as IIoT, the
training in the diﬀerent levels of the company will help to transmit the value propo-
sition form the technical and commercial groups of a technology venture, to the
customer. Asli et al. (2013) incorporates the balanced scorecard framework to the
SAM which adds a customer perspective, an internal processes perspective, and a
growth learning perspective. Adopting these perspectives will allow companies to
embrace strategies that will lead, not only to the alignment between business and
IT but also to the alignment of these strategies with their own missions (Asli et al.,
2013). This research considers these approaches fundamental for technology ﬁrms
which attempt to raise awareness of the beneﬁts of IoT to the 90% of manufacturing
companies in the non-adopters side.
When new technology projects are developed, it would be ideal for technology
companies to identify which speciﬁc actions along the project contribute to the
overall business strategy. Unfortunately, integrate strategic planning with tactical
activities during project management is still not easy (Lee et al., 2007). To achieve
this, management models need to align diﬀerent levels inside an organization and
take into account external elements, e.g. partners and customers (Lee et al., 2007).
Project managers would need to spend time not only planning projects but also
aligning individual actions carried out during the project development, to the over-
all strategy. To fulﬁll the requirements of the I4.0 vision, the development actions
while executing projects should align with the long term strategy as much as possi-
ble. Into project management, there should be a clear identiﬁcation of the actions
which contribute to the vision and the ones which not (regardless of deciding to
execute them). This way alignment can exist not only towards a single customer
but also to a whole customer segment (Lee et al., 2007), which consists of all the
potential users of a technology which share the same needs.
One common mistake when developing a product or technology, is not having
24
==PAGE:26==
a clear vision of who are the customers of a single product (Lee et al., 2007). IoT
might have very similar needs across the diﬀerent industries, e.g. an automotive
factory and a food processing factory may need the same technology to predict fail-
ure in conveyor belts, but may need very diﬀerent solutions to automate the supply
chain. Furthermore, they could have huge diﬀerences with the solution that a phar-
maceutical company needs, even in the conveyor belts. Lee et al. (2007) proposed
a strategic alignment model for product development, where the identiﬁcation of
diﬀerent market segments is necessary and drives alignment. The model is based
on road-mapping as a tool for alignment, thus, is extremely helpful to understand
what and when should technology companies develop to push I4.0 towards maturity.
Cuenca et al. (2014) twisted the SAM model into a Service-Oriented model
(SOSAM), by turning the model around service, the authors center it into the cus-
tomer interaction (external). They depicted the components of the model as busi-
ness service & technology scope; and business & service competences. The former
approach follows the service level perspective proposed by Henderson and Venka-
traman (1993). By adopting a service position, technology ﬁrms can get closer to
manufacturers, this way close relationships can be built and an environment where
feedback is constantly ﬂowing can be created. Development in IIoT is an extremely
iterative process, hardware and software products are in constant change and it is a
big challenge to collaborate when multiple organizations are involved (especially big
ones). Adopting service-oriented strategies will reduce the time and iterations that
the development processes take, by bringing technology companies closer to their
customers.
The customer or market might be the most important external element but not
the only one. In industries like IoT, partners play one of the most important roles for
success and certainly, alignment is imperative. Ho et al. (2015) proposed a strategic
alignment framework from a holistic perspective of a company, i.e. business, infor-
mation and organization perspectives, to align company needs with partners (for
outsourcing). Into technology companies, this model can potentially close the gap
between in-house or outsource development of technology. For technology companies
it is imperative to identify their key developments, they need to be very conscious
about their skills and know-how, to do not deviate their activities from their core
businesses. In many cases, this decision may not be evident and the framework
proposed by Ho et al. (2015) is a handy tool. It is clear that for challenges like
interoperability, the former approach needs to be considered, to achieve alignment
between the diﬀerent kinds of IoT ﬁrms.
2.7
The gap in the research
After presenting the picture of the challenges and the research done into the strategic
alignment ﬁeld, we can ﬁnd some answers to the questions derived from our research
question. On the other hand, we can pinpoint the gap on the strategic alignment
literature that needs to be covered to overcome the challenges of I4.0.
It is clear that the IoA has been explored, and relevant tools have been devel-
25
==PAGE:27==
oped for alignment. Also, extensive research has been made to unify the alignment
theories as well as to formalize the elements of the models; which has enabled busi-
nesses to shape up their operations and increase their performance. Nevertheless,
the useful research for new technology ventures is limited, whereas ongoing success-
ful business can use strategic alignment to correct and optimize, new technology
companies need to identify if they are pursuing the right goals before or (ideally) at
the same time of leveraging an alignment strategy.
To communicate the value or beneﬁts of industry 4.0, technology ﬁrms need
to recognize customer segments. They need to diﬀerentiate if the customer looks
for reducing cost, increasing eﬃciency or value. They need to make use of shared
knowledge systems and constantly train their diﬀerent groups keeping everyone on
the same boat.
Firms need to understand the limits of their know-how and work together with
customers and partners. Firms should map all the players in projects and identify
who needs to be coordinated. Thus, the development partners should be selected in
the earliest stages of the process.
When the traditional alignment approach was developed, the implementation of
IT into business operations was on a relatively in-mature state. In the 1980’s suc-
cessful businesses ran lots if internal processes by ’paperwork’; today a great deal
of these processes, can not be done that way anymore if ﬁrms want to keep their
competitiveness. Therefore the need to understand IT and its integration with pro-
cesses was huge. Today not using IT to support operations would lead to an abrupt
failure. Although the traditional approach to model IT/IS and administrative pro-
cesses as diﬀerent blocks highlights the importance of IT on eﬃcient processes, it
also implies that they should be treated as individuals and ﬁnd a ﬁt between them.
Nowadays, strategic alignment modeling for IT/IS and operations need to be uniﬁed
and treated as one entity. Processes need to be designed as a combination of human
and technology tasks.
In the available research, little work has been done into OiA; the IT strategy and
infrastructure has mainly been described with an internal focus, thus it is necessary
to develop new models, where the reach of IT as a whole, is extended to external
elements, e.g. partners and customers. This way communication would be enhanced
through a bigger section of the value chain allowing faster alignment, which leads
to higher customer satisfaction. Thus, technology ventures which have critical ROI
time-lines can accelerate their revenue ﬂow and survive in the early stages; since for
these ﬁrms, a misaligned product release can imply the end of the venture.
To thrive, technology companies need tools where their product/technology de-
velopment is the center of focus, is shaped by the needs of the customer and devel-
oped in cooperation with partners. Tools where their processes are seen as one unit
with human and technology tasks entangled. They need to adapt fast to changes to
sustain their competitive advantage, making money while developing strategic inno-
vation. Strategic innovation should build the foundation of the long term vision in
the early stages of a technology venture and lead to radical innovation. The former
26
==PAGE:28==
implies that they need to have a detailed picture of when and what customers need,
and embrace a balance between revenue, technology, and business.
Experience has shown that strategies are speciﬁed using objects, events, and
functions (Thevenet, 2008); but it is diﬃcult to draw links between the strategic and
operational level when using strategic alignment models (Thevenet, 2008). There is
still big opportunities to improve business and IT alignment (Luftman et al., 2008).
To enhance and apply the tools of strategic alignment is necessary (Luftman et al.,
2008). The strategic alignment ﬁeld has a lack of practical tools to address align-
ment between business and IT. Also, the strategic alignment ﬁeld has a lack of tools
that combine the IoA and OiA beneﬁts, to help new technology ventures to imple-
ment alignment strategies during technology development projects. Tools that take
into account several stakeholders through a longer section of the value chain. Tools
that identify inside and outside a company who needs to share knowledge and be in
constant communication; ﬁnding the right partners and customers. This way, tech-
nology ventures will be able to communicate the beneﬁts of the technology inside
and outside the company, and asses if they should develop in-house, outsource or
co-develop technology; reducing the development time and the number of iterations
to mature technology. Frameworks, where the tactical activities during projects go
in line with the overall strategy and see all processes as a combination of IT and
human tasks.
The summary of the ﬁndings and limitations of the available strategic alignment
research can be seen in table 4:
Table 4: Findings and limitations of the strategic alignment literature
Findings and limitations
1)
Strategic alignment research for new technology ventures is limited
and there is none for the speciﬁc case of I4.0.
2)
Strategic alignment literature has a lack of practical tools for im-
plementation.
3)
A link between capabilities, knowledge and product development is
needed.
4)
Processes need to be understood as a unique element that is built
by a combination of IT and human tasks.
5 )
Strategic alignment ﬁeld has limited research with strong external
focus.
2.8
New research question
With the strategic alignment literature in mind we can reﬁne our research question:
What should drive the strategy of technology ventures to overcome the challenges of
I4.0 in manufacturing?
To answer this question we need to take into account the challenges presented in
section 1.3. From challenges 1 and 2, it can be identiﬁed that technology ventures
27
==PAGE:29==
need to understand and communicate the beneﬁts of I4.0. From challenge 3, it can
be identiﬁed that technology ventures need to know how to asses their capabilities.
28
==PAGE:30==
3
Research Approach
3.1
Research design
As a ﬁrst step, the research question was broken into a set of structuring questions
to make the research more manageable.
The sub-questions helped the research
to identify two speciﬁc paths to overcome the challenges of I4.0 in manufacturing
and understand what should drive the strategy of technology ventures. The sub-
questions are how can technology ventures understand and communicate the beneﬁts
of I4.0? and how can technology ventures assess their capabilities? These to make
proper use of the potential that I4.0 trends bring to the industry. To answer these
two structuring questions, a set of additional questions were developed to help guide
the research. In the ﬁgure below, an overview of the research design, the research
question, structuring questions, and complementary sub-questions is presented (ﬁg-
ure 3).
Figure 3: Research design
29
==PAGE:31==
The research design consists of a literature review and two case studies. The
research ﬁeld of the literature was selected because the researcher identiﬁed great
potential to solve the research question. The literature review was done to gain a
strong theoretical foundation, to be able to apply it speciﬁcally to technology ven-
tures aiming to overcome the challenges of I4.0. The former, not only to solve the
research question but also to generate a new tool for practitioners. To conﬁrm and
build the theory, empirical data was collected by conducting two case studies. The
ﬁrst case study is a predictive maintenance project and the second study is an edge
analytics9 project. The two cases were considered relevant for this research since
both projects are pilots in the implementation of I4.0 applications.
Figure 4 shows a ﬂowchart of the research process of this inquiry:
Figure 4: Research process
9The term edge computing is a distributed computer paradigm which brings computation and
data storage closer to the location where it is needed (Wikipedia, 2019b). Analytics is the discovery,
interpretation and communication of meaningful patterns in data (Wikipedia, 2019a) .
30
==PAGE:32==
Industry 4.0 challenges research: A literature research was conducted to
understand the challenges I4.0 is facing to achieve its vision. The purpose of the
literature research was to ﬁnd the most relevant barriers for the I4.0 adoption and
formulate with precision the research question.
Research question: After identifying the research question, an exploration of
literature was conducted. As a result, the strategic alignment literature was selected.
The former due to the potential to merge communication, collaboration, business,
and technology. Then, the research question was reﬁned with the insights gained
from the literature.
Strategic alignment literature research: First the traditional strategic align-
ment theory was studied, then extensive research into the strategic alignment litera-
ture of the last 15 years was conducted and the relevant additions to the traditional
approach for the matter of this research were pointed out.
Monthly meetings with CEO: Every month, meetings with the CEO of Con-
nectium (Technology ﬁrm developing the projects of the case studies) were carried
out. During those meetings, the researcher presented the potential solutions based
on theoretical research to overcome the challenges faced by Connectium. The overall
objective of the meetings was to understand if the theories were addressing accu-
rately Connectuim’s challenges for I4.0 integration.
Theoretical model design and building: Firstly, making use of the strategic
alignment literature a theoretical model was designed. Secondly, the model was en-
hanced by using the empirical knowledge obtained from the monthly meetings. Few
iterations were done before designing a formal case study. The modeling was done
following the recommended techniques of the strategic alignment literature. This
means that the elements presented on the model and the linkage between them were
carefully selected to facilitate implementation and increase eﬀectiveness.
Identify uncertainties: The key elements and uncertainties of the model were
identiﬁed and a set of propositions were formulated to design an appropriate case
study and gather the right information to reduce or eliminate uncertainties.
Case study design: A case study was designed following the methodology
proposed by de Vaus (2001). Two cases where all the elements of the model were
present, were selected, allowing to compare the predicted outcome with a real sce-
nario
Interview experts: After selecting the units of analysis of the case study fol-
lowing the de Vaus (2001) methodology. Interviewing was selected as the sampling
method for primary data. All the interviews were conducted following the method-
ology proposed by Kvale (1996).
Structure and analyze data: To analyze the primary data obtained within
the case study, methodologies proposed by de Vaus (2001) and Kvale (1996) were
followed. Speciﬁc details of the methodologies will be presented on section 3.3 and
31
==PAGE:33==
3.4.
Enhance model with empirical evidence: After the ﬁndings of the research
analysis, few more iterations were done to the model correcting propositions that
mismatched the empirical evidence.
The OiA model: As the last step, a new framework enhanced by the empirical
evidence was presented.
3.2
Literature review
The strategic alignment literature was selected to build the theoretical framework.
Strategic alignment literature was considered relevant to solve the set of questions
obtained, because of the well-founded research on merging techniques between the
diﬀerent elements of an organization. The tools and theory provided by strategic
alignment are of great use to match the ﬁrms’ technology with the I4.0 needs.
The theoretical research was conducted into two main sources, all the reposi-
tories for the Association of Information Systems (AIS), and the Danish Technical
University repository Findit. As a ﬁrst step, the most accepted and cited strate-
gic alignment models were studied as a point of reference. Then, the research was
divided into two main searches shown in ﬁgure 5, strategic alignment model/frame-
work (excluding all dynamic strategic alignment) and dynamic strategic alignment.
Both searches were ﬁltered to show only results in English and only from the past
15 years, to focus on the recent ﬁndings and the addition to the traditional models.
The papers found were classiﬁed into 4 diﬀerent categories: model, modeling tech-
nique, implementation, and validation.
Figure 5: Search methodology
The classiﬁcation criteria for the papers is the following:
32
==PAGE:34==
Model:
papers which present a new model or framework of
strategic alignment.
Modeling technique:
papers which present a methodology or best practices to
develop a new strategic alignment model.
Implementation:
papers which present a methodology or framework to
implement an strategic alignment strategy.
Validation:
papers which show studies and results of strategic align-
ment implementations.
As a result of this research, 49 useful papers were found; 26 were classiﬁed as
“model”, 9 as “modeling technique”, 3 as “implementation” and 14 as “validation”.
It is worth to mention that some of the papers were classiﬁed in more than one
category.
3.3
Case studies
The research was carried out over a period of ﬁve months through a comparative
approach of two case studies. The case was designed with an explanatory approach,
divided into ﬁve embedded units of analysis and on a retrospective basis (de Vaus,
2001).
It was conducted in Connectium a small technology ﬁrm and two inter-
national companies Manufacturex and Industrial Automation devices (IA devices),
which were involved as Connectium’s customers; each one in a separate project.
Manufacturex is an international large manufacturing company and IA devices is
large international OEM.
ManufactureX is a more than 5B e company and it has representation in more
than 100 countries. They serve markets like energy, food and beverage, buildings
and industry in general. In the last ﬁve years, it has had an excellent performance,
increasing revenue by around 30%. It is raked as a top leader in some of their lines
of business. IA devices is a more than 20B e corporation and it is also present in
more than 100 countries. It has shown a very stable economy for the last 5 years.
IA devices is an industry leader in power management and automation systems.
Connectium is a technology ﬁrm based in Europe. The company has 25 em-
ployees and started its operations three years before the study was made.
The
company ﬁeld is in IIoT. It oﬀers a software platform which provides connectivity
to thousands of industrial devices (things) and its value proposition is to enable
full industrial interoperability. The ﬁrm has a ﬂat structure and is, at the time of
writing, running four pilot projects with four international companies. The ﬁrm has
won a few international competitions and they oﬀer a unique software technology
to tackle the interoperability challenges faced by manufacturers.
The cases are two projects: predictive maintenance and edge analytics projects.
The units of analysis consist of ﬁve diﬀerent groups throughout the organization
identiﬁed as key during the research: Top management, sales/marketing depart-
ment, R&D department, partners and customer. Each of them was analyzed at
33
==PAGE:35==
three diﬀerent levels: fundamental needs, workgroups and implemented strategy.
The units of analysis were selected to obtain a strong internal validity since the
analyzed variables were assessed from diﬀerent perspectives (de Vaus, 2001); e.g. all
the interviewees belonging to a diﬀerent unit of analysis were asked their opinion
regards the same topic and conclusions were made by comparing all of them.
The chosen cases represent two diﬀerent scenarios, where the number of groups
(internal and external) within each respective company vary both in nature and
complexity. With Manufacturex, Connectium had to interact with partners and
third parties, and Manufacturex not only represents the customer but also repre-
sents the end-user of the technology. With IA devices, Connectuim worked directly
and IA devices is the one dealing with diﬀerent partners and end-users. i.e. from the
Connectuim perspective, no partnerships were leveraged. Thus, the research could
compare and understand the role of partners in diﬀerent scenarios, as well as the
communication structure, noting the good and bad practices related to the diﬀerent
setups, being able to ﬁnd common patterns and also contrasting results.
Monthly meetings with the CEO of Connectium were carried out during the
whole period.
The literature research was done during the ﬁrst months in the
strategic alignment ﬁeld, right after the ﬁrst theoretical propositions were made.
Then with the monthly meetings, a theory-building approach was taken and few
iterations were made to the theoretical model and propositions (de Vaus, 2001).
All these details were taken into account to design a case study which accurately
challenges the propositions made and answers the research question.
To get to know the opinion of the diﬀerent actors around the early adopters of
the I4.0 technologies, interviewing was selected as the primary source of data collec-
tion. A set of interviews were conducted of the participants of two diﬀerent projects
that Connectium developed with Manufacturex and IA devices respectively. The
former was done to understand the perspective of the diﬀerent groups and point out
the contrast between their expectations, to understand their challenges with I4.0
integration and listen to their ideas on how to overcome those challenges.
Interviewing was selected as primary data collection method, over methods like
surveys and observation, because of its capabilities in clarifying and elaborating
on the own experience of the participants (Kvale, 1996), allowing the researcher to
understand the nature behind their faced challenges. Surveys were discarded as a
data collection method due to the lack of ﬂexibility when it comes to exploratory
research. This means to explore the faced challenges and gather the ideas of the
participants on how to overcome them within the case study. The use of observation
was diﬃcult because of the limited access to the projects.
3.3.1
Predictive maintenance project
This project was made for an international manufacturing ﬁrm: ManufactureX.
ManufactureX wanted to connect all the relevant devices in their conveyor lines to
implement a predictive maintenance solution. This project is the ﬁrst of that kind
ever implemented by Manufacturex and it is considered a pilot project. The next
34
==PAGE:36==
step of the company is to extend the solution to a bigger section of their factory
and the ﬁnal goal to extend to the rest of their factories worldwide. From the Man-
ufacturex perspective, the project was developed with three technical partners: an
international cloud service provider, an international consultancy company (provid-
ing an analytics solution) and Connectium.
Manufacturex represents a very special case for device connectivity since they
not only own the devices they want to connect but also are the producer of the
same devices. The former creates a smooth environment for co-development since
Connectium can access to all the knowledge needed for integration, e.g. manuals,
proprietary protocols, hardware designers, etc. This special case is ideal to under-
stand the beneﬁts of strong partnerships in technology testing and development.
During the project, Connectuim established a weak partnership with the cloud
service provider and an almost null relationship was carried out with the consultancy
company. On the commercial side, the relationship of Connectuim with Manufac-
turex was direct, i.e. no distribution partners were involved.
To ﬁnd out the level of alignment between all the actors of the project, the main
representatives from each of them were interviewed. Figure 6 shows the structure
of the interview design. From the sales department, top management and R&D de-
partments of Connectium, the interviewees were: the CEO, CFO and CTO & data
entry lead respectively. From the consultancy company, the managing director was
interviewed. From the Manufacturex side the digitization sr. manager was inter-
viewed since that person was the main representative of the project. Table 5 shows
the role of each of the interviewees during this project.
Figure 6: Predictive Maintenance project interview design
35
==PAGE:37==
Table 5: Interviewees of the predictive maintenance project
Company
Title
Role in the project
Connectium
CEO
Project manager / Sales
Connectium
CFO
Sales / Business development
Connectium
CTO
Technical manager
Connectium
Data entry lead
Device data extraction
ManufactureX
Sr. digitalization manager
Project manager
I. Consultancy
Managing director
Project manager
3.3.2
Edge analytics Project
This project was made for an international OEM: IA Devices. IA devices wanted to
develop an edge analytics application. Therefore they need to get data from their
own and competitors devices, as well as oﬀering their customers a software solution
to tackle their interoperability challenges.
IA devices portfolio includes a broad scope of industrial devices and monitoring
solutions. IA devices has tried to solve the interoperability problem before, but
using diﬀerent technology and obtaining just partial solutions to the problem. This
project is the ﬁrst one with the technology that Connectium oﬀers. The project
started with a new way of integrating diﬀerent product lines into a common plat-
form and evolved into cooperation to make all IA devices’ products interoperable.
The project is considered a pilot and the scope was to enable a few of their respective
product lines to be fully interoperable. If the project is successful the end goal is to
extend it to all of IA devices’ product lines.
The project was developed without partners from the Connectium side. From
the IA devices side, a partnership was made with a software company.
To ﬁnd out the level of alignment between all the actors of the project, the main
representative from each of them was interviewed. Figure 7 shows the structure of
the interviews. From the sales department, top management and R&D departments
of Connectium, the interviewees were the CEO, CFO and CTO respectively. From
IA Devices, the IIoT connectivity Director (technical responsible), and the VP of
innovation (commercial responsible) were interviewed. Table 6 shows the role of
each of the interviews during this project.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 7: Edge Analitics project interview design.
Table 6: Interviewees of the edge analytics project
Company
Title
Role in the project
Connectium
CEO
Project manager / Sales
Connectium
CFO
Sales / Business development
Connectium
CTO
Technical Responsible
IA Devices
IIoT Connectivity Director
Technical manager
IA Devices
VP of Innovation
Commercial Responsible
3.3.3
Cases relevance
Connectium is a technology venture, it is a start-up company and is being ﬁnanced
by private investors. During its operation, development has been progressing with
considerable budget limitations, i.e. due to the lack of resources tested technolo-
gies could not be adopted before closing a sales deal, which has complicated the
sales process. Development decisions have been crucial to win projects and avoid
bankruptcy, as well as for building the foundation of the long term vision of the com-
pany (eliminate industrial interoperability). However the company today is focused
on building strategic relationships with customers, to develop a reliable solution;
building trust to achieve big revenue in the next 5 years.
To use a small start-up company allows having a case where agile communica-
tion happens inside the company, reducing the complexity of the problem and letting
the research focus on the ﬁt towards the external elements. On the other hand, the
customers (Manufacturex and IA devices) are huge multinational companies, with
complex management structures. Which is ideal to have a more detailed picture of
37
==PAGE:39==
the problem, allowing the researcher to analyze a complex situation on the research
focus (external elements).
During the presented projects, companies operated with cross-functional pro-
cesses and through a vertical market; which helped this inquiry to understand the
nature of the customer needs by considering more variables. The analyzed cases
involve big international companies that work with technology and distribution
partners to get to end customers or end-users; such structure is very common for
industrial projects and ventures.
The main challenge the ﬁrms involved are trying to overcome is interoperability,
which was stated before as a top challenge for I4.0. To do so, Connectium is working
together with partners and customers. Therefore, the case is relevant to test the
importance of the partnerships and co-development to embrace the I4.0 vision.
Since the ﬁrm is in a start-up stage, strategic innovation has been key in fundrais-
ing and making money while innovating. The analysis of successful and unsuccessful
developments gives a better understanding of its relationship with alignment. Fur-
thermore, it allowed the researcher to identify key actions that the ﬁrm has taken
to embrace alignment.
3.4
Data collection and analysis
The primary data of this inquiry consists of ten interviews with experts from the
industry; each giving their point of view. All of the interviews were recorded with
the permission of the interviewees. The selection of interviewees was done strate-
gically to provide a wide picture of the projects through the value chain within
the researcher’s network. The selected people had a strong knowledge about the
projects, seeing that they had been completely involved during the projects and had
led multiple projects of the same nature before.
Data was collected and analyzed simultaneously through the Ad hoc meaning
generation approach presented by Kvale (1996), the analysis for the edge analytics
project is shown in ﬁgure 8. As a ﬁrst step, all the interview recordings were divided
into units by topic and categorized (Kvale, 1996). Secondly, each of the units was
condensed into themes (Kvale, 1996). Then, the similar themes from all the inter-
views of the same project were clustered (Kvale, 1996). Seven cluster categories
were created: Project participants, customer needs, challenges, opportunities for
improvement, interaction between groups, expectation between groups, place in the
road map and development process.
All the challenges mentioned by the interviewees were listed and a table was
made to identify who shared the same challenges. Also, all the opportunities for
improvement mentioned by the interviewees were listed, making possible to identify
common potential solutions mentioned by the diﬀerent groups. Figure 8 shows a
section of the challenges and opportunities tables; it also shows the list of all the
challenges that were mention by the participants of both projects within the case
38
==PAGE:40==
study.
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 8: Data analysis through the Ad hoc meaning generation proposed by Kvale (1996).
==PAGE:42==
Semi-structured interviews were selected as a sampling method since the goal
was to understand the perspective of the diﬀerent actors of the projects; this to get
to know what is driving their decisions, how they identify their needs and acquire
a better understanding of their interaction processes (Kvale, 1996). Furthermore,
valuable information for the projects is not documented, since it is related to non-
established procedures or oral communication. Also, since the analyzed projects
were new ventures, corporate policies and ordinary processes do not apply in the
same way, not allowing the researcher to base the research on written documents,
e.g. process handbooks or strategy documentation.
Besides, qualitative data was obtained through monthly meetings with the CEO
of Connectium, which was elected as the main actor of the case studies. The struc-
ture of the meetings was the following: 1) Ask the CEO about the challenges faced
in the projects; 2) present potential solutions based on academic literature and 3)
receive feedback from the presented theories. The ﬁnal objective of the meeting was
to verify that objectives were aligned; thus, the meetings help reﬁne the research
focus and ensure that the research tackles the faced problems.
Since Connectium is currently developing several projects and all the interviewed
people within the case studies belong to a medium/top management elite; each in-
terview had a length of 30 minutes with a shortlist of open questions. The interview
length was restricted due to the reduced availability of the participants. The topic
of each interview was the analyzed project. The interview questions were translated
from the research questions (Kvale, 1996) to understand the point of view of the
interviewees and obtain detailed information about the research topic. This way, the
degree to which the knowledge and opinions between diﬀerent groups match could
be assessed and understood.
As an interviewer, the researcher had a strong understanding of the nature of the
projects beforehand; having worked for approximately ﬁve years within the studied
industry. Hence, it was possible to understand more technical answers, which helped
to use more eﬃciently the interview time.
An interview guide with interview questions was used, it contained eight ques-
tions with sub-questions. The interview questions were translated from the research
sub-questions (Kvale, 1996). For further detail, refer to the interview guide in ap-
pendix A.1. All the interviewees were given a very general description of the research
topic and an overview of the structure of the interview beforehand. The questions
were designed in the shortest way possible, taking care of keeping the focus on the
study subject.
3.5
Theory building and modeling
The strategic alignment model proposed in this thesis has been created following
some of the methodologies and best practices mentioned in the strategic alignment
literature to design strategic alignment models.
41
==PAGE:43==
Thevenet (2008) uses the INSTAL method to provide guidelines to help in the
identiﬁcation of the strategic alignment links between the diﬀerent elements of a
model. First, Thevenet (2008) identiﬁes the strategic and operational elements to
align. Second, they design a strategic alignment map. Finally, they specify the links
that will align the elements of the map. The links proposed by Thevenet (2008)
could represent value proposition, target customer and capabilities; and make the
connection between strategic and/or operational levels.
Ba¨ına et al. (2008) recommend to design the strategic alignment strategies with
the Business Rules Motivation model, which essentially relates tactics with objec-
tives, strategy with goals and mission with vision.
The former means that the
Business and IT strategies should be designed by taking into account the relation-
ship between the mentioned elements, modeling in this way would avoid ambiguity
and facilitate the adoption of strategies for managers (Ba¨ına et al., 2008; Bleistein
et al., 2006; Doumi et al., 2011).
For eﬀective implementation, Doumi et al. (2011) suggest to model in two diﬀer-
ent levels: functional and strategical level. The reason behind this is the importance
of linking both levels to leverage an eﬀective strategy. Doumi et al. (2011) argues
that both levels are usually expressed in diﬀerent languages and in diﬀerent docu-
ments, which hinders the common understanding and implementation. Furthermore,
Noce et al. (2011) proposes to model strategic alignment frameworks linking strate-
gic objectives with the competencies structure. i.e. that objectives could be related
to the skills inside the company that can contribute to attaining the objective.
For a reliable implementation of a strategic alignment model, Salaheddine and
Ilias (2018) suggest to take into account the value chain and analyze them for the
current and future states. El Mekawy et al. (2009) introduced 23 criteria for evalu-
ating an strategic alignment model divided into four groups; which should be taken
into account while designing strategic alignment models: Organizational related
(e.g. size, futurity, etc.), Analysis related (information strategy, level of business,
etc.) and Utility related (ﬂexibility, strategic ﬁt, strategic integration, etc.).
42
==PAGE:44==
4
Analysis I: Understanding and Communicating
I4.0
Structuring question no. 1: How can technology ventures understand and com-
municate the beneﬁts of I4.0?
From section 1 it was concluded that companies perceive I4.0 as highly complex
and they lack a clear idea of the beneﬁts it entangles. But where and when does
this problem happens? and who is involved in that process? If ventures want to
adopt new strategies that eliminate these problems, ﬁrst they need to understand
where are they originated and who can solve them. This ﬁrst analysis will focus on
understanding the communication processes, depicting who is involved and how. By
doing the former, speciﬁc communication problems and the ﬂaws in the processes
can be pointed out. The objective of the analysis I, is to identify all the opportuni-
ties in the communication processes. Then, by using the strategic alignment theory,
IT and IS potential can be exploited to address all the communication opportunities.
Certainly, not everybody has the same understanding of I4.0 and this has many
implications (Andreas Schumacher a, 2016). Whereas some people inside the same
organization can see the beneﬁts, others can not. Unfortunately, for companies sell-
ing I4.0 technology like Connectium, this is a major problem, since the adoption
decision usually comes from more than one person (especially in big organizations).
Edge analytics project
CTO: Some people within IA devices...they understand [the value we
add], but some people don’t...understand the value we add at all...because
it is not their job, they do something else..
The technology companies, need to identify what kind of beneﬁt they are of-
fering to their customers. They need to have a clear idea if it is a cost reduction,
eﬃciency increase or added value; the problem is that it might be a combination
of them. It is not surprising that communication and transmitting the value to the
customer were the most mentioned challenges in our research. However, once the
value proposition has been transmitted to the customer, new ventures struggle on
the selection of an appropriate business model, since normally they deal with unex-
plored markets. Factors like intellectual property and pricing can be diﬃcult to ﬁt
between organizations. e.g. Whereas IA devices wanted to pay for the technology
on a consultancy scheme, Connectuim wanted to sell the technology in a software
as a service scheme.
Edge analytics project
IIoT connectivity director: the technology is not really the bottle-
neck, now what we are facing is: how do we, from the start, think about
how the business looks like....what would be the business model, during all
the phases, during the experimentation phase, pilot phase and during the
industrialization phase, how can we get to (a) business model where we
can support a company like Connectium, that has some ﬁnancial requests
and cannot absorb costs like a big company can do.
43
==PAGE:45==
CEO:
ﬁnding the exact price this is worth is very diﬃcult because we
don’t want to sell custom made software, we want to sell things as a
subscription...
CFO: The main challenge is that today, they are used to looking at
this type of projects as a professional service, where they hire consul-
tants...they pay for it once and it’s done...
To have a subscription model has an impact on the beneﬁts customers can re-
ceive. For Connectium, a subscription scheme not only goes inline with its ﬁnancial
needs and revenue targets but also will allow them to maintain and enhance their
technology; increasing the customer’s satisfaction. From all these reasons, the ben-
eﬁts for IA devices can be seen, but once again communication becomes a challenge
since transmitting the beneﬁts of the business model is not an easy task.
But the communication problems do not end there, one of the main ﬁndings
of this analysis is the impact of communication in the overall performance of a
technology venture. When big companies with complex management structures like
ManufactureX and IA devices have ineﬃcient communication, communication cycles
become extremely long processes. For example, when a request takes a week to be
transferred and then another week to be answered, it will take two weeks to have an
answer; but if there was a misconception from the beginning, the process has to be
followed again. Then the process will take one month. The former example might
seem simplistic, however, in practice this is very common and the consequences are
surprisingly long processes.
Predictive maintenance project
CEO: We were introduced in 2017... essentially it took us 18 months,
to get to the point were they actually signed oﬀfor this contract.
Managing director: this project was planned to be delivered on Novem-
ber 2018..., (we) started (the) discussion... in March 2018 and we are
going to deliver on November 2019.
But then, after a contract has been signed and a project has been started, are
communication problems over? Unfortunately, this research found that this is far to
be true. When a project in an industry as complex as IIoT starts, the complexity
of technicalities and considerations increases signiﬁcantly. It is evident that is not
easy to communicate and understand all the requirements that an industrial project
may need. One of the main causes of complexity is the number of parties involved
in this kind of projects. For example, in the edge analytics project, the needs of IA
devices were a complex combination of seven diﬀerent entities inside the company
and two external to it. This nature creates an unsteady environment, where the re-
quirements are in constant change. Furthermore, Connectium can understand some
of the needs of IA devices through direct communication, but it can’t have direct
access to the source of some information since IA devices has been in charge of the
communication towards the end customer; i.e. Connectium can just have a partial
understanding of the problem. In the predictive maintenance project, from Connec-
tium’s perspective, the project was developed with one hardware partner. From the
44
==PAGE:46==
ManufactureX’s perspective, four departments were involved but the digital trans-
formation department had the project management responsibility. A cloud service
provider and a consultancy company were also involved to develop the project. In
these complex structures, it is very important to know where to ﬁnd information.
Identifying the relevant actors in a project and establishing a communication chan-
nel in the early stages, will accelerate development during the whole development
process.
Edgge analytics project
IIoT conectivity director: the main challenge is that it takes lots of
time, lots of back and forward ﬁnding the right people with the right in-
formation
If we analyze the problem from the perspective of a big organization, the top
management group, deals with cross-functional communication. Big organizations
may have several business units with individual R&D and sales departments, which
might need to collaborate on certain projects. To communicate the strategy in these
organizations is evidently complex and therefore highly important to leverage align-
ment strategies.
If we analyze the problem from a small technology ﬁrm perspective. The top
management has direct control over the sales and R&D group. Sales and R&D can
develop the project as a cross-functional team, which means that the alignment of
the internal needs of the ﬁrm is easy and agile. Big companies need to learn from
these and develop cross-functional strategies and create new teams linked to the
same project to work closely together.
Big companies are aware of the slowness of their processes and acknowledge that,
with the available technology, this can be considerably improved, the IIoT connec-
tivity director stated that the projects that last years, could be reduced into months,
which is not a satisfactory result:
Edgge Analytics project
IIoT conectivity director: if a project is taking a couple of months
in a digital world, we are not doing good enough.
But then, if the problem has been acknowledged, why it has not been solved?
Maybe the reason behind is that even though big companies are aware of the prob-
lem, they do not always pay enough attention. To change radically a management
strategy is not an easy decision; big corporations have a long management heritage
and to change the organizational culture or mindset is hard.
Edgge Analytics project
IIoT conectivity director: but this (the implementation of digital
technologies) takes not only tools, it takes processes, also mindset.
45
==PAGE:47==
In summary analysis I pointed out the following ﬁndings:
Table 7: Findings of analysis I
Findings I
1)
It is diﬃcult to identify which beneﬁts should be transmitted to cus-
tomers and it might be a combination of cost reduction, eﬃciency
increase or added value.
2)
Select and communicate the appropriate business model should not
be underestimated.
3)
Complex management structures have a direct impact on the length
of communication cycles and the eﬀectiveness of communication.
4.1
Relation with the literature
But then, how can technology ventures solve their communication problems? To
answer this question, we will analyze the answers given by two of the participants,
from the predictive maintenance project the sr. digitization manager and from the
edge analytics project the IIoT connectivity director.
In the predictive maintenance project, to solve all the communication challenges
the sr. digitization manager proposed the following:
Predictive Maintenance project
Sr. Digitalization Manager: ...I would be placing all people in the
same team at our location for the given period of time, but I would like
to do it...continuously, it would be good to have all the resources con-
stantly together...because when we are sitting together...then we are able
to create [a] diﬀerence...you don’t need that everybody is employed by
ManufactureX...
It is clear that in this project remote communication has not been very eﬀective.
Locating people from diﬀerent companies in the same place might be eﬀective and
ideal, but costly or diﬃcult. Applying the strategic alignment theory: the technology
service scope presented by Cuenca et al. (2014) proposes that IS should provide com-
munication channels. Then, to overcome the communication challenges, companies
need to create an IS infrastructure where internal and external actors of a project
can work closely together, sharing knowledge. The participants of the projects also
need platforms where the speciﬁcations of the project, contact information of actors
and milestones are shared.
In the case of the edge analytics project, the IIoT connectivity director proposal
had a much stronger relationship with the strategic alignment theory:
IIoT connectivity director: when we get into...very complex setups,
with many partners...In an ideal world all of these people would ﬁnd
46
==PAGE:48==
their place in a framework and knowing exactly where to ﬁnd the re-
quirements...being able to communicate easily to the other actors, what
are delivering and when; synchronizing the road-maps of everyone and
making complete transparency on what is going on in the projects...
It is important to highlight the importance of both perspectives. In the predic-
tive maintenance project, it is clear that the Sr. digitization manager perceives that
the use of IT and IS for communication is far from giving the same results than
personal communication can give.
This is a big opportunity for communication
technologies and remote management strategies, new frameworks need to be devel-
oped to embrace the same performance that personal communication can give. The
perspective presented by the IIoT connectivity director proposes something similar
to a project management approach, but for technology ventures; however, it goes
beyond that and proposes a new communication scheme across organizations. To do
this, administrative and IS infrastructure should be designed to bring people closer
from the diﬀerent departments, since communication and share knowledge will sus-
tain the alignment between the individual needs (Walsh et al., 2010; Cuenca et al.,
2014; Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007).
The empirical evidence gathered in this research supports the theory that com-
munication and shared knowledge are essential for fast and eﬀective product/tech-
nology development (Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007; Lee et al., 2007). The complexity
of ManufactureX and IA devices structure resulted in a slow development process
with several iterations. Even though it is clear that IS have a strong impact on
communication and performance (Damiani et al., 2008; Jadda and Janati Idrissi,
2015; Kimble et al., 2009) it is hard for practitioners to know how to use it in their
speciﬁc projects. To do it, organizations should change their mindset since orga-
nizational culture plays a big role in alignment strategies (Fattah and Arman, 2014).
Lastly, this analysis conﬁrmed that the business governance should be done with
a collaborative approach and with the use of IT; this means that stakeholders should
ﬁnd their place as collaborators during the whole process (Cuenca et al., 2014).
Firms need to innovate in their business and communication strategies and take
an active role in speeding the development process; creating cross-functional teams
and strong communication channels towards customers and partners (Cuenca et al.,
2014).
47
==PAGE:49==
5
Analysis II: Capability Assessment
Structuring question no. 2: How can technology ventures assess their own ca-
pabilities?
From section 1 it was concluded that technology ventures fail when assessing
their capabilities for I4.0 adoption. Then, how can technology ventures improve in
estimating their capabilities? which are the key actions to obtain a proper assess-
ment? who needs to be involved during the assessment? If technology ﬁrms want
to get better in estimating their capabilities, ﬁrst they need to have a clear picture
of their core business. A lack of clarity in the focus of a venture can have severe
consequences. In the predictive maintenance project, Connectium accepted the re-
sponsibility of the hardware implementation in the conveyor lines. Connectium is a
software company and had limited experience with hardware implementations. The
decision of providing and installing the hardware in the conveyor lines resulted in
an unexpected consumption of resources. Connectium used a signiﬁcant amount of
time troubleshooting hardware issues which deviated them from their main objec-
tive.
Predictive maintenance project
CEO: we..shot our self on the foot...by agreeing to provide gateways
and connectivity...that was not an ideal solution...now we have hardware
ﬂoating around... and it is not something we want to do.
When the capabilities of a venture are clear, ﬁrms will have a clear view of what
can be developed without help and what needs help from third parties. In predictive
maintenance project after trying to develop in-house some connectivity technology,
Connectium decided to outsource it, partnering with a hardware company. Although
Connectium had the capabilities to eventually develop the connectivity technology,
they recognized that identifying the correct technology partner at an early stage of
the project was a key action for success. The reason behind this, is that the connec-
tivity technology has been developed and tested by several software companies, even
though licensing the technology is not cheap, it was certainly unfeasible to develop
the technology and fulﬁll the project deadlines.
Predictive maintenance project
CEO: one of the things we did very well was (to) realize early on that
we needed...partners to actually solve this problems we had, if we haven’t
done that...we wouldn’t have been able to deliver...
On the other hand, it is hard (if not impossible) to assess capabilities precisely
when new technology is developed. Technology companies often sell products to be
implemented in production when they are released, this is a very challenging task
since to deliver a fully functioning technology when it is ﬁrst implemented is rare.
They need to consider the technology development on-site as part of the develop-
ment process and communicate to the customer the beneﬁts of doing that. Not doing
that, can lead to a big misalignment on expectations. If a manufacturer experience
a break down in the production line due to the integration of a new technology, the
48
==PAGE:50==
manufacturer will lose trust in the technology, although this may be a mandatory
step in the development road-map; whereas if this issue is known beforehand, the
right measures can be taken, minimizing the consequences.
Predictive maintenance project
Managing director: there were some challenges...at the beginning, the
gateways were not 100% tested..so there were challenges to get the data
in a uniform format...it took up to six or eight weeks to stabilize the data
format... then it is taking longer to get enough data (to create the data
models)
Another important consideration for a proper assessment is the third party tech-
nology. For technology ﬁrms it is crucial to understand the technology from third
parties that will be integrated with their own, this will give a better understanding
of the challenges and empower companies to set more precise milestones.
Predictive maintenance project
CTO: [to understand 3rd party technology] needs to happen before we
even start the...integration, that is one part of the research we need to be
much better at...before we even talk about, when do we actually deploy
[our solution]...
It is important to state, that regardless of the amount of eﬀort that is leveraged
before implementation when new technologies are integrated there will always be
uncertainties and acknowledging them is important to move forth in the develop-
ment process. In the predictive maintenance project, a workshop was organized by
Manufacturex and all the participants of the project were invited to test their tech-
nologies; the objective of the workshop was to integrate the technologies. After the
workshop, the technology of the cloud service provider, the consultancy company
and Connectium; could not be integrated. Mismatches happened in several sections
of the project. If we compare the outcome with the original objectives, the workshop
ended up with poor results. On the other hand, it was the stepping stone of the
project, allowing parties to move forth with the development.
Managing director: possibly the hackathon (workshop) could have been
a little bit...later, when the gateways were more tested, but I am also
aware that there is always problems when you are integrating two prod-
ucts that have not been integrated before, so I am not sure if it makes a
diﬀerence, to be honest, that is just the reality.
From analysis II, the following ﬁndings can be pointed out:
49
==PAGE:51==
Table 8: Findings of analysis II
Findings II
1)
Technology companies need to have a clear view of their core busi-
ness.
2)
Technology ventures should use partners to develop technologies
that deviate them from their core business
3)
Production testing should be consider as part of the development
process.
4)
Understanding third party technology will help to set more pre-
cise milestones, however to remove completely uncertainty of new
technologies is not possible.
5.1
Relation with the literature
From the perspective of strategic alignment theory for product development, hav-
ing in mind who is/are the customers during a project is very important to asses
own capabilities and achieve alignment towards them (Lee et al., 2007). Technology
companies need to assess which are the key developments that need to be done in
cooperation with the customers and partners, since this will bring alignment be-
tween internal and external elements of a company (Lee et al., 2007; Cuenca et al.,
2014).
Technology ventures aiming to create a solution that satisﬁes a great population
should have in mind the big picture when developing speciﬁc projects. To identify
the proper customer segment for the technology, will lead to add features that satisfy
a speciﬁc market (Lee et al., 2007). Thus, stronger alignment towards internal and
external elements of a company can be created, driving towards sustained alignment
(Lee et al., 2007).
To facilitate alignment, the top management and the development department
need to decide if they will develop in-house and deliver directly to the customer, out-
source/license a development or co-develop with partners to deliver to the customer
(Ho et al., 2015). It can be seen from analysis II that partnering has strong impacts
in alignment. By partnering with the hardware company, Connectium was able to
align expectations with Manufacturex, delivering on time a well functioning tech-
nology. On the other hand, taking the hardware responsibility with the gateways in
the conveyor line, drove it apart from their know-how and generated a misalignment
between all the stakeholders of the project.
In the edge analytics project, Connectium needed to understand its limitation
towards the project and work together with IA devices; otherwise to identify the
end customer needs and get the correct help from IA devices to align functions and
expectations will be hard to achieve (Ho et al., 2015). To have a partnership relation
allows both companies to take advantage of their capabilities during the project and
gives a clearer picture of which problems belong to whom (Ho et al., 2015; Cuenca
et al., 2014).
50
==PAGE:52==
Another key step in the alignment process for technology ventures is the reduc-
tion of uncertainties. This does not mean that uncertainty can be avoided nor that
accurate deadlines could be estimated, but that they will be much more realistic;
which is very important to meet the customer expectations (Lee et al., 2007). Tech-
nology ventures should consider key to test in production to achieve alignment.
51
==PAGE:53==
6
Theory building
From the analysis I, it was pointed out the importance of communication in tech-
nology ventures and the potential to enhance it with the use of IT and IS. Analysis
I also pointed out the need for diﬀerent stakeholders to be in direct communication
and sharing knowledge. From analysis 2, the impact of capability assessment in
new technology ventures was presented and together with the strategic alignment
literature: the buy, develop or co-develop decisions; were analyzed. Now to help
technology ventures to overcome all the challenges of I4.0, the development of a
strategic alignment tool is presented using the ﬁndings of analysis I and II. This
section presents the Outside-in strategic alignment model (OiA model) inspired by
the strategic alignment literature from the past 15 years. The model is particularly
inspired by two speciﬁc models the TSAM proposed by Walsh et al. (2010) and the
NPD-SAM proposed by Lee et al. (2007); it uses to some extent all the OiA models
presented in section 2.6. It has been design using the methodology and best practices
for strategic alignment modeling available in the literature (Thevenet, 2008; Ba¨ına
et al., 2008; Bleistein et al., 2006; Doumi et al., 2011; Noce et al., 2011; Salaheddine
and Ilias, 2018).
The OiA model brings the customer and the development & sales partners into
play, explaining their position in alignment strategies. The model is the outcome
of theoretical modeling and theory building through meetings and interviews within
a case study. It sees IT and business processes as one entity to support the entire
operations through a section of the value chain. The model has a strong focus on
communication, especially in its inﬂuence in the technology development process and
the role of IS in it. The main focus of the model is to align budget, revenue, business
models and technology; by enhancing and speeding up communication throughout
organizations. The ﬁnal objective of the OiA model is to thrive in strategic innova-
tion, making money while developing technology.
The translator model makes a great contribution into the alignment tools, its
structure allows identifying people and systems inside a company; facilitating the
development of eﬀective alignment strategies. One key characteristic of the model is
the deﬁnition of needs and its linkage with people and systems. However, the “lack”
of focus on the environment limits the potential to solve the research question of
this paper. Therefore, it is considered necessary to take into account to some extent
the environmental block proposed by Khan et al. (2012) and it will be adopted the
customer segment perspective presented by Lee et al. (2007) to create a tool which
simpliﬁes implementation.
From analyses I and II we can point out the following ﬁndings:
52
==PAGE:54==
Table 9: Findings of analysis I and II
Findings I and II
1)
Eﬀective communication will shorten communication cycles and re-
duce the development iterations. IT and IS have huge potential to
solve the communication challenges.
2)
Technology is important, however, it is not always the “bottleneck”.
To ﬁnd an appropriate business model and communicate its bene-
ﬁts, plays a big role in technology development.
3)
Technology companies need to have a clear view of their core busi-
ness to identify when to buy, develop or co-develop; which is more
important than having strong development capabilities.
4)
Understanding third party technology will help to set more precise
milestones. Thus, it is important to establish strong relationships
with partners. The use of IT and IS to share knowledge, will align
objectives and expectations.
The main proposition stated to build the model was:
main proposition: Eﬀective communication, partnerships and share knowledge will
align the ﬁnancial, sales/marketing, R&D, and customer needs during time; leading
to strategic innovation and giving a sustained competitive advantage.
Walsh et al. (2010) uses the translation theory to explain the interaction between
the diﬀerent levels of an organization and how eﬀective management changes can be
done when they are communicated correctly. In a fundamental level, the alignment
and communication of the needs of the groups inside the organizations can be done
through direct communication or project managers (Walsh et al., 2010). Our model
takes the translation theory proposed by Walsh et al. (2010) but instead of seeing one
single translator (project manager), identiﬁes that translation also happens between
the diﬀerent groups of people participating in a technology venture.
6.1
The Needs level
The OiA model takes the concept of needs from the translator model. Which takes
the Maslow’s pyramid deﬁnition that when a need is not satisﬁed the owner of
the need will act as to satisfy it (Walsh et al., 2010). We deﬁne 4 essential needs
found during our research, which need to be covered to successfully run a technol-
ogy venture, three internal and one external: ﬁnancial (internal), R&D (internal),
sales/marketing (internal) and customer (external). Such are naturally linked and
the change on one would aﬀect the others. It is important to highlight the diﬀer-
ence between a need and a desire. A need is something that needs to be covered to
succeed in any venture. A desire is a “good to have” thing, not covering a desire
would not imply the failure of a venture. Figure 9 shows the needs diagram. The
non-continuous line between the needs represents the dynamic nature of the needs
and that the needs are not necessarily aligned during time.
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 9: The four needs of OiA.
In the ﬁrst step, we would deﬁne each of the presented needs. The R&D needs
are all the tools and technologies which the R&D department should have to fulﬁll
completely the scope of a project. e.g. with limited time for development, the R&D
department may need to outsource or license speciﬁc technology to deliver on time
and fully cover the project scope.
The ﬁnancial needs are all the resources that a ﬁrm should have to operate
according to the strategy and milestones. The ﬁnancial needs should lead to set
ﬁnancial goals that ensure proﬁtability, growth and increased value for shareholders
(Asli et al., 2013). They can be fulﬁlled from the outside of the ﬁrm (e.g. private
or public investments) or the generated revenue from sales. Time also plays a role
in the ﬁnancial needs and it can be critical for small ventures to survive, when they
deal with big corporations slow processes from the customer side can lead to a long
time without receiving any revenue, exhausting the venture’s resources.
The sales/marketing needs are all the tools or knowledge that the sales/-
marketing department should have to be able to fulﬁll the sales targets. e.g. the
sales/marketing department may need speciﬁcations of the technology they are sell-
ing and success stories; to be able to raise trust and transmit the value proposition
towards the customer.
The customer needs are all the commercial, technical and ﬁnancial needs; that
a customer or customers through the value chain should have covered to acquire a
product or service. Covering the customer’s needs will enable technology ﬁrms to
acquire new customers that belong to the same or similar customer segment (Asli
et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2007).
6.2
The People level
Each of the needs presented in the previous section belongs to a certain group of
people. In this section, the relationship between the needs and groups of people is
presented. The people’s level would be similar or equivalent to the intermediates
54
==PAGE:56==
level in the TSAM.
This research identiﬁes 6 diﬀerent groups which are always present in a technol-
ogy venture: ﬁnancial/top management (internal), R&D (internal), marketing/sales
(internal), R&D partners (external), distribution partners (external) and customer
segment (external). The categorization of the groups was based on two diﬀerent
approaches; the commonly recognized functional groups (Lee et al., 2007) and the
relevant actors present in the analyzed case studies. Then, the strategic alignment
theory was applied to match the groups’ activities in a way they support one another.
The top management is the owner of the ﬁnancial needs of a technology ven-
ture and it is responsible for leading two groups, sales/marketing and R&D depart-
ments. Towards R&D department, the top management has to communicate the
sales strategy and then agree on a development strategy. Towards the sales/market-
ing department, the top management has to communicate the R&D strategy and
then agree on a sales strategy. The ﬁnancial needs and the sales needs have a very
close relationship, the number of sales is one of the most important variables to
justify investments, on the other hand, the revenue made by sales deﬁnes the ﬁxed
cost of operations, therefore the size of a company.
Financial-R&D: Firms need to select which development projects to pursue, it
is obvious that each of the projects implies a cost and the cost can diﬀer from each
other. It is natural to have a limited budget for development and a development
team may have many desires which may do their work easier, but such desires not
necessarily cover the developments that a customer may need, on the other hand,
those desires may build the foundation of the long term product/technology. To
cover the desires of R&D may be expensive and leave a ﬁrm without their necessary
resources for its operation, but may also drive towards strategic innovation. Thus,
the degree of alignment between the ﬁnancial and R&D needs can increase the op-
erating costs and lead to unhealthy ﬁnancial conditions or drive towards strategic
innovation.
Proposition 1: pursued development projects should always represent strategic
innovation, pursuing other projects have none or very limited beneﬁts.
The marketing/sales department has to agree with the customer in the terms
and scope of the solution, either directly or through distribution partners; consid-
ering the ﬁnancial and technical capabilities and limitations. The sales department
has the challenge of transmitting the value proposition to the customer, which may
imply to convince commercial and technical people on the customer side. The sales/-
marketing department needs to identify the key project owners and decision-makers
inside an organization and transmit the right beneﬁts to succeed in selling projects.
Avoiding miss-leading information to keep alignment during the sales process is
critical, therefore communication should happen between the sales and R&D de-
partment. To do so, both departments should work together and be involved in the
interaction with the customer. Often high technology ﬁrms create new workgroups
related to a speciﬁc project, mixing people from the R&D and sales department to
55
==PAGE:57==
improve the degree of cooperation, information sharing and support joint endeavors
(Coombs and Gomez-Mejia, 1991).
Financial-Sales/Marketing: The management strategy needs to be clear and
transmitted to the sales/marketing department. It should bring the sales depart-
ment close to R&D. The sales department should have clear objectives to fulﬁll the
revenue goal to sustain a technology venture. The sales department have to ful-
ﬁll its needs to be able to close customer contracts. The interaction between the
management and the sales department should help the management to allocate the
resources strategically to maintain or increase the revenue stream.
Proposition 2: A clear vision of the top management and eﬀective communi-
cation towards sales/marketing is necessary to identify key development and to set
realistic sales goals.
R&D-Customer: Maybe the biggest mistake in the development of a produc-
t/technology is to launch a product that does not cover the customer needs (Lee
et al., 2007). Probably the reason behind that is the diﬃculty to diﬀerentiate the
needs from the desires of a customer and to categorize customers in the appropriate
segment (Lee et al., 2007). Technology companies need to have a very sharp eye
to identify the essential needs of a customer since the customer itself can categorize
them wrong. Communication plays a key role in the alignment of the customer and
R&D needs. The former might seem obvious, however, it is a common mistake to
rely on written and spoken communication. When a project manager of a manufac-
turing company has a partial understanding of the technical details of the processes
or technology in the factory ﬂoor, spoken or written communication can lead to huge
miss interpretations of a problem. Furthermore, a limited understanding from the
customer’s perspective, of the development capabilities of a venture, could cause
partial information sharing, since it may seem not relevant from the customer’s
perspective. To overcome this communication challenge, technology ﬁrms need to
ensure to ask the right questions to get the right information, look for direct contact
with the technical experts and even travel and see on-site the applications. In an
OiA perspective, the main goal in the relation between R&D and customer is to
help the customer to reach their vision (Asli et al., 2013).
Proposition 3: Eﬀective communication and share knowledge will reduce devel-
oping time and cost; and will help to set realistic development milestones - spoken
and written communication is not enough to align the customer and R&D needs.
The customer group is the owner of the customer needs. Often in the IIoT in-
dustry big customers have a complex management structure and it can be divided
into diﬀerent business units; however, they may have shared needs. Furthermore,
the partners, end-user or end customer can inﬂuence the customer needs. Thus, the
customer needs are complex and are the result of a combination of the needs and
capabilities of diﬀerent stakeholders. It is clear that there are a lot of factors that
can unbalance those needs. Technology ﬁrms need to understand the nature of those
needs and help the customers to ﬁnd the best solution. To develop accurate solu-
tions, technology ﬁrms need to understand the needs of the individuals, so they can
56
==PAGE:58==
design their technology, taking into account the diﬀerent perspectives; Technology
ﬁrms need to take an active role in this matter making use of IT and IS.
Marketing/sales-Customer: The sales department needs to 1) identify the
right people in the customer side to sell a project, 2) transmit the right beneﬁt to
the individual stakeholders and 3) be able to agree on the right business model that
fulﬁlls the ﬁnancial needs of the company and ﬁts the customer. While doing the
mentioned points, the sales department need to have a big understanding of the
R&D strategy and capabilities, this will allow setting realistic milestones. Technol-
ogy ﬁrms need to create new workgroups related to a speciﬁc project, mixing people
from the R&D and sales department.
Proposition 4: Selling non-tested or developing technologies should be done with
a holistic point of view - Understanding the technical and ﬁnancial needs is manda-
tory to balance the sell-develop and develop-sell decisions.
In the people level, the translation layer is carried out, mainly by the head of
the groups. Translation of management strategy and its changes happens at the
people’s level. Figure 10 shows the needs and the people level diagram. Partners
are presented with a non-continuous line since they are not involved in all the tech-
nology ventures necessarily. However, this research conﬁrmed the importance of the
partners element in I4.0.
Figure 10: The people’s level.
57
==PAGE:59==
6.3
The Strategic level
To develop a practical model for implementation, the key question is: how can
technology ﬁrms embrace alignment into their operations? To achieve this it is im-
perative to understand how the overall business strategy is shaped, broke down and
transmitted through the diﬀerent groups in a company. The strategic level would
be similar or equivalent to the actants level on the TSAM.
In previous sections, this document departs from the assumption that the main
driver of alignment comes from outside of the company; however, strategy
deﬁnition is an iterative process, which means that there is an interaction in both
directions. For the matter of this thesis, we would deﬁne that the ﬂow direction is
ﬁrst from the customer needs to the business strategy and then from the business
strategy to the customer. The main reason behind this ﬂow deﬁnition is to state the
importance of the outside picture when it comes to developing an eﬀective strategy,
adopting the service level perspective proposed by Henderson and Venkatraman
(1993). Figure 11 shows the ﬂow direction in OiA, it is important to mention that
ﬁgure 11 is a simpliﬁed diagram which shows only the direction, leaving out the
means to deliver the strategy to the customer.
Figure 11: Oustide-in Strategic Alignment ﬂow direction.
To deﬁne a business strategy driven by the customer during time, it is necessary
to have a picture of the customer in a certain period (Lee et al., 2007). I4.0 has
the vision to fully communicate things and automate processes. Certainly, this is a
long term picture but is shaping the path of the manufacturing industry, since com-
panies are following it to attain these goals. Manufacturing companies have short
and midterm targets for I4.0 adoption. These targets build the technology adoption
road-maps that they are pursuing. To develop the customers’ technology adoption
road-maps, allows technology ﬁrms to identify the needs of a customer during time.
The technology road-map of the customer gives the R&D department information to
develop its technology development road-map, which can shape the R&D strategy
(Lee et al., 2007). Furthermore, the customer’s technology adoption road-map gives
information to develop sales targets; since depending on the adoption plans of the
customer the sales potential can be estimated (Lee et al., 2007).
The R&D strategy and the sales strategy needs to be developed as a combination
58
==PAGE:60==
in the overall business and IT strategy and then split into individuals to drive the
diﬀerent groups of a ﬁrm. The business and IT strategy is the plan with the leveraged
technologies to achieve corporate goals. The strategy level is added to the people
level and shown in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Oustide-in strategy transmition and communication diagram.
Proposition 5: Developing and understanding the customer’s technology adoption
road-map, facilitates strategic innovation, allowing to set realistic sales goals and
selecting the right development actions.
6.4
The OiA model
In this section, a new model is deﬁned where the three levels are taken into consid-
eration, and four ﬁts are presented which need to be fulﬁlled to achieve alignment:
the budget, revenue, business model and technology ﬁts. We will deﬁne ﬁt between
two needs to the degree in which they support each other (Walsh et al., 2010).
The OiA Model shown in ﬁgure 13, presents all the elements participating in a
technology venture. Figure 13 shows IT/IS infrastructure as the background of the
model, which means that its role is to support as much as possible all the processes
that link all elements. The OiA model merges the IT strategy into the overall busi-
ness strategy and deﬁnes it as the plan with the leveraged technologies to achieve
corporate goals. The business and IT strategy should be ruled by selection mech-
anisms that take into account the diﬀerent stakeholders. The OiA Model proposes
to design all processes as a combination of human and technology tasks and should
be supported by the IS infrastructure.
In the people’s level section, the relationship between needs and people was
presented. Then, in the strategy level section, the relationship between the strategy
59
==PAGE:61==
and the people was presented.
Also, in the strategy level section, the strategy
transmission process was presented and now it has been presented the role of IT
and IS. Finally, they are merged and the OiA model is presented in ﬁgure 13.
60
==PAGE:62==
Figure 13: Outside-in Strategic Alignment Model.
==PAGE:63==
The presented model conclude on the deﬁnition of 4 important ﬁts technology
ventures should meet to thrive in alignment:
Business model ﬁt - The degree in which the processes that link the sales/-
marketing needs and the customer needs of a technology venture support each other.
Budget ﬁt - The degree in which the processes that link R&D needs and the
ﬁnancial needs of a technology venture support each other.
Revenue ﬁt - The degree in which the processes that link the sales/marketing
needs and the ﬁnancial needs of a technology venture support each other.
Technology ﬁt - The degree in which the processes that link the R&D needs
and the customer needs of a technology venture support each other.
A strong budget ﬁt should match the development budget with the ﬁnancial
capabilities. Since the ﬁnancial capabilities are usually a limitation for development,
it will guide the ﬁrm to identify the key developments to allocate the resources cor-
rectly.
A strong revenue ﬁt should give a technology venture a solid ﬁnancial condi-
tion. The activities of the management should support the selling process oﬀering
clear guidance with realistic sales goals and the possibility to oﬀer attractive deals
to the customer.
A strong technology ﬁt should match the development of a technology venture
and the technical needs of the customer. It would allow the venture to take strategic
decisions to deliver an accurate solution/technology either alone or in cooperation
with R&D partners.
A strong business model ﬁt should match the selling oﬀer with the customer’s
adoption capabilities. It would allow a technology venture to commercialize a cer-
tain technology, giving a clear win-win condition towards the customer.
62
==PAGE:64==
7
Discussion
This research raised the following question: how can technology ventures overcome
the challenges of I4.0? to answer the research question it was broken into two sub-
questions, how can technology ﬁrms communicate the beneﬁts of I4.0? and how can
they asses their capabilities? The ﬁrst sub-question was addressed by analyzing the
communication process of two case studies. The IS and IT theory, together with the
ideal solution presented by the participants were used to answer the sub-question.
The second sub-question was addressed mainly by studying the positive and nega-
tive development decisions stated by the participants of the projects, then relating
them to the service-oriented alignment, alignment for new product development and
alignment for outsourcing theory. Lastly, to solve the research question as a whole,
the OiA model was proposed. The model contains all the elements that need to be
communicated to solve the communication challenges, then stresses the importance
of capability assessment and deﬁnes a speciﬁc place for partners in alignment strate-
gies; all these to create a practical tool for alignment implementation for technology
ventures in the I4.0.
7.1
Contributions
In this section, the contributions to the strategic alignment literature are presented.
To do so, the contributions related to each of the propositions presented in the
theory-building section will be detailed. All the contributions are summarized in
table 10.
Proposition 1
One of the main objectives of this research was to understand how ﬁrms can em-
brace strategic innovation since it will drive them to signiﬁcantly outperform their
competitors (Lee et al., 2007). This research found that aligning tactics with strat-
egy will accelerate strategic innovation. This means, that the more activities during
projects that are aligned with the overall objectives of a company, the faster it will
attain such objectives.
Proposition 2
A common mistake is not having a clear vision of who are the customers of a single
product (Lee et al., 2007). The OiA model is a tool that will help practitioners to
align products with customer segments. From an OiA perspective, to identify cus-
tomer segments is necessary for alignment (Lee et al., 2007). To help practitioners
in the implementation of alignment, the OiA model uses the customer road-maps to
deﬁne the business and IT strategies.
Once a strategy is deﬁned, it needs to be communicated properly to ensure its
eﬀectiveness (Walsh et al., 2010); to ensure this, the OiA proposes a communication
ﬂow which should help practitioners to transmit the overall strategy. The commu-
nication ﬂow starts from the top management which needs to generate a customers
road-map to deﬁne an overall strategy. Then, the management needs to break the
strategy into R&D and sales strategy and communicate both to the sales and R&D
63
==PAGE:65==
groups. Communication is an iterative and bidirectional process, but the OiA high-
lights the importance of starting from the customer’s needs and ﬂowing to the inside
of a company.
Proposition 3
The OiA literature shows that communication and shared knowledge have a direct
impact on the speed and eﬀectiveness of technology development (Masa’deh and
Kuk, 2007; Lee et al., 2007). The former, is acknowledged by this research and it is
extrapolated to external elements of a company; i.e. sharing knowledge between dif-
ferent organizations is key to align technology development activities. To solve the
communication problem ﬁrms need ﬁrst to identify all the relevant actors of a ven-
ture (Thevenet, 2008). Then, make a detailed plan of the communication channels
and the processes that will be leveraged. Having a clear vision of the communicated
elements is equal or more important than selecting the right technologies and design
the processes to communicate. Communication and shared knowledge will sustain
alignment between the needs of the individuals (Walsh et al., 2010; Cuenca et al.,
2014; Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007), to ensure that, this research proposes a set of com-
monly identiﬁed groups which should share knowledge to sustain alignment.
Walsh et al. (2010) details the communication between groups that is centralized
by project managers which carry out the translation layer between the stakeholders.
Translation plays a big role in alignment since any kind of misunderstanding will
have an impact on the overall performance of a technology venture. The mismatches
in translation can have diﬀerent explanations, but doubtlessly the complexity of I4.0
projects gives several opportunities for misunderstandings. This research identiﬁed
that the translation layer happens in all the interactions between the groups of a
venture and it is carried out mainly by the head of the groups. Thus, all these
groups must ﬁnd their place as collaborators during projects (Cuenca et al., 2014),
to have better alignment in expectations; to achieve that the OiA model presents
a set of links which should guide managers to allocate stakeholders in the correct
place during the project.
However, to have people from diﬀerent companies constantly together may be
hard and expensive, therefore the proper use of IT can empower companies to have
strong communication regardless of their locations. A proper assessment needs to
be done before selecting or implementing IT for communication purposes, since a
bad design and integration may result expensive and drive the venture to failure
(Kimble et al., 2009).
Proposition 4
Co-development will bring alignment between internal and external elements of a
company (Lee et al., 2007; Cuenca et al., 2014), for this reason, the OiA model is
a tool that considers partners, customers and end-users; in the design of alignment
strategies. Partners will ease the identiﬁcation of own core business activities (Ho
et al., 2015; Cuenca et al., 2014), this means that they play a big role in capability
assessment. The awareness of third party technology and a strong understanding of
it gives better insights of what needs to be developed, co-developed or outsourced.
Finally, to select successful developments, ﬁrms should select them with a customer
64
==PAGE:66==
focus (Asli et al., 2013), this means they should select them with an OiA perspective.
Proposition 5
The OiA points out that companies can use the technology adoption road-maps to
develop the R&D strategy and sales goals. This is based on the idea presented by
Lee et al. (2007) that technology road-maps can shape the R&D strategy; also that
the main goal in the relation between R&D and the customer, is to help the cus-
tomer to reach their vision (Asli et al., 2013). The OiA model uses road-mapping as
a tool which will help technology ventures to thrive in strategic innovation. Road-
maps point out the key developments that will satisfy the customer during time,
this way the right development actions will be pursued and the objectives in the
supplier-customer relationship would be aligned.
Main proposition
Strategic alignment literature deﬁnes administrative and IS/IT processes. The OiA
model deﬁnes only one kind of processes, merging the IS/IT and administrative pro-
cesses as one, the main reason behind this deﬁnition is the current high adoption of
IS into business processes. Today tools like mobile phones, email, corporate chats,
and digital technologies in general; are embedded in the corporate processes. The
OiA model argues that in the process design, IS/IT should be always taken into
account.
The model deﬁnes 3 levels which come into play: needs, people and strategy;
inspired primarily from the TSAM and the NPD SAM (Lee et al., 2007; Walsh et al.,
2010). Henderson and Venkatraman (1993) deﬁnes the strategic ﬁt, to the match
between internal and external elements. Walsh et al. (2010) deﬁnes seven ﬁts that
match the diﬀerent IT needs existent in an organization. The OiA takes inspiration
from both theories and deﬁnes four ﬁts. The ﬁts objective is to align the needs of a
set of commonly identiﬁed groups of people inside and outside an organization. The
OiA model argues that strengthening those ﬁts would have a big positive eﬀect in
communication, technology development and strategic innovation in general.
The technology ﬁt points the development partners and the communication chan-
nel towards them. The Business model ﬁt points out the decision-makers and the
beneﬁt that needs to be transmitted to each of them, as well as the pricing condi-
tions. The budget ﬁt points out who needs to be involved in the deﬁnition of the
development strategy, to ensure that budget is allocated properly and the correct
projects are pursued. The revenue ﬁt, points out who needs to be involved in the
deﬁnition of the sales strategy and sales target deﬁnition. Thus, the OiA gives the
answer to our research question explaining which strategy should new ventures fol-
low to solve the communication and capability assessment challenges.
65
==PAGE:67==
  
Proposition 
Existent literature 
Contribution 
Pursued  development  projects  should always 
represent  strategic  innovation, pursuing other 
projects have non or very limited benefits. 
Strategic innovation should drive firms to significantly outperform 
their competitors (Kimble et al., 2009). 
Aligning  tactics  with  strategy  will  accelerate 
strategic innovation. 
A clear vision of the top management and  effective 
communication  towards sales/marketing is necessary 
to identify key  developments  and  to  set  realistic 
sales goals. 
One common mistake is not having a clear vision of who are the 
customers of a single product (Lee et al., 2007). 
Alignment  tool  to  fit  product/technology  development 
with customers of I4.0. 
Identification of different market segments is necessary and drives 
alignment (Lee et al., 2007). 
A framework where customer segment roadmapping is 
used to define the business and IT strategy. 
Effective management changes can be done when they are communicated 
correctly (Walsh et al., 2010). 
Proposal of the communication flow of manage- 
ment changes in technology ventures 
Effective   communication   and   shared 
knowledge will reduce developing time and cost,  and 
will help to set realistic development  milestones  - 
spoken  and written communication  is  not  enough to 
align the customer and R&D needs. 
Communication and shared knowledge are essential for fast and effective 
product/technology development (Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007;Lee et al., 
2007). 
Cross-organizational shared knowledge is key to 
align development activities. 
Communication and shared knowledge will sustain the alignment 
between  the  individual  needs  (Walsh  et  al.,  2010;  Cuenca  et 
al.,2014; Masa’deh and Kuk, 2007). 
Commonly identified groups which should have 
shared knowledge to sustain alignment. 
 
Project managers carry out the translation layer (Walsh et al.,2010) 
IS should provide communication channels (Cuenca et al., 2014). 
The  translation  layer  happens  at  the  people’s 
level between all the groups in a technology ven- 
ture. 
Stakeholders  should  find  their  place  as  collaborators  during  the 
whole process (Cuenca et al., 2014). 
A set of links for communication between stake- 
holders leveraging IS/IT. 
Selling  non  tested  or  developing technologies 
should be done with a holistic point of view - 
Understanding the technical and financial needs is 
mandatory to balance the sell-develop and develop 
sell decisions. 
Co-development will bring alignment between internal and external 
elements of a company (Lee et al., 2007; Cuenca et al., 2014). 
A tool to align the development strategy with 
partners, customers and end users. 
To have a partnership relation allows companies to take advantage of 
their capabilities (Ho et al., 2015; Cuenca et al., 2014). 
Partnerships play a main role in capability assessment. 
Successful  development  happens  when  internal  processes  are  tailored 
with a customer perspective (Asli et al., 2013) 
OiA perspective leads to select successful developments. 
Financial  goals  should  ensure  profitability,  growth  and  increased 
value for shareholders (Asli et al., 2013) 
Selection and communication of business model 
is as important as the technology itself. 
Developing and understanding the customer’s 
technology adoption road-map, facilitates  strategic 
innovation,  allowing  to  set  realistic  sales  goals 
and  selecting the right development actions. 
The technology road-map of the customer can shape the R&D strategy 
(Lee et al., 2007). 
The  main  goal  in  the  relation  between  R&D  and  customer  is  to 
help the customer to reach their own vision (Asli et al., 2013). 
The use of customer’s technology road-maps to 
develop R&D strategy and sales goals. 
Table 10: Contributions.
==PAGE:68==
7.2
Practical implications
Strategic alignment models can be applied to small, medium and large organizations.
El Mekawy et al. (2009) classify the SAM applicable to any size of organization. The
model proposed in this inquiry has a strong foundation built on the SAM model,
however, this research is focused on new technology ventures, which might make the
proposed model more suitable for small ﬁrms and small groups on new ventures of
big enterprises.
The OiA model is a practical tool to implement alignment strategies in an I4.0
context, it is more suitable for companies developing technology that will be im-
plemented in running factories and need to be tested on brownﬁelds. System inte-
grators, OEMs, manufacturers and any kind of new ventures targeting the manu-
facturing industry can use this tool. Also, it is suitable for companies developing
technology for a customer segment in a project basis scheme.
The slowness of big companies can kill innovation. This research argues that
small companies targeting big customers, can use their ﬂexibility and fast response
to accelerate big companies processes; to do so, small companies need to design
the right processes and use the appropriate IT tools (Cuenca et al., 2014). e.g.
Connectium could have agreed with Manufacturex form the very beginning to es-
tablish the proper communication channels (weekly remote conferences, corporate
chat, centralized project information database) and propose the necessary IT tools
to accelerate development (remote data monitoring, customer’s interface for self-
customization, etc.). On the other hand, big companies pursuing new technology
ventures need to have ﬂexible administrative structure and IS infrastructure (Sun
and Chen, 2006, 2008) to bring participants closer every time a new venture arises.
The OiA model is designed to reduce the learning curve on industrial projects. To
bring partners, customers, and end-users closer; the OiA model creates an envi-
ronment where knowledge is spread faster and by reducing the intermediaries, the
negative eﬀects of translation layers can be minimized. If communication is eﬃcient
and eﬀective, technology ﬁrms will reduce the length of the projects. Shorter com-
munication cycles represent huge savings in time and resources, but also can avoid
bankruptcy for new technology ventures.
For small technology ventures, it is hard to leverage alignment strategies; they
need to identify if they are pursuing the right goals in the ﬁrst place. The OiA
model attempts to help ventures to leverage alignment strategies at the same time
of deﬁning the right goals. This way ventures can accelerate strategic innovation.
To do so, the OiA model has been designed having in mind the essential needs that
ventures need to cover on a daily basis. Thus, they can use the OiA model as a
tool to improve in their daily tasks and not as an extra project that needs to be run
on parallel. In fact, the main objective of the OiA model is to help ﬁrms to focus
on their know-how and stop developing activities which add limited value to their
technology.
The OiA model recognizes partnerships as crucial to thriving in alignment; how-
ever, it goes beyond that and also looks for identifying the right people inside the
right partner. This way all parties can take full advantage of their capabilities. The
67
==PAGE:69==
former should reduce signiﬁcantly the implementation challenges in complex indus-
tries like manufacturing.
7.3
Limitations
The OiA is not an attempt to redeﬁne the strategic alignment theory, the main con-
tribution is the application of the theory into the speciﬁc case of technology ventures.
The obtained model is most likely applicable to project-based companies which have
many stakeholders involved and need to partner up and co-develop constantly to be
able to thrive. It was designed with empirical evidence of an I4.0 context, which
makes it more suitable for technology ﬁrms within this industry. The use of the OiA
does not give detail of the implications and role of IT in management strategies, e.g.
for the administrative processes of a company.
The case studies left out of scope the alignment of the distribution partners since
none of them involved any, and it is evident that they play a big role in the technol-
ogy success process. Also, the needs of technical and commercial partners were left
out of scope, but they could play an important role in alignment. Partners’ needs
might be diﬃcult to match, i.e. is diﬃcult to ﬁnd an appropriate business model to
target together with partners the customer and end-user.
The presented cases are pilot projects and to rate the success of the projects is
very diﬃcult or not possible because it depends on the place on the road-map it
represents to the individuals.
Propositions made by the OiA can be very diﬃcult to apply when companies
with very stiﬀand strict policies are involved.
The ﬁrst step into the OiA is probably to identify the right people to sell the
project or technology. Maybe to get contact with all the relevant stakeholders from
the beginning is hard, but the OiA philosophy presented by the model, is to look for
embracing that contact as soon as possible. Then, as the projects move forth, aim
to bring all the elements of the OiA model into play. This research acknowledges
that it takes time to ﬁgure out all the relevant stakeholders, but technology ventures
should aim to ﬁnd them as soon as possible to place them in the OiA framework.
7.3.1
Limitations in the methodology
One of the reasons the strategic alignment literature was selected to tackle the
problem, is that ineﬀective communication and misalignment between stakeholders
was identiﬁed as one of the main problems, however there might be other suitable
literature related to project management, technology management, and product de-
velopment; that could be used to expand the theory and increase the validity of the
model.
Although the research was carried out in cooperation with industry top lead-
ers, the data presented in this document only represents two speciﬁc cases, and the
68
==PAGE:70==
results obtained cannot be generalized. The presented data were treated following
the methodology proposed by Kvale (1996) and de Vaus (2001), it is subjective and
it is aﬀected by the interviewees’ and the researcher’s point of view. The intervie-
wees’ own experience on the treated industry and project management may vary,
regardless of the maturity of the company they belong to, aﬀecting the decisions
and processes followed during the conducted cases. The data obtained from some
of the partners is limited in the sense that direct access was not always possible,
however, the gaps were analyzed with the meta-data obtained from the rest of the
groups.
The case study was conducted in a small ﬁrm, which means that the structure
and internal processes are simple, limiting the number of studied variables. These
helped the researcher to focus on the external elements of a ﬁrm, but also gives a
weak validity to apply the same results to big enterprises as a whole. The conclu-
sions might only be extrapolated to big companies if the analyzed subject is a small
group conducting a new technology venture. Also, all the external factors outside
the project were not taken into account; e.g. the number of projects each company
is running at the moment, the ﬁnancial conditions, the priority of the project, per-
sonnel rotation, etc.
69
==PAGE:71==
8
Conclusion
Overcoming the challenges of the adoption of I4.0 is still a very diﬃcult task. The
complexity of the industrial projects hinders the understanding of the potential ben-
eﬁts that can be obtained by manufacturers. The number of parties involved in I4.0
projects hinders eﬀective and agile communication. To develop full I4.0 projects
requires a great amount of knowledge and capabilities. In practice, it is rare that
one company has the full knowledge to develop a full project alone.
With the developed tool, technology ventures should be able to envision the
correct IT technologies to achieve radically new business models.
Implementing
technologies were more information from the customer can be captured and com-
munication is faster, this will lead to accelerate technology development and increase
customer satisfaction.
This research argues that in the strategic alignment ﬁeld the amount of practi-
cal tools is limited, and when it comes to new technology ventures it is very scarce.
Models based on empirical and theoretical frames will give practitioners the required
tools to overcome the challenges. The qualitative research conﬁrmed the impor-
tance of IS and share knowledge in alignment, as well as communication in general.
Furthermore, it pointed out the lack of implementation of strategic alignment in
new product developments. Product development has a very dynamic nature and
requires constant communication cycles between elements throughout organizations.
To overcome the challenges of I4.0 in manufacturing, this research proposes a
theoretical and empirical model, the Outside-in Strategic Alignment model. The
model is based on an extensive literature review of the strategic alignment ﬁeld of
the last 15 years and two case studies. The model can be used to analyze tech-
nology ventures in three diﬀerent levels, linking the diﬀerent stakeholders with the
business strategy and their needs. First, OiA gives guidance to practitioners for
communication, indicating what to communicate and to whom. Second, gives a list
of potential partners and points the develop, co-develop or buy decisions. Finally,
it gives a holistic picture of the technology development scenario, therefore the OiA
model output is a handy tool for alignment implementation.
9
Further work
To conﬁrm the validity of the OiA model, it is needed to challenge its propositions
extensively with empirical evidence. Also, more data is needed to conﬁrm if the
commonly identiﬁed groups for the model are regularly present in technology ven-
tures targeting I4.0.
The OiA model proposes the uniﬁcation of processes as a combination of human
and technology tasks. However, more research is needed to describe this integration.
Finally, the model needs to be tested by practitioners and its performance needs
to be documented. The former will lead to enhance it or discard its usefulness.
70
==PAGE:72==
References
(2019).
Al-majali, D. and Md. Dahalin, Z. (2014). It – business strategic alignment in in-
ﬂuencing sustainable competitive advantage in jordan: Structural equation mod-
elling (sem) approach.
Andreas Schumacher a, b *, S. E. b. W. S. a. b. (2016). A maturity model for as-
sessing industry 4.0 readiness and maturity of manufacturing enterprises. Elsevier
B.V.
Ashton, K. (2009). That ’internet of things’ thing. RFID Journal.
Asli, M. N., Dalfard, V. M., and Poursalik, K. (2013). A combination model us-
ing strategic alignment model and balanced scorecard and strategies’ prioritisa-
tion based on topsis technique. International Journal of Productivity and Quality
Management, 12(3):313–326.
Asoh, D. A., Belardo, S., and Duchessi, P. (2007). Knowledge strategic alignment:
Research framework, models, and concepts. Knowledge Management and Business
Strategies: Theoretical Frameworks and Empirical Research, pages 188–208.
Avison, D., Jones, J., Powell, P., and Wilson, D. (2004). Using and validating the
strategic alignment model. Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 13(3):223–
246.
Azedine, B., Noureddine, F., and Rabia, M. (2012).
Deploying holistic meta-
modeling for strategic information system alignment.
Information Technology
Journal, 11(8):946–958.
Baker, J., Jones, D. R., Cao, Q., and Song, J. (2011). Conceptualizing the dy-
namic strategic alignment competency. Journal of the Association of Information
Systems, 12(4):299–322.
Ba¨ına, S., Ansias, P. Y., Petit, M., and Castiaux, A. (2008). Strategic business/it
alignment using goal models. Ceur Workshop Proceedings, 336:31–43.
Beﬀers, R. and de Waal, B. (2018). Enhancing the strategic alignment model: The
contribution of bisl. Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Management,
Leadership and Governance Ecmlg 2018, pages 18–27, 18–27.
Bhattacharya, P. (2018).
Aligning enterprise systems capabilities with business
strategy: An extension of the strategic alignment model (sam) using enterprise
architecture. Procedia Computer Science, 138:655–662.
Bleistein, S. J., Cox, K., and Verner, J. (2006). Validating strategic alignment of
organizational it requirements using goal modeling and problem diagrams. Journal
of Systems and Software, 79(3):362–378.
Campbell, B. (2007). Strategic alignment: A dynamic process. Acis 2007 Proceedings
- 18th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, pages 28–37.
71
==PAGE:73==
Coombs, G. and Gomez-Mejia, L. R. (1991).
Cross-functional pay strategies in
high-technology ﬁrms. Compensation and Beneﬁts Review, 23(5):40–48.
Cuenca, L., Boza, A., Ortiz, A., and Trienekens, J. J. M. (2014). Business-it align-
ment and service oriented architecture: A proposal of a service-oriented strategic
alignment model. Iceis 2014 - Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Enterprise Information Systems, 3:490–495.
Cuenca, L., Ortiz, A., and Boza, A. (2010). Business and is/it strategic alignment
framework. Iﬁp Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 314:24–
31.
Damiani, E., Mulazzani, F., Russo, B., and Succi, G. (2008). Saf strategic alignment
framework for monitoring organizations. Lecture Notes in Business Information
Processing, 7:213–+.
de Vaus, D. (2001). Research Design in Social Research :. Sage,.
Doumi, K., Baina, S., and Baina, K. (2011). Experimenting a modeling approach
for modeling enterprise strategy in the context of strategic alignment. Communi-
cations in Computer and Information Science, 220:356–368.
El Mekawy, M., Rusu, L., and Ahmed, N. (2009). Business and it alignment: An
evaluation of strategic alignment models. Communications in Computer and In-
formation Science, 49:447–455.
Fattah, F. and Arman, A. A. (2014). Business-it alignment: Strategic alignment
model for healthcare (case study in hospital bandung area). 2014 International
Conference on Ict for Smart Society (iciss), pages 256–259.
Goepp, V. and Avila, O. (2015). An extended-strategic alignment model for techni-
cal information system alignment. International Journal of Computer Integrated
Manufacturing, 28(12):1275–1290.
Henderson, J. C. and Venkatraman, N. (1993). Strategic alignment: leveraging infor-
mation technology for transforming organizations. Ibm Systems Journal, 32(1):4–
16, 4–16.
Hermann, M., Pentek, T., and Otto, B. (2016). Design principles for industrie 4.0
scenarios. Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, 2016-:7427673, 3928–3937.
Ho, L., Management Group (ikm, K., and Computing, F. O. (2015). Alignment of
a strategic outsourcing framework to practitioner case studies. Proceedings of the
European and Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems, Emcis 2006.
Jadda, S. and Janati Idrissi, M. A. (2015). Strategic alignment and information
system project portfolio optimization model. 2015 10th International Conference
on Intelligent Systems: Theories and Applications (sita).
Khan, S. A., Qureshi, S. A., and Zaheer, A. (2012).
Extending the is strategic
alignment model: A study from the perspective of service industries.
Actual
Problems of Economics, (130):252–258.
72
==PAGE:74==
Kimble, C., Bourdon, I., and Lehmann-Ortega, L. (2009). Business meta-models
and the saga of business-it strategic alignment. 15th Americas Conference on
Information Systems 2009, Amcis 2009, 7:4829–4838.
Kohlegger, M., Maier, R., and Thalmann, S. (2009). Understanding maturity mod-
els results of a structured content analysis. Proceedings of I-know 2009 - 9th In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Management and Knowledge Technologies
and Proceedings of I-semantics 2009 - 5th International Conference on Semantic
Systems, pages 51–61.
Kvale, S. (1996). Interviews. Sage.
Lee, H.-K., Liu, C.-M., and Lee, M.-H. (2007). 6.2.1 from foresight to insight: A
strategic alignment model for new product development.
Incose International
Symposium, 17(1):900–915.
Lewis, M. (2012). Strategic alignment model: Helps determine sales training invest-
ments. T and D, 66(12):52–56.
Lichtblau, K., Stich, V., Bertenrath, R., Blum, M., and Bleider, Martin, A. M. K.
S. E. S. M. S. (2015). Industrie 4.0 readiness.
Luftman, J. (2000). Assessing business-it alignment maturity. Communications of
the Association for Information Systems, 4.
Luftman, J., Dorociak, J., Kempaiah, R., and Rigoni, E. H. (2008). Strategic align-
ment maturity: A structural equation model validation. 14th Americas Conference
on Information Systems, Amcis 2008, 3:1491–1506.
Maksim, B., Valerie, F., Sabine, K., Li, W., and Liu, K. (2018). Exploring the cloud
computing loop in the strategic alignment model. Digitalisation, Innovation, and
Transformation, 527:117–124.
Masa’deh, R. and Kuk, G. (2007).
A causal model of strategic alignment and
ﬁrm performance. Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on Information
Systems, Ecis 2007, pages 1694–1705.
Million Insights (September 28, 2017).
Industrial Internet of Things Market
Size to Expand Globally Based on Easy Availability of Various Advanced
Electronic Devices Till 2025.
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
industrial-internet-of-things-market-size-to-expand-globally-based-on-easy-avail
html. [web-page].
Noce, I., Lourenco Martins, J. C., Belfo, F. P., Ferreira, I., and Coelho, J. S. (2011).
Strategic alignment through organizational modeling: A case study in a public
institution. Communications in Computer and Information Science, 219:129–+.
Presley, A. (2006). Erp investment analysis using the strategic alignment model.
Management Research News, 29(5):273–284.
Salaheddine, A. and Ilias, C. (2018). Continuous improvement of strategic alignment
model. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, 25:12–20.
73
==PAGE:75==
Schallehn, M., Schorling, C., Bowen, P., and Straehle, O. (2019).
Beyond
proofs of concept:
Scaling the industrial iot.
https://www.bain.com/
contentassets/c737b279ee6e480a9fdc9d5f2fb0f0e2/bain_brief_beyond_
proofs_of_concept_scaling_industrial_iot.pdf. [Accessed: 2019-07-28].
Selim Erol1, Andreas Schumacher1, W. S. . (2016).
Strategic guidance towards
industry 4.0 a three-stage process model. International Conference on Competitive
Manufacturing.
Shancang Li, Li Da Xu, S. Z. (2003). The internet of things: a survey. Springer
Science+Business Media New York 2014.
Smaczny, T. (2001). Is an alignment between business and information technology
the appropriate paradigm to manage it in today’s organisations?
Management
Decision, 39(10):797–802.
Sun, C.-M. and Chen, R.-S. (2006). A study on the strategic alignment process with
information technology for new ventures: From a dynamic capability perspective.
Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Information Systems, Ecis 2006.
Sun, S. Y. and Chen, Y. Y. (2008). Consolidating the strategic alignment model
in knowledge management. International Journal of Innovation and Learning,
5(1):51–65.
Thevenet, L.-H. (2008). Modeling strategic alignment using instal. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 5232:261–271.
Vadala,
E.
and
Graham,
C.
(2006).
Downtime
costs
auto
indus-
try $22k/minute - survey.
https://news.thomasnet.com/companystory/
downtime-costs-auto-industry-22k-minute-survey-481017.
[Accessed:
2019-07-28].
van de Wetering, R., Mikalef, P., and Pateli, A. (2018). Strategic alignment be-
tween it ﬂexibility and dynamic capabilities:. International Journal of It/business
Alignment and Governance, 9(1):1–20, 1–20.
Vargas, N., Johannesson, P., and Rusu, L. (2010). A uniﬁed strategic business and it
alignment model: A study in the public universities of nicaragua. 16th Americas
Conference on Information Systems 2010, Amcis 2010, 7:5098–5110.
Walsh, I., Renaud, A., and Kalika, M. (2010). Re-conceptualizing is strategic align-
ment: The translated strategic alignment model (tsam). 16th Americas Confer-
ence on Information Systems 2010, Amcis 2010, 3:2317–2328.
Weiss, J. W., Thorogood, A., and Clark, K. D. (2006). Three it-business alignment
proﬁles: Technical resource, business enabler, and strategic weapon. Communi-
cations of the Association for Information Systems, 18.
Wikipedia (2019a). Analytics. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytics. [Ac-
cessed: 2019-07-28].
Wikipedia (2019b).
Edge computing.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edge_
computing. [Accessed: 2019-07-28].
74
==PAGE:76==
Wirtz, M. E. . J. (2017). Unlocking value from machines: business models and the
industrial internet of things. Journal of Marketing Management, pages 33:1–2,
111–130.
Zhou, J. (2013).
Digitalization and intelligentization of manufacturing industry.
Advances in Manufacturing, 1(1):1–7.
75
==PAGE:77==
A
Appendix
A.1
Interview guide
1. Internal and external, who participated in this project?Can you mention all
of them? And how?
2. Where is this project placed in the roadmap of the ﬁrm?
3. How does the ﬁrm designed/developed/scoped this project? How do you de-
cide which features to implement?
(a) Which were the challenges of these?
(b) What could have done better or which one is the ideal way?
(c) How does Connectium participated in this regard?
(question not for
Connectium)
4. Which were the challenges the ﬁrm faced in this project?
5. Which were the challenges the ﬁrm faced when trying to sell this project?
(a) How did the ﬁrm overcome those challenges?
(b) Can you describe the sales process?
(c) What could have been done better?
(d) What was done wrong?
6. Which challenges the ﬁrm faced when trying to develop this project?
(a) How did the ﬁrm overcome those challenges?
(b) Can you describe the developing process?
(c) What could have been done better?
(d) What was done wrong?
7. Remember the groups of the project, Tell me about your interaction omnio
and with the diﬀerent groups? Was it good? Was it bad? Why?
(a) Could it have been better?
(b) Does every group expectations from each other were met along the pro-
cess?
8. Would you classify the project as successful?
76
==PAGE:78==
A.2
Additional ﬁgures
Figure 14: IERC IoT deﬁnition
Figure 15: Bain and Company: IoT ﬁrm categories (Schallehn et al., 2019)
The readiness model associates 18 ﬁelds to measure the six dimensions it is made
of, ﬁgure 16 shows the readiness model, the inner circle shows the six dimensions
and the outer circle the 18 ﬁelds.
77
==PAGE:79==
Figure 16: Readiness Model with 6 dimensions and 18 ﬁelds (Lichtblau et al., 2015)
Figure 17: Bain and Company:Shift in IoT customer concerns (Schallehn et al.,
2019)
78
==PAGE:80==
A.3
Project plan
==PAGE:81==
Thesis project plan 
 
Project title: 
How to align high tech firms solution with the manufacturing Industry. 
 
Objective: 
To understand and align the needs of the manufacturing industry with the Industrial Internet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Things (IIoT). 
 
Justification: 
The 4th industrial revolution is currently facing big challenges, whereas the manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
industry is paying a lot of attention and money investment into the IIoT solutions, almost
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100% of the current installed base devices in the manufacturing industry, is not ready to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
connected and share data which will empower companies to get the benefits of this trend.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore the data science needed for many of the IIoT applications is very immature and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
a lot of data recording and analysis should be done in the coming years to create reliable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution; i.e. predictive maintenance. Therefore, a big gap exists between the end solution
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e.g. predictive maintenance) and the factory floor. This project intends to find out what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategy does an IIoT firm needs to adopt in order to thrive today, i.e. which technologies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs to be adopted, developed or acquired; to make IIoT a successful business today. 
 
Extra information: 
The project will be developed in collaboration with an IIoT firm based in Copenhagen, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
started operations in 2017. The company will give access to internal information and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between 5 and 7 international companies network (current customers). The companies are
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world
leaders
in
their
own
Industry. Furthermore access to partners and relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders. In exchange, the company will receive a model, methodology or framework;
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
which
empowers
the
company
to
implement
a
strategy to acquire the necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capabilities/technologies to thrive in a structured way as well as access to the all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information and analysis developed into the project. 
 
Objectives outlining: 
 
Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the various components that make up an issue 
By applying relevant alignment models and researching about business cases, a clear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
picture of the challenges and the components will be obtained. 
Can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
international level to develop ideas and solve problems 
Using existing alignment and maturity tools, room for improvement can be found and give
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommendations accordingly. 
 
80
==PAGE:82==
Masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
actions 
The alignment approach was selected to take into account the market, technology and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maturity, achieving an holistic analysis of the problem. 
Can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solving technological problems 
It is intended to develop a new framework/methodology as outcome from this report, this
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be by adapting and enhancing current methodologies, mixing different frameworks or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing new frameworks based on the research. 
Can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing 
By writing and defending the thesis, this objective will be achieved. 
Is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specialist area. 
With the access to academic research, companies collaboration and its network this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objective will be achieved. 
Can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specialization 
By creating a project plan and the guidance of my supervisor this objective will be achieved. 
Masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
timetables, design, solution and documentation 
This will be achieved by presenting the plan and working close with my supervisor, then a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
high level and quality  project will be achieved. 
 
Project timeline: 
 
 
Month 1: 
Interviewing and supporting empirical evidence with theoretical evidence. 
●
Conduct the set of interviews for the use case  
●
Support as much as possible the findings with the literature research. 
 
81
==PAGE:83==
 
Month 2: 
 
Analysis, grammar enhancement and document flow. 
●
Analyse the data from the new interviews, update the results and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
document them. 
●
Write discussion and conclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents. 
1   Summary 
2   Introduction 
2.1    Motivation 
2.2    The Fourth Industrial Revolution - Opportunities and Challenges  
2.3    The challenges and the IIoT firms 
2.4    Readiness and maturity of I4.0 in Manufacturing 
2.5    Research question 
3   Research Approach 
3.1    Research Design 
3.2    Literature review 
3.3    Case studies 
3.3.1 
Predictive maintenance project: 
3.3.2 
Edge analytics Project: 
3.3.3 
Cases relevance 
3.4    Data collection and analysis  
3.5    Limitations  
4   Theoretical Framework 
4.1    Alignment formal definition 
4.2    Misalignment between Industry 4.0 and technology firms 
4.3    The traditional approach 
4.4    Internal vs External alignment 
4.5    Inside-out alignment 
4.6    Outside-in alignment 
4.7    Modeling Techniques 
4.8    The gap in the research 
5   Analysis I: Understanding and Communicating I4.0 
5.1    Preliminary conclusion 
6   Analysis II: Capability Assessment 
7   Analysis III: A Model built by evidence 
7.1    The Needs level 
 
82
==PAGE:84==
7.2    The People level 
7.3    The Strategic level 
7.4    The OiA model 
8   Discussion 
8.1    Contributions 
8.2    Practical implications 
8.3    Limitations 
9   Conclusion 
 
83
