==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Flexible Arrays for Low Frequency MRI
Master Thesis
Student:
Arlene Desallia Meidahl
s107106
Supervisor:
Vitaliy Zhurbenko
Co-Supervisor:
Juan Diego Sanchez
25th August 2019
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Purpose
In this thesis, the possibility of designing ﬂexible high impedance coils at low frequency 13C
(32.13MHz) such as a single loop high impedance coil (HIC) and 3turn 1gap coil, is detailed.
The study covers the modelling, design, evaluation, fabrication and implementation of each coil.
Methods
The majority of this project is the modelling and simulations of the coils using two software
simulation tools called Computer Simulation tool (CST) and Advance Design System (ADS).
Simulations of the new designs with diﬀerent detuning methods are also presented and com-
pared.
The second focus of this project is the construction of the designed coils to conﬁrm the possib-
ilities of extending ﬂexible coils at low frequency. A prototype of each coil is fabricated using a
commercial coaxial cable RG316/U. The ﬂexible HIC coils are integrated with printed circuit
board (PCB). The PCB houses all the soldered lumped-elements: tuning capacitor, dc blocking
capacitors, RF choke, detuning circuit, high power protection circuit and the preampliﬁer for
decoupling purposes. A solid case which is made of a mechanical plastic box is used for hous-
ing the PCB to protect it and to hold the HIC coil stable and prevent it from breaking. The
developed HIC coils were tested on the bench using a phantom that contains mainly water and
salt. The so-called ”BALACLAVA”, a bonnet is also used to investigate the performance of the
coil compared to a phantom in terms of Q-factor and resonance frequency. The eﬃciency of the
coils were also evaluated by measuring each coils signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) using a spectrum
analyzer. Series of measurements were carried out to optimize and characterize the coils before
bringing them for MRI scan experiments.
After thorough evaluation of the diﬀerent coils designed, the most promising ﬂexible high im-
pedance coil (HIC) was chosen. The decision made was based on the performance of the coils
with regards to Q-factor and signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR). Six prototypes of the HIC design were
brought to Aarhus University Hospital for testing.
Results
The results achieved from the MR scan experiments look promising and can possibly be im-
proved by extending the array into a bigger array. The construction and the results of the CST
model and ADS lumped-element model of the coil showed good agreement Employing diﬀerent
detuning and tuning techniques were achieved. An increased of the signal-to-noise-ratio com-
parable to the reference coil (standard coil) was demonstrated. Five prototypes of the coil plus
a spare one were successfully fabricated and tested, at the bench and at the MRI scanner. The
diﬀerent approaches used in this design can possibly provide useful information of improving
ﬂexible high impedance coil design.
Conclusion
The work covered in this master thesis provides possibilities of extending a new technology
which is being applied only at high frequencies 1H (123 MHz and above) into low frequency
application 13C (32.13 MHz). The ﬂexibility of the coil will allow great depth of penetration
as it can be placed as close to the part of the patient’s body to be scanned and so as the
form-ﬁtting of the coil arrays will contribute into the sensitivity of the coil, thus, improve the
SNR, hence improve the signal reception and image quality. Furthermore, this new technology
1
==PAGE:3==
addresses a technique of designing coils, that both focuses on patients comfort and gives bene-
ﬁcial for medical technologist. In other words, a more patient approach was presented in this
project design due to its ﬂexibility. One can call it ”one-size-ﬁts-all” or ”squeeze-in,stretch out
” receiver coils because it allows close ﬁt to the subject and depending on who the patient is,
the coil can easily be stretched out to ﬁt the head of an adult (left) and squeezed in to ﬁt the
head of a child (right) which is demonstrated in the ﬁgure below.
2
==PAGE:4==
Thesis Structure
The presented thesis is subdivided into nine chapters.
Chapter I the introduction and structure of the thesis.
Chapter II the basic principles of MRI are summarized.
Chapter III provides an overview of the HIC design, introduces the design principle, and de-
scribes the initial approaches of designing the coils. Simulation methods, including CST mod-
eling and ADS simulation are detailed.
Chapter IV describes the design, implementation and evaluation of ﬂexible HIC designs. Meth-
ods for bench measurements are presented. Furthermore, a new detuning technique is presented.
Chapter V presents the interface, prototype and implementation of the ﬁnal design and MRI
scan measurements and results are presented.
Chapter VI presents a general discussion of the whole design .
Further, it gives some per-
spectives for follow-up projects and future work.
Chapter VII presents the conclusion.
3
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology (HYPERMAG), which is
a part of the Department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), in fulﬁllment for acquiring a MSc. degree in Electrical Engineering.
The internal supervisors of this master thesis are Associate Professor Vitaliy Zhurbenko of
the Department of Electrical Engineering and Postdoc Juan Diego Sanchez of the Department
of Health Technology, HYPERMAG Group.
4
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgement
First and foremost, I would like to greatly thank my internal supervisors:
I sincerely thank Professor Vitaliy Zhurbenko for giving me the opportunity to work on this
project, for the encouragement, for lifting my self-conﬁdence to continue despite of the hard-
ships that I encountered along the way, for providing the guidance.
Postdoc Juan Diego Sanchez, I would like to sincerely thank him for his guidance through-
out the master project period, for the technical and theoretical advises, for the encouragement
and for the trip to Aarhus University Hospital. It was such a great experience to be part of
it and see how coils were really tested at the MRI scanner. Without them, I would not have
managed to complete the project in time.
I would also like to thank, Jan Kilund, the engineering assistant at the Department of Health
Technology for the great help and valuable inputs whenever it is needed.
I would also like to thank, Bo Brændstrup, the engineering assistant at the National Space
Department at DTU for helping with the PCB printing.
Most of all, I would like to sincerely thank my husband for always being there, for the pa-
tience, for taking care of our kids whenever I needed to stay longer at DTU to work on my
project. My kids, who served as my alarm clock everyday, who gave me strength every morning,
my inspirations.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my parents-in-law, who helped me through out
this period, for helping out picking up our kids whenever we wanted help when I worked over-
time at DTU, and also for the moral support.
To my grandmother, who died of cancer last year. I feel sorry that I did not get the chance to
see her for the last time. I know she would not be able to read this, but I would like to express
my heartfelt gratitude for raising me with all her might. Without her, I would not have reached
this far.
Lastly, I would like to thank all the people who stayed behind me, those who believed in
me, those who told me that I could do it, no matter how hard it is, my DTU mates and friends.
It took me years to reach this point, but I did not stop, I did not give up!
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
2
Theoretical Background
9
2.1
Magnetic Resonance System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Radio Frequency (RF) Coils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Flexible High Impedance Coil (HIC)
12
3.1
Introduction to High Impedance Coil (HIC) Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
HIC Validation based on Previous Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
HIC Validation Using Commercial Coaxial Cable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Coil construction and Bench Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Design of Flexible HIC at 32MHz
21
4.1
HIC Initial Design Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
HIC using Capacitors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
HIC Tuning using Capacitor at the Outer Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
HIC Tuning using a Capacitor at the Port Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.3
Comparison of the Two Tuning Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
3Turn-1Gap HIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
HIC Final Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Detuning Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5.1
HIC Single Loop when PIN diode is Forward Biased . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5.2
HIC Single Loop when PIN diodes is Reverse biased . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.6
Propose Detuning Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6.1
New Detuning Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.7
Comparison of HIC Coils and a Standard Coil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Flexible HIC Final Design
49
5.1
HIC Design - Interface and Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.1
Bench Measurement of the Final HIC Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
MRI Scanner Measurement Using Head Phantom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.1
Flexible HIC MRI Scan Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Discussion
59
7
Conclusion
61
8
Bibliography
62
6
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
A key issue for improving MRI image quality and provide better comfort for the patient is
the concept of ﬂexible receiver-coils. Currently, there are available commercial receiver coils
in the market that oﬀer good performance but relatively heavy and not ﬂexible due to their
mechanical solid cases. Furthermore, some ﬂexible receiver-coils have been developed but only
implemented for high frequency 1H MRI (123 MHz and above), so the possibilities of extending
this technology for imaging of low-gamma nuclei (13C) and providing patient comfort is the
main objective of this project. [1] [2]
Carbon 13 (13C) is considered to be very relevant in medical imaging technology. It shows a
great contribution in detection and monitoring of brain tumors and neurodegenerative diseases.
It is a type of metabolic imaging that can identify tumors, which use and metabolize nutrients
diﬀerently than normal cells. This is done by using a substance/compound called ”pyruvate”,[3]
[4] which is metabolized by the human body, therefore can be used as a marker for metabolic
diseases. This compound (pyruvate) needs to undergo the hyperpolarization procedure. Hy-
perpolarization is a process where a magnetic ﬁelds is used to increase the magnetization of
the nuclei several orders of magnitude, and therefore increases the detected signal strength.
Then the compound (”pyruvate”) can be detected by the MRI experiment. Generally, (13C)
has a signiﬁcant purpose in the accuracy of characterization, detecting of tumors in the human
body including monitoring of treatment process. Medical technologists used it to determine
how accurate the method is and how it works by tracking the changes in metabolism in the
area, where the tumor is.
Designing an RF coil is not just a matter of cutting a wire or coaxial cable and form it into a
circular loop and take it to the bench or at the MRI scanner for testing. It requires a wide under-
standing over the work presented in this thesis the coil design started with the construction of
a circular coil loop 3D model using computer simulation tool (CST). Followed by the 3D model
is the construction of a lumped-element model in Agilent Design System (ADS). These two
diﬀerent simulation tools were used to evaluate the theoretical behaviour of the coils in terms
of the coil source impedance at the Larmor frequency (32.13MHz). Diﬀerent approaches were
taken into consideration to achieve the most promising result before proceeding to fabrication.
Firstly is the overall geometry of the coil (ﬂexible/solid, circular/elliptical) which in this project
was chosen to be circular and ﬂexible. Secondly, the choice of material where in this project is
a coaxial cable RG316/U was used. Finally, the design parameters for the coil: loop diameter,
thickness of the conductors, length of the coil and the relative permittivity of the dielectric
material. These parameters were traded-oﬀto be able to come up with an initial solution to
start with and to build a coil that can initially be used for pre-bench testing (Q-factor and
resonance frequency measurement). The construction leads to three diﬀerent designs: high im-
pedance coil with tuning capacitor placed at the outer conductor gap, high impedance coil with
7
==PAGE:9==
tuning capacitor placed at the port of the inner conductor, and 3turn-1gap high impedance coil.
The three diﬀerent designs were fabricated and tested on the bench to verify their performance.
The coils were characterized based on their Q-factor and resonance frequency in sample-loaded
and unloaded setup. The measurement is performed by measuring the s21 of each coil using a
network analyzer and a double-loop probe connected to each of the analyzer port. The double-
loop probe is placed in the vicinity of the tested coil. To demonstrate the performance of each
coil in loaded setup, a phantom ﬁlled with a solution of NaCI in water, mimicking human tissue
conductivity at the frequency of interest, was used. To take advantage of the ﬂexibility, the
designed coils are then integrated to a so-called ”Balaclava”, a bonnet made of cloth. The coils
were taped on it during the initial measurements then in the end the coils were sewed around
it to demonstrate their ﬂexibility properties. Series of measuring Q-factor and resonance fre-
quency were carried out including PIN diodes to detune the coils during transmit phase and
power protection diodes (used to prevent the preampliﬁer from being damaged when it receives
a signal that exceeds the permissible input power) in the circuit. The results then show that
adding the diodes has a big impact on the overall performance of the coils. Besides Q-factor
and resonance frequency, the designed coils were also characterized based on their signal-to-
noise-ratio (SNR). SNR measurements were performed using a spectrum analyzer available and
inducing a reference sinusoidal signal (through an external loop). Each individual coil with a
preampliﬁer connected to it, was placed in a shielded box. In the shielded box is a pickup loop
feed with a -70 dBm signal from a signal generator which will then be induced on the coil.
The overall results are then compared to a standard coil which was used as a reference of a
state-of-the-art coil..
The comparison of the designed coils to a standard coil based on the impact of the PIN diodes
and power protection diodes led to a wider investigation regarding improvement of Q-factor
and achieving the highest possible signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) comparable to the standard coil.
Diﬀerent approaches of detuning the coil were presented which basically improves the coil per-
formance but the design did not end there. A further evaluation was conducted by analyzing the
entire circuit which led to the ﬁnal design. The ﬁnal HIC single-loop coil design has a perform-
ance comparable to the standard coil ( used as a reference coil). Despite fabricating 3 diﬀerent
coil designs, only the design performing best was brought to Aarhus University Hospital for
MRI testing. The ﬁnal ﬂexible HIC coils were tested using a head phantom that contains (13C)
compound. The results from MRI test were successful and promising, and show great possibility
of improving MR scan imaging.
8
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Magnetic Resonance System
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a diagnostic test that can be used to evaluate various
part of the anatomy. It simply allows the medical technologists to see high quality images of the
inside of the body: e.g. heart, brain, lungs, etc. Basically, magnetic resonance system is made
up of three main components: magnet (superconducting), a gradient coils and RF transmitter
and receiver. Most MRI system uses superconducting magnet to generate the static magnetic
ﬁeld which consists of many coils through which a current of electricity passed creating a strong
magnetic ﬁeld necessary to align the spins and achieve equilibrium. The magnet is the largest
component of the MRI so it take most of the space in the MRI machine. Next are the mag-
netic gradient coils which creates an additional magnetic ﬁeld (lower strength compared to the
main magnet) that vary the main magnetic ﬁeld, so that each signal can be related to an exact
location, which allows diﬀerent parts of the body to be scanned. Lastly, are the RF coils (trans-
mitter and receiver), that transmit RF waves into the patient’s body and receives the signal
when a current is generated by the RF system.
The process of using MRI scanner can simply be described as follows. First, the patient is
positioned into the MRI scanner, where the magnetic ﬁeld generated by the main magnet will
align the atomic nuclei within the body of the patient in response to the magnetic ﬁeld. Then
an RF pulse will be directed through the coils into the part of the body being scanned, which
will cause the nuclei to spin at a speciﬁc frequency. Then the generated magnetic ﬁeld will be
altered by the gradient magnet, allowing the MRI scanner to detect precisely which section of
the body should be scan. Afterwards, the RF pulse is switched oﬀwhich causes the atoms to
released the absorbed energy. Then the absorbed energy is detected by an RF coil (receiver)
and send the data to a computer that will process the MRI imaging.
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Magnetic Resonance Imaging system architecture [5]
2.2
Radio Frequency (RF) Coils
In the process of designing RF coils, several requirements should be taken into consideration.
RF coils can be used as a transmitter, a receiver, or both transmitter/receiver. The construction
of the coil design can be implemented in multiple ways depending on the region of interest (ROI)
to be imaged, high SNR and other factors. Generally, RF coils are classiﬁed as surface coils and
volume coils respectively.
Surface Coils
Nowadays, surface coils have been used extensively in all MRI experiments.
As the name
implies, it is used to image body parts that are very close to the skin surface or near the region
of interest (ROI). Surface coils can be based on a loop of conducting material, typically with
various shapes (circular/elliptical/rectangular) and can be implemented as transmit or receive
coils. This type of coils produce scanned images with a high SNR hence produces great quality
image. This type of coils allows the possibility to combine coils into an array to extend the
ﬁeld of view (FOV). Figure 2.2 shows the diﬀerent variety of commercial single-loop coils and
diﬀerent conﬁgurations.
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Types of surface coils and diﬀerent conﬁgurations [6]
Volume Coils
Volume coils are coils generally utilized as transmit coils, though they can also be used eﬀectively
as receiver-coils. They are used to cover a large area of the body or one speciﬁc region to
allow homogeneous receive and transmit sensitivity. In addition, volume coils have better RF
homogeneity. Example of volume coil is the main known birdcage coil (Fig. 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Type of Volume coil [7]
11
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 3
Flexible High Impedance Coil (HIC)
This section will introduce the concept of a high impedance coil using CST and ADS simulation
tools. Additionally, the equivalent circuit model of such coils will be evaluated, in order to
validate the diﬀerent simulation setups used throughout this work.
3.1
Introduction to High Impedance Coil (HIC) Design
The characteristic of HIC can be illustrated by comparing it to a conventional coil which is a
low impedance coil (LIC) structure. Figure 3.1 illustrates the circuitry of the two diﬀerent coils.
In LIC, the capacitive part and the inductive part form a series LC circuit. When the coil (LIC)
is tuned, the impedance is very low, where in the Smith Chart (blue circle), it can be seen as
a short circuit, the resistance is almost zero while in HIC, the distributed capacitance and the
conductive parts form a parallel LC circuit. After the HIC is tuned, the impedance will be very
high (kΩ) and it shows like an open circuit in the Smith Chart (red circle).
Figure 3.1: Circuitry of LIC (left) and HIC (right) [8]
12
==PAGE:14==
3.2
HIC Validation based on Previous Literature
The initial concept of the HIC designed was based on an article [8] of designing high impedance
detector arrays for magnetic resonance tuned to a proton Larmor frequency (123MHz) at 3T.
The ﬁrst goal of this part was to reproduce the results published in order to validate the
simulation models used throughout the thesis.
First a geometrical model of the coil, that
consist of a coaxial cable was constructed using CST modelling tools (Fig.3.2).
Figure 3.2: Single loop coil model in CST (top), port of excitation and a resistor to short circuit
the outer conductor (left), outer conductor gap (right)
The coil has a diameter of 80 mm.
The inner conductor has thickness of 1.0 mm and is
made of a copper clad steel silver and the outer conductor is 2.4 mm thick and made of a silver
plated copper braid while the dielectric material that separates the two conductors is made of
a Teﬂon type (PTFE) with a relative permittivitty of E0 = 2.1. The model from the article
was duplicated and simulated to validate the results which were published (Fig.3.3). A lumped
resistor is attached at the outer conductor of the coil to close the circuit and a port at the
inner conductor which will be the point of receiving the signal. With the physical parameters
mentioned, accurate results were obtained from the simulation shown in ﬁgure 3.3.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.3: Source impedance of the coil (left), prototype of the published coil with the respective
physical dimensions (right)[8]
3.3
HIC Validation Using Commercial Coaxial Cable
In order to further validate the simulation setup, an additional validation of the published HIC
coil design was performed, using a commercially available coaxial cable (RG316/U)[9] of similar
characteristics than the one used by Zhang et.al [8]. The diameter of the loop is kept to 80
mm, however, the physical parameters of this coaxial cable are ﬁxed. The same process was
performed where a 3D model of single loop coil is constructed and simulated using CST.
Figure 3.4: Source impedance of the constructed HIC
Figure 3.4 shows that using this commercial coaxial cable RG316/U limits the parameters
14
==PAGE:16==
that can be adjusted to achieve the desired resonance frequency of 32.13 MHz. As illustrated
in the ﬁgure, a resonance frequency of 129.67 MHz which is almost very close to what was on
the article. From here it can be concluded that ﬁne tuning technique is necessary to obtain a
resonance frequency of 32.13 MHz.
To fully understand the circuitry of the coil and how it is characterized, an HIC lumped-
element model is constructed using ADS tool (Fig.3.5). This would simplify and describe the
attributes of the coil resistance, inductance and capacitance by using electrical components such
as inductors, capacitors and resistors. This would also show how the results obtained from the
CST converged into ADS simulation results.
Figure 3.5: Lumped-element model the HIC element
As explained earlier, the coaxial cable consists of two conductors: center (inner) and outer
conductor and is characterized by a lumped inductance and lumped resistance. To simply de-
scribe the coil circuitry, L1 and L3 represents the inner conductor while L2 and L4 represents
the outer conductor of the coaxial cable. The lumped capacitors C1, C2, C3, and C4 model the
electric coupling between the center conductor and the outer conductor and R represents the
lumped resistance of the conductors.
Basically, the RF current in a coaxial cable travels from the signal source through the in-
ner conductor to the load and then return through the outer conductor of the coaxial cable to
the signal source again. Figure 3.6 demonstrate the current ﬂow in a coaxial cable.
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.6
The value of the the lumped-elements has to be determined and the inductance per unit length
of the inner conductor can be calculated using equation [10]:
L = µ0µr
2π ln (D
d )
(3.1)
Where µ0 is the permeability of free space (4×10−7 H/m) and µr is the relative permeab-
ility of the dielectric material (1.25×10−6 H/m). The inductance per unit length is slightly
frequency dependent, and is determined by the eﬀective outer and inner conductor diameter,
and equivalent conducting layer. The capacitance per unit length of a coaxial cable is inde-
pendent of frequency and is determined by ϵr, D and d. It can be calculated using equation 3.2
[10].
CL = 2πϵ0ϵr
ln (D
d )
(3.2)
Where C represents the capacitance per unit length of the coax, ϵ0 is the permittivity of free
space (8.85 × 10−12), ϵr is the relative dielectric constant of the material, D is the outer radius
of the coaxial cable and d is the inner radius of the coaxial cable described in ﬁgure 3.7.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.7: A coax cable built in CST
After calculating the value of the inductance and capacitance the circuit was simulated which
yields to a resonance frequency of 129.9 MHz.
Figure 3.8: Source impedance of the constructed HIC using ADS [9]
Some further evaluation helped to discover that the lumped element model used in ADS was not
suﬃciently accurate. In ﬁgure 3.8, it can be seen that the results are quite close to the results
obtained from the CST simulation. Not until a tuning capacitor for ﬁne tuning was added at
the outer gap of the outer conductor (circled in ﬁgure 3.5), the resonance frequency remains at
the same frequency while experimental measurements showed a very diﬀerent behaviour. This
led to an even further study of the lumped-element model.
17
==PAGE:19==
Basically, the HIC element can be regarded as a parallel LC circuit which consist of two loop
being coupled together (inner and outer conductor). These two coil loops have a mutual in-
ductance and the mutual inductance between these two loops is equal to the self-inductance of
the outer conductor. In ADS, it can be represented by a function ”Mutual” circled in ﬁgure 3.9
which includes the mutual inductance of the two loops in the simulation. It is also important
to mention that the coil loop can be described as two open ended loops which are connected
in series by the center conductor. The concept is also illustrated in ﬁgure 3.9 where the two
dotted squares represent the two open ended loops.
Figure 3.9: Lumped-element model of the HIC element(left) and the 3D model cut into two to
represent the two open ended loops (right)
After calculating the inductance and capacitance of the HIC lumped-element model, the circuit
is simulated and yields to results shown in ﬁgure 3.10. The result shows the return loss (S11)
and the input impedance of the HIC coil which is much more close to what is obtained from
the practical measurements detailed in the next section.
Figure 3.10: ADS simulation result of the constructed HIC
18
==PAGE:20==
3.3.1
Coil construction and Bench Validation
The material of the HIC design was based on RG316/U, mentioned in section 3.3. The coaxial
cable used is a standard non-magnetic RG316 (Habia Cable. Søderfors, Sweden) [9]. RG316/U
coaxial cable has an inner conductor diameter of 0.51mm, an outer conductor diameter of 1.52
mm. This coaxial cable was also used to build an initial prototype of a single HIC coil for bench
validation. After evaluating the theoretical characteristics of the HIC model using CST and
ADS, an experimental analysis was performed to evaluate the results.
The most common method to evaluate the characteristics of a receiver coil is to measure the
Q-factor and the resonance frequency for the unloaded and sample-loaded setup. The common
way to perform this measurement is to use double-loop probe. A double-loop probe basically
consists of a two identical loops being decoupled. The decoupling of this two loops is achieved
by overlapping the two coils with the critical overlap. The two loops are then connected to
each port of the vector network analyzer and placed to the vicinity of the coil being tested.
The Q-factor and the resonance frequency can be extracted directly from the S21 curve in the
network analyzer but basically determining the resonance peak of the curve and the -3dB band-
width(diﬀerence between the upper and lower band edges) will give the Q-factor. The setup is
illustrated in ﬁgure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Setup for measuring the Q-factor and resonance frequency of the HIC in the
bench.The arrows shows the -3dB bandwidth which could use to determine the Q-factor
A prototype of a single element HIC based on RG316/U was fabricated and evaluated. Table 3.1
shows the result of the measured HIC obtained from the vector network analyzer (VNA). From
the result obtained, it can be concluded that both the results from ADS (fres = 119.9 MHz)
and bench measurements (fres = 119.74 MHz) showed a very good agreement. The Q-factor
results also shows a relatively good agreement, but this aspect will be analyzed further in the
next section.
19
==PAGE:21==
Table 3.1: High Impedance Coil (HIC)
HIC Single loop
Freq(MHz)
Q-factor
Impedance (kΩ)
Bench
119.47
193.28
ADS
119.9
5.654
CST
129.67
5.229
20
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 4
Design of Flexible HIC at 32MHz
In this section, the main goal is to extend the concept of the HIC coils to the lower frequency of
13C at 3T (32 MHz). Several design options are proposed, and their performance is evaluated
in terms of Q-factor, SNR and decoupling based on electromagnetic and circuital simulations.
4.1
HIC Initial Design Approach
The ﬁrst 3D model constructed in CST in the previous section was used to optimize the physical
parameters of the coil. This coil is intended to use in human head imaging and will be used as
the building block of an array so the diameter of the loop is decided to be kept at 80 mm as
it is the common size for human-coil arrays. Then to achieve the desired resonance frequency
(32.13 MHz), the only parameters left to be adjusted is the relative permittivity of the substrate
(dielectric material that separates the inner conductor and outer conductor), thickness of the
inner conductor and the ratio between the radius of the outer and inner conductor. After doing
series of simulations and adjustments, the right physical parameters of the coil that yields to the
desired resonance frequency was obtained. With an inner conductor of 1.46 mm, ratio between
the outer and inner conductor of 1 mm and choosing other dielectric constant with a relative
permittivity, Er = 11.9 (silicone material), yields a resonance frequency of 32.13 MHz shown in
ﬁgure (4.1). The results from the simulation concludes that it is possible to design a 13C HIC
coil with this physical attributes.
Figure 4.1: Source impedance of the HIC initial approach.
21
==PAGE:23==
Using other dielectric material was the major key in achieving this result. The capacitance
per unit length of a coaxial cable increases with the increase in the dielectric constant of the
material between the inner conductor and the outer conductor. This can be proven by going
through the equation of calculating the distributive capacitance of a coaxial cable using the
same equation described earlier in section (3.2)[10] and its resonance frequency [10].
CL = 2πϵ0ϵr
ln (D
d )
(4.1)
With an increase of the capacitance per unit length, the resonance decreases.
In order to
get an illustration of the concept, equation (4.2) can be used, where L is the inductive part of
the source impedance and C is the total capacitance of the cable. Basically, both the capacit-
ance and inductance is inversely proportional to frequency so an increase and decrease of both
parameters will increase and decrease the resonance frequency [10].
fres =
1
2π
√
L × C
(4.2)
Unfortunately, the unavailability of a coaxial cable based on the physical dimensions used in
the 3D model makes it diﬃcult to produce the coil. This could also be possible if there are
more advance 3D printers that can do the job but since DTU do not have such machine then
an alternative could be to use commercial coaxial cable that can easily purchase online. Since
this approach was not possible, the work moved on to continue the evaluation of the HIC using
the coaxial cable that has been designed and validated in 3.3.
4.2
HIC using Capacitors
Based on the result obtained from the initial bench validation in section 3.3.1, which yields to
a resonance frequency of 119.9 MHz (ADS) and 129.67 MHz (CST), the next step should be to
tune the coil at the Larmor frequency 32.13 MHz, using both CST and ADS simulation tools.
Two methods of ﬁne tuning are detailed: placing a tuning capacitor at the gap of the outer
conductor and at the port gap of the inner conductor. Both methods are detailed in the next
section of the report.
4.2.1
HIC Tuning using Capacitor at the Outer Gap
The model setup used for tuning the HIC is shown in ( Fig.4.2). A port is created at the outer
conductor gap and the lumped capacitor is placed which is used for ﬁne tuning the coil at the
desired resonance frequency. The 3D model of the coil was simulated with the frequency sweep
of 10 MHz to 200 MHz.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: Tuning capacitor at the outer gap of the outer conductor
By inspecting the source impedance of the HIC coil plotted on a Smith Chart or a Cartesian
Plane, it can be seen that the coil is tuned at 32.13 MHz and has a very high source impedance
of 12.726 kΩ.
Figure 4.3: A 80 mm diameter loop HIC coil tuned to 32.13 MHz using 115 pF capacitor at
the gap of the outer conductor (top center image) which is implemented in a CST schematic
afterwards to make simulation much easier (right top image). Left image shows the source
impedance of the HIC using Smith Chart and right bottom image shows the source impedance
using a Cartesian plane.
23
==PAGE:25==
A lumped-element model of the HIC coil is constructed in ADS to be able to understand
how the model behaves compared to the CST model. A tuning capacitor of 103.50 pF is placed
at the outer gap of the outer conductor for ﬁne tuning which yields to a resonance frequency of
32.13 MHz and a source impedance of 3.594 kΩ(Fig.4.5).
Figure 4.4: Lumped-element model of the HIC using 103.50 pF capacitor at the outer conductor
gap
24
==PAGE:26==
The comparison of the obtained results with the two diﬀerent simulation tools, show a rel-
atively good agreement of the tuning capacitance needed to tune the coil at 32.13 MHz
Figure 4.5: Source impedance of the simulated HIC using Smith chart and Cartesian plane
illustration using tuning capacitor at the outer conductor gap
4.2.2
HIC Tuning using a Capacitor at the Port Gap
On the other hand, with the goal of getting more ﬂexibility, other technique of tuning the coil
was considered. By adding a capacitor at the coil port illustrated in ﬁgure 4.6, the coil reached
its resonance frequency at 32.13 MHz and still obtained a high impedance (Fig.4.7). With this
technique, the coil will be more ﬂexible in the sense that with the presence of a lumped-elements
at the outer gap might cause the coil to break when it is squezzed in and stretched out. This
can simply be avoided by using this technique.
Figure 4.6: Tuning capacitor at the port gap of the inner conductor
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.7: A 80 mm diameter loop HIC coil tuned to 32.13 MHz using 92 pF capacitor at the
port gap (top rigth image). Left image(bottom) shows the source impedance of the HIC using
Smith Chart and right image shows the source impedance using a Cartesian plane.
Similarly, a lumped-element model of the HIC with the tuning capacitor at the port gap was
also constructed to be able to evaluate how the coil behaves compared to the coil design with
tuning capacitor at the outer conductor gap. Figure 4.8 shows the ADS model of the coil with
a tuning capacitor of 96 pF at the port gap of the inner conductor.
Figure 4.8: Lumped-element model of the HIC using 96 pF capacitor at the coil port
26
==PAGE:28==
And the simulation yields a resonance frequency of 32.13 MHz with a source impedance of
4.17 kΩ. Here it can also be concluded that the results obtained from CST tools converged with
the result from ADS because the value of the tuning capacitor used in both simulation tools are
very close, so in that case the ADS model of the coil correspond very well to the 3D model.
Figure 4.9: Source impedance of the simulated HIC at 32.13 MHz at Smith chart and Cartesian
plane illustration using tuning capacitor at the port gap
27
==PAGE:29==
4.2.3
Comparison of the Two Tuning Technique
To be able to evaluate the behaviour of these two tuning technique, an electromagnetic simula-
tion that shows the transmit ﬁeld distribution of both coil model was performed.
Figure 4.10: Magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld B+
1 for HIC with tuning capacitor at the port gap
(Coil 2 - top ﬁgure) and magnetic ﬁeld B+
1 for HIC with tuning capacitor at the outer conductor
gap (Coil 1 - bottom ﬁgure)
To come up with a conclusion which tuning technique should be used, a prototype of both
the coils was fabricated and measured on the bench. Same setup was used to observe the per-
formance of both coils. The Q-factor and resonance frequency were measured with the network
analyzer. Results of the same setup are listed in table 4.1. Coil 1 represents the HIC with the
tuning capacitor placed at the outer gap of the outer conductor while Coil 2 represents the HIC
with the tuning capacitor placed at the port of the coil.
Table 4.1: High Impedance Coil
Coil
Freq(MHz)
Ctuning(pF)
Q-factor
Coil 1
32.18
117.2
245.27
Coil 2
32.13
84
121.24
28
==PAGE:30==
The results of the electromagnetic simulation shown in ﬁgure 4.10 do not show any big dif-
ference on the ﬁeld distribution produced by the two diﬀerent conﬁgurations. However, the
measured Q-factor of Coil 2 i signiﬁcantly lower than that of Coil 1 (more than 50% lower).
This would ultimately imply a decrease in performance, due to higher amount of thermal noise
in the coil. Therefore based on this result, the option of tuning the coil on its outer conductor
was considered for further evaluation (despite of its slightly lower ﬂexibility).
4.3
3Turn-1Gap HIC
Another option to design a high impedance ﬂexible coils into lower frequency 13C at 3T, is
the concept of multiturn- multigap[11]. Based on the evaluation of designing a singleturn-1gap
ﬂexible coil, the design limits the adjustment of the properties of the coaxial cable to achieve
the desired resonance frequency. In the previous design (singleloop-1gap HIC), a tuning capa-
citor was needed to tune the coil to 32.13 MHz. The existence of a lumped model at the coil
decreased the ﬂexibility of the coil. Using a tuning capacitor can be avoided by extending the
length of the coil, thus the capacitance and inductance increased. Since increasing the capacit-
ance and the inductance of the coil decreased the resonance frequency then the singleloop-1gap
HIC with a resonance frequency of 123 MHz 1H (without a tuning capacitor) can be extended to
a number of turns or number of gaps to achieve the resonance frequency (32.13 MHz) of the coil.
The design of this coil was based on a source material that have been published before [12]
[11]. Figure 4.11 show a graph of the loop diameter as a function of the resonance frequency.
This illustrates the outcome of their study wherein they have compiled 9 diﬀerent conﬁgura-
tions of gaps and turns with the respective loop diameter, electric permittivity of the substrate
material (ϵr), diameter of the outer conductor. As it can be seen in the graph (red circle), with
a diameter between 6cm - 8cm, which shows a 3turn and 1 gap conﬁguration can be an option
but with the goal of keeping a loop diameter of 8 cm, an approximation of this speciﬁc design
property is depicted.
Figure 4.11: Lumped-element model of the 3turn-1Gap coil [11]
29
==PAGE:31==
This approach led to a coil design of 3turn-1gap ﬂexible HIC. The geometric parameters of
the designed are listed in table 4.2; the designed geometry is given in terms of each loop dia-
meter d0, d1 diameter of the outer conductor, the ratio between the radius of the outer and inner
conductor r2/r1, the number of tuns nt, the number of gaps ngap, and the relative permittivity
of the substrate material ϵr. The design of the coils is basically based on the parameters of
RG316/U, in order to facilitate the fabrication and validation of the proposed design.
Table 4.2: Geometric parameters of 3turn-1gap
d0 (mm)
r2/r1(mm)
ϵr
nt
ngap
70
0.76
2.1
3
1
Implementing an accurate CST model of the multiturn coil was too complicated, and it was
decided not to do it at this point. Instead, only an ADS model(Fig.4.12) is used in this to
evaluate the characteristic of the coil. An ADS lumped-element model was constructed with
their respective inductance, capacitance and resistance. The value of the lumped-elements was
calculated by using the formula found in the published article [12]. The capacitance was calcu-
lated using the same equation in 3.2 used earlier in the previous section while the inductance
was calculated using equation 4.3 shown below:
L = n2
t µ0
d0
2

ln(8d0
d1
) −2

[12]
(4.3)
Figure 4.12: Lumped element model of 80 mm 3turn-1gap HIC
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.13 shows the result of the simulation in ADS. Basically, the resonance frequency of
27.79 MHz obtained in this simulation was the result of measuring an 80 mm loop HIC coil.
From this it can be seen that the HIC coil has a very high impedance (8.105kΩ) at that fre-
quency which is quite close to the target resonance frequency (32.13 MHz). Then a further
study on how to achieve the target frequency went on.
Figure 4.13: Source Impedance of the 3turn-1Gap coil - 80mm
It was then realized that decreasing the length of the coil will increase the resonance frequency
because when the length is decreased, both the capacitance and inductance decreases, and ba-
sically decreasing the capacitance and inductance will increase the resonance frequency. So a
further calculation of the inductance and capacitance was performed to be able to obtain the
desired values. The result is based on a loop diameter of 67 mm which corresponds to the 70
mm prototype that was fabricated. Figure 4.14 shows the lumped model of the 67 mm 3turn-
1gap HIC coil with its respective capacitance and inductance value, which yields to a source
impedance shown in ﬁgure 4.15
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.14: Lumped-element model of the 3turn-1Gap coil - 67mm
Figure 4.15: Source Impedance of the 3turn-1Gap coil - 67mm
32
==PAGE:34==
Three prototypes of the 3turn-1gap coil conﬁguration was fabricated to be able to investig-
ate which coil loop diameter could obtain the desired resonance frequency. A diameter of 80
mm, 70 mm and 65 mm fabricated using the same nonmagnetic coaxial cable RG316/U.
Figure 4.16: 3turn 1gap HIC prototype - 70 mm
Same procedure as the ﬁrst prototype of HIC single loop coil were performed to evaluate the
performance of the 3turn 1gap coil on the bench. Table 4.3 shows the results obtained from
the vector network analyzer (VNA). From this results it can be concluded that this concept of
designing a ﬂexible high impedance coil at low frequencies is also possible and promising like
the single loop coil element design. The ADS simulation result also converged with the bench
result based on the resonance frequency.
Table 4.3: 3turn-1gap HIC
Coil
Diameter (mm)
Freq(MHz)
Q-factor
3turn-1gap
80
27.37
238.27
70
32.65
233.65
65
34.05
224.39
33
==PAGE:35==
4.4
HIC Final Design
The results obtained from the two designs (single HIC and 3turn-1Gap) led to a further study on
how to improve the performance of such a coil in terms of the Q-factor and resonance frequency,
so a new circuitry is introduced and evaluated. Contrary to the ﬁrst HIC design (Fig.4.17,left)
[13], the ﬁnal circuitry of the ﬁnal design is described based on the excitation connection used in
Multi-turn-split-conductor transmission-line resonators (Fig.4.17, right). The inner conductor
do not have any direct contact to any signal sources this time. Both ends of the inner conductor
are grounded and a gap at the center of it was left open. On the other hand, one end of the outer
conductor is connected directly to the positive pin of the source while the other was left open.
So basically the point of excitation is at one end of the outer conductor (+ source) and inner
conductor (- source). The tuning capacitor used to ﬁne tune the HIC to its desired resonance
frequency is placed at the port gap of the outer conductor.
Figure 4.17: Schematic of HIC coil - First design (left) and Final design (right)
Similarly, to be able to evaluate the characteristics of the ﬁnal circuitry described in ﬁgure
4.17, an ADS lumped element model was constructed (Fig.4.18). The value of the inductance,
capacitance and resistance is still the same because the structure of the coil did not change.
The HIC is still a two open ended loop that is coupled together. Further evaluation of the ﬁnal
HIC will be detailed in section 4.5.
34
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.18: Final circuitry of the Final ﬂexible HIC design
35
==PAGE:37==
4.5
Detuning Network
Detuning is required for receiver coils during excitation. The main reason for this is that RF
pulse has a frequency of 32.13 MHz, just as the carbon atom (13C), and the tuned HIC coil, if
the coil is not detuned it would pickup the RF signal during transmission and might damage
other devices connected into it such as the preampliﬁer and matching circuits.
The most common way of detuning is by using a nonmagnetic PIN diodes.
It is also im-
portant to mention that the PIN diodes does not contain any magnetic parts, otherwise it will
inﬂuence the magnetic ﬁeld generated by the magnet in the MRI. The PIN diodes will func-
tion as a switch to open (forward biased) and close (reverse biased) the HIC circuit. This will
basically be triggered by a DC signal generally provided by the MR scanner. In this design,
the detuning network consists of a two PIN diodes that are connected each between the leads
on the inner conductor and outer conductor. This is basically in series conﬁguration wherein
each PIN diodes is connected in series with the resonant circuit (the coil). A Model of the PIN
diodes are illustrated in a dotted square in ﬁgure 4.20 . The behaviour of the coil with the PIN
diodes during forward and reverse biased are detailed in the next section.
The PIN diode to be used in the project is MA4P7470F-1072T [14] which is non-magnetic
(suitable for MRI applications). Constructing an ADS model of the PIN diodes is necessary as
the model itself is not available in ADS. This is then used to demonstrate the behaviour of the
PIN diodes when it is forward and reversed biased.
Figure 4.19: ADS model of the PIN diodes MA4P7470F-1072T when reverse biased (A) and
forward biased (B). Values of the lumped-elements are taken from the datasheet.
4.5.1
HIC Single Loop when PIN diode is Forward Biased
When a DC signal is applied, the PIN diodes will short the two ends of the inner conductor
to the outer conductor then the HIC will be decoupled from the transmitter and it is at oﬀ
resonance. This is when PIN diodes are forward biased.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.20: HIC lumped-element model with the pindiode and power protection diode when
pindiodes are forward biased
In ﬁgure 4.21, it shows that when the PIN diode is forward biased the impedance appears
to be very low to the RF signal.
Figure 4.21: Source impedance of the HIC single loop coil when pin diode is forward biased
37
==PAGE:39==
4.5.2
HIC Single Loop when PIN diodes is Reverse biased
When the PIN diodes are reversed biased, the coil is then turned ON with the preampliﬁer and
the capacitance of the PIN diodes is reﬂected back to the RF source. Model of the reversed
biased PIN diodes is shown in blue dotted square.
Figure 4.22: HIC lumped-element model with the pin diode and power protection diodes when
pindiodes are reverse biased
In ﬁgure 4.23, the PIN diodes appears as an open circuit and it has a large resistance (8.98kΩ),
thus it is high impedance so this is basically when the PIN diodes are in reverse biased.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.23: Source impedance of the HIC single loop coil when PIN diodes is reverse biased
Table 4.4 shows the impedance of the single HIC without the presence of the PIN diodes and
power protection diodes. It can be seen the drastic shifting of the resonance frequency of the
single HIC.
Table 4.4: Single HIC Source Impedance
Source Impedance measurement using ADS
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Impedance
HIC Single
+lumped
32.13
7.054kΩ
+pindiode
32.10
8.334kΩ
+pin +protection
29.60
9.961kΩ
Similarly, the eﬀect of the high power protection diode can also be observed clearly in the
result for the ﬁnal HIC.
Table 4.5: Final HIC Source Impedance
Source Impedance measurement using ADS
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Impedance
Final HIC Coil
32.13
12.49kΩ
+lumped
32.13
10.37kΩ
+pindiode
32.13
12.88kΩ
+pin +protection
30.23
7.977kΩ
39
==PAGE:41==
Generally preampliﬁers are very sensitive as they can be damaged by high RF power. Therefore,
a high power protection circuit is required for damage prevention when preampliﬁer receives a
signal that exceeds the permissible input power. The diode used in this design is UMX9989AP
[15]. The model of this diode is also not available in ADS therefore a model of this is constructed
and is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.24. The values of the lumped components of the constructed model
are extracted from the datasheet. This model is placed before the ampliﬁer which is shown in
ﬁgure 4.22 in a red dotted circle.
Figure 4.24: UMX9989AP ADS model
After further evaluation of the coils using CST and ADS, the coil prototypes were tested on
the bench to evaluate their performance in terms of SNR. Listed in table 4.4 and ?? are the
impedance, resonance frequency, Q-factor and SNR obtained from ADS simulation and bench
measurements in three diﬀerent conﬁgurations: with only lumped elements such as blocking
capacitors and RF chokes; plus PIN diodes; plus a power protection diode. This was necessary
to check the impact of the diodes in the circuitry. It shows then that with PIN diodes, the
resonance frequency and Q-factor decrease a little but decrease drastically with the power pro-
tection diode. The reason behind this is unclear but one possible reason could be the parasitic
capacitance of the diodes.
40
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.6: Q-factor and SNR Results - UNLOADED
S21 Measurements Using Double Loop Probe
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Q-factor)
SNR
HIC Single
-pin -protection
32.13
245
29.45
+pindiode
32.10
234.20
29.41
+pin +protection
30.0
170
29.48
3turn 1gap
-pin -protection
32.85
233.60
20.19
+pindiode
32.46
146
19.54
+pin +protection
30.44
99
12.54
Standard coil
-pin -protection
32.05
260
41.55
+pindiode
32.05
235.11
41.14
+pin +protection
30.01
243.43
41.05
Final HIC Coil
-pin -protection
32.0
259.60
42.10
+pindiode
32.08
244.60
41.35
+pin +protection
32.04
243.43
40.70
From the results obtained, the 3turn-1Gap has the worse performance of all the coils. It was
then concluded to continue the work using the HIC Single loop coil for the rest of the thesis..
Though the results obtained from both simulation and the bench converged, the problem arised
when ﬁnally the preampliﬁer was connected to the HIC Single loop coil. The decoupling between
the HIC and preampliﬁer failed. The reason behind this could be the detuning network imple-
mented in the circuit or the LC circuit where the HIC is directly integrated. It is then proposed
to implement another detuning technique. The new proposed method of solving this problem
is covered in section 4.6.
41
==PAGE:43==
4.6
Propose Detuning Network
In the previous section of the ﬁrst designed approach, the issue about the decoupling problem
was covered. Due to this problem, the ﬁrst designed approached was stopped and concluded to
ﬁnd another detuning technique that could basically solve the problem.
4.6.1
New Detuning Network
To start with, an schematic representation of a single loop coil is constructed in ADS (Fig.4.25).
The new circuitry now consists only of: 3 DC blocking capacitors(value of 1000 pF and 2000
pF ); one connected at each pin of the inner conductor and the other is one connected to the
input pin of the preampliﬁer to block DC signals; a preampliﬁer to amplify the MRI signal; two
PIN diodes connected in series are used to detune (turn oﬀ) the HIC loop during the trans-
mission which are powered by a DC bias source; a high power protection diode to protect the
preampliﬁer from being damaged when possibly high RF power signal is received; a LC ﬁlter (L
= 3.9 uH, C = 6.8 uH) that ﬁlter out unwanted signals; an RF choke (18 uH) that block other
signals and to pass only DC signals; DC source (10 V) that will provide DC signals to drive the
pin diodes; and a tuning capacitor (C17) = 103.50 pF added in parallel to tune the coil to the
appropriate frequency.
The new detuning technique consist of two PIN diodes connected in series. Both PIN diodes
are connected in parallel with the resonant circuits, when the PIN diodes are forward biased
(by applying a DC current) a large impedance will be inserted at the coil loop, thus blocking
the current ﬂow at the Larmor frequency during transmission, in that case the HIC coil is at
oﬀresonance.
Figure 4.25: HIC Single Loop coil with the new detuning network
42
==PAGE:44==
4.6.2
Analysis
To evaluate the performance of the coils using the new detuning technique, series of simulation
with and without the detuning and high power protection circuit conﬁguration were performed.
The results obtained from the ADS simulation shown in table 4.7 show that adding the PIN
diodes increases the source impedance but with the high power protection diode the source
impedance and resonance frequency of the coil decrease drastically. This will also be evaluated
when all four coil prototypes integrated with the new detuning network is implemented using
ADS.
Table 4.7: Source Impedance
Source Impedance measurement using ADS
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Impedance (kΩ)
HIC Single
+lumped
32.13
15.83
+pindiode
32.13
22.06
+pin +protection
30.0
8.59
3turn-1Gap
+lumped
32.75
1.019
+pindiode
32.13
22.0
+pin +protection
24.80
9.70
Final HIC Coil
+lumped
32.13
10.37
+pindiode
32.13
12.86
+pin +protection
30.23
7.977
4.7
Comparison of HIC Coils and a Standard Coil
A prototype of HIC coils: single loop coil, 3turn-1gap coil and the standard coil (reference coil)
is shown in ﬁgure 4.26 to evaluate their performance on the bench. Here, the integration of
the PIN diodes and high power protection diode was investigated to be able to conﬁrm if both
diodes will aﬀect the performance of the HIC coils.
Figure 4.26: HIC-Single Loop (left), Standard Coil - Reference Coil (middle l eft), 3turn-1Gap
(middle right), Final HIC (right)
43
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.8 shows the Q-factor, resonance frequency and SNR of all HIC designed coils including
the standard coil (used as a reference coil), obtained from the vector network analyzer(VNA)
by performing an s21 measurement using a double-loop probe in an UNLOADED setup. The
measurements were performed in three diﬀerent conﬁgurations: just the coil itself, with PIN
diode only, and lastly both with PIN diodes and high power protection diode. The single loop
HIC is tuned with a capacitor of 117.2 pF while the ﬁnal HIC coil was tuned with a capacitor of
106.8 pF. Based on the results obtained from the practical measurements being conducted, the
PIN diode shifted the resonance frequency and decreased the Q-factor. While the high power
protection diode also decreased the Q-factor and resonance frequency drastically in all four coils
though it did not aﬀected the SNR of the single HIC, standard coil and the ﬁnal coil that much,
but shows a high decreased on the SNR of the 3turn-1gap coil.
Table 4.8: Q-factor and SNR Results - UNLOADED
S21 Measurements Using Double Loop Probe
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Q-factor)
SNR
HIC Single
-pin -protection
32.20
245
32.55
+pindiode
32.15
236.40
32.36
+pin +protection
30.96
167.56
31.06
3turn 1gap
-pin -protection
32.67
230.19
25.90
+pindiode
32.33
185.32
20.72
+pin +protection
30.12
120.10
12.74
Standard coil
-pin -protection
32.03
257
40.44
+pindiode
32.05
232.70
40.14
+pin +protection
30.56
243.43
40.95
Final HIC Coil
-pin -protection
32.0
259.60
42.10
+pindiode
32.08
244.60
41.35
+pin +protection
32.04
243.43
40.70
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.27, 4.28, and 4.29 show how the eﬀect of using the PIN diodes and power protec-
tion diodes can be seen in a S21 measurements. Clearly, it can be seen that the diodes have a
great impact with the 3turn-1gap HIC coil performance.
Figure 4.27: Eﬀect of PIN diodes and Power protection diode to the FIRST HIC DESIGN
Figure 4.28: Eﬀect of PIN diodes and Power protection diode to the FINAL HIC DESIGN
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.29: Eﬀect of PIN diodes and Power protection diode to 3tURN-1gap HIC coil
The same measurements and setup were used to evaluate the performance of the three coils
in LOADED setup (Fig. 4.30). A phantom ﬁlled with a solution of NaCI in water (left) was
used to measure both the Q-factor and SNR while a test person wearing the ”BALACLAVA”
(right) where only one coil was taped into it was used to measure only Q-factor on the bench.
The head phantom was not available in DTU so SNR measurements were neglected.
Figure 4.30: Setup for Measuring SNR using a PHANTOM and a BALACLAVA
46
==PAGE:48==
As it can be seen in table 4.9, the Q-factor of the single HIC is increased at approximately
25% for PHANTOM loading while the SNR decreased at approximately 25% when compared
to unloaded SNR result shown in table 4.8. With the BALACLAVA on, it can be seen that the
Q-factor decreased signiﬁcantly due to the losses introduced by the sample. The coil itself have
losses so both will contribute on the increase of noise level which degrades the SNR. When the
three coils are compared, it can be concluded that the HIC Single loop coil is more comparable
to the standard coil (reference coil) than the 3turn-1gap coil design.
Table 4.9: Q-factor and SNR Results - Loaded with Phantom and Head
S21 Measurements Using Double Loop Probe
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Q-factor
SNR
HIC Single
-phantom
32.31
186.3
21.75
-head
32.28
123.66
3turn 1gap
-phantom
29.52
60.45
12.74
-head
30.17
77.45
Standard coil
-phantom
31.93
69.80
30.44
-head
31.87
109.79
Final HIC Coil
-phantom
31.84
65.41
30.70
-head
31.99
117.20
The eﬀect of the diodes especially the high power protection diode have been evaluated by
using ADS simulation tool. On the other hand, the detuning can also be evaluated by per-
forming S21 measurements using a vector network analyzer by depicting the tuned (peak of the
curve) and detuned (dip of the curve) state. A similar eﬀect can be observed when connecting
a low impedance ampliﬁer. Once an ampliﬁer is connected the coil, it will go into oﬀresonance
state. Figure 4.31 shows the detuned and tuned states of the HIC Single coil (left), standard
coil (middle) and the ﬁnal HIC coil (right). By estimating the diﬀerence of the peak and the
dip of the curves, an approximation of detuning level is depicted for each coil design: 46 dB
(HIC Single Coil), 37 dB (Standard Coil) and 25 dB (Final HIC).
47
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.31: Detuning Measurement Result
48
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5
Flexible HIC Final Design
5.1
HIC Design - Interface and Prototype
The ﬂexible HIC ﬁnal design was then prepared to be interfaced with a real MRI system (GE
Healthcare) placed at Aarhus University Hospital in Skejby. As shown in ﬁgure 5.1, it consists
of the following components: the HIC coil itself, tuning capacitor, detuning circuit (PIN di-
odes), high power protection diode, preampliﬁer, RF chokes, DC blocking capacitors, ﬁlter and
a DC source supply. Basically, when looked at from the side of the HIC coil, the impedance is
inﬁnity, thus a high impedance where current can not ﬂow. When looked at from the side of
the preampliﬁer, the preampliﬁer still sees a high impedance.
Figure 5.1: Interface of the Final HIC System
49
==PAGE:51==
Five prototypes of the ﬂexible HIC coils were constructed and tested using the 3T MRI scanner
at Aarhus University Hospital. The housing of the circuitry is made of a solid ”plastic ” box,
shown in ﬁgure 5.5. Holes were digged on two sides to integrate each end of the HIC coil. This
helps the coil to maintain its circular shape and hold it stable.
Figure 5.2: Prototype of 80 mm Flexible HIC
5.1.1
Bench Measurement of the Final HIC Design
In order to evaluate the eﬃciency of the coil, SNR measurements were carried out using a vector
network analyzer (VNA). Each coil was placed in a shielded box and a signal generator is used
to feed the pick up loop with a -70 dBm signal. The preampliﬁer is supplied with 10 V DC
supply and a current of 150 mA.
Same setup as the previous measurements was used to evaluate the performance of the coil
in terms of Qunloaded and Qloaded. In loaded setup, a phantom ﬁlled with a solution of NaCI
in water was used for the experiment. It is also important to mention that the preampliﬁer
was excluded when measuring Q-factors. Figure 5.3 shows the S21 curve of only one coil in
unloaded setup (red, blue and green) and one coil in loaded setup (yellow) which also represents
the results in table 5.1. The curves were added just to illustrate how the resonance frequencies
shifted with the PIN diodes and power protection diode. This time both the PIN diodes and
power protection diodes did not aﬀect the Q-factor and resonance frequency drastically.
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.3: S21 Measurement of a Single HIC Coil without diodes (red), with PIN diodes (blue),
with PIN diodes and power protection diode (green), and loaded with PHANTOM plus PIN
diodes and protection (yellow).
Table 5.1: Q-factor and Resonance Frequency Results
S21 Measurements Using Double Loop Probe
Coil
Frequency(MHz)
Q-factor
HIC Single
-pin -protection
32.0
259
+pindiode
32.08
244.20
+pin +protection
32.04
241.15
phantom
31.84
65.421
head
31.99
117.20
The decoupling of the coils was also evaluated on the bench using the double-loop probe by
measuring the S21. The HIC was connected to a preampliﬁer and the required DC voltage was
supplied to switch the PIN diode. An S21 drop between the transmission state and the receiving
state was measured at approximately -25 dB which can roughly illustrated in ﬁgure 5.4.
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.4: Detuning
Five ﬂexible HIC coil prototypes and a spare coil was fabricated to be tested at the scan-
ner (Fig.5.5). Each coil was ﬁne tuned to the desired resonance frequency using capacitors with
value that ranges from 90 pF - 123 pF. After ﬁne tuning and optimization, the coils were tested
in terms of their SNR. It is also important to mention that one requirement when designing
coils is to achieve a maximum SNR in order to obtain the best image quality. Same setup was
performed as the previous coils.
Figure 5.5: Flexible High Impedance Coil Prototype
52
==PAGE:54==
The result obtained from the spectrum analyzer was processed using MATLAB. The SNR
of the coils in a LOADED and UNLOADED setup are listed in table 5.2. The result of the
measurement listed on the table looks promising, so these prototypes are the ones that were
brought to Aarhus University Hospital in Aarhus for testing. So now the SNR of these coils are
comparable to the standard coil (reference coil) though the dropped of SNR is still almost 25%
of the UNLOADED SNR.
Table 5.2: SNR Results Measured at Larmor Frequency (32.13MHz)
SNR Measurement Using Spectrum Analyzer
Coil
UNLOADED
LOADED
A1
40.05
30.35
A2
39.69
31.075
A3
40.56
31.96
A4
43.093
32.28
A5
40.70
30.70
A6
40.07
30.85
The decoupling of two coils was also evaluated by performing SNR measurement using two
coils. A5 and A6 was used as the test device. The measurements were carried out by placing
A5 and A6 inside the shielded box. The output of A6 was connected to the spectrum analyzer
and a signal of -70 dBm was fed to the pick-up loop. A5 was not connected to any port and a
signal generator. Both coils have the preampliﬁer connected. The setup is illustrated in ﬁgure
5.6. Series of SNR measurements were performed in order to evaluate the SNR of A6 with the
presence of another coil. Results are listed in table 5.3.
Figure 5.6: Setup for measuring SNR of two HIC coils separated in series of diﬀerent distances.
53
==PAGE:55==
Then the result of the measurement shows that A6 (coil under test) achieved almost the same
SNR (40) when A5 is critically overlapped A6 at 1 cm. On the other hand, moving A5 away
from A6 results to a higher SNR, while placing A5 more close to A6 worsen the SNR. This con-
cludes that to gain the best SNR, the coils should be properly decoupled, and that can be done
by optimizing the overlap between the coils. It can also be observed that A6 SNR increased
almost 25% from the previous results (table 5.2), from an SNR of 40 to 50. The reason of
increased could probably be because A6 is now placed more close to the pickup loop (Fig.5.6),
where it used to be placed in the middle of the bench.
Table 5.3: SNR Results -UNLOADED
SNR Measurement Using s Spectrum Analyser
Coils (A5 and A6)
DISTANCE (cm)
SNR
4
50.08
3
50.91
2
50.15
1
48.77
0
41.59
-0.5
41.05
-1
40.00
-2
48.39
-2.5
44.53
-3
37.42
-3.5
15.97
It is also important to mention that the process of SNR measurements using the spectrum
analyzer was set to a speciﬁc settings to run the measurements. 300 averages were used, in
order to reduce the variability of the noise region, and therefore obtain more repeatable SNR
measured values. Afterwards, the results were processed using MATLAB in order to calculate
the diﬀerence between the signal level and the noise ﬂoor level. Figure 5.7 shows an illustration
of how the signal level and noise ﬂoor level can be depicted.
Figure 5.7: Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR) of the 5 ﬂexible HIC including the spare coil
54
==PAGE:56==
5.2
MRI Scanner Measurement Using Head Phantom
The performance of the ﬁnal ﬂexible HIC design was compared to a rigid coil shown in ﬁgure
5.10 which is a 14 array element. The evaluation of their performance was based on the imaging
experiments using a phantom. The phantom used was a head-shaped phantom with a 2 mm
thick shell, a height of 300 mm from top to bottom, and 225 mm in maximum outer parameter.
It contains of ethylene glycol which has a natural abundance 13C and NaCI. The test was
conducted using a 3T GE MRI scanner at Aarhus University Hospital. Setup for MRI test is
shown in ﬁgure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Head phantom (middle), MRI scanner (left) and ﬂexible coils setup (right)
A single-slice Chemical Shifting imaging (CSI) sequence is used to estimate the SNR of the
coil under test. Images of the head were acquired in the axial plane with a FOV of 36x36 cm2,
a slice thickness of 20 mm, and a matrix of 24x24. The nominal spatial resolution was therefore
1.5x1.5x 2 cm3. This FOV, represents a realistic FOV for human brain studies, and is the
standard used for coil QA assessment at Aarhus University Hospital.
A separate measurement was done to estimate the noise for the subsequent SNR estimation.
The noise measurement was acquired with ﬂip = 00, i.e. with zero transmit power. All meas-
urements were done following standard automatic shimming.
5.2.1
Flexible HIC MRI Scan Result
The performance of the designed HIC is compared to an already designed rigid coil (Fig.5.10).
Figure 5.9 shows the SNR images of the single ﬂexible HIC coil and Rigid Coil (top) and at
the bottom is the SNR image of both the coil arrays. As it can be seen, the SNR of the single
ﬂexible HIC is very low at the surface compared to the rigid coil. While the performance of
the 5-element ﬂexible array HIC coil shows a promising result because of its close ﬁtting. It
attained an SNR of ( 50) at the center which is comparable to that 14-element array (Rigid
coil) used as a reference. Though the SNR at the surface looks worse for the single ﬂexible coil,
the performance of the 5-element array demonstrated a good result.
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.9: SNR of the single HIC coil compared to a single Rigid coil (top ﬁgure), SNR of the
5-channel ﬂexible array compared to the 14-element Rigid coil array
Figure 5.10: Rigid coil - 14 element array
56
==PAGE:58==
The result in the ﬁgure 5.12 shows that the SNR of the single ﬂexible coil at anterior-posterior
is approximately 50% lower than the rigid coils.
Figure 5.11: SNR lines across the central axis of the measured slice for ﬂexible coil (1 channel)
and rigid coil (1 channel) (anterior-posterior on the left side)
While the 5-channel array achieved an approximated SNR = 125 because of its closer ﬁtting
while the rigid coil array achieved an approximated SNR = 70 (at the phantom surface).
Figure 5.12: SNR lines across the central axis of the measured slice for 5-channels ﬂexible coil
and 14-chanels Rigid coil (anterior-posterior at the center and right-left on the right side).
57
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.13 shows the ﬁnal circuitry of the designed ﬂexible high impedance coil (HIC).
Figure 5.13: Flexible HIC Final Circuitry
58
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The main goal of this project was to understand the concept of the design, model, and under-
standing the behaviour of the HIC coils by using CST and ADS tools. The lumped element
model constructed in ADS was an approximation, not exact, thus, the result converged with
the CST. Although it was just an approximation, hence, it is an approximation that enables the
rest of the study to be realized and to move further with the design. And the most signiﬁcant
part is the validation of the coil model which was realized by reproducing a design that was
implemented in higher frequencies. The properties of their design was used in 3D modelling
to conﬁrm if the same outcome is achieved. This validation proved a reliable modelling since
an accurate result was obtained. Next was the validation using a coaxial cable (RG316/U)
available in DTU Lab. The properties of that coaxial cable was used in CST 3D modelling and
so as in calculating the value of the lumped components used in in ADS lumped model, then
later on fabricated and tested a single prototype of the coil which turned out to have an almost
accurate result from the ﬁrst validation.
After a reliable model was achieved for the simulation of HIC coils, the next part of this
work focused on the design considerations to extend this type of coils to low frequency, and
more precisely, to 32.13 MHz (13C at 3T). The ﬁrst option that was studied was the design
using a coaxial cable with an arbitrary dielectric permittivity. This design proved successful in
simulation, achieving the desired resonance frequency with permittivity of around 11.9, which
could be realized using silicone, for example. The fabrication of this was left for the future work,
due to the impossibility of fabricating such coaxial cable in our lab. A more simple approach
proved to be the addition of a tuning capacitor in one of the loops forming the HIC. Two al-
ternative methods of tuning the HIC coil were investigated: (1) tuning capacitor placed at the
outer gap of the outer conductor and (2) placing the tuning capacitor at the port gap of the
inner conductor. The study then shows that placing the tuning capacitor at the outer gap of
the outer conductor yields higher Q-factor but degrades the ﬂexibility of the coil, while placing
the tuning capacitor at the port of the inner conductor gains greater ﬂexibility but degrades
the Q-factor almost 60%. Trade-oﬀs between these parameters were taken into consideration
to achieve the best result. In the end, sacriﬁcing the ﬂexibility over gaining better Q-factor was
chosen, so tuning the capacitor using method 1 was implemented.
On the other hand, another method of tuning the ﬂexible HIC coil to 32.13 MHz was to use
the 3turn-1gap concept which was basically increasing the length of the coaxial cable to be
able to increase the capacitance and inductance of the coil, thus resonance frequency decreased.
This design avoided the presence of a lumped element (tuning capacitor) at the coil which ex-
hibited better mechanical ﬂexibility. However, its performance was extremely aﬀected by using
the PIN diodes and power protection diodes, therefore this method was not realized in the end.
59
==PAGE:61==
During the preparation of the HIC coils for testing at the MRI scanner, it was found that
their performance was very sensitive to the addition of PIN diodes (used for detuning the coil)
and especially protection diodes (used to protect the preampliﬁer from surge electromagnetic
signals). The degradation was observed by the Q-factor dropped, resonance frequency shifting,
and decreasing of the SNR of the coil, with the presence of the diodes.
The comparison of the designed ﬂexible HIC led to a further study on how to improve the
performance of the coil, that led to the introduction of a new HIC circuitry design which exhib-
its better performance in terms of the Q-factor, SNR, resonance frequency and ﬂexibility. In
the ﬁnal design, the concept of tuning the HIC coil through placing the tuning capacitor at the
outer conductor was kept, but this time the port of excitation is at the outer conductor so the
tuning capacitor was placed at the port gap of the outer conductor. In that case, the ﬂexibility
of the HIC was increased because the presence of a lumped-element at the coil was avoided.
Furthermore, the eﬀect of the PIN diodes and power protection diode was not signiﬁcant this
time, as it did not decrease drastically any of those parameters anymore. This overall perform-
ance justiﬁed the fabrication of a 5-element array using this coils as building blocks, in order to
test the coil performance further at a real MRI system.
Six prototypes of the ﬂexible HIC were fabricated and brought to Aarhus University Hospital
for MRI testing. The test started ﬁrst by evaluating only one single coil followed by testing the
5 array coils. In the fabricated array, the ﬁve coils were decoupled from the neighbouring coils
by overlapping each coil. The results obtained were compared to a rigid coil array which have
the same target application (human head imaging). While the performance of a single HIC coil
showed signiﬁcantly lower SNR compared to the rigid one (about half), the performance of the
5-array coil on a human-head phantom showed comparable SNR to the rigid array. This result
shows the potential of such a design for low frequency coils, and calls for further investigation
in order to optimize its performance.
60
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis describes the possibilities of extending the concept for designing high
impedance ﬂexible coils based on a coaxial cables, into lower frequency, (13C) 32.13 MHz at
3T. The ﬂexible HIC coil was successfully modelled using CST and ADS tools. Diﬀerent tun-
ing and detuning techniques were also successfully implemented which led to the ﬁnal design,
and fabrication.
The fabricated prototype of the ﬁnal ﬂexible HIC design was successfully
implemented into a 5-element array and tested at the 3T MRI scanner at Aarhus University
Hospital. The results achieved from the MR scanning reveals that form-ﬁtting the coil array
to the head-phantom increased the detection sensitivity in MR imaging experiments, and this
led to a promising SNR comparable to that rigid coil used as a reference coil, thus improve
signal reception and scan image quality. The design of the coil array based on a coaxial cable
(RG316/U) oﬀers the ﬂexibility that will be beneﬁcial for most patients and medical technolo-
gies.
Ultimately, the results presented here show that the beneﬁts of ﬂexible coils already shown
at higher frequencies (1H), can also be extended to lower frequencies such as that of 13C.
61
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 8
Bibliography
[1] D. Mager, “An mri receiver coil produced by inkjet printing directly on to a ﬂexible sub-
strate, in ieee transactions on medical imaging, vol. 29, no. 2,” pp. 482–487 p., 02-2007.
[2] J. R. Corea, “Screen-printed ﬂexible mri receive coils,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://
mriquestions.com/uploads/3/4/5/7/34572113/c13 ross et al-2003-nmr in biomedicine.pdf
[3] A.-L. JH, Increase in Signal-to-Noise Ratio of ¿10,000 Times in Liquid-State NMR.
[4] “Metabolic imaging of patients with prostate cancer using hyperpolarized [1-13c]pyruvate,”
14-08-2013.
[5] P.
Sprawls,
“Magnetic
resonance
imaging,”
2000.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.sprawls.org/resources/books/Sprawls%20Magnetic%20Resonance%
20Imaging%20PMT%20%20.pdf
[6] A. D. Elster, “Receive-only rf coils,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://mriquestions.com/
receive-only-coils.html
[7] ——,
“Radiofrequency coils,”
1994. [Online]. Available:
https://mriquestions.com/
rf-coil-functions.html
[8] M. A. C. Bhei Zhang, Daniel D. Sodickson, “High impedance detector arrays for magnetic
resonance,” 2017-08-11. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1709.03416.pdf
[9] H.
Cable,
“Data
sheet
rg316,
revision
2007-12-20,”
2007.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.elfadistrelec.dk/Web/Downloads/ t/ds/Habia-RG316 eng TDS.pdf
[10] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 4th Edition.
Wiley, 11-2011.
[11] M. O. M. P. Lena Nohava, Raphaela Czerny, “Flexible multi-turn multi-gap coaxial
rf coils (mtmg-ccs):design concept and bench validation,” 05-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://index.mirasmart.com/ISMRM2019/PDFﬁles/0565.html
[12] R. F.-K. J. F. J.-C. G. E. L. Raphaela Czerny, Raphaela Czerny, “Flexible multi-turn
multi-gap coaxial rf coils:enabling a large range of coil sizes,” 05-2019. [Online]. Available:
https://index.mirasmart.com/ISMRM2019/PDFﬁles/1550.html
[13] H. N. D. L.-. K. S. Serfaty, S., Multi-turn split-conductor transmission-line resonators.,
1997.
[14] M. Electronics,
“Data sheet ,rev.2.” [Online]. Available:
https://cdn.macom.com/
datasheets/MA4P7470-1072T.pdf
62
==PAGE:64==
[15] Microsemi,
“Data sheet ,
revision 2019-01-19,”
2007. [Online]. Available:
http:
//static6.arrow.com/aropdfconversion/38d28c5e03cbf2b603dd65c7a436e687380b35df/
umx9989ap datasheet.pdf
[16] A.
D.
Elster,
“Inventor
of
mr
imaging,”
1994.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//mriquestions.com/who-invented-mri.html
[17] F. Gustau, RF and Microwave Engineering, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication.
John Wiley,, 2012.
[18] P. Sprawls, Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
John Wiley,, 2012.
[19] L. B. Rowan Gilmore, Practical RF Circuit Design For Modern Wireless Systems ,Volume
11.
Artech House, Inc, 2003.
[20] J.
F.
J.-C.
G.-E.
L.
M.
O.
L.
N.
S.
G.-R.
M.
P.
J.
S.
Raphaela
Czerny,
Roberta Frass-Kriegl, “Ultra-ﬂexible and light-weight 3-channel coaxial transmission
line reonator receive-only coil array for 3t,”
05-2019. [Online]. Available:
https:
//index.mirasmart.com/ISMRM2019/PDFﬁles/1558.html
[21] A.
Berger,
“Magnetic
resonance
imaging,”
01-2002.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1121941/
[22] A. P.-M. S.-V. A. L. L. W. Graham C. Wiggins, Jonathan R. Polimeni, “96-channel
receive-only head coil for 3 tesla:
Design optimization and evaluation,” 07-21-2009.
[Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/mrm.22028
[23] S. B. P. H. V. T. K. S. C. T. Boris Keil,
James N. Blau and L. L. Wald,
“A 64-channel 3t array coil for accelerated brain mri,” 07-2013. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3538896/pdf/nihms-391090.pdf
[24] G. D. M. M. Eulalia Seres Roig, Arthur W. Magill, “Hardware andinstrumentation-
notea
double-quadrature
radiofrequency
coil
design
forproton-decoupled
carbon-13
magnetic resonancespectroscopy in humans at 7t,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3538896/pdf/nihms-391090.pdf
[25] C. L. V. Z. Juan Diego Sanchez-Heredia, Esben Søvsø Szocska Hansen and J. H. Ardenkjær-
Larsenr, “Low-noise active decoupling circuit and its application to 13c cryogenic rf coils at
3t,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://orbit.dtu.dk/ﬁles/130421945/tomo 03 060 1 .pdf
[26] K. H. P. B. B. S. Brian Ross1, Alexander Lin2, “Clinical experience with 13c mrs in
vivot,” 2003. [Online]. Available: https://mriquestions.com/uploads/3/4/5/7/34572113/
c13 ross et al-2003-nmr in biomedicine.pdf
63
