==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Raman assisted FWM and Nonlinear Com-
pensation in VPI
Vishav Rattu (s171892)
DTU 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Fotonik
Ørsteds Plads, bygning 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Photonics Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters
degree in Photonics Engineering.
DTU, August 25, 2019
Vishav Rattu (s171892)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisors Anders Clausen, Francesco Da Ros and
Michael Galili who gave me an opportunity to grow and be a part of this project,
providing me assistance whenever required. The thesis required a lot of dedication
and mental resources on my behalf which was a challenge in itself. I appreciate the
support of Anders Clausen who redirected me during some very stressful times, espe-
cially when I was feeling demotivated.
I believe that growth can only happen when there is some external pressure and
difficulty. My family was always there for me during these periods of growth and
with their support, it was possible for me to complete this project.
The support
of my friends and my peers is also acknowledged who made me smile during some
overwhelming moments.
Last but not the least, I would like to acknowledge my friend and my mentor
Haris, whose advice and support was helpful which gave me some new perspectives
on handling challenging situations and managing emotions.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The non linear Kerr effect and its play inside optical links has always been one of
the limiting challenges in today’s fiber optic communication links. To increase the
performance of a link, one has to increase the optical power, however that will lead to
the generation of non-linear effects that will always limit the performance of the link.
Various techniques have been employed in the past to overcome these nonlinearities.
One of them includes the use of an Optical phase conjugation (OPC) setup, which is
based on the idea that the conjugated signal, after propagating via the second span,
would lead to a decrease in the power of the non linear distortions. The focus of this
thesis will be based on employing OPC with EDFA and Raman pumping to see if the
performance of the link is increased when Raman amplification is used. All of the
experiments are conducted using the VPI photonics simulation software.
This thesis is divided into chapters that describe experiments done in the VPI
environment which act as building blocks to the final stage where all the individual
blocks are finally put together to meet the goal of this thesis: compensating nonlin-
earites and improving the performance of the link using Raman amplification using
an OPC system. One naturally has to ensure that the individual blocks are validated.
This is very crucial because if one of the components is not verified in the VPI envi-
ronment, then one can easily question the validity of the results obtained for the final
setup. Therefore, the first few chapters will be dedicated to verifying the simulations
for every effect that is crucial for the final setup.
After all the components and effects are verified, for the final chapter, the Raman
pump power will be changed to observe any improvements in the performance. There
will be discussions on the comparisons made with the EDFA only setup and which
one is better: the Raman or the EDFA.
Since the chapters constitute of the experiments done in VPI, every chapter is
comprised of Goal, theory, method, Results and discussions and a summary. For every
simulation done in VPI, the input variables and the important component parameters
(for e.g., the Universal Fiber Module (UFM) parameters) that were used are given
in Appendix C. Appendix B describes the limitations of the system implemented in
chapter 7 using an example. Appendix A gives an example of what is not desired
when implementing the OPC system.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vii
1
Soliton propagation
1
1.1
The first order soliton
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Third order soliton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Four wave mixing
11
2.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Raman scattering
15
3.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
OPC: Theoretical background
21
5
Compensation using only EDFAs
25
5.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Theory and implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Results and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Raman assisted Four Wave mixing
35
6.1
Why Raman amplification? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Results and discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Variation of Raman pump power and its impact
43
7.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.2
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8
Future work and Conclusion
51
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A Inside the HNLF with high signal and pump powers
55
B Limitation Example
57
C Global and Module parameters
61
C.1 Chapter 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
C.2 Chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
C.3 Chapter 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
C.4 Chapter 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Soliton propagation
This chapter describes the soliton propagation and how dispersion effects and SPM
(Self Phase Modulation) effects are verified through the propagation of the first and
the third order solitons.
The validation of SPM and dispersion effects is a basic
requirement for FWM and Idler generation in more complex systems.
1.1
The first order soliton
1.1.1
Goal
In order to see if the dispersion effects and the self phase modulation in VPI simula-
tions are validated, we need to come up with a method that could verify both at the
same time. This can be done via the generation of a soliton. Why? because a soliton
is created when the dispersion length and the non linear length have a constant ratio.
If this ratio is maintained along the propagation in VPI simulations, then we have
made sure that the effects are validated. If we validate the propagation of a soliton,
then we have validated the dispersion and the SPM effects in the VPI environment.
The theoretical calculations and the conclusions obtained in MATLAB would be then
compared to the results obtained from simulations done in VPI. It is ensured that
the input parameters for VPI simulations and the parameters used to calculate the
non-linear and dispersion lengths in MATLAB are the same.
For the first order soliton, the dispersion length and the non-linear length are
equal. This would mean that the soliton should propagate while retaining its shape
both in time domain as well as the frequency domain. The goal is to validate the
propagation of the first order soliton in both domains.
1.1.2
Theory
The NLS equation in its normalized form [Agr06] is given by,
i∂U
∂χ = sgn(β2)1
2
∂2U
∂τ 2 −N 2|U|2U
(1.1)
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Soliton propagation
where,
U =
A
√P0
,
χ = z/LD,
τ = T
T0
(1.2)
β2 represents Group velocity dispersion parameter (GVD). z represents the distance
travelled in meters, P0 the peak power of the soliton. For the sech pulses, the full
width half maximum (FWHM) is given by
TF W HM = 2ln(1 +
√
2)T0 ≈1.763T0
(1.3)
and for the first order soliton, the following condition holds true:
N 2 = LD
LNL
= 1 = γP0T 2
0
|β2|
(1.4)
The expressions for non-linear length and dispersion length are given by,
LD = |T0|2
β2
,
LNL =
1
γP0
(1.5)
where γ is the non-linear parameter. Another important point to keep in check is
that we are operating under the anomalous GVD regime. This means that the sign
of β2 in equation 1.1 is negative. This also implies that the Dispersion parameter ’D’
given by,
D = −2πc
λ2
β2
(1.6)
should have a positive sign.
The Table 1.1 lists all the values used for the calculation of the ratio between the
dispersion length and the non-inear length. These same values are used as input for
the simulations.
Parameter
Value
P0
0.067 W
T0
25 ps
D
15.6298ps/(nm-km)
γ
1.4834 W −1km−1
λ
1555 nm
Table 1.1: Parameters used for fundamental soliton.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 The first order soliton
3
Figure 1.1: Setup for simulating solitons using sech pulse shape as the input pulse
to the fiber.
1.1.3
Method
The basic steps to validate the propagation of a soliton are as follows:
1. Calculate the theoretical values of LD (dispersion length) and LNL non-linear
length.
2. Plot the theoretical fundamental soliton, both optical spectrum and the time
evolution.
3. Set the global parameters such that there are enough points to map the soliton
in both time domain and frequency domain. Also the time window and the total
frequency window should be such that they capture the essential information
for the pulse. One must also ensure that the sampling rate is large enough to
sample the sech pulse which satisfies the non-linear schrodinger equation (NLS)
(equation).
4. Plug in the same numbers for the VPI simulation as the theoretical ones.
5. The fiber parameters are given by figure C.1 and the global parameters are
given by figure C.2.
6. The pulse width is 25 ps. So theoretically, this pulse width and the amplitude
should be maintained throughout the length of the fiber for a fundamental
soliton wave with N=1.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Soliton propagation
7. This can be verified by calculating the root mean squared error for various
distances. The root mean squared error is given by the following equation:
RMSE(z) =
√∫
T (P(z, t) −P(0, t))2dt
T
(1.7)
where T represents the time window of the sech pulse where most of the im-
portant information about the pulse is contained. So by comparing the power
values with that of the theoretical power at z=0, we can see how the error grows
with increasing distance for the fundamental soliton. If the error is relatively
small and doesn’t go up with distance, we have successfully validated the first
order soliton.
1.1.4
Results
The input pulse simulated and the theoretical input pulse are presented in figure1.2
Figure 1.2: Comparison of analytical and simulated fundamental soliton at z=0.
For the flow of the soliton, we can refer to figure 1.3 We can observe that the
simulations indeed match with the predictions and the fundamental soliton preserves
its shape.
Figure 1.4 shows that the optical spectrum also retains its shape for different
distances.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 The first order soliton
5
Figure 1.3: Figure representing the soliton as a function of distance and time.
Figure 1.4: Optical spectrum for first order soliton.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Soliton propagation
Figure 1.5: Root mean squared error for different distances calculated using equa-
tion 1.8.
From the RMSE values, we can observe that the error values are as low as 0.1
mW when compared to aprroximately 67mW of sech pulse. Also, the RMSE values
only vary by 0.001 mW for a periodic distance of z0 given by,
z0 = π
2 LD
(1.8)
where z0 is the period of soliton where the pulse shape repeats itself after every z0
dsitance. The calculated value of the dispersion length D is equal to 10.06 km.
1.2
Third order soliton
For further insight and validation of the SPM and dispersion effects in VPI, we look
at the third order soliton propagation. Here, N=3, which is related to dispersion
length and the non linear length as follows:
N 2 = LD
LNL
= 9
(1.9)
To change the N from 1 to 3, the peak power of the soliton sech pulse was changed
to 9 times the peak power used for the fundamental soliton. The other parameters in
equation 1.4 were unchanged. The global parameters are the same as the first order
soliton, meaning that the number of sampling points are the same for the third order
soliton. The order is 3, and so the soliton changes its shape throughout the period
of soliton. Theoretically, the soliton must return to its original pulse shape after a
soliton period z0. This will be checked when comparing with the results obtained
from the simulations.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Third order soliton
7
Parameter
Value
P0
0.603 W
T0
25 ps
D
15.6298ps/(nm-km)
γ
1.4834 W −1km−1
λ
1555 nm
Table 1.2: Parameters used for third order soliton.
1.2.1
Results
The same method mentioned for the fundamental soliton is followed here as well.
The results are extracted from the VPI simulations and are plotted together on a 3-D
graph to see the evolution of the third order soliton. The figure1.6 shows the flow
diagram of the third order soliton. We observe that the pulse returns to its original
shape after every soliton period z0 [agrawal].
Figure 1.6: Third prder soliton power evolution for 2z0 period length.
In figure 1.7 we can see that the sech pulses after z0 interval overlap with each
other, thus verifying the interplay between the dispersion and the SPM effects.
The RMSE for the third order sech pulses is also shown in figure 1.8 . I have
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Soliton propagation
Figure 1.7: Third order soliton sech pulses on the same graph for 2 soliton period
length 2z0.
plotted two points at the beginning and at the end of 2z0 distance to show the RMSE
value at these distances. The RMSE values are less than 0.55 mW. Comparing it to
the peak power of the third order soliton (0.603 W), we conclude that the RMSE is
relatively low for over 2z0 period. If the RMSE values at the end of 2 soliton period
length is relatvely low, concluding that the soliton comes back to its orginal shape
after 2 periods with less relative error.
1.3
Summary
From the simulation results of first oder and third order soliton, we can say that the
dispersion and the nonlinear effects have been validated with the theory.
Important Remark
The main issue with getting the simulations right was related
to the ’Nonlinear Adjustment Factors’ option in figure C.1. One of the factors called
the ’SPM EC’ which is related to the electronic contribution from the SPM was 8/9 by
default. This had to be changed because the non-linear contribution was happening
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Summary
9
Figure 1.8: RMSE plot at 0 and 2z0 distance.
at a factor of 8/9 instead of 1. So, the default value of this factor was changed from
8/9 to 1.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Four wave mixing
2.1
Goal
The goal of FWM experiment is to verify SPM and XPM (Cross Phase Modulation)
effects between the signals and the pump in VPI.This is essential because we need to
be sure that the Idler generated during the FWM process matches with the theoretical
equations. If this is verified, then we can proceed to compensating the Idelr by putting
OPC.
2.2
Method
The setup required for FWM process is as follows C.4: C.1 The steps involved to
Figure 2.1: Four wave mixing setup.
verify the FWM process are as follows:
1. Choose one laser as ’signal’ and one laser as ’pump’.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Four wave mixing
2. Phase matching condition will ensure that the FWM is the most efficient. In
order to do so, one has to make sure that the phase mismatch parameter κ
given by equation 2.1 will go to zero [Han+02].
dθ
dz ≈∆β + γ(2Pp −Ps −Pi) ≈∆β + 2γPp = κ
(2.1)
3. Ensure that we are operating under the non depleting pump regime. This should
be ensured throughout the whole fiber.
4. If the above point is checked, the approximation given in equation 2.1 is valid.
So proceed to record points in VPI by changing the signal wavelength.
5. Plot the calculated parametric gain obtained from FWM of signal and Pump
frequencies.
6. Plot the points obtained from the simulation on top of the calculated gain profile
to compare and verify the FWM in VPI.
In order to make κ zero, or in other words, in order to have phase matching, we
need to ensure that ∆β is negative. So, we choose the pump wavlength such that the
relation 2.2 is valid
λp > λ0
(2.2)
Here, λ0 is the zero dispersion wavelength. If the above relation holds, then, the
relation 2.4 (which is also an approximation of equation 2.3 when β4 term is neglected
for small frequency difference), becomes negative, thus ensuring phase matching.
∆β = (ωp −ωs)2[
β3(ωp −ω0) + β4
2
(
(ωp −ω0)2 + 1
6(ωp −ωs)2)
]
(2.3)
∆β = −2πc
λ2
0
dD
dλ (λp −λ0)(λp −λs)2
(2.4)
where λs represents signal wavelength. The dispersion slope dD
dλ is 0.03ps/(nm2−km)
According to the theoretical parametric gain presented in figure 2.2, to ensure we
are operating under the non depleting regime throughout the whole 500m length of
fiber,The signal power level should be lower than the pump power level by at least
30dB everywhere. Even when the gain is greater than the 60 dB. Taking this into
account, we choose the signal power to be -90dBm, and the pump power to be 2.8 W
at 1560.7 nm. The zero dispersion wavelength is set at 1559 nm.
2.3
Results
The signal wavelength was sweeped with reference to pump wavelength in order to
get as many points on the graph as possible for verification. The crucial points should
cover the two side lobes of the figure 2.2. The results are given in figure 2.3.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Results
13
Figure 2.2: Theoretical parametric gain as a function of signal-pump wavelength
difference.
Figure 2.3: Comparison between calculated and theoretical curves for parametric
amplification.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Four wave mixing
2.4
Summary
We observe that the simulation results match with the theoretical parametric gain
curve. If we zoom in on the right lobe of figure 2.3 (as shown in figure 2.4), we see
that there is still a 1 dB difference between the predicted curve and the simulated
results.
Figure 2.4: Zoomed in picture for a side lobe showing difference between the simu-
lation results and theoretical curve. 3 more points were plotted at the
right side of the lobe.
This mismatch between the theory and the simlations at higher frequency separa-
tion can be attributed to β4 term that is neglected when arriving at equation 2.4. At
very high frequency separation, the β4 term must be incorporated into theory for a
more accurate theoretical curve.
For future simulations, the frequency separation between the pump and the signal
will be less than 100 GHz (or 0.8 nm).
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Raman scattering
3.1
Goal
The goal for this chapter is to verify the Raman scattering in VPI. This is crucial
because we will be incorporating Raman amplification with FWM in upcoming chap-
ters.
3.2
Method
To verify the Raman scattering, we first need to select the Raman effect as on, in the
universal fiber parameters. Choosing the Raman fraction as 0.17. One has to also
make sure that the Inter band and the Intra band Raman adjustment factors are set
to 1. Next, we choose the a Raman Gain file and an attenuation file which contains
values for different wavelengths. Values from the Raman gain file are plotted against
wavelength values at 1460 nm pump wavelength. This Raman gain profile is going to
be used by VPI.
Figure 3.1: Setup to verify Raman scattering.
The Raman gain profile indicates the values of gain as a function of signal wave-
length which is about 0.39 per watt per km at 1550nm. Raman effect can be verified
if the on off gain saturation curve matches with the simulation results. We will be
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Raman scattering
Figure 3.2: Raman gain profile as a function of wavelength plotted for Raman-
Gain1.dat.
focusing on the forward Raman pump scheme to verify Raman scattering. The setup
is given by figure 3.1:
I am also using an attenuation file which contains the information on the how
different wavelengths are going to be attenuated differently.
3.2.1
On off gain
The on-off gain is defined as as the gain experienced by the signal when the pump
is switched from off to on. For forward pump scheme, if we are operating under the
undepleted regime, the on-off gain is given by the expression 3.1:
Gainon−off = exp(gsLeffPpump)
(3.1)
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Results
17
where gs is the value of the gain parameter (per watt per km) given by the Raman-
gain1.dat file and
Leff = 1 −exp(−αpL)
αp
(3.2)
and Ppump is the pump power. The expression 3.1 is only valid under the non-
depleting regime. This expression is only valid [Kjæ+08]if:
Ps << αp/gs
(3.3)
Because then, the signal and the pump propagation equations become:
dP +
s
dz
= P +
s (gP +
p −αs)
(3.4)
and
dP +
p
dz
= −(λS
λp
gsP +
s + αp)P +
p ≈−αpP +
p
(3.5)
In order to set up the parameters, other non linearites like SPM,XPM and FWM
are turned off since we are only concerned with the verification of Raman scattering.
Spontaneous Raman scattering is turned off. Other parameters are listed in figure
C.5
To verify the Raman scattering, it is not only necessary to verify under the unde-
pleted regime but also where the pump depletion occurs. Only then we can confidently
say that the Raman amplification is verified. For forward pump scheme, if the loss
of the pump is approximately equal to loss of the signal(αp ≈αs),the gain under
depletion [Agr12] becomes:
Gdep =
1 + r0
r0 + G−1−r0
undep
(3.6)
where r0 is given by:
r0 = λsPs(0)
λpP0
(3.7)
Where P0 is the pump power at the beginning of the fiber. One can plot the
depleted gain as a function of the pump power and then compare the simulated
results with the theoretical one according to equation 3.6. This is done in the next
section.
3.3
Results
3.3.1
Forward pumping scheme
The simulation results were plotted on the same graph as the theoretical ones. The
undepleted gain was also plotted to have a feeling at what pump power the gain
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Raman scattering
enters the undepleted regime. Figure 3.3 shows the comparison plot of Simulation,
theoretical depeted and theoretical undepleted curves.
Figure 3.3: Depleted, Undepleted and simulation (circles) plotted on the same
graph for comparison.
The error graph in figure 3.4 shows the difference between the simulation results
and the theoretical depleted gain as a function of pump power. The error is approxi-
mately 0.014 dB
3.4
Summary
As can be seen from the graphs, for forward pumping scheme, the on-off gain is very
similar to the theoretical plots and we can safely say that even for high pump power
levels, the gain profile matches with the depleted gain theoretical curve.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Summary
19
Figure 3.4: Error graph showing error difference between theoretical and simulated
results vs pump power for saturated gain.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
OPC: Theoretical
background
Figure 4.1: setup to perform Non linear compensation with an OPC. Here Span 1
and span 2 represent a fiber accompanied by an amplifier(either EDFA
or Raman).
The next upcoming chapters where EDFAs (Erbium Doped Fiber amplifiers) and
Raman amplifiers are emplyed are based upon the theory given in this chapter In the
figure 4.1, inside the OPC, let the pump represent Popc. Length of the first span is
L1, span 2 is L2. Let the length of the HNLF inside OPC represent l to distinguish
the field components before and after HNLF. The electric field components are repre-
sented by their respective amplitude components Ai(z, t) where i will represent the
point of consideration (for example: if it is at L1,then i is L1, etc).
The electric field amplitude corresponding to ’sig’ and the Idler produced repre-
sented by ’c’ will undergo the following transitions:
Esig →EsigL1 →EsigL1+l →EsigL1+l+L2
(4.1)
EcL1+l →EcL1+l+L2
(4.2)
So, from the figure 4.1, the equations of waves corresponding to different points
at the link are:
==PAGE:32==
22
4 OPC: Theoretical background
1.
Esig1 = Asig1(0)exp(−iωsig1t)
(4.3)
Esig2 = Asig2(0)exp(−iωsig2t)
(4.4)
Here ’sig2’ represents the second frequency which will beat with our ’sig1’ fre-
quency via the first span. For simplicity, let us represent sig1 and sig2 as 1 and
2. Let ’k’ be such that it takes values of 1 and 2.
2. After going through the first span, the signal frequency becomes:
EkL1 = Ak(0)exp(−iω1t)exp[i(D2 + DNL)L1 + (D3 + Dloss)L1]
(4.5)
During the propagation, in the first span, due to FWM happening between
the signal 1 and signal 2, we have idler frequencies produced inside the first
span. Let the lower frequency idler be called a and the higher frequency Idler
be represented as a′. The component a would be situated at 2ω1 −ω2 frequency,
whereas the a′ component would be situated at 2ω2 −ω1
3. We have a pump which is also coupled into the HNLF inside the OPC to pro-
duce Idler frequencies of 1 and 2. Let us call them 1I (produced by FWM of
1 and pump) and 2I (produced by FWM of 2 and pump). Along with these,
there are other FWM components produced as soon as they start travelling
inside the HNLF. Because of FWM between the pump and the a component,
we have aI and similarly FWM between the pump and the a′ component gives
a′I component.
Inside the HNLF, there is FWM between the newly produced Idler frequencies.
The HNLF is kept short (usually 50 to 100 m) to reduce the FWM between
the newly generated Idler frequencies. This topic will be touched upon in more
detail in the upcoming chapters with amplifiers and why this is important. For
now, let us assume that the length of the HNLF is negligible in comparison to
the length of the 2 spans and the newly generated Idler frequencies that come
out of the OPC are unaffected by the FWM happening between them. So there
is negligible FWM between 1I, 2I, aI and a’I.
4. Let the amplitude of the pump frequency inside the OPC be given by ApOP C.
Then, the newly generated ’idler’ signal given by kI (where k = 1, 2, a, a′), which
is simply the conugate copy of the original signal is given by
EkI = AkI(L1, t)exp(−i(D2 + DNL)L1 + (D3 + Dloss)L1)
(4.6)
where,
AkI(L1, t) = A∗
k(0)A2
pOP Cexp(−i(2ωp −ωk)t)
(4.7)
==PAGE:33==
4 OPC: Theoretical background
23
The newly generated Idler frequencies are formed in such a manner that the
pump acts like a mirror and reflects the position of the signals 1,2, a and a’ in
the frequency domain.
5. The filter is a band pass filter which only allows the Idler frequency components
(kI, k=1,2,a and a’) to pass through it. It is made sure that the suppression at
the pump abd signal frequencies to the right side of the pump is large enough,
so that they have negligible amplitude when they enter the second span.
6. Finally after the second span, the wave equation becomes:
EkI(L1+L2, t) = A∗
k(0, t)exp(−i(D2 +DNL)(L1−L2)+(D3 +Dloss)(L1+L2))
(4.8)
So, if L1=L2, then we have,
EkI(2L1, t) = A∗
k(0, t)exp((D3 + Dloss)(L1 + L2))
(4.9)
Ideally, if the power profiles are symmetric for the first and the second span and if a
lossless transmission is assumed, all the other non linearities except for D3 should be
compensated completely. The non-linearities from D3 are very small in comparison
with D2 and DNL. So, according to equation 4.9, one should get the conjugated
signal back without any nonlinearites.
However, in reality, the power profiles will never be perfectly symmetrical. In
the upcoming chapters, we will invesitgate two cases: one with only EDFAs,(with
more asymmetry) and another one where backward pumping scheme is used (more
symmetrical case), the latter being the focus of the thesis.
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Compensation using
only EDFAs
This chapter is the starting point for our further investigations in improving the
efficiency of an optical link by reducing the Idler power further. The implementation
of this setup will provide a pathway for compensating non-linearities using Raman
amplification. This can be done by substituting Raman amplifiers with the EDFAs
which are expected to provide a better performance.
This is because the Raman
amplification ensures more symmetry in the power profiles for both spans. This will
be discussed in more detail in the following chapters.
5.1
Goal
The goal of the simulations in this chapter is to validate the FWM Idler product
power with the theory where only EDFAs are used to compensate the losses in span
1 and span 2.
5.2
Theory and implementation
First we need to discuss the case where the OPC is absent. The setup is given in figure
5.1. After span 1 and span 2, there is a noiseless EDFA present which is compensating
for the loss that occurs during the propagation in the span.(Note: all the EDFAs that
were used in VPI were noiseless.) The power profile is given by figure 5.2.For this
particular case, the power of the idler product that is produced as a result of FWM
[AlK+18; AME17]between the signal 1 and signal 2 separated by some frequency
difference ∆f is given by,
Pa = P2P 2
1
(Dγ
3
sin(N∆βL/2)
sin∆βL/2
)2[(1 −exp(−αL)2 + 4 exp(−αL) sin2(∆βL/2)
α2 + ∆β2
]
(5.1)
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Compensation using only EDFAs
Figure 5.1: Setup with EDFA after each span without OPC..
Figure 5.2: Power profile of signal 1 (or 2) as it propagates both spans each of length
100km. The power is amplified to -3dBm at theory end of the second
span by the EDFA at point c in figure 5.1.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Theory and implementation
27
where P1, P2 represent signal 1 and signal 2 respectively. ’D’, γ , α and L represent
the Degeneracy factor, non-linear parameter and the length of 1 span respectively. ∆β
[ATE18] is given by 5.2
∆β = −4π2β2(f2 −f1)(f2 −f1) = −4π2β2(f2 −f1)2
(5.2)
where f1 and f2 represent the frequencies of signal 1 and signal 2 respectively. So
the Idler power depends on the frequency separation ∆f = f2−f1 between the signals
along with the dispersion between them. The dispersion β2 is assumed to be the same
for both frequencies in the calculations. The power profile of signal1 (or signal 2) is
given by the figure 5.2.
Figure 5.3: The setup given in (i) represents the setup for the EDFA based configu-
ration in the presence of OPC.(ii) represents how the Optical spectrum
(x-axis is frequency) is expected to look at the respective points in (i)
for a better understanding of what is actually happening at every stage
of the setup..
In the presence of OPC, there are some changes made to the setup. The new
setup is shown in figure 5.3. The power of the FWM product at the end of 2 spans
in the presence of OPC is given by equation 5.3. According to the figure 5.4 at point
’g’, the FWM power is expected to drop at certain frequency separation ∆f values.
Pai = P2P 2
1
{
2Dγ
3(α2 + ∆β2)
sin(N∆βL/4)
sin∆βL/2
[
α(exp(−αL) + 1)sin(∆β/2)
+∆β(exp(−αL) −1)cos(∆βL/2)
]}2
(5.3)
The table 5.2 consists of all the parameters used for calculations of the power in
equation 5.3 and 5.1 and other important parameters corresponding to the setup in
figure 5.3 .
The bullet points listed below show how the signals propagate throughout the
setup.
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Compensation using only EDFAs
Figure 5.4: Evolution of optical spectrum at every stage of the setup..
• Due to FWM between the pump and the signal 1,2,a and a’, the new Idler
frequencis generated will be placed in such a way that the pump will act as a
mirror and the new Idler frequency, for e.g, 1i, will be produced at 2fpump −f1.
The new Idler frequency generated has a very low power magnitude (<-200
dBm)
• The important variables that affect the new Idler frequencies generated inside
the HNLF are: the pump power inside input to the HNLF, the power of signals
1 and 2, the non-linear parameter of the HNLF, and the length of the HNLF.
• An attenuator (point b) is placed right before the OPC with an attenuation of
67 dB. The attenuator is present to reduce the power of the signals 1,2,a and
a’ that enter the OPC. This step is required because if the signals propagate
inside the HNLF for a very short distance without any attenuation with signals
1 and 2 having -3dBm power, there will be FWM between the newly generated
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Theory and implementation
29
Parameter
Value
f1
1.92792577492e+14
Disperision (β2)
15.6298ps/(nm-km)
γSSMF
1.4834 W −1km−1
N (number of spans)
2
LSSMF
100 km
LHNLF
50 m
γHNLF
5 W −1km−1
αSSMF
0.1898 dB/km
P1andP2
0dBm (before 50/50 coupler)
gain of EDFA at ’e’
199.1822 dB
Attenuation at ’b’
67 dB
Pump power at OPC
1 µW
Pump frequency
f1 −40GHz
Table 5.1: Parameters used for the EDFA only setup in figure 5.3.
1i,2i,ai and a’i signals on the left side of the pump during the propagation for
even 50m. This is not accounted for in the theoretical model where the length
of the HNLF is considered to be very small in comparison to the length of the
SSMF and thus the FWM between these new signals is not accounted for in the
theoretical model. The VPI environment, however, will take this into account
and thus there will be FWM between the newly generated signals to greater
extent if the signals are not attenuated. To avoid the FWM between the newly
generated Idler frequencies inside the HNLF, one can reduce the non-linear
parameter of the HNLF and the power level of the incoming signals so that the
new FWM products (1i,2i,etc) are formed at an even lower power level. This
can be done by placing an attenuator in front of the OPC. The resultant FWM
products will have a very low power, and hence the FWM happening inside
the HNLF among the newly generated low power Idler frequencies will also
be less. We would like to have this so that the simulations fit well accroding
to the theoretical prediction. The pump power is chosen to be -30dBm, the
signals 1 and 2 are attenuated and become -70 dBm just before the HNLF,
and the resultant FWM Idler is produced at an even lower magnitue of power
(<-200dBm).
• The filter representing 2 filters is placed around point ’e’ to remove the pump
and the signal frequencies (1,2,a and a’). Each of these 2 filters has a 200 dB
attenuation. This leaves us with only the newly generated Idler frequencies.
• Once the the pump and the signal have been filtered out, the Idler signals
need to be amplified before they propagate in the second span. The EDFA at
point ’f’ is a noiseless amplifier. Since the signals were attenuated before they
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Compensation using only EDFAs
propagated inside the HNLF, the idler signals need to be amplified to the same
exact power as the signals just before they entered the first span. We choose
the gain of the amplifier so that the idler signal has the same power:which is
-3dBm just before it enters the second span.
• Figure A.1 shows what will happen If the above point is not taken into account
where the signal power levels and the pump power are kept high along with
the non-linear parameter inside a long HNLF. The figure A.1 shows the optical
spectrum just after the HNLF where we observe that other FWM products have
been formed (to the right side of the signals and to the left side of the Idler
frequencies) which are not required.
• If we were to filter the Idler from figure A.1 after it propagated via the long
HNLF, the resultant FWM product at the end of 2 spans will not be what
we expected since FWM was happening inside the HNLF among the newly
generated Idler frequencies as well the other non-required FWM products, which
will definitely impact what we get at the output of 2 spans and will not be
consistent with the theoretical model [AlK+18]. This is the crucial reason why
signal and the pump power levels were lowered inside a short (50 m) HNLF
with a reduced non-linear coefficient (the value of γ was reduced from a typical
value of 11W −1km−1 to 5W −1km−1)
The theoretical plots using equations 5.1 and 5.3 are plotted on the same graphs to
compare the FWM prodcuts when OPC is absent/present.
5.3
Results and Conclusions
From the figures, we observe that the simulation results are in good agreement with
the theoretical model. This not only confirms the FWM in the VPI environment,
but XPM, SPM and dispersion effects are also validated again. For the case without
OPC, the maximum error between theory and simulation is 0.05 dB, and for the case
where OPC is present, the error difference does not exceed 2dB at points where the
power drops to -65 dBm.
From these figures, we can also conclude that between 0 to 12 GHz there are
instances where the presence of OPC is a nice thing to have for the performance.
Since the Raman and the FWM effects have been verified, one can now proceed
to incorporate distributed Raman amplification in both spans replacing the lumped
amplifiers and observe how the FWM idler power is affected after 2 spans for both:
with and without OPC cases.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Results and Conclusions
31
Figure 5.5: Comparing FWM Idler product as a function of frequency separation
between the signals.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Compensation using only EDFAs
Figure 5.6: A comparison made between theory and simulations for EDFA case
when OPC is absent.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Results and Conclusions
33
Figure 5.7: Comparing theory and simulation results when OPC is present. The
figure shows excellent agreement between theory and simulation results.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Raman assisted Four
Wave mixing
In the last chapter, we saw how the the FWM Idler product varied as a function of
frequency separation when EDFAs were only used in the link. In this chapter, we will
investigate how using Raman amplification may change the FWM Idler product.
We will also discuss the impact of a filter which would be placed just before an
OPC and discuss its relevance.
6.1
Why Raman amplification?
The symmetry in the power profile for the link plays an important role when it comes
to compensating non-linearities. As we saw in equation 4.8, the non-linearities will
be well compensated if the first half of the link before the OPC is symmetrical to
the second half of the link after the OPC. This means that if P(z) represents power
in the first half of a link with a total distance of L, where Pidler propagates in the
second half of the link, then the second order non-linearities will be compensated if
[Ros+15],
P(L/2 −z) = Pidler(L/2 + z)
(6.1)
where z ranges from 0 to L/2. As the amplitude of the signal varies over a distance
’z’, the dispersion seen by the pulse also varies along the distance because the second
order dispersion is highly dependent on the width and the amplitude of the pulse.
The higher the pulse amplitude, the more non-linearites it accumulates as it prop-
agates. Thus if we match the amplitude (power) profile from the first half of the
link to the second half accroding to the equation 6.1, we will be compensating more
non-linearities theoretically.
If we compare Raman amplification with a lumped based amplification scheme
(EDFA), the power profile of a backward pumped Raman amplification scheme looks
more symmetrical to the EDFA case. In the Raman case, the power profile at the end
of the span, unlike EDFA, is more gradual. Thus if were to replace the EDFAs with
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Raman assisted Four Wave mixing
Raman pumps with a backward pumping scheme, one expects an improvement in the
performance of the link because a more symmetrical system is now at play. Figure
6.3 shows the signal power profile when EDFAs are replaced with Raman amplifiers
with appropriate pump power levels. The setup for Raman amplification is shown in
figure 6.5
Figure 6.1: Setup without an OPC when EDFAs are replaced with Raman pumps.
Figure 6.2: Setup showing Raman pumps replaced with EDFAs in presence of an
OPC.
To obtain the power profile that compensates all the loss inside a 100km long
fiber, different pump powers were sweeped for a backwards pumping scheme. The
pump wavelength used was 1460 nm. The setup shown in figure 6.5 was used to sweep
the pump power to obtain different power profiles so that the one where the power
reaches closest to -3dB is selected.
A total of 13 power profiles were plotted and the pump power that reached closest
to -3dBm was 0.711 mW. This power was then used for all the Raman pumps in figure
6.1 and figure 6.2.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Method
37
Figure 6.3: Power profile of a backwards pumping scheme where the loss in the sig-
nal power inside the SSMF is compensated completely for both spans..
6.2
Method
The method followed here is similar to that of the EDFA case, the only difference
being the EDFAs are replaced with Raman pumps. There are also some changes made
to the universal fiber (for example minimum step size), and some global parameters
(Appendix C). Signal 2 is sweeped such that the frequency difference between signal
1 and signal 2 varies from 0.3 GHz to 17.8 GHz. For every sweep, the backwards
Raman pump power is kept the same, that is, 0.711 mW.
6.3
Results and discussions
• The figure (6.7) shows a comparison made between the case without OPC per-
taining to figure 6.1 and the case with OPC pertaining to figure 6.2. The Idler
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Raman assisted Four Wave mixing
Figure 6.4: Variation of pump power for a total of 13 sweeps to determine the power
profile that reaches closest to -3dBm..
Figure 6.5: Setup used to determine the appropriate pump power level.
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Results and discussions
39
Figure 6.6: A zoomed in image of the figure 6.6 at the end of the span.
power obtained at the end is plotted on the y-axis as a function of frequency
difference ∆f between the signals 1 and 2. One observes that there is a simi-
lar trend followed to the EDFA case, where for very small frequency difference
separations, the Idler power when OPC was present, was lower than the Idler
power when OPC was absent.
• Another important observation was that the Idler power also decreased by 3-4
dB when Raman amplifiers were replaced with EDFA amplifiers for a frequency
separation between 1 to 8 GHz. The behaviour is completely different for higher
frequency separations when we consider the Raman amplifiers. Here, for the
case when OPC is present, the Idler product power at higher frequency sepa-
ration values is relatively lower than the case when OPC was absent. This is
different from the EDFA only case, where both cases of with and without OPC
almost converged at 18GHz frequency difference.
• Another important point to mention is how when EDFAs were being used for
amplification, the only non-linear process happening is the FWM between the
Idler frequencies during the propagation in the second span. After it has reached
the end of the span, there is an instantaneous increase in the power levels.
For the Raman amplification however, there is not only FWM as the signals
propagate in both spans, but also distributed amplification from the backwards
pumping. Thus, the non-linear phase of the signal is going to vary differently
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Raman assisted Four Wave mixing
Figure 6.7: Comparison plot of Idler product power as a function of frequency sep-
aration in the presence and absence of an OPC when Raman amplifiers
are used.
for the Raman assisted case as the signals are amplified during the propagation
in the spans along with FWM. Taking into account this point, we are now going
to discuss why a filter must be installed just before the signal frequencies enter
the OPC for the Raman case and why it becomes important at higher frequency
separation values.
6.3.1
The impact of installing a filter just before the OPC
For simplicity, let us call the group of frequencies to the right side of the OPC pump
as the ’signal band’, and the group of frequencies to the left hand side of the pump
as the ’Idler band’. In the figure 6.8, we can see that the some of the signal bands
formed due to the FWM in the first span, overlapping with the pump and the FWM
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Results and discussions
41
Figure 6.8: Setup when a filter1 is introduced just before the OPC to remove the
signal bands crossing to the left side of the pump..
signlas near the pump. Some of the overlap is also found between the signal band and
the Idler band to the left side of the pump frequency in the frequency domain, and
the overlap between some frequencies near the pump and the Idler band. This means
that when we filter out the Idler product after it comes out of the OPC and make it
propagate via the second span, we are also going to propagate the overlapped portion
that entered the Idler band region because this overlapped portion is going to remain
after the filter at point ’e’. This will result in the FWM between the Idler band and
the overlapped portion as it propagates via the second span. The Raman pump in the
second span is not only amplifying the Idler band, but also the overlapped portion
that is propagating alongside. This will affect the Idler product power as it arrives
at the end of the second span which is not desired.
If the signals 1 and 2 start with a larger frequency difference, say 15 GHz, the
overlap between the pump and the Idler band, and the signal and the Idler band is
going to be greater, thus having moe impact on the Idler product than the impact
caused at lower frequency separation. Figure 6.9, shows a comparison plot for what
happens when a filter is placed just before the attenuator (before OPC), to exclude
some of the overlap caused due to the signal band. As can be seen from the comparison
plot, by excluding the signal band, not much changes are observed at higher frequency
separations. The changes in the Idler product power after the introduction of a filter
is no more than 0.8 dB. There is still some overlap between the FWM frequencies
near the pump and the Idler band which cannot be simply removed by placing a filter
before the OPC because this overlap is caused inside the OPC when signal band and
the pump start interacting (shown in Appendix B), thus producing FWM products
around the OPC pump frequency which then overlap with the Idler band.
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Raman assisted Four Wave mixing
Figure 6.9: Comparison plot to compare the effect of including .
6.4
Summary
It is shown how the Idler product power is affected, when a backward Raman am-
plifier is employed such that all the loss in the previous span is compensated. The
simulations, however, still need to be validated with theory.
In the final chapter
describing future work, the theory to validate the FWM Idler product is described in
more detail. We will also see how the simulations might have some resemblance to
the theory by comparing it to some previous work [AlK+18].
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7
Variation of Raman
pump power and its
impact
The Idler product power when Raman amplification was used instead of EDFA,
showed a decrease in its value when compared to the EDFA case for most of the
frequency separation values. This is attributed to a more symmetrical signal power
profile when backward Raman amplification was used. One of the ways that could
affect the the symmetry of the power profile is by changing the backward Raman
pump power which will be discussed more thoroughly in this chapter.
Speculation
If somehow, one could make the power profile more symmetrical, one
could then further decrease the Idler product power obtained at the end of 2 spans.
If we look at the power profile in figure 6.3, we observe that at 100 km, the slopes
to the left side of the mid link and the right side are different in magnitude. One
could decrease the backward pump power at 100km to partially compensate the losses
happening inside the first span and make the power profile more symmeterical. This
happens because when the backwards pump power is lowered, the difference in the
magnitude of the slopes on either side of the mid link is also lowered thus improving
the symmetery.
However, when the backwards pump power is lowered the signal
power at the end of the first span, does not reach -3dBm. For the second span, since
the launch power of the Idler (produced inside the HNLF) is lower, the signal goes
down further than it had in the first span and thus lowers the symmetry. This will be
looked upon in this chapter. Thus we speculate a slight increase in the performance
when the backwards pump power is lowered.
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Variation of Raman pump power and its impact
Figure 7.1: Comparison plot to compare the power profiles when backward pump
power is lowered.
7.1
Method
The figure 7.1 shows the power profile of three variations of the pump power used in
setup. When the Idler power is filtered out at 100 km, it is ensured that the EDFA
at point ’f’ in figure 6.2 amplifies the Idler power to -7dBm or -4dBm depending on
where the signal reaches at the end of the first span. The table 7.1 mentions the
respective pump power levels used in the setup 6.2.
Case
pump: first span
pump : second span
Power reaches -3dBm (completely compensated)
0.7116 W
0.7116W
Power reaches -4dBm
0.6748 W
0.742 W
Power reaches -7dBm
0.558 W
0.859 W
Table 7.1: Table containing backward pump powers corresponding to power profiles
in 7.1.
==PAGE:55==
7.1 Method
45
Figure 7.2: Comparison plot with and without OPC when the signal reaches -4dBm
in the first span.
The method followed here is as follows:
1. The pump powers from the table 7.1 are used for implementing the setup in
figure6.1.
2. The Idler product power is recorded as a function of frequency separation as
the signal 2 was swept.
3. Then, the pump powers mentioned in table 7.1 are used again to implement the
setup in figure6.2.
4. The Idler product power is again recorded as a function of frequency separation
by sweeping the signal 2.
5. For every pair of pump power levels in the table 7.1, the Idler product powers
are plotted on the same plot for both cases: with and without OPC.
Thus we have three different plots for every case given in the table 7.1. To see
if the speculation made was correct, we will compare all three cases where the OPC
was present and observe how the effects of lowering the backwards pump power on
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Variation of Raman pump power and its impact
the Idler product as a function of frequency separation. This comparison is made in
figure 7.4.
Figure 7.3: Comparison plot with and without OPC when the signal reaches -7dBm
in the first span.
7.2
Results and discussion
From both figures 7.2 and 7.3, we observe how when OPC was included, there was a
decrease in the Idler product power for most frequency separation values.
The variation in the backwards Raman pump power also produces some interest-
ing results. The figure 7.4, shows how the Idler product power changes when the
backwards pump power is lowered. For very low frequency separation values, and
for some unique frequency difference values (for example at 14 GHz) where the Idler
power seems to go down rapidly, for all three cases, we observe that when the pump
is lowered, there Idler power is observed to increase indicating that there is less non-
linear compensation at these frequency separation values. This is contrary to our
speculation where the Idler product power should have decreased even further when
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Results and discussion
47
Figure 7.4: A comparison plot that shows how the Idler product power is affected in
the presence of an OPC when the backwards pumping power is changed.
the pump power was lowered.
This would mean that the symmetry between the
power profiles for both spans actually decreased when the pump power was lowered
for the -4dBm case and for the -7dBm case.
From figure 7.1, it is evident for -7dBm case that even though the magnitude of
the slopes of the signal profile and that of the filtered Idler profile at 100 km (mid
link), seem to be closer, there is a further decrease in the Idler power at 170 km which
actually has lowered the symmetery. This means that the decrease in the non-linear
product would not be as effective as it would have been if the signal power was com-
pensated completely in the second span. The same goes for the case where the signal
reaches -4dBm in the first span.
From figure 7.4, we also observe that for the local maxima region of the plots, the
case for -7 dBm has lower Idler product power or in other owrds, the local maxima
for -7 dBm case is lower than the local maxima of -3 dBm and -4 dBm case. For the
case of -4dBm, the local maxima is lower than that of -3dBm. Taking into account
the sharper rise and fall of the Idler product power for the -3dBm case, during the
propagation of the Idler band in the second span, there was more Idler compensation
and the phase cancelling was more effective in the -3 dBm case. This leads us back
==PAGE:58==
48
7 Variation of Raman pump power and its impact
to equation 4.8 where if the link has more symmetry along the mid-link where the
OPC is placed, we will have more interaction between the phase which corresponds
to a better phase matching condition. This also shows that the -3 dBm case is more
symmetric than -4 dBm or -7 dBm case.
7.3
Conclusion
According to the simulations and the figures, it is clear that Raman assisted FWM
has led to a decrease in the Idler power, thus compensating some Idler frequencies
at most frequency separation values when the OPC was employed. Even though the
speculation made was proven incorrect for both -4dBm and -7dBm cases, we still ob-
serve a decrease in the Idler power leading to non-linear compensation (even though
it was less effective than the case where the loss is compensated completely in the
first span(-3dBm case).
If we now observe the EDFA case, the Idler does not decrease as effectively when
a mid-link OPC was employed as effectively for the Raman assisted case. This is seen
from figures 7.2 and 5.5. Thus, the Raman assisted FWM is worth looking into and
should be preferred over employing EDFAs for compensating non-linearites.
7.4
Limitations
Let us consider the case where the signal power reaches -4 dBm in the first span. If
we look at figure B.1 which shows the optical spectra at 15 GHz just after the HNLF
and before the filter 2, we observe that signal band and some frequencies that were
generated near the pump now enter the Idler band.
Now at such a high frequency difference, when the Idler band is filtered at point
’e’, we arrive at figure B.2.
This Idler band contains some frequencies that have
crossed over from the signal band and the pump and have entered the Idler band.
These will pass through the filter as well and will propagate in span 2. After the
Idler band propagates, the optical spectra at the end of span 2 is given in figure B.3.
These frequencies that have crossed over to the Idler band can interfere with the Idler
signals which is not required and could change the Idler signal power which we are
interested in.
This will be the limitation to the system desctribed above. In order to overcome
this, one can place the pump further to the left. Currently, the pump is placed 40
Ghz to the left from the signal 1. To avoid the limitation described above, one can
change the location of the pump and place it further to the left (say 70 or 80 GHz to
the left of signal 1). If this is done correctly and when the Idler band is now filtered,
the rectangular filter at point ’e’ should be placed such that it is centered at the mid
==PAGE:59==
7.4 Limitations
49
point of 1i and 2i Idler signals with a width wide enough to encompass the necessary
ai and a’i FWM signals and exclude the ’noise’ frequencies that crossed over to the
Idler region. Then, one can avoid this limitation alltogether.
Note,
when using filter 1 just after the first span, one can remove the tail of the
signal band that crosses over to the Idler band, but unfortunately, the frequency el-
ements from the pump still remain. These frequencies form inside the HNLF. One
can avoid this problem at once if the pump is placed at a further distance to the left.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Future work and
Conclusion
It was mentioned previously that the non-linear phase is affected by both, the Raman
amplifiation happening inside both spans and the FWM between the signals. The
Idler product not only gets amplified by the Raman pumps, but is also undergoing
FWM in span 2. Thus, to ensure that this nonlinear phase shift caused by both
Raman amplification and FWM is still accurate, the results obtained need to be
validated by a theoretical model. The equations for the FWM idler product power
when Raman amplification is used for the case where OPC is absent and where the
loss is compensated completely in the first span is given by [AlK+18],
Pidle = D2γ2
9
P2P 2
1

M
∑
k=1
[e(gk+i∆β)Lk −1
gk + i∆β
][ k−1
∏
j=1
e(gk+i∆β)Lk]
2 sin2(N∆βL/2)
sin2(∆βL/2)
(8.1)
where gk is the exponential gain or loss for the kth segement when both spans
1 and 2 of length L are divided into a total of M segments. This equation is still
a discreetized approximation [IT95]. One part of the future work is to implement
this equation in MATLAB with appropriate number of sections and investigate the
equation by playing with the number of segments M.
To see some degree of validation of the simulations and the results obtained in
the thesis, we look at the figure 8, in the paper [AlK+18] parts of which are shown
in figure 8.1 and figure 8.2.
Upon close observation in figure 8.2, for the solid red curve, at around 7 - 10 GHz
separation, there is a point of inflexion where the second derivative goes from negative
to positive. This is of interest because a similar pattern is observed in figure 7.2 and
figure 6.7 for the case of without OPC. This shows that some physics is definitely
at play in these simulations. The simulations show some promise, to have numerical
verification, one needs to implement the equation 8.1 and plot the points on top of
theory to see the error differences betwen the simulations and the theory.
==PAGE:62==
52
8 Future work and Conclusion
Figure 8.1: Part of Figure 8 from paper [AlK+18]. Power profiles when forward
and backward Raman pumps are employed according to the paper by
Mohammad A.Z.AL-Khateeb. We are interested in the solid red curve
here and the corresponding Idler product power which corresponds to
only backwards pump being used.
==PAGE:63==
8 Future work and Conclusion
53
Figure 8.2: Part of Figure 8 from paper [AlK+18]. The solid red curve represents
the equation 8.1 where the OPC is absent and the signal and the Idler
powers reach 0 dBm at the end of 2 spans.
One also needs to take care of separating the pump and the signal frequencies
by enough distance (atlesat 70 to 80 GHz) in the frequency domain so that we do
not have any limitations like the limittion mentioned in appendix B. All the Raman
simulations then, must be carried out with this newly placed pump and signal and
the final Idler power must be observed for a frequency separation.
One can also extend this project by dividing the whole link into 4 equal parts
and employing 2 more backward Raman amplifiers placed at L/4 and 3L/4 distances.
There is a huge possibilty that the symmetery of the link would improve and the
Idler power as a fnction of frequency difference would go down when more pumps
are included because by employing 2 more pumps, one is forcing the power profile to
not vary much, thus leading to more symmetry and a more effective compensation of
nonlinearities. What happens when RIN is included? is another question that needs
to be answered in the future.
==PAGE:64==
54
8 Future work and Conclusion
8.1
Conclusion
The main focus of the thesis was to observe FWM and compensate nonlinearites with
Raman amplificaton.
I believe this has been done albeit having some limitations.
A theoretical verification is still required for both, with and without OPC cases.
Through comparing Idler powers for different Raman pump powers, it is concluded
that the better system would still be the one where the signal power is compensated
completely for both spans. Both EDFA and Raman assisted FWM has been shown
and if the numerical verification for the Raman case is done properly, one can con-
clude that employing Raman amplifiers would still be the better option, as far as
performance is concerned. Future work is important as it puts the simulations to the
test for the Raman assisted case, and potentially improving the performace of the
system even further.
