==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Transport and Logistics
Optimization of Shunting in Copenhagen
Central Station
A real-life oriented approach, in collaboration with DSB
Giuseppe Matera (s171716)
Supervised by:
Steven Harrod (DTU)
Jakob Meinhardt (DSB)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tel: 45 25 48 00
http://www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The railway traffic around Copenhagen Central Station is very condensed, and the
track layout causes the area to be a natural bottleneck for the network.
This thesis investigates the possibility of applying mathematical optimization to
the scheduling process of trains at Copenhagen Central Station. The paper proposes
a methodology that combines data modeling and optimization tools to compute a
feasible timetable. The timetable is defined by microscopic train movements of both
revenue trains and trains shunted to the different depot areas. The movements refer to
”blocks” that model pieces of tracks of the infrastructure map that has been provided
by Banedanmark.
The thesis has been carried out in collaboration with DSB, which has provided
the data and technical insights on the operational rules that define the operations at
Central Station.
The project tries to manage the problem with a real-life oriented approach. A
discussion in this paper assesses the compromises made to adapt the reality to the
data modeling.
The results are computed with a time limit of 30 minutes, and relevant instances
are solved to optimality. The time is suitable for tactical planning more than real-time
management. The author believes that the microscopic approach leads the results to
be a step closer to reality.
The methodology and the results proposed in this paper require improvements and
further studies to be operationally applicable. These are discussed in the conclusion
of the thesis.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master Thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a master degree in Transport and Logistics.
Kongens Lyngby, September 2, 2019
Giuseppe Matera (s171716)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I want to thank my supervisor Steven for his presence throughout the
whole period of the thesis. This project would have been impossible without him and
his railway knowledge.
I want to thank DSB, and Jakob in particular, for their willingness to collaborate
with me.
I want to thank my family and friends that have supported me during my 2 years
journey in Denmark.
The Matgiulole House, Lollo, Mathi, Ale, Olly, Lisa, Valentin, that have been the
best flatmates I could ever have; Roma-Milano connection trio, Chicco, Matteo, and
Guido, best neighbors ever; the Transport Mafia, Vaso, Maria, John and Fran, that
have shared the same path at DTU with me; all my colleagues from the ufficio, to
have shared together the summer days in the library; all my friends in Rome, that
even from far away have always been here becoming more family than friends; last
but not least, my mother, my father, and my sister, that have always been there for
me.
I want to thank Valentina, who has supported me through the most stressed period
of this thesis.
A special thanks to Lollo, who became like a brother for me, these two years would
have been very different without you.
Also, I want to thank Denmark to have welcomed me, DTU for the best studying
experience, and the SU to have given me the economic support that I needed.
Flat out.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Copenhagen Central Station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
The layout of the station
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
The trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Current dispatching practice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
9
2.1
Timetabling Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Mathematical formulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Real-life applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Network Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Train Shunting and Platforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Data classification
21
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
3.1
DSB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Timetable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Matchings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
Operational rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Banedanmark and the Railway Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Methodology
27
4.1
Process Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
The Network Graph
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Data Modeling with Java
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
Route Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Train Connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.3
Time Discretization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.3.1
Train Moves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.3.2
Train Timings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.4
Platforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.5
Shunting and Depots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.5.1
Generation of shunting trains . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.5.2
Depot assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.6
Solution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
The Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5
The ILP Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5.1
The Hypergraph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.5.2
The model formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Computation and Results
59
5.1
Basic case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Changing discrete-time unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Headway relaxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Twenty-four hours horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Solution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.5.1
Track consistency and platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.5.2
Time separation between block occupancies . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5.3
String-line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.5.4
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Discussion
71
6.1
Project findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Method evaluation and comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3
Recommendations to the Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7
Conclusion
75
A Map
79
B Code
83
C Input and Solutions
85
D DSB Statement
87
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This paper addresses a railway timetabling problem for Copenhagen Central Station
(KBH). The problem falls within the category of optimization problems. Data
modeling and Operational Research (OR) have been used as tools to formulate and
solve a problem where trains traveling trough the station area are routed and sched-
uled.
The project took inspiration from a previous master thesis (Sørensen and Jensen 2016)
that dealt with the same problem, with the idea of proposing a different approach
that could be more suitable for real-life applications.
An overview of the problem, the stakeholders, and the current operational prac-
tices at KBH are presented in this chapter. The scope of the thesis and the technical
definitions used throughout the paper are then exposed. Chapter 2 presents a sum-
mary of the literature survey on the topic, that has been carried out in order to
understand the current state-of-the-art in railway timetabling optimization. Chapter
3 gives an overview of the data received from the industries that have been used in
the project. Chapter 4 thoroughly describes the informatical tools that have been
developed and used to model the data and compute the results. Chapter 5 presents
the results computed for different scenarios. The findings of the projects are then dis-
cussed, evaluated, and compared to the previous work (Sørensen and Jensen 2016) in
chapter 6, where also some recommendations to the management are given. Chapter
7 summarizes and concludes the paper and assess further work and improvements.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Copenhagen Central Station
KBH is the main rail station of Copenhagen, and it is managed by the state-owned
company responsible for maintenance and traffic control, Banedanmark. On the other
hand, DSB is the primary passenger train operator at the station.
According to DSB, every year Banedanmark has to ”approve” the timetable proposed
by DSB, also considering the time slots that are assigned to other operators such as
SJ, the Swedish operator.
According to a report of the Danish Transport and Construction Agency (Trafiksyrelsen
2013) from 2013, the capacity of Copenhagen Central Station is wholly utilized by
regional and inter-city trains, even after the KØR project, (Trafiksyrelsen 2006), had
been implemented.
The latter is an infrastructure project that extended the sta-
tion capacity by building new tracks towards Ny Ellebjerg for the new high-speed
line København H - Ringsted that has been opened last May 2019, (Local 2019). It
stated in the report (Trafiksyrelsen 2013) that the new line would increase the traffic
from 39 to 48 trains per hour, and the station capacity will be maxed out. According
to the report, it would be possible to operate such traffic only by optimizing the op-
erations at KBH, even after the Signalprogrammet, will be implemented in 2021 and
the capacity would be increased. The Signalprogrammet is a Banedanmark project,
(Banedanmark 2019a), that will replace the old signaling system with a new IT-based
solution where there would be no signals on the track as they would appear on the
screen in the driver’s cab.
Given these considerations, the station can be considered a potential bottleneck for
the whole network.
1.1.1
The layout of the station
Figure 1.1 illustrates the central station area, including the S-train tracks, that are
not treated in this project and are separated from the rest of the network. The green
lines highlight the part of the network where the problem has been defined. The four
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Copenhagen Central Station
3
travel directions are depicted in the picture, there is Østerport/Nørreport on the east
side, and Kastrup, Ny Ellebjerg and Valby on the west side. Two out of four depots
that have been used in the project are also shown in the picture. Chapters 3 and 4
will describe in detail how the directions and the depots have been modeled.
Figure 1.1: layout of platforms and directions at central station, including the S-
line. Ny Ellebjerg tracks are drawn with dashed lines since the map is
not updated. Picture taken from (Trafiksyrelsen 2013).
1.1.2
The trains
Figure 1.2 illustrate the trains, with their specifics, currently operated by DSB. The
train’s top speeds vary between 120 km/h and 200 km/h.
However, the current
signaling system and the track infrastructure allow a maximum speed of 180 km/h
(excluding the new high-speed line). Besides, the trains traveling in the area con-
sidered in the project drive at lower speeds, that range between 40 km/h and 130
km/h.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: trains operated by DSB with their composition and specifics illustrated.
Picture taken from (DSB 2019).
1.1.3
Current dispatching practice
As mentioned before, the current signaling system uses physical signals. According to
DSB, these signals are manually activated by the personnel in the control tower, that
manually dispatch a train assigning a route based on the current track occupancies
at the station. As a safety rule, a block, defined in this context as a piece of tracks
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Scope
5
between two signals, can be accessed 1 minute after a train has left it.
Moreover, DSB confirmed that the shunting movements are currently not planned
but self-decided by the planners on the day of operation.
1.2
Scope
The main objective of the thesis is to build a feasible revised timetable where shunting
movements are included, given the original timetable provided by DSB (section 3.1.1)
and a list of pre-defined matchings (section 3.1.2). The revised timetable includes
a pre-assigned platform and a route for each train. Each route is assigned within
the physical boundaries defined by the network map (section 3.2. The output will
be represented by a list of microscopic scheduled moves that specify the spatial and
temporal occupations of the trains in the network.
The shunting movements are generated by a program since they are not included in
the schedule. These trains are generated and are assigned a depot where they will be
routed to, considering a rough estimate of the capacity of each depot. The parking
problem of trains inside the depots is not in the scope of the project. Besides, the
depots are assigned based on the arrival task and the category of the train.
Initially, more importance was given to the generation and scheduling of shunting
movements. However, it has been found in the course of the project that the number
of shunting movements created with the rules and dataset provided by DSB, was
significantly lower compared to the number of passenger trains.
For this reason,
the focus has shifted to optimize the DSB train traffic at KBH in general, where
no-revenue trains are included.
1.3
Definitions
Copenhagen central station ”KBH” are used interchangeably throughout the paper
and refer to the station area analyzed in the project. ”KH” specifically refers to the
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
platform area of the station. The following list defines the meaning of technical words
used in the paper:
• Station: an actual train station, or an infrastructure point that can be the
origin or destination of a train in the original timetable provided by DSB 3.1.1.
• Matching: a connection between a train unit arriving at Central station, and
departing with another train service. Matchings data refer to 3.1.2.
• Endpoint: access or exit point to/from the network used in the project. The
latter is defined in 3.2 and 4.2.
• Destination and final destination: a destination is an endpoint that defines
the exit point of a train in the network, while the final destination is the actual
final destination of the train service.
• Train: a train, in this context, is a train moving from an endpoint to KH or
vice-versa.
• Real train: is the real physical rolling stock composition that can be modeled
by more than one ”train.”
• Train connection: a train is connected to another if their rollings stocks units
belong to the same matching.
• Train continuation: a train can have a successor that departs from the same
track at KH or one of the depots. A train and its successor models the same
real train.
• Connection time: it is the time between the arrival of one train and the
departure of its connection.
• Shunting: in this context, shunting is intended as moving a train to or from
the depot for parking or completion of tasks.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Definitions
7
• No-revenue train: in this context is defined as a train shunted to or from a
depot. It also referred to as ”shunting train” in the modeling part of the paper.
• Access track: it is a track used to access or exits from a depot.
• Microscopic: intended as a high level of details.
• Move: defines a train movement between two blocks in the network.
• Cell: a cell, is defined in the context of the Hypergraph model described in 4.5.
It is a transition node that defines the transition between two block occupancies
at a specific time.
• Horizon model: it is an extended version of the hypergraph model where the
horizon is divided into subsets that are solved separately. It is used to solve a
big instance, described in 5.4.
• Scheduled move: is a move returned as a solution. It defines an assigned
train move from a time i to a time j.
• DT - Discrete-Time unit: is the integer value used to discretize the train
running times.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
A literature survey on related topics has been carried out to gain more knowledge
on the different needs of the project. The following sections introduce to the state-
of-the-art methods used for timetabling optimization in general, the transformation
of a railway network and implementation of the Train Shunting Problem (TSP) and
Train Platforming Problem (TPP).
2.1
Timetabling Optimization
2.1.1
Mathematical formulations
According to (S. S. Harrod 2012), ”a fully defined timetable, specifies the paths that
train follow on a railway network including track lines used, junctions or stations
traveled.” The paper presents four fundamental mathematical formulations suitable
for deterministic timetable optimization in Railway. The oldest model is the Mixed
Integer Sequencing Linear Program (MISLP) where the scheduling decision is decom-
posed into binary variables that decide the sequencing of pairs of conflicting trains
and real variables that regulate the times at control points. The MISLP models are
more suitable for cases where the main concern is the adjustment of the timing of
trains where a feasible schedule is given. On the other hand, Binary integer occupancy
programs (BIOP) are more focused on the combinatorial solution of many trains run-
ning on a limited track network. In this kind of model, the track structure is modeled
by binary variables that represent the assigned occupation of tracks during a discrete-
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Literature Review
time interval. Alternative formulations of BIOP are present in the literature in the
form of alternative graph models, like (Mascis and Pacciarelli 2002) and (D’Ariano,
Pacciarelli, and Pranzo 2008). In alternative graph theory, a central problem graph
is subdivided into sub-graphs where each one represents feasible moves for a single
train in time and space, and conflicts are represented by nodes connected forming a
clique where only one node can be occupied.(Mascis and Pacciarelli 2002) represents
an application of a job-shop approach to railway scheduling.
The hypergraph formulation proposed in (S. Harrod 2011) overcomes the BIOP
by mapping binary decision variables to adjacent pairs of track occupations i.e., the
transition between two-track segments. The last formulation is the Periodic Event
Scheduling Program (PESP), which is the only timetable model of the four presented
that is used in actual commercial service. It is suited for periodic timetables where
passenger connections between trains are the main interest. An example of a real-life
application of this model is the timetable of the Berlin U-Bahn network scheduled
with a period of 10 minutes (Liebchen 2008).
The hypergraph model introduced in (S. Harrod 2011) it is of primary interest to
the methodology of the project, in fact, an adjusted version of the model has been
used to compute the results (see section 4.5 and chapter 5).
(S. Harrod and Schlechte 2013) proposes a comparison between two different
timetabling formulations where one enforces time separation between trains and the
other enforces a physical separation. Individually, the train pathing problem is con-
sidered where its goal is to find the route or path of a train upon the railway network
with maximal profit. The first formulation is the Arc Configuration Problem (ACP),
which is based on feasible sets of time-expanded arcs on a track without occupation
conflicts. The second formulation is the hypergraph model, which has been intro-
duced above, where each hyperarc represents a train move from an origin node to a
destination node containing all other potential conflicting nodes. Two sample data
are considered, one is a European network in Germany, and the other is in North
America. Both networks are transformed using the two different methods (time sep-
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Timetabling Optimization
11
aration and physical separation), and it is notable how the transformation produces
different effects: the different separation can provide different values for train occu-
pancy in the network, where the physical block separation emulates better the reality.
The results give identical values in half the scenarios and show less computation time
for the hypergraph model on average. Moreover, the ACP experiences difficulty in
enforcing train separation on single bidirectional tracks, therefore the hypergraph
model is suggested when microscopic data is available.
The hypergraph model, presented in (S. Harrod 2011), wants to address the tran-
sition conflict that cannot be solved with block occupancy transitions — the formu-
lation models explicitly a multicommodity flow on a directed hypergraph where each
flow represents one train. A train’s path can be defined by constructing two graphs.
In the first graph, sloping arcs represent train movements, and horizontal arcs rep-
resent the train being stationary, and nodes represent the endpoints of the track
segments. The second graph is then defined where vertices are the union of the set
of nodes corresponding to train movements in the first graph (occupancy nodes) and
the set of original nodes (transition cells). Binary variables in the model represent a
hyperarc where each arc has a head, which represents the next block occupancy and
time, and a tail consisting of occupied blocks and transition cells. In the objective
function, there is a weighted utility vector for each train defining incentive or penalty
for block occupation.
The more interesting constraints are the block occupancy and block transition
constraints. In the first group, parallel tracks such as sidings are merged in a single
block where a capacity parameter defines the magnitude. In the second group, the
capacity of each cell supports the transition, and it is a function of the capacities of
the blocks adjacent to the cell. Moreover, the latter limits the transitions through
a cell within a time interval called ”transition window” defined with discrete times.
The headways are implemented in the model as additional side constraints when the
discrete-time unit or the minimum track block length is lower than the headway. The
model has then been tried on a set of problems on an experimental network solved with
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Literature Review
different values for the transition window depicting differences between the complete
relaxation of the transition window constraint and a full and narrow time window.
Lastly, the model has been tested with real data from the North American Railway
with different dispatching scenarios with both freight and passenger trains. A discrete-
time unite of one minute seems to provide a good approximation of real-valued times
with acceptable computational time.
(L. G. Kroon, Dekker, and Vromans 2007) proposes a stochastic optimization
model that can find an optimal allocation of running times supplements on railway
timetables minimizing the average delay of a train on consecutive trips. The model
is used to modify a given cyclic timetable and evaluate at the same time the new
timetable operating several realizations of the trains in the timetable.
The latter
makes the proposed approach a hybrid method between a timetable model and a
simulation model. An interesting observation is a trade-off between the allocation
of running time supplements and the increase of block occupation times due to the
longer running times.
Typical applications of running time supplements in practice are mentioned in the
paper, such as dependency on the weight for cargo trains, special operational sup-
plements on highly utilized nodes, and allocation of the more significant part of the
total running time supplement on the first trips of the route. The first formulation
of a stochastic optimization model with a single train on a single line is then defined.
It is divided into two parts: the planning part for determining the running time sup-
plements and operate a number of realizations along with a number of trips subject
to external disturbances (similar to the PESP formulation), and an evaluation part
for estimating the average delay of the train.
Moreover, the convergence to an optimal allocation of the supplements is proven when
the number of realizations tends to infinity. The model has been extended to allocate
time supplements and buffer times with several trains operating according to a cyclic
timetable. The models are finally tested on both theoretical and real-life cases, pro-
viding a definite improvement of the trains’ punctuality for the reference timetables.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Timetabling Optimization
13
The results have also shown that the first formulation does not lead to a minimum
average delay.
(D’Ariano, Pacciarelli, and Pranzo 2008) proposes an alternative graph formula-
tion for real-time management with flexible timetables applied to a railway bottleneck
in Amsterdam. The main principle is to plan less in the off-line phase using timeta-
bles with flexible routes, arrival/departure times, and sequencing and postpone the
resolution of possible conflicts to the real-time management process.
A flexible timetable is characterized by time windows for arrival/departure times
where the public timetable available to passengers includes only the maximum ar-
rival time and the minimum departure time. Moreover, the timetable flexibility is
represented by a quantity calculated as the minimum between the sum of maximum
arrival times and the minimum dwell times subtracting the minimum departure times.
The conflict resolution problem (CRP) is then formulated with an alternative graph
composed by a set of nodes, a set of fixed arcs and a set of pairs of alternative arcs.
The nodes represent the passing of one train through a specific block. The arcs repre-
sent a precedence relation between two nodes where the fixed ones represent the train
routes and the alternative arcs model the conflicts representing possible precedence
relationships between two nodes.
Moreover, fixed arcs are weighted with running times and alternative arcs with setup
times (in this case equal to 0). Four algorithms to solve the graph are proposed,
where the first two are two simple heuristic methods used in practice as dispatching
rules, the third one is a greedy algorithm, and the last one is the branch and bound
algorithm described in the paper (10).
The four methods have been applied with different values of flexibility on pertur-
bated scenarios of the case of the bottleneck area around Schiphol. All the algorithms
give less average secondary delays for increasing values of flexibility. The branch and
bound algorithm outperforms the first three heuristics providing optimal solutions in
297 out of 300 cases with 2 minutes time limit of execution time.
(Mascis and Pacciarelli 2002) is another paper on alternative graphs, where a
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Literature Review
general job-shop scheduling problem is modeled with blocking and no-wait constraints.
It is strongly connected to (D’Ariano, Pacciarelli, and Pranzo 2008); thus, a brief
description follows.
Given an alternative graph, no wait constraints are represented with a pair of fixed
arcs having the same length with opposite sign, while blocking constraints are modeled
with alternative arcs with length equal to zero. This general model could be applied
to a railway scenario to solve conflicts in real-time. It can be solved by finding a
complete, consistent selection i.e., one arc is selected for each pair of alternative arcs,
and there are no positive length cycles. Heuristic and exact methods that respectively
find good feasible schedules and solve the problem to optimality are introduced in
this paper; therefore a deeper investigation could be done if an alternative graph
formulation would be needed in this project.
2.1.2
Real-life applications
(Borndörfer et al. 2017) describes different cases of successful real-life applications
of mathematical optimization in the railway industry. Three different cases are pre-
sented; specifically, they are long-term freight routing, mid-term rolling stock rotation
planning, and real-time train dispatching. The first two cases are of less interest to
our purpose since we are not treating rolling stock rotation, and the freight routing
problem is considered from the whole network perspective. The authors also give a
general overview of the planning process for railway transportation in Europe assign-
ing the different problems to three levels, namely strategic, tactical, and operational.
The train dispatching problem is attractive to our purpose and belongs to the
operational level. It is defined as the re-routing and re-scheduling in real-time due
to the deviation of trains from original schedules, where the objective is typically
a function of the delays. A MIP program minimizing cost as a function of time is
defined where three sets of variables are associated with line resources, and the other
three sets are associated with station resources. The variables are a routing vector
(choice among alternatives), a vector defining ”who goes first” between two trains
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Network Transformation
15
and the real-time schedule vector. Two constraints are thus associated respectively
to scheduling and routing on the line and in stations. A sub-problem for both line
and station level can be obtained dropping alternatively one of the two constraints.
It is attractive to our case the sub-problem labeled as Station Dispatching problem
(SD) that aims to find routes and schedules for trains in a station given their arrival
and departure times. The TD has been applied in several lines in Europe embedded
in the TMS systems of operators, in both semi-automatic and fully automatic modes.
A good example is represented by the TMS dedicated to Roma Tiburtina station
that has been equipped with a heuristic algorithm developed by the authors to re-
schedule and re-route the trains inside the station. The system seemed to work very
well (average gap 0.6%), but still needs to be approved to become fully operative.
Bombardier operates other successful cases of embedded optimization in TMS systems
in Italy (semi-automated) and Latvia (fully-automated) and NSB in Norway (semi-
automated).
2.2
Network Transformation
(Schlechte et al. 2011) presents a time discretization approach for network simplifi-
cation in railway optimization. It is of primary interest the discretization procedure
defined by the authors as cumulative rounding technique. The procedure wants to
control the rounding error when real-valued times are discretized by tolerating only
small deviations. The running times usually are rounded up, and with respect to the
cumulative rounding error, it is sometimes allowed to round down. Formal implemen-
tation of the procedure is proposed in the form of an algorithm.
Discretized minimum headway times between trains are also considered.
The
headway between two routes is calculated iteratively as the maximum time interval
during which a route occupies a track segment i. e. the sum of relative reservation
duration and relative release duration, divided by the fixed time discretization. The
relative reservation duration is the sum of the approach time, the reacting time, and
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Literature Review
the time needed to set up the route.
The relative release duration is the sum of
the release time, the switching time and time needed by the train between the block
signal at the beginning of the route and the overlap. A third algorithm that put
all the pieces together is then proposed aiming to transform a railway network from
microscopic to the macroscopic level. The method is composed of three main steps:
macroscopic network detection (ND), aggregation (AG), and time discretization (TD).
ND is constructing the directed graph that represents the macroscopic network from
the microscopic graph and the train routes. AG is a further aggregation of block
sections (micro) to tracks (macro) and station areas (micro) to stations (macro). TD
is time discretization with the cumulative rounding procedure described before.
(“Construction of Discrete Time Graphs from Real Valued Railway Line Data”
2018) proposes another method for the network simplification with time discretization.
A set partitioning model is proposed where the objective is to minimize the number
of blocks and the induced error due to the discretization. The dominant component
of the objective function is the latter, where the total induced error is calculated
as the sum of all the errors derived obtained as the difference between the real-
valued time rounded up (discrete) and the real-valued source time. The size of the
combination of track segments is controlled by two parameters defining the minimum
and the maximum number of tracks that can be combined into one block.
The
lower bound can define a default headway between two trains, especially in the case
where track segments represent signaled track segments.
Moreover, an important
factor introduced by the author is the rolling minimum operating headway i.e., the
bottleneck time of the network. Track segments need to be merged without creating a
significant variation on travel times to avoid creating bottlenecks that would increase
the overall flow. It is not clear if this is ensured by the model or by the pre-processing
of the data when creating the set of possible blocks. The method has been applied to
a real case of North American double-track Railway with a two-block separation rule.
The results prove the efficiency of this fast method and highlight the importance of
carefully chose the value of the discrete-time unit since small changes in its size can
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Train Shunting and Platforming
17
have significant effects on the model’s representation of the actual operations.
2.3
Train Shunting and Platforming
In (Freling et al. 2005), the train unit shunting problem is defined. Given a railway
station, a shunting yard, a timetable with arrival/departure times at/from the station
with platforms and estimates of route costs the problem consists of matching the
arriving and departing shunt units and parking the units on a shunt track. In this
case, trains have fixed arrival and departure times at the station but flexible times
from the shunt track. The shunt tracks are of two types: Last In First Out (LIFO)
tracks can be approached from one side only, and free tracks can be approached from
both sides. Also, shunt units may have different sub-types and thus different lengths.
The solution approach is divided into two steps. In the first step, the supply (arriving
units) needs to be matched with demand (departing units) resulting in a set of blocks
(train units coupled together in the entire planning period). In the second step is
block is assigned to a shunt track ensuring that the capacity is not exceeded and
crossing does not occur.
The matching problem is formulated as a mathematical model. For each arriving
and departing train, a network is defined where the nodes are places where the train
can be divided into parts (subsets of adjacent train units), and each arc corresponds
to one part.
The objective function wants to minimize the weighted sum of the
number of parts and the costs of the assignment; thus, train units are kept together
as much as possible. The outcome is a set of arriving parts assigned to departing parts,
defined before as blocks. A set partitioning model is defined for the assignments of
blocks to shunt tracks where feasible assignments and their costs are obtained from
pre-processing the data. The goal of the model is to minimize the total cost of the
shunt plan. Moreover, a column generation approach is proposed where the pricing
problem is represented by a network where each block is represented by a layer of
nodes corresponding to different approach types to and from the shunt track and arcs
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Literature Review
are feasible assignments weighted with the cost of assigning a specific block to the
shunt track arriving and departing from the specified side. The authors propose a
dynamic programming algorithm with the objective of finding promising columns.
Finally, the method is applied to the railway station of Zwolle in the Netherlands
with a 24 hours planning period with different scenarios. Optimality has been reached
only in one case out of 12 with 40 minutes as a time limit in CPLEX, where the other
scenarios had low gaps and most of the computational time is used by step 2.
(Caprara, Galli, and Toth 2007) presents a general formulation of the train plat-
forming problem. The connection between directions and platforms are called arrival
and departure paths where two-way paths are allowed. A set of platforms in a station
and a set of trains to be routed to a platform with a time horizon are given. For each
train, a collection of patterns is given where a pattern corresponds to a feasible route
represented by an arrival path with arrival time, a platform and a departure path
with departure time. Two patterns are incompatible if either their platform occupa-
tion interval overlaps for a time interval greater than 0 or if they occupy incompatible
paths for a time interval larger than a pre-defined threshold called dynamic threshold.
A pattern-incompatibility graph is defined in order to model hard incompatibilities
while soft incompatibilities i.e., use of the same arrival/departure paths close in time
are admitted but penalized in the objective function.
A time window for each train is also defined given an ideal arrival/departure time
along with a maximum arrival/departure shifts. An ILP is then proposed with a
quadratic objective function that minimizes the total cost associated with pattern
assignment to trains, the cost of using each platform assigned and the penalties for
soft incompatibilities (the non-linear term). The quadratic term is linearized, and
the LP relaxation is solved with a Branch-and-Cut-and-Price method applied to 4
instances representing 4 stations of the Italian Railway using a different value for the
dynamic threshold.
For all the different stations, the method was able to improve the solution signifi-
cantly over the current heuristic method used by the operator. A notable difference
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Train Shunting and Platforming
19
with computational time due to the number of platforms is registered for the instance
”Milano Centrale,” where eight hours were needed to solve while the other three in-
stances needed less than one minute.
(Sørensen and Jensen 2016) deals with the timetabling problem of Copenhagen
Central Station and defines it as ”Combined Shunting and Platforming Problem.” This
work is highly related to this project; therefore it is further analyzed and discussed
in chapter 6.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Data classification
This chapter introduces the data used throughout the project. As indicated in the
process flow in section 4.1, input data from different sources are needed. Banedanmark
has provided us with the infrastructure map that has been used to generate the graph
that abstracts the railway network. DSB has provided the original timetable and a
list of predefined matchings. Moreover, DSB has arranged a list of operational rules
that they would like to include in the project.
3.1
DSB
DSB has provided a timetable with all the trains and stations of the Danish railway
network. It refers to the operating timetable of 22-10-2015, which is the same dataset
used in Sørensen and Jensen 2016.
It has been decided to use an old dataset to
facilitate the comparison between the two methods, which can be found in chapter 6.
Moreover, DSB has provided a list of matchings of trains at KH corresponding to the
same date.
3.1.1
Timetable
Table 3.1 shows an example of the timetable introduced before.
Togkategori and
Tognummer refer respectively to the train category, relevant for the platforming (see
section 4.3.4), and the train number. Frastation and Tilstation are the departing and
arriving stations. In this project, a subset of the original timetable is used where only
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Data classification
train movements having KH as departing or arriving station are considered. The
other stations correspond to physical stations or infrastructure points, and they are
the following:
• VAL refers to Valby station.
• GB refers to the infrastructure point København G, direction towards Ny Elle-
bjerg.
• BAN refers to the infrastrucutre point Bavnehøj, direction towards Copen-
hagen Airport.
• KN refers to Nørreport station.
Fratid and Tiltid are respectively departure and arrival times, while TogKøretid
is the driving time and Togophold is the dwelling time if the train is stopping.
Table 3.1: Example of input timetable data.
Togkategori
Tognummer
Frastation
Tilstation
Fratid
Tiltid
TogKøretid
Togophold
L
49
KH
VAL
12.55.00
12.58.30
03.05
00.00
L
53
BAN
KH
13.41.30
13.45.00
03.05
10.00
3.1.2
Matchings
Table 3.2 shows an example of matchings.
The arriving train is on the left part
of the table, while the departing train is on the right part. Ank and Afg indicates
respectively the arrival day and the departing day e.g. if Ank is equal to 1 and Afg is
equal to 2, the train unit is staying overnight. Ank.Hændelser and Afg.Hændelser are
the maintenance operations for the train unit at arrival and departure. Tid stands
for arrival or departure time, while Tognr indicates the train number of the arriving
and the departing train unit.
Table 3.2: Example of input matchings data.
Ank
Tid
Tognr
Materiel
Ank.Hændelser
Afg.Hændelser
Tognr
Materiel
Afg
Tid
Ophold
1
08.05
10
ICA91
F
TR TUC
45
ICA81
1
10.55
02.50
1
05.03
67018
ME2
VÆRK
67018
ME2
2
05.00
23.57
==PAGE:33==
3.1 DSB
23
3.1.3
Operational rules
The set of operational rules provided by DSB has been defined based on the previous
work on the shunting problem at KH, (see (Sørensen and Jensen 2016)) and future
work ideas. The operational rules that have been implemented are further discussed
in chapter 4, while the full set is presented below.
• Platform preference. A train has a preference regarding the platform track,
depending on the train service type, arrival task or destination station (if it is
a trough train).
• Depot preference. An arriving train has a preference regarding depot, de-
pending on train type, train service, arrival task, or stay time.
• Predefined movements based on arrival tasks. To given arrival tasks, the
endpoint of the shunting movement is given.
• Internal shunting. A train can be shunted internally within the entire depot
area. The internal shunting should always be feasible concerning the timetable
(as shunting movements between depot areas might cross the main tracks). This
internal shunting happens when moving from a workshop or servicing area to a
parking area.
• Capacity of the depot areas. There is an upper limit to how many units
each depot can contain. As the parking itself is not considered in the project,
a reasonable way to consider the capacity is a unit-based threshold.
• Electrified tracks The electrification of the tracks should be considered (if
relevant).
• Driving times within the model Designing a more sophisticated driving
time function since the current is uniform.
• Additional depot In the current model, the depot KG_GB is not included.
It should be included in future work.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Data classification
• Different objectives for the objection function At the moment, the ob-
jective is to maximize the number of movements. Other interesting objectives
could be:
– The robustness of the shunting movements.
– Minimizing the internal shunting
• Incompatibility Matrix. A more fine-masked partition of timescale (going
from 1 minute to ½ minute). From experiments, this leads to violations of the
mathematical model.
• Use of signals in the infrastructure model Taking the signals into consid-
eration.
• Route generation. Use the graph for route generation instead of predefined
routes.
3.2
Banedanmark and the Railway Network
Infrastructure data used in this project has been given from Banedanmark.
The
infrastructure map has been consulted along with the track diagrams found in the
TIB-S document Banedanmark 2019b. The latter indicates the allowed speeds for
different tracks in the network. Further details are discussed in section 4.3.
The map of tracks in KBH is shown in full size in figures A.1 and A.2 in the
appendix. It represents the tracks topology in detail, and it has been essential in the
course of the project. The extension of the map defined the domain of the scheduling
process, and it is limited to 1200 meters away from KH towards Nørreport Station
and between 1150 and 2300 meters away from KH towards Dybbølsbro, depending
on the direction. It has a high level of details and contains other relevant information
needed in different parts of the working process:
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Banedanmark and the Railway Network
25
• Signals. Main signals have been used as entry/exit points of a train in the
network, and often for block separation. A further discussion is presented in
section 4.2.
• Distances. Distances in meters of small pieces of tracks have been used to
compute the running times of the trains. It is further discussed in section 4.3
• Junction Speeds. As mentioned before, maximum allowed speeds are given
in the TIB-s document Banedanmark 2019b, though some junctions have lower
maximum speeds indicated in the map.
Section 4.2 describes how the topological map has been utilized to construct the
network graph that is used to schedule the train movements.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This chapter describes in detail the technical part of the project. Section 4.1 presents
an overview of the process flow, from the raw data to the final results. Subsequently,
section 4.2 describes how the track network has been divided into blocks to form a
graph. Section 4.3 describes how the raw data have been handled with data structures
by the Java program. Finally, section 4.4 introduces the database system that has
been used to handle processed data needed to generate the input for the ILP model,
described in section 4.5.
4.1
Process Flow
Figure 4.1 is a data flow diagram that summarizes the process needed to manipulate
the data introduced in chapter 3, and to compute the results. A rectangle represents
a function, intended as a program or a source, while circles indicates input/output
data.
The first process has been to divide the tracks found in the Infrastrucure Map (section
3.2) into blocks, to form a network graph where blocks are connected. The Original
Timetable and Matchings introduced in section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 along with the Blocks
data are passed as input to the Java Data Manager program that reads the data
from .csv files. The latter is an original object-oriented program that manipulates
the data with data structures and performs different actions such as routing, time
discretization of the network, matching of trains, platforming, shunting movements
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methodology
generation, and depot assignment. Section 4.3 describes this process in detail. The
program produces two database tables that are imported by the Database program.
The latter can generate OPL Data that can be read by the ILP model defined with the
optimization software IBM CPLEX. The ILP model is used to compute an optimized
Timetable Solution and it is formally described in section 4.5. The solution is passed
to the Java Solution Analyzer, a part of the Java program introduced above that
finds potential conflicts, e.g., platform occupancy of two trains at the same time or
too low time separation between train movements. If the solution has no conflicts, a
final Revised Timetable is found. On the other case, the trains are assigned a new
platform, and the process starts again.
Figure 4.1: Data flow diagram.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 The Network Graph
29
4.2
The Network Graph
A graph that digitally represents the railway network has been constructed by man-
ually dividing the tracks into blocks. It was done following a rule of thumb where
signals and switches are used as bounds of the blocks. Both are identified by a code
that refers to a physical infrastructure point. Specifically, a block can be defined as:
• Signal to switch. It is the case of the network endpoints where trains enter
or exit the network.
Figure 4.2: Block definition between a signal and a switch, highlighted in red.
• Switch to signal. It mostly applies to blocks preceding platforms. Figure 4.3
shows the block preceding platform 5.
Figure 4.3: Block definition between a switch and a signal before platform 5. The
block is highlighted in red.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methodology
• Switch to switch. It is the most common case, as the station area requires
multiple switches between tracks.
Figure 4.4: Block definition between two switches, highlighted in red.
• Signal to signal. It applies to longer tracks where switches are fewer, they are
divided into multiple blocks according to signals. An example is shown in figure
4.5. In some cases platforms blocks are represented by two signals as endpoints.
Figure 4.5: Block definition between two signals, highlighted in red.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 The Network Graph
31
As mentioned before, platforms are modeled as a single block between two signals.
The average length of a platform block is 153 meters, where the shortest block is 110
meters and the longest is 227 meters. It has to be noted that these measures do not
correspond to the actual platform length. According to (Trafiksyrelsen 2013), the
platforms used in the project have a lenght varying between 300 and 340 meters.
Blocks have been formed and numbered from the left part of the map (Nørreport)
to the right (Dybbølsbro), with the rule of thumb where blocks with a lower number
always precede blocks with a higher number. In this way, a train traveling from west
to east will have routes composed by blocks labeled with ascending numbers while
the routes of trains traveling in the opposite direction will have descending numbers.
Once the blocks are defined, the network graph is built as a graph where a set
of nodes represents the blocks, and the arcs define the connections between adjacent
blocks. The topology of the network allows from 0 to 2 arcs for each node, as three-
way switches in this network do not exist. Figure 4.6 illustrates a visual representation
of a subset of the graph. It is essential to understand that the arcs in the figure above
do not represent the travel direction but only describe the topology of the network,
i.e., the direction is only an attribute of the node shown by the color in the figure.
Every node has an attribute defined as direction that specifies the travel di-
rections allowed on the corresponding block. It is because not all the tracks in the
network are bi-directional. Specifically, when direction is 0, the track is bi-directional
if it equals to 1 trains are allowed to travel only from left to right, while it is the other
way around when it equals to -1. The travel directions have been assigned to each
block based on the specification from DSB and refer to (Sørensen and Jensen 2016).
Every node/block has an attribute speed that indicates the allowed speed on that
piece of track. The speeds have been assigned according to the information found
on the map (A.1 and A.2) combined with the specifications of the TIB-S document
(Banedanmark 2019b).
Moreover, the distance of each block is computed summing up the distances indicated
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Methodology
Figure 4.6: Subset of the network graph. The different colors and lines indicate the
node type and its travel direction.
in the map.
Sink and source nodes in the graphs, i.e., nodes that respectively have no ingoing
and outgoing arcs, represent the destinations of the trains. They refer to four end-
points that corresponds to the stations defined in section 3.1.1, and to the access
tracks of the depots. Every endpoint can be assigned as the origin or destination of a
train, respectively through a subset of source and sink nodes. Figure 4.6 shows nodes
1 and 2 that correspond to the source and sink nodes of the endpoint KN (Nørreport).
The depots are modeled as ”black boxes” since train movements inside the depots
are out of the scope of the project. The trains can originate or terminate from/to a
depot through the blocks corresponding to the access tracks of the depot. Further
==PAGE:43==
4.2 The Network Graph
33
details on the origin and destination of a train, travel directions and endpoints can
be found in section 4.3.1 and 4.3.5.
A total of 200 blocks have been defined to represent the entire network map.
The blocks have been written down in an excel table where each one specifies its
attributes, i.e., the direction, speed, and distance, and its preceding and heading
nodes. The excel table corresponds to the Blocks data mentioned in section 4.1 and
it is passed as input to the Java Data Manager program. Table 4.1 shows the first
seven nodes of the network, illustrate above in figure 4.6.
Table 4.1: First seven nodes of the network.
ID
Tail1
Tail2
From
To
Head1
Head2
Distance (m)
Speed (km/h)
Direction
1
-1
I2009
SP447a
4
336
60
1
2
-1
I1009
SP447b
3
5
228,5
60
-1
3
2
SP447b
SP447a
4
108
40
-1
4
1
3
SP447a
SP445
6
7
48
60
0
5
2
SP447b
SP446
8
9
51.5
50
-1
6
4
SP445
SIN
10
308
60
0
7
4
S445
SP444b
11
12
210
50
0
The ID -1 refers to a dummy node representing the network out of the boundaries.
The dummy node precedes node 1 in the table above since it is an endpoint of the
network. The fields From and To indicates the labels of the block bounds named
according to a rule of thumb that uses the signals and switches identification numbers.
However, some artificial infrastructure points have been created for some crossings
where IDs were missing. Specifically, the block bounds are labeled by a following this
rule:
• Signal labels correspond to the actual ID found in the map, or they are com-
posed by the signal type followed by the ID.
• Switch labels are composed by the prefix ”SP” followed by the ID of the switch
in the map.
• Artificial points are identified by the prefix ”A” followed by the ID of the
preceding switch.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Methodology
4.3
Data Modeling with Java
As introduced before, a Java program has been written to manipulate the input data
and perform different actions. This section will describe step-by-step how these ac-
tions have been implemented, after giving a general overview of how the objects relate
to each other. Figure 4.7 shows a simplified version of the class diagram representing
the program.
Figure 4.7: Simplified UML Class Diagram of the Java Data Manager program..
It has to be said that the figure does show the methods of the classes and less
important fields for the sake of simplicity. It is proposed mainly to show the multi-
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
35
plicities between the objects and how they are connected.
The classes that have been generated from the input data are shown in orange. The
yellow classes read the data and generate the classes Train,Matching and TrainUnit,
modelling Original Timetable and Matchings introduced in section 4.1. The other or-
ange classes are hard-coded in the software. The green classes model the elaborated
data that will produce the output. The red classes implement the main methods that
manipulate the data. The purple class Route is created in order to model the route
composed of a list of blocks.
After reading the data, an instance of Network class is created containing the
lists of trains, blocks, and depots. The list of connected blocks informatically rep-
resents the network graph described in section 4.2. Each train is assigned an origin
block startBlock and a destination block endBlock corresponding to its origin and
destination endpoints.
4.3.1
Route Generation
Having a list of trains with the origin and destination blocks assigned, and a network
graph, it is possible to generate all the feasible routes automatically. It is done by
two recursive algorithms implemented as Java methods in the Network class. They
are combined in another function that returns the set of all the feasible routes of the
given train.
1 public boolean
f e a s i b i l i t y
( Block b ,
Block x , int
direction ) {
i f
(b == null
| |
b . getId () == −1 | |
b . getId () > x . getId ()
| |
( direction
== 1 && b . getDirection () == −1)
| |
( direction == −1 && b . getDirection ()
== 1) )
3
return
f a l s e ;
5
else
i f
(b . getId () == x . getId () )
return
true ;
7
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Methodology
else
i f
(b . getNext () . get (1) != null )
9
return
f e a s i b i l i t y (b . getNext () . get (0) ,x , direction )
| |
f e a s i b i l i t y (b .
getNext () . get (1) ,x , direction ) ;
11
else
return
f e a s i b i l i t y (b . getNext () . get (0) ,x , direction ) ;
13 }
Listing 4.1: algorithm that finds the path feasibility between two blocks given the
travel direction.
1 public void DFS ( Block b ,
Block x ,
int
direction ) {
b . setVisited ( true ) ;
3
i f
(b . getId () == x . getId () ) {
b . setVisited ( f a l s e ) ;
5
return ;
}
7
// stop condition
i f
(b . getId () > x . getId ()
| |
( direction == 1 && b . getDirection () == −1)
| |
( direction == −1 && b . getDirection () == 1) ) return ;
9
for
( int
i =0;i<b . getNext () . size () ; i++) {
11
Block next=b . getNext () . get ( i ) ;
i f
( next != null && ! next . isVisited () ) {
13
this . visitedBlocks . add( next ) ;
i f
( this . crossing (b) )
15
b . setVisited ( f a l s e ) ;
DFS( next , x , direction ) ;
17
}
}
19 }
Listing 4.2: depth first search algorithm that visit all the nodes that are connected
to a target block x, starting from a specific block .
Listing 4.1 shows the algorithm that determines if there is at least one feasible
route between two blocks. The travel direction is passed as input since there could
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
37
be feasibility between two blocks in one way but not on the other. Listing 4.2 is a
depth first search algorithm on a graph where all the nodes are visited recursively as
far long possible before backtracking, until the given node is found. It is possible to
visit all the nodes that have a feasible path to the node to find, only by determining
the nodes that appear in more than one path. These nodes are labeled as crossing
and they are found by the function crossing. The algorithm stops when it finds a
node with a higher id number than the target node, if all the heading nodes have
been visited or if the current block does not allow the travel direction that is passed
as input.
The function generateRoute calls the DFS function if there are feasible paths between
the origin and destination of the train, checked with the feasibility method.
The
routes are then constructed using the list of visited nodes. The implementation of
generateRoute and crossing are reported in Appendix B, for the sake of brevity.
Figure 4.8 shows an example of route generation. Visited nodes are coloured in
green, while the target node is in blue. Firstly, the algorithm visits nodes 1, 2 and 4.
Node 4 is a crossing, and it is colored in yellow. Node 5 is found and the route [1, 2,
4, 5] is created. The algorithm backtracks as node 6 is higher than 5. The procedure
goes back to the root node 1 to start again. Node 3 is visited and node 4 is colored
in green as no other nodes that precedes it are left to be visited. Node 5 is found
again and the route [1, 3, 4, 5] is created.
4.3.2
Train Connection
A train in this context is modeled by the class Train and it is defined to be a movement
of assembled rolling stocks from the endpoints of the network to KH and vice-versa.
Thus, a train stopping or passing by at KH will be split into two trains if it is contin-
uing its journey. For example, a train going from KN to BAN it is represented by
two trains in the model as KN to KH and KH to BAN.
Every train that has KH as the destination it is assigned a successor train. Under
certain conditions, if KH is the final destination of the corresponding real train, a
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Methodology
Figure 4.8: Example of route generation.
shunting train is created and assigned as successor. Section 4.3.5 explains how gener-
ation of shunting trains is performed.
Specifically, a real train can be connected to another if they are part of the same
matching. In this case, a real train is shunted to the depot if the difference between
the arrival time of the first and the departure time of the second at/from KH in
the original timetable is greater or equal than 40 minutes. This time is defined as
connection time. This value is set since DSB assessed it as the minimum time required
to shunt a train to a depot and back to KH. In general, according to DSB, a train
should not occupy a platform for more than 10 minutes. Therefore train connections
ranging between 10 and 40 minutes should not be allowed.
Practically, a fixed dwelling time is defined for each train that has a successor. This
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
39
value corresponds to the layover time of the original timetable. When the original
layover is larger than the ten minutes threshold, a dwelling time of 10 minutes is
assigned to the train. For all the shunting trains, a fixed dwelling time of 7 minutes
is assigned as it is the minimum time needed to reverse a train, according to DSB.
Two particular cases of train connection are excluded in this project. In the first
case a train arrives at KH where some train units continue their journey, and other
train units are shunted to the depot. The second case is similar, but the whole train
is shunted to the depot where it will be decoupled and ran again as two services. In
both cases, the model would require two successors for the first train, and the current
formulation does not allow it.
4.3.3
Time Discretization
Train movements in real life are continuous in the time domain; therefore, they are
represented by real numeric values. In this project, the running times of the trains
are discretized and expressed by an integer value. First of all, the real-valued running
times of each train have to be computed. A simple function calculates the running
time for each block as:
RT(s) = distance · 0.001
speed · 3600
(4.1)
Where RT is the running time for the given block, distance is the length of the
block in meters and speed is its assigned speed in km/h. The acceleration and deceler-
ation of a train are taken into account for blocks corresponding to the endpoints and
platforms. Here the assumption is that trains accelerate or decelerate for the whole
length of the block. Equation 4.2 expresses the running time calculation for these
blocks:
RT(s) =
√
2 · distance
a
(4.2)
Where a is the fixed acceleration in m/s2 set to a conservative value of 0.5 m/s2
valid for each block and train.
The real-valued block running times are then dis-
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Methodology
cretized using a cumulative rounding technique inspired by (Schlechte et al. 2011).
The implementation is shown in listing 4.3. A discrete time defines the length of
a time unit in the discrete domain. In this project, it is mainly used a value of 10
seconds, but other values have been used to compute the results. Further details can
be found in chapter 5. The intuition is that the real-valued running time is divided
by a discrete-time unit and then rounded up or down. A discrete running time is
set to each block of the route, and it is calculated following these conditions for each
iteration:
• If the rounding error given by rounding down is lower than the cumulative error,
the running time is rounded down.
• If the rounding error given by rounding down is greater than the cumulative
error, or if rounding down gives a running time equal to 0, the running time is
rounded up.
1 private double discretizeTrainMovements ( Train train , Route route ) {
double cumErr=0;
3
for
(Route r :
train . getRoutes () ) {
i f ( r . equals ( route ) ) {
5
for
( int
i =0;i<route . getBlocks () . size () ; i++) {
Block b = route . getBlocks () . get ( i ) ;
7
int runTimeD;
int k= ( int ) Math. c e i l (b . getRunTime() / discrTime ) ;
9
i f
(k > 1 && (b . getRunTime() −(k −1) ∗discrTime <= cumErr
) ) {
runTimeD = (k −1) ∗discrTime ; // round down
11
cumErr = cumErr −(b . getRunTime() −(k−1) ∗discrTime ) ;
// decrease
error
}
13
else {
i f
(k==0) k=1; // no rt=0 allowed
15
runTimeD=k∗discrTime ; // round up
cumErr = cumErr + (k ∗discrTime −b . getRunTime() ) ; //
increase
error
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
41
17
}
b . setDiscreteRT (runTimeD) ;
19
b . setMoveTime(runTimeD/discrTime ) ;
}
21
}
}
23
return cumErr ;
}
Listing 4.3: implementation of the cumulative rounding techinique for time
discretization.
4.3.3.1
Train Moves
The class Move implements train movements. An instance of this class represents a
train movement between two blocks, and it is characterized by a discrete time and a
travel direction. Time corresponds to the discrete running time, computed with the
algorithm in 4.3, of traveling from the first block to the second calculated using the
primary route of the train. The primary route is the shortest path between the two
blocks and defines the minimum running time of the train. Direction is the travel
direction (left or right) of the train.
Every train is assigned a list of moves that define part of the input of the ILP model
(section 4.5).
4.3.3.2
Train Timings
Discrete departure and arrival times have to be assigned for each train. Each timining
has a minimum, optimal, and maximum time. Optimal departure and arrival times
from/to KH are calculated as:
ta
opt = td
opt + minRunTime + dwellingTime
(4.3)
td
opt = ta
opt −minRunTime −dwellingTime
(4.4)
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Methodology
Equations 4.3 and 4.4 show the relations between the optimal and arrival times.
minRunTime is the minimum running time mentioned in 4.3.3.1. ta
opt and td
opt are
respectively equal to the discretized arrival and departure times at/from KH of the
original timetable. In practice, when the origin of a train is KH, td
opt is the original
departure time, while ta
opt is calculated with 4.3. On the other hand, when a train is
going to KH, 4.4 is used to compute td
opt where ta
opt corresponds to the original arrival
time at KH.
When a train is the successor of another train, the following equation defines the
relation between the departure time of the first and the arrival time of the second:
td
opt = ta
pred
(4.5)
Where ta
pred is the optimal arrival time of the train that has the current train as
successor.
The equations above force the model to have connected trains where the layover
between them is always 0. This is done because the optimal arrival time ta
opt of a
train at KH is not representing the actual arrival time of the real train at the platform.
The latter can be computed as the difference between ta
opt and the dwelling time.
Minimum and maximum departure/arrival times are dependent of the optimal
values and define the range of arrival/departure of a train. A fixed slack of 5 minutes
is set in the program, giving a range of 10 minutes. In this context, slack stands for
the maximum time deviation from the original schedule.
For example, if a train in the original timetable arrives at KH at 7:30 and the
discrete-time unit is 10 seconds, the optimal arrival time of the train would be:
ta
opt = 7 · 3600 + 30 · 60
10
= 2700
Thus, the train in the example would have an optimal arrival time at KH at 2700
model time.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
43
4.3.4
Platforming
A platform has to be assigned to each train in the network. The platform assignment
is performed by using a rule of thumb where platform preference is based on train
category, destination, and depot compatibility are considered.
Table 4.2: platform preference per category.
Train Category
Platform Preference
ØK
1 - 6
ØP
1 - 6
ØM
1 - 6
ØF
1 - 6
ØD
1 - 6
IB
1 - 6, 26
IE
1 - 6, 26
IC
1 - 6, 26
RØ
no preference
M
no preference
L
3 - 6
RR
no preference
SM
no preference
SP
no preference
Table 4.2 enumerates the platform preference for each train category. It has to be
noted that the dead-end platform 26 is not included in the current formulation. The
table above does not represent a strict rule in the current platform assignment. More
importance has been given to the origin and destination of the train. The current
platforms that are currently used in the schedule found using the Rejseplanen app
(Rejseplanen 2019), have been used to give a rough estimate of how the platforms
should be assigned according to trains origin and destination. Finally, the platforms
have been assigned by an automated process in the following way.
If the origin is KH, platforms are firstly assigned based on the destination:
• VAL, platforms 7 and 8.
• BAN, platforms 5 and 6.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Methodology
• GB, platforms 7 and 8.
• KN, platforms 1, 2 and 3.
Secondly, trains having KH as destination are assigned a platform based on their
origin:
• VAL, platform 3. Platforms 5 or 6 are used if the train has a successor going
to BAN, and platform 2 if it goes to KN.
• BAN, platforms 1 and 2. If the train has a successor going to VAL, platforms
7 and 8 are used, and platforms 1 and 2 if it goes to KN.
• GB, platforms 2 and 3. All the trains coming from GB have either no successor
or a successor going to KN; therefore, platforms 2 and 3 are fixed.
• KN, platforms 6 and 7. If the train has a successor going to BAN, platforms 5
and 6 are used, while 7 and 8 are assigned if going to VAL or GB.
Every train having category L is assigned to platform 4 without regarding its
category or destination. This is done in order to avoid conflicts as this category is
the most restrictive with platform preference.
For real trains continuity, once a platform is assigned to a train, the same platform
is allocated to its successor.
Since every direction has more that one platform preference, the assignment is done
by alternating the platform assigned. For example, GB has platforms 7 and 8 and four
trains are scheduled having GB as destination. Listing those trains with ascending
time order, they will be assigned platforms 7, 8, 7, 8 respectively.
The platforms assigned using the rule above have to be re-assigned in the case
of depot incompatibility, i.e., each depot is not reachable from every platform. It is
the case of shunting trains that go or come from the depots, e.g., a train is assigned
a depot that is not accessible from its platform; hence a new platform needs to be
allocated. Table 4.3 lists the depot incompatibilities for each platform found with the
feasibility algorithm listed in 4.1.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
45
Table 4.3: depot incompatibilities for each platform.
Platform
Depots
1
KHD
2
KHD
3
KHD
4
KHD
5
None
6
None
7
None
8
KGC
The depot names shown in the table above are introduced in section 4.3.5.2.
4.3.5
Shunting and Depots
As introduced in section 4.3.2, shunting trains are generated when KH is the final
destination of a real train. A shunting train is an instance of TrainShunt, a subclass
of Train, and models the shunting movements of a train traveling between KH and
its assigned depot.
4.3.5.1
Generation of shunting trains
Two shunting trains are generated for each train that has to be shunted, according to
the 40 minutes rule defined in 4.3.2. One shunting train goes to the depot, and it is
the successor of the first train. The second shunting train is the successor of the first
shunting train and goes from the depot to KH. The connected train is the successor
of the second shunting train. The shunting train going to the depot keeps the same
train number of the train that is shunted from while the second shunting train has
the train number of its connected train. Figure 4.9 shows a visual example of the
generation of shunting trains in the model.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Methodology
Figure 4.9: Visual representation of shunting trains generation. A dashed line rep-
resents a train standing still (waiting). Solid lines are train movements..
Train 1000 is connected to train 2000, and there is a connection time of 40 minutes.
TS 1000 departs for the depot after 7 minutes train 1000 is arrived at KH. TS 2000 is
the successor of TS 1000 and departs from the depot after 20 minutes. Finally, train
2000 departs from KH 7 minutes after TS 2000 is arrived at KH. In the example,
it is assumed that the travel time of the shunting trains between the depot and KH
is 3 minutes for both ways. This travel time is not fixed as it depends on the route
assigned to the shunting train. Moreover, the example suggests that the physical
units stay at the depot for 20 minutes. This time is dependent on the connection
time and includes parking, completion of arrival tasks if there is any, and turning on
and off the engine for longer stays.
4.3.5.2
Depot assignment
A depot is assigned to each train that needs to be shunted. The depots used in the
network are the following:
• KGC. It stands for the Klargøringscenter where operations such as fueling are
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
47
performed.
• KHD. It models the closest depot to KH. In some DSB documents, it is indi-
cated as part of KGC but is modeled as separate in this project.
• BLV. It stands for Belvedere depot, located in the Dybbølsbro area.
• KT. It represents København G depot. It is the furthest depot, and its access
tracks are out of range in the map used in the project. Therefore, the tracks
corresponding to the endpoint GB are used as access tracks instead.
The depot assignment is performed by considering the depot preferences provided
by DSB. The latter are dependent on train type and arrival task. Table 4.5 shows
the depot preference for groups of rolling stock types. It has to be noted that ICA
trains need to be shunted to KGC when the arrival tasks F and VÆRK are required.
They respectively stands for fueling and maintenance.
Table 4.4: depot preference for different rolling stock types and arrival tasks. The
parenthesis indicate an arrival task.
Rolling Stock Types
Depot
ABS, B, Bk, ME, EA
BLV
ETS
KT
MG, ERF
Anywhere
ICA
Anywhere
ICA (F and VÆRK)
KGC
Every depot has a maximum capacity that has to be taken into account in reality.
In this project, a rough estimate of depot capacities has been given from DSB. Exact
numbers would require to estimate them using the exact track lengths, and it is out of
the scope of this project. Table 4.5 presents the depot capacities used in the project.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Methodology
Table 4.5: estimates of depot capacities measured in train compositions.
Depot
Capacity
BLV
12 compositions
KT
19 units
KGC
15 units
KHD
12 units
The capacities are measured in train units or compositions. A unit is a physical
rolling stock unit. A composition consists of either a ME or EA unit, 2 or 3 B units,
or a BK unit and an ABS unit. Depot capacity has been included in the modeling
process. An algorithm simulates a 24 hours horizon where the original timetable is
used, and depots are assigned dynamically. Firstly, a train is assigned its preferred
depot. If the train has no preference, it is assigned to the less occupied compatible
depot. If a depot reaches its capacity when a new assignment is made, the train
is assigned to another available and compatible depot. For the sake of brevity, the
Java implementation of the depot assignment simulation is shown in Appendix B
as it is a complex combination of multiple functions (assignDepots, getFeasibleDepot,
findBestDepot, changeDepot from class Network).
When a train is assigned a depot, the depot is automatically assigned to the whole
chain of its successors. Thus, a shunting has a depot as its origin or destination, and
a block corresponding to a access track of the given depot will be set as origin or
destination block.
4.3.6
Solution Analysis
The final step of process flow is the solution analysis. The ILP model, described in
section 4.5, returns a solution that represents the revised timetable. The solution is
a list of scheduled moves that define the assigned train movements in the network.
Accurately, each scheduled move represents a space-time arc that indicates a train
moving from a block to another, from a time I to a time J.
The exit scheduled move of a train ,i.e.
the final move going from a node to the
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Data Modeling with Java
49
dummy node -1, models the fixed dwelling time when the block start corresponds to
a platform :
tj −ti = tdw + tb
(4.6)
The time window defined by tj and ti is the total time where a block b is occupied.
It is defined by the sum of the dwelling time tdw and the running time of the block
tb. It has to be noted that this particular move does not model a real movement of
a train, but its idling at the platform, even though the tb component represents the
train breaking and stopping.
Figure 4.10 shows the simplified class diagram that models the solution analyzer
implemented with Java.
Figure 4.10: Simplified UML Class Diagram of the Java Solution Analyzer..
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Methodology
As shown in the figure above, an instance of ScheduledMove has two Blocks and
one Train. A SolutionAnalyzer has a list of scheduled moves and two train sets, train-
Set and conflictingTrains that respectively model the set of all the scheduled trains
and the trains that are not scheduled due to some conflict.
The SolutionAnalyzer reads the scheduled moves from a .csv files generated by
the ILP model. Two functions can be used to analyze the solution:
• checkPlatformOccupancy() checks if there are no violations at platforms when
a real train is dwelling at KH i.e. a platform is not occupied by two trains at
the same time.
• checkBlockOccupancy(int timeSeparation) verifies when the a certain time sep-
aration between train movements is violated e.g. if timeSeparation = 1, the
function checks when two trains access the same resource within a distance in
time of less than one time unite. Moreover, the method computes the average
time separation between two trains occupying the same block, for the whole
network.
If there are conflicts, i.e., trains not dispatched in the solution, their platforms are
manually re-assigned, the program starts again and new tables for the database are
created. The data flow diagram 4.1 presented before summarizes the process.
4.4
The Database
The output of the Java Data Manager is exported as database tables. The tables
are manually imported into a database system externally developed with the software
FileMaker Pro. The latter is a:
”cross-platform database application program that allows users to orga-
nize data into screens, layouts or forms and manage contacts and projects”
(Techopedia 2019).
==PAGE:61==
4.4 The Database
51
The database used in the project is a complex system developed by Steven Harrod
in order to handle data for the hypergraph model described in 4.5. This section is
limited to describe only some of its functionalities. A full explanation of how the
system work is out of the scope of the project.
Specifically, two tables are generated: Moves and Trains. They respectively rep-
resent the object of the classes Move and Train in the database.
The trains in the database are the output of the data modeling process described in
4.3 and represent a train with its database id, train number, origin and destination
block, timings, layover and other attributes specif to the ILP model such as the utility,
must run and exclude flags. The latter respectively refer to the train utility, a flag
that forces the dispatching of a train and a flag that excludes the train from the input.
Further details are found in section 4.5.2 where the mathematical model is presented.
Figure 4.11 illustrates how trains records are visualized in the program.
Figure 4.11: Trains records visualized in the database system.
The moves are generated as described in 4.3.3.1 and are linked to a single train
record in the databases. Figure 4.12 shows how the moves of one train are displayed
in the program.
A move record refers to the blocks of a network. A network is a set of blocks
used to model the blocks transitions in the ILP model, and it is manually imported
using the graph table described in section 4.2, and visualized in table 4.1. A table
block defines a network block in the database. Further details on block transitions
are discussed in section 4.5.
The database program is needed to generate the OPL data, input of the ILP model.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Methodology
Figure 4.12: Moves of a train visualized in the database system.
OPL is a data format used by the optimization software IBM CPLEX. A record
of a table Problem is created and connected to a network and a set of trains. A
problem defines the whole input of the ILP model. Different flags can be set for the
problem, and the relevant ones are introduced in the results section 5. Finally, OPL
data are generated as a calculation across values between the connected tables and
exported. OPL data generation is also a complex matter; for the sake of brevity, it
is not formally described in this paper.
4.5
The ILP Model
An integer linear programming model has been used to compute an optimized timetable
with microscopic train movements, given the input described in the previous sections.
The model has been externally implemented in OPL with IBM CPLEX and refers
to the hypergraph formulation proposed by Steven Harrod in (S. Harrod 2011). The
==PAGE:63==
4.5 The ILP Model
53
intuition behind using a hypergraph and its definition is following. The ILP model
is formally described in section 4.5.2.
4.5.1
The Hypergraph
A hypergraph is a graph where an edge can join multiple vertices, i.e., an edge in a
standard graph is a two-element subset of nodes while a hyperedge is an arbitrary set
of nodes.
Recalling the overview given in chapter 2, the hypergraph formulation models explic-
itly a multicommodity flow on a directed hypergraph where each flow represents one
train.
Specifically, given a set of track blocks B and a time horizon in discrete time units
T, a graph G = [V, E] is defined where V is the set of nodes defined by the endpoints
of the blocks B, and E is the set of all the feasible directed arcs. A single flow in the
graph G represents a train. Figure 4.13 shows a sample path on graph G.
Figure 4.13: The graph G with nodes and a sample path representing train move-
ments over time. Picture taken from (S. Harrod 2011).
A hypergraph H = [N, X] is defined where N is the union of two sets:
”nodes corresponding to the train movement arcs of G and any original
nodes V bounded by active train movement arcs. Each of the first set of
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Methodology
nodes represents actual occupancy of a block during a discrete-time unit,
and the latter set of nodes represent the transitions between blocks.” (S.
Harrod 2011)
The transition nodes define the cells. Figure 4.14 illustrates the relation between
occupancy nodes and cells.
Figure 4.14: Graph H where solid point are the block occupancy nodes, and transi-
tion cells are hollow points. The dashed box shows the boundaries of
the transition for cell (2, t+1). Picture taken from (S. Harrod 2011).
On graph H, different hyperarcs and simple arcs can be drawn. Each arc has a
head representing the next block occupancy and time, and a tail containing occupied
block nodes and conflicting transition cell nodes. Figure 4.15 illustrates an example
of hyperarcs and a simple arc.
The intuition behind using the hypergraph formulation stands on the failure of
simple graphs of capturing the interaction of trains transitions over the same block.
According to (S. Harrod 2011):
”Block occupancy constraints are insufficient to ensure operationally fea-
sible train paths because by definition, train paths are continuous and
the discrete track occupancies do not represent the transitional status of
trains between blocks. In simple words, the lack of constraints on the
transition between blocks allows trains to jump past each other, as if by
==PAGE:65==
4.5 The ILP Model
55
Figure 4.15: Hyperarcs a and b, and a simple arc c. Picture taken from (S. Harrod
2011).
magic, at locations or in situations where track capacity is not sufficient
to allow such moves.”
4.5.2
The model formulation
In this section, the Hypergraph model is formulated.
Figure 4.16 illustrates the
mathematical formulation with an objective function and two groups of constraints.
The variables, parameters, and sets of the model are listed in figure 4.17.
The decision variables in the model are:
• occupancy arcs xr
i,j,a,v, that represent the possession of node i at time u and
the exit into node j at time v of train r.
• artificial arcs yr,r′
t,t′ , that link the arrival of train r at time t, to the departure
of train r’ at time t’.
The objective function (1a) is maximizing the utility of a train consisting of:
”profit” for completion of a train journey, later origination and earlier termination,
penalties for en route waiting and layovers.
Constraint (1b) enforces single departures, (1c) ensures flow conservation, and 1(d)
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Methodology
Figure 4.16: The Hypergraph formulation proposed by Steven Harrod in (S. Harrod
2011).
is the sinking constraint. (1b) and (1d) are omitted if the train is succeeding another
train. (1b) and (1d) become equalities if a train is forced into the solution by setting
to 1 the provision must run defined in the pre-processing of the input.
(1e) and (1f) set the linkages between connecting trains. (1g) is optional and assures
equal trains count in each direction when trains are not already linked as a round
trip. equal Constraint (2a) enforces a common block occupancy limit that models
the possibility of having parallel segments such as sidings into the same block. In
this project, the block capacity is fixed to 1 for each block as a block models a single
==PAGE:67==
4.5 The ILP Model
57
Figure 4.17: variables, parameters, and sets used in the hypegraph formulation pro-
posed by Steven Harrod in (S. Harrod 2011).
rail track. (2b) limits the transition trough each cell to a time window defined by ϵ
and δ. (2c) and (2d) define the headways between trains in the network. Headway is
intended as the minimum block separation between trains traveling at the same time.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Computation and
Results
In this chapter are reported the results computed with IBM CPLEX, using the ILP
model described in 4.5.2. The computation has been performed on a Windows 10
machine with 8GB of RAM and the Intel processor i5-8250U having the following
specifics: CPU @ 1.60GHz, 4 Cores, 8 Logical Processors.
As described in chapter 4, the input data for the optimization model have been
modeled and elaborated with the Java program, and generated by the database system.
The timetable data available covers a horizon of 24 hours. The original number of
trains is 1570, while 61 shunting trains have been generated by the Java program.
5.1
Basic case
The basic case has a reduced schedule horizon of 4 hours, where departures range
between 8 a.m. and 12 p.m. and the total number of trains is 365.
It has to be said that when the horizon is reduced, the depot assignment is still
performed by taking into account the whole 24 hours horizon. The penalty for en
route waiting is never considered as a train stopping at the platform is modeled with
an exit move, as described in 4.3.6, and stops at other points of the network are not
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Computation and Results
allowed in the current formulation.
Different inputs are set for the basic case:
• headway is equal to 2. Two block separation is the maximum currently sup-
ported by the model.
• discrete-time unit is set to 10 seconds. Different values are tried in other
scenarios.
• δ and ϵ are set to 0 initially, and then increased. They define the transition
time window of a cell.
• utility is set to 100 for each train. It represents the ”profit” of the scheduled
train.
• earlier termination and later origination are set to 0.01, as the goal is to
schedule as much trains as possible, at the expense of time deviation from the
original timetable.
Four instances have been created for the basic case and solved with CPLEX with
a solving time limit of 30 minutes. Table 5.1 shows the 4 scenarios with input values,
objective value and computation time. The latter includes pre-processing time and
solving time.
Table 5.1: computation results for the basic case. Four instances and their iterations
are shown..
Instance
horizon
δ, ϵ
TD (s)
Headway
Platf.
Objective
Trains Scheduled
Opt. gap (%)
Comp. Time (m)
1.1
8-12
0
10
2
0
36164.98
362/365
0
12
1.2
8-12
0
10
2
1
36466.96
365/365
0
8
1.3
8-12
0
10
2
3
36470.14
365/365
0
8
2.1
8-12
2
10
2
1
35765.71
358/365
1.95
35.5
2.2
8-12
2
10
2
2
36166.62
362/365
0.56
36
2.3
8-12
2
10
2
3
36464.6
365/365
0
24
3
8-12
4
10
2
3
30960.04
310/365
17.10
10
4
8-12
6
10
2
3
-
No solution
-
-
Platf. in the table above indicates the platform configuration i.e., each number
corresponds to a modified platforming scenario, where the original one is indicated
with 0. It is exemplified by instances 1 and 2. They have been solved multiple times
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Changing discrete-time unit
61
as the first solutions have encountered conflicting trains, which have been assigned a
new platform. Conflicting trains are intended as trains causing issues to the solver
when it tries to dispatch them, due to their proximity in time and space. Conflicting
trains can even be infeasible if they are not scheduled when the solution is optimal.
The re-assignment of platforms has been done manually, looking at the solution and
trying to find a better platform assignment that could solve the conflicts. Assigning
new platforms to conflicting trains has been proven to improve the solution gradually.
This is exemplified by instance 2, where 7 trains were not dispatched in the first
solution and all the trains are scheduled at the third iteration.
The platforming
scenario 3 has then been used for the succeeding instances as it allowed to schedule
all the trains for every instance.
The computation times vary between 8 and 36 minutes. They significantly increase
when more restrictive transition time is used. It is the case were conflicting trains
have been found and re-assigned a new platform, leading to a shorter computation
time when conflicts were solved.
The results shown in the table above have been solved to optimality in 5 out of
8 cases. Two instances have a small optimality gap, while instance 3 could not be
solved at all with the given time limit. . As expected, the computation time increases
when the transition time is larger. Moreover, comparing the instances 1-3, 2-3, and 4,
that have the same platforming scenario and all the trains scheduled, it can be seen
that the objective value decreases when the transition time is larger.
5.2
Changing discrete-time unit
New instances have been defined in order to test the model using different values for
the time-discrete unit. Specifically, it has been tried a time-discrete unit of 6 seconds
and 30 seconds. The latter has led to building a set of 364 trains instead of 365.
Table 5.2 presents the results of the two different scenarios.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Computation and Results
Table 5.2: results for scenarios with different discrete-time unit.
Instance
horizon
δ, ϵ
TD (s)
Headway
Platf.
Objective
Trains Scheduled
Opt. gap (%)
Comp. Time (m)
5
8-12
0
6
2
3
36451.66
365/365
0
20.5
6
8-12
3
6
2
3
36443.07
365/365
0
43
7
8-12
0
30
2
3
36078.80
361/364
0
28
All the trains have been scheduled in both instances having 6 seconds as a discrete-
time unit. When using 30 the seconds, three trains are infeasible and therefore not
scheduled. It was expected to encounter more trains conflicting when the discrete-
time unit is increased as time is approximated with a more significant error. This can
lead a train to occupy a block for more time than it would do in reality.
The three instances have all been solved to optimality with expected computational
times for instances 5 and 6 where the smaller time unit increases the size of the model.
The solving time of instance 7 is not expected as a larger discrete-time unit should
reduce the size of the model significantly, and thus the computation time. However,
this is probably due to the infeasible trains.
Moreover, the time increases when the transition times are increased, as expected.
Comparing the objective values of the instances 5 and 6, it is clear that including the
transition time in the model leads to a worse solution in terms of deviation from the
original schedule.
Further analysis of the effects of changing the value of the discrete-time unit
has been carried out. The settings of instance 1.3 have been used to generate six
instances having a different discrete-time unit that ranges from 10 to 30 seconds,
with increments of 4 seconds. Table 5.3 shows the results. The column Ideal Obj
Difference enumerates for each case the difference between the ideal objective value
and the actual objective.
The ideal objective values represent the case where all
the trains are dispatched, and there are no deviations from the original schedule. It
is done in order to make all the instances comparable, as the last three present a
different number of trains, due to different time discretization.
Figure 5.1 plots the ideal objective values differences against the time-discrete unit.
The plot indicates that a value of 18 seconds gives a better solution while 30 seconds
gives the worse, in terms of objective values. However, it has been tried to solve the
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Changing discrete-time unit
63
Table 5.3: results for instance 1.3 scenario using different time-discrete units..
TD (s)
Objective
Ideal Obj Diff.
Trains Scheduled
Computation Time (m)
10
36470.14
29.86
365/365
8
14
36478.18
21.82
365/365
6
18
36479.66
20.34
365/365
3.5
22
35980.96
219.04
360/362
5.5
26
36081.6
318.4
361/364
7.5
30
36078.80
321.2
361/364
28
instance 2.3 where the transition time is equal to 2 time units, and the solver has not
been able to find an optimal solution withing the 30 minutes time limit. The best
solution has 336/365 trains scheduled with an optimality gap of 7.74 %.
Discrete-time unit values from 22 to 30 seconds lead to solutions where not all the
trains are dispatched. It is due to the increase of conflicts between trains, given by a
larger approximation error when times are discretized.
Figure 5.1: difference between the objective values and the ideal values plotted
against discrete-time values.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Computation and Results
5.3
Headway relaxation
This section presents the computation of three instances where the headway has been
relaxed for all the trains. Table 5.4 shows the results.
Table 5.4: results for scenarios with different discrete-time unit and the headway
relaxed.
Instance
horizon
δ, ϵ
TD (s)
Headway
Platf.
Objective
Trains Scheduled
Opt. gap (%)
Comp. Time (m)
8
8-12
0
10
0
3
36476.33
365/365
0
3
9
8-12
0
6
0
3
36461.12
365/365
0
7
10
8-12
0
30
0
3
36190.19
362/364
0
0.5
It is clear from the table above that the headway constraint is a bottleneck for the
computation process. The computation times are considerably lower compared to the
previous instances. However, including the headway contributes to the robustness,
therefore, the solutions presented above cannot be considered operationally feasible.
Moreover, it is interesting to note that instance 10 includes one train more in the
solution compared to instance 7, which has the same settings.
5.4
Twenty-four hours horizon
The implementation of the model in IBM CPLEX has a tool that can divide the time
horizon into subsets, solve these separately, and merge the solution. This process
leads to a solution that is not optimal for the whole horizon, as once a subset is
solved, the scheduled movements of the trains of that subset are fixed. Therefore, the
horizon model produces a solution that is not globally optimal but has local optima.
The horizon model has been used to compute a solution where all the 1631 trains are
included. The horizon has been divided into 4 subsets of approximately 6 hours each,
starting from 0:00 to 24:00, using the default discrete-time unit of 10 seconds. This
gives a full horizon of 8640 time units. The model iterates over the full horizon and
solves 4 times every 2200 units. Moreover, for each iteration, the model backtracks
300 time units to recover the trains that stand in between two subsets.
==PAGE:75==
5.5 Solution Analysis
65
An instance with all the 1631 trains, shunting included, has been created. The
input settings of this instance follow the basic case. It has been solved in 3 hours and
45 minutes and 1612 out of 1631 trains have been dispatched.
The solution has not been improved as the purpose of this large instance was
mainly focused on testing the model performance more than provide an ultimate
solution.
5.5
Solution Analysis
All the results presented above have been checked with the Solution Analyzer pre-
sented in section 4.3.6.
5.5.1
Track consistency and platforms
Firstly, before analyzing a solution, defined by a set of scheduled moves, the program
checks the platform assignment and the track matching.
Precisely, the program checks if each train has been assigned the same platform
of its successor, or the same depot access track in the case of shunting trains. Having
different blocks as origins of continuations of trains would lead to an inconsistency in
the input data.
The list of the scheduled moves of each solution is then processed. As mentioned
in 4.3.6, two functions are used to verify possible conflicts at platforms, and block
occupancies with time separation. Moreover, the trains that are not dispatched in
the solution are found and re-assigned manually to another feasible platform. The
computation has resulted in no platform conflicts, for every instance.
Furthermore, an overview of the number of trains assigned to each platform and
their occupancy rate is printed out. Table 5.5 shows the assignments of the plat-
forming scenario 3, using 10 seconds as time-discrete unit. The values are for the
twenty-four-hours horizon.
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Computation and Results
Table 5.5: number of trains assigned for each platform.
Platform
Trains
Real Trains
Occupancy Rate (%)
1
160
94
32.3
2
264
141
67.6
3
288
160
72.8
4
72
43
28.1
5
235
117
46.6
6
262
142
55.6
7
197
112
53.0
8
154
78
50.7
The number of real trains corresponds to the number of actual coupled rolling
stocks using the platform. It has to be noted that platform 4 is scarcely used. A
new platforming rule could be used to assign more trains to this platform and get
a more realistic scenario. The occupancy rates shown in the table above have been
calculated as follows:
Op =
∑(tj −ti)
T
∀p ∈P, move | blocki = platformBlockp
(5.1)
Where Op is the occupancy rate of platform p, ti and tj are the start and end
move times converted into seconds, T is the horizon time in seconds, blocki is the start
block of the move, P is the set of platforms. In other words, it is the sum of move
times of moves corresponding to platform occupancy, divided by the time horizon.
5.5.2
Time separation between block occupancies
The block occupancy separation has been checked for increments of one time units,
starting from 0, and it has been found that a resource is never occupied by two trains
at the same time. However, for values of time separation greater than 0, violations
occur and their number increase along with the time separation. Table 5.6 shows the
statistics for the most relevant instances.
==PAGE:77==
5.5 Solution Analysis
67
Table 5.6: time separation statistics.
Instance
Time separation (s)
Violations
Avg. separation (m)
1.3
20, 40, 60
22, 89, 174
6.55
2.3
20, 40, 60
2, 42, 172
6.52
3
20, 40, 60
1, 2, 13
7.48
5
20, 40, 60
35, 92, 197
10.79
6
18, 36, 60
2, 33, 143
10.91
7
30, 60
32, 81
2.23
The time separation column shows the different time separation values in seconds.
The ”Violations” column shows the correspondent number of violations for each time
separation value. The last column shows the average separation in minutes between
two moves on the same block for the whole network.
Instance 2.3, 3, and 6 have a transition time of respectively 2, 4, and 3 time units.
For the lower time separation values, corresponding to 2 time units, they resulted
in having up to 2 violations and are highlighted in red. The violations were due to
trains arriving at KH and missing a successor and disappearing from the network.
The reason behind this error is described in 5.5.4.
5.5.3
String-line
The database system has a tool that can draw the solution string-line. Due to the
size of the train set, a string-line of the whole schedule would not be readable. Figure
5.2 illustrates the string-line plot of a subset of 17 trains with their continuations,
where departures range from 8:00:00 am to 8:25:20 am. The horizontal axis indicates
the time units, while the vertical axis refers to the distance in meters from the first
end-point at the right part of the map, i.e., Nørreport direction.
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Computation and Results
Figure 5.2: string-line of the first 17 trains with continuations of instance 2.3.
Each real train is shown with a different color. The dots indicate the network
blocks, while a flat line stands for the platform stays between a train’s run and its
continuation. The trains that originate from KH (around 1200 meters in the plot)
are the continuation of physical trains that arrived at the station before 8 am.
Due to the complexity of the network, the string-line above cannot be used to check
possible overlapping between trains traveling towards the same direction, e.g., two
trains can travel at the same time in the same direction since there are multiple tracks
placed at the same distance from the start.
==PAGE:79==
5.5 Solution Analysis
69
5.5.4
Errors
When analyzing the solutions, it has been noticed that some trains going to KH in
the original timetable dataset, were missing both a continuation (same train number)
and a connection from the matchings data. This leads to trains that ”magically”
disappear from the network after they arrive at Central station, since they do not
have a successor, i.e., they are not shunted to depot either continued with the same or
another train number. The number of this group of trains in the basic case instances
is 12.
Moreover, the inter-city train 10, shown in the string-line plot 5.2, is not
shunted to depot since it is splitting into two services, and this case is not treated in
the current formulation, as discussed in 4.3.2.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this chapter are discussed the project findings based on the results described in
chapter 5.
The methodology is then evaluated by analyzing the advantages and
the drawbacks of the method proposed.
Finally, the method and the results are
compared to the previous work on the problem (Sørensen and Jensen 2016), and
some recommendations are given to the Management.
6.1
Project findings
The main objective of the project has been reached, as it has been demonstrated that
it is possible to build a feasible schedule where shunting movements are included, given
the problem formulation and the basic case scenario introduced in 5.1. However, the
initial goal was to generate an optimal solution for the whole 24-hours horizon. An
attempt has been tried, and a non-optimal solution has been generated, where not all
the trains were scheduled. The author believes that an optimal solution for the full
horizon case could be computed by having more memory available when searching
for solutions.
The computation has shown that currently, it is not possible to generate a solution
having more than 20 seconds of transition time between two blocks. Table 5.6 that
the 60 seconds rule used at KBH is violated a significant amount of times, apart for
the non-optimal solution of instance 3. These violations do not make the solution
robust, given the current one-minute rule. On the other side, the physical separation
of two blocks is always guaranteed for every scenario.
However, the real-life one-
==PAGE:82==
72
6 Discussion
minute separation is applied on a different definition of blocks, i.e., the blocks defined
in this context can be as short as 16 meters, while real-life blocks are believed to be
longer on average. Also, it has been calculated that in the basic case, on average, a
track is accessed every 6 minutes and a half approximately. The latter proves that in
this context, part of the network is not highly utilized.
Different values for the discrete-time unit have been tried. Solving a less restrictive
instance in terms of both transition time and computation time has resulted in a
better solution when DT = 18. However, the reference value of 10 seconds is more
suited to this application as it was the only one that could solve to optimality the
more restrictive instance with two units of transition time. Larger values such as 22,
26 and 30 have been proven to be less suitable for the problem, as they were not able
to provide solutions where all the trains are dispatchedİt is an expected result, due
to shorter blocks where smaller time units are more appropriate.
The computation times related to the most operational instances, e.g.
2.3 and 6
are considered to be low enough for a tactical level of planning, but too large for
operational planning such as real-time management and disruption recovery.
Lastly, the results indicates an average platform occupancy rate of around 50 %.
This value is realistic, as a rate of 47% has been registered in 2010, according to
(Trafiksyrelsen 2013). However, some platforms present a significant higher or lower
individual occupation rate compared to the reality, and platform 26 is not used at all
at present.
6.2
Method evaluation and comparison
The methodology proposed in this paper has proved to implement a considerable
amount of operational rules required from DSB (3.1.3), that were not implemented in
the previous work (Sørensen and Jensen 2016). The latter proposed an original MIP
model where the objective function maximizes the number of train movements, simi-
lar to what is proposed in this paper. A significant difference stands in the definition
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Method evaluation and comparison
73
of ”movement.” (Sørensen and Jensen 2016) defines a train movement as the whole
path from an endpoint to KH, or from KH to an endpoint. The model assigns a route
from a manually generated set of routes, subject to a route incompatibility constraint
defined by a matrix. Shunting movements are generated, without regarding the depot
capacity and preference. This formulation leads to a lower level of detail that could
lead to inconsistencies if applied to real life. It is exemplified by the fact that the
model defined in (Sørensen and Jensen 2016) is not able to provide valid solutions for
discrete-time units lower than one minute.
However, computation times in (Sørensen and Jensen 2016) are considerably lower
compared to the ones that resulted in this paper.
As mentioned above, the route generation in (Sørensen and Jensen 2016) was
done manually. The methodology proposed in this project overcomes this limitation
and generate all the feasible routes for each train’s run. The depot preferences are
considered, based on the arrival tasks and train category, along with estimates of de-
pot capacities. The driving times are discretized with small time units, and a rough
estimate of acceleration and deceleration of trains is taken into account. However,
discretizing real-valued times is always a strong abstraction from the reality of train
movements, as real movements belong to the continuous domain. Also, the accelera-
tion and deceleration in real life are subject to different values than the one proposed
in this paper and are affected by the drivers’ behavior in real life. Moreover, the
blocks in the network have been defined by using switches and signals. It is believed
that the block definition in real life is different from the one proposed in this paper,
and works just by using signals.
Moreover, internal shunting between two depots is a common practice in real life, and
it is not treated in this project. Also, the depots are modeled as ”black boxes,” where
train movements and parking withing the depot area are not considered.
A significant limitation of the method proposed here is the platforming. Platform
preferences are considered, but the model is not able to assign the platform dynam-
==PAGE:84==
74
6 Discussion
ically as it is done in (Sørensen and Jensen 2016). A dynamic platform assignment
would provide a more optimized solution. Moreover, the dwelling times in the current
model formulation are fixed. Having a model that could assign the dwelling time of
each train given a time window would be more beneficial.
Another significant limitation of the method is its inappropriateness to periodic
timetabling. Train operators usually try to provide a periodic timetable, where trains
of the same service are scheduled with a fixed time between each other. It is not
currently possible to do this since the model can freely assign a time for each train
within 10 minutes from the original scheduled time, regardless of the trains of the
same service running before or after.
6.3
Recommendations to the Management
The method proposed in this paper could be used for further studies that will lead to
automate the scheduling process at Copenhagen Central Station. It is believed that
having an optimized schedule plan and implementing the new signal system could
allow DSB and Banedanmark to reduce the one-minute separation rule significantly,
as the dispatching process will be less affected by manual human errors.
Moreover, it would be highly beneficial to develop a tool for disruption recovery
and combine it with the one proposed in this paper. Ideally, a timetable could be
generated a week before the day of operation with the method proposed here, and
the new tool could be used for recovery of delays.
Furthermore, it has been shown that the number of tracks does not represent a
bottleneck itself because of the scarce average utilization.
It is believed that the
traffic density at the station is mostly caused by the topology of the tracks and that
adding flyovers that do not cross other tracks could be an appealing solution to reduce
routing conflicts.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The optimization problem at Copenhagen Central Station has been formulated, and
multiple instances have been solved. The methodology approach differed from the
classic timetable optimization methods available in the literature. The Hypergrah
model, ideated by Steven Harrod, was applied to processed timetable and matching
data modeled with a program written in Java by the author. The model has been
tried for the first time on a European railway network, and seemed to adapt well to
a complex network such as the Central station area of Copenhagen.
The initial goal was to provide a twenty-four hours shunt plan that could be feasible
within the revenue trains schedule. Throughout the six months of the project, the
objective has shifted to compute a revised optimized timetable with microscopic move-
ments, of a four-hours peak time where both revenue trains and shunt movements
are included.
The results are satisfactory, as different instances could be solved to optimality in
reasonable computation times, given the complexity of the problem. Various oper-
ational rules related to the shunting process have been implemented. Compromises
were made to adapt the reality to the context of the project, such as running times,
depot capacities, block definition, and fixed dwelling.
The methodology and results have been compared to previous work on the same prob-
lem. It is believed that the project has led to a step closer to reality, though further
works and improvements are needed to implement the solution in real life. Some ideas
on what should be changed, added, or developed are:
• Variable dwelling time: the dwelling time is currently fixed in this formula-
==PAGE:86==
76
7 Conclusion
tion. A variable dwelling time could provide a larger solution space and improve
the results. An experimental functionality that implements ”stops” for trains
is currently in the phase of development. A ”stop” will allow a train to idle at
a platform for a variable amount of time.
• Depot management: the parking problem of rolling stocks inside the depot
yard is of high importance for further work. Also, the calculation of real depot
capacities and the implementation of internal shunting movements are required
for real applications of the method.
• New matchings: DSB has provided the matchings, and they are believed to
be generated manually. A formulation of the ”Matching Problem” could provide
new matchings that would be optimized.
• Platforming: the platforming is done manually. An optimized platform as-
signment could provide benefits to the solution.
• Robustness: in general, the solution robustness to delays is not tested in this
project, and could be an interesting topic for further studies.
DSB finds the thesis to be of great interest for further studies on the problem. An
official statement from DSB is quoted below and can be reviewed in Appendix D.
”Giuseppe Matera has for the last six months, in cooperation with Devel-
opment Optimization, Planning department at DSB, written his master
thesis regarding optimization of shunting movements to different depot
areas around Copenhagen Central Station.
The railway traffic around
Copenhagen Central Station is very dense, and the infrastructure layout
causes the area to be a natural bottleneck for the eastern railway network
in Denmark. As an expansion of the network is unrealistic, the utilization
of the network is of great value for operators and the infrastructure man-
ager. Apart from the train services found in the official timetable, the
==PAGE:87==
7 Conclusion
77
shunting movements of the rolling stock units not in service must be ac-
counted for, as the movements occupy parts of the routes that the revenue
trains pass through. The task of assuring conflict-free and robust shunt-
ing movements between the depots and platforms around Copenhagen
Central Station is an important part of the daily operation. Throughout
the work, Giuseppe has managed to adapt and apply operational rules
of DSB and unite the field of optimization with the reality of train op-
erations, within a scope that could be expected of a master thesis. The
work has required a technical insight into the infrastructure layout and
train operation in general, and Giuseppe has demonstrated his ability to
model a detailed and complex reality. The thesis is of great interest, as
it addresses a problem that has yet to be automated within DSB, and
the potential could not be underestimated as the new Signaling System
requires a new level of details for planned shunting movements.”
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX A
Map
==PAGE:90==
80
A Map
Figure A.1: Left part of the infrastructure map..
==PAGE:91==
A Map
81
Figure A.2: Right part of the infrastructure map..
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX B
Code
The code of the Java program and the CPLEX model can be found in an external
shared folder. The Java program has been written as an Eclipse project, and it is
currently in developing mode. The OPL code is an updated version of Steven Harrod’s
code for the Hypergraph model.
The shared folder can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1y8qUTxKhbqyD5Qg0JtqzVvnRqKTDLWMt?
usp=sharing
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX C
Input and Solutions
The input files and solutions cannot be printed due to their lenghts. A shared folder
containing all the files has been created, and the link is provided below. Specifically,
it contains blocks, timetable, and matchings data, the OPL input data files, and the
solutions with the scheduled moves.
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1YmAVxXdcWpiO4ByR5pZCZm_AADBVIpZX?
usp=sharing
Note that the database inputs do not represent exactly the database tables. The
database tables are manually modified, and are not uploaded as they are part of
the complex database system. Also, the trains’ keys in the solution files refer to the
database tables. Contact the author to access the database.
Contact: giuseppematera1@gmail.com
==PAGE:96==
86
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX D
DSB Statement
==PAGE:98==
88
D DSB Statement
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
Banedanmark (2019a). Nyt fælles europæisk signlasystem til fjernbanen. https://
www.bane.dk/da/Borger/Baneprojekter/Signalprogrammet/Fjernbane.
— (2019b). TIB-S 2019. https://www.bane.dk/da/Jernbanevirksomhed/Sikkerhed/
Trafikale-regler/SR/TIB_S.
Borndörfer, Ralf et al. (2017). “Recent success stories on integrated optimization
of railway systems”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
74, pp. 196–211. issn: 0968-090X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.
2016.11.015. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0968090X16302339.
Caprara, Alberto, Laura Galli, Leo Kroon, et al. (2010). “Robust Train Routing and
Online Re-scheduling”. In: 10th Workshop on Algorithmic Approaches for Trans-
portation Modelling, Optimization, and Systems (ATMOS’10). Ed. by Thomas Er-
lebach and Marco Lübbecke. Vol. 14. OpenAccess Series in Informatics (OASIcs).
Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, pp. 24–
33. isbn: 978-3-939897-20-0. doi: 10.4230/OASIcs.ATMOS.2010.24. url: http:
//drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2010/2747.
Caprara, Alberto, Laura Galli, and Paolo Toth (2007). “04. Solution of the Train
Platforming Problem”. In: Transportation Science 45. doi: 10.2307/23017703.
“Construction of Discrete Time Graphs from Real Valued Railway Line Data” (2018).
English. In: International Conference on Optimization and Decision Science -
ODS2018 ; Conference date: 10-09-2018 Through 13-09-2018.
==PAGE:100==
90
Bibliography
D’Ariano, Andrea, Dario Pacciarelli, and Marco Pranzo (2008). “Assessment of flexi-
ble timetables in real-time traffic management of a railway bottleneck”. In: Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 16.2, pp. 232–245. issn: 0968-
090X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2007.07.006. url: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X07000587.
DSB (2019). Tog i drift. https://www.dsb.dk/om- dsb/virksomheden/tog- i-
drift/.
Freling, Richard et al. (2005). “Shunting of Passenger Train Units in a Railway Sta-
tion”. In: Transportation Science 39.2, pp. 261–272. issn: 00411655, 15265447. url:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/25769246.
Haahr, Jørgen Thorlund, Richard Martin Lusby, and Joris Camiel Wagenaar (2017).
“Optimization methods for the Train Unit Shunting Problem”. English. In: Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research 262.3, pp. 981–995. issn: 0377-2217. doi:
10.1016/j.ejor.2017.03.068.
Harrod, Steven (2011). “Modeling Network Transition Constraints with Hypergraphs”.
English. In: Transportation Science 45.1, pp. 81–97. issn: 0041-1655. doi: 10.
1287/trsc.1100.0337.
Harrod, Steven S. (2012). “A tutorial on fundamental model structures for railway
timetable optimization”. In: Surveys in Operations Research and Management
Science 17.2, pp. 85–96. issn: 1876-7354. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
sorms.2012.08.002. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1876735412000049.
Harrod, Steven and Thomas Schlechte (2013). “A direct comparison of physical block
occupancy versus timed block occupancy in train timetabling formulations”. In:
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 54, pp. 50–
66. issn: 1366-5545. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2013.04.003. url:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136655451300063X.
Kroon, Leo G., Rommert Dekker, and Michiel J. C. M. Vromans (2007). “Cyclic Rail-
way Timetabling: A Stochastic Optimization Approach”. In: Algorithmic Methods
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
91
for Railway Optimization. Ed. by Frank Geraets et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 41–66. isbn: 978-3-540-74247-0.
Liebchen, Christian (2008). “The First Optimized Railway Timetable in Practice”. In:
Transportation Science 42.4, pp. 420–435. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1080.0240. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1080.0240. url: https://doi.org/10.1287/
trsc.1080.0240.
Local, The (2019). Denmark opens first high-speed rail line, but commuters must wait
for faster journeys. https://www.thelocal.dk/20190531/denmark- opens-
first- high- speed- rail- line- but- commuters- must- wait- for- faster-
journeys.
Mascis, Alessandro and Dario Pacciarelli (2002). “Job-shop scheduling with blocking
and no-wait constraints”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 143.3,
pp. 498–517. issn: 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(01)
00338 - 1. url: http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0377221701003381.
Rejseplanen (2019). Rejseplanen web app. https://www.rejseplanen.dk/webapp/.
Schlechte, Thomas et al. (2011). “Micro–macro transformation of railway networks”.
In: Journal of Rail Transport Planning Management 1, pp. 38–48. doi: 10.1016/
j.jrtpm.2011.09.001.
Sørensen, Mads Skøtt and Jakob Rahr Bork Jensen (2016). “Combined Train Plato-
form and Shunting Optimization”. English. In: DTU.
Techopedia (2019). What is FileMakerPro. https://www.techopedia.com/definition/
7197/filemaker-pro.
Trafiksyrelsen, Danish Transport Authority (2006). Nyt spor for fjerntog Enghave-
Valby. http://www.trafikstyrelsen.dk/~/media/Dokumenter/02%20NYHEDER/
Dokumenter%20fra%20gamle%20nyheder/valby.pdf.
— (2013). Stationskapaciteten ved København H.
==PAGE:102==
