==PAGE:1==
䰀漀挀愀氀 昀氀甀漀爀椀渀愀琀椀漀渀 漀昀 
最爀愀瀀栀攀渀攀 昀漀爀 攀氀攀挀琀爀漀渀椀挀 搀攀瘀椀挀攀猀
一椀攀氀猀 倀椀挀栀漀渀
匀甀瀀攀爀瘀椀猀攀搀 戀礀 倀攀琀攀爀 䈀�䜀䜀䤀䰀䐀Ⰰ
 吀椀洀漀琀栀礀 䨀⸀ 䈀伀伀吀䠀Ⰰ
 
䰀攀渀攀 䜀䄀䴀䴀䔀䰀䜀䄀䄀刀䐀 愀渀搀 䄀猀欀攀 一漀爀猀欀漀瘀 䜀䔀䤀䰀
吀䔀䌀䠀一䤀䌀䄀䰀 唀一䤀嘀䔀刀匀䤀吀夀 伀䘀 䐀䔀一䴀䄀刀䬀
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
iii
Declaration of Authorship
I, Niels PICHON, declare that this thesis titled, “Local ﬂuorination of graphene for
electronic devices” and the work presented in it are my own. I conﬁrm that:
• This work was done wholly or mainly while in candidature for a master degree
at the Danish Technical University during the period spanning from March 6th
2019 to September 6th 2019.
• Where any part of this thesis has previously been submitted for a degree or
any other qualiﬁcation at this University or any other institution, this has been
clearly stated.
• Where I have consulted the published work of others, this is always clearly
attributed.
• Where I have quoted from the work of others, the source is always given. With
the exception of such quotations, this thesis is entirely my own work.
• I have acknowledged all main sources of help.
• Where the thesis is based on work done by myself jointly with others, I have
made clear exactly what was done by others and what I have contributed my-
self.
Signed:
Date: 30/08/2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
v
“Dirac was wrong.”
Joseph Fourier
==PAGE:6==
vi
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Abstract
Department of Physics
Master in Physics and Nanotechnology
Local ﬂuorination of graphene for electronic devices
by Niels PICHON
Engineering the electronic properties of graphene, a formidable 2D semi-metal, is of
prime importance for the development of novel electronic applications. This could
potentially be achieved using ﬂuorographene, a graphene derivate which has at-
tracted a lot of attention in the scientiﬁc community lately, and which is a large
band gap semi conductor. In this thesis, we investigate how the functionalization
of graphene using Fluorine, which leads to the formation of ﬂuorographene, can be
used as a tool to precisely engineer the band gap of the material. We discuss the
evolution of ﬂuorinated graphene physical properties with the amount of ﬂuorina-
tion, as well as the reversibility of the process. We also explore the possibility of
localized ﬂuorination for the creation of hybrid material and electronic devices, and
better control over its electronic properties.
==PAGE:7==
vii
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all those who have at one point or the other supported me in
my work. Patrick and Abhay, thank you so much for doing measurements for me
when the equipment was out of my reach, providing some of the most compelling
pieces of evidence featured in this thesis. Tim, thank you for your support and sug-
gestions, and for having entrusted me with helping you in the auto-stacker project.
Your out-of-the-box thinking helped me develop before and during the project, and
see things under a different perspective. Lene, Bjarke, Aske, I would not have suc-
ceeded without your countless hours spent discussing the underlying physics, and
debating the interpretation of the measurements. Even more so, I want to thank you
for the genuine interest you showed for the project and all you have taught me on
solid state physics and 2D materials, as well as the right mindset and critical view
needed to approach an experiment. Finally, I would like to give a big thank you
to Peter. Through my entire master, you have helped me grow. First through your
teaching, then by helping me get in touch with Tim and his project, and then by
trusting me with the VR molecular lab project which turned out to be an amazing
project, and again when you got me out of trouble with my academic turmoil, and
ﬁnally with this thesis. Your always-positive, forward thinking mindset is always a
breeze, and I am deeply grateful for all that you have brought me during these two
years in DTU. I will not forget what you have done for me.
==PAGE:8==
viii
Contents
Declaration of Authorship
iii
Abstract
vi
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Hexagonal boron nitride and encapsulated graphene
. . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Fluorographene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Fluorination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Deﬂuorination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Device Fabrication
18
3.1
Obtaining suitable crystals: exfoliation and selection . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Van der Waals Heterostructure fabrication: the Hot Pick-up method . .
23
3.3
Defects minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Cleanroom process: turning van der Waals heterostructures into func-
tional devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Characterization
35
4.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Raman Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Electrical Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
2 points measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3.2
3 points measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.3
4 points measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Terahertz measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
ARPES and nanoARPES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Results
45
5.1
Optical identiﬁcation of ﬂuorographene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Theoretical prediction of the evolution of transport properties with
ﬂuorination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3.1
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Evolution of the properties with ﬂuorination time . . . . . . . .
58
Deﬂuorination and reversibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
The case of bilayer graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:9==
ix
5.4
Localized ﬂuorine etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6
Discussion and Outlooks
81
A Cleanroom fabrication parameters
87
B
Sample preparation for nanoARPES characterisation
88
B.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.2
Stacking with very thin hBN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.3
Flipping Stacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.4
Selective Etching of top few-layers hBN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B.5
Mechanical removal of hBN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Bibliography
94
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
Motivation
As the semi-conductor industry slowly reaches the theoretical limits of what is phys-
ically possible to achieve with conventional Silicon, a change of paradigm is required
if this industry is to meet the needs for ever increasing computing-power. This
change could come in the form of 2D materials. Among others, graphene, a carbon
based atomically thin material, has gathered considerable interest since its discov-
ery 15 years ago. Spawning from its unique Dirac cone-shaped band structure, its
electrons behave as massless Dirac fermions. This leads to minimal scattering and as
a consequence, some electron mobility above 140000 cm2/V/s at room-temperature
[1].
Graphene is far from being an isolated case, and many other 2D materials, such
as transition metal dichalcogenides, have been isolated, with a variety of novel prop-
erties. But in terms of engineering possibilities, where these materials really shine
is in the possibility of assembling them in so-called van der Waals heterostructures.
Such structures consist of the assembly of virtually any 2D material layer, only held
together by van der Waals forces. Because the layers are not chemically bonded, this
means there is no restriction to which materials can be assembled.
One important example of van der Waals heterostructure is the case of encapsu-
lated graphene. At the nano-scale, the properties of a material are intrinsically de-
pendant on its surroundings. For that reason, any sort of contamination or stress in
the graphene layer will inevitably diminish the outstanding mobility of its electrons
and prevent quantum effects. Sandwiching graphene in between 2 sets of hexago-
nal boron-nitride layers, a 2D allotrope of boron-nitirde, can effectively reduce this
contamination while insuring maximum ﬂatness. For this reason, many graphene-
based electronic devices are leveraging encapsulated graphene.
An interesting discovery is that the etchant used for shaping the hBN when
creating an encapsulated graphene device, SF6, will also chemically functionalize
graphene in the doing. This means that the ﬂuorine in the etchant gas will chemi-
cally bind to graphene, effectively modifying its electronic properties, turning it into
a relatively large gap semi-conductor. Fluorine-functionalized graphene, or ﬂuoro-
graphene, has attracted a lot of attention in the last few years. Fluorinating using the
same etch as used for hBN allows for the formation of one-sided ﬂuorination. This
could lead to a number of opportunities. For starter, this would allow the etching
of the protective hBN and functionalization in one fabrication step which in itself
is interesting as the functionalized graphene is then supposed to be pristine from
contamination. Also, because of the one-sided ﬂuorination it should be possible to
deﬂuorinate a ﬂuorinated device using relatively low-temperatures annealing, effec-
tively making the functionalization and associated passivation reversible. Overall,
==PAGE:12==
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
this would allow for a non-destructive in-situ patterning method. With a ﬁner con-
trol over the process, one could even dream of obtaining a well controlled band gap,
based on the ﬂuorination amount, which could be used in electronic circuits for in-
stance. This ﬂuorination process is the object of study in this thesis.
Applications
We hereby describe a few direct applications that our work, should it come to fruition,
could make possible.
Reversible etching for re-purposable devices
This ability of ﬂuorinating localized areas and then deﬂuorinating them could have
some important implications in terms of device design. As illustrated in chapter 3,
fabrication of quality encapsulated graphene stacks is a long and complex process.
Overall, this is still a statistical game, where only a fraction of devices will be of high
quality, even in a well controlled environment with a highly repeatable process. Yet,
for each new device design, it is necessary to "sacriﬁce" an encapsulated graphene
stack, as the shaping into the required device geometry is a permanent process. This
is not an issue for an industrial process where each device will generally serve a sin-
gle purpose. But for research it is a bottleneck and the race for quality stacks is a key
component that allows explorative research. Even more so, reversibility allows for
increased controlled, which is also crucial in research. By providing the opportunity
to try a design with ﬂuorination and then deﬂuorinate once the experiment is done,
the focus could theoretically be shift on the trying many designs rather than mak-
ing stacks. This is thus a good candidate for allowing rapid prototyping of device
designs.
This process does have limitations indeed. Notably, it seems that the deﬂuorina-
tion is rarely complete (i.e. not all ﬂuorine is removed), which means that the device
quality will degrade over time. Yet being able to use a stack even twice would still
be a major improvement.
Graphene-graphene transistors
Bilayer graphene (i.e. 2 layers of graphene on top of one another), unlike monolayer
graphene, has a ﬁeld-induced, and thus tunable, band gap. This leads to another po-
tential application which emerges from the ability to obtain "monolayer" graphene
from bilayer graphene by ﬂuorinating the top layer, which should passivate it. As
described on ﬁgure 1.1, it would in theory be possible to build a full-graphene tran-
sistor by exposing the sides of a graphene ﬂake while protecting the centre area with
an electrical contact that would also serve as the gate of the transistor.
The advantage of such transistor reside in parts in the way it is contacted. Be-
cause the bottom layer is uninterrupted, there is no signiﬁcant contact resistance or
induced asymmetry by the difference of work function between the contacts and the
bilayer graphene. Such single ﬂake architecture also limits the failure points (which
often lie in the contacting for that matter). Also, on a large bilayer graphene ﬂake
(which tend to occur more frequently than monolayer graphene when exfoliated),
one could imagine a dense patterning to engrave multiple transistors in a single
pass which provides hints of an interesting upscaling technology of graphene tran-
sistors for the industry. Combining this with the ﬂuorographene masking technique
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
3
FIGURE 1.1: Schematic of the a full-graphene transistor fabrication process. a) We start with
some encapsulated bi-layer graphene (graphene in purple, hBN in blue). A gold contact
(yellow) is deposited on top at the centre of the device. b) The stack is ﬂuorinated, etching
away all of the top hBN ﬂake except for the part where the gold electrode is (plus some area
due to the etching angle of 66o) and ﬂuorinating the exposed top graphene layer (ﬂuorine is
drawn in green). c) Contacts are deposited at the edge
developed by Son et al.[2] (initially intended to create logic gates), it is possible to
start dreaming of full-graphene processing units architecture.
Selective exposition of graphene and removal of hBN
Last but not least, the ﬂuorination-deﬂuorination process represents a potent tool for
selective etching as it does etch hBN but not graphene (which is fully impermeable
to ﬂuorine), and can be desorbed from graphene after etching (assuming full deﬂu-
orination is possible). This could for instance be used to shape hBN into a mask for
instance. An example is given on ﬁgure 1.2. The idea in such design is to use local-
ized ﬂuorination to expose speciﬁc areas of graphene for further processing while
preserving most of the top protective hBN layer.
FIGURE 1.2: Example of a hBN mask creation using ﬂuorination. (few layers hBN in trans-
parent blue, monolayer graphene in purple, ﬂuorine in green.) a) We start with a hBN-
graphene-hBN stack. b) A pattern is etched using a ﬂuorine based etchant (e.g. SF6) c) The
stack is annealed to deﬂuorinate the graphene and allow for further processing of the ex-
posed graphene dots, while the rest of the graphene lattice is still protected by hBN. This
results in a dielectric pattern where the etched areas have a dielectric constant of 1 while the
un-etched hBN has a dielectric constant of 4.
Another direct application of the ability to selectively remove hBN is to allow
for surface sensitive characterization. Typically, all of the shaping of a device is
made with an encapsulated graphene stacks, which allows to protect graphene and
obtain its full potential (see 2.2). Then, just before using a surface sensitive method,
such as ARPES, the top layer is ﬂuorinated, and then the whole stack is annealed
in a controlled environment (this step could possibly be done directly in the ARPES
chamber) to expose the graphene to the measurement while retaining its properties.
==PAGE:14==
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
Goal
The aim of this thesis is to study how the properties of graphene change with ﬂuo-
rination and to evaluate the potential of such method for engineering the transport
properties of a graphene device in-situ, in a reversible manner.
Outline
We will start by reviewing the different materials and physical phenomena relevant
for our ﬂuorination study. We will detail the properties of graphene indeed, those
of hBN and the interest of encapsulated graphene as an example of van der Waals
heterostructure, and ﬁnally we will study ﬂuorographene. In the process, we will
also review the possibility of obtaining quantum conﬁnement in graphene.
At the nano-scale, shape and function highly correlates. Under this assumption,
any variation in the fabrication process of an electronic device can yield signiﬁcant
discrepancies in the subsequent experimental measurements. For this reason, we
will review our entire fabrication process, from the obtention of the base material,
to the van der Waals heterostructure formation, and the transformation of this struc-
tures into functional electronic devices in the cleanroom. We will also spend some
time discussing how contamination can be reduced to obtain as pure graphene as
possible.
In the following chapter we will go over the different characterization methods
we used in this body of work.
This will lead to our Results section. There, we will ﬁrst detail our theoretical
prediction of the optical contrast and transport properties of ﬂuorographene. Then
we will discuss the ﬂuorination and deﬂuorination of graphene on Silicon oxide
samples to get a better understanding of the evolution of the parameters with ﬂuori-
nation time using the Induced Coupled Plasma etch machine used for SF6 etching. A
quick mention of bilayer graphene ﬂuorination will also be made. Finally, we will re-
view the experimental impact of ﬂuorination of some encapsulated graphene-based
electronic devices.
Last, we will discuss the interpretation of our experimental results as a whole
and consider the implications on the applications previously described, as well as
further required work.
==PAGE:15==
5
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Graphene
Graphene is a carbon allotrope which is composed of an atomically thin layer of
atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice. This implies that each carbon atom is in
an sp2 hybridized conﬁguration, forming three σ bonds with its three neighbouring
carbon atoms (sp2 orbitals) and a delocalized π bond which forms a 2D electron gas
on each side of the lattice (out-of-plane spz orbital). The unit cell of the lattice, which
contains two atoms, is illustrated on ﬁgure 2.1.
FIGURE 2.1: Schematic of the graphene lattice. The unit cell is symbolized by the shaded
diamond. ⃗a1 and ⃗a2 are the unit vectors. A and B are the 2 (identical) atoms of the unit cell.
Band Structure
From this peculiar lattice we can derive the even more exotic band
structure of graphene. The two unit vectors can be expressed as follows:
⃗a1 = d0
2 (3, −
√
3, 0) and ⃗a2 = d0
2 (3,
√
3, 0)
(2.1)
where d0 is the bond length, which is 1.42 ˙A. Noting (n1, n2) the coordinates of a unit
cell in the lattice basis, we can deﬁne deﬁne the wavefunction in unit cell (n1, n2),
considering only the π orbital:
|ψ(n1, n2)
 =
ψA(n1, n2)
ψB(n1, n2)

(2.2)
==PAGE:16==
6
Chapter 2. Background
where |ψA|2 (respectively |ψB|2) is the probability of ﬁnding an electron on atom A
(respectively B). Because all atoms in the lattice are identical, the hopping probability
from one atom to the other is always the same at rest (at constant bond length), Vppπ.
Using a ﬁrst order tight binding model, we can consider that the probability to ﬁnd
an electron on the A site only depends on the probability of ﬁnding electrons on
neighbouring B sites (which makes 3 contributions), and vice versa. Provided we
start with electrons in A atoms, we recover electrons in B atoms by applying the
Hamiltonian once, which describes how electrons hop from one atom to the next:
ˆH
ψA(n1, n2)
0

= Vppπ

0
ψA(n1, n2) + ψA(n1 + 1, n2) + ψA(n1, n2 + 1)

(2.3)
More generally, we have for any electron distribution
ˆH|ψ(n1, n2)
 = Vppπ
 ψB(n1, n2) + ψB(n1 −1, n2) + ψB(n1, n2 −1)
ψA(n1, n2) + ψA(n1 + 1, n2) + ψA(n1, n2 + 1)

(2.4)
Again we can use that all atoms are identical and thus there is a one-cell periodicity
on the A atoms and B atoms. This means we can deﬁne the wavefunction for A and
B atoms as follows:
ψA,B(n1, n2) = eik1n1eik2n2ψA,B
(2.5)
From the Bloch theorem, we identify k1 and k2 as the projections of the wavevector
onto each of the unit cell vectors respectively. Introducing the phase sum function
W(k1, k2) = 1 + e−ik1 + e−ik2, we can now rewrite the previous expression for the
Hamiltonian:
ˆH = Vppπ

0
W(k1, k2)
W(k1, k2)∗
0

(2.6)
Solving the Schrödinger equation ˆH|ψ
 = E|ψ

we ﬁnally obtain the energy band
structure:
E = ±Vppπ|W(k1, k2)| = ±Vppπ
q
(3 + 2cos(⃗k.⃗a1) + 2cos(⃗k.⃗a2) + 2cos(⃗k.(⃗a1 −⃗a2)))
(2.7)
Already we can observe an interesting property. Graphene is a semi-metal: the
occupied (π) and unoccupied (π∗) bands have no energy gap between them, but
there are only meeting at discrete⃗k-points (see ﬁgure 2.2). We will name this points
⃗K and ⃗K′ respectively. We also deﬁne ⃗q =⃗k −⃗K. Linearising the energy for small ⃗q,
which is to say close to the Fermi point ⃗K, we can obtain that
E(⃗q) = ±3
2d0Vppπ|⃗q| = ±¯hvF|⃗q|
(2.8)
where vF is called the Fermi velocity.
vF = 3Vppπd0
2¯h
(2.9)
The resulting band structure close to the Fermi point is a called a Dirac cone, of slope
vF, and is shown on ﬁgure 2.3. This band structure exhibits a linear dispersion.
This in turn means that at the Fermi level, the electrons have a non-zero velocity.
Essentially, close the K (respectively K’) point, electrons in graphene behave like
massless particles, namely massless Dirac fermions. This is really the core of what
makes graphene so special.
==PAGE:17==
2.1. Graphene
7
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 2.2: (A) Band structure as obtained from the tight-binding calculation. (Credit:
Mads Brandbyge). (B) Contour plot of the energy of the π band. ⃗b1 and ⃗b2 are the reciprocal
lattice vector. K and K’ are the Fermi-points. White represents greater energy.(Credit: Mads
Bransbyge)
FIGURE 2.3: Linear band structure of graphene close to the K points.
Van der Waals forces
The ﬁrst time graphene was isolated, it was done by me-
chanically extracting it from bulk graphite. As a matter of fact, graphite is consti-
tuted of thousands of graphene layers stacked on top of one another. What makes
==PAGE:18==
8
Chapter 2. Background
this structure interesting is that as mentioned earlier, graphene only makes delocal-
ized π bonds out-of-plane. This means that the layers in graphite are not chemically
bonded. Instead, what holds them together are van der Waals interactions. van der
Waals forces are essentially the result of various electronic forces between the atomic
nuclei and molecular constituents. Typically, the potential associated with such in-
teractions decrease with distance to the power of six. It can be expressed as follows:
WVdW = CKeesom + CDebye + CLondon
r6
(2.10)
The three different constants refer to the main three contributions to the van der
Waals potential. The Keesom potential takes into account dipole-dipole interaction
between two freely rotating molecules with a ﬁnite dipole moment. Debye poten-
tial considers static dipole-molecule dipole interaction, between a static dipole and
a freely rotation polarisable molecule. Finally, the London potential, which con-
tribution is usually the largest contribution, accounts for static dipole-static dipole
interaction. This arises from the ﬂuctuation of electron distribution around the nu-
cleus.
Jumping ahead, for two atomically ﬂat layers, each atom of each layer applies
some van der Waals force on each atom of the other layer, based on the distance to
this other atom. Assuming that the contributions add up, and that the properties
of the two layers are constant throughout the material which is approximated to an
inﬁnite continuous slab, we can derive the interaction potential of the a layer 1 on a
layer 2 separated by a distance D as
WVdW, 12
Area
= −
AH
12πD2
(2.11)
where AH is the Hamaker constant, which only depends on the two layers’ mate-
rial. It is important to note that the dependence is now proportional to D−2, and
not to r−6, as was the case for atom to atom van der Waals forces. The evalua-
tion of the interlayer distance is a tricky question as for 2D layered materials, the
continuum assumption is questionable, and the distance depends widely on rough-
ness and contacted materials. In any case, with graphite-graphite Hamaker con-
stant being 2.2 · 10−19J, the resulting potential energy for graphene is on the order of
∼105eV/µm2.
Such number is small compared to the bond energy per area in-plane. However
it is sufﬁcient to hold together the layers of graphene. And because this is no case a
chemical bonding, this means that theoretically, any material can be assembled this
way. Assembling different 2D materials using these van der Waals forces is called a
van der Waals heterostructure. These are especially interesting because they allow to
combine the properties along with the materials. A basic example is graphene itself
where the addition of a layer to form bilayer graphene from two monolayers signif-
icantly modiﬁes the band structure. Another commonly used example is hexagonal
boron nitride-graphene-hexagonal boron nitride, also called encapsulated graphene,
which we detail further in section 2.2.
Quantum conﬁnement in graphene
At the quantum scale, the conductance of a
conductor can be related to the scattering of its electrons using the Landauer for-
mula:
G(E) = e2
π¯h ∑
m
Tm(E)
(2.12)
==PAGE:19==
2.1. Graphene
9
where Tm are the transmission eigenvalues of the channels in the material. For a
ﬁnite width W graphene ribbon, within the ballistic transport regime, one can derive
the transmission and obtain
G = 4e2
h ∑
m
θ(WkF
π
−m)
(2.13)
where kF = √πn is the Fermi wave number, n the carrier density, θ the step function
(we neglect minor phase contributions from the egde following the derivation of
[3]). Fourier series expansion yields, for an ideal ribbon:
G = 4e2
h
c0WkF
π
+ 4e2
h
 
∑
j
1
jπ sin(2jWkF) −c0
2
!
(2.14)
What we can see from this formula is that the conductance increases linearly with
the width of the ribbon plus an oscillating term on top, the period of which is also
proportional to the width. Also, the conductance should scale with the square of
the carrier density, which (see section 4.3.3) can be controlled in a hall-bar shaped
device, by applying some voltage to the gate of the device.
For such conductance to be observed, it is important to have ballistic transport.
This is only true if the width considered in the calculations is much smaller than the
mean free path, meaning that the transport is not governed by scattering with defects
and optical phonons. At room temperature, the mean free bath of electrons can reach
length scales on the order of 1µm. To obtain the relevant conductance properties it
is therefore convenient to use constrictions (an example is given on ﬁgure 2.4).
FIGURE 2.4: False colour Atomic Force Microscopy of a encapsulated graphene device with
a constriction(adapted from [3].
Quantum conﬁnement effect on conductance has been observed experimentally
by etching constrictions in a graphene-based device, by Terres et al.[3]. As a demon-
strator of the potential of localized ﬂuorination, we would like to observe if such
constrictions are doable by ﬂuorination.
==PAGE:20==
10
Chapter 2. Background
2.2
Hexagonal boron nitride and encapsulated graphene
In the 2D materials realm, it is important to stress that the properties of a nano-
scale structure are eminently dependant on the material’s surroundings. Any sort
of compound at a proximity of a graphene sheet will inherently affect its properties.
The most obvious inﬂuence is that of contaminants sitting directly on top of the
graphene sheet as well as lattice defect which will cause, e.g., electron scattering,
thus limiting the mean free path and the conductivity of the material. The shape
and rugosity of the underlying substrate also play a big part. Because graphene
is atomically thin, it can bend signiﬁcantly and thus conform to the substrate[4].
This means that a high rugosity substrate will lead to a high rugosity graphene,
limiting again the quality of the device. Finally, any sort of conductive material at a
given distance of graphene will act as a capacitance, or modify the band-structure of
graphene, among other degradations.
For all of these reasons, to make a high quality graphene based device, we need
to ensure that it is atomically ﬂat and protected from contaminants, as well as kept
away from external unwanted electronic inﬂuences. Sandwiching it in between 2
blocks of atomically-ﬂat insulating material seems interesting on these aspects. Such
material would also have to have a lattice structure and constants very close to these
of graphene to avoid internal stress that might stretch or damage it, while having as
little inﬂuence on the graphene band structure as possible.
FIGURE 2.5: Schematic of a hexagonal boron-nitride lattice. The unit cell is indicated by the
black diamond
The best candidate to date is hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). This material was
isolated in its 2D form by Pacile et al.[5] in 2008. It has, as it’s name suggests, an
hexagonal structure, just as graphene, with bond length of 1.446 ˙A, as illustrated on
ﬁgure 2.5. This yields a lattice mismatch of only ∼1.8% to graphene. For these rea-
sons it is a good candidate for guaranteeing the ﬂatness and low strain of graphene.
What is more is that hBN exhibits a high asymmetry between the two atom sites of
its unit-cell, one being occupied by boron and the other by nitrogen. This asymme-
try effectively results in a large band gap of around 5-6 eV. This fulﬁls the condition
of the encapsulating material playing the role of an insulator. Work by Decker et al.
[4], has shown experimentally that the aforementioned properties where indeed true
and that the ﬂatness of graphene on hBN was exceptionally high (see ﬁg.2.6 adapted
from the original article)
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Hexagonal boron nitride and encapsulated graphene
11
FIGURE 2.6: Experimental evidence of improved ﬂatness of graphene on hBN (adapted from
[4]). (a,b) STM topographs of graphene on hBN (a) and graphene on SiO2 (b) It can be ob-
served that on hBN height ﬂuctuations are below 5pm which is several orders of magnitude
below the bonds length. (c,d) Conductance maps of graphene on hBN (c) and graphene on
SiO2 (d). Here can be observed that ﬂatness indeed allow for a more homogeneous charge
density distribution.
Additionally, it was reported by Kindermann et al [6] that hBN does not inﬂu-
ence graphene band structure. This is unintuitive, because hBN has no symmetry,
and thus the combined heterostructure of graphene on hBN does not have any ei-
ther. This should, according to ﬁrst principle calculations open a band gap of around
50 meV[6]. However, the slight lattice mismatch between hBN and graphene does
result in some Moiré super-lattice, as it is not energetically favourable for graphene
to conform to the hBN lattice constant or vice-versa. This in turn means that the
symmetry breaking due to hBN ﬂuctuates with the position within the super-lattice.
Density Functional Theory calculations show that this more or less restores the sym-
metry and thus, on the super-lattice scale, the band structure of graphene should
remain untouched[6]. Experimentally, in most cases no band gap has been reported
in encapsulated graphene, supporting these calculations[7] (in some very speciﬁc
conditions, it might actually be possible to see the hypothesized bandgap due to the
asymmetry, as reported by Jessen et al.[8]).
Another unsuspected advantage of encapsulating graphene between hBN few-
layers is that it allows for much better contacting of the graphene edges. As shown
by the work of Wang et al. [1], etching through a hBN-graphene-hBN heterostructure
==PAGE:22==
12
Chapter 2. Background
yields a bevelled edges (illustrated on ﬁgure 2.7 adapted from the original publica-
tion). This is because ﬂuorine-based etchant (SF6, CF4, CHF...) which is typically
used to etch hBN have an etch angle of 45-75o[8]. This ensures that only the edges of
graphene will be in contact with the electrodes. In their work, it was reported that
such method allows for very low contact resistance of ∼100 Ohms/µm. One may
argue that a 1D contact should lead to a higher resistance than a 2D contact. This is
in fact not the case as it was shown theoretically that 1D edge contacts lead to shorter
covalent metal-graphene bond length at the edge, and larger orbital overlap, hence
maximizing the hopping probability. It is to be noted that because of the work func-
tion difference of graphene and Cr (of about 0.16 eV), typically used in the adhesion
layer of electrical contacts, including in our devices, the above mentioned resistance
varies between p-type and n-type doped graphene with a factor of 2 to 3.
FIGURE 2.7: Illustration of the bevelled edges created by etching an encapsulated graphene
heterostructure (adapted from [1]). (A) Schematic of the edge-contact fabrication process. (B)
High-resolution bright-ﬁeld STEM image of the bevelled etched edge. The bottom image is
a magniﬁed Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy map in false colours of the contact area. This
map shows evidence of the bevelled edge resulting from the etch angle of the encapsulated
graphene and the 1D nature of the contact between graphene and the metal lead.
For all the reasons mentioned above, all devices made in this work are based on
encapsulated graphene, the fabrication of which is described in section 3.
2.3
Fluorographene
Fluorographene is a graphene-derived 2D material, in which each carbon atom in
the graphene lattice is bonded to a ﬂuorine atom, alternating between upward fac-
ing ﬂuorine atoms and downward facing ones (see ﬁgure 2.8). As such it is the 2D
counterpart of 3D graphite ﬂuorine and 1D Teﬂon (a fully ﬂuorinated carbon chain).
This conﬁguration is referred to as a chair conﬁguration. Other conﬁgurations have
been studied theoretically, namely chair, boat, tricycle, zigzag, and armchair, with
chair being the single most stable structure. However the formation energy of boat
and zigzag being very close to the chair one, these conﬁgurations are not to be ruled
out ([9][10]). All of these structures correspond to fully ﬂuorinated graphene, with
CF stoichiometry, but other stable structures may arise during ﬂuorination as the
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Fluorographene
13
amount of available ﬂuorine is indeed smaller, complicating even further the pic-
ture. Regarding this issue, Sahin et al.[11] have concluded that, due to the close
formation energy of the different conﬁgurations at a given stoichiometry, it is most
likely that before reaching full ﬂuorination, the lattice exhibits various conﬁgura-
tions in different places. As such, the experimentally measured properties would be
the average of the properties of the different conﬁgurations.
FIGURE 2.8: Illustration of a mono-layer ﬂuorographene lattice, in various conﬁguration.
From top to bottom, Chair, Boat and Tricycle (adapted from [9]). The chair conﬁguration has
been shown theoretically to be the most stable.
In the case of fully ﬂuorinated graphene, CF, the band gap for the chair conﬁgu-
ration is estimated to be around 3.07eV by Density Functional Theory (DFT) [12] and
up to 7.5eV in GW0 calculations. Experimentally, the band gap has been found to be
well above 3eV [13]. This makes ﬂuorographene a wide band gap semi-conductor.
When ﬂuorinated on only one side, it has been experimentally shown that ﬂuo-
rination amount grows up to 25% [12], which would entail a stoichiometry of C4F.
In this conﬁguration, it is believed that the most stable conﬁguration is the one de-
scribed on ﬁgure 2.9. For such conﬁguration, DFT predicts a band gap of 2.93eV 1.
Again, this can be testiﬁed by the absence of light absorption of ﬂuorinated graphene
below blue wavelength, which suggest a direct band gap bigger than 3eV. Exper-
imentally, the resistance of one-side ﬂuorinated graphene was reported to have a
resistance several orders of magnitude higher than graphene (Robinson et al. report
6 orders of magnitude increase[12], while Withers et al.[14] report resistances on the
order of the TΩ(albeit for CF, not C4F)). One interesting fact about the predicted
1This is very close to the gap of graphene ﬂuorinated on both sides which is surprising. It is known
that DFT tends to underestimated band gaps and these theoretical values should be regarded with
caution.
==PAGE:24==
14
Chapter 2. Background
structure is that the carbons that bind to the ﬂuorine have to form sp3 bonds exclu-
sively while the rest of the carbon atoms remain in an sp2 hybridized conﬁguration.
This isolates some graphene hexagonal carbon cycles inside which the π bonds are
delocalized, alternating with saturated carbon atoms bonded to the ﬂuorine atoms.
This in turn means that in principle the electrons cannot jump from one cycle to the
the next like they would in a normal graphene lattice, unless they have sufﬁcient
energy to tunnel through the saturated carbon. This in turn might explain the for-
mation of the band gap. The breaking of symmetry by the binding to ﬂuorine might
also explain the formation of the band gap.
FIGURE 2.9: Illustration of one-sided ﬂuorinated lattice. Only 25% of the lattice is ﬂuorinated
and the underlying carbon form only sp3 bonds. The graphene cycles are thus isolated from
one another
In terms of Raman spectrum (see section 4.2), Nair et al.[13] report that as soon
as the smallest amount of ﬂuorination happens, the 2D peak of graphene is signif-
icantly reduced (in relation to the other peaks). In addition, a strong D peak and a
small but wide D+G peak appear. The amplitude of the D and G peaks will remain
more or less equivalent, while the overall amplitude of the Raman response will de-
crease with ﬂuorination. For full ﬂuorination, they report that the Raman response
of ﬂuorographene completely disappear. This claim is also supported by Wang et
al.[15] who claim that the reason for the disappearance of the peaks is that the direct
band gap of ∼3eV is larger than the energy of the typical excitation lasers (455nm or
532nm which correspond to 2.72eV and 2.33eV respectively). To remedy to this issue
they used a UV laser and showed that ﬂuorographene indeed exhibits a Raman re-
sponse, illustrated on ﬁgure 2.10, embodied by 2 peaks, one sharp at 1270 cm−1 and
a side smaller peak at 1345cm−1. They interpret these peaks as out-of-plane motion
of F atoms with respect to C lattice, and in-plane motion for the second one.
2.3.1
Fluorination
To obtain ﬂuorographene, one can proceed either using a top down or a bottom
up approach. The top down approach is the most widely used in the literature. It
consists of producing graphite ﬂuoride, a well control process, and then exfoliating
it, in a similar fashion as is done for obtaining graphene from graphite. With this
approach, each graphene ﬂake is fully ﬂuorinated on both sides, and thus is assumed
to be in a CF stoichiometry.
==PAGE:25==
2.3. Fluorographene
15
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 2.10: Raman spectrum of ﬂuorographene. (A) Evolution of the spectrum with im-
mersion time in a XeF2 gas (adapted from [13]) (B) Raman peaks of ﬂuorographene when
using a UV laser for excitation (adapted from [15]).
The bottom up approach on the other hand starts with graphene and works to-
wards the obtention of a ﬂuorinated layer. This can be achieved either by exposing
graphene for a long period of time to a ﬂuorine-based gas compound (typically SF6,
CF4 or XeF2) or by performing a chemical etch, using for instance an ICP etch ma-
chine. Note that if the ﬁrst one is a pure chemical functionalization of the graphene
lattice, the second also involves physical action of the gas particles onto the lattice,
which may cause a different behaviour.
We opted for the latter because, graphene will only be ﬂuorinated on the top-
side, unless the graphene is on a etchable substrate (e.g. Robinson et al.[12] use a
Silicon-on-insulator substrate, and etch through the Silicon to ﬂuorinate the back-
side of the graphene ﬂakes). We only want to ﬂuorinate the top side because we also
want to be able to reverse the process and deﬂuorinate afterwards, and because this
is the method we also use for etching the top hBN. Such process actually poses some
apparent paradox. As a matter of fact, if a carbon atom binds to a ﬂuorine atom, it
will change its bonds to all sp3, entering a tetrahedral conﬁguration, which is out of
==PAGE:26==
16
Chapter 2. Background
plane2. This also entails that the other carbon atoms are forming a sp3 bond with
the ﬂuorinated atom, while still forming 2 sp2 bonds and an spz bond. This hybrid
conﬁguration indeed is less favourable than the sp3 conﬁguration or the native sp2
hybridized graphene carbon conﬁguration. This in turn should favour a higher ﬂu-
orination amount. It could therefore seam unclear why the stable stoichiometry for
one-sided ﬂuorination is the C4F one, rather than for instance C2F. The answer might
lie in the bond energy. According to their DFT calculations, Robinson et al.[12] claim
that bond energy in C2F is lower than in C4F, making bonds in the latter more sta-
ble and thus explaining why the equilibrium ﬂuorinated stoichiometry is with 25%
ﬂuorination.
2.3.2
Deﬂuorination
One of the motivations of this thesis is to ﬁnd a reversible engineering method. From
that aspect it would be interesting to be able to deﬂuorinate fully the graphene.
This can possibly be achieved using annealing. However, as stated by Dubecky
et al.[16], the bond energy of F-C bonds in ﬂuorographene can very signiﬁcantly
between low-ﬂuorination amount samples (49.6kcal/mol) and fully ﬂuorinated ones
(112.3kcal/mol). This would mean that the amount of heat needed to deﬂuorinate
ﬂuorographene would also vary signiﬁcantly. This tend to match the experimental
ﬁndings of Nair et al.[13]: after a given amount of ﬂuorination3 it is impossible to
recover pristine graphene by annealing. Note that this study was made with fully
ﬂuorinated graphene (both sides) and that one-sided ﬂuorographene is supposed to
have a lower bond energy because of the comparatively lower ﬂuorination amount,
which means that it could possibly be deﬂuorinated. This will be the object of our
experimental study.
Chemically, Nair et al.[13] have shown ﬂuorographene to be very stable and re-
sistant to many chemical attacks. This means that this may not a good approach for
deﬂuorination either. Nevertheless, Robinson et al. report successful deﬂuorination
of one-sided ﬂuorographene using hydrazine (N2H4). However it appears, from
their graphs, that the hydrazine treatment has not been applied to fully one-side
ﬂuorinated graphene, and it is difﬁcult to deduce whether such treatment would
always work.
A last approach was used by Withers et al.[14] using e-beam lithography to re-
move ﬂuorine atoms. The idea is to shine an electron beam we just the right accel-
eration voltage to knock the ﬂuorine atoms off the lattice. They used 10keV accel-
eration voltage and a current of 0.13nA, with a high dose of 1C/cm2. They claimed
to manage to reduce the resistance of the exposed ﬂuorographene ribbons from TΩ
resistance to 100kΩ. It is unclear what is actually happening though. The energy
of a basic C-C double bond is 144kcal/mol and 83kcal/mol for single bonds, C-C
bonds in graphene being somewhere in between (with a bond potential energy in
graphene of 6.05×10−19J (= 3.76eV), we obtain a bond energy of about 87kcal/mol).
This is very comparable to that of F-C bonds in ﬂuorographene, and thus may rule
out the hypothesis that the ﬂuorographene atoms are actually knocked off the lat-
tice, as this would undoubtedly also damage the graphene lattice. What probably is
happening is in fact some localized drastic heating of the ﬂuorographene within the
2by out-of-plane we mean that the tetrahedral carbon resulting from carbon forming 4 s3 bonds is
a fully 3D structure and thus sticks out of the graphene plane which is ﬂat.
3In there experiments, Nair et al. ﬂuorinated graphene by putting it at room temperature in a
ﬂuorine gas saturated time for a long time. It is therefore hard to relate their ﬂuorination times with
ours but the trends and the underlying physics should indeed match.
==PAGE:27==
2.3. Fluorographene
17
spot of the e-beam. This in turn would imply similar limitations as the annealing
method. The fact that they do not manage to get ribbon resistance below 100kΩfor
µm wide ribbons also tends to corroborate this postulate.
==PAGE:28==
18
Chapter 3
Device Fabrication
To harness the potential of graphene for electronic applications and perform any
sort of transport experiment on it, the ﬁrst step is to transform the 2D atomically
thin carbon layer that is graphene into a device. By device it is meant any sort of
structure where graphene is electrically contacted to allow for measurements and
use in e.g. electrical circuits. This can be achieved in numerous way. The one chosen
in this work is via the Hall-bar shaping of an encapsulated graphene piece. In the
following chapter we will go through the different steps required for the fabrication
of such device.
3.1
Obtaining suitable crystals: exfoliation and selection
2D materials can generally be obtained in one of two ways. Either by synthesizing
them directly in the 2D form of the material, or by "extracting" 2D planes from a crys-
tal consisting of several layers stacked on top of each other, a process known as exfo-
liation. Typically, this is the case of carbon graphite, which is in fact made of a large
number of graphene layers stacked on top of each other. The latter method is the
one that has historically led to the isolation of graphene from graphite back in 2004.
This method, while producing rather small crystal ﬂakes, i.e. fragments of 2D mate-
rials, has one signiﬁcant advantage. In theory, the obtained crystal ﬂakes are single
crystals because during the mechanical process of exfoliation of the 2D layers, the
stress concentrates at the grain boundaries, which subsequently will make the ﬂakes
break there. On the other end, when synthesizing 2D materials, for instance using
Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD), the 2D materials will start "growing" from dif-
ferent nucleation points on the substrate that might be defects or contaminants, or
deliberately introduced precursors to control the position of the ﬁnal ﬂake. This in
turns means that the grains, when growing, will most likely have different orienta-
tions when joining, leading to clear grain boundaries (see ﬁgure 3.1). This can be an
issue because such boundaries will cause the electrons to scatter when trying to go
through, inherently limiting their mean free path.
It is important to nuance the above-mentioned limit of CVD, as recent works
have shown to be able to produce CVD graphene with grains of a size way above
the room temperature mean free path of graphene electrons (up to mm sized grains).
However, while transfer of large scale graphene sheets is now fairly accessible, as
shown in the works of Shivayogimath et al. [18], high quality van der Waals het-
erostructure from CVD graphene remains challenging to obtain. Such van der Waals
heterostructure fabrication from CVD graphene is already performed by a few re-
search groups around the world, but our research group has so far been unable to
reproducibly produce high quality "stacks" from CVD graphene. Similar issues also
arise with synthesized few-layer hBN.
==PAGE:29==
3.1. Obtaining suitable crystals: exfoliation and selection
19
FIGURE 3.1: Atomic-resolution STEM images of CVD graphene crystals (adapted from [17]).
On top, some pristine graphene within the grains (TEM on the left, STEM on the right). At
the bottom the defects at the grains boundary, where pentagons and heptagons form due to
the 27o orientation difference between the 2 grains.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 3.2: (A) Picture of a bulk 3D graphite crystal. (source: Wikipedia). (B) Picture of
some bulk 3D hBN crystals (source: hqgraphene)
For all these reasons, we have in the present work chosen to use exfoliated graphene
and hBN. We hereafter describe the process of the mechanical exfoliation and crystal
ﬂakes selection. Note that there are many more or less equivalent exfoliation meth-
ods, and that the process described below relates exclusively to the one with use.
To start up with, it is required to prepare an appropriate substrate for the exfo-
liation. We typically use a silicon wafer covered with a 90nm-thick silicon oxide.
==PAGE:30==
20
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
The reason for that choice is that the colour of 2D materials varies quickly with the
number of layers, and even more so with the substrate material. 90nm-thick oxide
provides a good contrast both for graphene (any number of layers) and hBN (start-
ing from around 15nm thick which corresponds to about 50 layers). An example
of what graphene and hBN look like on 90nm-thick oxide is displayed on ﬁgure
3.3. The wafers can have prefabricated index marks on them (which that allow for
easier alignment) which will make locating exfoliated crystals easier, but it is im-
portant that such marks are actually etched. This is because the process of making
structures from ﬂakes can require to heat up the chips and if the marks are made of
metal, e.g. gold, they may evaporate. The wafers are then diced in small roughly 2cm
x 2cm chips for easier processing. This step does not need to be precise and is per-
formed using a diamond scriber to draw cleavage lines upon which the chip dicing
is achieved by breaking the wafer by hand. This step will produce a fair amount of
silicon dust which might later contaminate our ﬂakes. For that reason, the obtained
chips are cleaned by bathing them in Acetone, and bombarding with ultrasounds at
room temperature for 10 minutes. The process is then repeated with an IsoPropanol
(IPA) ultrasound bath for 10 minutes. Acetone and IPA are used to dissolve polymer
residues that might be on the chip, and the ultrasound bath is used to detach any
contaminant from the chip. Note that it is important for the chips to be properly
immersed so that the vibrations from the ultrasound bath are applied isotropically.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 3.3: Microscope image of (A) a monolayer graphene ﬂake (contrast has been in-
creased for better readability) and (B) a few-layers hBN ﬂake, on 90nm SiO2 on silicon (100x
magniﬁcation)
In parallel, some transfer tape can be prepared. The method varies slightly be-
tween hBN and graphene as it as been shown that different types of tape yield dif-
ferent exfoliation quality, based on the crystal type. The general process remains
similar though. A piece of adhesive tape is applied onto a raw hBN or graphene
crystal. Then, the tape is removed, leaving a few layers of crystal onto the tape.
Using another piece of tape or folding the tape onto itself, the crystal fragments are
then spread all over the tape. An extra piece of tape is then applied onto the original
"master" tape. The various pieces of tape can now be used for transfer as they should
contain some single or few-layers crystal ﬂakes. The process is illustrated on ﬁgure
3.4. For hBN, we use two varieties of thermo-release tape (EPL BT-150E-KL and SW
T20+LB B 140.00 MM). This kind of tape is more gentle on the ﬂakes and leaves
very few residues on the ﬂakes once transferred on the substrate. For graphene, this
==PAGE:31==
3.1. Obtaining suitable crystals: exfoliation and selection
21
tape has shown poorer exfoliation capabilities, and we use instead 3M scotch magic,
which is stronger, but may leave more residues.
FIGURE 3.4: Illustration of the process of preparing graphene tape for exfoliation. (A) A 3D
bulk crystal is ﬁrst dropped on a piece of tape. The extremities of the tape are folded onto
the tape to provide some handles. The crystal may be applied in different positions on the
tape to maximize the amount of few-layers ﬂakes deposited. (B) The 3D crystal is removed,
and the tape is folded onto itself multiple times to spread and further exfoliate the ﬂakes,
until the tape is uniformly covered in a thin layer. (B) Another piece of tape is applied on the
"master" one and rubbed gently before being peeled back. This second piece of tape is now
ready for application on a chip. If it is not to be used immediately it is recommended to fold
it onto itself to minimize the amount of time the cleaved graphene on the tape is exposed to
air. (Illustration credit: Célia Tommasone)
Before applying the tape onto the substrate, we ﬁrst plasma ash the chips, with
a 150W O2 plasma. This is supposed to remove all remaining organic contaminants
on the chip, as well as to create dangling bonds and residual charges on the oxide
surface, thus increasing the adhesion forces and maximizing the exfoliation capabil-
ities. The master tape with the crystals on it is then applied onto the chip, and given
a gentle rub. If we are exfoliating hBN, the chip with the tape on it is placed onto a
80oC hot plate, for the tape to become soft. Then the tapes are removed maintaining
an angle between the two pieces angle of around 30 to 45o. It is believed that the
tape peeling angle does have an inﬂuence, but at this stage no thorough study as
been conducted. Intuitively, it would make sense that exfoliation would be harder
if the tape is peeled in the normal direction to crystal ﬂake than with an angle as
the different layers are not chemically bonded, but held together by van der Waals
forces, which resultant is along the normal direction. Pulling on it with an angle,
could allow for the layers to slide against one another (tangential force orthogonal
to the van der Waals resultant), slowly reducing the overlapping surface and thus
the van der Waals force. Based on this qualitative (and speculative) reasoning, 45o
would in that regard be the best angle as it is the one providing the best trade of
between normal stress, and "sliding" stress. Yet, it is quite unclear what will make
the crystal cleave rather than stick to the tape or the substrate as a whole. Overall it
is a statistical process.
This statistical approach means that the majority exfoliated crystal will not be
usable as such. They will probably have still too many layers, or will be too small
or even be contaminated or damaged. The next logical step is therefore to "hunt" for
suitable crystals for the fabrication of encapsulated graphene. The typical yield will
==PAGE:32==
22
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
be less than 10 suitable graphene or hBN ﬂakes per chip, depending on the required
size (which indeed important for the ﬁnal device size). Finding the crystals is done
optically in a microscope. The colour of the different crystal thickness is illustrated
on ﬁgure 3.5. Note that this colours are only valid for 90nm-oxide thickness, and
white light. Also, the colours here are given for a 50x magniﬁcation. This is impor-
tant because, for large magniﬁcation, the Numerical Aperture (NA) of the objectives
is larger and thus more light could come from a variety of non-normal angles, which
means that the light path in the oxide and crystals is longer and thus the average
perceived colour varies slightly from the one in the ﬁgure, using e.g a 100x mag-
niﬁcation. Further discussion on the colour of crystals, , including our theoretical
predictions, is carried in section 5.1. Once a good candidate ﬂake is identiﬁed, it is
important to increase the contrast of the ﬂake drastically as this may reveal some
defects that would otherwise be hard to spot (see ﬁgure 3.6). The whole process is
thorough and can easily take up to 30min to an hour per chip, even for an expe-
rienced individual. For this reason, attempts at automating the process have been
carried out. This is out of the scope of this thesis, but interested reader will ﬁnd the
source code on the link in footnote1.
FIGURE 3.5: (A) to (C) Illustration of the variation of hBN color with thickness on SiO2
(adapted from [19]). (A) Microscope image of a ﬂake with various layer thicknesses. (B)
AFM measured height of the different layers. (C) Theoretical color of hBN on 90 nm-thick
SiO2 as a function of the thickness. (D) Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of a graphene
ﬂake illustrating the variation of color with the number of layers.
1https://github.com/NielsPichon/hBN-Hunter
==PAGE:33==
3.2. Van der Waals Heterostructure fabrication: the Hot Pick-up method
23
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 3.6: Microscope images (100x magniﬁcation) illustrating the importance of artiﬁ-
cially increasing the contrast (B) to spot defects in exfoliated hBN few-layers ﬂakes
3.2
Van der Waals Heterostructure fabrication: the Hot Pick-
up method
If 2D materials are in themselves promising, it is perhaps the ability to build cre-
ate van der Waals heterostructures which yields the most potential. The real issue
then is to create such van der Waals heterostructure. This is relevant for this the-
sis as, as illustrated in section 2.2, encapsulated graphene is itself a van der Waals
heterostructure, the hBN and graphene layers being held together by van der Waals
interactions.
There are various methods to build van der Waals heterostructure, such as Molec-
ular Beam Epitaxy, Metal Organic Vapour Deposition or Atomic Layer Deposition.
These methods rely on forming the layers directly on top of each other. This means
that they are thus intrinsically limited by the lattice matching of the materials and the
different electronic interactions, which strongly inﬂuence how the growth happens.
On the other hand, the most versatile and accessible methods must be mechanical
transfer methods which does not suffer from these limitations, and that we use in
this thesis. Essentially, it consists of building the structure from top to bottom by
picking up existing layers of material one after the other. We start with picking up
the top layer, using some sort of stamp, and work our way down, adding one layer at
a time to the stack (a name by which we now refer to the van der Waals heterostruc-
ture), relying on the fact that it would be more favourable for the subsequent layers
to remain "stuck" to the stack rather than it’s original substrate.
Since their introduction by Dean et al.[20], mechanical transfer methods have
evolved a lot. The original method consisted of exfoliating graphene directly on
a PMMA (Poly(methyl methacrylate)) ﬁlm attached to a silicon wafer with a wa-
ter soluble layer. The sample would then be dipped in water which would cause
the PMMA with graphene on top to go to the surface as it is very hydrophobic. It
could then be attached to a glass slide and, after alignment, brought in contact to a
wafer with exfoliated hBN on top, such that a graphene ﬂake would align, within a
few microns, to some underlying hBN ﬂake. The PMMA would then be dissolved
in Acetone. This method had a some issues though. First, as mentioned above, a
precision of a few microns is a large limitation. Then, once dropped on the silicon
substrate there is no way to transfer the resulting stack again. Finally, more critical
==PAGE:34==
24
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
to the fabrication of a high performance device is the ability of getting a clean in-
terface between the different layers. Again, any sort of contamination will indeed
cause scattering in the graphene for instance. And the original method did not al-
low for such clean interface to form, even if they heated the substrate to 110oC to try
and desorb any surface contaminant (water, hydrocarbons...) previously adsorbed
by either the bottom hBN layer or the top graphene layer.
Instead, we are using an improved take on the mechanical transfer in that re-
gard (i.e. cleaner inter-layer interfaces) developed by Pizzocchero et al.[21], coined
"Hot Pick-Up" method. In this approach, all materials are exfoliated on silicon chips,
and picked up using a "stamp" made of a PDMS (Poly(Dimethylsiloxane)) block on
top of which is coated some PPC (Poly(PropyleneCarbonate)). The breakthrough
of this method is that, while retaining the ease of execution and versatility of the
original mechanical transfer, it also allows to reduce drastically inter-layer contam-
ination, by optimizing the mobility of contaminants and the adhesion of different
objects, through the controlled variation of temperature. In addition, when drop-
ping a layer onto another one, the conjunction of the fairly low viscosity PPC and
the elasticity of the PDMS block allow for some squeeze out of the contamination to
happen. This is illustrated on ﬁgure 3.7. Typically, the block of PPC coated PDMS
is brought into contact with the wafer, close to the 2D crystal ﬂake to pick up with a
small angle, and its altitude with regard with the substrate is slowly lowered using
a micromanipulator. This in turn means that the PPC contact front will move very
slowly (e.g. ≃0.1µ/s) and apply a tangential force on the substrate, hence pushing
adsorbed contaminants. This means that there will be theoretically very little if no
contamination between a layer "stuck" to the PPC and the one on which it would be
dropped. In addition to the ability to get cleaner interfaces, this method also has the
strong advantage to allow for picking up hBN ﬂakes directly from the silicon sub-
strate as it appears that it is more favourable for hBN few-layers crystals to adhere
to PPC even at low temperature such as 40oC. Overall, this (theoretically) allows for
the versatile, cleaner, making and transfer of arbitrary van der Waals heterostructure
from exfoliated 2D crystals, and with any number of layers.
We now describe the process that was used in practice to create the devices in the
work.
The ﬁrst step is to prepare the "stamps". The PDMS is prepared by mixing a
base and a curing agent from a Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer Kit by Dow Corning
with a 10:1 ratio and then, after ﬁrm stirring and degassing, curing at 80oC for 24h
at least. It seems that variation on the curing time and temperature may affect the
mechanical properties of the PDMS. However, different versions of the recipe are
used among the research group without obvious consequence on the pickup abili-
ties. Once cured, the PDMS is cut in small 2cm x 2cm blocks. Each block can then
be plasma ashed in an O2 plasma asher at around 1W for 10 minutes, before being
coated as soon as possible with a solution of PPC in Anisole (= Methoxybenzene)
of around 15% concentration (typically 30g PPC for 100g Anisole), before spinning
for a minute at 1500RPM. The idea of plasma ashing the PDMS is to remove con-
taminants while potentially inducing local charges (dangling bonds and residual
charges) which should maximize the adhesion of the PPC layer. Some hopefully
uniformly PPC-coated PDMS is hereby obtained. It can now be further cut into
small 2mmx2mm blocks approximatively which will be glued at the extremity of
a glass slide (see ﬁgure 3.7) with some transparent bi-component epoxy glue. The
"transparency" factor is here very important as during stacking, alignment of ﬂakes
will be performed by looking from the top through, the glass slide, the underlying
PDMS block and hence the epoxy glue.
==PAGE:35==
3.2. Van der Waals Heterostructure fabrication: the Hot Pick-up method
25
FIGURE 3.7: Illustration of the Hot Pick-up technique (adapted from the original paper [21]).
(c) Photograph of the micro-manipulator we used, with the glass slide at the end. (d) and
(e) The assembly of the PPC on PDMS block on the glass slide. Compared to this picture,
we instead glue the PDMS block to the glass slide using transparent epoxy rather than using
tape, as it seem to adhere better to the glass slide, and reduce the extrinsic elasticity provided
by the tape. (f) Schematic illustration of the pick-up process. (i) The initial pickup, with
the ppc coated PDMS block on a glass slide, and the hBN ﬂake to pick on a substrate. (ii)
Heating up of the substrate at a "high" temperature (110oC in the paper while members of
our research group tend to use temperatures varying between 80 and 110oC). (iii) The ﬁrst
drop-down on graphene, with ﬁrst a squeeze out motion, followed by a slow motion up to
leave the hBN on the graphene. (iv) Pickup of the half stack. (v)Heating up of the last hBN
substrate at a "high" temperature (vi) Again, drop down using a slow squeeze out motion,
followed by a very slow upward motion to leave the stack on the substrate.
A ﬁrst hBN layer, the top one of the stack is now to be pickup among previously
exfoliated ﬂakes on a silicon chip (roughly 2cm x 2cm) with 90nm oxide thickness.
The oxide thickness is again quite important as the colour of the hBN will depend
greatly on it and we want to be able to have a good contrast, even through the PDMS
block for good alignment. To perform the pickup, the silicon chip is ﬁrst secured
by applying some vacuum under it, beneath a microscope, and heated up to 50oC,
above the glass transition. Heating up, will make the PPC less viscous when putting
the stamp down, allowing it to ﬂow more and conform better to the ﬂakes we want
to pick up. A glass slide with the glued PDMS block at the end is placed in a micro-
manipulator and brought slowly into contact with the chip, until the desired ﬂake
is entirely covered in PPC. Then the temperature is brought down to 38oC, allowing
the PPC to contract (i.e. reducing the thermal dilatation) while making it less viscous
again. Even more so, the glass transition temperature of PPC being 40oC, it will
be in the glass phase, making it "rigid". Finally, the glass slide is "snapped" back,
which is to say brought out of contact with the slide as fast as possible. Qualitatively,
speed of the retraction is crucial for a good pick-up. The reason for that may be that
PPC behaves as a non-Newtoninan ﬂuid close to its glass transition temperature,
according to [22]2.
2Note that a glass can indeed be regarded as a non-Newtonian ﬂuid as it is under certain consider-
ation still a highly viscous ﬂuid. Some experimental evidence of the eventuality of such behaviour can
be found in the work of Zehdner et al.[23] for various types of glass.
==PAGE:36==
26
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
One of the issues with such pickup method is that creases in the hBN might form
which will prove detrimental in future pickups where ﬂatness is key. To reduce such
creases, slides with hBN on it can be kept on a hotplate at 80 to 90oC for a few min-
utes and inspected in a microscope. They can then be used for the "drop-down" on
a prviously exfoliated graphene ﬂake. Again, we use 90nm-thick oxide on silicon
chips. This time, we heat up the substrate, after securing it with the vacuum suction,
to up to 80-90oC. It is important that the PPC, when getting in contact which the
substrate gets very ﬂuid (low viscosity), to allow for an efﬁcient squeeze out of con-
taminants. In their article, Pizzocchero et al.[21] suggest to use a temperature above
100oC to allow for water to evaporate and desorb from graphene. However, we have
not observed any obvious reduction of contamination in doing so, compared to our
method, which might hint at the fact that remaining contaminants after the squeeze
out between layers are mostly hydrocarbons rather than water. The glass slide with
the hBN on the PPC is dropped down (after aligning the hBN ﬂake over the desired
graphene ﬂake in the microscope view) with a slight tilt angle, all the way to the
point where the contact front of the PPC is very close to the desired graphene ﬂake.
Then the temperature is increased very slowly (e.g. 0.1oC/min) until the front as
gone over the whole graphene ﬂake. At this point, the slide is very slowly lifted,
making sure the hBN is left on top of the graphene ﬂake. For that purpose, temper-
ature can even be increased further.
This will leave a lot of PPC residue. On the one hand, this means that the glass
slide in now rendered useless as the PPC coverage is not uniform, and it shall be
disposed of. On the other hand, the residue can be cleaned by dissolving it in warm
acetone, typically leaving the substrate in a 80oC acetone bath for some time greater
than 10 min. Finally, the substrate should be annealed on a hot plate at a temperature
of around 80 to 110oC to allow for the hBN and graphene layers to relax, and more
speciﬁcally the graphene layer to match the ﬂatness of the few-layers hBN crystal
ﬂake.
Stacking can now be repeated by using the same pickup and drop-down process
again and again.
3.3
Defects minimization
If the hot pick-up process is supposed to allow for fast stacking of van der Waals
heterostructure while minimizing the amount of defects introduced, it remains an
imperfect process. In addition to polymer contamination and wrinkles, many, if not
most, encapsulated graphene stacks exhibit some sizeable amount of optically visi-
ble bubbles, trapped in between the different layers (see ﬁgure 3.8). Removing such
bubbles is a difﬁcult and uncertain process. Therefore, it is important to try and limit
their formation during the fabrication process as much as possible. Nonetheless, the
stacking of hBN-graphene-hBN being a long and thorough process it is of interest to
explore ways of removing these contaminant bubbles during post-processing.
If we are to remove bubbles effectively, it is important to understand their na-
ture and properties. On the one hand, it has been shown experimentally that, even
when samples are annealed in high vacuum, hBN and graphene crystals are densely
covered with contaminants, more speciﬁcally hydrocarbons [24]. This obviously op-
poses the very idea of a clean interface. On the other hand, work by Haigh et al. [25]
exhibit entire areas with pristine graphene within the heterostructure, while hydro-
carbons are coagulated in bubbles. This tend to suggest that contaminants "migrate"
or most probably agglomerate into bubbles. Another possibility would be for the
==PAGE:37==
3.3. Defects minimization
27
FIGURE 3.8: High Contrast microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of hBN on graphene
(horizontal stripe in the center). We see a lot of bubbles which is the main visual indication
of contamination stuck between the different layers.
bubbles to be made out of air that got trapped in between the layers during the drop
down of the stacks on top of the underlying ﬂakes. It is important to keep in mind
that before the graphene lies on to hBN, there is no indication that it would be atom-
ically ﬂat and thus air could very well be within the material "crevasses" during the
drop down. If that was the case, the pressure inside the bubbles should be roughly
the same as ambient pressure, while the squeezed hydrocarbon bubbles would have
indeed a much higher pressure. In their study of the shape of such bubbles [26],
Khestanova et al. have estimated the inner pressure of bubbles to be of the order
of several MPa for micrometer sized bubbles and up to 1 GPa for sub-10 nm ones.
They also argue that if most gases were compressed in a similar fashion, most of
them would liquefy. This clearly crosses out the hypothesis of air being the prin-
cipal component of bubbles. It results that the observed bubbles are hydrocarbon
contaminations bubble, which shape is the result of the competition between elas-
tic energies in the 2D layers and the van der Waals adhesion. Note that it has been
shown [26] that the content of the bubble does not inﬂuence the shape and size of
the bubbles and that bubbles tend to follow a universal proﬁle and aspect ratio, illus-
trated on ﬁgure 3.9, adapted form the original publication. Interestingly, they also
noted that smaller bubbles tend to deviate from the "universal" proﬁle, mostly be-
cause of residual stress in the 2D crystals. Because of the very low friction between
the 2D layers, there should not be any such stress after relaxation. This seems to
indicate that, should the samples be annealed, the bubbles would probably be fewer
but larger in size. From their derivations, we can also further demonstrate that it is
more favourable, for a given volume, to have one big bubble rather than multiple
bubbles. To start with, the universal height (hmax) to radius(R) ratio is given as (again
according to [26]):
hmax
R
=
 πγ
5c1Y
1/4
(3.1)
Here, Y denotes the Young modulus of the top 2D layer (e.g. graphene), γ the en-
ergy per area associated with separating the 2 layers, and c1 a dimensionless constant
==PAGE:38==
28
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
linking the elastic energy to the deformation proﬁle. If we neglect the bending en-
ergy, and set the strain to 0 (which should be the case after relaxation by annealing),
we get a total energy deﬁned as the sum of the elastic energy and the work from
hydrostatic pressure of the bubble:
Etot = Eel + EP = c1Y h4
max
R2 + PV
(3.2)
We now introduce the Volume as a function of height (using cV, a dimensionless
constant):
V = cVhmaxR2
(3.3)
We can right away replace R in this equation using the aspect ratio expression:
V = cVh3
max
s
5c1Y
πγ
(3.4)
This means that hmax ∝V1/3 We also introduce the expression of the hydrostatic
pressure derived in the article (again setting the strain to 0):
P =
1
cVhmax
4Yc1
hmax
R
4
(3.5)
Injecting both the pressure and the volume in the expression of the total energy from
equation 3.2, we get:
Etot = 5c1Y h4
max
R2
=
p
5πγc1Yh2
max =
√5πγc1Y

cV
q
5c1Y
πγ
2/3 V2/3
(3.6)
From there we can deduce:
Etot ∝V2/3
(3.7)
We can see that the total energy will scale slower with the volume than with the
number of bubbles of equal volume, e.g. n bubbles of volume V will have an energy
of twice that of a single bubble of volume V, while a single bubble of n times the
volume (= n × V) will have an energy of only n2/3 that of a single bubble of volume
V. It is thus energetically favourable to have the least possible amount of bubbles,
within the bounds of our approximations. This is also consistent with the Ostwald
ripening model that suggests that minimizing the surface energy, and thus the sur-
face to volume ratio is energetically favourable, which in turn means that bigger
bubbles are more inclined to form.
From the previous considerations, the ﬁrst post processing of a fully completed
Van der Walls heterostructure to consider is annealing. This should have 3 immedi-
ate consequences. First, the annealing should help remove polymer residues from
the transfer. The boiling point of Polypropylene Carbonate is at 242oC and thus, this
polymer used for our hot pick-up stamp, should completely be removed by heating
up at a higher temperature. Secondly, heat will allow for the relaxation of the 2D
layers, which in turn will reduce the stress and make the layers more atomically ﬂat,
which indeed will improve electronic transport. Last but not least, this will allow the
bubbles of contaminants to coagulates into bigger bubbles, leaving more area free of
contamination. In some conditions, it has been reported that the bubbles might as
well disappear fully, possibly by migrating towards the edges as stress is relaxed in
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Defects minimization
29
FIGURE 3.9: Heigh to width (respectively radius) ratio of bubbles stuck below hBN and
graphene layers (adapted from [26]). On top, triangle based pyramidal bubbles are consid-
ered, and on the bottom rounded shaped bubbles are examined. The graphs show experi-
mental measurements of the dimension ratios.
direction of the free edges. Yet, this is not a deterministic process, and very often,
only coagulation is clearly visible in microscope images (see ﬁgure 3.10). We hypoth-
esized that this can mostly be explained in two ways. For once, there is no energetic
incitement for a bubble to move. The deformation being exactly the same (and thus
the energy) wherever the bubble is (except from close to the edge, with respect to
the bubble size). This means that the kinematic of such migration of bubbles will be
very slow if not null, because the bubble is likely to follow a lattice random walk.
This should favour a long annealing at a consistently high temperature, over shorter
annealing times, as statistically, more bubbles are prawn to move to the edges. Also,
any sort of defect will tend to pin the bubbles. More speciﬁcally, edges and some
lattice defects will entail the presence of dangling bonds with which hydrocarbons
will most likely bond. Other sorts of contaminants, less likely to occur, such as solid
particles and wrinkles (these are supposed to disappear during relaxation) will also
most likely block the way of the bubbles by "sucking them up" in the low pressure
area around them, the lower pressure being created by the deformation of the 2D
layers around the particle.
==PAGE:40==
30
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 3.10: Microscope images (100x magniﬁcation) of Encapsulated graphene. (A) The
stack as is after the stacking process was completed. The apparent bubbles are small. (B)
After annealing at 600o for an hour in a tube furnace in N2 gas, at atmospheric pressure.
The bubbles are now much bigger and a bit fewer. This suggest that the contamination has
aggregated in the larger bubbles. This also means that most of the contamination present in
the stack before the annealing was invisible to the naked eye. Note that the chosen example
is an "extreme" case, chosen for facilitating the explanation. However, if coagulation of the
bubbles always happen in one degree or the other, such large bubbles are fairly scarce.
The next step would be to try to "push" the bubbles out. The idea here is that,
if the bubbles would move randomly with heat, we should on the other hand, with
a proper externally applied force, be able to guide them towards the free edge of
the heterostructure. This could possibly be achieved using contact-mode Atomic
Force Microscopy(AFM) with the right set Voltage (for a more detailed explanation
of what AFM is, see Chapter 4.1). Even in the absence of bubbles, this could also
improve the quality of the uncontaminated graphene. As demonstrated by Couto
et al. [27], the main source of residual disorder in high-quality graphene (when the
encapsulating hBN ﬂakes are atomically ﬂat and there are no other source of con-
tamination) is random stress ﬂuctuations. Their hypothesis is that a well applied
force should reduce these ﬂuctuations. This process was used on a few stacks but no
reproducible results were noted. The required force (deﬁned by the contact mode set
voltage) ﬂuctuated a lot from a stack to the other and between bubbles, and usually
lead to actually tearing apart the top hBN layers. This feature, initially an unwanted
by-product was found to potentially be useful and will be discussed further in the
corresponding section (appendix B.5) as a mean of engineering the top hBN thick-
ness.
As mentioned earlier, the main source of bubble riddance in annealing is be-
lieved to be thermal random vibrations of the lattice, which in turn causes the bub-
bles to perform some random walk before getting pinned to some defect, merging
with another bubble via Ostwald ripening, or exiting the lattice. One idea to im-
prove the process would be to organize the vibrations to guide the bubbles out of
the lattice. This could maybe, in theory, be achieved using some well controlled,
externally applied vibrations. Any sort of standing mechanical wave would create
some nodes towards which the bubble would converge. By sweeping the frequency,
the modes would then move, hopefully, dragging the bubbles with them towards
the edges of the layers. Such mechanical vibration could typically be created using
==PAGE:41==
3.4. Cleanroom process: turning van der Waals heterostructures into functional
devices
31
a piezo-electric buzzer on which a sinusoidal tension is applied, with a sweeping
frequency. In theory, such method, if it works, could prove much more efﬁcient
than thermal annealing: the stress ﬂuctuations are organized, and could reach much
greater amplitude without encountering the issues that high temperature annealing
have (higher reactivity with oxygen, curling up of layers). But in practice, our few
trials have proven not to work. This could be due to a few factors. First, the ﬂakes
used for trial had previously been annealed and the remaining contamination was
most likely already pinned to defects. Our supply voltage source had a relatively
low power output, which might not have been sufﬁcient to unpin the bubbles. Sec-
ondly, the resonant frequency of our piezo-buzzer was on the order of 1kHz which
was much lower than the resonant frequency of graphene. From the corrected Morse
potential suggested by T.Belytschko et al [28] for C-C bonds in graphene can be used
to derive a stiffness close to bond equilibrium distance of 834N.m−1. From there it
can be deduced that, modelling again the bonds as spring mass systems, the reso-
nant frequency would be on the order of 6·102GHz which is clearly much higher.
Another issue, we ran into was that of properly transmitting the vibration, in an
isotropic manner to the graphene and hBN lattice. We used some double sided tape,
which has a frequency response of its own and might not have transmitted the vi-
brations as intended. Overall, it is hard to conclude whether or not such method
could work at this stage, but if it did, it surely would present some real interest.
3.4
Cleanroom process: turning van der Waals heterostruc-
tures into functional devices
Once a clean and hopefully defect free van der Waals heterostructure is obtained it
can ﬁnally be processed into an electronic component. This has to be performed in
a controlled, particle free environment to avoid external contamination within the
fabrication process, and is thus done in Nanolab Cleanroom, in DTU3.
In our case, the heterostructures will be processed into Hall Bars (see 4.3). For
such design, and for most designs involving the shaping of graphene based devices,
the ﬁrst step is to etch the outline of the device. The goal of such step is to deﬁne
in which area the electrons will be able to ﬂow, as well as to avoid short circuit
with the soon-to-be-deposited electrical contact leads (they would otherwise all be
connected together by the graphene outside the relevant area). To perform such etch,
the van der Waals heterostructures are ﬁrst transferred to a index-marked silicon
wafer. It is recommended that the index marks are made of deposited metal (e.g.
gold) instead of etching them directly in the oxyde because if a stack or a contact
was to touch the etched index marks, it would result in shorting the device with the
underlying silicon which will be used as the electrical gate in our measurements,
and thus is unwanted. The chips can then be brought inside the cleanroom. After
rinsing in IsoPropanol to remove residual contaminants, PMMA resist is then spun
onto the chip. The chain length of PMMA, the concentration in the the solvent (in
our case Anisol) and rotation speed matter a lot here as they will radically change the
required mask exposure and development times. The parameters for the different
masks are summarized in appendix A. This coat of PMMA will represent our etch
mask. It is then exposed using e-beam lithography in order to "draw" the outline
3DISCLAIMER: Some of the following process has not been performed by the author but by some
other members of the research group as they require extensive training in a clean room environment,
which was deemed as a not so constructive use of the available project time, or are not accessible to
master students altogether (e.g. this is the case of the E-Beam lithography machine).
==PAGE:42==
32
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
of the device (the only non-exposed area being the device itself). In such step, the
important parameter are exposure dose and current. Essentially, the e-beam works
by extracting electrons from a metal tip and accelerating them to hit the surface of a
given sample. This will result in breaking bonds and knocking off atoms, as well as
electrons, at the surface of the material. The spot size will ultimately be deﬁned by
how good the collimation of the electron beam is, but also by the scattering events in
the exposed sample. A lower acceleration current will have the electrons penetrate
less, resulting in less spread out scattering and thus a more precise exposure, but
will also require a much higher dose to get the same knock off damage. Thus, for a
large area, where the etch does not need a lot of precision, a high current can be used
and a lower dose can be set as in fact, each point will also receive some of the dose
of neighbouring points, due to proximity effects (scattering). On the other hand, for
small precise features, a low current but with a higher dose is recommended. In the
case of a positive resist, the knock off damage will cut the polymer chains, making
the resist easier to dissolve with adequate solvents than the non-exposed polymer.
Once exposed, the mask can be developed using IsoPropanol (IPA) or IPA in water
depending on the strength of the developer needed, the addition of water making
for a stronger developer. Again, all parameters are summarized in appendix A. The
resulting etch mask is illustrated on ﬁgure 3.11. Finally, the sample is etched using
Inductively Coupled Plasma etching (ICP) with, successively, SF6 and O2 gas. SF6
is used to etch away the hBN, and O2 the graphene4. The mask can then be rinsed
away using acetone. The remaining device shape is shown on ﬁgure3.11.
FIGURE 3.11: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of one of our devices (device 2575,
chip LR-WC-C12). (A) With a hall bar etch mask. (B) After the ﬁrst etch
A similar process can used to etch where the contacts are going to be deposited,
but without the ﬁnal acetone removal of the mask.
Once this etch is done, the
graphene edge is exposed where the contacts are to be deposited. Because graphene
edges are reactive, it is important to quickly move on with the electrode metal depo-
sition, to avoid having too much contamination sitting at the edge under the metal.
As a matter of fact, the ﬁrst round of devices made during this thesis had there edges
exposed for nearly 20 days before gold was deposited (because of events indepen-
dent of us, namely an unexpected shortage of chromium gold that we use for the
contacts). The result was a really high average contact resistance, if not a total lack
4This will in practice only remove the top hBN and graphene, and not the bottom hBN. This is
because it has been found that the contacts are less fragile and of better quality than when the bottom
hBN is also etched away, like in Wang et al.’s [1] work. It also has the advantage of providing an
insulating bottom layer in the case where the heterostructure has been transferred onto a graphite
back-gate, hence preventing the contacts from shorting the gate.
==PAGE:43==
3.4. Cleanroom process: turning van der Waals heterostructures into functional
devices
33
of conductivity from the leads to the device. This has been assessed by two-point
measurements(see 4.3) which showed resistances on the order of the MΩon aver-
age, where as such measurement usually exhibit resistance on the order of the kΩ.
These contacts had to later be redone in order to use the devices. The metal depo-
sition itself is done by e-beam deposition using the same mask as the etch which,
as mentioned above, has not been removed at the end of the etch process. A ﬁrst
adhesion layer, typically Chromium, is deposited, followed by the actual lead metal.
Note that the choice of the lead and adhesion layer metals is important as the con-
tact resistance should be minimized, while the work function difference between
the adhesion layer and graphene should also be minimized to avoid asymmetries.
Chromium and Palladium have proven to work efﬁciently and are thus seldom used.
Our research group uses Chromium as it has yield better results in the past. Once
the deposition is complete, a lift-off process can be performed. It consists of spraying
acetone on the sample, hereby removing the gold wherever it was deposited on the
mask, and dissolve the mask as well. Resulting "completed" devices examples are
shown on ﬁgure 3.12.
FIGURE 3.12: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of one of our devices (device 2575,
chip LR-WC-C12) once fully processed. In yellow are the gold contacts and in the centre the
eched encapsulated graphene Hall bar.
For this whole process, the masks had to be drawn in an appropriate software be-
forehand and then loaded in the E-Beam machine. This was done using the software
L-Edit by Tanner. A screenshot of the mask drawing corresponding to the device of
the previous example is displayed on ﬁgure 3.13.
In the case of ﬂuorination of a device, a mask is created following the exact same
process. After mask development a step called Descum is performed. The idea is
that for ﬂuorination to exhibit relevant and reproducible properties, the etch though
the top hBN must be as homogeneous as possible. To maximize the probability of
that happening, we perform a short exposure time (e.g. 5s) O2 plasma etch using the
ICP machine, in order to remove any PMMA residue where the mask is supposed to
be dissolved. Finally, the ﬂuorination itself is done using the ICP machine, this time
with SF6.
==PAGE:44==
34
Chapter 3. Device Fabrication
FIGURE 3.13: Screenshot of the mask as drawn in Tanner L-Edit software for device 2575,
chip LR-WC-C12
==PAGE:45==
35
Chapter 4
Characterization
We hereby describe the different characterization methods in use for this work.
4.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
At the nano-scale, there is a very strong correlation between form and function. For
this reason, understanding the shape of the surface of the materials we deal with
is crucial. In the case of Van der Waals heterostructures, it is a very efﬁcient way
of obtaining the defect and contamination distribution within the stack. For this
purpose, we can use Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
On the most naive level, AFM works by running a tip on the material surface
and recording the tip vertical movement to obtain the surface height proﬁle of the
underlying material. The name comes from the fact that at the micro and nano scale,
"contact" actually translates into local atomic forces (typically Van der Waals inter-
actions) of the material’s atoms applied onto the tips atoms.
In practice, the tip is located at the end of a well characterized cantilever, on
which a laser is shone. The laser is reﬂected on a photo-detector which has multiple
quadrants. By reading the resulting voltage on each quadrant, it is possible to obtain
where the laser is hitting the sensor, and thus the position of the tip. Or a the very
least, it allows to obtain the height variations of the height.
The naive approach is in fact not the best because it does not allow to know how
much force is applied by the tip. Instead, we can use a variety of different working
modes, coined as tapping mode, and contact-mode. The contact-mode is the clos-
est to the "naive" approach. The tip is brought into contact with the sample, and
moved vertically by a piezo-electric ceramic to insure the read-out voltage on the
optical sensor remains the same. This in turn, means that the relative position of
the tip with respect to the sample remains constant and thus the applied force on it.
By reading the applied voltage on the piezo-ceramic we can then obtain it’s dilata-
tion/contraction and thus the height variations of the sample. This mode allows for
a good sensing of the surface roughness. But, because the tip directly apply force on
the sample, it might create some irreversible damages (see appendix B.5).
On the other hand, tapping mode is much more gentle on the sample. Because
the cantilever is well characterized, we can derive its resonant frequency. Oscillat-
ing the cantilever using the piezo-ceramic, it is then possible to deduce the sub-
strate height by measuring the oscillation frequency shift due to the proximity of the
sample (any external force will make the oscillation frequency shift away from the
resonant frequency), or by making sure the oscillation amplitude remains constant
and measuring the excitation amplitude variation in the piezo-ceramic necessary for
maintaining this oscillation amplitude constant.
The AFM machine we use, a Brukker Dimension Icon, allows for both constant
oscillation amplitude based tapping mode and contact mode. We use the tapping
==PAGE:46==
36
Chapter 4. Characterization
mode for our surface roughness characterization purposes and contact mode for
stack post-processing (e.g. bubble pushing as discussed in section 3.3).
4.2
Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy allows to obtain a ﬁngerprint of a given material. It is especially
handy with graphene as it allows to identify the number of layer, the ﬂatness and
the amount of defects inside a graphene ﬂake.
The method relies on the non-elastic scattering of photons when traversing a
material, namely Raman scattering. When a photon gets scattered, it can excite the
material to a virtual energy state, typically through the mean of phonons or local
polarisation, before the photon in emitted back. This in turn means the re-emitted
photon will have a different energy (and thus wavelength) than the incident photon.
Shining on a sample with a monochromatic light, e.g. a laser close to the UV
range, we can then measure the intensity of the light emissions from the sample at
a given wavelength λmeasure (using a bandpass ﬁlter) and deduce the shift ˜∆ν from
the original source wavelength λsource deﬁned as follows:
˜∆ν =
1
λsource
−
1
λmeasure
(4.1)
Plotting the amplitude measured as a function of the shift for a given source wave-
length gives a Raman Spectrum, which is unique for each material.
The spectra of graphene and hBN are displayed in ﬁgure 4.1 (adapted from [29]
and [30]) respectively. When looking at an encapsulated stack, the hBN spectrum is
not so relevant in that it is so weak compared to graphene and the substrate peaks
that they are typically ignored (Gorbachev et al. report the hBN peak around 1366
cm−1 is 50 times smaller than the G peak of graphene[31]). As of the graphene
spectrum, we can deduce a lot of information from it [29]. For starters, the G peak
(around 1587 cm−1 for mono layer graphene), corresponding to the in-plane vibra-
tional modes, can teach us how many layers of graphene there are. As illustrated by
ﬁgure 4.2, the G peak increases almost linearly in amplitude with the number of lay-
ers while the peak centre shifts towards lower wave numbers. Meanwhile, the D (for
disorder) peak, relates to the hexagonal lattice breathing modes. This peak is only
noticeable in the presence of signiﬁcant defects. Its position is very dependant on
the excitation laser frequency. The second order of this disorder peak, the 2D peak,
on the other hand, is always present, even without defects, and is the effect of two
phonon modes. It is, as the D peak, a resonant mode, and thus its shape and centre
depends on the excitation wavelength. It should however be centred around 2600
cm−1 for 532 nm excitation. Shape variations with the number of layers is illustrated
on ﬁgure 4.2. Monolayer peak is narrow and symmetric which can be a measure of
purity as well. Finally, the ratio of the 2D peak amplitude over the G peak amplitude
will quantify the quality of graphene (i.e. ﬂatness and amount of defects), the ratio
for encapsulated graphene being expected to be greater than 2.
A good illustration is that of mono-layer graphene on SiO2. In this case, graphene
follows all the corrugations of the underlying substrate and is thus un-ﬂat. Because
of this, the 2D and G peaks have roughly the same amplitude as seen on ﬁgure 4.3.
==PAGE:47==
4.3. Electrical Characterization
37
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 4.1: Raman spectra (A) of graphene and graphite (from [29]) (B) of hBN (from [30])
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 4.2: (A) Raman shift of the 2D peak (from [32]). We can see that the centre fre-
quency of the peak remains consistent, no matter the number of layers, while the amplitude
increases. (B) Raman shift of the 2D peaks in the graphene spectrum, for various numbers of
layers (from [29]). The two graphs corresponds to two different excitation frequencies, illus-
trating that the 2D peak response is dependant on the excitation laser wavelength. Overall,
we can observe that the more layers, the more red shifted the 2D peak gets. The peak also
tend to split into two.
4.3
Electrical Characterization
If 2D materials are to be used as building blocks of modern electronics, their elec-
tronic properties need to be assessed: mobility and mean free path of the electrons,
resistance, hysteresis, doping, band gap... After creating contacts to the encapsu-
lated graphene shaped in a hall bar1(see section 3.4), we can now pass some current
through the graphene sheet, while possibly applying some voltage on the highly
doped silicon wafer that will act as gate (alternatively, the encapsulated graphene
can be dropped onto a graphite ﬂake that will provide a better gate later on). This
will directly give us access to the contact resistance, device resistance, I-V character-
istic, doping and homogeneity, mobility of the electrons, and mean free path of the
1Note that there are other conﬁguration such as the Van der Paw conﬁguration that could also give
information about mobility. But these were not used in this work and thus will not be discussed
==PAGE:48==
38
Chapter 4. Characterization
FIGURE 4.3: Experimental Raman spectrometer of graphene directly exfoliated on oxide. We
can see that the left peak (the G peak) is actually taller than the 2D peak on the right which
is an indication of poor ﬂatness.
electrons. This different characteristics can be obtain by contacting various terminals
of the device in 2-points, 3-point or 4-point measurements.
4.3.1
2 points measurement
The ﬁrst measurement that can be performed is a simple 2 point measurement. Ter-
minals on the device are connected 2 at a time and a resistance readout is performed.
This is more however more of a sanity check to see if the terminals were properly
contacted. This is nonetheless an important check to make as it gives indication that
might become relevant if something behaves oddly. An extra layer of information
can also be obtained by applying different voltages on the gate of the device and
measuring each time the resistance in this conﬁguration. This will reﬂect the con-
ductivity of the device as a function of the doping (a more detailed explanation of
the impact of the gate voltage on doping is provided in 4.3.3)
FIGURE 4.4: Schematics of a 2-points electrical measurement on a hall bar-shaped graphene
device.
==PAGE:49==
4.3. Electrical Characterization
39
4.3.2
3 points measurement
3-points conﬁguration, on the other hand, can be used to extract an individual con-
tact resistance, as current is only ﬂowing across one contact in the circuit, which is
illustrated on ﬁgure 4.5.
FIGURE 4.5: Schematics of a 3-points electrical measurement on a hall bar-shaped graphene
device.
FIGURE 4.6: Schematics of the equivalent circuit to a 3-points electrical measurement on a
hall bar-shaped graphene device. The terminals 2 and 3 have been "merged" in the equiva-
lent circuit because no current is running between them and thus the potential is the same
at the 2 terminals.
Typically, a voltage is applied between 2 terminals and we measure the potential
at the third. Because no current is ﬂowing to the third terminal, the potential is the
same as the one at the second terminal (see equivalent circuit on ﬁgure 4.6). This
in turn allows for the extraction of the contact resistance, after subtracting the lead
resistance which can be estimated easily from chromium/gold conductivity and the
length of the leads (R = L/Aσ, with L the length of the leads, A their cross-sectional
area, and σ the conductivity of chromium/gold).
==PAGE:50==
40
Chapter 4. Characterization
4.3.3
4 points measurement
On the Hall bar geometry, the last electrical measurement of interest is the 4 points
measurement. Such measurement allows to directly probe the voltage drop between
two contacts within the graphene device, without including the contact resistance,
as no current is running through the measurement probes.
FIGURE 4.7: Schematics of a 4-points electrical measurement on a hall bar-shaped graphene
device.
For such conﬁguration, the device is connected as shown on ﬁgure 4.7. A bias
voltage is applied between the end terminals of the device2 which act as the source
and the drain of the device. This is to ensure that some current ﬂows through the
entire device. Finally, the potential difference between two consecutive terminals is
measured.
Additionally, to obtain extra information, a variable potential can be applied to
the back-gate (here the silicon from the wafer, or alternatively graphite if the stack
has been transferred on graphite back-gate), which will in turn vary the doping in
the graphene3.
When applying a voltage on the gate, the graphene and the silicon from the wafer
act as plate capacitor. This means that the surface charge density4 ρ = n · e in the
graphene can be easily calculated as follows:
Vgate = ne
C
(4.2)
where Vgate is the applied voltage, and C the capacitance per area of the plate capac-
itor. The capacitance per area itself can be estimated using a simple plate capacitor
model:
C = ϵ0ϵr
d
(4.3)
2This can also work by connecting other terminals as source and drain as long as the V+ and V-
terminals are enclosed between source and drain. This is especially useful in the case where one of the
end terminals fail or is not properly contacted
3It is indeed possible to apply a voltage on the back-gate in 2 and 3 points measurements, but we
only use it in 4-points conﬁguration in this body of work
4n is the carrier concentration and e the elementary charge of the electron
==PAGE:51==
4.3. Electrical Characterization
41
where ϵr is the dielectric constant of the inter-plate material, and d the distance be-
tween the plates. In our case, we actually have 2 dielectrics layered on top of each
other: silicon oxide from the wafer, and hBN. Using the parallel capacitor formula
we have that the overall capacitance is:
C =

C−1
hBN + C−1
SiO2
−1
=
 dhBN
ϵ0ϵhBN
+ dSiO2
ϵ0ϵSiO2
−1
(4.4)
The conductivity (per area) of graphene can be linked to the carrier density using
the Drude model:
σ = e(neµe + nhµh)
(4.5)
where h and e indices represent holes and electrons respectively. Away from the
charge neutrality point there is mostly one single type of carrier so we can assume
that the charge density obtained with the capacitor model is entirely of a single car-
rier type, either holes or electrons, depending on whether we are in the conduction
or valence band. Inserting the capacitor model in the Drude formula we obtain:
σ = CVgateµ
(4.6)
Looking at the slope of the graph of σ as a function of gate voltage we ﬁnd:
dσ
dVgate
= Cµ + CVgate
dµ
dVgate
(4.7)
Because of the shape of the conduction and valence bands close to the charge
neutrality point (K and K’ points), the mobility is assumed to be independent of
gate voltage in that region and we can further simplify the previous equation as:
µ = 1
C
dσ
dVgate
(4.8)
which gives us access to the mobility.
Ultimately, we can obtain the above mentioned conductivity in a given section of
the device from the measure intensity through the device and the measured voltage
difference through the section of length L and width W:
Vmeas = (V+ −V−) = W
Lσ · I ⇔σ = W
L
I
Vmeas
(4.9)
Finally, the Einstein relation can be used to link the graphene conductivity to the
mean free path λ of the electrons[33].
σ = 2s2ve2
2h
kFλ
(4.10)
where kF = √πn is the Fermi momentum, h the Planck constant, and 2s and 2v,
the degeneracy factors of spin and valleys respectively. Combining this with the
conductivity from the Drude model (equation 4.6), we can obtain the mean free path
as:
λ = ¯h
e µ√
πn
(4.11)
It is important to note that the model above is valid only if the contacts are far
==PAGE:52==
42
Chapter 4. Characterization
enough from each other. This is because the applied model for mobility and mean
free path describes a non ballistic regime, which is to say, where the transport is
dominating by isotropic scattering inside the graphene itself. If the distance be-
tween the contacts or the width (respectively length) of the ribbon was to be smaller
than the mean free path of the electrons, the transport would become dominated
by anisotropic scattering events against the bounds of the ribbons and the contacts,
making the model non-appropriate. A good rule of thumb is to put the contacts at
least a µm apart from each other as room-temperature mean free path of electrons in
graphene is on the order of the µm for a high quality device.
4.4
Terahertz measurements
Terahertz measurements (THz) is a experimental method for obtaining the conduc-
tivity of a given thin-ﬁlm conductive sample. Typically, a femto-second long laser
pulse is shone on a photo-conductive antenna (PCA), which will release a short
electro-magnetic pulse with a frequency range going from 0 to the THz domain.
This pulse if ﬁnally shone on a sample. Then the transmission through the sample
is measured, by reconverting the transmitted signal into an electrical signal, again
through the use of a PCA. As illustrated on ﬁgure 4.8, the transmitted signal will
actually split in a series of subsequent pulses, corresponding to different numbers of
reﬂections inside the substrate.
FIGURE 4.8: Schematics of the transmission of a THz laser pulse through a sample. On
top, only the substrate, is present. At the bottom, the thin-ﬁlm we want to measure the
conductivity of is laid down on the substrate. Note that the equations on the ﬁgure are
only valid for a very thin-ﬁlm (otherwise its thickness should also be considered). This
approximation should be valid in our case as we want to measure graphene based materials,
of sub-nanometre thickness, on silicon wafers of thicknesses of the order of the millimetre
.
Summing over all the transmitted signals, it is possible to derive that the total
transmission coefﬁcient is:
t = Et
E0
=
t12t13eiδ
1 −r23r21ei2δ
(4.12)
==PAGE:53==
4.5. X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy
43
where rij and tij are the reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients at the different inter-
faces, deﬁned as



tij =
2
ni+nj
rij =
ni−nj
ni+nj
(4.13)
and δ = ndω/c here represents the phase shift and attenuation due to transmission
through the oxide of thickness d. Replacing in equation4.12 by the actual expression
of the transmission and reﬂection coefﬁcients, and rearranging the expression using
that δ ≪15, it can be obtained that
t =
1
1 + nsubstrate −iωd(n2 + nsubstrate)
(4.14)
We now use that the refractive index is the square of the dielectric constant:
n2 = ϵ = ϵ∞+ i σ
cϵ0
(4.15)
We ﬁnally obtain (using again that δ ≪1)
t =
1
1 + nsubstrate + σd
ϵ0c
(4.16)
What appears here is that by measuring the transmission, and knowing the sub-
strate oxide refractive index, we obtain a direct measure of the conductivity of the
thin-ﬁlm.
This property can be used to map the local conductivity of a sample
throughout a sample with a high accuracy. The resolution however cannot be re-
ally high as the use of THz ultimately yields a large diffraction limit (the diffraction
limit is deﬁned as dlim = λ/2NA6), with the associated wavelength being of the
order λ ∼10−4m.
4.5
X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy
X-ray Photo-electron Spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface characterization technique which
allows to determine the chemical composition of a sample. I does so by shining a
beam of X-Rays onto the surface of the material and measuring the kinetic energy
of the electrons that get knocked out of the sample by the beam. By plotting the
amount of electrons detected against the binding energy of such electrons (The en-
ergy needed to extract the electrons), we obtain a graph where the peaks are charac-
teristics of the probed elements. The peaks horizontal position henceforth depends
on the electronic structure and the amplitude on the amount of elements of a given
kind.
This is a very surface sensitive method, with penetration depth on the order of
tens of nanometres. This means that doing XPS measurements of a 2D material
should reﬂect quite accurately the composition of such material, as well as include
the peaks from the underlying substrate.
C-C bonds, such as those found in graphene, yield a peak at 284.8eV. Often-times,
a side lobe at around 286 may appear, which corresponds to C-O-C conﬁguration,
5δ = ncω
d
which means that with a pulse in the THz frequency range and an oxide thickness of the
order of 100nm (we typically use 90nm thick oxides), δ ∼10−3.
6NA here stands for Numerical Aperture and is determined by the optics used in the setup, not by
the method itself.
==PAGE:54==
44
Chapter 4. Characterization
typically found in hydro-carbon contaminants, that will inevitably land on graphene
if exposed to ambient air. Organic-ﬂuorine bonds should exhibit a peak around
688-689eV binding energy (source. Thermo-Fisher XPS documentation). Therefore,
when looking at the so-called C1s peak region, centered around the C-C peak, we
should see appear some side lobes, the amplitude of which will increase with ﬂuo-
rination amount
4.6
ARPES and nanoARPES
The ARPES method, which stands for Angle-Resolved Photo-Emission Spectroscopy,
is a technique to probe directly the band structure of a material. It was not used per
se in this body of work but a side goal of this thesis was to prepare samples for
characterisation in a NanoARPES (ARPES measurement with a spot size sufﬁciently
small to probe nano-scale structures). As a matter of fact, this technique is very sur-
face sensitive. This means that it is not possible to probe a 2D material’s properties
in an encapsulated device directly. Several approached to solve this problem where
explored and are detailed in appendix B.
==PAGE:55==
45
Chapter 5
Results
In this chapter we are going to explore how ﬂuorination can be used as a mean of
tailoring the electronic properties of graphene. We will discuss theoretical predic-
tions of the evolution of the properties of graphene with ﬂuorination and explore
them experimentally. Then we will discuss our experimental results regarding the
localized ﬂuorination of encapsulated graphene devices. We will also discuss the
reversibility of the process.
5.1
Optical identiﬁcation of ﬂuorographene
One of the key features of ﬂuorographene is that it is a large band gap semi-conductor.
This has an interesting consequence: it makes it transparent to most of the visible
light, as wavelengths above 400nm (∼3eV) tend to not have enough energy to excite
electrons from the valence to the conduction band and are thus not absorbed, mak-
ing ﬂuorographene mostly transparent. As the energy of the gap grows with the
ﬂuorination amount, all the way to 2.93eV (according to Robinson et al.’s calcula-
tions[12]) for C4F, which corresponds to full ﬂuorination of one side of the graphene
monolayer, it should in theory be possible to identify the ﬂuorination amount of the
graphene by simply measuring the reﬂectance of a ﬂuorographene ﬂake. In practice
it could even more easily be achieved by measuring the RGB contrast of the ﬂake
with the SiO2 substrate in microscope images.
We consider the structure represented in ﬁgure 5.1, where the ﬂake is directly laid
down onto the silicon oxide of a given thickness (dependant of the chosen wafer
substrate), typically of 90nm oxide in our experiments, and an underlying silicon
bulk, which we consider inﬁnite in our calculations. Above the ﬂake is air which
refraction index will be taken as n0 = 1. For the oxide we will only consider the real
FIGURE 5.1: Schematic of the structure we consider in our calculations (adapted from [34]).
Light is coming vertically from the top and the underlying Si wafer is considered inﬁnite in
the vertical direction.
part of the refraction index following the work of Blake et al.[34]. Following their
mathematical development we can compute the reﬂected intensity as a function of
==PAGE:56==
46
Chapter 5. Results
the wavelength:
Ir(λ) =


r1ei(φ1+φ2) + r2e−i(φ1−φ2) + r3e−i(φ1+φ2) + r1r2r3ei(φ1 −φ2)

×

ei(φ1+φ2) + r1r2e−i(φ1−φ2) + r1r3e−i(φ1+φ2) + r2r3ei(φ1−φ2)−1 
(5.1)
φi=1,2 = 2πnidi/λ
(5.2)
ri=1,2,3 = ni−1 −ni
ni−1 + ni
(5.3)
di here refers to the thickness of the i-th layer, ni to the refractive index of the corre-
sponding layer, λ to the light wavelength. The layer numbering is detailed on ﬁgure
5.1. We now deﬁne the overall contrast as the variation of reﬂected intensity between
the background I0 (obtained by setting n1 to 1) and the ﬂake I:
C(λ) = I0(λ) −I(λ)
I0(λ)
(5.4)
As a ﬁrst approximation, one could compute the refraction index of ﬂuorographene
using it’s gap energy Eg of 2.93eV using the Moss relation which is found to be a
good approximation for medium-sized band gap semi-conductors:
n4Eg = 92
(5.5)
However, this is a very generic approach which may not be appropriate for 2D mate-
rials. Instead, it would be better to use theoretical predictions of the refraction index,
such as the one provided by Kumar et al.[9]. On ﬁgure 5.2, it appears that the refrac-
tion index is almost constant in the visible spectrum (from 1.7eV to 3eV), and we will
therefore use a constant value of n = 1.689 for our calculations. Note that this value
is valid for fully ﬂuorinated graphene only. The value for single-face ﬂuorination
may vary. According to the same authors, the imaginary part of the refractive index
should be zero in the optical frequency range.
We can now plot the contrast of graphene and C4F (one-sided graphene ﬂuorina-
tion, which corresponds to 25% ﬂuorination) as a function of wavelength and oxide
thickness, as shown on ﬁgure 5.3.
But this, by itself still requires to perform some spectroscopy measurements to
conﬁrm experimentally, which might prove cumbersome. Because we would like to
be able to identify different ﬂuorination amounts directly from microscope images,
we need further processing. The idea is now to include the red, green and blue
sensitivity (¯r, ¯g, and ¯b) of the microscope camera sensor in order to determine what
colour the ﬂake would appear in the image. This can be done using the following
formula:





R = R +∞
0
Isource(λ)Ir(λ)¯r(λ)dλ
G = R +∞
0
Isource(λ)Ir(λ) ¯g(λ)dλ
B = R +∞
0
Isource(λ)Ir(λ)¯b(λ)dλ
(5.6)
This allows us to compute the contrast individually for the 3 different pixel colours.
As of the source intensity, we consider a white light, obtained from a black body
radiation at 3200K. The emission spectrum in the visible range is displayed on ﬁg-
ure 5.4. Finally, the sensitivity curves for 2 common camera sensors, used in our
microscopes (Nikon DS-Fi2) are shown on ﬁgure 5.5. The resulting RGB contrast
==PAGE:57==
5.1. Optical identiﬁcation of ﬂuorographene
47
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.2: Theoretical refraction index of ﬂuorographene for different ﬂuorine arrange-
ment conﬁgurations (adapted from [9]). The most stable conﬁguration is the chair conﬁg-
uration and is the one used for our calculations. (A) Real part of the refractive index (B)
Imaginary part of the dielectric function. This imaginary part being 0 in the low energy
domain, we assumed a null imaginary park of the refractive index for the visible spectrum.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.3: Contrast as a function of wavelength and silicon oxide thickness.
(A) For
graphene. (B) For ﬂuorographene (from eq.5.1)
for graphene and ﬂuorographene, as a function of oxide thickness, is displayed on
ﬁgure 5.6.
==PAGE:58==
48
Chapter 5. Results
FIGURE 5.4: Normalized emission intensity as a function of wavelength, within the visible
spectrum, for a black body source at 3200K.
==PAGE:59==
5.1. Optical identiﬁcation of ﬂuorographene
49
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.5: RGB sensitivity of some camera sensors. (A) Nikon DS-Fi2 camera. (B) Sony
ICX285AQ sensor (which equipped older versions of the Nikon DS-Fi2 camera)
==PAGE:60==
50
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.6: Contrast as a function of wavelength and silicon oxide thickness. (A) For a
Nikon DS-Fi2 camera. (B) For a Sony ICX285AQ sensor (which equipped older versions of
the Nikon DS-Fi2 camera). The predicted values for ﬂuorographene are for two-sided chair
conﬁguration ﬂuorographene
==PAGE:61==
5.2. Theoretical prediction of the evolution of transport properties with ﬂuorination
51
5.2
Theoretical prediction of the evolution of transport prop-
erties with ﬂuorination
Transport from tight-binding model
To obtain a basic understanding of how ﬂuorination would impact transport through
a graphene ribbon, we performed some transport calculations. To do so, we use a
nearest-neighbour tight binding model, similarly to what we presented in section
2.1. In this model, electrons jump between atomic orbitals on neighbouring atoms,
and spend most of their time "tightly bound" (hence the name) to an atom, by oppo-
sition to the free electron model where electrons position is supposed to be indepen-
dent from the atoms’ positions. In the case of graphene, the schematic can even be
simpliﬁed further as only the de-localized π bond is considered. The motion of the
electrons can be described by there kinetic energy, or hopping matrix element:
Vppπ =

φπ(1)| ˆH|φπ(2)

(5.7)
where ˆH is the Hamiltonian describing the system. In the case of graphene where
all bonds and atoms are identical, Vppπ has a constant value of -2.7 eV, at least when
atoms are 1.42 ˙A apart, the bond equilibrium distance. We also deﬁne the on-site
energy as:
ϵ0 =

φπ(1)| ˆH|φπ(1)

(5.8)
For a graphene lattice the Hamiltonian can be built by ﬁlling the matrix with ones
where two atoms are connected, and zeros otherwise, and multiplying by Vppπ. If
two graphene systems are connected, the right hopping matrix V can be deﬁned in
a similar fashion. An example for the structure on ﬁgure 5.7 is described here:
h = Vppπ


0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0


(5.9)
V = Vppπ


0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0


(5.10)
where h is the Hamiltonian of a the unit cell.
FIGURE 5.7: Schematic of a graphene chain. Each unit cell, for which the is boxed in dashed
blue line and the atoms are numbered from top to bottom. The describing Hamiltonian is
given in equation 5.9 and the right-hopping matrix in equation 5.10.
==PAGE:62==
52
Chapter 5. Results
The global Hamiltonian of any graphene system can be obtained with this for-
malism, by creating a block matrix where the block corresponding to the (n,m) unit
cell is given as:
ˆHnm = hδnm + Vδ(n−1)m + V †δ(n−1)m
(5.11)
We now introduce the Green’s matrix G which contains a collection of solutions to
the time-dependant Schrödinger equation:
HG(t) = i ∂
∂tG(t), with G(t = 0) = 1
(5.12)
From this matrix we can obtain the solutions to the time-dependant Schrödinger
equation, for any initial state f:
φ(t) = G(t) f
(5.13)
For more convenience, we will instead introduce the retarded version of the Green
Equation which can only propagate forward:
G(t) = iθ(t)eiHt
(5.14)
with θ the step function. Further derivation can prove that, in the energy domain,
this retarded Green function can be obtained with a simple matrix inversion:
G(E) = [(E + iη)1 −H]−1
(5.15)
where η is a positive inﬁnitesimal quantity. Using the retarded Green function in
energy and the imaginary part of self-energies of the left and right leads ΓL and ΓR,
which describe the decay rate of the probability of ﬁnding an electron at its initial
position, it is possible to derive the transmission of the given device. Such derivation
is out of the scope of this thesis. The transmission for a given energy is given as:
T(E) = Tr(ΓRGΓLG†)
(5.16)
Implementation and results
Such calculation was implemented, with the help of J.Sødequist, into a real-time
Virtual Reality (VR) sandbox molecular builder that the author has been working
on, parallel to this thesis. In this virtual laboratory, the user can freely build any
molecule, and deposit leads on it. The transport for the contacted device is then
computed and updated in real time, using the formalism previously described. An
example screenshot of a graphene ribbon simulated in the VR software is provided
on ﬁgure 5.8.
Note, that as can be seen on the the screenshot, the user ever only contacts few
atoms. This is made so that even user with little knowledge of the actual computa-
tion can still evaluate the transport properties of the device they are working with.
To make the calculation accurate, the selected leads are replicated, directly in the cal-
culations, in the device direction, a number of times. Then, to obtain the self-energy
of the replicated leads, rather than using the traditional method which implies some
recursive process, we use a Complex Absorbing Potential (CAP), as described in
[35]. In this method, we directly deﬁne the self-energy as a complex potential which
==PAGE:63==
5.2. Theoretical prediction of the evolution of transport properties with ﬂuorination
53
FIGURE 5.8: Screenshot from the VR molecular builder.
The displayed structure is a
graphene ribbon, where the carbon atoms are in black. The left and right leads are rep-
resented by red and blue blobs respectively, around the contacted atoms. The associated
transport is represented on the graph in the background.
grows with distance to the lead-device edge. It is described as follows:



W(x) = i ¯h2
2m
  2π
∆x
2 f (x)
f (x) = 4
c2

δx
x2−2x1+x
2
+

∆x
x2−x
2
−2

(5.17)
where x is the position along the device main axis, x2 is the position of the outer-most
part of the lead, x1 is the position of the junction between the lead and the device and
∆x is the length of the lead. The evolution of such potential with x is shown on ﬁgure
5.9. As can be seen, the values are very close to zero for small distances and grow
very fast as distance increases. This suggest that having long leads is important, the
far lead atoms contributing more than the close ones. For this reason, we have tested
the convergence with the number of "user deﬁned leads" replications, for some well
known systems. The 3D plot of transmission as a function of replications number is
shown on ﬁgure 5.10. Based on this graph, we chose to limit our calculations to 16
replications, as this will minimize the size of the matrices to invert while providing
to converged values. To ensure the validity of our model, we checked it against DFT
calculations, provided by M.Brandbyge. They are displayed on ﬁgure 5.11. As can
be seen there, for a graphene ribbon, the CAP method, gives results very close to
the traditional lead self-energy calculation method (which is recursive) and DFT. It
seems that it slightly overestimates the width of the dip in transmission, and at the 0
energy point, it cannot capture the large peak shown by DFT, which corresponds to
edge states. However, it seems good enough to obtain at least a qualitative under-
standing of the transport characteristics of sp2 hybridized 2D carbon systems.
To be able to start considering ﬂuorination, some modiﬁcations need to be made.
The problem with ﬂuorination is that C-F bonds are made on sp3 orbitals which
are not taken into account in our model. To accurately describe such hopping, we
would need to implement some more complex framework, such as the Slater-Koster
approach which allows for considering more than single-orbital transport. How-
ever, as a ﬁrst approximation, we chose a simpler approach. Because ﬂuorination
==PAGE:64==
54
Chapter 5. Results
FIGURE 5.9: Evolution of the Complex Absorbing Potential with distance to the lead-device
contact point.
FIGURE 5.10: Evolution of transport predictions with the amount of user-deﬁned leads
("unit cells") repetitions, for a graphene ribbon with a ﬂuorine atom sitting on top (see ﬁgure
5.12). It appears that after 16 repetitions, the calculation is converged.
basically saturates the spz orbital of the bonded carbon1, the hopping probability to
and from this carbon more or less goes to zero. Even more so, it also inﬂuences the
neighbouring carbons. To represent this, the functionalization of our graphene lat-
tice with ﬂuorination is simulated by setting the hopping parameters in our Hamil-
tonian to zero whenever a carbon is bonded to a ﬂuorine, and by adding -1 to the
on-site energy of neighbouring atoms. This value of -1 is an arbitrary value chosen
1technically the underlying carbon is not even in a sp2 hybridized conﬁguration but in a full sp3.
We only use the spz denomination here an explicit way to refer to the orbitals facing in the normal
direction to the graphene plane, through which the ﬂuorine will bond.
==PAGE:65==
5.2. Theoretical prediction of the evolution of transport properties with ﬂuorination
55
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.11: (A) Simulated graphene ribbon. (B) Transmission as a function of energy
through the structure in (A), for our setup with Complex Absorbing Potential, the recursive
method for computing the leads self-energies, and DFT simulation.
to match the DFT simulations. Varying the value in fact translates created band gaps
along the energy axis. A value of zero leads to a centred band gap on the zero en-
ergy. Physically speaking, the reason for this negative value added to the hopping
of the neighbouring atoms is that because ﬂuorine is very electronegative, it is going
to capture the electron shared by carbon in the C-F bond. This leaves a hole in the
bonded carbon which will create a potential barrier for other holes (and a potential
well for electrons2). This is reﬂected by adding the negative energy to the on-site
of neighbouring atoms. This also means that adding a ﬂuorine will affect the trans-
mission unsymmetrically for holes and electrons. Such approximation was tested
against DFT (again provided by M.Brandbyge) for a single ﬂuorine atom sitting on
a graphene ribbon. This is displayed in ﬁgure 5.12. We can see that the overall
trend is well captured by our approximation, which we think is enough to obtain a
qualitative understanding of the evolution of transport with ﬂuorination.
Using this framework, we have reproduced the experiment for two different ﬂu-
orination schemes and the resulting data is displayed on ﬁgures 5.13 and 5.14. What
appears is that, a single ﬂuorine atom can have tremendous effect on the transport
properties of graphene ribbon, effectively bringing the transmission to zero for some
energies, which means that a band gap has been opened. The effects are also very
dependant on where the ﬂuorine atoms sit, which is again no surprise. When the
ﬂuorination amount reaches 25% there is for both ﬂuorination patterns a large band
gap opening. Interestingly, in the second ﬂuorination scheme, the transmission goes
to zero for the entire energy spectrum. This is indeed just an artefact from our code
as there is no remaining channel without at least one carbon which hopping has
been brought to zero because it is bonded to a ﬂuorine. In reality, some small hop-
ping probability still exists, and sufﬁcient energy could allow for electrons and holes
to tunnel through such carbon, which would restore transmission for larger ener-
gies. One more observation that can be made is that from the very ﬁrst ﬂuorine, the
quantization of the transmission is lost, implying that, given the scale of the ribbon,
2Note that the -1 factor added to the on-site energy does not describe the phase shift induced by the
potential well for electrons. As such, any interference between electrons created by the ﬂuorine will be
disregarded by our model.
==PAGE:66==
56
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.12: (A) Simulated ﬂuorinated graphene ribbon. (B) Transmission as a function of
energy through the structure in (A), for our setup with Complex Absorbing Potential, the
recursive method for computing the leads self-energies, and DFT simulation.
a single ﬂuorine can create enough scattering events to break quantum coherence.
From these simulations, it appears that we can expect to obtain some signiﬁcant
resistance increase, even with small ﬂuorination times (i.e. ﬂuorination amount).
As the ﬂuorination time increases, the band gap becomes large enough that the de-
vice will stop conducting altogether (resistance well above GΩif not TΩ) unless a
very large voltage is applied, possibly larger than what the device can handle. The
smoothing of the quantization of the transport also suggest that, on the most naive
approach, it would be impossible to get quantum conﬁnement in a ﬂuorographene
constriction. However, it is important to keep in mind that all the above simulations
are performed for a very small ribbon. In a real experiment, ribbons are typically
on the micron scale. This means that the amount of ﬂuorination needed to obtain
the same effects as seen here is indeed larger. We believe that, as far as transport
is concerned, a similar trend could be observed for ﬂuorination ratios on the same
order as those involved here.
For the quantization on the other hand, what our simulation showed is that a sin-
gle ﬂuorine atom can create scattering events on a very large radius (a single ﬂuorine
atom in a 3 "unit-cell" wide ribbon lead to the formation of a band gap, and signif-
icant smoothing of the quantized "steps" in the transport curve). We may speculate
that an uneven edge could be "smoothed" by the scattering radius of ﬂuorine, thus
creating a clean interface for quantum conﬁnement. An illustration is provided on
ﬁgure 5.15. To be able to conclude whether such hypothetic phenomenon is possible,
more detailed calculations would be required.
Applying some voltage to the device will affect the device as it induces some lo-
cal changes to the potential landscape (and thus hoping probability), and thus mod-
iﬁes the Hamiltonian, which is not taken into account in our simulations. Applying
some potential to the gate will change the doping as well, varying the conductance
of the device. This can be simulated by adding some corresponding on-site energy
to the atoms of the lattice. Provided all atoms are affected the same by the gate, this
would result in shifting the transport graph along the energy axis. Following this
hypothesis, for a gate that covers the entire device, we assume that applying some
gate voltage will not change the band structure, and we could be able to change
==PAGE:67==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
57
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.13: (A) Gradual ﬂuorination of a ribbon, with 1 ﬂuorine atom per unit cell. The
carbon atoms are in black and the ﬂuorine in pink. (B) Evolution of transport with the
ﬂuorination for the structures on in (A)
the doping to attain some conductive region again, hence getting an estimate of the
band gap. The gap being relatively large that would however require some signiﬁ-
cant voltage and it is uncertain whether this can be experimentally achieved.
5.3
Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂu-
orination and deﬂuorination
5.3.1
Experimental results
If there is some extensive literature about fully ﬂuorinated graphene CF, there is in
fact very few reports of experimental evolution of the properties of graphene with
single sided ﬂuorination, which is what will happen (or so we believe) if graphene
on silicon oxide or on hBN is exposed to a ﬂuorination via Induced Coupling Plasma
ﬂuorination. There are a few pieces of information that we would like to extract.
The ﬁrst one is to understand under what conditions full one-sided ﬂuorination can
be achieved. We would also like to understand to what extent this ﬂuorination is
==PAGE:68==
58
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.14: (A) Gradual ﬂuorination of a ribbon, with 1 ﬂuorine atom per unit cell. The
carbon atoms are in black and the ﬂuorine in pink. (B) Evolution of transport with the
ﬂuorination for the structures on in (A)
reversible via annealing. And ﬁnally, we would like to understand the evolution of
the properties between the pristine graphene and the fully ﬂuorinated state.
Evolution of the properties with ﬂuorination time
To obtain this information, two sets of samples were used. The ﬁrst one is a set of 8
samples of exfoliated graphene on 90nm-thick silicon oxide. The second one was 6
samples of CVD graphene, transferred on high resistivity 90nm-oxide. We expected
both sample types to exhibit a similar behaviour. The CVD ones where a later ad-
dition for allowing subsequent measurements which require larger ﬂakes because
of there intrinsic resolution (THz measurements and XPS). These samples were ﬂu-
orinated one by one, using ICP etching with SF6 gas, with different exposure time,
ranging from 2s to 1min, with an acceleration power of 75W. The measurements
performed on these samples are described hereafter.
Optical contrast
The ﬁrst measured evolution was that of the optical contrast. The
underlying idea would be to obtain an understanding of the evolution of the optical
contrast with the percentage of ﬂuorination. The results are shown on ﬁgure 5.16
and 5.17 for the exfoliated and CVD batches respectively.3
3For each, the rgb values were obtained by looking at the median values on the graphene ﬂake. The
error was taken equal to the standard deviation. It was then propagated using the following formula:
∆C = ∂C
∂I ∆I +
∂C
∂Ibackground ∆Ibackground, where ∆represents the uncertainty on the value.
==PAGE:69==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
59
FIGURE 5.15: Schematics of how the large scattering radius of ﬂuorine could possibly
smooth the extremity of a quantum constriction. The carbon atoms are in purple and the
ﬂuorine atoms sitting on top are in green. The ﬂuorine constriction "edge" is symbolized by
a solid green line. The scattering radius of some of the edge ﬂuorine atoms is represented by
blue circles. The resulting effective constriction edge is represented by a green dashed line.
The ribbon extends way beyond the represented area.
The ﬁrst observation is that the colour contrast is as expected decaying to a point
where it becomes almost impossible to see the ﬂuorinated graphene, at least in the
visible spectrum, as illustrated on ﬁgure 5.19. Even more so the contrast seem to
decay exponentially. This trend is interesting because it relates to the band gap,
which theoretical predictions predict to grow exponentially. This in turn means that
the amount of light absorbed should decay exponentially as less and less lower-
energy wavelength get absorbed. And it seems to be the case here.
Our theoretical prediction of the contrast of fully ﬂuorinated (both-sides) graphene
on 90nm-oxide, with a Sony ICX285AQ sensor, which is the one installed in the mi-
croscope used for our measurements, is ±1% (depending on the colour). This is
still lower than the current observed colours. This comes as no surprise considering
the band gap of one-side ﬂuorinated graphene is lower than that of fully ﬂuorinated
(from a few tenth of an eV to almost a factor of 2 depending on theoretical prediction
methods, e.g DFT or GW).
The second thing to note is that there is a lot of variability from one ﬂake to
the other, even when they belong to the same chip and have thus been ﬂuorinated
at the same time (typically around 2 to 5% contrast variation). This is also the case
when comparing with the CVD graphene. This highlights the statistical nature of the
ﬂuorination process. One of the possible causes of variation might be the presence of
contamination (water, hydrocarbons...) on the exfoliated ﬂakes, which could in turn
inﬂuence the process the kinetic of the process, especially considering it is conducted
at room temperature (no water sitting on the graphene lattice would therefore be
desorbed under the action of heat). Roughness and defects also play a role as they
make graphene more or less reactive.
One other source of variation is the plasma from the ICP machine itself. Even
once started, it takes some time to stabilize. During this period of time, the plasma
==PAGE:70==
60
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.16: Contrast evolution of ﬂuorinated exfoliated graphene with ﬂuorination expo-
sure time. (A) The average graphene ﬂake colour, as observed on 100x magniﬁcation images
is displayed. (B) Evolution of the contrast with ﬂuorination time. The data was ﬁtted with
some exponentially decaying curves. The vertical error bars were obtained from the stan-
dard deviation of the red , blue and green channel, measured on each image. This standard
deviation is usually around 2 to 3 (8-bit colours) which yields errors on the contrast of around
± 1% on average. The RGB values used are the median of the values on the graphene ﬂake.
The uncertainty regarding the ﬂuorination time is unknown (the machine provider does not
specify any value in the manual), but it is believed to be well below 2 seconds.
may not be homogeneous, and its power may vary to some extend. This of course
implies that the amount of ﬂuorination that happens during stabilization may ﬂuc-
tuate, even on a single sample. According to the clean room employees in charge
of the machine, the ﬁrst 2s of plasma etch should in any case be disregarded as the
inhomogeneity is at its greatest in this period of time. Nonetheless, the ICP machine
showed no sign of ﬂuctuation in any of its readings, nor did the visual camera feed-
back in the chamber. The system being designed for long time etches (typically on
the order of minutes), this cannot be used to conclude on the absence of ﬂuctuation.
Raman spectroscopy
To get a better understanding we also characterized our sam-
ples using Raman spectroscopy. Our spectra are mostly single-point spectra, ob-
tained using a 5mW 455nm laser. A word of caution is here required. The laser of
this machine being ageing, the output power is hardly reproducible. This leads to
widely varying amplitudes collected. However, the relative amplitude of the peaks
==PAGE:71==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
61
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.17: Contrast evolution of ﬂuorinated CVD graphene with ﬂuorination exposure
time. (A) CVD graphene colour evolution (actual images), as observed with 100x magniﬁ-
cation is displayed. (B) Evolution of the contrast with ﬂuorination time. The data was ﬁtted
with some exponentially decaying curves.
should remain the same no matter the laser power. For this reason, we have nor-
malized all our peaks to the Silicon peak amplitude. A typical ﬂuorinated graphene
spectrum is displayed on ﬁgure 5.20, obtained for a sample ﬂuorinated using ICP
for 8s.
As soon as the slightest ﬂuorination is performed, there is a sizeable D peak and
a small and broad D+G peak that appears, while the 2D peak reduces signiﬁcantly.
This matches the observations of Nair et al. [13]. Even if their ﬂuorination method
==PAGE:72==
62
Chapter 5. Results
FIGURE 5.18: Contrast evolution of ﬂuorinated graphene (both CVD and exfoliated) with
ﬂuorination exposure time. The ﬁt was performed on the jointed data of both sample sets
FIGURE 5.19: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of a monolayer graphene ﬂake after
60s of ﬂuorination. On the right the contour of the ﬂake have been traced out in blue blue
dash line for better visibility.
was different, the fact that the spectra appearance are similar suggests that we in-
deed performed ﬂuorination. The D peak appearance in fact comes as no surprise
as it corresponds to a breaking of the symmetry in the graphene lattice (D and its
overtone are in-plane phonon modes, but D only appears in case of asymmetry),
which inevitably happens during ﬂuorination. The D+G peak is probably a conse-
quence of the strong presence of the D peak as it corresponds to a mixture of the 2
in-plane modes D and G. Surprisingly, there is also a side lobe to the D+G peak that
appears, above 3000cm−1, which no literature known to the author makes mention
of. It seams to correspond to the 2D’ peak, the overtone of the D’ peak, which cor-
responds to a disorder-induced phonon. This peak does not need defect to appear
(it can be seen is some pristine graphene samples). Yet it is a testimony of the high
disorder induced by ﬂuorination.
For exfoliated graphene, after 15s ﬂuorination, the ﬂuorinated graphene stopped
having a Raman response altogether. This is consistent with the observations re-
ported in the literature. However, to be certain that the graphene was still there,
==PAGE:73==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
63
FIGURE 5.20: Raman spectrum of ﬂuorographene, after 8s of SF6 ICP etch. We can clearly
see a D peak of about the same amplitude as the G peak. The 2D peak’s amplitude is very
reduced and a broad D+G is visible. An extra side lobe to the D+G peak also appears in most
spectra, here annotated 2D’ as it seems to match the overtone of the D’ peak, at 3230cm−1.
we performed a topography map using AFM. This is shown on ﬁgure 5.21. Note
that for CVD, after 30s, the response is almost null but still present. It is hard to tell
where the discrepancy comes from with certitude. Two main hypothesis are consid-
ered. The ﬁrst one might be that the discrepancy originates in the aforementioned
slow stabilization time of the plasma in the ICP machine. However this hypothesis
is hard to believe for "long" exposure times such as 30s, where the inhomogeneity
of the plasma should average out. The other hypothesis, is that the transfer of CVD
graphene always leave some polymer residues, which in turn could delay the ﬂuo-
rination.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.21: (A) AFM topography of a ﬂuorinated graphene ﬂake, after 15s ﬂuorination.
This very ﬂake showed no Raman response, and is almost invisible in the visible spectrum,
as seen in microscope images (100x magniﬁcation)(B). Illumination has been corrected in (B)
==PAGE:74==
64
Chapter 5. Results
To dive more in-depth, we extracted the peaks, ﬁtting them using Lorentzian
peaks and graphed their evolution with ﬂuorination time (see ﬁgure 5.22 and 5.23
for exfoliated and CVD graphene respectively). If there is a lot of dispersion in the
data, we can nonetheless extract some trends. In terms of amplitude it makes no
doubt that the 2D peak collapses very quickly. Both D and D+G peak appear and, in
the case of CVD, increase, until a certain ﬂuorination threshold where they start de-
creasing until disappearance. More surprising is the increase in G peak. This suggest
that the addition of Fluorination reinforces both in-plane phonon modes, not only
asymmetry driven ones. The 2D peak decrease can be associated to the "high" disor-
der regime where the high disorder makes graphene behave more as a amorphous
structure, reducing second order phonons (averaging of phonon direction).
As expected from literature, the peaks centre remain fairly static with ﬂuorina-
tion time. Fluorination thus does not introduce dispersive behaviour.
From the exfoliated graphene measurements, it appears clearly that all peaks
broaden with ﬂuorination. The trend is less deﬁned for CVD but some increase is
still visible. There is no deﬁnite explanation as of why the global broadening hap-
pens. In many case, the width of the peaks in nano-scale semiconductors can be
correlated to the the crystal scale itself [36][37]. In our case, it could imply the nar-
rowing of crystal domains. This in turn could mean three things. Either ﬂuorination
favours edges, effectively ﬂuorinating edges in priority and thus reducing grain size.
Or ﬂuorination happens in clusters, which is unlikely because our data is rather ho-
mogeneous across a given ﬂake and CVD ﬁlm. The third hypothesis is that graphene
gets etched. The latter hypothesis is actually supported by our XPS measurements,
displayed further in this report. Such hypothesis however would not apply to the
broadening of the D+G peak, as the above mentioned scale-dependant broadening
is for single-phonon peaks, which is not the case of D+G.
A ﬁnal mention of the uncertainty on the measurement has to be made here.
Again, the ﬂuorination time is subject to unknowns because of the ICP plasma sta-
bilization mostly. In the case of CVD, the mandatory presence of transfer polymer
residues also introduces some unknowns. For graphene, the quality of ﬂakes may
vary a lot, which could also inﬂuence how ﬂuorination happens. As of the Raman
measurement itself, the peak ﬁtting may become imprecise, as ﬂuorination increases
especially, because on many measurement the noise level is high compared to the
effective signal. This is especially true for the D+G and 2D peaks.
THz spectroscopy
The DC conductivity of our CVD samples has been measured
using THz spectroscopy4. The original transferred CVD graphene ﬁlm’s conduc-
tivity is displayed on ﬁgure 5.24. It can be observed that the ﬁlm is already fairly
damaged. This should be kept in mind when analysing the data. The less damaged
part of the chip has been diced after the measurement into 6 samples, each of them
being subsequently ﬂuorinated with a different time. The results for 5s and 8s are
displayed on ﬁgure 5.25.
What can be seen is that for both 5s and 8s the DC conductivity drops below the
noise limit of the measurement (∼0.1mS). Similar results were obtained for 12s.5
This follows our theoretical prediction that even a little ﬂuorination amount can
cause large scattering and drastically reduce conductivity.
4The measurements were performed by P.Wheelan.
5The maps for 5s and 12s are incomplete as our THz measurement setup failed during both mea-
surements, the laser shutting down. The existing data is believed to have correctly been collected
nevertheless.
==PAGE:75==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
65
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 5.22: Evolution of the Raman peaks parameters with ﬂuorination time, for exfoli-
ated graphene. (A) Peaks amplitude, normalized by the Silicon peak at 980 cm−1’s ampli-
tude. (B) Peaks centre frequency. (C) Peaks Width. (D) Peaks relative amplitude to the G
peak.
A mention must be made of the conductivity at the edge of our samples. It is
in fact the actual Silicon edge of the diced chip. This means that the input gets
scattered in random direction, hence the measured conductivity. This is in no case
the graphene edge that is conducting.
XPS measurements
Last but not least, the CVD samples were analysed using XPS6.
This gave us access to the amount of ﬂuorine present on each sample. The spectra ob-
tained during the XPS measurement for different ﬂuorination times, centred around
the C1s peaks, are displayed on ﬁgures 5.26 and 5.27. Fitting the various peaks for
our samples, we extracted a trend for the ﬂuorination amount as a function of ﬂuo-
rination time. It is presented on ﬁgure 5.28.
Overall, what appears is that as expected the amount of ﬂuorine on the samples
increases with ﬂuorination time. Even more so, we can see that the proportion of C-F
bonds increases as ﬂuorination time also increases, at least for the ﬁrst 8 seconds of
ﬂuorination, as can be observed by the growing area below the peak around 289eV
in the C1s spectrum. What is more surprising though is that there is also a growing
number of CF2 and CF3 bonds7, as can be understood by the peaks around 291 and
6The XPS measurements were performed by A.Shivayogimath.
7By CF2 bonds, we refer to a carbon atom bonded to two ﬂuorine atoms
==PAGE:76==
66
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 5.23: Evolution of the Raman peaks parameters with ﬂuorination time, for CVD
graphene. (A) Peaks amplitude, normalized by the Silicon peak at 980cm−1’s amplitude. (B)
Peaks centre frequency. (C) Peaks Width. (D) Peaks relative amplitude to the G peak.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.24: (A) DC conductivity map obtained by THz spectroscopy of our CVD graphene
sheet before ﬂuorination. (B) Bar plot of the distribution of DC conductivity in the black
dashed line rectangle on our CVD graphene sample.
293eV respectively. The valence of carbon being of 4, and 3 bonds being made in
graphene, there is only one possible conclusion: the graphene lattice gets damaged
as ﬂuorination time increases. Coincidently, the area below the CC peak at 284-
285eV diminishes, again indicating damage to the graphene lattice. Last but not
==PAGE:77==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
67
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.25: DC conductivity map obtained by THz spectroscopy of two ﬂuorinated sam-
ples. These samples where obtained by dicing the chip mapped on ﬁgure 5.24.(A) After 5s
ﬂuorination. (B) After 8s ﬂuorination.
least, for 12s and 15s etch time, for which the CF2 and CF3 bonds are clearly present,
the CO peak (285 to 288eV) also undergoes a sizeable growth, which also tend to
indicate an increase in the amount of bounding sites for oxygen to bind, and thus
damaging of the lattice.
At this point, it is again important to stress that the initial CVD ﬁlm was fairly
damaged before the experiment was performed. This would inevitably lead to a few
CF2 and CF3 bonds at the damaged edges. Some such bonds could also form with
the polymer residues from the transfer. But the increasing ratios and the trend clearly
indicate that there is more than just contaminants and edges ﬂuorination happening.
==PAGE:78==
68
Chapter 5. Results
FIGURE 5.26: XPS spectrum for the C1s peaks of ﬂuorinated graphene, for 5 and 8s ﬂuori-
nation times. The raw data (in red) is ﬁtted using a Gaussian-Lorentzian peaks mixture (in
yellow) to obtain the blue curve. The background which is removed for the ﬁt is in green.
It is difﬁcult to interpret the absolute ratios, as the sensitivity to different ele-
ments is very dependant on the machine and its optics. In addition, each bond type
may inﬂuence the response of other bond types. For this reason we can only com-
ment on the peak area trend rather than their absolute size. This is not the case how-
ever for the larger peaks (C1s, F1s, O1s...) which amplitude is supposed to mostly
depend on the sensitivity of the machine and the amount of the given elements (C, F
and O respectively for the previously mentioned peaks). Using a sensitivity of 0.286
for carbon and 1 for ﬂuorine, as suggested in [38], we can obtain that the relative ra-
tio of ﬂuorine to carbon actually inverts as the ﬂuorination goes on, with 13% more
ﬂuorine than carbon after 15s of ﬂuorination. This again may corroborate the idea
that graphene gets damaged: because of the valence of 4, carbon would not be able
to bind to more than one ﬂuorine unless some of the C-C bonds in the graphene lat-
tice are broken. Interestingly, even if some of the ﬂuorine was to bind to the polymer
residues and hydrocarbon contaminants, the ratio would never match the one ob-
served as there are (hopefully) in lower proportion than the graphene, and are often
carbon based themselves.
For 30s ﬂuorination, the XPS measurement returned an odd spectrum. A ne-
glectable amount of carbon and ﬂuorine was detected. Yet, optical images support
that the spectrum was indeed measured on graphene. This sample was particularly
==PAGE:79==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
69
FIGURE 5.27: XPS spectrum for the C1s peaks of ﬂuorinated graphene, for 12 and 15s ﬂuo-
rination times. The raw data (in red) is ﬁtted using a Gaussian-Lorentzian peaks mixture (in
yellow) to obtain the blue curve. The background which is removed for the ﬁt is in green.
damaged so results should be dealt with caution. Anyhow, provided the measure-
ment is to be trusted, this would show that after a given ﬂuorination time, the en-
tirety of the lattice could be etched away.
Deﬂuorination and reversibility
To study the reversibility of the process, we have tried to deﬂuorinate our exfoli-
ated graphene samples. We started with low temperature annealing, on samples
ﬂuorinated for 10s. We performed Raman spectroscopy every 25oC step, from 75oC
to 175oC, letting the sample cool down to room temperature in between each step.
Virtually no visible change happened in that range. For that reason, we decided to
try annealing at a much higher temperature. In Nair et al.’s body of work[13], they
observed full deﬂuorination for some of their tests, as low as 250oC, in Argon/H2
atmosphere. We wanted to be certain that if deﬂuorination was to be obtained, it
would happen. For this reason, we chose to anneal our samples at 600oC in Argon
atmosphere for an hour. This time we did observe some change.
Optical characterisation
The ﬁrst thing we noticed was variation in the optical
contrast (see ﬁgure 5.29). Disregarding the 2s point (which, as discussed before
==PAGE:80==
70
Chapter 5. Results
FIGURE 5.28: Graph of the evolution of the area of the C1s peaks for the different bond types
with ﬂuorination time. The areas have been normalized by the total area at each time step.
While CC bonds amount collapses, CF bonds ﬁrst increase and then diminishes after 12s,
while CF2 and CF3 consistently increase. The appearance of CF2 and CF3 bonds coincides
with the explosion of the amount of CO bounds.
might not be representative), the blue and green contrast always increase, in a pro-
portion which is steadily decreasing with the prior ﬂuorination time grows. The red
contrast also decreases on average but very little. This is consistent with what we
expected from the literature, as the bonds get stronger with the amount of ﬂuorina-
tion, and thus harder to break. It is no surprise that the blue and green contrast are
the one undergoing the largest contrast change as the ﬂuorination decreases. The
less ﬂuorine, the smaller the band gap, and thus the longer the wavelengths that get
absorbed. The blue wavelengths getting absorbed ﬁrst, it is normal that the contrast
increases ﬁrst for blue, then green and ﬁnally red.
FIGURE 5.29: Graph of the evolution of how much contrast to the background was gained
during deﬂuorination with regard to before deﬂuorination (for each time step, the variation
was averaged over our various samples).The time on the x-axis is the initial ﬂuorination time
of the exfoliated graphene samples. They have been deﬂuorinated using annealing at 600oC
for 1 hour in Argon atmosphere.
==PAGE:81==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
71
If the trend follows what we would expect from the literature, the values are
nevertheless odd. As seen on ﬁgure 5.30, the contrast values go beyond that of
graphene. This is indeed not compatible with pure deﬂuorination. At this stage
it is unclear whether it is a systematic measurement error (possibly because of some
manipulation mistake with the settings on the microscope) or the sign of an actual
structural change. Further investigation would be needed here. It is to be noted that
the samples came out of the furnace with some odd purple traces on them (see ﬁgure
5.31). This is most probably some pyrolysed polymer residues (from the exfoliation
tape for instance), forming few-layers graphene. If such residue was covering our
samples, it could explain the contrast increase. Also, the furnace used for annealing
is usually used for material growth, and this could very well lead to the deposition
of some contamination left in the furnace chamber, which would also impact the
measured contrast.
FIGURE 5.30: Graph of the RGB contrast after deﬂuorination, as a function of initial ﬂuori-
nation time.
FIGURE 5.31: Illumination corrected microscope images (100x magniﬁcation) of a graphene
ﬂake, (A) before, (B) after ﬂuorination for 10s, and (B) after deﬂuorination for 1 hour at 600oC
in Argon atmosphere. The rather geometric purple shapes correspond to the graphene,
while initially blue and erratic traces are tape residues, that got pyrolysed during anneal-
ing
Raman spectroscopy
The evolution of the Raman spectrum trends obtained after
deﬂuorination is presented on ﬁgure 5.32. The ﬁrst thing to note is that for 15 and
==PAGE:82==
72
Chapter 5. Results
20s prior ﬂuorination time, we now have a Raman response, albeit quite weak in the
case of 20s ﬂuorination. This indicate some obvious deﬂuorination. However for
the rest of the samples, the trends are less clear. The only really noticeable fact here
is that, no matter the original ﬂuorination time, no single sample recovered the orig-
inal pristine graphene state. This goes against what we would have expected from
the literature. One possible explanation is that, as suggested from the XPS measure-
ments, we in fact partially etched the graphene. The higher amount of disorder and
defect induced would be responsible for a large contribution to the D and 2D peaks.
Finally, given the relatively low amplitude of the 2D and D+G peaks compared to
the noise and other peaks, it is hard to say whether the 2D’ peak appeared in the 15s
and 20s deﬂuorinated samples.
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 5.32: Evolution of the Raman peaks parameters after deﬂuorination with prior ﬂuo-
rination time, for exfoliated graphene. (A) Peaks amplitude, normalized by the Silicon peak
at 980 cm−1’s amplitude. (B) Peaks centre frequency. (C) Peaks Width. (D) Peaks relative
amplitude to the G peak.
To try and evaluate better the recovery amount, we graphed the average am-
plitude variation with deﬂuorination for the various prior ﬂuorination times on
graph 5.33. Right away the data exhibits some structure. The lower the ﬂuorina-
tion amount, the stronger the increase of the G peak amplitude with deﬂuorination,
and the more important the decrease in D peak amplitude is. For the D+G peak there
is no noticeable steady variation. Finally for the 2D peak there might be a small de-
crease of recovery with ﬂuorination time. Overall we obtain the expected trends,
which is to say, the less initial ﬂuorination, the more recovery we get.
==PAGE:83==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
73
FIGURE 5.33: Variation of the Raman peaks amplitude with deﬂuorination as a function of
prior ﬂuorination time.
FIGURE 5.34: Evolution of RGB between bilayer graphene and the substrate, with ﬂuorina-
tion time.
The case of bilayer graphene
Along with monolayer ﬂakes, we have also conducted some ﬂuorination experi-
ments on bilayer graphene ﬂakes. The goal here is to see whether we can obtain a
total passivation of the top graphene layer and obtain a van der Waals heterostruc-
ture that behaves just like graphene.
From the optical contrast variation displayed on ﬁgure 5.34, we can see that, as
for monolayer graphene, the contrast decreases with ﬂuorination time. However,
for 60s ﬂuorination time, the contrast goes well below that of monolayer graphene.
This could mean one of two things. Either the ﬂuorination of the top layer also has
an impact on the bandgap of the underlying layer. Or the top layer gets etched away,
which is consistent with what we have seen for monolayer CVD graphene.
As of the Raman spectrum (see trends on ﬁgure 5.35), we can see that the trend
follows that of monolayer graphene. A strong D peak and a D+G peak appear,
while the 2D peak decreases. This decrease is more progressive than for mono-
layer graphene though. The peaks also generally broaden with ﬂuorination time.
==PAGE:84==
74
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
FIGURE 5.35: Evolution of the Raman peaks parameters after deﬂuorination with prior ﬂuo-
rination time, for exfoliated graphene. (A) Peaks amplitude, normalized by the Silicon peak
at 980 cm−1’s amplitude. (B) Peaks centre frequency. (C) Peaks Width. (D) Peaks relative
amplitude to the G peak.
A very interesting fact is that after 20s of ﬂuorination, the centre frequency of bi-
layer graphene slightly shifts towards the position of the 2D peak in a monolayer
graphene. The spectra of monolayer, bilayer and ﬂuorinated bilayer are overlayed
(around the 2D peak) on ﬁgure 5.36. It is hard to conclude with the limited available
data if what we observe is due to the top layer getting passivated, or if it is simply
due to the ﬁtting error (±12cm−1 of uncertainty on the ﬁt of these peaks on average,
as stated by our ﬁtting software, Fityk. The data is indeed very noisy.).
In general, the fact that even after a long ﬂuorination time the Raman response of
bilayer graphene is not rendered similar to pristine monolayer does not suggest that,
as we would have hoped, the top layer is rendered "invisible" by the ﬂuorination.
Discussion
Overall, putting aside the high variation from sample to sample, most probably due
to variations in ﬂake quality and in the plasma stabilisation, as well as the pres-
ence of transfer polymer on the CVD samples, we have been able to extract some
clear trends. As expected, the longer the ﬂuorination time the more transparent the
graphene gets. As of the Raman spectrum, we observed, as reported in the litera-
ture, the appearance of a strong D peak, the signiﬁcant reduction of the 2D one, and
the appearance of a broad D+G peak. For longer ﬂuorination times, we have also
==PAGE:85==
5.3. Experimental evolution of graphene properties with ﬂuorination and
deﬂuorination
75
FIGURE 5.36: Overlayed Raman spectra for bilayer, ﬂuorinated bilayer and monolayer
graphene. The amplitudes are in arbitrary units and chosen for better readability.
noticed the total disappearance of Raman response, which is again in accordance
with reports in the literature.
However, a few observed phenomenons differ signiﬁcantly from the theory, and
reported experiments. We have observed a 2D’ peak which is not mentioned in
previous experiments. The larger discrepancy lies in the XPS data that suggest that
the graphene lattice gets etched away, as signiﬁcant amounts of CF2 and CF3 bonds
appear.
Our guess for why this happens, while not reported in most experiments, is that
we are using ICP etch. This process adds a physical attack to the pure chemical attack
from simply putting the samples in ﬂuorine-based gas atmosphere. It is possible that
the induced plasma coupling power is enough to actually create knock off damage
in the graphene lattice. As a matter of fact this seems to match the observations of
Wang et al.[39] who used CF4 plasma to ﬂuorinate CVD graphene. They also report
signiﬁcant amount of CF2 and CF3 bonds. They stress the inﬂuence of the plasma
power and the amount of defects of the original CVD ﬁlm. Therefore it could be
interesting to reproduce our experiment with different plasma power than the one
we used (75W). They do not however report the 2D’ peak but their measurements
actually stop before 3000cm−1 and could not therefore allow for comments on this
peak.
When de-ﬂuorinating, using 600oC annealing in Argon atmosphere for 1 hour,
we noticed some recovery, both in the contrast and the Raman spectrum. Some
of our samples which where not showing any response even started having a re-
sponse again. The recovery amount was clearly correlated with the prior ﬂuori-
nation time, in accordance with the growing bond energy as ﬂuorination amount
increases. However it was not possible to obtain full recovery of the graphene prop-
erties.
With the available data it is not possible to comment on whether the etching of
the graphene lattice is visible after deﬂuorination. However, the fact that none of
our sample recovered fully, even the low ﬂuorination time one, contrary to what is
stated in the literature, may suggest that the lattice actually got etched away and
that the remaining D and D+G peaks, as well as the 2D’ get a strong contribution
from the induced defects.
==PAGE:86==
76
Chapter 5. Results
5.4
Localized ﬂuorine etching
Because ﬂuorination is a local process, one may imagine to use ﬂuorine as a mean
to pattern graphene devices. An example of such application is given in the work
of Witheres et al.[14]. They effectively obtained an entirely ﬂuorinated graphene de-
vice and then deﬂuorinated parts of it using e-beam deﬂuorination to obtain some
graphene nano-ribbons. It is easy to conceive performing the negative process of
theirs, adding ﬂuorine at speciﬁc locations, through the use of masking, to induce
localized passivation of graphene, or even quantum conﬁnement. Based on our pre-
vious exploration of the ICP-based ﬂuorination process, it appears that it is possible
to achieve such ﬂuorination to a certain extend and hereby tune the transport prop-
erties of graphene.
We have fabricated some devices following the process described in section 3.4.
Only 2 of these devices survived our initial characterization. The other devices suf-
fered from various issues, from absence of gate response, to poorly contacted leads,
destruction by mishandling or electrical failure because of gate leakage. The re-
maining two functional devices are displayed on ﬁgure 5.37. This devices were ﬁrst
characterized using 2,3 and 4 points measurements. We show the resistivity plots
on ﬁgure 5.38. It can be observed that the resistivity signiﬁcantly diverges from the
V shaped curve that we expect from the pristine graphene band structure. First,
the charge inversion point is not unique. This indicates some inhomogeneity in the
graphene ribbon. The multiple points are not centred on zero voltage which is a sign
of intrinsic doping, possibly due to contamination, or lattice damage. Overall, the
mobility in these devices is, for electrons, around 5000cm2/V/s for both regions in
device 2575 and 1000cm2/V/s in device 7525. This is very low which indicates some
poor quality graphene. This indeed will complicate the interpretation of our results.
Yet, since these devices show some conductivity and gate response, we should nev-
ertheless be able to extract some data from their ﬂuorination.
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.37: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of two devices after contact deposi-
tion. (A) Device 2575 on chip LR-WC-C12. (B) Device 7525 on chip LR-WC-C12.
We decided to try 2 different ﬂuorination patterns. The ﬁrst one is a simple 0.5µm
wide bar through the ribbon. This should turn the concerned region of the device
into a semi-conductor. The second one was patterned with a constriction. A line with
a small gap in the centre was drawn as a mask. The hope is that we would manage
to create some quantum conﬁnement in the interstitial area. To do so, the gap was
drawn with a 166nm interstice. The idea here is to try to obtain a constriction on the
==PAGE:87==
5.4. Localized ﬂuorine etching
77
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.38: Resistivity variation with gate voltage. (A) For device 2575, between the left
most bottom 2 contacts (7 and 8). (B) For device 7525, between the right most bottom 2
contacts (2 and 3)
same scale as the work of Terres et al.[3] (∼300nm). Some adjustment were made to
take into account the etch angle (66o) which will inevitably broaden the pattern when
the etchant goes through the top hBN which is roughly 30nm thick. This implies a
broadening on the order of 70nm on each side, which will result in an interstitial
area of 166 + 70 + 70 = 306nm wide. The masked hBN was etched using SF6 in the
ICP machine for 15s for the "bar" and 8s for the constriction. The resulting etched
devices are displayed on ﬁgure 5.39. Note that both devices had 3 contacts on each
side. This mean that we could have the ﬂuorination in between 2 sets of contacts
while retaining a "pristine" segment of the ribbon to serve as reference.
==PAGE:88==
78
Chapter 5. Results
(A)
(B)
FIGURE 5.39: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of our two ﬂuorinated devices after
local etching. (A) Device 2575 on chip LR-WC-C12. A constriction has been etched (B)
Device 7525 on chip LR-WC-C12. A full line as been etched across the device in an attempt
to fully passivate the device region.
The measurements for the 15s bar ﬂuorination turned out to follow what we ex-
pected to some extent. The ﬂuorinated segment showed no sign of conduction with
a resistance bigger than GΩ. The exact measurement of the resistance was not possi-
ble as the currents involved were lower than the noise level measured by our multi-
meter. Nonetheless, we did not get any gate response. This could mean 2 things.
Either the gap created by the ﬂuorination is too large for the gate-created doping
to go out of the gap. Or, as we have seen in our XPS measurements, the graphene
lattice has been etched away. Because, the ﬂuorinated graphene does not have any
Raman response, and the XPS spot-size is larger than the ﬂuorinated region, the only
way to know for certain if it is indeed the actual doing of ﬂuorographene, would be
to deﬂuorinate the region. In any case, we veriﬁed that the device is not destroyed
as a whole by measuring transport through the untouched region of the device, that
yielded the same transport as before ﬂuorination.
The measurements for the 8s constriction ﬂuorination on the other hand showed
no sign of variation, with regard to before the etch. One possible explanation is
that 8s etch is too short for the etchant to go through the hBN. The other possible
explanation is that for 8s ﬂuorination, there is not enough ﬂuorine to affect the re-
maining interstitial channels. It is however unlikely that no increase in resistance
in the ribbon would be detected providing scattering in the ribbon is supposed to
be isotropic and as such the current should ﬂow in the ribbon as whole. Reducing
the width should thus have an effect on the resistance8. This device was then re-
ﬂuorinated for 2 more seconds, without any visible change again. The ﬂuorination
was repeated for 2 extra seconds. At this point our measurements stop showing any
sort of conduction in the ﬂuorinated section. However it is hard to say for certain
as one of the contacts (the "source", which is to say one of the end terminals) was
found not to work any more. We tried using a different terminal as the source but
8As shown in section 5.4 we should at least observe some decrease of the conductivity slope
==PAGE:89==
5.4. Localized ﬂuorine etching
79
the device then burned (a massive gate leakage spike appeared followed by a to-
tally ﬂat signal through the device) leaving us with no deﬁnitive answer. The device
was conﬁrmed to be burned optically as we can see fringes in the optical images,
translating some drastic heating at various spots in the device (see ﬁgure 5.40).
FIGURE 5.40: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) or device 2575 after it failed electri-
cally. The diffraction fringes testify of intense heating that happened.
As mentioned, it would be interesting to deﬂuorinate the remaining device to
ensure that it is whole. There is one hurdle to deﬂuorinating such device however.
Because the leads’ metals and encapsulated graphene have very different thermal
expansions, annealing the device at high temperature will undeniably break the
contacts. One could imagine performing such annealing and then redepositing con-
tacts, but this would imply changing the device geometry and thus its property,
making our reference irrelevant. Some other methods for performing the deﬂuori-
nation could imply local heating using an e-beam (similarly to the work of [14]), or
a laser. Because of the high vacuum and extreme low contamination required for
e-beam lithography, we did not get access to a working e-beam machine we could
use for deﬂuorination. As of laser deﬂuorination, we have tried to use a prolonged
exposition of one of our CVD graphene, previously ﬂuorinated for 8s, in the Raman
spectrometer. We used the maximum laser power, 7.6mW, for 3h, with a 10x objec-
tive. No optical change was visible between the exposed area and the surrounding
graphene ﬁlm. They was no noticeable change in the Raman response either. The
used laser power is relatively low, which means that it is not impossible that lo-
cal laser deﬂuorination works, but this would require a dedicated setup at the very
least.
Our transport measurements proved rather inconclusive overall. Provided the
ﬂuorination does passivate completely graphene, no signal or gate response should
be noticeable, which is what we think we might have observed. But if that is the case
there is no way to tell whether what we observe is the result of passivation or if the
device simply failed, without deﬂuorinating. The deﬂuorination itself proved more
difﬁcult than when graphene is on Silicon oxide, and this because of the mismatch
between the thermal expansion of the leads and of the device itself. We are therefore
==PAGE:90==
80
Chapter 5. Results
unable to conclude at this stage on the transport properties of ﬂuorographene, and
the reversibility of the ﬂuorination in-situ.
==PAGE:91==
81
Chapter 6
Discussion and Outlooks
Results
Through the course of this thesis we have been able to study how some properties
of graphene evolve as we gradually functionalize it with ﬂuorine. Such ﬂuorination
was performed using Induce Coupled Plasma etch with SF6 gas as this is the method
we traditionally use to remove the top hBN few-layers of an encapsulated graphene
heterostructure.
What we have observed partially matches the results obtained in the literature
through other ﬂuorination methods. Generally, our measurements tend to indicate
a gradual opening of a band gap.
Optically, this can be translated in a reduction of the optical contrast, as measured
on microscope images, because less and less wavelengths of the visible spectrum are
absorbed, their energy becoming lower than the growing band gap as ﬂuorination
times increases. Using 90nm thick silicon oxide covered wafers, the obtained con-
trast after ﬂuorination times larger than 15s for exfoliate ﬂakes also matches roughly
our theoretical predictions, which is to say the contrast becomes on the order of ±2%
contrast with the background, while our predictions suggested a ±1% contrast for
dual-sided ﬂuorination (which as a larger band gap).
From Raman spectroscopy, we have observed a signiﬁcant increase of the D peak,
to match the G peak amplitude, even for short ﬂuorination times, while the 2D peak
decreases signiﬁcantly and a D+G peak also shows up. We also noted the appear-
ance of a 2D’ which the literature makes no mention of, and which suggests an added
disorder in the lattice. The growth of the D peak and the D+G peaks are interpreted
as the breaking of the lattice symmetry by the introduction of ﬂuorine atoms. After
about 15s seconds of ﬂuorination time, the Raman response of ﬂuorographene dis-
appears, which is consistent with the opening of a bandgap larger than the excitation
laser energy (455nm and 532nm for our two systems).
Theoretically, we have predicted that even a very small ratio of ﬂuorination could
cause signiﬁcant scattering and by doing so open a band gap. Through TeraHertz
spectroscopy mapping, it appears that, even for 5s of ﬂuorination time, the con-
ductivity of our samples drops below the noise limit of our measurement device
(∼0.1mS). This implies a signiﬁcant increase of scattering events and an associated
drop in transmission, as predicted, and possibly the opening of a gap.
The only real departure from what we expected from theory lies in our X-ray
Photo-electro Spectroscopy data. For ﬂuorination times below 8s, our spectra show
the appearance of C-F bonds in increasing quantities, suggesting a gradual ﬂuorina-
tion of our graphene sample. However, from 12s and onwards, signiﬁcant amounts
of CF2 and CF3 bonds can be observed (by CF2 it is to be understood a carbon atom
bonded to two ﬂuorine atoms). This is not possible if carbons atoms are still in the
==PAGE:92==
82
Chapter 6. Discussion and Outlooks
graphene lattice where each form three bonds with neighbouring atoms. The in-
crease in CF2 and CF3 bonds amount forbids the hypothesis of these bonds simply
being at the edges and defects. We believe that what happens is that the graphene
lattice effectively gets etched away during the ﬂuorination process. This indeed goes
against the theoretical belief that graphene is impermeable to ﬂuorine. However ICP
ﬂuorination also involves a physical attack from the accelerated plasma ions which
could be responsible for the damage observed.
As of deﬂuorination, it was observed that our samples’ properties evolve to-
wards less-ﬂuorinated properties after annealing at 600oC for 1h in Argon atmo-
sphere. Even more so, the less ﬂuorinated the samples, the more recovery happened,
which is consistent with the fact that the more ﬂuorinated graphene is, the stronger
the bonds to ﬂuorine are. Such recovery translates into an increase of the contrast,
which is larger for less ﬂuorinated samples, and a regain of amplitude of the G peak,
and a decrease of the D peak in our Raman measurements. We have even observed
that samples with ﬂuorination times of 15 and 20s respectively started exhibiting a
(albeit small) Raman response, while they would not before deﬂuorination. Nev-
ertheless, contrary to what was stated in other studies, even our less ﬂuorinated
samples did not recover there pristine graphene properties, still exhibiting notice-
able D and D+G peaks. We believe the discrepancy lies in the fact that out ﬂakes
got etched, as suggested by the XPS data, which means that our ﬂakes have been
irreversibly modiﬁed.
Overall it appears that ﬂuorination using ICP does work in the sense that a band
gap is opened. However, with the current power in the plasma, the process may etch
graphene for longer exposure times, making the process irreversible to some extend.
We also noticed some large variations from graphene ﬂake to graphene ﬂake
which could be attributed to the original graphene quality variations and contami-
nation, as well as the slow stabilisation of the plasma in the ICP machine.
As of transport, we have successfully measured and ﬂuorinated an encapsulated
graphene hall-bar shaped device. Such ﬂuorinated device showed no sign of con-
duction whatsoever in the ﬂuorinated area. However, we did not succeed in deﬂu-
orinating it, which would have been the only way, given the ﬂuorination area, to
tell apart electrical failure of the device from actual passivation. Signiﬁcant etch-
ing of the device is probably not relevant here because optically, the area inside the
constriction appears the same colour as the bottom hBN, not like the Silicon oxide.
If the latticed had signiﬁcantly been etched, the underlying hBN would also have
been, leading to a different colour. The deﬂuorination of such a device is, even un-
der the hypothesis that a better tailored process would be reversible, very complex
because ﬂuorographene is very stable chemically and it is not possible to anneal the
device without breaking it because of mismatch in thermal expansion of the different
compounds of the device.
Discussion
From the present results it appears that one-sided functionalization using SF6 ICP
etch does succeed in opening a large band gap in graphene. However the current
power used in the plasma (75W), which is the one used for etching hBN initially, is
too strong and results in irreversible damage of the graphene.
To obtain a deeper understanding of whether this process could be better tai-
lored to become reversible, it would be interesting to reproduce the experiments of
this thesis with a lower power to evaluate whether damage are still present and if
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 6. Discussion and Outlooks
83
ﬂuorination can still be obtained. This would also implies the making of hBN etch
tests with the new parameters, to make sure such low power is still compatible with
the etching of the top hBN layer of an encapsulated graphene device, which is es-
sential if the method is to be used to ﬁne tune the properties of a device in-situ.
Exploration of other methods for deﬂuorinating a device is also needed. Anneal-
ing not being an option, local heating using an e-beam or a laser could be a suitable
route. Also, it is reported in the literature that hydrazine, which is usually used for
reducing graphene-oxide, could be used for this purpose.
Provided the etching process gets better controlled, it would be interesting to
further explore the potential of ﬂuorographene as a mean of patterning a device. If
our experiment of building a ﬂuorographene constriction did not succeed because
of an electrical failure of the device, our theoretical hypothesis of a smoothing of the
edge by the large scattering radius of ﬂuorine does support the possibility of quan-
tum conﬁnement. Also, this could be tested as a way of patterning quantum dots for
instance, the properties of which are highly sensitive to the quality of edges of the
dots. In any case, it would be interesting to study whether the mentioned quantum
smoothing would happen and whether it is compatible with quantum coherence in
the gap of a constriction, using ﬁrst principle-calculations beforehand.
Consequence for the applications
We would now like to evaluate the implications of our ﬁndings on the applications
detailed in introduction. To start up with it seems that the idea of re-purposable de-
vices is not yet accessible. Without any mean of performing damage-free ﬂuorina-
tion and deﬂuorination, such application is at the moment forbidden. However the
hope is that through better control of the ICP ﬂuorination, it could still be attainable.
The same goes with selective etching of hBN in graphene-hBN heterostructures.
As of all-graphene transistors, consisting of a partially ﬂuorinated bilayer graphene
ﬂake, a few issues arise. We have not found found any compelling evidence of a
bilayer graphene ﬂake starting to behave as a mono-layer ﬂake so far. After long
ﬂuorination time there might be a hint of the 2D peak shifting towards the position
of the 2D peak in monolayer graphene. However this is not sufﬁcient evidence to
be able to conclude whether it is in fact possible. What could be happening in re-
ality is that with the current settings, the top layer gets partially etched, leading to
a ﬂuorinated bottom layer which goes against the idea of passivating the top layer
only.
Overall, the suggested applications are not possible with the recipes we used, be-
cause of the irreversible damage induced. Nonetheless, with a lower plasma power,
there is no strong evidence showing this is not achievable, especially for short ﬂu-
orination amount where more of the original properties of graphene are retrieved
during deﬂuorination (or at least for which the characteristics of the sample shift
more towards less ﬂuorinated samples characteristics).
As a ﬁnal note, from our experiments, ﬂuorination appears to be a highly sta-
tistical process, as we have noticed a wide variation from sample to sample. This
is mostly due, or so we believe, to the strong inﬂuence of the initial graphene qual-
ity, and to the slow stabilization time of the plasma in the ICP machine. This does
not forbid our applications per-se, but it does imply that many samples might be
required to obtain a given set of characteristics (e.g. the desired band gap), and thus
that ﬂuorination might be better designed for large scale production, where hav-
ing a statistical distribution of properties across samples is acceptable, rather than
==PAGE:94==
84
Chapter 6. Discussion and Outlooks
small, highly reproducible batches. Finding a way to guarantee a better deﬂuorina-
tion (which will hopefully be allowed by a lower ICP power) could remedy to this
pitfall by the reversibility it would provide.
==PAGE:95==
85
Appendix
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
87
Appendix A
Cleanroom fabrication parameters
FIGURE A.1: Table of the parameters used for the different cleanroom processing steps.
==PAGE:98==
88
Appendix B
Sample preparation for
nanoARPES characterisation
B.1
Motivation
ARPES, which stands for Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy, is a spec-
troscopy method, allowing to directly probe the band structure of the surface of a
sample. This is achieved by shining a laser on a sample with a given angle. This will
knock off electrons with a given kinetic energy that depends on the electron work
function, binding energy and the initial photon energy. Conservation of the electron
momentum implies that in-plane momentum of the electron is conserved, while the
normal component is not and is dependant on the band depth to vacuum. By mea-
suring the kinetic energy of the electrons, perpendicular to the sample surface it can
then be deduced the binding energy and the band depth.
The problem with such technique is that it is a surface characterization technique
and thus it requires that the material to probe be "visible". This is typically a problem
if one wants to probe graphene in an encapsulated van der Waals heterostructure.
Our research group, in partnership with a team of Aarhus University, would like
to perform some nano-ARPES (essentially a ARPES measurement with a nanometer
scale beam size) measurements of graphene based structures such as an antidot lat-
tice in graphene made by nano-lithography [8], or some local ﬂuorographene struc-
tures. The former is only possible in presence of at least a top hBN ﬂake, while the
latter is also dependant on the presence of hBN for insuring a least amount of con-
tamination before ﬂuorination. Some way of removing the top hBN is thus needed
to allow for the nanoARPES experiments, to be conducted in fall 2019.
B.2
Stacking with very thin hBN
The ﬁrst obvious method to guarantee the minimum amount of disturbance from
hBN top layers would be to minimize the amount of top hBN layers to start with.
However, this is technically very difﬁcult. Below 30nm, hBN on 90nm-oxide be-
comes almost invisible. And even more so, it tends to curl up. This somehow ruins
the idea of a ﬂat hBN support for graphene. An example is provided on ﬁgure B.1
which is a picture of what the microscope camera sees through the PDMS block.
The blue-ish blob in the centre is actually a close to 5nm thick hBN ﬂake, with the
brighter and most visible areas being the curled up edges. What is more is that pick-
ing up very thin ﬂakes is actually very difﬁcult. In fact, similarly as for graphene,
picking up with the hot pick up method requires a minimum thickness that seams to
revolve around a few nanometres, which already corresponds to tens of hBN layers,
==PAGE:99==
B.3. Flipping Stacks
89
a single hBN monolayer being 0.3nm thick. This option is thus probably not to be
preferred.
FIGURE B.1: Picture of the view from the microscope camera (50x) during stacking. The low
contrast blue blob is the hBN ﬂake on top of the PDMS block. The brigher blue edges are
believed to be the curled up edges of the ﬂake.
B.3
Flipping Stacks
To obtain quality edges when using lithography to pattern graphene, it is essential,
according to the work of Jessen et al. [8], to have a top hBN layer. However there
is no indication that a bottom hBN layer is required. This means that theoretically,
a "half-device" could be made where only the top hBN layer and the graphene are
present. Then one could imagine ﬂipping the heterostructure upside down. Polshyn
et al. [40] report that they have successfully done so.
The general method consist of using a thin ﬁlm of polymer, typically PPC, that
is picked up using some adhesive tape. This ﬁlm is then placed on top of a PDMS
block at the end of a glass slide to be used as a stamp for hot pick-up, in place of the
PPC covered PDMS block we normally use. This will allow to separate the PPC onto
which the heterostructure will be stuck after pickup. the ﬁlm can then be dropped
upside down on another substrate. Because of the relatively low fusion temperature
of PPC, the ﬁlm can at this point be removed by annealing above 275 oC, which will
leave the ﬂipped heterostructure on the new substrate.
This method has a few pitfalls. The ﬁrst is the way the ﬁlm has to be secured to
the tape. Because we need to be able to put the PPC ﬁlm in contact with original
substrate on one side, and on the new substrate on the other side, this means that
we must, prior to attaching the ﬁlm to the tape, cut a small rectangular area from
the tape, which will be the contact are. It is then important that the tape is not
too brittle. Otherwise, the ﬁlm might break on attachment to the tape, on pickup
of the heterostructure, or when detaching the ﬁlm from the PDMS block. This last
step has proven in our trials to be the most difﬁcult step during which most failures
happen. The obvious way to increase the yield strength of PPC is by increasing the
concentration of the polymer in the solvent, for a consistent spin coating rotation
time and speed. However, the ﬁlm thickness cannot be increased mindlessly. The
issue is that if the ﬁlm is too thick, when trying to evaporate it, as it liqueﬁes, it will
ﬂow, moving the heterostructure along, which might damage it. Also, thicker ﬁlms
tend to leave more residues. We have tried various concentration ranging from 5 to
==PAGE:100==
90
Appendix B. Sample preparation for nanoARPES characterisation
25% mass (we used Anisole as a solvant), which we spun at both 1000 and 2000RPM
on glass slides. We observed that with a concentration of 15% (roughly 30g in 100g
Anisole) at 2000RPM, we managed to pickup and ﬂip the heterostructure with a high
yield. Note that our trials were performed on raw hBN ﬂakes and that results may
vary for actual heterostructures.
As a side note, we would like to underline that it is of crucial importance to
let the PPC cool down far below the glass transition temperature because the ﬁlm,
which does not conform to the underlying PDMS block tends to deform signiﬁcantly,
a phenomenon which is encouraged by softening with heat. An illustration of the
high elasticity of PPC when heated up is provided on ﬁgure B.2
FIGURE B.2: Picture of the hot pick-up setup for stack ﬂipping. The PPC covered tape is
placed at the end of a glass slide, with the tape free area aligned onto a PDMS block. It is
possible some diffraction fringes below the glass slide, close to the substrate which corre-
spond to the deformed ﬁlm.
B.4
Selective Etching of top few-layers hBN
This is one of the direct potential applications of the main results of this thesis. Pro-
vided graphene could be completely deﬂuorinated, one could simply etch the top
hBN of a device using SF6 ICP etch. This would also ﬂuorinate the graphene which
will need to be then be deﬂuorinated. Based on our current results, such application
is not yet doable. However, as mentioned in conclusion, we believe that with a better
ﬁne tuning of the ICP etch power, one could maybe achieve reversible ﬂuorination.
Ideally, the etch will be made on an un-contacted device to avoid breakdown be-
cause of different thermal expansions, which will ultimately allow for deﬂuorination
directly in the ARPES chamber, thus protecting the graphene device from external
contaminants until the very last minute.
==PAGE:101==
B.5. Mechanical removal of hBN
91
B.5
Mechanical removal of hBN
A last approach would consist of mechanically removing the top hBN few layers,
or at least thing the hBN down sufﬁciently in order to minimize its impact on the
ARPES measurements. The problem lies in the vertical control of the mechanical
action. One way that has been investigated is using an AFM tip. The AFM has
initially been used to try and remove contaminants from between the layers (see 3.3).
But, while investigating the parameter space, it was found that with a sufﬁciently
high applied force (controlled by the set voltage) by the tip, in contact mode, and
scanning speed, the top hBN layers were carved into. We will refer to the opened
area as a window. The ﬁrst opened window is illustrated on ﬁgure B.3.
FIGURE B.3: Microscope image of our ﬁrst mechanically created "window" in the top hBN
ﬂake of an encapsulated graphene stack.
The depth of the window is approximatively
15±3nm. The tip used was a Bruker TESPA V2 with a nominal cantilever stiffness of 37
N/m, and a scanning speed of 12.5µm/s.
Seeing the interest of such discovery as a potentially hBN thickness engineering
tool as well as a candidate for removal of trapped bubbles, the experiment has been
repeated, this time intentionally, on various stacks and freshly exfoliated hBN. Using
both allowed to rule out the contribution of the underlying substrate in the process.
Also, the experiments were always caried out with the tip model, a Bruker TESPA
V2, to insure a reproducible cantilever stiffness, thus limiting the parameter space.
Note that the set voltage and the stiffness here play a symmetric role. Increasing
the set voltage implies a higher steady-state deformation of the cantilever and thus
a greater applied force, while increasing the cantilever stiffness will also increase
the applied force for a given deformation. To rule out the hypothesis of a blunt or
broken tip as the cause of the window opening the experiment was conducted with
different tips of the same make and model, as well as several time in a row with the
same tip, each time producing consistent results. It was found that for a scanning
speed of 10µm/s (2Hz scanning frequency on a 5µm scanning window), it was not
possible to open a window, no matter how high the set voltage was (we tested from
0.5V to 9V which corresponds roughly to up to 24.6µN1 of vertical force applied
1the sensor sentivity of the Icon pt.2 AFM machine with a TESPA V2 tip was measure at 76nm/V,
meaning that a deﬂection of 76nm of the tip would yield a 1V readout on the sensor
==PAGE:102==
92
Appendix B. Sample preparation for nanoARPES characterisation
on the sample). For a scanning speed of 20µm/s (2Hz scanning frequency on a
10µm scanning window) on the other hand, it was found that from 6V set voltage,
which corresponds to a downward force of 16.4µN, a window would consistently be
opened, while lower set voltage wouldn’t (an example is illustrated on ﬁgure B.4).
FIGURE B.4: (A) Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of another window openened in
van der Waals heterostructure. The tip used was a Bruker TESPA V2 with a nominal can-
tilever stiffness of 37 N/m, and a scanning speed of 20µm/s. The window, in the deep
area, has a 16±3nm depth. (B) AFM map (tapping mode) of a hBN ﬂake after a window
was opened. This ﬂake was the subject of some extensive testing with different set voltages
ranging from 0.5 to 6V and as can be seen, only one area exhibits signs of it, corresponding
to the 6V set voltage. It is approximatively 14±3nm deep
The scanning speed seems to play a decisive role in this process. This hints at
the fact that few-layers hBN might behave as a visco-elastic material. What it entails
is that hBN would resist shear ﬂow as it is stressed. Hence, a fast moving external
force would result in a higher stress concentration and thus lower yield stress point
than a slower applied stress. Such hypothesis has yet to be investigated.
The other interesting observation of these measurements is the fact the win-
dow depth seem to be always in the same range.
For all the opened windows
with a 20µm/s scanning speed and 6V set voltage, the depth was approximatively
15±4nm, as illustrated on ﬁgure ??. This means that given a certain top hBN depth, a
certain amount of it could reproducibly be removed. It is important to note here that
in the cases where the experiment was conducted on encapsulated graphene, the
presence of graphene after the experiment was accessed using raman spectrometry.
Some devices have even been made out of some of the windowed stacks (see B.5).
No hypothesis as of why the mechanical removal stops after a given depth could be
formulated so far.
It has also experimentally been observed that increasing the scanning speed to
40µm/s leads to a deeper window of around 30-50nm, but this was only assessed
optically as the left hBN residues around the window prevented the AFM machine
from safely scanning the ﬂake after mechanical removal.
On a last note, it is important to keep in mind that "catching an edge" of the top
hBN ﬂake with the tip will most often result in tearing apart the top layer, no matter
what scanning speed or set voltage is used.
==PAGE:103==
B.5. Mechanical removal of hBN
93
FIGURE B.5: Microscope image (100x magniﬁcation) of device 7525 on chip LR-WC-C12 at
the ﬁrst etch mask step. It can be observed that part of the masked area overlaps some
mechanically removed hBN. The ﬁnal device was found to work perfectly, but with some
high inhomogeneity, possibly due to the step edge at the border of the window.
FIGURE B.6: Microscope image (50x magniﬁcation) of a van der Waals heterostructure with
a top window of roughly 50nm deep, almost going through the top hBN entirely. It was
opened using a scanning speed of 40µm/s and a set voltage of 6V. Again the presence of
graphene afterwards was assessed using Raman spectroscopy.
==PAGE:104==
94
Bibliography
[1]
L. Wang et al. “One-Dimensional Electrical Contact to a Two-Dimensional
Material”. In: Science 342 (Nov. 2013), pp. 614–617. URL: https://science.
sciencemag.org/content/342/6158/614.
[2]
J. Son et al. “Atomically precise graphene etch stops for three dimensional
integrated systems from two dimensional material heterostructures”. In: Na-
ture Communications 9 (Dec. 2018). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication / 327942269 _ Atomically _ precise _ graphene _ etch _ stops _
for_three_dimensional_integrated_systems_from_two_dimensional_
material_heterostructures.
[3]
B.Terres et al. “Size quantization of Dirac fermions in graphene constrictions”.
In: Nature Communications 7 (May 2016). URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/ncomms11528.
[4]
R. Decker et al. “Local Electronic Properties of Graphene on a BN Substrate via
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy”. In: Nano Letters 11 (2011), 2291–2295. URL:
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/nl2005115.
[5]
D. Pacile et al. “The two-dimensional phase of boron nitride: Few-atomic-layer
sheets and suspended membranes”. In: Applied Physics Letters 92 (Apr. 2008),
pp. 4477–4479. URL: http://research.physics.berkeley.edu/zettl/pdf/
346.APL.92-Pacile.pdf.
[6]
M. Kindermann, B. Uchoa, and D. L. Miller. “Zero-energy modes and gate-
tunable gap in graphene on hexagonal boron nitride”. In: Physical Review B 86
(2012). URL: https://journals.aps.org/prb/pdf/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.
115415.
[7]
J. Xue et al. “Scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy of ultra-ﬂat
graphene on hexagonal boron nitride”. In: Nature Materials 10 (2011). URL:
https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat2968.
[8]
B. S. Jessen et al. “Lithographic band structure engineering of graphene”. In:
Nature Nanotechnology 14 (Feb. 2019). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41565-019-0376-3.
[9]
V. Kumar and R. Santosh. “First-principle calculations of structural, electronic,
optical and thermodynamical properties of ﬂuorinated graphene”. In: Materi-
als Science and Engineering B 246 (July 2019). URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jallcom.2013.08.025.
[10]
O. Leenaerts et al. “First-principles investigation of graphene ﬂuoride and
graphane”. In: Physical Review B 82 (2010). URL: https://journals.aps.org/
prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.82.195436.
[11]
H. Sahin, M. Topsakal, and S. Ciraci. “Structures of ﬂuorinated graphene and
their signatures”. In: Physical Review B 83 (2011). URL: https://journals.aps.
org/prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.115432.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
95
[12]
J. T. Robinson et al. “Properties of Fluorinated Graphene Films”. In: Nano Let-
ters 10 (July 2010). URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/nl101437p.
[13]
R R. Nair et al. “Fluorographene: A Two-Dimensional Counterpart of Teﬂon”.
In: Small 6 (2010). URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201001555.
[14]
F. Withers et al. “Nanopatterning of Fluorinated Graphene by Electron Beam
Irradiation”. In: Nano Letters 11 (Aug. 2011). URL: https://pubs.acs.org/
doi/abs/10.1021/nl2020697.
[15]
B. Wang et al. “Photoluminescence from nanocrystalline graphite monoﬂuo-
ride”. In: Applied Physics Letters 97 (2010). URL: https://aip.scitation.org/
doi/10.1063/1.3491265.
[16]
M. Dubecky et al. “Reactivity of Fluorographene: A Facile Way toward Graphene
Derivatives”. In: The journal of physical chemistry letters 6 (Mar. 2015). URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00565.
[17]
P. Y. Huang et al. “Grains and grain boundaries in single-layer graphene atomic
patchwork quilts”. In: Nature 469 (Jan. 2011). URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/nature09718.
[18]
A. Shivayogimath et al. “Do-It-Yourself Transfer of Large-Area Graphene Us-
ing an Ofﬁce Laminator and Water”. In: Chemistry of Materials 31 (Mar. 2019),
pp. 2328–2336. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.chemmater.
8b04196.
[19]
Y. Anzai et al. “Broad range thickness identiﬁcation of hexagonal boron ni-
tride by colors”. In: Applied Physics Express 12 (Apr. 2019). URL: https : / /
iopscience.iop.org/article/10.7567/1882-0786/ab0e45.
[20]
C. R. Dean et al. “Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electron-
ics”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 5 (Oct. 2010). URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/nnano.2010.172.
[21]
F. Pizzocchero et al. “The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of van der
Waals heterostructures”. In: Nature Communications 7 (June 2016). URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/ncomms11894.
[22]
J. D. Thomsen. “Measuring and Tailoring the Structure of Two-Dimensional
Materials by Transmission Electron Microscopy”. PhD thesis. Technological
University of Denmark, 2017, p. 28.
[23]
C. Zehnder et al. “Lithographic band structure engineering of graphene”. In:
Scientiﬁc Reports 7 (Dec. 2017). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41598-017-17871-4.
[24]
M. H. Gass et al. “Free-standing graphene at atomic resolution”. In: Nature
Nanotechnology 3 (Sept. 2008), 676–681. URL: https : / / www . nature . com /
articles/nnano.2008.280.
[25]
S. J. Haigh et al. “Cross-sectional imaging of individual layers and buried in-
terfaces of graphene-based heterostructures and superlattices”. In: Nature Ma-
terials 11 (July 2012), 764–767. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nmat33860.
[26]
E. Khestanova et al. “Universal shape and pressure inside bubbles appearing
in Van der Waals heterostructures”. In: Nature Communications 7 (Aug. 2016).
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms12587.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
[27]
N. J. G. Couto et al. “Random Strain Fluctuations as Dominant Disorder Source
for High-Quality On-Substrate Graphene Devices”. In: Physical Review X 4
(Oct. 2014). URL: https://journals.aps.org/prx/abstract/10.1103/
PhysRevX.4.041019.
[28]
T. Belytschko et al. “Atomistic Simulations of Nanotube Fracture”. In: Physical
Review B 65 (June 2002). URL: https://journals.aps.org/prb/abstract/10.
1103/PhysRevB.65.235430.
[29]
A. C. Ferrari. “Raman spectroscopy of graphene and graphite: Disorder, elec-
tron–phonon coupling, doping and nonadiabatic effects”. In: Solid State Com-
munications 143 (July 2007), pp. 47–57. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0038109807002967.
[30]
I. Stenger et al. “Low frequency Raman spectroscopy of few-atomic-layer thick
hBN crystals”. In: 2D Materials 4 (June 2017). URL: https://iopscience.iop.
org/article/10.1088/2053-1583/aa77d4/pdf.
[31]
R.V.Gorbachev et al. “Hunting for Monolayer Boron Nitride: Optical and Ra-
man Signatures”. In: Small 07 (Jan. 2011). URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/
smll.201001628.
[32]
Y. Liu et al. “Temperature dependence of the electrical transport properties in
few-layer graphene interconnects”. In: Nanoscale Research Letters (2013). URL:
https://nanoscalereslett.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/1556-
276X-8-335.
[33]
A.Shafﬁque. Graphene Carrier Transport Theory. Springer, Mar. 2012. URL: https:
//www.nist.gov/publications/graphene-carrier-transport-theory.
[34]
P. Blake et al. “Making graphene visible”. In: Applied Physics Letters 10 (Aug.
2007). URL: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.2768624.
[35]
H. Xie et al. “Complex absorbing potential based Lorentzian ﬁtting scheme
and time dependent quantum transport”. In: The Journal of chemical physics 141
(Sept. 2014). URL: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.4898729.
[36]
Y. Gao et al. “Size-Dependent Raman Shifts for nanocrystals”. In: Scientiﬁc Re-
ports 6 (Apr. 2016). URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4840311/.
[37]
I.H.Campbell and P.M.Fauchet. “The effects of microcrystal size and shape on
the one phonon Raman spectra of crystalline semiconductors”. In: Solid State
Communications 58 (1986). URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0038109886905132.
[38]
J.F.Moulder et al. “Handbook of X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy”. In: Physi-
cal Electronics (1992). URL: https://books.google.dk/books/about/Handbook_
of_X_ray_Photoelectron_Spectros.html?id=A_XGQgAACAAJ&redir_esc=y.
[39]
B.Wang, J. Wang, and J. Zhu. “Fluorination of Graphene: A Spectroscopic and
Microscopic Study”. In: ACS Nano 8 (Jan. 2014). URL: https://pubs.acs.org/
doi/abs/10.1021/nn406333f.
[40]
H.Polshyn et al. “Quantitative Transport Measurements of Fractional Quan-
tum Hall Energy Gaps in Edgeless Graphene Devices”. In: Physical Review Let-
ters 121 (Nov. 2018). URL: https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.121.226801.
