==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation, characterization and assessment of alternative 
process chains for 3D functional nano patterning of bone plugs 
for ligament reattachment 
 
 
 
Benassi Lorenzo 
MSc Thesis, 
September 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
Summary 
 
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................................. 1 
Preface ............................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Introuction ........................................................................................................................................................ 4 
Components and Mould Optimizations ........................................................................................................... 8 
Plastic Flow Simulation ................................................................................................................................... 18 
Chemical Process Evaluation .......................................................................................................................... 25 
Laser Texturing - LIPSS .................................................................................................................................... 39 
Mold Inserts machining .................................................................................................................................. 46 
Process Chains ................................................................................................................................................. 50 
Cavities Analysis .............................................................................................................................................. 55 
Injection Moulding .......................................................................................................................................... 72 
Plastic part assessment................................................................................................................................... 78 
Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................................... 86 
References ....................................................................................................................................................... 88 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
1 
 
Abstract  
 
Surface structuring of medical implant has been shown to reduce the rejection rate of 
medical devices inserted inside living tissue. Several studies have shown that by 
texturing the surface of medical implants at micro/nanoscale it is possible to foster cell 
adhesion.  
The surface texturing of medical devices poses many challenges in terms of cost and 
time needed for achieving such result. A viable solution for mass production of surface 
enhanced medical devices is achieved via injection molding. However, nano structuring 
of injection molds, especially in case of complex 3D molds for micro components, is not 
a trivial task. Accessibility of the surfaces to be structured and processing time are of 
main concern and limiting factors on the choice of the microstructures.  
In this work, two different process chains are analyzed for the nano structuring of a 
bone micro plug. The first method relies on a chemical deposition process in order to 
produce a semi random structure on the entire mold surface of the medical component. 
The characteristic size of the structures is controlled by acting on the deposition 
parameters. The second process relies on laser structuring of the mold components by 
producing Laser-induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS). 
The two process chains are compared and an evaluation of the applicability in different 
production scenarios presented. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
2 
 
Preface 
 
This thesis has been prepared at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the accomplishment of 
master’s degree at the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia.  
The work has been carried out from March to September 2019 at the department of Mechanical 
Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Giuliano Bissacco and Francesco Giuseppe Biondani.  
I would like to thank my supervisors for their inspiration and contribution to my work. 
My gratitude goes also to Dr. Peter Torben Tang, for his support and knowledge during the chemical 
experiment. I want to thank also Prof. Islam Aminul, for his support in the CFD simulation, Dr. Berit Wenzell 
for the precious help during the SEM analysis and all the staff of the Mekanik workshop for all the work. 
 
 
 
Lorenzo Benassi 
==PAGE:6==
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
4 
 
Introuction 
 
 
Nanotechnology application, for biomedical implant, are rising interest. The possibility 
to give new proprieties to a medical device in order to reduce healing time and avoid 
rejection of the foreign body by our immune system [1] is an important challenge for 
the future integration between engineering and medicine. 
Many technologies are available to issue nanofeature on a medical device [2], but the 
majority of those technology are optimized for operate on flat surfaces. 
The present thesis aims to explore the generation of nanopatterning in complex 3D 
geometry, such as mould cavities, in order to obtain micro sized plastic parts with 
nanostructure on the surface.     
The work starts from the result obtained by the last year classroom of PhD Summer 
School in “micro mechanical system design and manufacture”. 
The outcome was a micro device, in polymeric material, composed by two parts aimed 
to reattach ligament in small bone application, like hand bone [3]. 
In the case of a partial detachment, the injury will frequently heal itself, if given enough 
time and if it is not expose to stress. On the contrary, in case of complete detachment, 
surgery may be needed to re-attach the soft tissue to its associated bone.  
 
The change in the surface roughness can improve the biocompatibility of a component 
inside our body, the optimal nano-roughness is mainly related to the cell-type. A nano 
patterned surface promotes cell adhesion, cell proliferation and cell differentiation [4]. 
The generation of nanostructure can improve both the strength of the implant and 
reduce the healing time. Researchers have found that rough and smooth surfaces will 
encourage different types of cell adhesion (fig.1). 
 
Fig.1 Schematic of the interactions between bone and the implant surface 
 at different topographical scales. from [4] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
5 
 
The implant, subject of this works, consists in two parts: 
 
- a flexible component, here referred as anchor, with a clothespin shape. His role is 
to be insert inside a hole drilled in the bone and expand generating a friction fit 
 
- a pin part, here referred as plug, that force the anchor to expand. This component 
presents a hole, the surgeon insert a wire through it. By pulling-up the wire the 
interference fit is created. 
 
 
The method of use can be divided into four operative steps (fig. 2): 
 
1) Hole drilling in the bone 
 
2) Wire insertion in the plug hole 
 
3) Plug insertion in the bone 
 
4) Anchor insertion 
 
 
    
    
 
Fig2. Device functionality. From left to right: hole drilling, plug (blue) insertion with wire (yellow), anchor 
(red) insertion to generate friction fit 
 
 
We need to optimize the components geometry, in order to achieve a better injection 
moulding process and evaluate different methodology to generate nanopatterning on 
parts surfaces. 
The selected materials in the project are PLA (Polylactic-acid), a synthetic biodegradable 
polymer, and PP, one the most widespread and economic plastic compound. The PLA 
gain lots of attention because present many favourable properties, such as easy to 
fabricate, not toxic or carcinogenic, biocompatible and high mechanical strength. 
Another important characteristic of PLA is the material lifetime, it should allow that the 
anchor remain functional for a minimum time of 12 months and maximum time of 36 
months and then it will be absorbed by the body since this polymer is fabricate using 
starch, an organic compound consisting of glucoses joined by glyosidic bonds. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
6 
 
Unfortunately, not only cell, osteoblast, and protein proliferate in the nano-roughness 
surface, but also bacteria and virus. This is one of the critical points because infection 
can occur and compromise the patient healing, it could be potential harmful for 
patient itself [5] [6]. Many studies suggest that bacteria prefer low roughness surface 
(Ra in few nanometre range) or adhere to surface with topographic feature larger than 
the bacteria size (1-2 µm). So, an intermediate value should be good enough both to 
promote the plant-body integration and to prevent and reduce the risk associated to 
the proliferation of bacteria [7]. 
The target dimension selected for our nanostructure falls in the range of 500 nm. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. A comparation of the scales of various biological and physic world 
 
Most of the studies to assess the cell proliferation along nanopatterned surface are 
conducted on flat sample. We want to investigate the creation of nanofeature on 
complex 3D geometry, such as cavity on mould, in a fast, economic and reproducible 
way on industrial scale. The selected methodology to achieve this result are an 
electrochemical process (copper plating) and a laser texturing process (LIPSS).  
The two process differs in terms of nanofeature shape, spatial uniformity and 
distribution, treatable material and control parameters.  
The replication of nanostructures, engraved on a metal surface, to a polymer skin is 
not a trivial passage. Injection moulding is characterized by a high pressure and 
velocity injection of plastic material inside a close cavity, then when the cavity is fully 
filled the material is solidified. Injection moulding use temperature higher than the 
melting temperature (T > Tm). 
In this work we take into account micro injection moulding (µIM), this technology can 
replicate on the final polymer-part the nanofeature in our dimension range. 
 
==PAGE:10==
7 
 
 
 
Fig4. Polymer processing capabilities in terms of micro/nano features vertical replication at different 
features’ lateral dimensions, from [8] 
 
 
The combination of fast nanopatterning methodology and micro injection moulding 
bring interesting prospective to the industrialisation and large-scale production for soft 
tissue reattachment. The aim to reduce the healing time and reduce the fabrication 
cost of texturized product is an important objective for the future development of 
biomedical components industry.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
8 
 
Components and Mould Optimizations  
 
This section aims to introduce the starting point of the entire project by showing the 
system components, the defect that have been found and the applied design 
modification 
in 
order 
to 
get 
a 
correct 
injection 
moulding 
fabrication.  
We started by analysing an already existing mould with two different cavities: one for 
the anchor insert (here referend simply as anchor) and one for the anchor plug (here 
referred simply as plug) (fig.1). The running system and the injection gates belong only 
to the movable mould part.   
 
Fig. 1 Components: anchor (left) and plug (right) 
 
Trying to create some sample using this mould in an injection machine, several 
problems and defects occur in the final part such as air bubble, extraction problem, 
voids, short shot and flash. Those problems are strongly related to a non-optimized 
design of the part and the mould. We want to obtain the same final products, with the 
same functionality, but of course without defect. To do so we need to modify either 
the part and mould design.  
 
The parts consistently differ in shape bringing problems during the plastic filling 
operation, the flow balance between the cavities is not easy. 
The anchor fills a volume 8,01 mm3 and the plug just 5,8 mm3 so the anchor have 
1,38 time more material. 
As we will see further, despite this difference the anchor fills faster than the plug 
does. This behaviour is mainly cause by the gauge difference. Considering the 
definition of thin wall as any wall thickness between 0,3 mm to 0,9 mm [9] we can 
see that the anchor components is a thin wall element ( 0,51 mm) in contrast of the 
plug ( 1,5 mm). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
9 
 
 
Moreover, the aspect ratio of cavities as the length of plastic flow divided by the thick 
of the part is: 
 
𝑙
ℎ ratio for anchor = 3,3 / 0,51 = 6,47 
 
𝑙
ℎ ratio for plug = 3,2/1,5 = 2,13 
 
Those ratios differences explain the imbalance in the cavity filling. This mean that 
anchor cavity will have a higher plastic flow velocity and so it needs less time to be filled 
for the same quantity of material.  
The bubbles air are mainly concentrated in the plug component making it the critical 
part of the system. These voids have different position, depending on the injection 
parameters: they can be concentrated near the gate or over the hole. Vacuum voids 
are often caused by uneven solidification between the surface and the inner sections of 
the product and especially occur in thick area. 
       
 
 
==PAGE:13==
10 
 
    
              
 
 
Fig2. Plug defect analysis: air bubble in different position 
 
 
 
Also, the anchor could present some imperfection such as deformation, material flesh, 
voids  
 
          
 
Fig. 3, anchor defects: voids and flash (left), air bubble (right) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
11 
 
Now we list the geometry variation and the different design proposal for both cavities 
and mould. 
 
-anchor modify:   
we added draft angle to the plug-housing and to the rope span, this will help the 
demoulding phase. Also all the edges have been rounded  
 
 
 
 
Fig.4: anchor draft angle 
 
 
-plug modify:   
Plug was the main problematic component. Particularly, the critical areas are the 
surrounding spot around the hole, because there is a flux deviation and is the furthest 
point from the injection and the area near the gate because present a thick wall 
geometry. The design proposals are: all circular shape, basically is the same geometry 
but applying a revolved boss. This allow an axial-symmetric geometry which is good for 
plastic flux and also remove all the sharp edges. The draw backs are that the contact 
between anchor and plug is concentrated only on the theoretically contact line. The 
ejector pin must be trimmed to create a concave shape in order to follow the circle 
shape of the plug inside the cavity. 
 
        
 
Fig.5: all circular shape plug 
 
==PAGE:15==
12 
 
The other proposal is to generate a bulge, or protuberance, in the bottom flat part of 
the plug cavity. This local modification is created only in the movable halves of the 
mould. This geometry tries to reduce the chunky geometry, give a preferred direction 
to 
the 
plastic 
flow 
and 
increase 
the 
velocity 
of 
the 
stream.  
 
The Venturi effect state that the pressure of a fluid reduces when passing through a 
constricted section. In order to maintain the mass continuity, the fluid velocity of an 
incompressible fluid must increase in the passage through the constriction while the 
pressure must decrease. This is given by the conservation of mechanical energy, each 
increment of kinetic energy generated by the velocity increment is balanced by a 
pressure drop. 
 
fig. 6: venturi schema 
 
 
p1-p2 =  
ρ
2  * (v22 – v12) 
 
where: 
ρ is de fluid density 
v1 = is the fluid velocity at the wider section (lowe valure) 
v2 = is the fluid velocity in the restricted section  
 
If the velocity increase, we need to consider the shear stress because in micro 
component is easy to reach the maximum value acceptable by the material, the 
Newton’s viscosity law’s show that the shear stress between adjacent fluid layers is 
proportional to the velocity gradients between the two layers 
𝜏= −𝜇
𝑑𝑣
𝑑𝑦  
where 𝜏 is the shear stress, 𝜇 is the viscosity coefficient and 
𝑑𝑣
𝑑𝑦  is the shear rate. 
The computation of the actual velocity is a complicated task that require direct 
numerical simulations which is not the aim of this thesis. We started with literature 
works addressing this problem [10], trying to understand the qualitative behaviour of 
the phenomenon and using a trial and error approach in order to find the best 
geometrical dimension.  
==PAGE:16==
13 
 
 
So, we have simulated different bump geometries given by the equation: 
 y = -a (x-a)2 + 0,5 
 where a is a coefficient with discrete value ( 15, 25, 50)  
 
 
Fig.7 Sketch of the different bump geometries 
 
The paper considers a channel height of 2 and the maximum bulge height as 0,5; in 
our case the plug is 1,50 mm thick so using the same proportion the maximum height 
is 0,36 mm. 
 
 
 
Fig.8 Average streamwise velocity contour plots from [10] 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Average pressure contour plots from[10] 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
14 
 
As shown in fig 8 and 9 by progressively restricting the section, the first part of the 
bump makes the flow velocity increase consistently with the pressure decrease which 
is mechanically responsible for the acceleration. After the top of the bump the flow 
decelerates. 
 
Implementing this geometry and testing different protuberance dimension with 
simulation in MoldFlow Insight (see next chapter) we decide to use the following 
dimension and position for the protuberance.  
 
 
 
                                            
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10 plug with pocket design (top left), section (top right), mould protuberance dimension (bottom) 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
15 
 
Mould modifies. 
 
For the mould we try a different orientation of the cavity by lining our parts orthogonally 
to the injection flow. The modify was also on the runner system because we want to 
simulate two cases: half circular and all circular channel, which means that in one case 
the runner system belong only to the movable part and on the other case is in both 
side. This type of orientation allows to reduce the variation of plastic flow direction and 
save a little time on the tooling process because the runner system is shorter.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11 Full circular runner system (top), semi-circle runner system (down) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
16 
 
Regardless the orientation we also made some local redesign of the mould using some 
of the well know best practices in plastic mould design. 
 
-Venting channel: the venting system in the micro moulding is very important because 
the air trapped in the cavity is often a considerably fraction of the whole part volume 
[11]. The most known effect of improper venting is the Diesel effect, or gas burn which 
is a small black spot on the plastic part. Gas compression can directly result in shorts 
because the resistance offered by the pocket of compressed gases in the cavity will slow 
down the fill rate and so allowing the melt front to cool more before the part is full. 
Being cooler the viscosity will increase, and more pressure is required to fill the part.   
 Vents should be as deep as possible without causing flash. That depth is based on 
several factors, such as the type and grade of material, part geometry and process 
parameter. The cavities critical zones were founded using Moldflow simulation software. 
According to manuals [9][12] we decide to create venting channels with the following 
dimension 0.0017 x 0.2 x 0.4 [mm].  
     
 
Fig. 11 : venting channel dimension (left), venting channel main parts (right) 
          
 
Fig. 12 comparation between new mould (left) and the old one (right) 
 
-Cold slug well: the primary function is to act as a trap for the cold slug; A small lump 
of plastic that cools and solidifies inside the nozzle tip during the cooling phase of the 
injection cycle. Cold slug wells enhance the flow from the polymer by hooking the colder, 
greater-viscosity polymer going in the forefront from the molten mass and permitting 
the next, hot, lower-viscosity plastic to run much more easily into the mould-cavity. 
==PAGE:20==
17 
 
 
Fig. 12 schematic behaviour of polymer flow inside the mould 
 
The cold slug prevents that a few cold material-drops can get into the cavity and 
adversely affecting the properties of the completed component. 
  
                               
Fig. 12 cold slug well main parts and dimension suggestion 
 
In table 1 we list the different geometries and orientation for runner system and moulds.  
Vertical Orientation 
Horizontal Orientation 
Circular Plug – Half circular runner 
Circular Plug – Half circular runner 
Circular Plug – Full circular runner 
Pocket Plug – Half circular runner 
Pocket Plug – Half circular runner 
 
Pocket Plug – Full circular runner 
 
 
Table 1, summary of geometries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
18 
 
Plastic Flow Simulation 
 
In this chapter we analyse the different mould and parts design by using Moldflow as 
simulation software. The aim is to find the best geometry, both for mould and 
component, in order to get a good result during the injection phase. The simulation 
software offers a forecast on the final results but as usually, real conditions are quite 
hard to fit inside a mathematical model.  
Moldflow is a software for plastic injection moulding which provides tools that help to 
validate and optimise the design of plastic parts and injection moulds. Predicting the 
moulding process, potential defects can be avoided, enabling high-quality plastic 
products to be manufactured correctly at first time. 
The Moldflow software options include Moldflow Adviser, which provides plastic 
simulation tools for engineers and analysts to ensure moulded part quality and 
manufacturability. Moldflow Insight helps to simulate the most advanced moulding 
processes to avoid production delays. 
The main object of our simulation was to determinate: 
- the gate and runner size, in order to fill both cavities roughly at the same time, 
- choose the best design for the plug  
- decide which orientation provide the best results.  
In total 6 different type of simulation were required.     
 
Vertical Configuration 
Circular Plug 
 
Pocket Plug 
 
Circular Plug – runner system in both 
mould 
Horizontal Configuration 
Circular Plug – runner system only in one 
side 
 
Pocket Plug – runner system in both 
mould 
 
Pocket Plug - runner system only in one 
side 
 
Table 1, list of simulation based on different geometries 
 
As first step, with Moldflow Adviser, using a trial and error approach we found the 
correct geometrical parameter for the runner system. The starting point was to insert 
the old gate and runner dimension, so the software gives a suggestion on how modify 
the parameters. Increasing the gate section enable to obtain a better result in terms of 
cavity drop pressure.  
 
==PAGE:22==
19 
 
 
Our constraints are given by the predetermined insert dimension, since we are 
generating a insert that will be mounted inside an already present mould with a cavity 
for this purpose. The main think to consider is the position of the ejector pin and the 
distances between them. Those are fixed measure, so we are not completely free. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Mould with inserts cavities (left) and insert cavity dimension (right) 
 
Once the gate and runner dimension have been found, then it was possible to simulate 
the fill analysis and try to understand the outcome values of the injection process. As 
reference we have used the Quality Prediction tool, this function combines shear stress 
at the wall, pressure drop and fill confidence. Particularly the shear stress at the wall 
seems to be one of the prime suspects for the main defect in plug and anchor. The PLA 
that we use have a maximum shear stress of 0.5 [MPa] and with our geometry and 
process condition it is simple to exceed this limit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
20 
 
                   
Configuration 
Gate 
Runner 
Anchor end 
diameter 
[mm] 
Anchor gate 
length     
[mm] 
Plug end 
diameter 
[mm] 
Plug gate 
lenght      
[mm] 
Section 
[mm] 
Vertical 
Circular Plug 
0.32 
20 
0.27 
20 
20 
Pocket Plug 
0.26 
20 
0.30 
20 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
Horizontal 
Circular Plug – 
runner system 
in both mould 
 
0.32 
 
15 
 
0.27 
 
15 
 
20 
Circular Plug – 
runner system 
only in one side 
 
0.35 
 
15 
 
0.32 
 
15 
 
20 
Pocket Plug – 
runner system 
in both mould 
 
0.32 
 
15 
 
0.27 
 
15 
 
20 
Pocket Plug - 
runner system 
only in one side 
 
0.35 
 
15 
 
0.32 
 
15 
 
20 
 
Table.2 gate and runner system dimension 
 
 
For each cavity orientation and runner system section we have performed several 
simulations, using the machine parameter obtained during the injection process.  
With MoldFlow Insight we can include venting channel, viscosity-temperature 
behaviour of the polymer, machine injection pressure profile, mould material and 
geometry. 
Process parameter adopted: 
 
Polymer 
NatureWork 3251D 
Melt Temperature [°C] 
190 
MouldTemperature [°C] 
25 
Max. machine injection pressure [MPa] 
100 
Machine clamp open time [s] 
10 
Analysis sequence 
Fill + Pack and Warp 
Table.3 Process parameter used for MoldFlow simulation 
 
In the figure 2 the cavity in both configurations was fillet approximately at the same 
time. 
As example we show the vertical configuration with circular shape plug and the 
horizontal configuration with pocket plug and full circular runner system. 
==PAGE:24==
21 
 
    
 
Fig. 2 Fill time MoldFlow analysis 
 
The Quality prediction result is used to estimate the quality of the mechanical properties 
and appearance of the part. This result is derived from the pressure, temperature, and 
other results. The red parts concentrate near the gate are normal, because the section 
reduction create a high mechanical stress (fig. 3).  
 
 
Fig. 3 Quality prediction in MoldFlow 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
22 
 
The values of shear stress are here showed:  
 
 
 
Fig.4 Shear stress at the wall in MoldFlow, the maximum scale value is set at 0,5 MPa 
 
As we can see, particularly in the horizontal configuration, the shear stress in quite high 
and cover many parts of the anchor surface. The mean value is 0,6 MPa that is 
unacceptable for our material. 
After running all the configuration, we found that the two final candidates are the 
pocket-plug in vertical configuration and the circular-plug in vertical. 
The decision fall on the pocket plug because is easier to machine, there are no issue for 
the ejector pin shape and the simulation results are adequately similar.  
   
 
Fig. 5 Shear stress at the wall in MoldFlow, the maximum scale value is set at 0,5 MPa 
 
So, according to the plastic producer we can compute the Viscosity-Shear Stress profile 
for different temperature gradiente and insert those parameter in the matematical 
model. This enable us to simulate a more realistic material beahvior during the injection 
process.   
 
==PAGE:26==
23 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Rheology diagram of PLA 
 
After having sat the parameter we can also display the pressure graph.  
 
 
Fig. 7 Injection pressure machine profile 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
24 
 
The improvement from the old design to the new one is now show. We can see a greater 
shear stress in the anchor in the old design. We have achieved a 30% reduction of shear 
stress 
 
 
Fig. 8 Shear stress at the wall of the old design in MoldFlow, the maximum scale value is set at 0,5 MPa 
 
With the CFD simulation we can assess the change in the flow profile velocity (fig. 9). 
Thanks to the cold slug well, in the runner system, we can see a marked change in the 
uniformity and distribution of flow stream: on left picture there is a denser concentration 
of material flow in the inner wall, instead on the left picture there is a more uniformity 
in the velocity distribution.  
       
 
Fig.9 Velocity profile in MoldFlow 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
25 
 
Chemical Process Evaluation  
 
In this paragraph we want to discuss about the direct nanopatterning generation on 
copper using two different technique: chemical etching and copper plating. Those kind 
of technology have the following advantages: low cost, simple equipment required, low 
application time, direct generation of nanostructures without using mask, simple to do. 
The drawback are: limitation on available material, rapid surface wearing, applicable on 
the whole area and not to specific point, difficult to set (etching in particular). 
 
We want to try two different etching process with different reagent and the plating 
process to assess which one is the best in terms of nanostructure dimension. The aim 
is to obtain a uniform textured surface with a mean value of 500 nm for the feature 
dimension. 
The experiments are conducted on three copper samples made in CW 008/A, an 
oxygen free copper used in telecommunication application. All the samples have a 
cylindrical shape, mirror polished surface and a small L-shape cavity generated by a 
mill nose in the centre of the top surface. The incision allows to understand the 
process behaviour on sharp corner, the angle variation of the cavity and the texturing 
carried out on a milled surface.   
 
Cu 
Pb 
Bi 
Other 
min 
Max 
min 
Max 
min 
Max 
min 
Max 
99.95 
/ 
/ 
0.005 
/ 
0.0005 
/ 
0.03 
 
Table 1. CW 008/A chemical composition 
 
 
All the samples are analysed in the same points before and after the etch/plating 
process with a 3D microscope. Two flat surface and one sharp corner are used as control 
point to see the surface modification generated by the processes. For each sample we 
detect the same area, using a coordinate system to be sure about the initial condition 
of the specific spot and avoid local variation and random effect that can falsify our 
analysis. 
A common pre-treatment is carried by simply immerging each sample into a becher 
containing alcohol for one minute and dry over a heater to allow the alcohol evaporation 
remove impurities.  
 
Chemical Etching 
 
Etching is a method that remove material from a surface in such a way to create a 
pattern, it is normally classified into two categories: wet and dry etching. For wet 
etch, the etchant is supplied from the liquid phase and can be carried out simply from 
a liquid container such as a beaker; in contrast dry etching is a more complicated 
process which use ions to remove a selected patterned material. Both techniques are 
broadly used in electronic industry.  
==PAGE:29==
26 
 
 
 
First etching process:  
The chemical solution composition is 1100 ml 62% of nitric acid (HNO3) diluted to 
3500 ml. 
Material: 
-Copper sample  
-Chemical solution 
-Becher with water 
-Timer 
 
Procedure: 
The sample is introduced in the chemical bath for 3.30 minutes, as we can see by the 
imagine (Fig. 1) there is a beaker full of water to stop the reaction once we pull out 
the sample. 
Copper is oxidized by concentrated nitric acid, HNO3, to produce Cu2+ ions; the nitric 
acid is reduced to nitrogen dioxide, a poisonous brown gas with an irritating odor. The 
experiment is conducted under a fume hood. 
Cu(s)  +  4HNO3(aq)  ——>  Cu(NO3)2(aq)  +  2NO2(g)  +  2H2O(l) 
 
 
Fig. 1 First chemical etching equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
27 
 
 
 
Second etching process: 
In this experiment the solution composition is: 
 150 g/l NH4CO3 (ammonium carbonate) + 100 g/l NaCl (sodium chloride) + 100 g/l 
NH3 (ammonia) (conc. 25%). 
Material: 
-Copper sample  
-Chemical solution 
-Becher with water 
-Timer 
-Aerator/Air pump 
 
We introduce a tube inside the becher (Fig. 2) that generate bubble , it should help 
the chemical reaction to reach all the point. 
The time of immersion was very long, about 24.30 minutes. By looking the surface, 
we observed that the corrosion was located just in a few spots, so we decided to 
terminate the experiment event if was not complete. 
 
                   
 
Fig. 2 Second chemical etching equipment 
 
Copper plating 
This process differs from other experiment type, in this case we are not eroding the 
copper surface, but we apply a copper layer over the sample.  
Usually copper plating occurs in an electrolytic cell, electrolysis is obtained using a DC 
current to dissolve a copper rod and transport the copper ions to the sample. The bath 
contains an ionic solution which provide a direct electric current to flow from copper 
source to the sample. 
 
==PAGE:31==
28 
 
 
 
Electroplating is a process in which a base metal is coated with a thin layer of more 
noble material by electrolytic deposition [13]. The electroplating process is composed 
by four fundamental parts: 
- Cathode: the negative electrode where negative electrons are created and positive 
ions are discharged, it is the object that is going to be plated 
- Anode: positive electrode where negative ions are discharged and positive ions are 
created 
-Electrolyte: is the conductive medium where the flow of current take place along with 
the movement of matter.  
-Direct current: the electricity that pass from the anode to the cathode 
As result of passing direct current from the anode to the cathode through the 
electrolyte, the positive ions of the coating metal get reduced to metal at the cathode 
as metal coating. The metal coating bonds to the cathode and so the electroplating 
process is complete. The formula of the process is: 
 
M → M+n + ne 
M+n + ne → M 
Where M stands for the plating metal, and n is the number of the moles of electrons 
involved in the reaction. 
In our case the copper rod is the anode (-) and the sample is the cathode (+) (Fig. 3).  
The solution composition is: CuSO4 + H2SO4 
The electrical parameter is: 2 A applied for 1.40 min 
 
Fig. 3 Copper plating functioning schema 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
29 
 
 
 
Image analysis 
For simplicity in the follow we name the sample as Sample I (first chemical etching) 
Sample II (second chemical etching), Sample III (copper plating). 
For each sample we analyse three main area:  
- 
Before the treatment we have put a small piece of tape (3Mtm vinyl) to preserve 
the original surface 
- 
Sharp corner 
- 
Flat surface 
From each areas we want obtain a specific information: from the taped zone we want 
to understand the height difference before and after the treatment, in the sharp 
corner we are interest in the angle variation and the process outcome over milled 
surface, the flat surface allow us to understand the roughness change and infer about 
the nanostructure dimension.  
 
 
 
Fig.4 Olympus Lex 3D microscope 
 
As microscope we use the Olympus LEXT OSLS41000 a confocal microscope capable of 
taking high-resolution 3D images. The laser confocal optical system receives only the 
light focused through the circular pinhole, rather than capturing all the light reflected 
and scattered from the sample. This helps eliminate blur, making it possible to acquire 
an image with higher contrast than can be obtained with an ordinary microscope. When 
measuring height, the microscope acquires multiple confocal images by shifting the 
focus position automatically. Based on the discrete focus position (Z) and detected light 
intensity (I), it estimates the light intensity variation curve (I-Z curve) for each pixel 
and obtains its peak position and peak intensity. Since the peak positions of all the 
pixels correspond to the surface irregularities of the sample, it provides 3D shape 
==PAGE:33==
30 
 
information for the sample’s surface. Similarly, the peak intensity data forms an image 
where all positions on the sample’s surface are brought into focus (extended image). 
 
 
LEXT specific: 
Lens  
Magnification 
(optical – 8x 
digital)  
Field of view 
(um)  
Working 
Distance (mm)  
Numerical 
Aperture  
5x  
108x - 864x  
2560 - 320  
20.0  
0.15  
10x  
216x - 1728x  
1280 -160  
11.0  
0.30  
20x  
432x - 3456x  
640 - 80  
1.0  
0.60  
50x  
1080x – 8640x  
640 - 80  
10.6  
0.50  
50x  
1080x - 8640x  
256 - 32  
0.35  
0.95  
100x  
2160x - 17280x  
128 - 16  
0.35  
0.95  
Table II. Technical parameter of the Olympus LEXT OSLS41000 
 
Sample I. 
Treated and non-treated area  
 
The difference between the surface with the tape (red cursor) and the treated surface 
(blue cursor) have an average of 2,5-3 µm. 
 
Fig. 5 SPIP imagine of copper sample, the height difference between the treated area and the initial one 
 
L-shape cavity 
The sharp corner variation is very small (less than 2 degrees) 
==PAGE:34==
31 
 
 
Fig. 6 Angle variation of L-shape corner before (left) and after (right) the etching 
By the 3D imagine (fig. 7) we can see that the surface before the treatment is very 
smooth and present some scratch in the right angle. After the process the roughness 
has increase but we can observe uniform zone long the corner edge that seem to be 
not aggressed by the acid.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 3D imagine of the sharp corner 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
32 
 
To a more accurate analysis we can use the cross-section tool of SPIP 
 
Fig. 8 Cross section of the cavity before (top) and after (down) the etching 
 
The initial peak-to-peak was around 28.5 micron (upper imagine) and after the 
treatment the distance is decreased at 13 µm which means that the etching process 
have 
removed 
more 
material 
in 
the 
flat 
surface 
and 
less 
in 
cavity 
 
Flat surface 
Before the treatment we know that roughness was very small, around Ra=10 nm and 
after the process is increased up to 61 nm ad Ra value. 
 
Fig. 9 Roughness after treatment (bottom) 
The SPIP software allows to perform a Pore Analysis a useful tool to detect and quantify 
particles, pores, grains, and other image features with boundaries. We used the 
standard watershed detection method that will simulate a rain falling on the surface and 
fully divide the image into connected (packed) shapes each representing a catchment 
basin. The histograms show the distribution of the pores area’s graphically. 
==PAGE:36==
33 
 
 
Fig. 10 Pore Analysis SPIP view, in the top we can see a the pore filling, the histogram distribution and the 
mean value of the feature 
 
The average pore diameter of 2326 nm and a mean Z range of 477 nm. The use of 
this tool is very sensitive to the selected parameters and threshold, so we need to 
take these results carefully.  
Sample II 
In this case the erosion is approximately about 2,5 micron 
 
 
Fig. 11 height variation 
Also, in this case the sharp corner variation is small, about 1,5 degrees. 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
34 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 12, 3D imagine of the cavity before and after the etching process 
 
We can also compare the corner cross section; we can see that both top and bottom 
surface are reduced uniformly.  
 
Fig. 13 Cross section of the cavity before (top) and after (down) the etching 
The profile overlapping confirm the uniformity of the process, it the fig. 14 the blue line 
represents the cavity cross section before the etching process, the red line is the same 
section after the etching. 
 
Fig. 14 profile overlapping before and after the treatment 
 
==PAGE:38==
35 
 
The cross section comparation of the flat surface show that in some zone the acid did 
not worked. 
So, it is difficult to evaluate the process outcome; even the treated zones could be 
affected by some alteration.   
This surface behaviour is probably caused by a not correct surface preparation, and so 
some grease residual probably was still present. 
In the 3D image we can distinctly see a ridge of the initial surface (fig.15) 
 
 
Fig. 15 surface 3D representation of a partial etched area 
The pore analysis is not useful in this case because we decide not to consider this 
process. 
 
Sample III 
In this case we have a surface increase of around 6,5 microns. In fig.16 the blue cursor 
is over the plated surface, and the red cursor is over the polished area.  
 
 
Fig. 16 surface 3D representation of a partial etched area 
 
==PAGE:39==
36 
 
Even in this case the corner variation in neglectable, it is less than 0,5 degrees (fig.17). 
 
 
Fig. 17 angle variation before and after the plating process 
 
 
The process seems to be uniform in every zone and not so strong because after the 
treatment, in the valley, we can still observe the milling nose pattern. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 18, 3D representation of angle variation before and after the plating process 
 
==PAGE:40==
37 
 
The flat surface analysis, after the copper plating we can see a sensible roughness 
increment.  
 
 
Fig.19 surface analysis 
 
 
The roughness value before and after the plating process are: 
 
Polished Surface 
Plated Surface 
Ra [nm] 
4,13 
28,71 
Rq [nm] 
5,54 
35,95 
Rz [nm] 
44,62 
215,21 
Sa [nm] 
5,78 
124,85 
Sq [nm] 
12,62 
159,35 
Sz [nm] 
1028,9 
2968,8 
 
We conduct a Pore Analysis on the plated surface to evaluate the nanofeatures 
dimension. We have used two imagine with a 100X of two different flat areas. The 
final result is the mean value. 
 
 
Fig. 20 Pore Analysis SPIP view, flat areas analysed 
==PAGE:41==
38 
 
 
 
Fig. 21 Pore Analysis SPIP view, pore filling and histogram distribution 
 
The average pore diameter of 486 nm and a mean Z range of 620 nm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
39 
 
Laser Texturing - LIPSS 
 
 
Laser texturing allows for intricate and consistent designs to be added to injection molds 
for decorative purposes. These textures enable individualization of products ranging 
from automotive components to packaging by mimicking the look of leather, wood, 
geometric patterns and much more. When compared to conventional surface treatment 
using chemical etching processes, laser texturing can offer ecological and design 
advantages. 
Deriving their name from an acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of 
Radiation, lasers are electronic optical devices that generate a very intense and narrow 
beam of monochromatic light by amplifying photons with more energy through collisions 
with other photons. While the technology has existed for over half a century, applying 
it to the generation of textures on materials is a relatively recent development. 
 
Theory 
Laser can be used to generate nano and micro-sized structure and texture in a wide 
range of materials. 
This can be achieved by heating the material above its melting point but below its 
minimum energy required to induce atomic and molecular separation, or 
displacement, due to incident intense laser irradiation, the so called ablation 
threshold. 
Laser-induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS) has been a research hotspot 
following their discovery some five decades ago by Birnbaum [3] when he utilised 
pulsed ruby laser to irradiate semiconductors 
This technology offers a series of unique characteristic in the nanostructured field: 
flexibility, simplicity, controllability and reproducibility, making it a very promising 
technique for generate surface modification of biomaterials 
 
Fig. 1 Laser machine for LIPSS generation 
 
==PAGE:43==
40 
 
LIPSS generate in the material periodic structure after irradiation of pulsed laser with 
intensities near the material’s ablation threshold. These structures are often called 
ripples. The LIPSS effect can be observed by using polarized laser with pulse widths of 
10 ps or shorter. 
 
The theoretical physical explanation behind this technology is still discussed. One view 
is the interference between the laser beam and the electric field excited by the laser, 
the so-called surface plasmon polariton (SPP). The results are the ripples structure as 
the surface ablation. The other theory states that LIPSS is the result of the self-
organization of the material. The emission of electron, caused by laser absorption 
induce instability in the lattice, so LIPSS are generated by surface relaxation due to 
the instability of the surface 
 
What makes LIPSS different from traditional laser induced damage is the creation of 
self-oriented nanostructure and wave shape surface that present a periodicity equal or 
smaller that the wavelength of the laser light. LIPSS structure can be formed in 
polymers, dielectrics, semiconductors and metals. 
It is possible to classify these nanostructures into two main category: Low-spatial-
frequency LIPSS (LSFLs) and High-spatial-frequency LIPSS (HSFLs). 
LSFL structures have period Λ close to the initial laser wavelength λ with grating vector 
perpendicular to the polarisation of the laser field in most cases especially for high 
absorbing materials. In contrast, HSFL have period Λ in the range of λ/2 to λ/20 of the 
initial laser wavelength λ. The grating vector for these structures is either parallel or 
perpendicular 
to 
the 
polarisation 
of 
the 
laser 
field 
[14]. 
 
It is generally known that the LSFL period scales linearly with the irradiation wavelength. 
HSFL instead have spatial periods less than the wavelength of the light used and are 
generated with multiple pulse irradiation at lower energy. HSFL are oriented either 
parallel or perpendicular to the laser beam polarization, depending on the material[15]. 
The parameter influencing the shape, size and depth of LIPSS are: 
• 
pulse width 
• 
polarization state 
• 
laser wavelength 
• 
laser power 
• 
angle of incidence 
• 
number of consecutive pulses 
 
==PAGE:44==
41 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Depict of the main parameters of LIPSS 
 
 
LIPSS can be applied in a wide range of technical field [15]. The change in the surface 
characteristics can be used in: 
 
- Medical application: when cell growth is needed it is demonstrated that cell align along 
LIPSS on titanium-based material and exist a correlation between ripple size and cell 
spreading. Those kind of behaviour in the joint replacements show a greater 
osteointegration 
and 
an 
increased 
life 
span 
of 
the 
implants. 
In other experiment, over a polymer foils this laser structured was generated to 
investigate with respect to proliferation, adhesion and orientation of mammalian cells. 
On polystyrene (PS) covered with LIPSS cell proliferation and adhesion was improved 
due to surface chemical changes. Each cell-type have a specific critical value for a 
minimum periodicities’ requirement, the LIPSS must be above this level so the cells will 
be aligned along the nanostructures. 
 
-Tribology: during Reciprocating sliding tribological tests (RSTT) it was found that LIPSS 
treated material present a lower coefficient of friction, one or two factors smaller; the 
wear tracks on modified surface are distinctly smaller. 
This behaviour has two explanation: the lubricant oil used in the test cover the laser 
structured surface and create an intermediate layer, protecting the two metals from 
direct contact. Also, the laser-induced oxidation seems to contribute to the improved 
tribological behaviour on LIPSS covered surfaces. The tribological change depend on 
aspect ratio of the nanostructure and on the treated material, on steel materials, the 
improvement is less pronounced compared to titanium-based material. 
  
 
- Structural colour: the first thing observable by eyes is that a LIPSS surface usually 
diffract light generating structural colour. This phenomenon depends on the ripples 
morphology: size and orientation of the structure as well as angle of incident light and 
observation. Knowing the outcome of parameter and the effect on different material a 
pre-selected picture could be reproduced using LIPSS. The suitable application for this 
behaviour are: optical data storage, encryption, anti-counterfeiting, decoration. The 
main advantage of using this laser technique is the possibility to store more on the 
same area, the difficult to copy the laser generate colour and the reading process is 
unambiguous. 
==PAGE:45==
42 
 
 
- Wetting : as seen for tribological application, the LIPSS surface change the wetting 
properties. It is possible to generate superhydrophobic surface by changing the contact 
angle. This is due to the roughness modification, so air remains underneath the liquid 
and so the surface can expel water. 
 
Experiment  
The experiment was conducted at C.B.Ferrari, an Italian company that produce 
automated machines for milling and laser solutions, with 3 and 5 axes. The machine is 
equipped with a laser head produced by Coherent, HyperRapid NX. 
 
System specification are: 
 
Single wavelength Output (nm) 
1064 
Repetition Rates (MHz) 
1 
Pulse duration (ps) 
8 - 10 
Average Power (W) 
100 
Pulse Energy (µJ) 
250 
Direction of Polarization  
Vertical 
Polarization Ratio  
>100:1 
 
Table 1. Laser head characteristic 
 
 
The tests are conducted as follow:  
first, using a sample of the same material that we have used for the mould insert 
(IMPAX) we try to generate different square using different percentage of the 
maximum laser power.  
The we analyse all the spots in order to find were le LIPSS are succeeded better in 
terms of shape, periodicity, orientation and depth. 
Finally we apply the chosen power parameter to the mould cavities. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Impax steel sample before tests 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
43 
 
The general process parameters are: 
 
Velocity = 2500 mm/s 
Line distances = 10 um 
Frequency = 1 MHz (without div and burst) 
Average power = 100 W 
 
For power factor we tried different percentage of the average laser power  
 
First try: spot dimension 2x2 mm 
Power Factor 
18% 
20% 
16% 
14% 
22% 
 
By looking each spot with microscope, we decide to focus more on the P=22% 
because seems to have the best results. 
So we tried to repeat the experiment and generate other spots with power factor 
around those value. In this case for each value of P we create two spots to be sure 
that the result has are repeatable.  
 
Second try: spot dimension 2x2 mm 
Power Factor  
22% 
23% 
24% 
25% 
 
In this case, after microscope analysis, the decision fallen on P=23%, the LIPSS are 
correctly marked and seems to have the best aspect ratio. 
To be sure about the result and have statistical significance repeatability, we decide to 
generate other spots 
 
Third try: spot dimension 5x5 mm. The P=16% spots have three repetition. 
Power factor 
16%  (3 repetition) 
20% 
23% 
 
 
Fig. 4 Impax steel sample after tests 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
44 
 
SEM analysis 
We now asses the outcome with a SEM analysis to understand the nanofeature 
dimension and choose which one is the best. 
The decision is mainly based on the feature dimension.  
In table 2 we list the result based on the different power factor: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P= 18% 
 
Average width = 399 nm 
 
Interline distance = 845 nm 
 
 
 
 
 
P= 16%  (three repetition) 
 
Average width = 392 nm 
 
Interline distance = 763 nm 
 
 
 
 
 
P= 20% 
 
Average width = 445 nm 
 
Interline distance = 767 nm 
 
 
 
 
 
P= 22% 
 
Average width = 437 nm 
 
Interline distance = 793 nm 
==PAGE:48==
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P= 23% 
 
Average width = 504 nm 
 
Interline distance = 859 nm 
 
Table 2. SEM analysis summary 
 
 
The decision falls on P=23% because the value of the width perfectly fit with our 
initial aim. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
46 
 
Mold Inserts machining  
 
The tooling process chain involve the micro milling process: a downscaling version of 
the conventional milling which use tools with diameters in the sub-millimetre range.  
It is known that, one of the fundamental contributions to obtain a good accuracy of a 
milled component is the deflection of the tool due to the cutting forces [16]. As in the 
conventional milling, the manufacturing process is subtractive and uses rotating cutting 
tools to remove material from a starting stock piece, commonly referred as the 
workpiece. The basic milling system, or mill, consists of a worktable for positioning the 
workpiece, a cutting tool (most commonly an endmill), and an overhead spindle for 
securing and rotating the cutting tool.  
Micromilling has become an established process for manufacturing three dimensional 
micro components in metal, this technology allows to generate virtually any geometries. 
The milling tool, provided with cutting edges, rotates at high speed while moving along 
defined trajectories and engages the workpiece, removing material in the form of chips.  
The mill machine used is Mikron UCP 600 a 5-Axis machine, the CAM program to 
generate the tool path is HyperMIL; as input file is the SolidWorks mould part document 
(.SLDPRT). 
 
 
Fig. 1  Mikron UCP 600 (left) and worktable (right) 
 
 
Considering the geometries of the insert we use different tools, this allow to going 
from rough to refined treatments. The critical points of the cavities are the plastic 
injection gate and the fillet at the pin basis (see fig. 2). 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
47 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Applicable tool diameters for different parts of the mould. 
 
 
The tool selected maker is JJTools, a Korean manufacture that provide a wide range of 
micromilling tool. In our case the G series tools has been taken into account, 
particularly the 2HRBG series. 
 
Fig. 3 HyperMill CAM program for movable insert generation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
48 
 
The catalogue provides the radial and axial depth, spindle velocity and feed rate based 
on the workpiece material. The classification consider: 
-Copper (our case) 
-Prehardende/Hardended steel with HRc : 30 - 40 
-Hardended steel with HRc: 45 – 55 
 
In our case we consider the copper and the steel witch HRc between 30 and 40 since 
the IMPAX producer provide this value. 
 
 
                                                             table I micro milling tool catalogue  
==PAGE:52==
49 
 
A list of the used tool is here provided: 
 
Tools 
Diameter [mm] 
Tip length [mm] 
Spindle 
[RPM] 
1 
1 
2 
17000 
2 
0,4 
3 
18000 
3 
0,20 
3 
18000 
4 
0,3 
1,5 
18000 
Table II geometry and speed used for manufacturing 
 
 
 
The ejector-pin holes are made in two different stage. Two pre-holes are generated with 
mill and finished with reamer with a dimension of 0,4mm. Then to precise generate the 
0,8 mm holes the mould is insert in an EDM machine. Electrical discharge machine is a 
process that use a conductive material which generate spark that occur between a tool 
electrode and a workpiece in presence of a dielectric fluid. During the discharge pulses, 
a high temperature plasma is formed in the gap between the tool and the workpiece. 
This plasma allows an electrical current flow which cause a temperature rise until the 
melting point end evaporation of a discrete volume of workpiece and electrode material. 
In this case we use an electrode tool with a constant circular cross section along its 
length.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 EDM functioning principle (top), EDM machine (down) 
 
==PAGE:53==
50 
 
Process Chains 
 
This chapter aims to present and explain the details of the two different process chain 
used to generate the mould inserts. We want to show the parameter used to generate 
the nanopatterning and give a comparation in terms of applicability and equipment 
needed to fabricate the nanofeatures. 
 
Copper inserts process chains 
 
The process chain for copper mould inserts fabrication is composed by the following 
steps: 
 
Insert machining →  pre-chemical treatment → copper electroplating → ejector pin 
hole finishing 
 
As seen in the previews chapter, we apply the electro-chemical process directly on the 
inserts.  
One of the important requirements in electroplating technology is cleanliness of the 
surface to which coatings are applied, parts to be plated cannot be introduced into an 
electroplating solution without pre-treatment of some kind. The chemical and physical 
nature of a metallic surface has a very marked effect upon the quality of any 
electroplated metal that may be used to protect it. The presence of grease, oil, corrosion 
products, dirt, or other extraneous material affects the adherence, continuity, and 
general 
durability 
of 
plated 
deposits. 
 
First, we use a degreasing process, called cathodic degreasing. The workpiece is 
connected to the cathode, so hydrogen is released at the workpiece. For each molecule 
of water that breaks up during such electrolysis two parts of hydrogen are released at 
the cathode for every part of oxygen liberated at the anode.  
The process parameters are: 
 
Voltage = 5 V 
Time = 20 second 
 
Then we perform an activation process to remove the oxide layer by immerging the 
pieces inside a commercial solution called “dry acid”. The time of immersion is 
approximately 20 second at room temperature. This process increases the adhesion 
during the plating process since an oxide layer is not electrically conductive as pure 
copper. 
Since the test we have conducted was carried on a sample of the same material but 
different dimension we need to calculate the new current density requirement. 
 
==PAGE:54==
51 
 
The sample was cylindrical : Ø24 x 15 [mm] thus the total volume of 6785,84 [mm3] 
and the current provided was 2 [A] [see chapter ] 
Now, the inserts are rectangular but there is a difference between the movable and 
the fix part : 
- the move part is 35,4 x 35,4 x 5 [mm] so 6265,8 [mm3] but we need to subtract the 
screw holes and the cavities volume so the final volume is 5774,04 [mm3]  
- the fix part is composed by two overlapped rectangular but we have to subtract the 
running system, holes, venting channel and cavities so the final volume is 6404.15 
[mm3]   
 
Using a proportion we can find out the amount of current we need to apply for each 
part of the mould. 
 
We can calculate the scaling factor 
2: 6785,84 = X: 6265,8 → X = 0,944 
 
Then we apply this factor to the initial current 
Currentmovable-insert = 2 [A] * 0,944 = 1,88 [A] 
We use the same proportion to the fixed part: 
Currentfix-insert = 1,7 [A] 
 
 
fig. 1 Copper plating equipment 
 
The pure copper connected to the anode is kept inside a filter-bag to prevent the 
residues arising from the electrolytic solution process from entering the electrolyte. 
The insert is orientated in order to have the surface with cavities in line with the copper 
bag, this allow to achieve the best ion flow and avoiding possible shading effect.  
 
The picture 2 shows the difference of the mould aspect after (left) and before (right) 
the treatment. 
 
==PAGE:55==
52 
 
 
The 
surface 
is 
uniform, 
clean 
and 
covered 
by 
an 
opaque 
oxide 
layer. 
When the pieces are removed from the bath it is necessarily to dry with compressed air 
in order to remove all the possible drop that can be trapped inside the cavities. 
 
 
Fig. 2 Coper inserts: after the treatment (left) and before the treatment (right) 
 
During the micro-milling process we have generated a pre-hole for the ejector pin of 
0,4 mm. 
Giving the fact that the copper plating is an additive process, means that the hole 
could be reduce his dimension due to copper particle adhesion, we have decided to 
execute the hole finishing after the plating process. So, the movable insert is worked 
in the EDM machine to obtain a 0,8 mm holes.  
 
Steel inserts process chains 
The process chain for steel mould inserts fabrication is composed by the following 
steps: 
 
Insert machining →  Pickling → Laser texturing 
 
Once the two inserts are generated, already with final ejector hole, we perform a 
pickling pre-treatment. Pickling is a surface treatment used to remove impurities, 
corrosion films, inorganic contaminants. It is simply carried by immerging the inserts 
inside a beaker containing the cleaning solution.   
Then we place the inserts inside the machine and align the piece with the machine 
coordination system (fig. 3).  
==PAGE:56==
53 
 
     
 
Fig. 3 Insert inside the laser machine (left), CCD camera view (right) 
 
After that we need to choose the dimension of the spots, in this case we use a 
rectangular shape that perfectly suit with the cavities. It is possible to use the machine 
internal CCD camera to find the coordinates of starting and ending points of the desired 
spot. 
 
 
The parameters used to generate the laser texturing are: 
 
Velocity = 2500 [mm/s] 
Line distances = 10 [µm] 
Frequency = 1 [MHz] (without burst) 
Power= 77 [W] 
 
        
 
Fig. 4 Cavities after the LIPSS process, it is possible to recognise the laser rectangle spot shape 
 
It is possible to see that the LIPSS cover also the upper surface of the mould. This could 
be avoided by using a 5-axis machine with CAM program. In our case we can ignore 
this detail because texturing over the contact surface of the mould and over the venting 
channels 
do 
not 
affect 
the 
final 
results 
of 
replicability.  
The overall process takes less than one minute, and it is applied to both inserts.  
 
 
==PAGE:57==
54 
 
 
We tried to align the LIPSS along the existing groove left by the milling to perform the 
maximum uniformity (fig. 5). 
as we can see there is an angle, about 10°, between the main direction of the tool and 
the average direction of the ripples.    
 
 
 
Fig.5 LIPSS aligned with the milling groove (red ellipse) 
 
Comparation between process chain  
-Copper plating involves more steps compared to the laser texturing but is relative 
easier to do and require less sophisticated equipment. The needed instruments are 
easy to use and to find. The main drawback of this process is that is applicable on a 
limited variety of material (mainly copper), the process control is easy but the final 
nanofeature dimension is not controllable in a precise way. Last, pure copper is not as 
easy as steel to be machined with milling process. 
-LIPSS: the laser texturing process can be applied virtually on any kind of material 
(metal, plastic, glass…), it is a fast and controllable process. The equipment used are 
much more expensive compared to the copper process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
55 
 
Cavities Analysis  
 
In this paragraph we assess the outcome of the two process chains. In particular we 
analyse the inserts cavities in order to understand the nanofeature dimension, not 
covered areas, aspect changes depending on the position along the cavity. 
In the first section we perform a SEM analysis, the resolution of this microscope is 
ideal for the dimension we are looking for. Since the SEM provide only 2D imagine, in 
the second section a replica mould process is presented. Basically, we fill the cavities 
with a silicon material, demould when is cured and analyse the negative of the 
cavities with the LEXT microscope. 
Copper insert – SEM analysis 
 
       
 
Fig. 1 SEM inside the NanoLab and copper insert placed on the support 
 
For each cavity we want to assess the presence of nanostructure and the size of them, 
particularly we focus our analysis on the quasi-vertical areas that are the most critical. 
The selected area to be checked are the following: 
 
- 
For the anchor: the leg area with a round shape section (1) and the bottom 
area which is the deepest part of all cavities (2).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
56 
 
    
 
 
Fig. 2 Anchor cavity: spotted areas (green circle), anchor section on the right 
 
Area 1: in the SEM analysis of the anchor cavity we focus on the leg (fig. 3). 
We can identify the milling groove (fig. 4) and the nanofeature geometry and size (fig. 
5).  
 
   
 
 
Fig.3 SEM vision of whole anchor cavity and leg zoom 
 
   
 
 
Fig.4 SEM analysis of the leg anchor, magnification of 1000 and 5000 
==PAGE:60==
57 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5 SEM imagine, 2500 and 10000 magnification of anchor leg 
 
Area 2: 
We also analysed the deepest point of the cavity which is at the bottom of the leg. Here 
the copper did not fully cover the surface (fig. 6), in fact the are some spots with the 
added material and other place without. This might be caused by an irregular charge 
distribution and a particle deviation due to the side surfaces or a small bubble trapped 
in the cavity. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
58 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 deepest point in the anchor cavity, area 2 in fig. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the plug : the protuberance area (1), the vertical wall (2) and the pin base (3)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.7 selected area for SEM analysis 
==PAGE:62==
59 
 
Area 1:  
In the plug we inspect the area around the protuberance. We can assess what is the 
outcome of the plating process in this local 3D modification. The nanoparticle 
distribution is uniform and have covered all the surfaces. 
 
   
 
Fig.7 SEM vision of whole plug cavity and protuberance zoom 
 
   
 
Fig.8 SEM imagine, 5000 and 10000 magnification of plug protuberance 
    
 
Area 2: 
 
The nanoparticle has also covered the side wall of the cavity, by tilting the SEM 
workpiece by 30° we can check the adhesion in the quasi-vertical region. 
Here the nanostructures are slightly different compared to the flat surface; they shape 
is a bit sharped.   
==PAGE:63==
60 
 
 
 
Fig.9 SEM imagine of plug quasi-vertical wall 
 
Area 3: 
 
In this case we want to asses the presence and the dimension of the nanofeature in 
the area around the pin.  
==PAGE:64==
61 
 
   
 
 
Fig. 10 SEM imagine of pin area 
 
The summary of the nanofeature dimension is shown in Table 1 
Cavity Location 
Feature Diameter [nm] 
 
Mean breadth 
STD 
Anchor - leg wall 
532 
49 
Plug - protuberance 
520 
41 
Plug – vertical wall 
422 
82 
Plug – Pin base 
512 
67 
 
Table 1. Average dimension of nanofeature based on the cavity location 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
62 
 
Steel insert – SEM analysis 
 
We now set-up the machine for analyse the steel insert (fig. 11). We will check the 
same area analysed for the copper mould (fig. 2) and (fig.7).  
 
 
fig. 11 steel insert inside the SEM 
 
 Anchor: 
 
- area 1: As first, the anchor leg is analysed by tilting the SEM worktable of 30 
degrees.  The LIPSS structure are well marked and aligned with the mill tool path (fig. 
12-13). 
    
 
Fig.12 SEM anchor leg  500 and 5000 magnification 
==PAGE:66==
63 
 
  
 
Fig.13 SEM anchor leg 10000 magnification 
 
Area 2: 
The laser also reached the lowest point of the cavity generating a ripple with 509 nm 
thickness and 710 nm as mean distances. It is possible to see some debris remained 
from the milling operation (fig. 13). Those big particles are difficult to remove, 
ultrasound cleaning is not enough. It would recommended a polishing treatment, 
anyway we believe that those swarf will be removed during the injection process. 
 
Fig. 13 SEM imagine of the anchor cavity deepest point 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
64 
 
Plug: 
Area 1: 
the protuberance areas present a well ordered LIPSS structures. No significant 
geometry modification due to the bulge shape seems to affect the feature dimension.   
 
   
    
 
Fig.14 SEM imagines with different magnification: from 500x to 20000x 
Area 2: 
The wall presents a tricky challenge, because is not easy to reach either by the LASER 
beam and by the SEM. 
So, during the production phase we have used a median focus to treat all the cavity. 
In the first imagine (fig. 15) it is possible to distinguish the milling pattern and the 
laser texturing present interruption. An approximation of the ripple dimension in about 
342 nm and the centre to centre distance of 930 nm. In the top part, near the mould 
flat surface, the LIPSS has not been generated everywhere. 
The ripples become less frequent and are blurrier. 
The LIPSS are no more continuous, they seems to be engraved only in the milling 
grooves, the distances between the rows is 2,8 µm 
==PAGE:68==
65 
 
The imagines are captured by tilting the SEM workpiece by a 30° angle (fig. 15). 
 
 
 
Fig. 15 SEM images of plug cavity vertical wall, there is an interruption in the ripple 
 
-Area 3: 
The same thing happens on the pin: the basis is textured but as we go up over the 
pillar the nanostructure become discontinues and non-well marked.   
 
==PAGE:69==
66 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Fig. 16 Sem imagine of the pin 
 
Cavity Location 
Feature Diameter [nm] 
 
Mean thickness 
STD 
Anchor - leg wall 
512 
108 
Plug - protuberance 
505 
87 
Plug – vertical wall 
342 
/ 
Plug – Pin base 
320 
96 
 
Table 2. Average dimension of nanofeature based on the cavity location 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
67 
 
Replica Mould 
 
In this section we want to describe the replica mould process that we have performed 
with the aim to assets and evaluate the size and depth of the nanofeature inside the 
cavity. 
To conduct this experiment we have used a commercial kit “8511 AccuTrans AB Intro-
Kit” produced by Coltene. 
AccuTrans is a casting silicone for take accurate impression on textured surfaces. It is 
composed by a low-viscosity, thixotropic compound known as polyvinyl siloxane. This 
material solidifies quickly into a rubber-like solid, taking the shape of whatever 
surface it was lying against while curing. It’s supplied with two-part cartridge, this 
kind of package keeps the two liquid component in separate tubes until the moment 
they are mixed and applied, because once mixed, they harden rapidly. 
 
The working time depends on the ambient temperature, the lower is the temperature, 
the slower the material sets. Vice versa the higher is the temperature the faster is the 
setting time.  
The AccuTrans kit provide the dispenser, the cartridge containing the silicone and the 
mixing tip (fig. 17) 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.17 AccuTrans equipment 
 
 
The replica mould can detect feature in the submicrometric scale. The material viscosity 
and the shrinkage allow to have a hint on the final result after a moulding process. Off 
course this silicon is not the final polymer so the result may differ. Here we show a 
comparation between two imagine of the plug cavity (pin basis zone): a 20x 
magnification scan of the replicated surface and a SEM imagine of the actual surface 
(460 as magnification). The details are successfully replicated. 
 
==PAGE:71==
68 
 
 
Fig.18 Comparation between the same area replicated with silicon (left) and the actual area detected on the 
mould with SEM (right) 
 
Experiment: 
 
To run the experiment we will test only the fix half of the mould because the ejector pin 
holes may cause some problem during the extraction of the solidified material.  
 
Both, copper and steel insert, are first spread by an enough quantity of the silicon 
material 
and 
then 
pressed 
using 
a 
hand 
hydraulic 
press. 
The rest time, according to the producer instruction is 15 min at 24 degrees.  
The experiment is repeated three times in order to obtain a significant number of 
samples 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
69 
 
 
Fig.19 from the top hydraulic press, in the bottom hydraulic press detail with mould, result 
 
Results: 
The obtained samples are now analysed using the LEXT microscope, the nanofeature 
detection is conducted using the 100x magnification. The inspected areas are the flat 
surfaces and the wall parts. 
 
 
Steel Mould 
 
The detected zones in the steel insert are: for the anchor cavity we observed the thick 
part of the leg and the rounded part on the top.  
 
 
         
 
 
Fig. 20 3D imagine of anchor leg 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
70 
 
For what concerns about the plug cavity we have analyse flat part under the pin and 
the zone over the protuberance  
 
Fig.21, 3D images of plug surface 
 
The mean values are 
 
Anchor 
Plug 
Mean Width [nm] 
636 
756 
Mean Peak to Peak [nm] 
763 
880 
Mean Depth [nm] 
180 
220 
 
Table 3. Mean nanofeature dimension comparation 
 
 
 
 
Copper Mould 
 
In the copper insert we performed the same analysis in the same zones. In this case 
the result are more difficult to interpret because the nano-feature are not periodic and 
the irregularity of the initial surface (before the copper plating) generate some 
confusion. Moreover, the pores analysis is a qualitative method since is strongly 
related to the set parameter.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
71 
 
 
 
Fig. 22 plug (top) and anchor (bottom) 3D surfaces 
 
 
 
In this case the results for the nanofeature size are 
 
Plug 
Leg 
Mean Bredth [nm] 
930 
1310 
Mean Height [nm] 
390 
420 
 
Table II. Mean nanofeature dimension comparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
72 
 
Injection Moulding 
 
The tests are conducted in the DTU plastic laboratory using moulding machine 
ALLROUNDER 370 A, produced by Arburg. The injected material are PLA and PP, the 
aim is to reproduce on the plastic parts surfaces the 3D nanopatterns inside the mould 
cavities. 
 
The paragraph is divided in 4 main section 
- Micro injection moulding characteristic overview   
- Material proprieties 
- Process parameters 
- Results 
 
Micro injection Moulding 
 
Micro injection moulding (μIM) is the downscaled process of the tradition plastic 
injection moulding technology. This process allows to obtain relatively low cost of the 
polymeric part especially in large quantities, mass production of complex product, fast 
production cycle, automation possibilities, high variety of final shape and wide range 
of material e texturing type.  
Even if the concept and the physics behind μIM and conventional moulding are the 
same, there are some important changes in methods and operation: process, machine 
and measuring need to be more accurate.  
The main characteristic of micro moulding is with the capability of produce micro 
components having a dimensional range from micrometre to millimetre scale, but 
exhibiting micrometric features. 
 
Nonetheless is purely to imagine that the melted material can perfectly fill and 
replicate the nanostructure, cool down, solidify and be ejected to produce a perfectly 
replicated structure on the surface.  
The final quality for the plastic parts are strongly influenced by: mould temperature, 
polymer melt temperature, holding pressure and injection velocity. Nevertheless, we 
have a nonlinear behaviour of these parameter on the final result: a small change in 
one of these parameters affect the quality of the replicated surface.  
 
 
 
Fig.1 Injection moulding machine 
==PAGE:76==
73 
 
 
 
Since the production of a proper mould is expensive and time consuming, we adopted 
the strategy to generate inserts.  
An insert is an exhangable part that is placed inside the cavity of the primary mould. 
It extends the useful life of the tool and provides the possibility of changing and 
testing various structures and conditions using the main mold without the need to 
replace the complete mold 
 
 
 
 
fig.2 Molud with cavities inserts  
 
 
 
 
 
Material: 
 
Since the final application of our pieces is for surgical implant application, we decided 
to use a material with this characteristic:  
 
- Injectable  
- Biocompatibility 
- Biodegradability 
- Lifetime between 12 and 36 months. 
 
Biocompatibility is the proprieties of a material to perform with an appropriate host 
response in a controlled situation, in our case the interaction with the human body. 
Market offers are lots of synthetic biodegradable polymers that we can use, for 
example, polyanhydrides, poly(orthoesters), polycyanoacrylates, poly(amino acids), 
polycaprolactone, poly(glycolic acid) and poly(lactic acid) (PLA). Among all those 
materials, PLA gain lots of attention, because have many favourable properties, such 
as easy to fabricate, not toxic or carcinogenic, biocompatible and also high mechanical 
strength. PLA is a biopolymer and has been commercialised for the manufacture of 
short-shelf life 
products. The last important characteristic of this material is its lifetime. It should 
allow that the anchor-plug system remain functional for a minimum time of 12 months 
and maximum time of 36 months. According to the requirement and the materials we 
==PAGE:77==
74 
 
have in our laboratory, Ingeo biopolymer 3052D, provided by NatureWorks, was 
selected in this project:  3052D resin can be processed on conventional injection 
molding equipment. The material is stable in the molten state [17]. In table I, the 
main physical and mechanical properties of Ingeo biopolymer 3052D are reported, 
while table II shows the processing temperature. 
PLA or Polylactic acid is made from dextrose (sugar) extracted from biobased 
materials 
 
We have also performed injection test with a more general polymeric material: Sabic 
579S a PP grade with narrow molecular weight distribution. This compound is suitable 
for producing thin-walled injection molding articles and it gives low warpage tendency, 
high stiffness & outstanding flow properties for excellent part filling. 
The material has been dried at the same condition used for the PLA. 
The following table show the technical properties: 
 
 
 
Table 1. NatureWork PLA main characteristic  
 
 
 
fig.3 Rheological curves comparation between PP (left) and PLA (right) 
 
 
From the rheological chart we can see a difference in the material viscosity between 
one and two order of magnitude, this explain why the PLA is much more difficult to be 
injected compared to the PP. 
 
==PAGE:78==
75 
 
 
Process Parameters 
 
We now describe the parameters used during the test, the section will be divided for 
the insert material (steel or copper) and for the polymer deployed (PLA or PP). 
Each plastic are previously dried using the following condition: 
 
Residence Time (hour) 
2 
Air Temperature (°C) 
45 
Air Dew Point (°C) 
-40 
Air Flow Rate ( m3 / hr – kg resin) 
1.85 
 
Table 2. Drying process parameters 
 
Several experiments were run for each mould and each material, the first aim was to 
fully fill the cavity, then we try different strategies in order to achieve the best 
replication for the nanostructure. We here report the best value founded which are 
capable to properly mould the final part (no flash, void, ecc) and best replicate the 
internal nanofeature. See Appenix to find the different parameter for the different 
batch 
 
PLA 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 injection moulding machine temperature section 
 
Section 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
T (°C) 
205 
195 
190 
185 
180 
 
Injection Pressure [bar] 
320 
Holding Pressure [bar] 
220 
Injection Speed [mm3/s] 
10 
Cooling Time [seconds] 
10 
Mould Temperature [°C] 
45 
 
Table 3. Injection moulding process parameters for PLA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
76 
 
 
 
PP 
 
 
Section 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
T (°C) 
230 
220 
215 
210 
200 
 
Injection Pressure [bar] 
240 
Holding Pressure [bar] 
220 
Injection Speed [mm3/s] 
12 
Cooling Time [seconds] 
15 
Mould Temperature [°C] 
60 
 
Table 4. Injection moulding process parameters for PP 
 
 
 
 
Moulding Results 
 
The cavity is completely filled, and no flash are present in the part. There still 
presents some air bubble in the plug part, but the size is significantly smaller 
compared to the old geometry. 
 
 
 
  
fig. 5 Final results: PP on the left, PLA on the right 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
77 
 
If we compare the size of the bubble inside de re-designed plug to the old, we can see 
a consistent reduction. The height of the former bubble is and now 
 
 
 
 
Fig.6 comparation between the big air bubble in the old components (left) with the smaller air bubble in the 
new geometry (red circle on the right) 
 
 
 
Also, the anchor is more accurate, the flashes are completely disappeared 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.7 Anchor do not present flesh anymore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
78 
 
Plastic part assessment  
 
We want now to show the assessment of our plastic parts. This paragraph is divided in 
two section: the first is the LEXT and the SEM analysis of the nanofeature, then we 
test the system functionality by performing a pulling strength test. 
 
PLA 
 
The PLA is the more difficult material to be processed, the nanofeature are not well 
replicated especially in the copper insert. The poor replication is caused by the physic 
proprieties of the material, since the viscosity is high the polymer does not flow easily 
inside a small cavity and fill the nanostructure. Also, there is a limitation in the mould 
temperature, over 35-40 °C the parts extraction is complicated and usually generate 
crack or part breaking. This relative low temperature with the high viscosity implies 
that the plastic flow is quickly solidify without the complete replication of feature.  
 
Copper Insert 
 
 
 
fig.1, 3D imagine of anchor in PLA moulded in copper insert 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
79 
 
 
 
Fig.2, 3D imagine of plug in PLA moulded in copper insert 
 
 
Steel Insert 
 
The replication of LIPSS structures on PLA parts are more defined. This behaviour is 
probably caused by the different mould thermodynamics, copper is high thermal 
conductive material and the plastic that flow through copper get cool sooner. A rapid 
cooling generates a solidified polymer skin and the replication do not successfully take 
place. In contrast, steel with a thermal conductivity much lower compared to copper, 
allow a slower polymer solidification and the nanofeature filling is easier. 
 
     
 
 
Fig.4 LIPSS imagine on plug PLA 
==PAGE:83==
80 
 
 
Fig.5 SEM imagine of plug surface in PLA 
 
PP 
 
Copper  
 
In this case, with PP, the nanofeature is easier to be achieved. Even with the copper 
mould we are able to replicate the nanopatterning. The SEM imagines present some 
obstacle, the nonconductive nature of polymer cause problems during the acquisition. 
In this case a plating with conductive material is suggested.    
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
81 
 
 
 
Fig.6, 3D Anchor (top) and SEM imagine of plug (down) 
 
Steel 
Even in this case the replication of LIPSS with PP is more accurate. The structure are 
uniformly spread over the plastic surfaces. The dimension change, compared to the 
feature dimension inside the metallic insert is very small (see Table I). 
 
 
Fig. 6 SEM imagine of plug protuberance in PP 
==PAGE:85==
82 
 
  
 
Fig. 7 SEM imagine of anchor leg in PP 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 SEM imagine of plug in PP 
 
 
Copper PLA 
Mean diameter [nm] 
Anchor – leg wall 
982 
Plug – protuberance 
1100 
Plug – vertical wall 
722 
  
Copper PP 
Mean diameter[nm] 
Anchor – leg wall 
815 
Plug – protuberance 
737 
Plug – vertical wall 
912 
  
==PAGE:86==
83 
 
 
 
Stell PLA 
Mean thickness [nm] 
Anchor – leg wall 
589 
Plug – protuberance 
613 
  
Steel PP 
Mean thickness [nm] 
Anchor – leg wall 
639 
Plug – protuberance 
505 
  
Table I. Summary of nanofeature dimension for different insert and plastic materials 
 
Anchor-plug functionality validation  
 
We now perform the validation test by using rib-pig bones which present some similar 
characteristic with human bones. In fact, it was important that the bottom part of the 
anchor took place during the application in the sponge part of the bone in order to 
achieve the best real application. for each bone, three holes were machined on 
surface with a drill bit having a diameter of 2.5 mm. 
A copper wire, used for the EDM machine, with a diameter equal to 0.3 mm was insert 
in the hole of the plug part. Then, the anchor was fixed upon the plunge and both are 
put in the hole made in the bone. To fix the two part and allow the mechanism to 
work, a knot was made by the suture on the anchor. 
To keep the bone fix we use a vise with a piezoelectric dynamometer that allow to 
detect the Z force. 
The suture was fixed to the head cross of the machine. 
 
 
            
  
 
==PAGE:87==
84 
 
 
 
 
Fig.9 Machine set-up and test phase, bone in the vise with plug-anchor (orange) and wire 
 
 
The test results differs depending on the components material, from the Diagram 1 
we can see that for PLA the average system strength is 37,85 N and for the PP 
components is 44,16 N 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
85 
 
 
 
Diagram 1. Force diagram of pull test, PLA (top) and PP (down) 
 
From the force profile diagram, we can see the differences between PLA an PP. PLA 
present a brittle behaviour, in fact we the system reach the maximum force the 
anchor leg suddenly cracks and there is a step in the force diagram. On contrast PP is 
more rubber like material, neither of the component breaks, the are pulled out 
because the external force is higher than the friction generated by the assembly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 2. Force profile for different materials: PLA (top blue line) and PP (bottom orange line), Newton on y 
axis 
 
==PAGE:89==
86 
 
Conclusion  
 
Nanoscale geometry modification over a polymer surface is a promising technology for 
present and future applications, the topography variation brings specific proprieties and 
improve the functionality of a product. 
We have investigated a biomedical component to be used in surgical application. The 
object of this micro implant is to generate an interference fit, inside a pre-drilled hole, 
for small bone applications in order to reattach broken ligament. This thesis work aims 
to assess how to generate, on a complex 3D polymeric micro-component surface, a 
series of nanostructure in the range of 500 nm. This surface modification should 
accelerate the adhesion of osteoblast cell, improve the surgical implant strength and 
reduce 
the 
patient 
healing 
time. 
We started by an existing component design which present some problems during the 
injection moulding process. Those kinds of defect can be reconducted by a non-optimal 
mould design, so the first phase of the project was to find a design modification both 
for components and mould in order to maintain the same functional proprieties but 
achieve a good result in the injection process. The choice of work with plastic material 
and injection moulding technology is mainly derived by the fact that polymers, 
especially bio-absorbable plastic such as PLA, present a good interaction with human 
body compared to metallic implant. Also, injection moulding offers the possibility to 
achieve a mass production of our system, this can reduce the components cost.  
Among the various available technique to generate nanopatterning over metallic inserts 
we decided to try two different ways: an electrochemical method, called copper plating, 
on a copper mould and a laser texturing technology, called LIPSS used to treat a steel 
surface. 
Both process are fast, easy to do and brings different results in terms of nanofeature 
topography and distribution.  
The evaluation of nanostructure is particularly focused on the 3D shapes inside the 
insert’s cavities: the vertical wall, with a small angle of 1,5° respect to the flat-bottomed 
cavity surface is a tricky point to be reached. 
Copper plating show a fully covering of all wall, but the process presents some limitation 
in the deeper spot: the copper deposition does not reach all the mould surface. The 
process chain is quite simple to do, does not required complex equipment, is fast. Many 
tests can be generated in a small amount of time in order to assess the best current 
parameter and find the way how to overcome the incomplete cover problem of deep 
point. This may be achieved by generating agitation in the electrolytic bath and 
increasing the process time. 
Laser induced periodic surface structure (LIPSS), is a laser texturing with a 
characteristic ripple and wave shape. The process chain involves less steps compared 
to the copper plating, the texturing process is very fast (few seconds) and the 
nanostructure are uniformly spread. The shape and the distribution of the feature is 
controllable by the input laser parameter and is easy to be controlled. The drawback of 
this process is that the quasi vertical wall has not been treated. The angle is too low, 
and the laser cannot texturize the whole surface. Since the whole process is conducted 
with a 5-axys machine, it is possible to overcome this problem by tilting the worktable 
==PAGE:90==
87 
 
and/or generate a CAM program with the exact cavity geometry. In this case the 
required equipments are more expensive but the outcome is deterministic 
nanostructure with a relatively easy setting capabilities.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
88 
 
References 
 
[1] C. E. Campbell, A.F. von Recum, 1989,“Microtopography and soft tissue 
response.,” 
[2] Handbook 
[3] Summerschool, 2018 
[4] The effects of combined micron-/submicron-scale surface roughness and 
nanoscale features on cell proliferation and differentiation 
[5] "Towards Laser-Textured Antibacterial Surfaces" Adrian H. A. Lutey , Laura 
Gemini, Luca Romoli, Gianmarco Lazzini, Francesco Fuso, Marc Faucon & Rainer Kling, 
2018 
[6] "Staphylococci and implant surfaces: a review" Llinos G Harris, R Geoff Richards, 
2006 
[7] "In vitro study of human vascular endothelial cell function on materials with 
various surface roughness" 
[8] "Replication of micro and nano surface geometries", H.N. Hansen, R.J. Hocken , G. 
Tosello, 2011 
[9] "The Complete Technology Book on Plastic Extrusion, Moulding And Mould Design 
" p.306, ,  
[10] "Effect of geometry and Reynolds number on the turbulent separated flow behind 
a bulge in a channel", J.-P. Mollicone, F. Battista, P. Gualtieri and C. M. Casciola, 2017 
[11] "Advancements on the simulation of the micro injection moulding process", 
Marhöfer, David Maximilian; Tosello, Guido; Hansen, Hans Nørgaard; Islam, Aminul, 
2013 
[12] "Injection mould venting: the hidden process parameter", Paul E. Allen 
[13] "Laser induce periodic surface structure", J.E Sipe, Jeff F. Young, J.S Preston, 
and H.M. van Driel, 1983 
[14] "Gecys P., Vinciunas A., Gedvilas M., Kasparaitis A., Lazdinas R. and Raciukaitis 
G., Ripple formation by femtosecond laser pulses for enhanced absorptance of 
stainless steel, Journal of Laser Micro/Nano-engineering Vol. 10, No 2, 2015. 
[15] "Laser-Induced Periodic Surface Structures—A Scientific Evergreen", J¨orn 
Bonse, Sandra H¨ohm, Sabrina V. Kirner, Arkadi Rosenfeld, and J¨org Kr¨uger, 2017 
[16] " M.A. Mateos et al Woodhead Publishing Series in Biomaterials 2009, Pages 231-
251” 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
