==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis  
Author: Miguel Chapela Rivas 
 
Supervisors: Michael Linden-Vørnle  
and Daniel Haugård Olesen 
 
September 2019  
Creation of ﬁre risk maps using UAVs  
 
==PAGE:2==
DTU Space
National Space Institute
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, building 327+328+356
Ørsteds Plads, building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Wildﬁres are an increasing concern in all the world, and later in parts where they
never been a major problem like Scandinavia. People’s attention and also money tend
to focus on how to suppress wildﬁres once it started. Some recent studies are pointing
on the beneﬁts of focus more on prevention instead of focusing only on extinction.
Research to create risk models using satellite data and remote sensing techniques have
been done in the last decades. However, not much has been done using data collected
from drones.
In this thesis, current satellite ﬁre risk models are studied to ﬁnd how to apply
them using data from drones. Moreover, it proposed a UAV platform to collect data,
which consists of a multispectral camera. The platform is used to collect data from a
park in Denmark. This is later used to apply a modiﬁed satellite model with the UAV
data. Besides, the same model is applied using satellite and aircraft data. The results
show a better performance from the satellite and aircraft due to mistakes in the data
collection with the platform. Due to weather conditions, not many data collection
campaigns could be done. In the end, advices for a future data collection are given.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank my supervisors Michael Linden-Vørnle and Daniel Haugård
Olesen who show a great interested in this project since the beginning. Without their
guidance and help I would not be able to accomplish it.
I also would like to thank Philip Lind, who apart from ﬂying the drone, helped me
to integrate the camera on it, and made from the data collection campaigns a fun one
day trip. Also thanks to Alexander Rietz who helped me with the camera payload.
I also would like to thank my friends, that always tried to help me from Denmark
or in the distance. I would have not manage to ﬁnish this thesis without their support
and reviews.
Finally, I thank my family for their encouragement to pursue my goals. And of
course, thanks to Maritere for appearing in my life.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
aGL above Ground Level
BOA Bottom of Atmosphere
BS Buzzard Six
CRP Calibrated Reﬂectance Panel
D2R Distance to Roads
D2S Distance to Settlements
DEM Digital Elevation Model
DLS2 Downwelling Light Sensor 2
DSM Digital Surface Model
DTM Digital Terrain Model
EFFIS European Forest Fire Information System
EU European Union
EVI Enhanced Vegetation Index
FIR Far Infrared
GIS Geographic Information Systems
GSD Ground Sampling Distance
HFI Hybrid Fire Index
LIDAR Light Detection and Ranging
LWIR Long wavelength Infrared
MSI Multispectral Instrument
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abbreviations
MWIR Mid wavelength Infrared
NDII Normalised Diﬀerence Infrared Index
NDMI Normalized Diﬀerence Moisture Index
NDVI Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation Index
NIR Near Infrared
NMDI Normalized Multiband Drought Index
PS+ Parrot Sequoia+
PW Precipitale Water
REMX MicaSense RedEdge MX
RF Radio Frequency
S2B Sentinel 2B
SMC Soil Moisture Content
SWIR Short wavelength Infrared
TOA Top Of Atmosphere
Ts Surface Temperature
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
VCI Vegetation Condition Index
VMC Vegetation Moisture Content
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Problem limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Fire risk models
5
2.1
Structural Variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Dynamic Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Modelling Fire Risk with drones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Sensors for UAVs
17
3.1
Multispectral Camera selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Data collection
25
4.1
Study area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Data collection campaigns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Methodology
33
5.1
Drone data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Aircraft and satellite data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Results
39
6.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Comparison of true color composites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Elevation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4
Slope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.5
Aspect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6
NDVI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.7
Fire risk maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Discussion
59
8
Conclusions and future work
61
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Bibliography
63
A Integration of RedEdge-MX
69
B Workﬂow in Agisoft Metashape
73
C QGIS methodology
77
C.1 Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
C.2 Variables calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.3 Variables classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.4 HFI calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C.5 Zevenbergen & Thorne method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
The control of ﬁre has been one of the keys to human evolution. It has been used to
keep us warm, cook or defence. Fire has also been an essential factor to take care of
many forests, woodlands and other vegetation types. Fire can be used for clearing
land, removing debris and reducing fuel loads, although alternatives should always
be considered (FAO.org 2001). This technique is known as prescribed burning and
consists in the controlled application of ﬁre to vegetation under speciﬁc environmental
conditions to achieve planned resource management objectives (FAO 1986). However,
uncontrolled wildﬁres can have severe negative impacts on human health, livelihoods,
assets, air and water quality and biodiversity. More than 90 percent of wildﬁres are
caused by humans, either on purpose or out of neglect. Moreover, with the increasing
temperatures and drought due to climate change, it is expected that the number
of ﬁres escalates, as well as the intensity and the vegetation area aﬀected by them
(FAO.org 2001).
Wildﬁres, also known as wildland ﬁres or forest ﬁre, can then be deﬁned as ﬁres
that burn any type of vegetation in countryside areas, and sometimes reaching urban
areas. According to San-Miguel-Ayanz et al. 2018, in 2017, wildﬁres burnt over 1.2
million ha of natural lands in the European Union (EU) and killed 127 people among
ﬁreﬁghters and civilians. The European Forest Fire Information System (EFFIS)
estimated losses of around 10 billion euros caused by these ﬁres. The ﬁres aﬀected all
the territories in the EU, not only the Mediterranean region but also in counties like
Sweden, UK, Ireland, Finland and Latvia, where wildﬁres had not been a problem in
the past. Besides the EU, wildﬁres are a major concern in all the world. About 400
million ha are burned annually, comprising 3–4 % of the Earth’s vegetated surface
(Martin 2019).
As deﬁned by FAO.org 2001, ﬁre management involves an integrated approach
with ﬁve key elements: review (monitoring and analysis); risk reduction (prevention);
readiness (preparedness); response (suppression); and recovery. In all these elements,
forest managers have crucial roles to play; however, ﬁre management policies tend to
focus on suppression budget-wise. The importance and value of forest ﬁre prevention
have been demonstrated through various research projects in the Mediterranean region
(Rego et al. 2018). But, even though ﬁre prevention forms part of the ﬁre management
policy, it does not receive enough attention and funding as ﬁre suppression.
In Heines et al. 2018, the trade-oﬀs between prevention management spending
and suppression spending are explored. Due to the increasing wildﬁre size and costs,
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
they recommend investigations into alternative methods to help prevent and manage
large wildﬁres. Their results show that ﬁre prevention lowers the risk of experiencing
large ﬁre events. However, not much resources are invested in prevention because its
beneﬁts are realized at an unknown time in the future. According to Assessment of
Forest Fire Risks and Innovative Strategies for Fire Prevention 2010, ﬁre prevention is
not only preferable but also a cost-eﬀective way to manage forest ﬁres when compared
to ﬁre ﬁghting and suppression.
Remote sensing can be applied to diﬀerent areas of ﬁre management, which include
ﬁre risk assessment, ﬁre detection, ﬁre monitoring or the assessment of the burn areas.
Typically satellite imagery is used, because they comprise extensive areas, where
access is complicated, in a regular and cost-eﬀective basis(Leblon et al. 2012). In
particular, for the ﬁre risk assessment, the main parameters that are examined are
the fuel type, fuel moisture, weather conditions and topography. Some of the previous
ﬁre risk assessment systems are based primarily on weather parameters that are point
source data from a sparse network of weather stations (Leblon et al. 2012). Now, the
availability of satellite allows moving ﬁre danger rating from point-based estimates
from weather stations to spatially-explicit measurements (Leblon et al. 2012).
As it is said in Vallejo-Villalta et al. 2019, global wildﬁres studies are usually related
to long-term approaches, and they do not focus as much in the prevention but, mainly
focus on ﬁnding global ﬁre regimes identiﬁcation or ﬁnd the relationship between
climate change and these regimes. Risk mapping includes a wide range of spatial
scenarios, from several hundred thousand to millions of square kilometers. Therefore
their policies application might be suitable for national and regional scale. Local risk
mapping refers to extensions below those previously mentioned (less than 1000 km2),
and due to the small scale, ﬁre risk maps are especially suitable to be included in land
management or emergency planning at the municipal or local community level.
As it was shown, wildﬁres are a global problem, but as they say in FAO.org 2001
local communities are crucial actors for the ﬁght against them. The daily decisions can
have signiﬁcant inﬂuences on the prevention of occurrence of ﬁres, and they can act
quickly to suppress a wildﬁre. Most integrated ﬁre management activities and eﬀorts,
therefore, take place at the local level, requiring what is known as a community-based
ﬁre management approach.
In the last decades, research have been drifting towards the use of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAV), also known as drones, for ﬁre management.
UAV have
many advantages over satellite platforms, specially when we talk about local wildﬁre
management. Satellites can cover big areas, but they pass over only a limited time,
while drones are ﬂexible and ﬂy when they are needed. Moreover, satellites can only
be aﬀorded by national or international agencies due to the high cost, while drones
can be managed by small companies or municipalities.
The UAV system objectives can include ﬁre detection, monitoring, measurements,
diagnosis, prediction and ﬁreﬁghting. Most systems are trying to focus on ﬁre detection
and monitoring, as many advances have been made in image processing and pattern
recognition techniques (Akhlouﬁet al. 2018).
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Problem formulation
3
1.1
Problem formulation
Above, it has been presented how ﬁre management policies tend to focus on suppression,
and not give enough emphasis on the prevention. Moreover, it has been shown that
remote sensing oﬀers a considerable opportunity in order to do a ﬁre risk assessment,
but the scales of the studies performed made them diﬃcult to be applied at a local level.
Finally, the great potential of integrating drones in ﬁre management was described.
The main purpose of this study is to investigate how UAV can be used to make
a ﬁre risk assessment of a forested area using them as the only data source. At the
same time, the same ﬁre risk assessment will be done using aircraft and satellite data.
To do the correct ﬁre risk assessment, the vegetation state, weather conditions and
topography must be modelled to indicate the ﬁre risk. When this project started no
current ﬁre risk model using drones had been found. Therefore the existing models,
which source of data are primarily satellite and aircraft, are studied. Based on this
information, the most suitable model to be applied by a drone platform will be chosen.
In order to obtain the necessary data, a payload that can be carried out by a
UAV must be created. A wide range of possible sensors can be chosen. Despite, in
general, the more parameters measured, the better, it must be taken into account the
limitations regarding weight, power, cost and complexity of the instrument.
Once the data is collected, the data will be processed in a Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) environment and integrated it according to the ﬁre risk model. At the
same time, using satellite and aircraft data from the same area, a similar model will
be created. The results from the diﬀerent platforms will be compared, to evaluate the
advantages and disadvantages and discuss possible ways to combine them.
1.2
Problem limitations
Due to the broad aim of this project, diverse ﬁelds are reached. Therefore, some areas
cannot be studied as deep as one would like. Consequently some limitations must be
introduced.
When studying wildﬁre modelling, it can be seen that multiple parameters play a
role in the risk assessment. They are in most cases modelled based on ﬁre statistics
and regional characteristics of the terrain or vegetation. To investigate which variables
are more suitable for a speciﬁc area will take almost the entire duration of the Master
thesis. Moreover, the study site will be in Denmark, were ﬁre statistics are not relevant
or non-existent. Therefore, the model will be based on one already existing.
In the same way, the development of the payload should not be one of the most
extensive parts of the project. For these reasons, the instrument for the payload
will be commercial oﬀ-the-shelf, and no particular sensors will be developed for this
project.
Another limitation is the location and the extent of the study area.
Drones
encounter many law restrictions on where and how far they can ﬂy. Therefore the
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
extent of the study area will not be as signiﬁcant as a proper ﬁre risk assessment will
aspire for.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER2
Fire risk models
The terms "risk" and "hazard" might seem that could be used indistinctly, however,
when talking about ﬁre management, and in this case wildﬁre management, diﬀerent
deﬁnitions can be found. The most common uses refers to ﬁre hazard as the potential
ﬁre behaviour associated with the "static" properties of fuel, regardless of the particular
weather conditions on a given day (Chuvieco et al. 2014) (Hardy 2005). Fire risk
refers to the probability of a ﬁre starting, aﬀected by the nature and incidence of
causative agents (mainly lightning and human factors), as well as the assessment of the
expected damages, given a ﬁre event (Chuvieco et al. 2014) (Hardy 2005). Therefore,
the consideration of ﬁre vulnerability should always be part of ﬁre risk evaluations
and would help to align them with other natural hazard assessments (Chuvieco et al.
2014).
For these reasons, the generation of a ﬁre risk model is rather complex, since it
requires a wide range of input variables, and integrating them all into a synthetic
index. The variables or indices can be grouped according to their temporal scale. In
Gerdzheva 2014 variables are classiﬁed into three groups based on the proposition
done by the EU Joint Research Center (JRC, 2002). The three groups are structural
or long-term, dynamic or short-term and integrated or advanced. Each one is deﬁned
in Gerdzheva 2014 as follows:
• Structural or long-term indices. They do not change in short time such
as topography, vegetation type, land-cover, land-use, slope, aspect, distance to
roads and vicinity to urban areas, population density, climate, and soils;
• Dynamic or short-term indices, which change moderately continuously over
time, such as vegetation or weather condition. This index intends to detect the
ﬂammability of forest fuels during the ﬁre season and hence, it uses variables
that change in a short period.
• Integrated or Advanced indices that contain both structural and dynamic
factors as mentioned above. However, the most critical issue in this approach is
how to combine the relevant variables eﬀectively to get a coherent criterion.
For simplicity, in this project, the variables or indices are classiﬁed in structural
and dynamic. This same classiﬁcation is done in Vallejo-Villalta et al. 2019, where
they group them in static and dynamic. After a literature review in some ﬁre risk
models (Vallejo-Villalta et al. 2019, Chowdhury et al. 2015, Gerdzheva 2014, Adab
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Fire risk models
et al. 2011, Hernandez-Leal et al. 2009 and Chaparro et al. 2015), it is possible to
see that many of them have variables in common. The following diagram shows the
variables that were used in the literature.
Fire risk
variables











































- Structural























- Topographic





- Aspect
- Elevation
- Slope
- Anthropogenic
(
- Induced hazards
- Vulnerability
- Vegetation type
- Dynamic







- Precipitable Water
- Soil Moisture Content
- Surface Temperature
- Vegetation Moisture Content
The diagram shows 6 structural variables and 4 dynamic variables. It is possible
to group aspect, elevation and slope as topographic type variables, since all are
related with form and characteristics of the land surface. The induced hazards and
vulnerability can be group in the anthropogenic variables, because they refer to
variables related with human-constructed elements. Moreover, the vegetation type is
taken a structural variable too. The dynamic variables are Precipitale Water (PW),
Soil Moisture Content (SMC), Surface Temperature (Ts) and Vegetation Moisture
Content (VMC).
In table 2.1 it is showed in which article are each of these variables used. As it
can be seen, most of the studies used both structural and dynamic variables. It is
interesting to notice that when structural and dynamic variables were used, the only
dynamic variable used was the VMC. Besides, from the structural variables, there is
always some anthropogenic and topographic variable.
In the following sections, the variables and how they aﬀect the ﬁre risk model are
described in more details.
Type
Variable
Vallejo-Villalta
et al. 2019
Chowdhury
et al. 2015
Gerdzheva
2014
Adab et al.
2011
Hernandez-Leal
et al. 2009
Chaparro
et al. 2015
Structural
Aspect
x
x
x
Elevation
x
x
x
Induced hazards
x
x
x
x
Slope
x
x
x
x
Vegetation type
x
x
Vulnerability
x
x
x
x
Dynamic
PW
x
SMC
x
TS
x
x
VMC
x
x
x
x
x
Table 2.1: Variables that were used in the reviewed ﬁre risk models
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Structural Variables
7
2.1
Structural Variables
As it was previously deﬁned, structural variables are the ones that do not change in a
short time.
• Elevation. As it is showed in (Gerdzheva 2014) there are contradictions about
classiﬁcations of ﬁre risk, when elevation is concerned.
Some authors like
Hernandez-Leal et al. 2009 suggest that higher altitudes are more likely to ﬁre
than lower altitudes, while others like Gerdzheva 2014 and Adab et al. 2011
state that areas with lower altitudes are riskier. Therefore elevation risk should
always be estimated, according to the speciﬁcations of each particular territory
(Gerdzheva 2014).
• Aspect. It indicates the compass direction of a slope. South aspects have
received more sunlight and exposure in the northern hemisphere, hence, drier
soil, which is more capable of ignition (Adab et al. 2011). In Gerdzheva 2014
the statistics of historical ﬁres conﬁrms, that the number of ﬁres on slopes with
south, southwest and southeast aspect is higher than on other sites. Also, west
aspects are more exposed to the sun during summer in the northern hemisphere,
since they warm during the morning, and then receive direct sunlight, from noon
until sunset.
• Slope. Slope is a parameter that does not inﬂuence the ﬁre ignition, but the
ﬁre behaviour and speed of spreading (Gerdzheva 2014)(Adab et al. 2011). In
this case, authors agree that ﬁre moves faster up slope than down, and also that
the spread rate increases the higher the slope grade is.
• Induced Hazard. In this variable, we group all the aspects that take into
account the risk of a ﬁre ignition, or propagation caused by human actions or
activities (Vallejo-Villalta et al. 2019). Some of these are electric power lines
and substations, transport infrastructure, recreational areas, roads or populated
areas.
• Vulnerability. Fire risk models can also measure the potential damage. In
this case, it is not measured the risk of ignition, but the impact on the burnt
objects or areas. Diﬀerent examples were found in the literature, like electric
power lines, roads and population areas, as well as some natural protected areas,
which have a higher impact. It can be observed that in many cases, the elements
that are an in induced hazard are also a vulnerability factor.
• Vegetation type. Vegetation type has a strong relationship with the forest ﬁre
risk. Diﬀerent types of vegetation have diﬀerent kinds of combustibility (Yakubu
et al. 2015). The eucalyptus, for example, an endemic species of Australia, has
a highly ﬂammable nature, even explosive (Buell 1997). Moreover much litter
consisting in falling bark, leaves, branches, and seed pods which contain oil,
increases the litter ﬂammability (Buell 1997).
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Fire risk models
2.2
Dynamic Variables
The dynamic variables are the ones that change in short periods as they are related
to the weather conditions. The dynamic variables of a ﬁre risk model are crucial since
they can detect the small variations on the likelihood of ignition and spread.
The ﬁre triangle (ﬁgure 2.1) describes the necessary ingredients for a ﬁre to start.
The three elements of the triangle are oxygen, fuel and heat. At least 16 % of oxygen
is necessary, and the air we breathe has 21 % (Wildland Fire Facts: There Must Be
All Three (U.S. National Park Service) 2016). The fuel is the material that burns. In
the case of vegetation, it can be alive or dead, but dead fuel ignites easier and burns
faster. A source of heat is also necessary. If the environment is warmer, the more
likely is a ﬁre to start and spread.
Figure 2.1: Fire triangle model. Source: Wildland Fire Facts: There Must Be All
Three (U.S. National Park Service) 2016
The four dynamic variables presented in table 2.1 have an important impact on
the ﬁre triangle model. It is possible to see that the four parameters, PW, SMC, Ts
and VMC, are interconnected.
The precipitations and temperature directly aﬀect the vegetation and soil moisture
content. The more precipitations, the higher the moisture content. On the other
hand, high temperature evaporates water and makes the moisture content decrease
and facilitates the ignition and advance of wildﬁres. For this reason, drier and hotter
summers have a more signiﬁcant ﬁre risk.
Chaparro et al. 2015 used SMC and Ts, it is said that higher temperatures together
with more prolonged and more intense droughts are expected in the near future leading
to drier vegetation and higher combustibility of the local fuels. They found that most
of the ﬁres in the Iberian Peninsula from 2010 and 2014 where under dry and hot
soil conditions before burning. Besides, the proportion of ﬁres under these conditions
increased for large ﬁres (from 70% in ﬁres <500 ha to 90% of ﬁres in those >3000 ha).
In Chowdhury et al. 2015, it was used three dynamic variables, Ts, PW and VMC.
Combining them and comparing them to the study area average values, they classify
each pixel from extremely high danger to low, according to the number of variables
above the mean. Their proposed index revealed that 94.78%–95.93% of the ﬁres fell
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Dynamic Variables
9
under “extremely high” to “moderate” danger classes during the 2009–2011 period on
the northern part of Alberta, Canada.
From table 2.1 it can also be seen that most of the authors only use the VMC as
the only input regarding the dynamic variables. Moreover, they use a diverse type
of indexes. In the following subsection, the VMC and the methods to obtain are
described in detail.
2.2.1
Vegetation Moisture Content indices
The VMC is one of the most critical factors aﬀecting its ignition probability as well
as the ﬁre propagation.(Dahanayake et al. 2018). As it was shown in table 2.1, the
vegetation moisture was studied in 5 out of 6 of the papers examined. Diﬀerent indexes
can be used in order to calculate the moisture content.
The most common way, is to measure the diﬀerences in reﬂectance in vegetation
between the visible and the infrared spectrum. As we can see in ﬁgure 2.2, the visible
spectrum comprises from 400 to around 700 nm wavelength. The infrared spectrum
goes 700 nm to 1000 µm and is divided in Near Infrared (NIR), Short wavelength
Infrared (SWIR), Mid wavelength Infrared (MWIR), Long wavelength Infrared (LWIR)
and Far Infrared (FIR).
Figure 2.2: Visible and infrared spectrum. Source: EM Spectrum: Near IR 2012
Figure 2.3 show a very interesting feature on vegetation. Green or healthy vegeta-
tion shows a very low reﬂectance value on the visible spectrum, while it increases in
the NIR spectrum, and then decreasing in the SWIR. The dry vegetation curves show
an increase also in the NIR, but not as aggressive as the green vegetation. Besides, in
the SWIR region, there is not a large diﬀerence in the reﬂectance values, as it was in
the green vegetation.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Fire risk models
The reason why the green vegetation is healthy vegetation is because of the
chlorophyll absorption (a green pigment). Therefore, the green light will be reﬂected the
most. Additionally, chlorophyll also strongly reﬂects NIR light (Verhoeven et al. 2006).
On the other hand, when the vegetation is unhealthy, stressed or dead, chlorophyll
quantities are much lower, leading to less NIR light being reﬂected(Verhoeven et al.
2006).
Figure 2.3: Reﬂectance curves of green vegetation, dry vegetation and soil. Source:
Clark 1999
In table 2.2 it is shown which index is used in each study, which are based on the
diﬀerences from reﬂectance curves shown before.
In Gerdzheva 2014, Chowdhury et al. 2015 and Hernandez-Leal et al. 2009 the
Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation Index (NDVI) is used. The NDVI takes into account
the amount of NIR and red light reﬂected by plants. And as it was said, healthy
vegetation will reﬂect a lot NIR light and almost no red. The NDVI ratio gives values
between -1 and 1. Negative values correspond to deep water, values close to 0 (-0.1
to 0.1) correspond to rock, sand or snow. From 0.2 to 1 values indicate how much
water content is in the vegetation, where 1 represent a high level of water content .It
is calculated as follows:
NDV I = NIR −Red
NIR + Red
(2.1)
In Chowdhury et al. 2015, Gerdzheva 2014, Adab et al. 2011 and Vallejo-Villalta et
al. 2019 Normalized Diﬀerence Moisture Index (NDMI) calculated. In Vallejo-Villalta
et al. 2019 they refer to it as Normalised Diﬀerence Infrared Index (NDII), and in
Chowdhury et al. 2015 they called it Normalized Multiband Drought Index (NMDI).
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Dynamic Variables
11
Index
Vallejo-Villalta
et al. 2019
Chowdhury
et al. 2015
Gerdzheva
2014
Adab et al.
2011
Hernandez-Leal
et al. 2009
EVI
x
NDMI
x
x
x
x
NDVI
x
x
x
VCI
x
Table 2.2: VMC index and where are they used
But in the end they all refer to the diﬀerence between on band in the NIR and SWIR
as shown in the following equation:
NDMI = NIR −SWIR
NIR + SWIR
(2.2)
NDMI is similar to NDVI and is commonly used to evaluate the moisture of the
vegetation Adab et al. 2011. Dryness increases the ﬂammability of the forest due
to the fact that the moisture inﬂuences the spreading of the ﬁre. Its values varies
between -1 and 1, where values between -0.4 and 0.4 indicate water stress, and the
closer to 1, more moisture content (NDVI and NDMI vegetation indices: instructions
for use 2019).
In Vallejo-Villalta et al. 2019 the NDMI was calculated ﬁrst, and afterwards, the
relative Vegetation Condition Index (VCI). The original for VCI formula used NDVI,
although it replaced by the NDMI as it is the index used to determine moisture stress.
In equation 2.3, V CIi represents the VCI for each date, as well as NDMIi is the
index in date in question. The minimum and maximum of the NDMI depends on
the period we are using. The VCI gives values between 0 and 100 and indicates the
relative variability in vegetation condition, values close to 0 indicate severe dryness
while the ones close to 100 indicate humidity (Vallejo-Villalta et al. 2019).
V CIi =
NDMIi −NDMImin
NDMImax −NDMImin
(2.3)
In Hernandez-Leal et al. 2009 the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) is used. It
was developed as an alternative of the NDVI, to optimize the vegetation signal with
improved sensitivity in high biomass regions and improved vegetation monitoring
through a de-coupling of the canopy background signal and a reduction in atmospheric
inﬂuences (Huete et al. 2002). It is calculated as shown in equation 2.4.
EV I = 2.5 ·
NIR −Red
NIR + C1 · Red −C2 · Blue + L
(2.4)
As NDVI uses the NIR and red bands, but also C1, C2, which are the coeﬃcients of the
aerosol resistance term, which uses the blue band to correct for aerosol inﬂuences in the
red band (Huete et al. 2002). L is the canopy background adjustment that addresses
nonlinear, diﬀerential NIR and red radiant transfer through a canopy (Huete et al.
2002). The coeﬃcients adopted in the EVI algorithm are, L = 1, C1 = 6, C2 = 7.5,,
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Fire risk models
and the 2.5 correspond to the gain factor (Huete et al. 2002). It was found in Huete
et al. 2002 that the NDVI saturated in high biomass regions such as in the Amazon
while the EVI remained sensitive to canopy variations.
2.3
Modelling Fire Risk with drones
The models from the articles reviewed before use data from various sources to obtain
the diﬀerent variables, depending on how many are used. Now a ﬁre risk assessment
will be done using a drone platform as the only source.
In principle, all the variables that were presented would be possible to obtain
using drones. However, the drone will not be equipped with all necessary instruments
to obtain them, because of the space and weight limitations of the drone. For this
project, the drone will count only with a multispectral camera. The multispectral
camera was found to be the optimal instrument since it can obtain the maximum
number of variables. More details on the camera and the other sensors can be found
in chapter 3.
Regarding the structural variables, all the topographic variables could be obtained
after processing a Digital Elevation Model (DEM). The DEM can be retrieved from
a photogrammetry1 software using the images from a drone ﬂight. In this project
we will refer to DEM as synonym of a Digital Surface Model (DSM). A DSM is the
representation of the Earth’s surface including the height of buildings, trees etc. On
the other hand, a Digital Terrain Model (DTM) only takes into account the elevation
of the Earth’s surface.
The induced hazards and vulnerability could be identiﬁed by means of a supervised
classiﬁcation from an RGB composite. However, due to the restrictions on the area
that it was allowed to ﬂy, it was not possible to ﬂy over roads or any building. More
information about this is given in chapter 4
The vegetation type classiﬁcation cannot be performed using a multispectral
camera. In order to classify the type of vegetation higher spectral resolution is needed
(Ishida et al. 2018). For this an hyperspectral camera can be used. This is also
discussed in more detail in chapter 3.
In Chowdhury et al. 2015 PW was measured the quantity of water vapor in the
atmosphere. An hygrometer can measure the relative humidity of the air, however
due to the time constraints it was not be consider. To obtain SMC and Ts thermal
infrared or microwave sensors are needed, which will not be used.
Finally, the VMC could be obtained using some of the index combining the bands
of the multispectral camera. In table 2.3, it can be found the variables which are used
and which not and why.
Therefore, 4 variables are taken into account, aspect, slope, elevation, and the
VMC. If we take a look back to table 2.1, it can be seen that the variables that are
1The task of photogrammetry is to establish the relationship between the image and the object
recorded.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Modelling Fire Risk with drones
13
Variable
Used in drone model
Comment
Topographic
Yes
Obtained from DEM
Antrophogenic
No
Restrictions on ﬂight area
Vegeation type
No
Need higher spectral resolution
PW
No
Do not count with hygrometer
SMC
No
Do not count with microwave or thermal camera
Ts
No
Do not count with thermal camera
VMC
Yes
Obtaining VMC index combinig camera bands
Table 2.3: Variables considered for the drone model
going to be used could be similar to one of the models reviewed. The topographic
and the VMC are always the variables more used.
Regarding the VMC, from the indices shown in table 2.2, the chosen index is the
NDVI. VCI need to use several measurements of diﬀerent days, and EVI it is used to
reduce the inﬂuece of the atmosphere, which are not relevant when using a drone. So
the most easily computed would be NDMI and NDVI. Moreover, both are the most
commonly used. However, NDMI will not be possible to compute with the payload
that will be developed, as it will be shown in the next chapter.
Now it is required to ﬁnd the way to integrate these variables to obtain a ﬁnal
risk index. For this, it was decided to use one of the models reviewed. The model
chosen was the one from Adab et al. 2011, since the variables it takes into account
could all be collected using the multispectral camera on the drone. Besides, as it is
said in Gerdzheva 2014, the model from Adab et al. 2011 shows a signiﬁcant relation
between risk zones and ﬁres in the study area, with almost 75% of all historical ﬁres,
placed in high risk or very high risk zones.
The ﬁre risk model from Adab et al. 2011 measures the risk using what they called
the Hybrid Fire Index (HFI). They take into account for VMC, slope, aspect, Distance
to Roads (D2R),Distance to Settlements (D2S) and elevation, using the equation 2.5.
The VMC in the original model is measured with NDMI, but in our case the NDVI
will be used.
HFI = 100(VMC) + 50(Slope) + 25(Aspect) + 10(D2R + D2S) + 5(Elevation)
10
(2.5)
As it is not possible to obtain the D2R and D2S, this variables will be removed
from the model. As it can be seen, they also have a very low weighting in the ﬁnal
index. The modiﬁed model would be:
HFI = 100(VMC) + 50(Slope) + 25(Aspect) + 5(Elevation)
9
(2.6)
Before calculating the HFI each variable must be classiﬁed. The weight of each
variable can be seen in tables 2.4 and 2.5. The weights or risk factor are given from 1
to 5, being 1 the lowest level of risk and 5 the highest.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Fire risk models
Figure 2.4:
Aspect directions classiﬁcation.
Source: How Aspect works 2019
As it was said before, aspect in-
dicates the slope compass direction.
It is expressed in degrees from 0 to
360, and the direction can be classi-
ﬁed according to the interval shown
in ﬁgure 2.4. Then in left table 2.4,
a risk factor is given according the
sunlight exposure of each aspect di-
rection.
It can be seen that northern di-
rections have lower risk factor, than
southern direction. And also west-
ern direction are given a higher risk factor than eastern. Notice also that ﬂat surfaces
(no slope), are expressed with 0, which could cause that some north values are lost.
The reason for having ﬂat as 0 is to avoid NaN values in that areas. More explanation
about this can be found in appendix C.
Table 2.4 (right) shows the elevation classiﬁcation.
In the models that were
reviewed, elevation ranges were in some cases more than 1000 m, for example in Adab
et al. 2011. In our case, due to the limitations on the terrain that is studied, the range
is very small. However, it is assumed that elevation will still play a role in the ﬁre
risk model.
Variable
Classes [deg]
Risk factor
Aspect
(0,22.5],(337.5,360]
1
(22.5,67.5]
1.5
(292.5,337.5]
2
(67.5.112.5]
2.5
(247.5,292.5]
3
0 (Flat)
3.5
(112.5,157.5]
4
(202.5,247.5]
4.5
(157.5,202.5]
5
Variable
Classes[m]
Risk factor
Elevation
(0,25]
1
(25,35]
2
(35,45]
3
(45,55]
4
(55,∞]
5
Table 2.4: Aspect (left) and elevation (right) risk factor classiﬁcation
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Modelling Fire Risk with drones
15
Figure 2.5:
Slope calculation.
Source:
Abuckley 2008
Slope is the vertical change in eleva-
tion in a surface. It can be expressed
in three diﬀerent way, ratio, percentage
and angle. They all refer to the change
between the elevation diﬀerence (rise),
and the ground distance (run), as shown
in ﬁgure 2.5.
In our case, it is expressed in percent-
age, and the intervals that are presented
on table 2.5 (left) for the risk classiﬁca-
tion, are the same as the ones used in
Adab et al. 2011. Slope higher than hun-
dred percent are given the lowest risk
factor, since they correspond to changes
between the earth surface and trees.
Finally in table 2.5 (right), it is shown
the classiﬁcation of the NDVI. The ﬁrst
interval correspond to no vegetated areas, therefore the lowest risk factor is given.
The highest risk factor is allocated to the next interval, since it shows the the driest
or most unhealthy vegetation. As the the NDVI increases to 1, the VMC increases,
therefore the risk factors are assigned accordingly.
Variable
Classes [%]
Risk factor
Slope
[0,5]
1
(5,10]
2
(10,25]
3
(25,35]
4
(35,100]
5
(100,∞]
1
Variable
Classes[Index value]
Risk factor
NDVI
[-1,0.25]
1
(0.25,0.45]
5
(0.45,0.55]
4
(0.55,0.65]
3
(0.65,1]
2
Table 2.5: Slope (left) and NDVI(right) weights
After the classiﬁcation of the variables, the HFI is calculated using equation 2.6.
The values of HFI range between 20 and 100. These values are divided in 5 equal
classes and given a risk class, as shown in table 2.6.
Risk class
Very low
Low
Medium
High
Very high
HFI interval
(20,36]
(36,52]
(52,68]
(68,86]
(86,100]
Table 2.6: HFI classiﬁcation
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER3
Sensors for UAVs
As a result of the miniaturization and decreasing cost of sensors, drones can be
equipped with almost any kind of sensors. Following some of the instruments that can
be carried by an UAV to measure the variables reviewed in chapter 2 are evaluated.
• RGB camera. RGB cameras are the standard color cameras that measure the
red, green and blue bands of the visible spectrum. Since these cameras are used
for multiple purposes, they exist in very small dimensions and weights, and with
very high resolutions. The obvious downside is that only the visible part of the
spectrum is measured, so it is not possible to estimate, the diﬀerences between
the dry and green vegetation, which was seen in ﬁgure 2.3. But they can be
used to do a visual inspection as well as create orthomosaic1 and DEM using
photogrammetric techniques.
• LIDAR. Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) is a technology that consists
of an emitting laser light to measure the distance to the target objects. One of
the main uses of LIDAR is for creating a DEM. It allows to create 3D models
of the forest canopy or monitor the growth rate of the forest. It also has the
advantage, in contrast to photogrammetric techniques, that it can penetrate
vegetation layers resulting in high resolution and high precision 3D data of the
terrain (Amon et al. 2015).
• Multispectral camera. These cameras capture not only the visible spectrum
but frequencies above or below it, like ultraviolet and infrared. They usually
include the red, green and blue bands plus a few bands in the infrared spectrum.
Compared to RGB cameras on the visible part of the spectrum, multispectral
cameras typically have lower resolution, bigger dimensions and be more expensive.
However, multispectral cameras, it is possible to obtain VMC index.
• Hyperspectral camera. Hyperspectral and multispectral usually sense the
same region of the spectrum, but the diﬀerence is that where the multispectral
camera will have no more than 10 bands of 10 to 100 nm bandwidth, and a
hyperspectral camera will have hundred of bands of a few nm. Besides, the
bands of a hyperspectral camera are, in most cases, contiguous.
However,
1Orthomosaic: Series of contiguous pictures, where the perspective aspect of the images have
been removed (orthorectiﬁed), assembled together in one continuous image (Mikhail et al. 2001)
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Sensors for UAVs
hyperspectral cameras are considerably more complicated to use and expensive
than multispectral.
Variable
RGB
LIDAR
Multispectral
Hyperspectral
Thermal
Topographic
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Antrophogenic
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vegeation type
No
No
No
Yes
No
PW
No
No
No
No
No
SMC
No
No
No
No
Yes
Ts
No
No
No
No
Yes
VMC
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Table 3.1: Variables that can be obtained the sensors reviewed.
• Thermal camera. It is a sensor that can obtain images from the thermal
infrared region, which is between 8 µm and 14 µm, i.e., between the MWIR and
LWIR. Thermal imaging can be using to obtain Ts and SMC as done in Kelly
et al. 2019 and Chang et al. 2018.
In table 3.1 it is shown which variables could be obtained which each sensor. After
reviewing which variables could be collected with each instrument, it was decided to
use only a multispectral camera.
The topographic variables could be obtained with any of the ﬁve sensors after pro-
cessing a DEM, acquired employing photogrammetry or LIDAR technology. Likewise,
anthropogenic variables, would be retrieved after doing a visual examination and then
a classiﬁcation of the human-induced hazards and vulnerabilities, with the images of
all sensors.
However, table 3.1 shows that VMC can only be obtained with multispectral and
hyperspectral cameras. In table 2.1 it was observed, how VMC was the variable that
was used in the majority of the models ( in 5 out of 6). The RGB camera, the LIDAR,
and the thermal camera were excluded for this reason. Besides, the LIDAR and RGB
camera will not add something that the multispectral could not deliver. Having the
thermal camera would allow having more variables, but due to the complexity of use,
it was not advisable since it would very time-consuming.
In the case of hyperspectral cameras, they will only add the vegetation type
variables. Doing at vegetation type study will require an in-depth investigation study
about the study area vegetation, which will be prolonged considerably the time needed.
Moreover, the diﬀerent species might not have signiﬁcant diﬀerences regarding the
risk. Therefore, it was discarded, also due to its diﬃculty of use, compared to the
multispectral.
After this point, it was necessary to decide which multispectral camera would be
used. DTU Space agreed to buy a new multispectral camera, to be used in diﬀerent
activities, and also for this project. In the following section, the options reviewed are
presented.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Multispectral Camera selection
19
3.1
Multispectral Camera selection
After an initial search, three cameras were mainly considered, Buzzard Six, Parrot
Sequoia + and MicaSense RedEdge MX. In the following sections, it is shown the
research process that was taken to decide which would be the most appropriate
choice. The characteristics, user experience and a literature review of the cameras
were discussed to make a decision. Besides, it has been taken into account that it
would be used to do ﬁre risk maps, but also that would be used in other projects at
DTU Space.
3.1.1
Overview
The Buzzard Six (BS) camera, ﬁgure 3.1a, is an advanced multispectral camera specif-
ically designed by Buzzard Cameras. Buzzard company is located in Warwickshire,
United Kingdom. The oﬃcial price that appears on the web page for the BS is 5,495.00
GBP, which is around 47,500 DKK. The company was founded by Oliver Drew after
completing his MSc Thesis research into the application of UAV acquired multispectral
imagery for precision agriculture and environmental studies.(About us 2019).
Parrot Sequoia+ (PS+), ﬁgure 3.1b, is built by the French company Parrot, founded
in 1994, which counts with an extensive portfolio, including drones, accessories, and
sensors like PS+. The PS+ is an aﬀordable (around 26,000 DKK), small and lightweight
multispectral camera, with high capabilities. Parrot is one of the leading European
groups in the fast-growing industry of drones. The Parrot Group designs and engineers
its products in Europe, mainly in France and Switzerland, making sales all around
the world (Investor Relations 2019).
The MicaSense RedEdge MX (REMX) is produced by MicaSense, a company
from Seattle, United States. They oﬀer drone sensors and data analysis services for
precision farming mainly. One of their positives points is that they oﬀer a lot of
resources for their users. The REMX cost around 36,800 DKK, and usually has a
delivery time of 10-14 days to Europe.
(a) Buzzard Six
(b) Parrot Sequia +
(c) MicaSense Red Edge MX
Figure 3.1: The three multispectral cameras reviewed
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Sensors for UAVs
3.1.2
Spectral bands
Regarding the spectral bands of the camera, the number of bands matters as much as
the spectral resolution. Having a higher level of spectral detail gives better capability
to see details (Multispectral vs Hyperspectral Imagery Explained 2019). If the sensors
have a very wide bandwidth, some details will be lost (MicaSense 2018b). Reﬂectance
curves from ﬁgure 3.2 (similar to ﬁgure 2.3), illustrates this problem. Both ﬁgures
show the 5 spectral bands from the RapiEye Satellite Sensors and some reﬂectance
curves or spectral signatures of diﬀerent vitality vegetation, soil, and water. As it
was said in section 2.2.1, for vegetation, a drastic increase occur from the visible to
the infrared spectrum. Depending on the vitality of the vegetation, this change is
more or less exponential. Therefore in multispectral sensors, a wide bandwidth would
more likely overlap this diﬀerence, resulting in more to determine the properties of
the observed object.
(a) Typical spectral reﬂectance curves of se-
lected surfaces in relation to the RapidEye
spectral bands. Source: RapidEye 2016
(b) Diﬀerences in reﬂectance at the Red Edge
wavelengths between three plant spectra with
varying levels of vitality. Source: RapidEye
2016
Figure 3.2: Spectral signatures of diﬀerent surfaces in the RapidEye Satellite bands
In table 3.2 and ﬁgure 3.3 we can see the spectral bands of the three cameras
considered. The BS has six bands, two in the Red Edge region, with quite narrow
bandwidth. Moreover, the 6 bands are equivalent to 6 bands of Sentinel-2 satellite,
which allows making a better comparison between satellite and drone images. The
satellite images that will be used in this project correspond to the Sentinel-2 satellite,
which is introduced later in chapter 5.
The PS+ has 4 bands. The red edge band is narrow with 10 nm bandwidth, but
the other 3 are 40 nm. It also does not include a blue band. Even though for most
vegetation indices it is not used, the blue channel can be used to study the atmosphere
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Multispectral Camera selection
21
and deep water. Therefore, this is a downside if the purpose is also buying a generic
camera, which can be used in more projects.
The REMX has 5 bands, very similar to the BS. It has even narrower bands in the
blue, green and red bands. It has only one band in the Red-Edge in between both of
the BS with the same spectral resolution. However, having redundancy in this band
might be unnecessary. The band in the NIR region is broader than BS one, but it
reaches higher in the spectrum, which could be interesting for some applications.
Camera
Blue(nm)
Green(nm)
Red(nm)
Red-Edge(nm)
Near-Infrared (nm)
Buzzard Six
475-525
537.5-562.5
662.5-687.5
695-705
745-755
775-785
Parrot SEQUOIA+
-
530-570
640-680
730-740
770-810
MicaSense RedEdge MX
465-485
550-570
663-673
712-722
820-860
Table 3.2: Multispectral cameras spectral bands
Figure 3.3: Multispectral cameras spectral bands
3.1.3
Spatial Resolution, pixel size and sensor resolution
A digital image comprises a two dimensional array of individual picture elements called
pixels arranged in columns and rows. It is important to distinguish between pixel
size and spatial resolution - they are not interchangeable (Spatial Resolution, Pixel
Size, and Scale 2015). Each pixel represents a square area on the Earth’s surface of
the pixel size dimensions (Analog and Digital Images 2001) and the sensor resolution
refers to the number of pixels for row and column of the pixel. The spatial resolution
of the sensor refers to the size of the smallest possible feature that can be detected. It
is possible to display an image with a pixel size diﬀerent than the resolution (Spatial
Resolution, Pixel Size, and Scale 2015).
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Sensors for UAVs
In table 3.3 the characteristics of the sensors for each camera are shown. It can be
observed that pixel size and spatial resolution are not equal. BS has a smaller spatial
resolution, than PS+ and REMX, while the pixel size of this two are slightly smaller
than BS. The sensor resolution is also practically identical, having BS a bit higher
sensor resolution.
In general, the parameters from table 3.3, do not show very strong diﬀerences that
would determine in favor of one of the cameras.
Camera
Pixel Size
Spatial Resolution
Sensor Resolution
Buzzard Six
5 µm
5.3 cm at 120m
1280 x 1024
Parrot SEQUOIA+
3.75 µm
11 cm at 120 m
1280 x 960
MicaSense RedEdge MX
3.75 µm
8 cm at 120 m
1280 x 960
Table 3.3: Pixel size, spatial resolution and sensor resolution
3.1.4
Weight and dimensions
The weight and dimensions are decisive when choosing the camera, since the smaller
the dimensions and weight of the sensor, the less power is consumed by the drone, the
longer the ﬂight time can be or more easily could be combined with other sensors in
the same payload.
From table 3.4 it can be seen that PS+ has clearly a considerable advantage in
this aspect. BS and REMX, show very similar dimensions and weight. However, the
dimensions are around 1/3 smaller than BS and REMX and its weight is less than
half of BS and REMX.
Name
Dimensions
Weight
Buzzard Six
8.65 cm x 6 cm x 5.4 cm
250 g
Parrot SEQUOIA+
5.9 cm x 4.1 cm x 2.8 cm
72 g
MicaSense RedEdge MX
8.7 cm x 5.9 cm x 4.54 cm
231.9 g
Table 3.4: Weight and dimensions of each camera
3.1.5
Calibration
Radiometric calibration is a crucial part of processing multispectral imagery. Radio-
metric calibration takes into account directional measurements (such as the position
of the sensor and the sun), irradiance measurements (using tools like light sensors or
reﬂectance panels), as well as gain and exposure data from the camera. Considering
these factors enables the conversion of raw digital numbers (from the raw imagery), to
sensor reﬂectance or irradiance, and then to surface reﬂectance values (The Importance
of Radiometric Calibration 2018).
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Multispectral Camera selection
23
The REMX contains Downwelling Light Sensor 2 (DLS2)( with embedded GPS)
and the PS+ a Sunshine Sensor which is both irradiance/light sensors. A light sensor
measures irradiance, which is heavily dependent on the sensor’s orientation relative
to the sun as it ﬂies (Light Sensors: the Basics (DLS and Sunshine Sensor) 2017).
Moreover, they both contain Calibrated Reﬂectance Panel (CRP), which they always
recommend to use, even when using a light sensor. The BS also includes a calibration
target, but no light sensor is mentioned.
In Best practices: Collecting Data with MicaSense Sensors 2019 they explain how
the images CRP should be taken for the REMX. The panel should be placed ﬂat on
the ground, far away from any objects that could aﬀect the light that illuminates
it. Then, standing in front of the panel, with the sun at the back and image of the
panel should be taken, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.4a. It is also said that CRP should be
at least 1/3 of the image width as seen in 3.4b. Besides, Micasense oﬀer in a clear
tutorial on how to convert the raw pixel values of an image into reﬂectance values in
RedEdge Camera Radiometric Calibration Model 2019.
(a) Illustration of how the image of the
CRP should be taken.
(b) Example of an image of the CRP. The CRP should
be at least 1/3 of the image width
Figure 3.4: Images from Best practices: Collecting Data with MicaSense Sensors 2019
3.1.6
Literature Review
In Assmann et al. 2018 they summarize 3 years of ecological monitoring with drone-
based multispectral sensors (PS+ and REMX). They discuss challenges, technical
aspects and practical considerations, and highlight best practices that emerged from
their experience. Many of the recommendations they found were similar to the ones
that manufacturers provide. For example, when taking the image for the radiometric
calibration, at least 1/3 of the total image size should be covered by the calibration
area of the reﬂectance target. When calculating the NDVI, their results show that
the main source of error was from not doing the radiometric calibration, followed by
cloud cover, solar angle, target degradation and protective lens cover.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Sensors for UAVs
In Ahmed et al. 2017 ﬁve land cover classes were determined with PS+. Again
multispectral imagery was radiometrically calibrated based on the reference panel
which photos were taken with PS+ on the ground before each ﬂight. They reach
classiﬁcation accuracies of 95, 89 and 82 % for the diﬀerent land-cover classes with
the PS+.
Also in Fernández-Guisuraga et al. 2018 PS+ was used to obtain multispectral or-
thomosaics at ultra-high resolution of burned areas. They report that the raw imagery
acquired by the Parrot SEQUOIA multispectral camera presented some undesirable
anomalies such as horizontal banding noise and non-homogeneous radiometry across
the image. They explain that the horizontal banding noise observed is a common
artefact of CMOS rolling shutter sensors. However, the PS+ uses a global shutter
system, and this eﬀect should not be signiﬁcant in this multispectral sensor. However,
they said that by the time they were using the camera, the error might not have been
reported.
The REMX was used in Dash et al. 2017 to collect multispectral imagery for
identifying physiological stress in mature plantation trees. The calibration process
was done using the calibrated reﬂectance panel. Results from this study clearly show
that the collection of multispectral imagery with REMX provides a useful method to
detect and monitor forest disease.
Also, REMX was used in Taddia et al. 2019 was used to monitor submerged
seaweed in shallow water. Here they highlight the importance of using the reﬂectance
panel together with the DLS2 for more accurate results. This is because, when only
the reﬂectance panel, no irradiance variations are addressed, and if only the DLS2
is used, the reﬂectance is not much accurate. They also point that to process the
images, no diﬀerences were found when using Agisoft PhotoScan Professional or Pix4D
Mapper Pro.
3.1.7
Conclusion
Focusing on the camera’s speciﬁcations, it would seem that BS would be the best
option, since it has the best spatial resolution and more spectral bands. However, the
lack of information and no feedback from others is a deﬁnite downside compare to the
other two. Moreover, REMX characteristics are pretty similar.
Both REMX and PS+ seems to have been successfully used in research previ-
ously. However, the major advantages for PS+ respect REMX are the price and the
dimensions, which in many projects this can be a constraint. In our case, the REMX
dimension and budget are within limits, and the REMX oﬀer better resolution and an
extra spectral band, which may be used in other projects..
Moreover, from the literature review done from the cameras, it seems that both
REMX and PS+ are very much similar regarding the ease of use.
In addition,
MicaSense oﬀers many tutorials and guides about REMX, what makes it more reliable
and user-friendly. Thus, it was decided that the REMX would be purchased.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER4
Data collection
4.1
Study area
After deciding which multispectral camera was going to be used, it was necessary
to ﬁnd a forested area where the drone was allowed to ﬂy. The general rules for
operations in the Danish countryside, do not allow to ﬂy over people, or above 100 m
above Ground Level (aGL). Moreover, the drone must always be on sight and farther
than 150 m from residential areas and roads (Rules and Regulations of Drone ﬂying
in Denmark 2019). Because of this, it was not possible to obtain induced hazards and
vulnerabilities, since the UAV is not allowed to ﬂy over roads or settlements. Besides,
the maximum extent of data that could be taken is limited because the drone must
always be on sight.
Also, there are some places, like airports, military bases, etc. where drones are
not allowed to ﬂy. In Naviair Web Portal 2019 it can be seen which places have
air restrictions.
From Naviair Web Portal 2019, some parks like Holtekollen or
Jægersborg Dyrehave, show they had no special restrictions. However, when asked
to the Naturstyrelsen (Danish Nature Agency), they would not allow the ﬂight, if no
guarantee that wildlife would no be disturbed.
However, there are some parks where Naturstyrelsen allows drones to ﬂight. One
of them is Knurrenborg Vang. This small forest of 109 ha, lies a few kilometers south
of Fredensborg, North Sealand as seen in ﬁgure 4.1. It is less than 30 min car drive
from DTU. So, ﬁnally, it was decided to ﬂy there.
Due to the restrictions mentioned above, and the duration of the drone batteries,
it was not possible to cover the whole area of the park. From the whole data collection
area, a rectangular study extent(red rectangle in ﬁgure 4.1) was clipped, to match
the extension of the areas of the drone, satellite and aircraft data. The rectangle
coordinates are shown in table 4.1.
Longitude
Value
Latitude
value
xmin
55.959150
ymin
12.426798
xmax
55.962059
ymax
12.432403
Table 4.1: Values of the extent coordinates from ﬁgure 4.1.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Data collection
In ﬁgure 4.2 the study extent is zoom in. Here the details of the study extent can
be seen. Two main features are noticed the Glenten playground area and a marshland
area. Besides, it can be that more or less half of the study extent is covered by trees
and the other half is grass. Also, it can be noticed a path crossing from the top left to
the right corner of the study extent.
After integrating the REMX multispectral camera on payload (more details in
appendix A) which would attach to a DJI S900, the payload was ready to collect data.
In the following section, the ﬂight campaigns that took place, included the initial test
in DTU, are presented.
Figure 4.1: Study area and the study extent that was used. Bing maps
4.2
Data collection campaigns
Several data collection campaigns were conducted until enough data to work was
collected correctly. Collecting more data would be desirable, however, it was not
possible due to weather restrictions, availability of the drone or pilot, or permission to
ﬂy in the park.
Apart from the drone and the camera payload, some other equipment was required
to carry out the data collection campaigns. Following the equipment is described:
• DJI S900. It is a multi-rotor UAV, with six folding arms, which make it very easy
to carry. It weighs 3.3 kg and has a maximum takeoﬀweight of 8.2kg (Spreading
Wings S900 - highly portable, powerful aerial system for the demanding ﬁlmmaker
2019). The maximum ﬂight time is 18 minutes with 6.8 kg payload on breezeless
day and uses a 12000 mAh battery (Spreading Wings S900 - highly portable,
powerful aerial system for the demanding ﬁlmmaker 2019).
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Data collection campaigns
27
Figure 4.2: Study extent close look. Bing maps
• REMX payload. This consist on the REMX multispectral camera mounted on
a wooden plate and with a power supply, that is connected to the drone. In
ﬁgures A.3 and A.4 the front (side facing the ground) and the back (side facing
the sky) of the payload are shown. The total weight of the payload, including
cabling, was is 0.5 kg.
• Drone batteries. Two batteries fully charged for the drone were carried for the
data collection campaign. The batteries were transported in a ﬁreproof case,
because of the ﬁre danger in case of an accident.
• Laptop. At least one laptop was needed. It must count with the software to
create the ﬂight route and uploaded it to the UAV. The software used was
UgCS. Besides, it was used to connect to the REMX in order to set the camera
parameters.
• Radio Frequency (RF) link. The RF was necessary to connect from the computer
with the ﬂight controller to the DJI S900. The RF link was connected to the
laptop via a USB port.
• Screwdrivers. The screwdrivers were necessary to attach the REMX payload to
the DJI S900.
• Drone controller. The drone controller was used to take oﬀand drive the drone
to the starting point. Once there the DJI S900 will follow the route planned in
UgCS automatically. After that, the control of the drone is taken again to land
it.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Data collection
4.2.1
Campaign 9th of August
On the 9th of August, the data that later is used to create the ﬁre risk maps was
collected after ﬂying over the study area. The ﬂight parameters are calculated with
a pre-ﬂight calculator, available when connected to the REMX network. A similar
calculator from MicaSense is available in Flight Calculator 2019.
The input parameters for the ﬂight calculator are presented in table 4.2. The
overlap between images is one of the crucial factors for a correct photogrammetric
reconstruction. Figure 4.3 show that there are two types of overlap. The MicaSense
recommendations (Best practices: Collecting Data with MicaSense Sensors 2019) for
the front and side overlap are 75 % as it is also shown in ﬁgure 4.3. Flight speed was
set 5 m/s and height 100 m aGL according to what is shown in ﬁgure 4.4. This chart
shows the trade-oﬀbetween the UAV velocity and height. At 100 m aGL the expected
Ground Sampling Distance (GSD) is around 6.8 cm according to table 4.4.
The main outputs from the ﬂight calculator are presented in table 4.3. Here the
distance between tracks, distance between captures and ﬂight time are shown. It can
be observed that the ﬂight time is higher than what was showed before for the DJI
S900. This is possible due to the low weight of the payload. When the drone landed
the battery was around 35-40 %.
Figure 4.3: Front and side overlap. Source: Best practices: Collecting Data with
MicaSense Sensors 2019
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Data collection campaigns
29
Figure 4.4: Sample overlap chart for MicaSense Sensors. Source: Best practices:
Collecting Data with MicaSense Sensors 2019
The parameters presented in tables 4.2 and 4.3, are the ones used and obtained by
the REMX pre-ﬂight estimator. But the route is created and uploaded to the UAV
using the UGcS. The only parameters that are needed, for UgCS make the ﬂight plan
are the ﬂight speed, distance between tracks and height.
Front overlap
Side overlap
Flight speed
Flight height
75%
75%
5 m/s
100 m aGL
Table 4.2: Mission input for Pre-Flight Calculator
Distance between track
Distance between capture
Flight time
21.62 m
16 m
26 minutes
Table 4.3: Mission outputs for Pre-Flight Calculator
After uploading the route to the UAV using the RF link, it was ready to capture
images. Before and after images from the CRP were taken. In ﬁgure 4.5 it is show
an image from the CRP. It can be seen that the CRP(the grey square in the image)
does not take up 1/3 of the image like MicaSense recommended, as it was shown in
ﬁgure 3.4b. This could have inﬂuenced the ﬁnal results of the images, as it will be
later discussed.
During ﬂight 347 images were captured in total. Some of these images, however,
correspond to the path that the drone took from the take oﬀpoint to the route start
point. Some of these images introduced some distortions because while the drone was
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Data collection
ﬂying to the start point, it could be tilted or ﬂying faster than it should. To solve this,
when the drone is going to the route starting point, it should be below the trigger
altitude of the camera (100 m aGL in our case).
An image from that day is shown in ﬁgure 4.6. In ﬁgure 4.7 it is shown the UAV
where the camera can be appreciated, while the drone ﬂew in DTU.
Figure 4.5: Image from CRP (NIR band) obtained on the 9th of August.
Alt (m)
GSD (cm/p)
30
2
40
2.7
50
3.4
60
4.1
70
4.8
80
5.5
90
6.1
100
6.8
110
7.5
120
8.2
130
8.9
140
9.6
150
10.2
Table 4.4: GSD in centimeters per pixel according to the altitude of the REMX.
Source: RedEdge: What is the resolution/GSD of the imagers? 2017
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Data collection campaigns
31
Figure 4.6: DJI S900 in the study area.
Figure 4.7: DJI S900 on the air with the payload at DTU.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Data collection
4.2.2
Test and other ﬂight campaigns
On the 24th of July, before going the ﬁrst data collection campaign, the payload was
tested in DTU. As it was the ﬁrst time the camera was being used, it was necessary to
calibrate the magnetometer from DLS2. To calibrate the magnetometer, the process
in MicaSense 2019 is followed. This process is needed to obtain correctly georeferenced
images. After this, the drone ﬂew over the DTU rugby ﬁeld. The camera successfully
obtained the images, which then were processed in Agisoft Metashape. In ﬁgure 4.8a
it is shown the true color composite from the images of that day.
The day after, on the 25th of July, the drone and the payload were taken to
Knurrenborg Vang. On this day, it was not possible to obtain any images. After a few
hours trying to connect with the DJI S900, it was not possible to establish connection
with the drone. Because of this reason, it was not possible to upload the ﬂight route,
and the data collection was postponed.
One week after, on the 2nd of August, another data-collection campaign was tried.
This time the ﬂying route was successfully uploaded, but the controller of the s900
failed a few minutes after takeoﬀ. The battery of the controller drop drastically, and
there was a high chance of losing control of the drone. Therefore, it was necessary to
land it. Some images could be obtained, but not enough overlap in some areas, and
the ﬁnal extent of the image was too small. In ﬁgure 4.8b it is shown the true color
composite from the data collected that day.
(a) Orthomosaic obtained from ﬂight on
the rugby ﬁeld
(b) Orthomosaic obtained from ﬂight on Knurren-
borg Vang the 2nd of August
Figure 4.8: Orthomosaic obtained from the test at DTU and the campaign on the
2nd of August
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER5
Methodology
In this chapter, the procedure followed to obtain the ﬁre risk maps with drone data
and with satellite and aircraft data are explained.
As it was said in previous chapters, the only sensor that will be carried by the
drone will be the REMX multispectral camera. The multispectral images are combined
to obtain NDVI. A similar process is done using images from the Sentinel 2B (S2B).
The Sentinel-2 mission comprises a constellation of two polar-orbiting satellites
(2A and 2B) placed in the same sun-synchronous orbit, phased at 180° to each other
(2 - Missions - Sentinel Online 2019). S2B has on board the Multispectral Instrument
(MSI), which has a total of 13 bands from visible to SWIR. Some of this bands are
similar to the ones on REMX as it can be seen from table 5.1 and ﬁgure 5.1.
Sensor
Blue(nm)
Green(nm)
Red(nm)
Red-Edge(nm)
Near-Infrared (nm)
REMX
465-485
550-570
663-673
712-722
820-860
MSI S2B
459.1-525.1
541-575
649.4-680.4
695.8-711.8
731.6-746.6
769.7 - 789.7
779.9 - 885.9
Table 5.1: Blue, green, red, red-edge and NIR bands from REMX and S2B.
Figure 5.1: Comparison of the 5 bands of the REMX and bands from 2 to 8 of S2B
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Methodology
Using the photogrammetry software Agisoft Metashape, it also will be obtained a
DEM from drone images. For the other model, a DEM from the Danish Agency for
Data Supply and Eﬃciency is used, which was collected by a LIDAR from an aircraft
during 2015-2015 (info - Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Eﬀektivisering 2016).
The process to obtain the ﬁre risk maps are similar independently of the data
source, although some diﬀerences are later explained. Essentially, the process can be
summarized in 4 major phases:
1. Pre-processing. Here, the necessary tasks to acquire the DEM and multispec-
tral images are comprised. In the case of the UAV a photogrammetry software
is needed, but the LIDAR and satellite images just need to be download from
Kortforsyningen download 2019 and the multispectral images from Copernicus
Open Access Hub 2019.
2. Variables calculation. This includes the processing that is done in QGIS(QGIS
3.4 Madeira) to obtain the topographic variables from the DEM and the index
calculation combining the bands of the multispectral images.
3. Variables classiﬁcation. In this phase, the values of each of the variables are
weight according to the risk criteria shown in section 2.3.
4. HFI calculation. Finally the classiﬁed variables are combined together accord-
ing to the HFI modiﬁed equation 2.6.
In the next sections, the process for obtaining the ﬁre risk maps with drone data
and with satellite and aircraft data are explained separately.
5.1
Drone data
The entire process followed to create the ﬁre risk maps using the drone data is
illustrated in ﬁgure 5.2. As can be seen, the pre-processing phase consists of three
steps. Drone images consists of the data collection campaign, resulting in the set of
images (including the CRP).
The next rectangle, Process Agisoft refers to the construction of the DEM and the
orthomosaic from the raw images in Agisoft Metashape. For that, the ﬁrst 34 images
and the last 10 images captured in the data collection camping were omitted, since
they were not corresponding to the planned ﬂight path as explained in 4.2.1.
In appendix B the procedure followed in Agisoft Metashape, which is based in
MicaSense RedEdge MX processing workﬂow (including Reﬂectance Calibration) in
Agisoft Metashape Professional 1.5 2019, is explained with more details. The steps
follow roughly are:
1. Images are calibrated, using the data from CRP and DLS2 sensor.
2. The positions of the cameras are aligned and optimized.
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Drone data
35
3. The surface is reconstructed creating a dense cloud.
4. DEM is created from the dense cloud.
5. Orthomosaic is constructed from the DEM.
6. DEM and orthomosaic are exported as .tiﬀimages.
After exporting the DEM and the multispectral orthomosaic from Agisoft Metashape,
they are open in QGIS. As Agisoft Metashape, always adds a background (black or
white) to the orthomosaic and DEM, ﬁrstly it is removed and after the image is clip
according to the extent shown in table 4.1. More details can be found in appendix
C.1.
Now the Variables calculation phase starts. As it can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2, three
variables must be calculated, since the elevation is directly the values of the DEM.
The DEM are the earth’s surface height, including the elements above it. Aspect
and slope are retrieved from the DEM using the QGIS gdaldem utility. This tool
calculates the aspect and slope using the Zevenbergen&Thorne method described in
appendix C.5. This is the process included in Calculate aspect and Calculate slope.
In the right of the graph from ﬁgure 5.2 it can be seen Multispectral orthomosaic,
which contains the 5 band orthomosaic. These ﬁve bands correspond to the REMX,
bands that are shown in table 5.1 and ﬁgure 5.1. It is important to notice that the
NIR band is band 4 and the red-edge is band 5.
Figure 5.2: Workﬂow process with the drone data.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Methodology
The Calculate NDVI step corresponds to the computation of the NDVI using the
raster calculator. As the red band in REMX correspond to the band 3, and the NIR
correspond to the band 4, the NDVI for the REMX will be as follow:
UAV NDV I = REMX4 −REMX3
REMX4 + REMX3
(5.1)
The third phase consists in the classiﬁcation of variables. Each variable are classiﬁed
according to the interval shown in tables 2.4 and 2.5 using the raster calculator.
After the variables are classiﬁed, the HFI is obtained as it is shown in the last
block of ﬁgure 5.2.
5.2
Aircraft and satellite data
The workﬂow followed in the case of aircraft and satellite data is similar to the previous
one, as it can bee seen in ﬁgure 5.3.
In this case, the DEM and the multispectral images are obtained directly. As it was
said, the DEM is obtained from Kortforsyningen download 2019, and the multispectral
images from Copernicus Open Access Hub 2019.
However, to obtain the same study extent the data need to ﬁrst be re-projected
from the UTM 33N the S2B, and from UTM 32N the aircraft, to the WGS84 projection,
to match the drone orthomosaic. In the LIDAR DEM, the study extent coincides with
the corner of four images as shown in ﬁgure C.2. Therefore, the images ﬁrstly are
merged. Then, they were re-projected and ﬁnally clipped to the study extent. More
details can be found in appendix C.1.
Respect the satellite multispectral images, two types of products from the S2B
were used, the level 1C and level 2A. Both are images of 100 km2, but the level 1C
product corresponds to the Top Of Atmosphere (TOA) reﬂectance, while the level 2A
corresponds to the Bottom of Atmosphere (BOA). The diﬀerence is that the level 2A
has atmospheric corrections, and level 1C not.
The two data-set from sentinel were:
S2B_MSIL1C_20190803T103029_N0208_R108_T33VUC_20190803T124406.zip
S2B_MSIL2A_20190803T103029_N0213_R108_T33VUC_20190803T134551.zip
They are images obtained on the 3rd of August 2019, while the drone images
correspond to 9th of August. However, since the weather conditions were similar
during these weeks, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences should appear because of this.
The NDVI is calculated in this case using band 8 and 4 from S2B. The NDVI
obtained from satellite products will be refer as S2B −1CNDV I or S2B −2ANDV I
depending on the image level that were used. Essentially both of them are calculated
as follow:
S2BNDV I = S2B8 −S2B4
S2B8 + S2B4
(5.2)
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Aircraft and satellite data
37
Figure 5.3: Workﬂow process with the satellite and aircraft data.
In the case of the variables calculated from the LIDAR DEM, they are computed
in the same way as with the drone data, using the Zevenbergen&Thorne method.
Once the variables are obtained, the process is the same as the one followed with
the drone data, but with images of diﬀerent resolution. In the third phase the variables
are classiﬁed again following the criteria from tables 2.4 and 2.5.
After that, the HFI is calculated again using the equation that is shown in the
last block of ﬁgure 5.3.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER6
Results
6.1
Overview
Firstly, the products obtained after the pre-processing phase are analyzed. In table 6.1
the bands that are used to calculate the NDVI are presented. It can be observed that
both satellite products have the same number of values and pixel size. A signiﬁcant
diﬀerence can be observed in the pixel size between the UAV and S2B. This means
that inside one pixel from S2B contains almost 23,000 UAV pixels. Also, it can be
observed that the total number of pixels for the UAV products does not correspond
exactly to the number of rows by columns. The reason is that some parts on the
corners have NaN values after clip to the extent. Regarding the UAV pixel size, it can
be noticed that the pixel size is consistent with what was shown in table 4.4.
In the same table, it can be observed the mean value of the images. In general,
the NIR products have signiﬁcantly higher values than the red band products. This
coincides with what has been seen in ﬁgures 2.3 and 3.2, where green vegetation shows
the reﬂectance minimum at the red band and maximum values in the infrared region.
The mean values also on the UAV products show higher values than the satellite.
In the same way, the standard deviation presents greater values than the satellite
products.
Product
Nbr. of pixels
Pixel size [m]
Rows
Columns
Mean value [16-bit norm]
Std [16-bit norm]
NIR S2B-1C
924
10
22
42
0.0394
0.0093
NIR S2B-2A
924
10
22
42
0.0436
0.0121
NIR UAV
25,444,732
0.066
4,861
5,255
0.0554
0.0338
Red S2B-1C
924
10
22
42
0.0073
0.0014
Red S2B-2A
924
10
22
42
0.0036
0.0018
Red UAV
25,444,732
0.066
4,861
5,255
0.0118
0.0109
Table 6.1: Red and NIR bands products
In table 6.2 the DEM from the LIDAR and UAV that are used to calculate slope
and aspect. Both products show a very similar resolution, even though the drone DEM
has a smaller pixel size. It can also be seen that the pixel size of UAV is higher than
the UAV products showed in table 6.1. Moreover, a slight diﬀerence exists between
the DEM UAV and DEM LIDAR regarding the mean value and standard deviation.
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Results
Product
Nbr. of pixels
Pixel size [m]
Rows
Columns
Mean value [meters]
Std [meters]
DEM LIDAR
637,100
0.4
575
1108
30.77
8.31
DEM UAV
1,548,559
0.27
1199
1296
34.46
10.36
Table 6.2: DEM products
6.2
Comparison of true color composites
A true color composite is the combination of the primary colors blue, green and red
combined to look as seen by the human eye. In this section, the true color composites
of the UAV and S2B are compared.
Figure 6.1 shows the true color composite made with the UAV blue, red and green
bands. It can be seen that the image is very similar to the close look to the study are
shown in ﬁgure 4.2, although the color might be more intense. Both the marshland
area and Glenten playground are clearly distinguish as in ﬁgure 4.2. Moreover, the
path that crosses from the top left to the right side can be recognized but it seems
that it is covered by more trees.
Figure 6.1: True color composite from UAV RGB bands.
In ﬁgure 6.2 it is presented the true color composite of the UAV images after
rescaling them to the S2B resolution. Now the Glenten playground and the marshland
area cannot be distinguished as clearly as in ﬁgure 6.1, even though it can be seen white
area in the zone of the Glenten playground, and a brownish area in the marshland
area.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Comparison of true color composites
41
Figures 6.3 and 6.4 show the true color composites of the S2B-1C and S2B-2A
respectively. Like in ﬁgure 6.2, the playground and marshland cannot as accurately
identiﬁed as in ﬁgure 6.1, but again the playground shows very white pixel compared
to its surrounded, and the marshland brownish and darker pixels. It can also be
appreciated that ﬁgure 6.2 show much diverse colors than both images from S2B. And
between S2B-1C and S2B-2A, it can be observed that S2B-1C shows less bright colors
than S2B-2A.
Figure 6.2: True color composite from the rescaled UAV RGB bands.
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Results
Figure 6.3: True color composite from the S2B-1C RGB bands.
Figure 6.4: True color composite from the S2B-2A RGB bands.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Elevation
43
6.3
Elevation
In ﬁgures 6.5a and 6.5b are shown the UAV and LIDAR elevation maps respectively.
It can be observed that both images present a similar pattern, but the tree area in the
LIDAR map, ﬁgure 6.5b, is better deﬁned, being able to identify the tracks between
trees. However, for the model obtained from the drone, ﬁgure 6.5a, the tree area is
more diﬀused.
(a) UAV elevation values
(b) LIDAR elevation values
Figure 6.5: Elevation values
Figure 6.6a and 6.6b show the discretized maps according to the interval show in
table 2.4. A similar observation from the tree area is observed now. In ﬁgure 6.6a the
area in yellow and orange (risk factor 3 and 4), barely show any gaps, while in 6.6b, it
can be seen how this are have some points with risk factor 3 and 4, but surrounded
by areas with risk factor 2.
In ﬁgure 6.7 the maps are analysed. In ﬁgure 6.7a, it is shown the histogram from
ﬁgures 6.5a and 6.5b, with UAV elevation map rescaled to the the LIDAR resolution.
Figure 6.7a clearly shows how the map obtained from LIDAR most of the values below
35 meters, while the UAV map has the values more equally distributed. But, as we
have seen from ﬁgure 6.5, this is mainly because, in the tree zone, the UAV does not
take into account the gaps between trees.
In ﬁgure 6.7b it is observed how this aﬀects the distribution of the risk classes.
The majority of the values for the LIDAR belong to the class 1 and 2, while the UAV
classiﬁcation have values dispersed between classes 1, 2, 3 and 4, and a few of them
with risk factor 5. This makes that the LIDAR has more values with risk factors 1
and 2 compared to the drone, while the drone has more with risk factors 3, 4 and 5
compared to the LIDAR.
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Results
(a) UAV elevation classiﬁcation
(b) LIDAR Elevation classiﬁcation
Figure 6.6: Elevation classiﬁcation
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Elevation [meters]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Relative probability [%]
LIDAR elevation
UAV elevation (rescaled)
(a) Histogram of elevation values
1
2
3
4
5
Risk factor
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Relative probability [%]
LIDAR elevation classes
UAV elevation classes
(b) Elevation risk classiﬁcation
Figure 6.7: Elevation Analysis
==PAGE:55==
6.4 Slope
45
6.4
Slope
Figure 6.5 shows the slope maps that were obtained from the UAV and the LIDAR
DEM. They express the slope as a percentage, from 0 to 100, where 0 is no slope. The
values above 100 % are represented also in black. Two main diﬀerences are observed
from both maps.
First, on the left bottom from ﬁgure 6.8b it can be seen a ﬂat large ﬂat region,
which in ﬁgure 6.8a is not. This area corresponds to the marshland area. From ﬁgure
6.1 it could be observed that some water surfaces exist, surrounded by grass. So, the
parts covered by water should be ﬂat, and we can see that in ﬁgure 6.8a are not.
The second signiﬁcant diﬀerence is the tree region. Figure 6.8b show all the tree
region with 100 % or above 100 % slope (black), while ﬁgure 6.8a only show this in
the surroundings of the tree area. Inside the tree area, quite high values of slope can
be seen, at least bigger than the values outside the tree area.
(a) UAV slope values
(b) LIDAR slope values
Figure 6.8: Slope values
Figure 6.9 shows the slope maps after doing the risk classiﬁcation. Now it can be
observed a large discrepancy between both maps. The tree area in ﬁgure 6.9b shows a
risk factor equal to 1. This means that before all the black region was pointing to
slope higher than 100 % since they are classiﬁed with a risk factor of 1. It is coherent
with the LIDAR DEM, since on it was possible to detect the area between trees, and
then, the slope between a point in the ground and the tree canopy will have a very
high slope value. On the other hand, ﬁgure 6.9a shows the same is with risk factor
equal to 5, since a high slope was detected, but not high enough to be over 100 %,
since the ground was not detected.
Also from ﬁgure 6.9b can be recognize that in the water area has a risk factor 1,
since it has 0 slope, while in ﬁgure 6.9a, the area show primarily values of 1, 2 and 3.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Results
(a) UAV slope classiﬁcation
(b) LIDAR slope classiﬁcation
Figure 6.9: Slope classiﬁcation
Figure 6.10a shows the histogram of the slope values from the LIDAR and the
UAV rescaled to the LIDAR. Values over 100% are omitted. It can be seen how most
of the values of slope values of the LIDAR are below 10 %, and then have a small
peak again of values above 70 %. The histogram from the UAV shows also a big
amount of values below 10 % slope, but whether the LIDAR curve decreased and then
increased exponentially, the UAV curve decreases linearly at a slow rate. This makes
that between 15% and 60 % slope the UAV curve is above the LIDAR line.
In ﬁgure 6.10b it is presented the percentage of each class for both maps. This
certainly illustrates what have been seen in ﬁgures 6.9a and 6.9b. It can be seen that
the risk factor 1 represents almost 60 % of the values from the LIDAR map, while
in UAV map it is less than 30 %. Then for the risk factor 2 and 3, both are very
similar, but already for class 3, the UAV it is above LIDAR. For risk factor 4, it is
around double, and for the risk factor 5, the UAV percentage is more than 3 times
the LIDAR classes.
==PAGE:57==
6.5 Aspect
47
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Slope [%]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Relative probability [%]
LIDAR slope
UAV slope (rescaled)
(a) Histogram of slope values
1
2
3
4
5
Risk factor
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Relative probability [%]
LIDAR slope classes
UAV slope classes
(b) Slope risk classiﬁcation
Figure 6.10: Slope Analysis
6.5
Aspect
In ﬁgure 6.11 it is presented the aspect direction in degrees. It ranges between 0
and 360, being 0 a ﬂat surface (no aspect direction). Figure 6.11a shows the aspect
direction for the UAV map. No clear topography direction can be identiﬁed from the
image, apart from a slight slope in the center. On the contrary, ﬁgure 6.11b, where the
aspect direction for the LIDAR is illustrated, shows clearly the ﬂat surface (orange)
with no aspect direction in the marshland area, and also the hill where the Glenten
playground is placed (in the middle of the image). Also, it can be observed the shape
of the trees and the paths between them.
The maps showing the risk classiﬁcation of the aspect are presented in ﬁgure 6.12.
Again the maps from the UAV in ﬁgure 6.11a show no clear pattern, apart from the
Glenten playground hill in the center, which is a bit diﬀuse. However, in ﬁgure 6.12b
the LIDAR map, shows without a doubt a slope facing south (in light blue, risk factor
5) and southeast (in green, risk factor 4). Also, a few slopes facing north (red, risk
factor 1). Finally, it can be seen in the marshland a large ﬂat area (in grey, risk factor
3.5).
In ﬁgure 6.13a the aspect direction values are represented in a polar plot. The 0
values (ﬂat) are not shown. Here it can be seen that the LIDAR aspect direction line
forms an arrow pointing towards the south (180o), and another small one pointing
north (0o). The UAV aspect direction, however, shows a star-like form, with small
peaks in each direction.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Results
(a) UAV aspect values
(b) LIDAR aspect values
Figure 6.11: Aspect values
(a) UAV aspect classiﬁcation
(b) LIDAR aspect classiﬁcation
Figure 6.12: Aspect classiﬁed
Figure 6.13b presents the bar plot with percent of each class for both maps. The
classes from LIDAR shows that certainly that there is a slope pointing south since
the risk class 5 accounts for 20 % of the total. It also shows the second highest bar in
risk factor 1, i.e., pointing north. Then the rest of the columns are approximately the
same, being the 4 and 4.5 (southeast and southwest) slightly higher.
==PAGE:59==
6.6 NDVI
49
Respect the risk classes of the UAV aspect, show that almost no ﬂat surfaces are
detected. In general, the rest of the classes are evenly distributed, although the south,
southwest, and southeast are a bit higher.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0
1
2
3
LIDAR aspect
UAV aspect (rescaled)
(a) Aspect polar plot. Zero values (ﬂat) are removed
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Risk factor
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Relative probability [%]
LIDAR aspect classes
UAV aspect classes
(b) Aspect risk classiﬁcation
Figure 6.13: Aspect Analysis
6.6
NDVI
Figures 6.14a, 6.14b, 6.14c and 6.14d show the NDVI maps obtained using the UAV,
the UAV rescaled to S2B resolution, the S2B level 1C and the S2B level 2A products
respectively. In the map obtained from the UAV the details of the image can be
identiﬁed clearly. It can be seen how in the middle of the image some objects do not
correspond to vegetation (which are sand area form the Glenten playground) as well
as some traces of the paths around the study area. Moreover, in the marshland area,
it can be seen that the NDVI values are very low. Also strips can be notice, along the
images, this could be caused by a diﬀerence in the illumination conditions.
In the case of the satellite maps, due to the low resolution for this study area extent,
the pixels can be accurately distinguished, and not any elements can be identiﬁed.
Despite that, ﬁgure 6.14a and 6.14c seem to have similar values overall. On the other
hand, the NDVI from the level 2A product in ﬁgure 6.14d, show very high values
(dark green) in most of the images, but also slightly smaller in the same areas that
ﬁgures 6.14a and 6.14c. The rescaled UAV map shows more similarities with the 6.14a
than with the two S2B maps, however, the objects still cannot be distinguish.
In ﬁgures 6.15a, 6.15b, 6.15c and 6.15d the images of the NDVI are show after the
risk classiﬁcation. It can be observed, that only in ﬁgures 6.15a and 6.15b there are
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Results
areas with risk factor 1 (blue). Then most of the images are between risk factor 2 and
5. The level 1C product, ﬁgure 6.15c, suggest a similar pattern to the UAV maps.
The level 2A in ﬁgure 6.15d, however, do not show any similarities, since almost the
entire extent has a risk factor of 2.
(a) UAV NDVI values map
(b) UAV rescaled NDVI values map
(c) S2B-1C+LIDAR NDVI values map
(d) S2B-2A+LIDAR NDVI values map
Figure 6.14: NDVI maps values
==PAGE:61==
6.6 NDVI
51
(a) UAV NDVI classiﬁed map
(b) UAV rescaled NDVI classiﬁed map
(c) S2B-1C+LIDAR NDVI classiﬁed map
(d) S2B-2A+LIDAR NDVI classiﬁed map
Figure 6.15: NDVI classiﬁcation
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Results
Figure 6.16a shows the histograms from the UAV rescaled, S2B-1C and S2B-
2A NDVI. It can be seen that the rescaled UAV NDVI area, (yellow), comprises a
considerable wider area than the NDVI calculated from satellite data. The NDVI
from both satellite products show a very similar shape, but it can be observed that
the level 2A product, (red), is shifted to the right and narrower than the one from the
level 1C, (blue).
In ﬁgure 6.16b it is presented the distribution of the NDVI after the risk classiﬁca-
tion. Both satellite products and the UAV original and rescaled are shown. It can
be observed there is barely any diﬀerence between the UAV original image and the
rescaled one. Both show the majority of the values in the class 2. Also, both satellite
products have most of the values with risk factor 2, in the case of the level 2A product
almost 100 % of the values. The level 1C, show similar distribution than the UAV,
although it has very few values with risk factor 4 and 5.
(a) Histogram of NDVI values
1
2
3
4
5
Risk factor
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Relative probability [%]
S2B-1C NDVI classes
S2B-2A NDVI classes
UAV NDVI classes
UAV NDVI classes (rescaled)
(b) NDVI risk classiﬁcation
Figure 6.16: NDVI Analysis
Now the bands that have been used to calculate the NDVI are analyzed. In ﬁgure
6.17a the red bands are illustrated. It can be seen that the level 2A product show
smaller values that the 1C in the red band, but with a similar shape. The UAV red
band comprises most of the values in the same area as both satellite products.
In ﬁgure 6.17b the NIR bands are shown. Similar characteristics can be observed.
In this case, the 2A product show higher values than the 1C, but again with very
much alike shape.IN the case of UAV NIR band, it also has a very wide range of
values that comprise both satellite bands.
==PAGE:63==
6.7 Fire risk maps
53
(a) Red bands
(b) NIR bands
Figure 6.17: Bands used to calculate NDVI
6.7
Fire risk maps
The maps in ﬁgure 6.18 show HFI after combining the products presented before
according to equation 2.6. In ﬁgure 6.18a it is shown HFI map using the only the UAV
products. Figure 6.18b shows the maps using the LIDAR topographic variables and
S2B-1C NDVI, while 6.18c shows LIDAR topographic variables and S2B-2A NDVI.
Since it was observed that UAV topographic variables were distanced from LIDAR,
the NDVI from the UAV, and the topographic variables from the LIDAR, were also
combined. The result is shown in ﬁgure 6.19d.
The UAV map in ﬁgure 6.18a shows mostly yellowish (HFI=60) values in the map
extent. The bottom of the playground and marshland areas show higher values in
orange and red, and in the playground area, the sand areas can be identiﬁed in blue
(very low HFI). Figure 6.19b presents in general lower values, specially in the tree
areas. Also, it can be observed how some squares with higher values appear, due to
the higher NDVI and lower resolution of the S2B. Figure 6.19b shows vary low values,
since the S2B-2A NDVI was in the majority of the extent equal to 2. In the map
combing UAV and LIDAR, it is observed how the tree area has lower values than
in ﬁgure 6.18a, while outside the tree area the values seem higher. Also inside the
playground, the blue area corresponding to the sand area can be distinguished.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Results
(a) S2B-1C+LIDAR ﬁre risk map with continuous values
(b) S2B-1C+LIDAR ﬁre risk map with continuous values
(c) UAV ﬁre risk map with continuous values
(d) UAV+LIDAR ﬁre risk map with continuous values
Figure 6.18: Fire risk maps showing continuos HFI values
Figure 6.19 show the discretized maps with the 5 HFI classes, very low, low,
medium, high and very high, according to the intervals from table 2.6.
Again it can be seen that the UAV map in ﬁgure 6.19a shows many values in the
medium class, compared to the others. It also in high and very high the marshland
area and the bottom of the playground.
Figure 6.19b shows similar values in the marshland and playground area, but
overall most of the values are high low or very low.
Figure 6.19c shows even more values in the very low and low classes, having only
a few values in high and very high on the bottom of the playground area.
The UAV and LIDAR map in ﬁgure 6.19d shows, unlike ﬁgure 6.19a, the tree area
==PAGE:65==
6.7 Fire risk maps
55
in low or very low classes. Outside the tree area shows more values in the high or very
high class than ﬁgure 6.19a and 6.19b.
(a) S2B-1C+LIDAR ﬁre risk map classiﬁed
(b) S2B-2A+LIDAR ﬁre risk map classiﬁed
(c) UAV ﬁre risk map classiﬁed
(d) UAV+LIDAR ﬁre risk map classiﬁed
Figure 6.19: Fire risk maps after classiﬁcation
Figure 6.20 presents the area plot of the HFI values from the maps show in ﬁgure
6.18.
It can be seen that both S2B and LIDAR HFI, in ﬁgures 6.20a and 6.20b, present
similar shapes, having both high peaks in some regions. Also, in ﬁgure 6.20d this
peaks can be notice, even though they are lower. It can be observed that in ﬁgure6.20c,
which shows the UAV HFI, has a more smooth shape, and do not show this peaks.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Results
S2B-1C+LIDAR
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
HFI
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Relative probability [%]
(a) S2B-1C+LIDAR HFI valueS
S2B-2A+LIDAR
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
HFI
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Relative probability [%]
(b) S2B-2A+LIDAR HFI values
UAV
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
HFI
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Relative probability [%]
(c) UAV HFI values
UAV+LIDAR
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
HFI
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Relative probability [%]
(d) UAV+LIDAR HFI values
Figure 6.20: HFI values area plot
Moreover, it can be noticed that in ﬁgures 6.20b and 6.20a have the values
concentrated mostly below the 50, whether in the rest of ﬁgures the values are spread
over the scale.
==PAGE:67==
6.7 Fire risk maps
57
In ﬁgure 6.21 it shown the percentage of classes from ﬁgure 6.19. It can be seen
that UAV class bars (green) are more spread, and mostly concentrated in low and
medium class, but without a big diﬀerence between them. On the contrary, the
S2B and LIDAR maps, show that are mainly concentrated in the low class, and the
diﬀerence between low and medium is quite big. Also, it can be seen that S2B-2A
(red bar), the diﬀerence is bigger and that there are almost no values on the high and
very high class. Finally, the UAV+LIDAR shows something in between. On the very
low, high and very classes show practically, the same percentage as the UAV, but
there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between low and medium classes respect the map only
with UAV data.
Very low
Low
Medium
High
Very High
HFI
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Relative probability [%]
S2B-1C+LIDAR
S2B-2A+LIDAR
UAV
UAV+LIDAR
Figure 6.21: HFI classes bar chart
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER7
Discussion
In the previous chapter, the components used to create the ﬁnal risk maps have been
compared. Firstly the elevation was analyzed. It could be observed that the DEM
obtained from the UAV images, even though it was composed of more values, showed
more diﬀused results than the one download from Kortforsyningen download 2019.
The model obtained from UAV does not show the space between the trees, as the one
with LIDAR, which made that the top of the trees confuse with a terrain with high
elevation diﬀerences. Then, these very high values were classiﬁed with a very high
risk factor, while for the LIDAR map had very low values.
Since the slope was obtained from the DEM, it also showed big diﬀerences in
respect from which source it came. First in the LIDAR slope map from ﬁgure 6.8b, it
was clearly identiﬁed two considerable large ﬂat areas, while in ﬁgure 6.8a were not
there. One of these areas corresponded to the marshland area. And secondly the top
of the tree areas were identiﬁed as a region with large slope in 6.8a, but lower than
100 %, while in 6.8b showed slope over 100 %. This area will be then classiﬁed in most
points with the highest risk factor when it was not a real slope, but the diﬀerence
between ground a the top of a tree.
Also, the aspect was aﬀected by the poor results of the UAV DEM. Figure 6.9a
show that the aspect for the UAV did not identiﬁed correctly the whole slope facing
south as it was in 6.12b. Moreover, the ﬂat areas were again not identiﬁed. However,
if the ﬂat areas are not taken into account, the ﬁnal distribution of the classes from
ﬁgure 6.12 do not show not that big diﬀerence, as it was shown with the slope in ﬁgure
6.9. Of course, one reason for this could be that for the aspect there are 9 classes and
for the slope only 5.
The NDVI calculated with the UAV, ﬁgure 6.14a, showed that clearly could identify
the small elements in the image. However, the NDVI classiﬁcation intervals may need
to be reconsidered, since the risk factor 1 and risk factor 5 where, in some cases,
mistaken. This could be seen in ﬁgure 6.15a where the paths, which mostly show
risk factor 1, as they should they showed also parts with risk factor 5. Also, in the
marshland area, it was classiﬁed mostly as zone with risk factor 5, and few traces of
risk factor 1. As could be seen in ﬁgure 6.1 there were clear water areas, which should
have been classiﬁed as not vegetation.
Looking at the NDVI obtained from the satellite images it was observed that the
level 1C product showed more similarities to the UAV NDVI than the level 2A, As it
was said, the level 2A are the images at the BOA, i.e. with atmospheric corrections,
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Discussion
while the 1C are the images TOA, which are not corrected. Therefore, one will expect
that the NDVI obtained from the UAV will resemble more to the 2A product. This
possible could happen due to a wrong radiometric calibration. As it was shown in
ﬁgure 4.5 from chapter 4, the calibration panel does not occupy 1/3 of the images, as
it was recommended by the manufacturer. The diﬀerence between the 1C and the 2A
product is what would be expected, since the BOA typically have higher NDVI values
than TOA. Moreover, it was observed that the UAV NDVI tend to be lower in zones
where are shadows appear.
Finally, the HFI was calculated using the 4 variables. The HFI map using only
data from the UAV showed that the tree area had a very big inﬂuence from the high
risk factors on slope and elevation, which gave in general very high HFI value. In
the maps where the LIDAR was used, this did not happen and it is even possible
to recognize the shape of the trees. In both maps using S2B and LIDAR, similar
ﬁnal results were achieved. Although when using S2B-1C the results outside the tree
area were close to the ones obtained with the UAV, while for the S2B-2A, the only
region with high risk was identiﬁed at the bottom of the Glenten playground. When
combining the UAV NDVI and topographic variables from the LIDAR, the risk factor
in the tree area decreased considerably, but outside tree zones it seems that the high
risk areas increase.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER8
Conclusions and
future work
8.1
Conclusion
Through chapter 2 ﬁre risk models were evaluated to decide which would be the best
option when using UAV data. In the end, a modiﬁed version from the model from
Adab et al. 2011 was selected. Moreover, the sensors which could be mounted on the
drone were reviewed in chapter 3. Finally, in 3.1 it was decided that the UAV payload
would count only with a multispectral camera, from which the REMX was the camera
chosen. In chapter 4, it was shown that various data collection campaigns were done
in the study area, but unfortunately, only data from one day could be used.
From the images collected from the drone in the study area, a DEM and a
multispectral orthomosaic were retrieved using the photogrammetry software Agisoft
Metashape. From the DEM the aspect and the slope from the study area were
obtained, and from the multispectral orthomosaic the NDVI was calculated. The
variables were ﬁnally classiﬁed and integrated using the criteria presented in section
2.3. A similar process was conducted using a DEM obtained from the Danish Agency
for Data Supply and Eﬃciency, where the DEM was created using a LIDAR sensor
mounted on a aircraft. The NDVI was calculated using images from the 1C and 2A
S2B products.
The variables obtained from the DEM show that the LIDAR model had a better
performance than the ones obtained UAV. The UAV, was unable to obtain the
diﬀerences from the ground and trees, or sense the ﬂat areas. This later had a big
inﬂuence on the ﬁnal risk maps, specially in the tree area. When combined the LIDAR
topographic variables with UAV NDVI this could be removed.
Regarding the NDVI, the UAV showed clearly their advantage over the satellite
when being able to obtain small elements, which are out of range the satellite platforms.
However, it showed more similarities to the S2B-1C product, which correspond to the
TOA, than to the S2B-2A. This, and the fact that the CRP image were not taken
correctly, suggest that UAV images were not correctly calibrated.
Thus, from the ﬁre risk maps obtained in this project, the map using the S2B-2A
and LIDAR product would be the best option for a ﬁre risk assessment of the study
==PAGE:72==
62
8 Conclusions and future work
area. However, improvements can be done regarding the data collection, which will
probably bring closer the results from UAV and S2B-2A and LIDAR.
8.2
Future work
At the beginning of the project, some parts were left not considered due to the limited
amount of time. The future work will involve deeper study in some ﬁelds, as well as
some corrections in others.
The risk model here used was a modiﬁed version from Adab et al. 2011, which was
a ﬁre risk model used in the northeast of Iran. It would be more appropriate to create
a ﬁre risk model for the site that is studied based on the climate and vegetation there,
as well as the wildﬁre statistics.
The payload only carried a multispectral camera. Adding a thermal camera would
allow to obtain variables like SMC and Ts, and obtain VMC index like NDMI. Also,
adding a LIDAR would allow to obtain terrain model, to have better results in the
DEM. Although, is using again a multispectral camera to obtain the DEM, it would
be recommended to use ground control points. Also, instead of using a multispectral
camera, an RGB camera with better resolution could be used.
When using the REMX again, it would be very important to obtain the calibration
images correctly, being the extent of the reﬂectance panel is at least 1/3 of the image,
and have the sun in the back. Also in day with sun and clouds, where the illumination
conditions change constantly, it would be recommended to have a model to reduce
the eﬀect of the shadows.
Finally, future work should also look to combine data from diﬀerent platforms,
UAV, satellite or aircraft, to enhance the advantages of each one towards modelling
ﬁre risk.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
2 - Missions - Sentinel Online (2019). url: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/
sentinel/missions/sentinel-2.
About us (2019). url: https://buzzard.camera/about.
Abuckley (2008). Expressing slope. url: https://www.esri.com/arcgis-blog/
products/product/mapping/expressing-slope/.
Adab, Hamed, Kasturi Kanniah, and Karim Solaimani (2011). “GIS-based Probability
Assessment of Fire Risk in Grassland and Forested Landscapes of Golestan Province,
Iran”. In: International Conference on Environmental and Computer Science.
Ahmed, Oumer S., Adam Shemrock, Dominique Chabot, Chris Dillon, Griﬃn Williams,
Rachel Wasson, and Steven E. Franklin (2017). “Hierarchical land cover and
vegetation classiﬁcation using multispectral data acquired from an unmanned
aerial vehicle”. In: International Journal of Remote Sensing 38.8-10, pages 2037–
2052. doi: 10.1080/01431161.2017.1294781.
Akhlouﬁ, Moulay A., Nicolás A. Castro, and Andy Couturier (2018). UAVs for wildland
ﬁres. doi: 10.1117/12.2304834. url: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2304834.
Amon, Philipp, Ursula Riegl, Peter Rieger, and Martin Pfennigbauer (2015). UAV-
based laser scanning to meet special challenges in lidar surveying.
Analog and Digital Images (2001). url: https://crisp.nus.edu.sg/~research/
tutorial/image.htm.
Assessment of Forest Fire Risks and Innovative Strategies for Fire Prevention (2010).
Assmann, Jakob J, Jeﬀrey T Kerby, Andrew M Cunliﬀe, and Isla H Myers-Smith
(2018). “Vegetation monitoring using multispectral sensors - best practices and
lessons learned from high latitudes”. In: doi: 10.1101/334730.
Best practices: Collecting Data with MicaSense Sensors (2019). url: https : / /
support.micasense.com/hc/en-us/articles/224893167.
Buell, Arthur (1997). The Eucalyptus of California. url: https://web.archive.org/
web/20060910202218/http://www.library.csustan.edu/bsantos/section3.
htm.
Chang, Kuan-Tsung and Wei-Ling Hsu (2018). “Estimating soil moisture content using
unmanned aerial vehicles equipped with thermal infrared sensors”. In: pages 168–
171. doi: 10.1109/ICASI.2018.8394559.
Chaparro, David, Mercè Vall-llossera, Maria Piles, Adriano Camps, and Christoph
Rüdiger (2015). “Low soil moisture and high temperatures as indicators for forest
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
ﬁre occurrence and extent across the Iberian Peninsula”. In: pages 3325–3328. doi:
10.1109/IGARSS.2015.7326530.
Chowdhury, Ehsan and Quazi Hassan (2015). “Development of a New Daily-Scale
Forest Fire Danger Forecasting System Using Remote Sensing Data”. In: Remote
Sensing 7, pages 2431–2448. doi: 10.3390/rs70302431.
Chuvieco, Emilio, Inmaculada Aguado, S Jurdao, M. Lucrecia Pettinari, Marta Yebra,
Javier Salas, Stijn Hantson, Juan Riva, Paloma Ibarra, Marcos Rodrigues, M
Echeverría, Diego Azqueta, María Román, Aitor Bastarrika, Susana Martinez, Car-
men Recondo, E Zapico, and Javier Martinez-Vega (2014). “Integrating geospatial
information into ﬁre risk assessment”. In: International Journal of Wildland Fire
23, pages 606–619. doi: 10.1071/WF12052.
Clark, R.N. (1999). url: https://www.scirp.org/reference/ReferencesPapers.
aspx?ReferenceID=1352996.
Copernicus Open Access Hub (2019). url: https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/
#/home.
Dahanayake, Kalani C. and Cheuk Lun Chow (2018). “Moisture Content, Ignitability,
and Fire Risk of Vegetation in Vertical Greenery Systems”. In: Fire Ecology 14.1,
pages 125–142. issn: 1933-9747. doi: 10.4996/fireecology.140112514. url:
https://doi.org/10.4996/fireecology.140112514.
Dash, Jonathan P., Michael S. Watt, Grant D. Pearse, Marie Heaphy, and Heidi S.
Dungey (2017). “Assessing very high resolution UAV imagery for monitoring forest
health during a simulated disease outbreak”. In: ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing 131, pages 1–14. doi: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.07.007.
EM Spectrum: Near IR (2012). url: http://dew.globalsystemsscience.org/key-
messages/near-infrared-and-the-electromagnetic-spectrum.
FAO (1986). “Wildland ﬁre management terminology”. In: FAO Forestry Papers. url:
http://www.fao.org/3/ap456t/ap456t00.pdf.
FAO.org (2001). Vegetation Fire Management | Sustainable Forest Management
(SFM) Toolbox | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. url:
http://www.fao.org/sustainable-forest-management/toolbox/modules/
vegetation-fire-management/basic-knowledge/en/.
Fernández-Guisuraga, José, Enoc Sanz-Ablanedo, Susana Suárez-Seoane, and Leonor
Calvo (2018). “Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Postﬁre Vegetation Survey Cam-
paigns through Large and Heterogeneous Areas: Opportunities and Challenges”.
In: Sensors 18.2, page 586. doi: 10.3390/s18020586.
Flight Calculator (2019). url: https://www.micasense.com/flight-calculator.
gdaldem documentation (2019). url: https://gdal.org/programs/gdaldem.html.
Gerdzheva, A.A. (2014). “A comparative analysis of diﬀerent wildﬁre risk assessment
models (a case study for smolyan district, Bulgaria)”. In: European Journal of
Geography 5, pages 22–36.
Hardy, Colin C. (2005). “Wildland ﬁre hazard and risk: Problems, deﬁnitions, and
context”. In: Forest Ecology and Management 211, pages 73–82.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
Heines, Betsy, Suzanne Lenhart, and Charles Sims (2018). “Assessing the economic
trade-oﬀs between prevention and suppression of forest ﬁres”. In: Natural Resource
Modeling 31.1. doi: 10.1111/nrm.12159.
Hernandez-Leal, Pedro, Alejandro Gonzalez-Calvo, Manuel Arbelo, África Barreto,
and Alfonso Alonso-Benito (2009). “Synergy of GIS and Remote Sensing Data in
Forest Fire Danger Modeling”. In: Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations
and Remote Sensing, IEEE Journal of 1, pages 240–247. doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.
2008.2009043.
How Aspect works (2019). url: http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/10.3/
tools/spatial-analyst-toolbox/how-aspect-works.htm.
Huete, A, K Didan, T Miura, E.p Rodriguez, X Gao, and L.g Ferreira (2002). “Overview
of the radiometric and biophysical performance of the MODIS vegetation indices”.
In: Remote Sensing of Environment 83.1-2, pages 195–213. doi: 10.1016/s0034-
4257(02)00096-2.
info - Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Eﬀektivisering (2016). url: https://www.
geodata-info.dk/srv/eng/catalog.search;jsessionid=255AAB5DBE34F234BEF3FCAD3F2AB
/metadata/6cedf383-ad5d-4040-a88d-54d037d467b5.
Investor Relations (2019). url: https://www.parrot.com/us/investor-relations.
Ishida, Tetsuro, Junichi Kurihara, Fra Angelico Viray, Shielo Baes Namuco, Enrico C.
Paringit, Gay Jane Perez, Yukihiro Takahashi, and Joel Joseph Marciano (2018).
“A novel approach for vegetation classiﬁcation using UAV-based hyperspectral
imaging”. In: Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 144, pages 80–85. doi:
10.1016/j.compag.2017.11.027.
Kelly, Julia, Natascha Kljun, Per-Ola Olsson, Laura Mihai, Bengt Liljeblad, Per
Weslien, L Klemedtsson, and Lars Eklundh (2019). “Challenges and Best Practices
for Deriving Temperature Data from an Uncalibrated UAV Thermal Infrared
Camera”. In: Remote Sensing 11. doi: 10.3390/rs11050567.
Kortforsyningen download (2019). url: https://download.kortforsyningen.dk/.
Leblon, Brigitte, San- Jesús, and Laura Bourgeau-Chavez (2012). Use of Remote
Sensing in Wildﬁre Management. INTECH Open Access Publisher.
Light Sensors: the Basics (DLS and Sunshine Sensor) (2017). url: https://support.
micasense.com/hc/en- us/articles/115002782008- Light- Sensors- the-
Basics-DLS-and-Sunshine-Sensor-.
Martin, Deborah A. (2019). “Linking ﬁre and the United Nations Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals”. In: Science of The Total Environment 662, pages 547–558. issn:
0048-9697. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.393.
MicaSense (2018a). RedEdge-MX Integration Guide (PDF). url: https://support.
micasense.com/hc/en-us/articles/360011389334-RedEdge-MX-Integration-
Guide-PDF-.
— (2018b). Why Narrow Bands Matter. url: https://blog.micasense.com/why-
narrow-bands-matter-2e5e38d82fc2.
— (2019). DLS Integration Guide > Magnetometer Calibration. url: https://
support.micasense.com/hc/en-us/articles/115001432308-DLS-Integration-
Guide-Magnetometer-Calibration.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
MicaSense RedEdge MX processing workﬂow (including Reﬂectance Calibration) in
Agisoft Metashape Professional 1.5 (2019). url: https://agisoft.freshdesk.
com/support/solutions/articles/31000148780- micasense- rededge- mx-
processing-workflow-including-reflectance-calibration-in-agisoft-
metashape-pro.
MicaSense Sensor: Automatic Triggering Options (no date). url: https://support.
micasense.com/hc/en-us/articles/235230068-MicaSense-Sensor-Automatic-
Triggering-Options.
Mikhail, Edward M., James S. Bethel, and J.Chris McGlone (2001). Introduction to
modern photogrammetry. Wiley.
Multispectral vs Hyperspectral Imagery Explained (2019). url: https://gisgeography.
com/multispectral-vs-hyperspectral-imagery-explained/.
Naviair Web Portal (2019). url: https://www.droneluftrum.dk/.
NDVI and NDMI vegetation indices: instructions for use (2019). url: https://www.
agricolus.com/en/indici-vegetazione-ndvi-ndmi-istruzioni-luso/.
RapidEye (2016). APPLICATIONS OF THE RAPIDEYE RED EDGE BAND. url:
https://resa.blackbridge.com.
RedEdge Camera Radiometric Calibration Model (2019). url: https://support.
micasense.com/hc/en-us/articles/115000351194-RedEdge-Camera-Radiometric-
Calibration-Model.
RedEdge: What is the resolution/GSD of the imagers? (2017). url: https://support.
micasense.com/hc/en- us/articles/226845728- RedEdge- What- is- the-
resolution-GSD-of-the-imagers-.
Rego, Francisco Manuel Cardoso Castro, Jose Manuel Moreno Rodríguez, Victoriano
Ramon Vallejo Calzada, and Gavriil Xanthopoulos (2018). Forest Fires: Sparking
ﬁresmart policies in the EU. url: https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/
forest-fires-sparking-firesmart-policies-eu_en.
Rules and Regulations of Drone ﬂying in Denmark (2019). url: http://dronebevis.
dk/english/.
San-Miguel-Ayanz, Jesus, Tracy Durrant, Roberto Boca, Giorgio Liberta, Alfredo
Branco, Daniele de Rigo, Davide Ferrari, Pieralberto Maianti, Tomas Artes Vi-
vancos, Hugo Costa, Fabio Lana, Peter Loﬄer, Daniel Nuijten, Anders C Ahlgren,
and Thais Leray (2018). “Forest Fires in Europe, Middle East and North Africa
2017”. In: Joint Research centre. doi: 10.2760/663443.
Spatial Resolution, Pixel Size, and Scale (2015). url: https://www.nrcan.gc.
ca/maps- tools- publications/satellite- imagery- air- photos/remote-
sensing-tutorials/satellites-sensors/spatial-resolution-pixel-size-
and-scale/9407.
Spreading Wings S900 - highly portable, powerful aerial system for the demanding
ﬁlmmaker (2019). url: https://www.dji.com/dk/spreading-wings-s900.
Taddia, Yuri, Paolo Russo, Stefano Lovo, and Alberto Pellegrinelli (2019). “Multi-
spectral UAV monitoring of submerged seaweed in shallow water”. In: Applied
Geomatics. doi: 10.1007/s12518-019-00270-x.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
The Importance of Radiometric Calibration (2018). url: https://support.micasense.
com/hc/en-us/articles/115002327753-The-Importance-of-Radiometric-
Calibration.
Vallejo-Villalta, Ismael, Estefanía Rodríguez-Navas, and Joaquín Márquez-Pérez (2019).
“Mapping Forest Fire Risk at a Local Scale—A Case Study in Andalusia (Spain)”.
In: Environments 6.3, page 30. doi: 10.3390/environments6030030.
Verhoeven, Geert and Loenders Jo (2006). “Looking through Black-Tinted Glasses –
A Remotely Controlled Infrared Eye in the Sky”. In:
Wildland Fire Facts: There Must Be All Three (U.S. National Park Service) (2016).
url: https://www.nps.gov/articles/wildlandfire- facts- fuel- heat-
oxygen.htm.
Yakubu, Issaka, Daniel Mireku-Gyimah, and Alfred Duker (2015). “Review of methods
for modelling forest ﬁre risk and hazard”. In: African Journal of Environmental
Science and Technology 9, pages 155–165. doi: 10.5897/AJEST2014.1820.
Zevenbergen, Lyle W. and Colin R. Thorne (1987). “Quantitative analysis of land
surface topography”. In: Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 12.1, pages 47–56.
doi: 10.1002/esp.3290120107.
Zhu, Xuan (2016). GIS for environmental applications: a practical approach. Routledge.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIXA
Integration of
RedEdge-MX
The REMX arrived at DTU on the 17th of June 2019. The kit included the camera,
DLS2 with embedded GPS, the CRP, and USB WiFi dongle, an SD card, and the
necessary cabling. The camera was integrated into the DJI S900, as shown in ﬁgure
4.7.
In ﬁgure A.1 it is shown the inputs and outputs of the camera. The REMX have 3
connectors for peripherals and a fourth connector(USB Type A) for the Wi-Fi module
(MicaSense 2018a). The Wi-Fi module allows to connect to the camera network and
manage the camera settings, as it does the port COMM. The DLS port connects
the camera with the DLS2, with the provided cable. The port PWR/TRG is the
connector for the external power and trigger signal.
Figure A.1: RedEdge-MX connectors (MicaSense 2018a).
The power input requirements for REMX are shown in table A.1. To provide the
necessary power and external battery was connected to the camera. The trigger signal
was not used.
The REMX count with three methods of Auto-Capture: Overlap mode, Timer
Mode, and External Trigger mode. The trigger mode use a rising-edge/falling edge
==PAGE:80==
70
A Integration of RedEdge-MX
Item
Value
Nominal Voltage
5.0 DC
Input Voltage
Range
4.0V-15.8V DC
Average Power
3.5 Watts average, 8.0 W peak (Camera Not
Providing Power to External GPS Module)
4.0 Watts average, 8.5 W peak (Camera
Providing Power to External GPS Module)
Table A.1: Power Input requirements (MicaSense 2018a)
pulse or a PWM signal (such as is typically used with standard servos). When using
a PWM signal as the trigger, the camera detects a transition from a “long” PWM to
a “short” PWM (MicaSense Sensor: Automatic Triggering Options no date).
In timer mode, the sensor will capture according the timer period (which is every
two seconds by default). If the timer period is set to less than 1.0 seconds, the camera
will capture as quickly as it can (about once a second)(MicaSense Sensor: Automatic
Triggering Options no date).
Finally, in the overlap mode, which is the one recommended by MicaSense, when
the aircraft climbs to within 50 meters below your target altitude, the sensor will start
capturing and only take a capture if it has traveled enough distance to ensure the
overlap percentage you have speciﬁed. When the camera’s altitude is below 50 meters
from the target altitude, the camera stops capturing.
The camera was integrated on the drone as shown in ﬁgure A.2. This is one of the
integration example provided by MicaSense in MicaSense 2018a, called Standalone
Integration Using Camera, DLS, GPS Module.
The standalone integration option requires only that power is provided to the
REMX system. Triggering is conﬁgured via the WiFi interface to either “Overlap” or
“Timer” mode, in our case "Overlap" is chosen. GPS information is provided by the
included GPS receiver connected to the DLS2 (MicaSense 2018a).
The REMX counts with 4 threaded mounting points to attach the camera to the
aircraft. Using the 4 mounting points the camera was screw to a wooden plate, as
it can be seen in ﬁgure A.3. This image shows the front view of the payload, i.e.,
the side that points to the ground. It also can be seen that on the right side are the
connections to the DLS2, power supply, and Wi-Fi link, and on the left side is the SD
card.
In the backside image from ﬁgure A.4, it is showed the 4 attachment points from
the wooden plate, which allow to connect to the DJI S900. Moreover, the power
supply for the camera can be seen. The power supply receives power directly from
the drone, and then provide power to the REMX. The payload weights, including all
the cables, 500 grams.
==PAGE:81==
A Integration of RedEdge-MX
71
Figure A.2: Standalone Integration Using Camera, DLS, GPS Module (MicaSense 2018a).
==PAGE:82==
72
A Integration of RedEdge-MX
Figure A.3: Front view of the payload.
Figure A.4: Back view of the payload.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIXB
Workﬂow in Agisoft
Metashape
To obtain the rectiﬁed orthomosaics and the DEM from the set of images obtained
with the REMX, it is necessary to process them a in photogrammetry software. In this
case the Agisoft Metashape was chosen. Following it is explained the process, which
is based on the tutorial from Agisoft to process REMX images (MicaSense RedEdge
MX processing workﬂow (including Reﬂectance Calibration) in Agisoft Metashape
Professional 1.5 2019).
The process followed to build the orthomosaic and the DEM is summarized in the
next 7 steps.
1. Add photos. First of all the images must be added. This can be done just
adding all images at once, and choosing the option "Multi-camera system", since
we are working with multispectral cameras. Also the calibration images should
be included.
Usually Metashape Pro will automatically ﬁnd out which are the calibration
images, automatically move then to a separate folder in the Workspace pane,
if the image meta-data says that the images are for calibrations. If they are
not automatically detected they can be added going to the Tools Menu and
Calibrate Reﬂectance. In here , using the "Locate Panels" button the calibration
images cam be selected and they will be in the calibration folder.
The images that REMX, are stored with the format "IMG_xxxx_n", where
"xxxx" is the capture number, and ’n’ is the number from 1 to 5 correspondent
to the band. Therefor for every capture there should be 5 images(one per band).
Images from the same ﬂight can be stores in diﬀerent folders. The same operation
of adding photos should be done for every folder.
2. Reﬂectance Calibration. The reﬂectance calibration is done automatically
once the calibration panels are located. Simply, Tools Menu and Calibrate
Reﬂectance, check on “Use reﬂectance panels” and “Use sun sensor”, and press
OK, and the calibration will be done based on the panel data and/or image
meta information.
==PAGE:84==
74
B Workﬂow in Agisoft Metashape
3. Align of photos. The Align Photos dialog is located in the Workﬂow menu.
The predetermined options are used, as shown in ﬁgureB.1. The result of the
align photos will be show the estimated camera locations and tie point cloud
(representing the matching points between the images).
Figure B.1: Align photos dialog preselection options
4. Optimize cameras. From the tools menu the "Optimize Cameras" dialog
is open and the parameters shown in ﬁgure B.2 are the ones chosen for the
optimization.
Figure B.2: Optimize cameras dialog ad the chosen parameters
5. Build Dense Cloud.
The generation of the dense point cloud allows to
reconstruct more accurate surface, which improves the quality of the orthomosaic.
==PAGE:85==
B Workﬂow in Agisoft Metashape
75
For this, go to the "Build Dense Cloud" dialog in the workﬂow menu.
By
default, the quality of the dense cloud is set to Medium. In the tutorial from
Agisoft(MicaSense RedEdge MX processing workﬂow (including Reﬂectance
Calibration) in Agisoft Metashape Professional 1.5 2019), it is explained that
higher quality used will result in more accurate surface (bigger number of points),
but will take longer time to process. In most cases Medium quality is suﬃcient
for aerial data processing, especially in cases of low variations of the terrain.
After executing this, a dense point cloud will appear in the Model view. When
working with the sample data from MicaSense, the dense cloud appears black.
After estimating the image brightness the view of the dense point cloud was
displayed normally as shown in ﬁgures B.3.
Note that the estimate image
brightness tool do not have any eﬀect on the ﬁnal exports, but just in the
visualization of the dense cloud in Agisoft.
(a) View of the point cloud before image
brightness estimation
(b) View of the point cloud after image bright-
ness estimation
Figure B.3: Model view of the dense point cloud
6. Build DEM. Building the DEM will generate an surface model, which also
then can be used as source for creating the orthomosaic, in a shorter period of
time than using Build Mesh operation. In the Workﬂow menu open the Build
DEM dialog. The default settings are good. It is important to remember the
correct coordinate system, and choose the Dense cloud and source data.
7. Build Orthomosaic. To build the orthomosaic again in the Workﬂow menu
the dialog Build Orthomosaic can be found. The default parameters are ﬁne
too. Make sure that the Surface use the DEM as source.
After generating the orthomosaic and DEM, it is possible to use the raster calculator,
to produce index like NDVI. In our case, it was decided that this would be done in
QGIS. The details for this is shown in appendix C.
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIXC
QGIS methodology
C.1
Pre-processing
In the pre-processing phase are included the task before having the data source with
the same extent and same projection.
Both the DEM and the orthomosaic obtained from the drone, have a non-
rectangular shape because in some parts there are no data. Agisoft adds to these parts
a white or black background, which later can be removed by null values. However,
then the issue, is that a large part of the drone images will contain no-data values,
while in the LIDAR and S2B images the corespondent area will have data.
Figure C.1: Clip study extent from UAV images.
Therefore all the images are clip to a certain extent, which corresponds with the
coordinates in table 4.1. In the case of the drone images, as it can be seen in ﬁgure C.1,
with that study extent there are missing a few values in the upper left and bottom
==PAGE:88==
78
C QGIS methodology
right corners. However, this part can be neglect since it is very small compared to the
total study extent.
The total area of the study extent is around 11 ha (red area in ﬁgure C.1), while if
all the data of the drone where included it would be 15.5 ha. Therefore 4.5 ha of data
are removed (grey area in ﬁgure C.1)
Figure C.2: Clip study extent from LIDAR images.
Respect the LIDAR DEM the study extent correspond to the corners of 4 images,
as it is shown in ﬁgure C.2. Therefore the 4 images are ﬁrst merged. As the LIDAR
image are in UTM 33N projection, and the drone images in WGS84, the merged image
is re-projected to WGS84. After that, the re-projected merged image is clip using the
coordinates from table 4.1.
In the case of the images from S2B the study extent was within the images. The
satellite images are re-projected from UTM 32N to WGS84 coordinate system. The
study extent corners were made to coincide with the corners of the pixel from the
satellite image as can be seen in ﬁgure C.3. This was because when clipping the image
if the study extent coordinate coincides in the middle of a pixel from the image, this
will not be taken. For S2B the images that have a 10 by 10 meters pixel, in this study
extent losing a row or a column of data will suppose to lose a considerable extent.
==PAGE:89==
C.2 Variables calculation
79
Figure C.3: Clip study extent from S2B images.
C.2
Variables calculation
The variables that are calculated using QGIS are three since the DEM is the elevation
model of the study area. Both slope and aspect are calculated using the GDAL Tools
Plugin, in the Analysis tools. Here the slope and aspect are computed using the
Zevenbergen & Thorne method (Zevenbergen et al. 1987), which is explained in section
C.5.
For calculating the slope it is important to choose the correct ratio of vertical
units to horizontal. As the horizontal units are in degrees because both DEM are in
the WGS84 projection, and the vertical units in meters the ratio of vertical units to
horizontal is 111120 (gdaldem documentation 2019). Also, the values of the slope are
chosen to be in percentage instead of degrees.
Regarding the aspect, no special parameters must be introduced. However, the
option to retrieved ﬂat as 0 instead of -9999, must be selected. This is because it was
tried using the option of getting -9999, which is the null value in QGIS, and then it
was not possible to convert it to a real value. And with the null values in there the
ﬁnal ﬁre risk map could not be computed correctly.
The NDVI it is calculated using the Raster Calculator, using the correspondent
NIR band and red band for the REMX, S2B-1C and S2B-2A.
==PAGE:90==
80
C QGIS methodology
C.3
Variables classiﬁcation
Variables are classiﬁed using the raster calculator. Each variable is classiﬁed according
the interval in 2.4 and 2.5. The classiﬁcation is done in three steps. Let us look for
instance at the NDVI. The code introduced to classiﬁed and NDVI would be as:
(("NDVI@1"<= 0.25)*("NDVI@1"+1/ "NDVI@1"+1)*1) +
((0.25<"NDVI@1" AND "NDVI@1"<= 0.45)*("NDVI@1"+1/"NDVI@1"+1)*5) +
((0.45<"NDVI@1" AND "NDVI@1"<= 0.55)*("NDVI@1"+1/"NDVI@1"+1)*4) +
((0.55<"NDVI@1" AND "NDVI@1"<= 0.65)*("NDVI@1"+1/"NDVI@1"+1)*3) +
((0.65<"NDVI@1" AND "NDVI@1"<= 1)*("NDVI@1"+1/ "NDVI@1"+1)*2) +
Each line of code could be separated into three. The ﬁrst check if the values of the
NDVI are in the given interval. If this is true it returns a 1, if it is false it returns 0.
(("NDVI@1"<= 0.25)
After that, the output from the expression above has to be placed in a particular
position of the image.
If the output from above was multiplied directly for the
NDVI value, it will be placed on the image, but multiplied by the value of the NDVI.
Therefore, instead of multiplied directly for NDVI it is multiplied for the NDVI
between the NDVI, which return 1 at the position it is looking. Then a one is added,
just in case, the NDVI value it is looking at is 0, because 0 between 0 will return 0.
("NDVI@1"+1/ "NDVI@1"+1)
Hence, if we are looking at a pixel, which is between the interval, a 1 in the position
we are looking at is returned. Now it only needs to be multiplied by the correspondent
risk factor that corresponds to that interval.
Following the same logic it is follow for the classiﬁcation of the elevation:
(("DEM@1"<= 25)*("DEM@1"+1/ "DEM@1"+1)*1) +
((25<"DEM@1" AND "DEM@1"<= 35)*("DEM@1"+1/"DEM@1"+1)*2) +
((35<"DEM@1" AND "DEM@1"<= 45)*("DEM@1"+1/"DEM@1"+1)*3) +
((45<"DEM@1" AND "DEM@1"<= 55)*("DEM@1"+1/"DEM@1"+1)*4) +
((55<"DEM@1")*("DEM@1"+1/ "DEM@1"+1)*5)
==PAGE:91==
C.3 Variables classiﬁcation
81
Of the slope:
((0<"Slope@1 AND "Slope@1"<= 5)*("Slope@1"+1/"Slope@1"+1)*1) +
((5<"Slope@1" AND "Slope@1"<= 10)*("Slope@1"+1/"Slope@1"+1)*2) +
((10<"Slope@1" AND "Slope@1"<= 25)*("Slope@1"+1/"Slope@1"+1)*3) +
((25<"Slope@1" AND "Slope@1"<= 35)*("Slope@1"+1/"Slope@1"+1)*4) +
((35<"Slope@1" AND "Slope@1"<= 100)*("Slope@1"+1/"Slope@1"+1)*5) +
((100<"Slope@1")*("Slope@1"+1/"Slope@1"+1)*1)
And of the aspect:
((0<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=22.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*1) +
((337.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=360)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*1) +
((22.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=67.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*1.5) +
((292.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=337.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*2) +
((67.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=112.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*2.5) +
((247.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=292.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*3) +
((112.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=157.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*4) +
((202.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=247.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*4.5) +
((157.5<"aspect@1" AND
"aspect@1"<=202.5)*
("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*5) +
(("aspect@1" =0 ) * ("aspect@1"+1/"aspect@1"+1)*3.5 )
==PAGE:92==
82
C QGIS methodology
C.4
HFI calculation
The HFI is ﬁnally calculated using the formula from 2.6 as follow:
(100*"NDVI@1" + 50*"slope@1" + 25*"aspect@1" + 5*"DEM@1")/9
The it is also classiﬁed from 1 to 5, being 1 very low and 5 very high.
((20<"HFI@1" AND "HFI@1"<= 36)*("HFI@1"+1/"HFI@1"+1)*1) +
((36<"HFI@1" AND "HFI@1"<= 52)*("HFI@1"+1/"HFI@1"+1)*2) +
((52<"HFI@1" AND "HFI@1"<= 68)*("HFI@1"+1/"HFI@1"+1)*3) +
((68<"HFI@1" AND "HFI@1"<= 86)*("HFI@1"+1/"HFI@1"+1)*4) +
((86<"HFI@1" AND "HFI@1"<= 100)*("HFI@1"+1/"HFI@1"+1)*5) +
C.5
Zevenbergen & Thorne method
Both slope and aspect are retrieved from the surface curvature from elevation. The
surface curvature is the amount by which a surface deviates from being ﬂat (Zhu 2016).
A common method for computing surface curvature at particular point, is to use a
quadratic polynomial function to a approximate a continuous surface representing
the surface covered by a 3x3 window centred at that point (Zhu 2016). In many GIS
software it is used the Zevenbergen & Thorne method (Zevenbergen et al. 1987). If
we assumed a 3x3 matrix with cells of size L as the one in ﬁgure C.4 the polynomial
function is:
Z = Ax2y2 + Bx2y + Cxy2 + Dx2 + Ey2 + Fxy + Gx + Hy + I
(C.1)
where,
A = [(Z1 + Z3 + Z7 + Z9)/4 −(Z2 + Z4 + Z6 + Z8)/2 + Z5]/L4
(C.2)
B = [(Z1 + Z3 + Z7 + Z9)/4 −(Z2 −Z8)/2]/L3
(C.3)
C = [(−Z1 + Z3 −Z7 + Z9)/4 + (Z4 −Z6)/2]/L3
(C.4)
D = [(Z4 + Z6)/2 −z5]/L2
(C.5)
E = [(Z2 + Z8)/2 −z5]/L2
(C.6)
F = [(−Z1 + Z3 + Z7 −Z9)/4L2
(C.7)
G = [(−Z4 + Z6)/2L
(C.8)
H = [[(Z2 −Z8)/2L
(C.9)
==PAGE:93==
C.5 Zevenbergen & Thorne method
83
I = Z5
(C.10)
As it is explained in Zevenbergen et al. 1987, slope and aspect are found by
diﬀerentiating equation C.1 and solving the resulting equation for the central point of
the 3x3 sub-matrix (x = y = 0). The slope is the ﬁrst derivative of Z with respect of
S, where S is in the aspect direction θ.
Slope = δZ/δS = Gcosθ + Hsinθ
(C.11)
Since, at the origin, cosθ = −G/(G2 + H2)1/2 and sinθ = −H/(G2 + H2)1/2
Slope = −(G2 + H2)1/2
(C.12)
The negative sign indicates that the direction, θ, is down-slope and is, by convention,
ignored. The maximum slope direction or aspect, θ, is found by diﬀerentiating equation
C.11 to ﬁnd its minimum. Therefore:
δSlope/δθ = −Gsinθ + Hcosθ = 0 −→θ = arctan(−H/ −G)
(C.13)
Figure C.4: 3x3 sub-matrix. Source: Zevenbergen et al. 1987
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
DTU Space 
National Space Institute 
Technical University of Denmark  
 
Elektrovej, building 327+328+356 
Ørsteds Plads, building 348 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
 
www.space.dtu.dk 
