==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Analyzing structure and functionality of 
an electronic health record: 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SUNDHEDSPLATFORMEN 
 
Case study: Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet 
 
Master Thesis for the degree of 
M.Sc. in Engineering Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mehwesh Shaheen, s132300 
Supervisor: Kristian Borch 
September 25, 2019 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
Analyzing structure and functionality of an electronic health record: 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SUNDHEDSPLATFORMEN 
Mehwesh Shaheen1 
1DTU Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Anker Engelunds Vej 1, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Abstract: Sundhedsplatformen is an American healthcare system, which have been implemented in Denmark, as an important 
part of the future transformation of the healthcare infrastructure. The system substitutes 30 earlier systems which results that 
44.000 employees, get the opportunity to work in a common system. Despite that the new healthcare system has led to many 
improvements, the doctors are enormously challenged, because of missing functionality and an inappropriate system structure, 
which have required non-affective changes in the workflow for the doctors. This paper applies an adapted framework inspired by 
Etienne Wenger and combines the table of boundary dimensions with the elements of implementation theory. To investigate 
which challenges the system structure and functionality of Sundhedsplatformen has entailed for the doctors, and which 
improvements are needed to optimize the usage of Sundhedsplatformen, a case study is conducted at the Department of Thoracic 
Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet. This paper concludes, that in order to optimize the system structure and the functionality in 
Sundhedsplatformen, then it is important that a relation between the communities is established. In order to include the doctors to 
define the content of the system, offer them education, ensure that they are able to adjust the system after the implementation and 
to ensure that the system fulfils their requirements: a broker relation between the doctors and Epic must be established by CIMT. 
1. Introduction 
The changes in the health sector, are due to increases in the number of elder citizens and the number of patients with chronic 
diseases. The patients’ expectation for a coherent treatment course is also rising and the requirements for empowerment among 
the patients have increased, since they want to participate more actively during their own treatment. This requires that hospitals, 
municipalities and, General practice (GP’s) gets a more solid cooperation through a digital health system. To increase their 
cooperation, it requires that they can access the patients’ health data in one system across the sectors. It is expected that the 
introduction of more advanced technological equipment and IT systems can support this, however, it also requires more 
competencies from the clinicians and changes in their daily workflow.[16] 
 
‘Epic’ is an American health system, that has been implemented in Denmark and known as ‘Sundhedsplatformen’ (SP). SP is a 
data-1, planning-2, and administrative system3, which can track the patients across the regions. SP substitutes 30 already existing 
IT- systems,[2] and was implemented during the years 2016 – 2017, in all hospitals in the Central Region and Region 
Zealand.[16] The hospitals were provided with the new platform to accommodate the prerequisites which follow with an increased 
interest in empowerment from patients, digitalization, new technologies, and better use of health data.[2] 
The SP is an electronic patient journal, which collects all the patient’s information in one system, this has been implemented as 
an important part in the future changes for the Danish health sector. The changes have to secure a continuity treatment course, 
by supporting closer cooperation between the health sectors and the several digital IT systems which are applied.[16] 
The Central Region and Region Zealand have until now invested 2.8 billion DKK, making it the most expensive IT project in the 
Danish health sectors history. In December 2014, it was estimated that the price would be around 1.15 billion DKK, but the 
budget is exceeded by more than 100%.[2] 
The SP allows 44.000 employees from around 20 somatic hospitals and psychiatrist in the two regions to get access to 2.5 million 
patient’s journals with information on e.g. blood results and scanning or x-rays, which is not conducted at the actual 
department.[2] This is because in SP, the patients’ data is updated into the same system, despite that the treatment follows 
beyond in different departments, hospitals and regions. SP have resulted in following improvements for the doctors:[13] 
- A stabilized system which is available in more than 99.8 percent of the time. 
- Shorter time through the login – by closing 30 old systems, the clinicians save time by logging in to different IT 
systems, as the SP gives one single access to the patient journal. 
- Higher patient security – easier overview to test results, x rays, blood tests, and pathology tests. 
                                                     
1 Can generate and retrieve data from the system for research, planning, etc. 
2 Can be used for patient bookings and employees‘ rosters. 
3 Patient information and documentation for treatment as test results etc. can be documented. 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
However, several challenges in implementing the system has been observed. For example, the system has required huge 
changes in the clinicians’ workflows – especially for the doctors.[5] 
In America, the health system is highly based on the patients’ private health insurance.[14] That is why SP consist of 
functionality, that requires the doctors to use their time on a huge amount of irrelevant payment documentation4. This has no 
relevance for the patients in Denmark because they already are insured by public health insurance.[14] 
This paper contains the following sections: Section 1-3 defines the research question, describes the methods used to collect 
empirical data and define how the theories are operationalized. In Section 4 the results and discussion are conducted based on the 
theoretical elements followed by a case study. Section 5-6 contains a recommendation and a conclusion that answers the 
research question. 
 
 
1.1. Problem Statement 
When the SP was implemented at the Danish hospitals, the system was not fully adjusted into the Danish workflows, which has 
entailed challenges in the quality of the patient treatment. Before the implementation, there wasn’t executed comprehensive user 
acceptance test (UAT) and the regions accepted poor UAT results. At the same time, there was neither executed comprehensive 
training of the doctors and insufficient planning of the implementation process. The SP was implemented, despite the insufficient 
analyses regarding how SP will affect the hospitals’ activity and the productivity of the doctors. This resulted in, that the regions 
were optimistic according to estimate a time interval for the hospitals ‘downtime’, as it was estimated to be only three weeks 
long.[11] The authorities audit, states that the downtime in the hospitals, has been a lot more than estimated three weeks. One 
and a half year after SP was implemented, it was identified that the level of activities and productivity at the hospitals were still 
not reestablished. Furthermore, the estimated achievements of SP is not achieved within three years after the 
implementation.[11] 
This paper investigate challenges the doctors meets, related to the system structure and functionality of SP. The definition of 
functions in SP are actions performed by the doctors, which helps them in conducting and documenting their daily work. The 
system structure of SP is a description of the relationships, the various functions have with each other. An example can be how 
the doctors are navigating in the system structure using the different functions. 
Research question: 
How can the system structure and functionality of Sundhedsplatformen be analyzed from a community of 
practice- and implementation theory perspective, and how can it be optimized? 
 
Sub-questions: 
To answer the research question and guide the answers in the right direction, two sub-questions is defined: 
 
 
• What are the challenges with the system structure and functionality of Sundhedsplatformen? 
This question is answered by analyzing the system structure and functionality of SP using a framework which combines the 
elements from Community of Practice and implementation theory. To involve doctors as a central element, as they are 
considered experts of the system, a case study is performed. The case study is based on a framework and supported by empirical 
data on specific challenges the doctors meet at the Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet. 
 
• How to optimize the system structure and functionality of Sundhedsplatformen? 
This question is answered based on the empirical data from the case study. By recommending a solution for optimizing the 
system structure and functionality of SP, will it be defined, how SP should be adjusted to support the doctor´s workflows, and 
increase the quality of the system and the patient treatment. 
                                                     
4 Invoice information, e.g. documentation for the type of needle there is used 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
2. Literature review 
This chapter defines the chosen theories and describes how they are applied to create a scientific basis for this paper.  
The implementation theory and the theory of Community of Practice is applied to define those elements which are relevant for 
analyzing the challenges in implementing SP at the Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet. 
2.1. Implementation theory 
Implementation science is applied to address various implementation challenges. This theory also gives an insight into 
understanding and explaining, how and why the implementation are achievements or failures. Implementation science is 
therefore based on an increased usage of theoretical methods as theories, models and framework. These can be categorized in 
three main categories based on their gains, which can further be divided in five sub-categories. The three main categories are:[4] 
- 
Translating: Description and/or guidance of the process in translating research into practice  
- 
Implementation: Understanding and/or explaining the influences of the implementation outcomes 
- 
Evaluating: Evaluation of the implementation 
As the SP is already implemented, it is irrelevant to analyse the first category, that’s why this report will only focus on the last 
two categories: Implementation and Evaluating.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Theoretical approaches in implementation science [4] 
Implementation 
The purpose of this category is to define, which type of influence the implementation will have. Different theories, models and 
frameworks can be applied and they are divided in sub-categories, as shown in figure 1. 
- 
Determinant framework: defines the types of determinants and individual determinants which functions as 
barriers and enablers. These have an influence on the output of the implementation. The purpose with these 
frameworks, is to predict the outcomes and the retrospective of the implementation.[4] 
- 
Classic theories: contain theories from other fields than implementation science, as organizational theories, 
psychology theories and sociology theories. These are applied to understand the outcomes of the 
implementation.[4]  
- 
Implementation theories: are defined by the implementation researcher and are applied to understand the 
outcomes, by defining the different aspects of the implementation.[4] 
According to the implementation of the SP it is relevant to apply this main category, to analyse the experiences and the 
challenges of the doctors. 
Evaluating 
In the category of the evaluation, certain elements of the implementation are defined, which should be evaluated to prevent 
challenges and to ensure the success of the implementation. Even though the ´evaluation frameworks´ is a smaller category, it is 
possible to apply theories, models and frameworks during an evaluation of the implementation process, from some of the first 
four small categories.[4] 
Evaluation framework: ensures a structured evaluation method and is certainly relevant when evaluating the implementation and 
the application of SP. 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
2.2. Community of Practice 
Etienne Wenger (Wenger) defines Community of Practice (CoP) as a social learning system, which occurs either by common 
interests or by achieving knowledge associated with a common area.[6] Learning in the system is based on the coaction between 
the two aspects; social competences which the community have acquired over the time, and the ongoing personal experience. 
CoP consist of three elements; a shared domain which creates an identity, a community which consists of members and their 
relationship and a practice which consists of shared methods, skills, tools, etc. CoP is a combination of three dimensions, which 
belong to the social learning system, each mode of belonging contributes to different stages of the social learning system:[10] 
- 
Engagement is an active involvement of meaning, to perform tasks and solves problems together. Members of 
the community participate and shapes the practice, gains competencies and contribute to the perception of who 
they are through engagement. 
- 
Imagination is a picture of communities construed by themselves in relation to the rest of the world. It contains 
new insights and establishment of models and visions. 
- 
Alignment is coordinating activities, processes, and resources to adapt and achieve results by defining the 
common ground, visions, procedures or structures and focus on the effort. 
CoP arises when a community belongs to a common domain and through time, builds up their common competencies and 
experiences through different activities as problem-solving, requests for information, mapping and knowledge etc.[8] 
 
Communities 
The implementation of SP is a cooperation between several communities of practices consisting of: the developer (Epic), the 
end-users (Doctors) and the responsible for the implementation (CIMT). 
During this project, there is most focus upon the doctors, as they are the users of the system. CIMT and Epic is already defined 
well in their practices, as they contains of members with high knowledge and competencies in IT, which creates eases in acquire 
knowledge of a new IT system. The doctors are a community which has a weaker knowledge and competencies in IT systems, 
which creates difficulties to apply a new system, where SP is already defined as a complex IT system.[5] This is why the 
definition of the community, by Wenger, is applied, as a purpose to define the elements a community contains of. To emphasize 
whether the doctors can include itself in a new community of practice, and to create a common foundation in cooperation with 
CIMT and Epic. 
When a community designs itself, the design is based on following six elements: events, leadership, connectivity, membership, 
projects and artefacts.[7] 
- 
Events: Bringing the community together through public events. If the events agree with the expectations of the 
communities, it will help to create a common identity. In according to create a relation between the doctors, CIMT 
and Epic, it is relevant to arrange community events as workshops, with the purpose to bring the communities 
closer together.  
- 
Leadership: The community of practice depends on internal leadership and supports the leaders to execute their 
roles as ´community coordinator´ which is responsible for the day-to-day work. It is important to have a leadership 
team who takes the responsibility for the progress in the use of the platform, and errors5 in the functionality can be 
prevented. 
- 
Connectivity: Enabling connectivity among people, e.g. by introducing broker relationships between people who 
needs help and those who offer help. It is important to ensure that it is possible for them to interact with each 
together and in multiple media. In purpose to strengthen the doctors in their community of practice, it is important 
to create possibilities to communicate and interact with the community, where it is possible to get help from.  
- 
Membership: The community’s members must have interest. To ensure a further interest from the members, it is 
required that the focus of the community should not be broad and diffuse. The doctors, CIMT and Epic should 
cooperate as members of one common community and create intern competencies and a common foundation.  
- 
Learning projects: These are projects and activities in purpose to research knowledge domains according to a 
certain field, e.g. literature review, data collection, statistics or expert interviews. To strengthen the competencies 
of the communities, then learning projects are good tools in order to develop a common knowledge foundation. 
                                                     
5 Not customized functions for Danish healthcare structure 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
- 
Artefacts: These exists in order of documents, models, guidelines etc., which a community of practice has 
developed. It is important that the community considers how the material can be maintained in a way where the 
advantages are available every time and that the community always will gain maximum results when using it. 
Guidelines on the intranet is a common artefact, among the doctors, as it is easy to maintain and update, and easy 
for the doctors to access. 
 
Boundary dimensions 
According to Wenger, a social learning system contains two important reasons why boundaries are created: They connect 
communities and they offer learning opportunities.[7] 
Boundaries are evaluated through three following dimensions: Coordination, transparency and negotiability.[7] 
- 
Coordination contains coordination between communities. This is why the new practice is presupposed to create 
a better cooperation and coordination between the communities, by coordinating the task and other actions. 
- 
Transparency defines an understanding of the coordination and the processes between the communities. 
- 
Negotiability emphasizes whether the coordination and the process between the communities are one-way or two-
way connected. 
 
Boundary processes 
The Boundary processes are decisive for whether the social learning systems works in cooperation. A number of elements can 
entail that the communities will be connected to each other. In this project, there are three types of bridges across the boundaries, 
which is emphasized: Brokers, Boundary objects, and Boundary Interactions.[7] 
Brokers are one of the bridges which is essential across boundaries. They are able to share the knowledge of the elements from 
one practice to another. Brokering can take care of one specific boundary, create connection and bringing news back and forth. 
Brokering is further based on a trust relation between the individuals across the communities of practice. Brokers is a well-
known role, which exists in many branches as IT implementer which ensures a balance between the developer’s limitation and 
the demands of the users. There are no defined roles for brokers in the implementation of SP, which has entailed lack of 
communication across the communities, which further has entailed challenges in the implementation of the system.[7] 
Boundary objects are not only based upon single practices, but most upon the content which supports the connection between 
different practices and allows information flow, common language, and shared processes between the practices.[7] 
- 
Artefacts is tools to connect multiple communities, e.g. a tool to report errors can connects several practices. 
- 
Discourse is also known as an important boundary object, as it emphasizes the importance of a common language, 
so the communities can communicate and negotiate across the practices. It is certainly important in the 
implementation of SP that Epic and the doctors can communicate with each other. 
- 
Shared processes as procedures, routines and rules creates possibilities for the practices and members to 
coordinate across boundaries, and allow them to coordinate their contributions. 
Boundary interactions are collusions which holds across the boundaries in order of visits, discussions or debates which entails a 
direct opportunity for a practice to develop. When one single member starts an interaction across boundaries and enters into 
another communities, then it is easier to understand their way of executing tasks. However, it is challenging to bring the 
knowledge back to one’s own community, because understanding in a stranger, require a distance to one’s own community. 
When two or several members visits, they will not subsist into the new practice, but rather negotiate according to their own 
practice. Which leads to a relevant and real outcome, since they are able to bring back to their own community of practice.[7] 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
3. Methodology 
Documentation 
Documentation as internet links and papers is used to create a general overview across the Danish health sector. Furthermore, a 
literature research about Epic and SP is conducted. The literature research and media coverage are applied, as the 
implementation of SP is a well-known topic mentioned by the media. 
Qualitative interviews 
To create an understanding of the problem creation and conflict management between the various stakeholders of SP, semi-
structured qualitative interviews with software developer (TJ) and IT architect (TS) have been conducted.[1] Qualitative 
Interviews are applied only, as they create a more descriptive and detailed understanding of the data. The following respondents 
have been interviewed face to face with purpose to reduce any kinds of misunderstanding and to increase the quality of the data. 
Open questions have been asked in purpose to create dialogue by giving the respondents the opportunity to explain their 
arguments. While the interviewer in order of needs has have the opportunity to ask additional questions during the interviews, 
which is not included in the interview guide.[Appendix I, II] 
Qualitative interviews are also conducted with 15 doctors to achieve a realistic insight into their usage of SP, the doctors are not 
mentioned by name, in according to sustain their anonymity, they are stated by their role: 
- 
Chief physician (one doctor) 
- 
Anesthesiologist (nine doctors) 
- 
Medical assistant (five doctors) 
Case study 
Case study is a relevant method to emphasize research questions, as it allows to focus upon the certain case and at the same time 
establish a perspective based on the collected data. A case study entails more descriptive explanations, which creates ease in 
understanding the undergoing reasons of the answers upon the research question.[9] 
This paper is based upon a case study at Rigshospitalet (Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology). The case study is based on 
methods of data collection as participated observation, qualitative interviews and documentation. 
Yin,[9] suggests following six steps to develop a guide in executing a case study: plan, design, prepare, collect, analyse and 
share. These six steps in this case study is connected through following three steps: 
- 
Define the case: The case is an analyzation of experiences and challenges of the doctors, during the 
implementation of the system. It is simultaneously an analyzation of whether the system has an influence on their 
workflows and an analyzation of which opportunities they have to evaluate it. 
- 
Select a case study design: There has been conducted a single case study at one specific department, for limiting 
the analysis and to enable a more qualitative data collection. 
- 
Using theory to analyse: This paper applies the implementation theory and the theory of CoP. The elements from 
the theories are combined and organized in a framework, in purpose to define the analysis, to maintain focus upon 
the collected data and to organize the collected data. It is further important that the collected data during the case 
study, is relevant for the theories and the research question. 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
Framework 
The case study at Rigshospitalet will be analyzed based on the adapted framework, which is inspired by Wenger. It combines the 
table of boundary dimensions of CoP and the elements of the implementation theory. The framework consists of three boundary 
dimensions; Coordination, Transparency, and Negotiability, crossed with the three modes of belonging: Engagement, 
Imagination, and Alignment. These nine elements are divided in two segments according to the elements of implementation 
theory: Implementation and evaluating. The framework is theoretical frame, which defines the essential points from each 
element, in order to perform the case study. 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
Implementation 
(Joint activities, problem-solving, and 
discussions) 
Implementation 
(Explanations, coaching, and 
demonstrations) 
Implementation 
(Structure and communication) 
 
Evaluating 
(Joint activities, problem-solving, and 
discussions) 
Evaluating 
(Explanations, coaching, and 
demonstrations) 
Evaluating 
(Structure and communication) 
 
Imagination 
Implementation 
(Understand to present issues and 
anticipate misunderstandings) 
Implementation 
(Stories, documents, models, and 
resources) 
Implementation 
(Common interests and needs in an 
overarching community) 
Evaluating 
(Understand to present issues and 
anticipate misunderstandings) 
Evaluating 
(Stories, documents, models, and 
resources) 
Evaluating 
(Common interests and needs in an 
overarching community) 
Alignment 
Implementation 
(Interpretable into action across 
boundaries) 
Implementation 
(Reveal common ground and 
differences) 
Implementation 
(Negotiating and contracts, 
compromises and broker) 
Evaluating 
(Interpretable into action across 
boundaries) 
Evaluating 
(Reveal common ground and 
differences) 
Evaluating 
(Negotiating and contracts, 
compromises and broker) 
 
Table 1: Combining the elements of CoP and implementation theory 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
In according to define and support the conclusion of the research question and the sub-questions, a case study is presented about 
SP in cooperation with Thoracic Anaesthesiology department at Rigshospitalet, which is the department where SP was 
implemented in November 2016. 
First, a short introduction of the stakeholders of SP will be presented in order to create a basic understanding of the 
communities, which is a part of the implementation. Secondly, a case study will be described with a short summary, where after 
a results and discussion of SP according to the nine elements from the framework, will be described. Furthermore, a description 
of the experiences and challenges the doctors meets, including an analysis of the functions and structure of the system will be 
presented. This section is applied to evaluate the opportunities about optimizing SP. 
4.1. Stakeholders 
In this section the supplier, implementer and end-users upon the implementation of SP, will be defined. 
Supplier 
It is the steering committee of the regions that decided to choose Epic, as the supplier of the new health system SP. The doctors   
was not included in the decision making.[11] 
One of the main reasons for Epic to be selected as a supplier of the new health system, among five other suppliers was that they 
introduced an optimal method to involve the clinicians in the adjustment process. It was prioritized, because it would increase the 
quality of the final product, that the doctors is a part of the adjustment process, as they have the most experience in the workflows 
at the hospitals.[2] One of the four suppliers that were not selected, was Systematic, who is the developer of MidtEpj, which is an 
health IT-system in Mid-Jutland.[12] In spite of the system worked well in Mid-Jutland, it was a political decision to select an 
EPIC.[5] According to IT-expert TJ, it is a well-known problem in the world of IT, that nobody thinks about the nation-wide 
consequences. Instead, it is on a regional basis, chosen through a unique solution which can appear better, as there are political 
competition and power which is involved. 
Epic has a big interest for getting SP implemented in the Central Region and Region Zealand. Their aim was to implement a new 
health system which could substitute 30 earlier systems.[15] The most important part for Epic was, that the functions of the 
systems worked and that they optimized the activity at the hospitals. 
Implementer 
The aim of the CIMT was to have a successful implementation of the system, within three weeks. Furtherly, that the 
implementation had to secure that the system worked and optimized the hospitals’ daily activity. CIMT and steering committee 
of the regions have been too optimistic about their choice of a new system, as they have chosen SP which was a fully developed 
system and was not appropriate for the Danish health system.[3] 
CIMT had an expectation of, that the system would be adjusted to Danish circumstances, as the implementation of SP has been 
requiring 270 projects staff from the Central Region and Region Zealand to adjust the American system to the Danish workflow. 
Furthermore, doctors have been included from the hospitals, to evaluate and confirm workflows and the clinical and 
administrative content.[2] 
Users 
The users of the system, which is 44.000 clinicians divided into two regions, have a big interest in the functions of the system, as 
they have to change their workflow according to SP. However, they have a minimal influence on the project, as they was not 
included in the decision making of which system should be implemented.[2] 
There is a traditional implementation problem when introducing new IT systems. According to TJ, Challenges and errors can 
appear, which complicates the usage of the system for the end users. After the implementation of the SP, the quality of the 
medical work has decreased. This has caused, several doctors had a breakdown with stress and even more have left the doctoral 
position at the hospitals. The doctors claim that it is not possible to give the patients an acceptable treatment through SP. This due 
to the big changes in the system structure, which requires enormous documentation which earlier has been executed by doctoral 
secretaries. According to the politicians, the doctors are not ready to accept a new IT system, as they are more conservative 
groups.[5]  
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
4.2. The case: Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet 
In cooperation with the Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology at Rigshospitalet, a case study is performed, with the purpose 
to achieve insights into the application of SP by the doctors. The case study is supported and defined by the CoP and 
implementation theory, with the aim to emphasize the doctors’ experience and challenges in SP. 
The Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology works in the field of anaesthesia and intensive care, in association with operations 
of heart and lungs on approximate 6,500 patients per year.  The department is the country’s largest Thoracic Anaesthesiologic 
Clinique, which has the capacity of 12 patients in the operation department and up to 19 admitted patients in the intensive 
department.[17] 
The department of the operation is covered by the staff 24/7, and where all types of operation in the chest for both children and 
adults. The most common operations are as following: Acute operation for clot in heart, Heart and lung transplantation, Trauma 
in according to stab or shot, and Acute correction or assistance for congenital heart diseases.[17] 
The Intensive department receives patients after heart and lung operation, which often have been in respirator treatment for a 
while. The department receives both children and adults, and new-born as well. Furthermore, patients in trauma are received 
after stab, shot, car accidents, work accidents etc.[17] 
Interview guide 
The framework is applied as a tool to guide the interview with the doctors. Furthermore, to limit and structure the outputs of the 
interviews, then the qualitative replies are applied to analyse the nine elements, which is included in the framework. 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
 
Which challenges do the doctors 
experience with the system structure and 
the functionality in SP? 
 
In which extend do CIMT offer 
education for the doctors? 
Is there a one-way or two-way 
communication between the doctors and 
CIMT? 
 
Which common activities, problem-
solving and discussion opportunities 
have the doctors, in cooperation with 
CIMT? 
 
Is it possible for the doctors to execute 
satisfaction survey of the education? 
How do the doctors evaluate SP? 
Imagination 
 
Whether are the doctors introduced to 
define errors and change requests, 
without creating any 
misunderstandings? 
 
What kind of documentation, guidelines 
and introduction are the doctors able to 
access? 
Do the doctors have a contact to Epic, 
when reporting errors? 
 
 
How and to whom do the doctors 
register errors and change requests for 
SP? 
 
 
Do the doctors have an influence on the 
preparation of the documentation? 
Do Epic report directly back to the 
doctors, after solving the errors? 
Alignment 
How does the updates and new 
knowledge of the system inform the 
doctors? 
 
Has the system structure and the 
functionality in SP required changes in 
the workflow of the doctors? 
 
Who is the broker between the 
stakeholders, according to add 
functions, debugging, etc.? 
Have the doctors been included during 
the adjustment and test of SP? 
Which pros and cons has SP led to? 
 
Who has the overview and the 
responsibility for the errors gets solved, 
according to the needs of the doctors to 
the system? 
 
 
Table 2: Interview guide based on the framework [Table 1]
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
Coordination, Engagement 
In the elements of coordination/engagement, challenges about the system structure and the functionality are defined. 
Furthermore, several joint activities, problem solving, and discussion opportunities to handle and solve challenges for the 
doctors, are analysed. 
Implementation 
SP works on a daily basis at the Anaesthesiologic department at Rigshospitalet. But there are still several issues with the system, 
resulting in challenges for the doctor’s work. 
“The functionality is okay, but there are too many levels and unnecessary click, which lies in a poor system structure” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
According to access a specific module in the system or to execute a specific action, then doctors have to go through a lot of 
clicks, because of a complicated system structure. As several functions is repeated in the system, it entails the doctor’s needs to 
do many unnecessary clicks in the system. The system is not structured according to their workflow, this is why it is known as a 
time consuming and non-intuitive messed system. They have to accept a lot of pop-ups, which leads to many important 
warnings disappears because of frustration.  
“We have learned it through learning by doing” 
(Interview: Chief physician, Rigshospitalet) 
All functions needed by the doctors are in the system, but as SP has a confused system structure and because the system contains 
too many irrelevant functions6, the doctors get distracted in their work and feel that the system does not meet up to their 
requirements. 
There is also too many functions in the system which do not meet the clinical requirements and leads to a decrease of the quality 
for the different functions. Several methods exist to execute a liquid plan, and tests shows that none of these methods are 
clinically appropriate, as none of the methods can be used to calculate nutrition automatically. That is why the doctors have to 
do the work manually.   
 “You can’t think of what you should know” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
Because of a poor translation the system contains insecure expressions, as it is translated directly from American to Danish, it 
leads to several expressions are misunderstood. 
“How should ‘override’ be understood?”  
(Interview: Medical assistant, Rigshospitalet) 
The doctors feel insecurity when they use the system, because the system is not translated according to the functionality. The 
term ‘override’ is applied as ´accept and continue´, and the term is not something one can understand by thinking. 
Evaluating 
There are no kinds of events, as joint activities between the doctors, CIMT and Epic, which is why the doctors thinks that there 
isn’t any efforts done to handle or solve their challenges. In order to create a bigger dividend for the doctors, SP has to be 
upgraded in a way where the usage of the system for the doctors is more effective, which will lead to an increased quality in the 
treatment for the patients.  
A use of joint activities as separated and combined workshops between the doctors and CIMT has to be implemented, in order to 
define the workflow of the doctors and furtherly the requirements of the doctors to the system structure and functionality. It has 
to be emphasized that the functions of the system will be upgraded based on a professional translation, which do not lead to 
clinical misunderstandings. It has to be clarified, in order to prevent and solve the challenges, it is more important to increase the 
quality of SP, than prioritizing the economic savings. 
In addition, joint activities between CIMT and Epic must be supplemented to ensure that Epic upgrades the system according to 
the doctor’s workflow and requirements. 
 
 
                                                     
6 Functions which are not relevant for the department 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
Transparency, Engagement 
According to the transparency/engagement, the amount of the preparation as education and training CIMT offers for the doctors 
is analysed. Furthermore, the level of the doctor’s opportunity to evaluate the education, arranged by CIMT is also analysed.  
Implementation 
The doctors have only participated in education and training in using the system, before it was implemented.  All the preparation 
was in the test environment, which was based on a half-finished system. The challenge in this situation is, that all kind of 
preparation has been executed in the test environment, which differs a lot from the production environment. The preparation 
with the end user before a system gets implemented is relevant, but it is rather important that the material of the education or 
training doesn’t differ from the implemented system. That has unfortunately been the case with SP, which is why frustrations 
among the doctors were created, including a huge loss of their time and trust, when the system was implemented. 
After the implementation of the system, it has not been possible to arrange more education or training for the doctors, neither is 
it possible to request more education. Therefore, their knowledge of the system is very limited and the doctor’s applying 
different methods of performing their work. When their knowledge of the system is not maintained, it leads to a greater 
likelihood of error documentation and waste of time, as doctors do not know which method is most appropriate and time-saving. 
The education needs to be adjusted to the implementation process, e.g. it is therefore relevant before the implementation to train 
super users for every department. The super users can be an assisting team on the department in an intensive period, which 
matches the first few weeks after the system is implemented. The super users have to ensure a quick error finding and to create a 
more effective daily work for the doctors. 
It is important that the education and training continues according the increase of the doctor’s competencies and knowledge of 
the system, when such a critical system related to patient treatment gets implemented. Therefore, the education and training 
should be prepared and held on an ongoing basis, as otherwise it will risk in a bigger resource waste, which has been the case of 
SP. The material of the education and the test environment should reflect the implemented system in a way where the doctors 
develop their competencies according to the exact system, by planning and predicting how to use the system in their complicated 
working days. 
Evaluating 
As there is no more focus upon the education or training, it is not possible for the doctors to evaluate it.  
 
In order for the doctors to get the maximum benefit from the preparation, it requires that they are able to evaluate SP 
continuously. This enables the process to secure that the teaching and training can be adapted to their requirements and 
expectations. 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
Negotiability, Engagement  
Negotiability/engagement analyses whether there is a one-way or two-way communication between CIMT and the doctors. 
Furthermore, how the doctors evaluate SP, is analysed. 
Implementation 
One of the biggest challenges, which is the reason why the implementation of SP has not been successful, is lack of 
communication across the communities. The doctors are complaining about the gap and the communication between CIMT and 
them. The communication between CIMT and the doctors has been one-way, which only allows them to report errors to CIMT, 
but are not able to lead a dialogue with the technicians from CIMT. 
“It is only possible for us to report errors which may be solved in an unknown time period” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
According to Wenger, it is important that the communities integrates with each other. This is why the doctors should be able to 
communicate through a two-way communication with CIMT, to ensure that they agree with the clinical challenges and 
consequences which can be created when the system contains a lot of errors. 
The technicians from CIMT do not have any knowledge about the clinically relevant problems, to increase the quality of their 
work and to ensure that they prioritize resources and time on the errors which has highest clinical consequences, it is necessary 
to establish a two-way communication. This will allow the technicians to communicate with the doctors about the errors being 
reported. In addition, it will reduce misunderstandings and ensure that the errors are resolved with higher quality, because the 
doctors will be a part of the error management. 
Right now resources and time is being applied on the errors, the doctors don’t prioritize, e.g. errors regarding the usability which 
have a minor clinical relevance, are prioritized higher compared to errors regarding the functionality. If the doctors are not able 
to communicate through two-way communication, the clinical issues will often be ignored as the technicians don’t possess 
clinical competencies. This is why errors in the system will affect the treatment of the patients.  
Evaluating 
The doctors gets an opportunity to evaluate SP by filling a satisfaction survey, which is dispatched few times in a year. Mostly, 
the doctors chose not to answer it, as it is time consuming and complicated. 
 “Our reply gets thrown out in a black hole where nothing is done” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
According to the doctors, there is a lack of motivation as they think that their evaluations are not prioritised, as they don’t 
experience any kind of improvements. Two-way communication will ensure that errors are resolved and the system improved, 
which can motivate doctors to evaluate the system. In addition, it is important that the evaluations are structured and not too 
time-consuming, as doctors have a busy work day and will not prioritize time-consuming evaluations. 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
Coordination, Imagination 
The elements coordination/imagination analyses, whether the doctors are introduced to define errors and change requests to the 
system, without any kind of misunderstanding is created. Furthermore, the process to register error and change request is 
analysed. 
Implementation 
There is no consideration about clinical guidelines, for reporting errors or how to define change requests, without the risk of 
creating any kind of misunderstanding. That is why the doctors doubt that the technicians can understand the report, as they 
don’t possess the needed competencies. 
As the doctors and the technicians have different competencies, there are a bigger risk of creating misunderstandings. Therefore, 
when errors are reported, it is important that they are reported detailed, in order to avoid any kind of misunderstandings, as staff 
with technical background from CIMT, receives the errors. When misunderstandings are created, then wrong changes in the 
system is executed, which have bigger consequences for the treatment the doctors have to execute.  
Either the guidelines should be defined for how the doctors should report errors and change requests to CIMT, or the technicians 
should obtain clinical competencies. It will decrease the misunderstandings and increases the quality of the error management 
and the further development of the system. 
Evaluating 
The doctors did receive a guideline which visualise how to report errors and change requests. The doctors don’t follow the 
guideline as it is time consuming. That’s why an increased risk of misunderstandings follow when they submit errors. 
Earlier, an intensive group of one doctor from each department existed and worked jointly across the hospital. This group of 
doctors was the single point of contact, and received feedback and errors from the departments. These points was discussed and 
they tried to solve it internality, otherwise it was reported immediately to CIMT. As nothing was done according to the reported 
errors, the department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, decided that all errors and change requests had to be delivered to a chief 
physician (AK), who in first place tries to solve those by himself. And if it is not possible to solve them, he will report it further 
to CIMT according to the guideline they have received. 
“It is time consuming and difficult to report errors and change requests, as it requires to fill in an application with 
many irrelevant fields”. 
(Interview: Chief physician, Rigshospitalet) 
As the system is centrally controlled, there are a lot of limitations and locked structure, which is why the doctors don’t have the 
rights to adjust it by themselves. In this case, they have to report most of the errors and change requests to CIMT, through a 
time-consuming application. According to (AK), a lot of unnecessary fields has to be filled in the application to report an error. 
There should be a focus upon a restructuring of the system structure, which requires an evaluation of Epics’ limitations to 
evaluate how far this can be possible. The restructuring should substitute the central controlling and make it possible for the 
doctors to configure SP at the department level. This will allow them to customize the system according to the department's 
needs and save time in reporting many errors. 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
Transparency, Imagination 
Transparency/imagination elements analyses the documentation, guidelines the doctors have access to, in order to navigate 
easily through the system. Furthermore, whether the doctors are involved in executing those documents is analysed. 
Implementation 
Through the intranet of the hospitals, the doctors are able to access several types of artefacts e.g. guidelines, which describes 
how to navigate through the system. The doctors were already introduced to those guidelines during the education, before the 
system was implemented. At that time, they didn’t find it interesting, as it was difficult to find out which terms to follow the 
guidelines. 
After the implementation of SP, they have not been trained in how to use the documentation they are able to access. The doctors 
think that there is too much documentation on the intranet, which is time consuming when they have to find the relevant 
guideline. Furthermore, it is not easy to read the documents as they contain information which is not described in a structural 
manner. This is the reason why the doctors don’t use the guidelines. They think that it is easier to learn the system through - 
learning by doing. This is not the ideal way of learning the system, as it applies more risk to the patient’s treatment. 
In order for the doctors to use the guidelines, it is required they are structurally constructed, which will make their use of the 
system much easier. Furthermore, other tools should be used as pocket maps, which is easily accessed by the doctors at any 
time. All the documentation has to be prepared and tested during the education or training of the doctors, to ensure that it is 
structured and easy to read. Before the super users leave the department, they have to introduce the doctors to the 
documentation. It should also be uploaded at the intranet, so it’s accessible at any time. 
Evaluating 
The doctors are not involved in defining or creating the guidelines they can access. They can neither adapt it nor give feedback 
in order to correct the documentation. In order to use the documentation, the doctors require to have a bigger influence on the 
documents, so that they can adapt those according to their needs and learnings. The doctors have to be involved in the 
adjustment process of the documentation, in order for them to own it and be motivated to use it. 
Negotiability, Imagination 
Negotiability/imagination contains the relation between Epic and the doctors. An analysis of whether there is a one-way or two-
way communication between Epic and the Doctors, is presented. 
Implementation 
Today the doctors are only reporting to CIMT and have no direct contact to Epic, because CIMT has the responsibility for the 
implementation of SP, which is why CIMT is a connecting part between the Epic and the doctors.  
There are several pros in communicating through CIMT, as the chances of creating language barriers are low and that the 
doctors will be able to contact CIMT locally. Therefore, all communication is done via CIMT and they must be responsible for 
clarifying whether it is possible to adjust the system according to the doctor’s preferences and the development limitation of 
Epic. 
Evaluating 
Epic does not communicate with the doctors therefore, the doctors don’t receive a feedback from Epic about when the errors 
will be solved, but when the errors are solved, the doctors receive an auto generated message.  
In case of Epic has questions to the errors, all communication should transpire through CIMT to the doctors. It will avoid 
misunderstandings and increase the quality of Epics work, in order to adjust the system according to the doctor’s requirements. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
Coordination, Alignment 
Coordination/alignment analyses how the adaption and the updates of the system is forwarded to the doctors. Furthermore, the 
doctors’ involvement in the adjustment and test of SP according to their workflow, is analysed. 
Implementation 
When updates of SP has to be implemented, the doctors only receive the information through their email about the planned 
update period. This leads to lack of specific information of expected changings and created consequences. 
Until now, only one single update has been developed called: SP18. This new update is implemented on all hospitals in both 
regions, 2nd February 2019. The doctors was not informed about the changing, but they were promised that most of their 
reported errors will be solved. This is why it was expected, that the upgrade will involve improvements which should solve parts 
of the challenges, the doctors experienced. But the doctors were not involved in the upgrade process. Thus, the upgrade has not 
been an effective solution for the hospitals’ activity level, since the specific challenges were not addressed. SP18 has not solved 
the clinical challenges or contributed adequately to the missing functionality in SP, it was concluded that it was exclusively an 
administrative update. 
The doctors should receive more information when upgrading is implemented, to determine whether it will affect their 
workflows. In addition, it is important that the upgrades is done with the involvement of the doctors, in order to adapt the system 
to their needs, otherwise the upgrades will not create any value and add more frustration. 
Evaluating 
In 2013, a development group on every hospital was established, this group was in close communication with Epic in order to 
adjust the system according to the Danish workflow. 18 co-workers as nurses and pharmacists from Rigshospitalet was selected. 
The managers of the hospitals decided that there were no recourses to include doctors, which is why the pharmacists had to 
decide how the doctoral module had to be created. Neither Epic nor pharmacists had the knowledge of the Danish doctors’ 
practice and workflows. 
“The world of the pharmacists exists of two patients, while our world is much more complicated” 
 (Interview: Medical assistant, Rigshospitalet) 
An improper distribution of time, resulted in that the doctors have been involved too late during the adjustment of SP. It took 
one and a half year before establishing a development group containing approximate 600 doctors from the Central Region and 
Region Zealand. Those doctors had an essential role in adjusting the clinical part and to decide how the system should be 
adjusted according to their workflows. However, there have not been executed control about, whether their clinical requirements 
have been included. 
To prevent the challenges in the system, it is important that the doctors are included during the adjustment of the system. The 
system should reflect their daily work and experiences, as other groups of clinicians don’t know the content of their needs. If the 
cooperation with the doctors doesn’t work well, then the system will create even more challenges.  
When the system was tested, the doctors were not introduced to the system as a whole, but only parts of several texts, buttons 
etc. was introduced. This leads to that the doctors could not evaluate the entire system. When the system was implemented, it 
was concluded that the inputs and the feedback of the doctors only had been included limited. Furthermore, the doctors were 
accused that they required the system as it is. 
“We are being accused for the central control and the messy system structure” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
“They chose to do the exact opposite of what we wanted, anyway”  
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
As it is not sufficient just to include the doctors in order to adjust the system, it is necessary to execute tests of the system before 
the implementation, the test should be performed in the production environment in cooperation with the doctors. It is also 
essential that the doctors test the entire system and each function. It is not sufficient that they only test specific functions, as it is 
important to get an overview of the entire system, and connect it to their daily workflow. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
Transparency, Alignment  
As the system structure and the functionality in SP differ from the earlier systems, the elements Transparency/alignment are 
applied to analyse if SP has required changes in the workflow of the doctors and which pros and cons the system have. 
Implementation 
SP has required changings in the work of the doctors, as it was not adjusted to the Danish healthcare structure. Because of lack 
of knowledge about the Danish specials, the system has not been adjusted sufficient. It is a heavy system compared to what the e 
doctors are used to. The system contains a lot of extra functions, which has no relevance for their department, and a lot of 
repetition on the same functions. After approximately three years, of the implementation, the doctors are getting used to the 
system. They have reorganized their workflow according to the system structure in SP, and by using the learning by doing 
method, the doctors are maintaining their work on a daily basis.    
“The structure in Sundhedsplatformen contains many comprehensive processes which leads to a decrease of the 
security of the treatment for the patient” 
(Interview: Chief physician, Rigshospitalet) 
The priority of the resource for the doctors are not optimally distributed. Blood tests has for example to be approved by the 
doctors, which is actually the task of a nurse in the Danish health care system. The distribution of resources in SP has led to 
bigger changings in the workflow of the doctors, which requires more of their time on the system, instead of, with the patients. 
To ensure an effective treatment, it is necessary that the system is being adjusted in according to the workflow of the doctors, 
and not the other way around. 
“On a clinical basis, the most critical issue is not been taking serious: When we as doctors don’t think that the system 
is developed for us and our critique isn’t taken serious” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
It is important the doctors feel that the system is created for them. In order for the doctors to see that they are prioritised, then it 
requires, that the system is adjusted to their workflows, instead of they have to adapt their workflow to SP. Therefore, an 
overview of their workflows has to be created to adjust the system and in order to optimize the patient treatment. 
Evaluating 
Somehow the biggest challenge is that the system doesn’t work according to the needs of the doctors. It is not enough that the 
system just works, it is important that it is an effective system, which eases the work for the doctors, so they use minimal time 
on the system, and instead providing a more effective patient treatment. 
“It works because it HAS to work, but we are not satisfied just because it works” 
(Interview: Chief physician, Rigshospitalet) 
The pros of SP are that several systems are integrated and that the doctors save time, since they don’t need to log into different 
systems. Generally, there is good thought process about the system, but it is missing the most basic and important functions and 
structure. SP gives the possibility to register enormous amount of data, but it is not possible to export it out of the system. For 
department of intensive, it is relevant to export the data about death and the patient’s intensive state. The doctors see this as a 
negative thing, since it was possible to do it in their old system. 
There are several methods of completing the medicine treatment for the patients in SP. However, in Denmark the hospitals are 
only following one method, to keep it unified and to use an appropriate method to minimize the risk for giving the wrong dose. 
By giving the option to complete the medicine treatment in different methods, it allows for wrong information is entered about 
the medicine and other important parameters in the system. This leads to a high risk of wrong treatment. 
The cons with SP is also that the system structure is inspired by the American health care, where it is the doctors’ responsibility 
to register the information, which in Denmark registered by the doctor secretary. This is why a lot of expensive doctoral hours 
are waste, and they can’t be overtaken by other groups, as the system does not allow to do so. Although the new distribution of 
resources has saved doctor secretaries, it is still not an optimal distribution that the most expensive resource, are executing tasks 
which can be done by cheaper resources. 
“Sundhedsplatformen is not adjusted essentially according to our departments” 
(Interview: Medical assistant, Rigshospitalet) 
At the department of the intensive, larger amounts of medicine for the patients are delivered through pumps, compared to other 
departments, which only gives the medication in ml. The doctors are therefore used to have a separate module for medicine 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
which is ordinated through pumps. This module is not included after the implementation of SP, therefore the doctors are 
registering medicine, which is ordinated by pumps manually in a common medicine module. The medicine has to be converted 
from pumps to ml, which is a comprehensive and time-consuming workflow, which increase the risk for incorrect 
documentation. 
There are a lot of basic functions which the doctors are missing in SP. It is for example not possible to scan patient bracelets, 
which leads to that the doctors have to enter the person number manually, several times in a day. The doctor’s furtherly wonder 
why this function is not integrated with SP, as it has been on the market for many years. It saves both time and risk for errors, 
when scanning the patient bracelet instead of the manual entering. The system has to decrease the level of the doctor’s work, by 
transforming their manual workflow into automatically workflows, for example by scanning patient bracelets, medicines, etc. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
Negotiability, Alignment  
Negotiability/alignment analyses the connectivity as brokers between the communities. In this element it is furtherly analysed 
who is responsible for solving the reported errors and that the system is maintained so that it fulfils the requirements of the 
doctors. 
Implementation 
According to Wenger, the brokers are applied between communities to create connection and move knowledge. The big gap 
between communities leads to misunderstandings, as the communities have different competencies and speak different 
languages. For this, brokers can be established between the communities in order to avoid creation of barriers. 
The doctors don’t consider CIMT as a part of the problem solving, as they can’t figure out why the errors are not being solved, 
but it is the technicians from CIMT, which is responsible for all the reported errors and change requests are prioritized. After 
CIMT has prioritized the reported errors and change requests, they report it further to Epic, as it is only Epic whom has access to 
edit in the system.  
In a lot of cases, misunderstandings are created, and Epic therefore thinks that the error is solved. For that, the doctors received 
an auto generated message about it is solved, when it is not. In these cases, it is required that the doctors have to report from the 
beginning, because they can’t give feedback to Epic on if they think that the errors are solved on an essential level. 
When Epic receives the errors, CIMT does not check whether they are resolved. This is because there is only one-way 
communication between Epic and CIMT, which is why they lack the control error handling. 
 “I think that a lot of our reported errors ends in a black box" 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
“There is a huge gap between those who use the system, and those who decide what there should be in it” 
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
 
CIMT is trying to act as a broker between doctors and Epic, the challenge is that they do not have clinical skills and have very 
limited knowledge of doctors' workflows. As a broker, it also requires them to have two-way communication with the 
community they are connecting. This have not been the case for CIMT. Therefore, doctors believe that CIMT does not comply 
with the broker role as they do not ensure that Epic fixes the errors according to doctors' workflows. 
Evaluating 
According to the doctors, there is a lack of willpower to make it work after the system is bought. The managers of the hospitals 
and the politician are neither willing to invest in optimizing the system, while the doctors are forced to use it, which is why the 
system is working on the edge and creates lots of dissatisfaction among the doctors.  
“It never works from day one”  
(Interview: Anesthesiologist, Rigshospitalet) 
According to the doctors, it is obvious that a huge system as SP can’t work exact satisfying from day one. That is why they are 
wondering why there are a lack of resources, to develop a more effective system and focus upon solving errors. 
 “To make it work, it is import to include the doctors more” 
(Interview: Chief physician, Rigshospitalet) 
Because of the importance to provide a professional treatment through SP, it is important that the system is continuously 
observed according to the doctor’s expectations. It is, therefore, relevant to allow resources in order to create a brokering group 
with clinical knowledge. It should be a group of employees from CIMT, which already have technician competencies, but 
should be trained in the clinical work flow. 
These have to be hired in order to maintain the system by ensuring a close cooperation between the communities, and to avoid 
misunderstandings. Furtherly, they have to ensure that errors are prioritized and solved, by focusing on the prioritised items 
which have a big clinical consequences. CIMT, as a broker should have access to the data model for SP, which describes the 
content, structure, and constraints of the system. Based on the data model, CIMT should conclude how it is possible to solve the 
errors. The data model is a confidential documentation owned by Epic, therefore, CIMT must request access to it. (TS) 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
Summary 
The framework shows the results from the case at the department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet. 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
SP works on a daily basis, but there are 
several challenges according to the 
functionality and system structure. 
CIMT have only offer education and 
training before the SP was implemented. 
The material of the education differs a 
lot from the implemented system. 
There is a one-way communication 
between CIMT and the doctors, as the 
doctors are only able to report errors. 
No kind of join activities between the 
doctors and CIMT to solve the 
challenges. 
There is no focus on evaluating the 
education or training by the doctors. 
The doctors evaluate SP by filling a time 
consuming satisfaction survey few times 
in a year.  
Imagination 
There are no consideration about clinical 
guidelines for how to report errors and 
changing requests, without the risk of 
creating any misunderstandings. 
Through the intranet, the doctors can 
access guidelines and instructions, 
which contains too much information 
and is not structurally. 
The doctors don’t have contact to Epic. 
Only CIMT reports to Epic. 
In first place a chief physician from the 
department tries to solve the errors. 
If he can’t, he report it to CIMT through 
a time consuming application and 
according to a guideline. 
The doctors have not been included in 
defining or creating the documentation. 
Furtherly, they can neither adapt nor 
give feedback according to it.  
Epic does neither communicate with the 
doctors nor CIMT, they only send an 
auto generated message, when errors are 
solved. 
Alignment 
The doctors only receive limited 
information when new updates get 
implemented. 
SP has required huge changings in the 
workflows of the doctors, because it was 
not adjusted sufficient to the Danish 
health structure. 
 
CIMT has tried to be a broker, therefore 
the communication between Epic and 
the doctors are going through them. 
The doctors are only been included 
limited during the adjustment and test of 
SP? 
The main advantages and disadvantages 
are: Several systems are integrated, 
which save their log in time. 
Inappropriate distribution of resources, 
resulted in reorganizing of workflows. 
No one has the overview and the 
responsibility for the errors get solved 
according the needs of the doctors. 
 
Table 3: Results from the case at the department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
5. Recommendation 
Following section describes which challenges, the department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology experiences caused by the system 
structure and functionality of SP. Furthermore, which improvements are needed to optimize the system structure and 
functionality of SP, in order to increasing the quality of the system. The challenges and improvements are based on the analysis 
of the nine elements from the framework: 
 
Challenges 
Improvements 
Coordination, 
Engagement 
 
- 
Functions as clinical inappropriate 
- 
Irrelevant functions 
- 
Too many steps and unnecessary clicks 
- 
Poor translation, which leads to insecure 
expressions 
 
- 
Join activities between doctors and CIMT: 
- 
Defining the needs of the doctors: for 
the system structure and the 
functionality 
- 
Improve the translation 
Transparency, 
Engagement 
- 
Huge deviations between the material of the 
education / test environment and the production 
environment 
- 
Lack of education after the implementation of 
SP 
 
- 
The material of the education and the test 
environment has to reflect the production 
environment 
- 
Super user  
- 
Structured guidelines, pocket maps, etc. 
 
Negotiability, 
Engagement 
- 
One-way communication between CIMT and the 
doctors 
- 
Lack of prioritizing of the errors 
 
- 
Two-way communication between CIMT and 
the doctors 
- 
Prioritize errors according to clinical importance  
 
Coordination, 
Imagination 
 
- 
No guideline for reporting errors 
- 
Central controlled system 
- 
Reporting of errors and change requests requires 
that the doctors fill up a time-consuming 
application blanket with irrelevant information 
 
- 
Define guidelines for the reporting of errors  
- 
Re-structure the system in order to substitute the 
central control, so that the doctors can be able to 
solve errors and personalize the system  
- 
Easier to report errors 
Transparency, 
Imagination 
 
- 
Lack of introduction of the documentation 
- 
Too many documents  
- 
Too much information in the documents 
 
- 
Introduction of the documents 
- 
Adjust the documentation by including the 
doctors 
Negotiability, 
Imagination 
 
- 
One-way communication between CIMT and 
Epic 
- 
No communication between Epic and the 
doctors 
 
- 
Two-way communication between CIMT and 
Epic 
- 
Establish communication between Epic and the 
doctors through CIMT 
Coordination, 
Alignment 
 
- 
The requirements of the doctors are included 
limited 
- 
Lack of the tests in cooperation with the doctors 
 
- 
Include the doctors in order to adjust and test  
- 
The doctors have to test each single function and 
the system as a whole, in order to ensure that the 
system fulfils their criteria 
Transparency, 
Alignment 
 
- 
Non-intuitive system structure  
- 
Changes in the workflow  
- 
The distribution of resources in SP requires a lot 
of time in documentation and less time with the 
patients 
 
- 
Adjust the system structure to the workflow 
- 
Adjust the functionality to the workflow of the 
doctors 
- 
Change the distribution of resources 
Negotiability, 
Alignment 
- 
A big gap between the doctors and Epic 
- 
Misunderstandings is occurred when errors 
should be solved 
 
- 
Implement CIMT as brokers, and ensure that 
they have clinical understanding and knowledge 
of the systems limitations 
- 
Ensure that the system is maintained according 
to the requirements of the doctors 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
The problem with the implementation of SP, is that there have been lack of communication, which has led to CIMT filtering the 
doctors' errors and change requests, without knowing whether they are resolved correctly or solved at all. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Current relation between the communities 
Figure 2, shows that CIMT is trying to be involved as a broker between the doctors and Epic. This can be seen when they are 
responsible to prioritize the submission made by the doctors, without any clinical background and thereafter forwards them to 
Epic. Epic tries to solve the doctors' challenges, but they often misunderstand the submissions which leads to incorrect or 
inadequate changes being implemented. 
According to Wenger, a broker relation between communities is necessary. In order to implement most of these improvements, 
CIMT must be introduced as a strong broker. As shown in the figure 3, they will establish a two-way communication with the 
doctors and EPIC, this will cause the errors and challenges raised will be prioritized and resolved without any misunderstanding. 
This will ensure a more efficient system structure and functionality in SP in relation to doctors' workflows, and thereby better 
patient care. The figure also shows that a one-way communication between Epic and the doctors is established, through which 
Epic must give doctors the status when the error is received, when it is expected to be resolved and when it is actually resolved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Recommended relation between Epic, CIMT, and the doctors 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
In order for CIMT to function as an effective broker, then it needs several sub-functions with different responsibilities. Figure 4 
defines the sub-functions that CIMT must consist of in order to fulfil an effective broker role between EPIC and the doctors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Structure of CIMT as broker 
The figure 4 indicates that CIMT must consist of two units. Below is a list of what each unit should be responsible for: 
IT department: 
- 
Prioritize errors - so that the errors of highest clinical relevance are resolved first. 
- 
Status from Epic - to ensure that Epic adheres an effective error handling by resolving all errors without any 
misunderstandings between them and the doctors. 
- 
Test - perform tests in collaboration with doctors 
- 
Brokering - finding a solution in according to doctors' requirements and Epics limitations. 
Training department: 
- 
Education and training - to develop and maintain teaching and training material. 
- 
Guide to reporting errors and making it easier to report errors. 
- 
Documentation - Introducing and maintaining guidelines, pocket maps etc. 
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
6. Conclusion 
This paper analyses the system structure and the functionality of SP, by applying CoP and the implementation theory. A 
framework inspired by Wenger is defined, where the table of boundary dimensions are combined with the elements from the 
implementation theory. The framework is applied to emphasize and structure a case study which is executed at the Department 
of Thoracic Anaesthesiology, Rigshospitalet, to answer the following research question: 
How can the system structure and functionality of Sundhedsplatformen be analyzed from a community of 
practice- and implementation theory perspective, and how can it be optimized? 
The case study is performed in order to analyse the challenges of the doctors. The main problem with the system structure and 
the functionality is, a weak broker role between Epic and the doctors. This has led to poor communication across communities, 
and the system has not been adequately adapted to the needs of doctors.  
The functionality in SP works in the daily work of the doctors, despite of the system is not adjusted sufficiently their 
departments. This is why they are using the functions they can access through the system, and the rest of the functions are 
handled manually, as the system is not supporting all elements. The challenge with the functionality in SP is, that the system 
contains too many irrelevant functions, functions which are not clinically appropriate, and a poor translation which is not based 
on the functionality, but directly translated without clinical reflections. 
The system structure is a bigger obstacle in the work of the doctors, as it is not adjusted in order to the doctor’s workflow. 
However, it has required a bigger change in the distribution of the resources and workflows. The system contains too many 
steps, unnecessary clicks and comprehensive processes which lead to a decrease of the security in the treatment of the patient. 
In order to optimize the system structure and the functionality of SP, it requires a closer cooperation and better communication 
between the individual communities, which can be done by strengthening CIMT's role as a broker. A broker role between Epic 
and the doctors contains several improvements, which together reduce the challenges and improve the usage of SP. 
To ensure that all improvements are implemented, then CIMT should have the clinical knowledge about the workflow of the 
doctors and the knowledge about the limitations of the system. As broker, CIMT is responsible for: 
- 
Arrange join activities as separated and combined workshops, to define the requirements by the doctors. 
- 
Prioritize to solve errors, which has largest clinical consequences. 
- 
Ensure that the system structure and functionality is adjusted according to the doctor’s needs. 
- 
UAT in cooperation with the doctors, to ensure that the system structure and functions, fulfil the requirements of 
the doctors. 
- 
Hire super users into the departments, in order to maintain the activity during quick error finding. 
- 
Introduce the doctors to the guidelines, pocket map, etc. as a tool in order to navigate in the system. 
- 
Go through a detail-based education of how the doctors have to use the system, and ensure that no changes occur 
between the material of the education and the actual system. 
- 
Define instructions for how to report errors and change requests easy and without misunderstandings. 
- 
Establish a two-way communication between the doctors and CIMT, and between CIMT and Epic. 
- 
Substitute the central controlling, so they doctor can personalize the system to their department, and be able to 
solve some of the errors. 
When CIMT is working in a broker role and implements all these improvements, and thereby improve the service of SP. 
Will it give the doctors opportunities to supply a better treatment of the patients, as they have to use less time on the 
system, and instead focus upon the patients. Furthermore, this will raise the activity level of the hospitals, through the 
productivity of the doctors. 
 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
7. References 
[1] [Article]  JAMSHED, Shazia. Qualitative research method-interviewing and observation. 2014. J Basic Clin Pharm. 
[2] [Article]  KJÆRGAARD, Karen. Kæmpe EPJ-projekt i Østdanmark. 2014. 
[3] [Article]  MORTENSEN, Henny.  Region Sjælland erkender: Vi er ikke na˚et i ma˚l med Sundhedsplatformen. 2018. 
[4] [Article]  NIELSEN, Per. Making sense of implementation theories, models and frameworks.  
Nielsen Implementation Science. 2015. 
[5] [Article]  PEDERSEN, Flemming. S. Mysteriet om Sundhedsplatformen. 2018. 
[6] [Article] WENGER, Etienne and Beverly. Introduction to communities of practice, 2015. 
[7] [Article] WENGER, Etienne. Communities of Practice and Social Learning Systems.  
Organization articles Vol. 7 (2). 225-246. 2000 
[8] [Article]  WENGER, Etienne. Communities of practice: A brief introduction. 2011. P.1-3. 
[9] [Article]  YIN, Robert K. Case Study Research Design and Methods (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 2016. 
[10] [Article]  YUKAWA, Joyce. Communities of Practice, 2012. 
[11] [Report]  LARSEN, Peder. Rigsrevisionen: Beretning om Sundhedsplatformen, 2018. 
[12] [misc]  
COLUMNA I REGION MIDTJYLLAND.  
https://da.systematic.com/healthcare/cases/columna-in-central-denmark-region/, (Accessed: 27.02.2019). 
[13] [misc]  
HULT, Christian. Oversigt over fremskridt og forbedringer.  
https://www.regionh.dk/til-fagfolk/Sundhed/sundhedsplatformen/om- sundhedsplatformen/Sider/Oversigt-
over-fremskridt-og-forbedringer.aspx, (Accessed: 29.01.2019). 
[14] [misc]  
JENSEN, Thomas. Det amerikanske sundhedssystem.  
https://faktalink.dk/titelliste/det-amerikanske-sundhedssystem, Nov 2015, (Accessed: 12.12.2018). 
[15] [misc]  
VILLADSEN, Steffen.  Efter et a˚rs tavshed taler amerikanske Epic endelig ud om Sundhedsplatformen. 
https://www.computerworld.dk/art/242657/efter-et-aars-tavshed-taler-amerikanske-epic-endelig-ud-om-
sundhedsplatformen-vi-har- ikke-den-store-kultur-med-at-vende-os-udadtil-men-nu-mener-vi-at-det-er-paa-
tide, Mar 2018, (Accessed:12.01.2019). 
[16] [misc]  
WASSINI, Lotte. Sundhedsplatformen. 
https://www.regionh.dk/om-region-
hovedstaden/denAdministrativeRegion/CIMT/sundhedsteknologi/Sider/sundhedsplatformen.aspx,  
(Accessed: 21.11.2018). 
[17] [misc]  
WEB, Rigshospitalet. Department of Thoracic Anaesthesiology. 
https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/english/departments/centre-for-cardiac-vascular-pulmonary-and-infectious-
diseases/department-of-thoracic-anaesthesiology/Pages/default.aspx, (Accessed: 20.08.2019). 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
I. 
Appendix A - Interview guide 
Respondent: TJ7 
Occupation: Software developer, Kimik-IT 
Introduction of SP and my thesis 
 
1. What do you think, is the reason why the challenges of the Sundhedsplatformen occurred? 
2. Are these challenges very familiar in the IT industry? 
3. Do cultural/distance have an influence on similar challenges? 
4. How would Kimik-IT have handled the implementation of an American system in Danish hospitals? 
5. How could we have avoided the challenges of implementing with the Sundhedsplatformen? 
6. Who should the end users be in the closest contact with? 
7. Do development projects ensure an effective solution? 
 
 
II. 
Appendix B - Interview guide 
Respondent: TS8 
Occupation: IT Architect, Danish Health Data Authority 
Introduction of SP and my thesis 
 
1. How can we solve the problem with the Sundhedsplatformen, as it is a centrally controlled invoicing system? 
2. How will knowledge of Epic’s limitations be obtained regarding the further development of the system? 
3. To what extent is it possible to change the system structure of the system? 
4. Is it an optimal solution to change the IT architecture of SP? 
5. What other possible solutions are there to handle the challenges of the Sundhedsplatformen? 
 
                                                     
7 Experience with implementing IT projects, through the last 30 years 
8 Experience with IT architecture, through the last 8 years 
