==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Fall 2019
Technical University of Denmark
Global distribution of unicellular plankton
traits.
Author:
Per Anton Vergod Almgren: s170464
Supervisor:
Andre Visser
November 17, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Camila Serra Pompei, Ken Haste Andersen and my supervisor Andre Visser for
their patient guidance and help throughout the process. I would also like to thank Agnethe Nøhr Hansen,
Andrew Barton from Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Samar Khatiwala from University of Oxford
for providing answers when in doubt.
Page 1 of 62
==PAGE:3==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Abstract
Unicellular plankton contribute to half of the global primary production. Thus they are an important factor
in the global carbon cycle, in terms of a carbon sink for the atmosphere. An understanding of biological
responses to a changing climate is therefore called for. Through this thesis, a numerical model is presented,
describing unicellular plankton ecosystem dynamics in a trait based perspective. The model was built using
cell size as a master trait, which all cellular processes and ecosystem interactions are set according to. There
are two types of plankton represented in the model; generalists and diatoms. Generalists include a wide
range of trophic strategies among unicellular plankton, all which are emerging from the master trait of cell
size. These include photoautotrophy, mixotrophy and heterotrophy. Diatoms are purely photoautotrophic,
but have two characteristics separating them from the generalists; a silica shell and an inner vacuole. The
model was ﬁrst implemented in a 0D-setting using a chemostat formulation in order to evaluate the model
performance in a simple setting. Then it was run in a global setting using transport matrices representing
monthly average circulation from an underlying global circulation model.
The results of the model are
compared to biogeographical patterns of plankton traits based on literature, both in broader terms and a
local study from the North Atlantic. The model only poorly reproduces regional trait biogeographies in the
North Atlantic, but manages to reproduce broad biogeographical patterns on a global scale, such as size
distribution and seasonal patterns.
Page 2 of 62
==PAGE:4==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
The trait-based approach to ocean ecology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Aim of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Unicellular plankton biogeographies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
North Atlantic diatom and dinoﬂagellate communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Method
10
2.1
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
The cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Resource uptakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Flux balance and Liebig’s law of the minimum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.4
Losses and leakages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.5
Predator-prey interactions and mortality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.6
Temperature eﬀects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.7
Governing equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
0D model - Chemostat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.1
Numerical tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Global model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.1
Transport Matrix Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.2
Global model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.3
Convergence test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Results
26
3.1
0D model - Chemostat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Global model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Discussion
35
4.1
Model setup and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Implementing diazotrophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Conclusion
40
A Matlab scripts
46
Page 3 of 62
==PAGE:5==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
1
Introduction
Figure 1:
Illustration of some unicellular plankton and
their relative size.
Figure from Follows & Dutkiewicz
(2011).
Unicellular plankton is a term covering a wide
range of marine organisms.
It includes a number
of protists such as diatoms, dinoﬂagellates, ciliates
and coccolithophores, and also some prokaryotes
(Cyanobacteria) such as Prochlorococcus and Syne-
chococcus (Kirchman, 2008). In general, unicellu-
lar plankton display size dependency with regards
to abundance; the smallest plankton are the most
abundant (Chisholm, 1992).
Unicellular plankton
contributes with around 50% of the global primary
production (Westberry et al., 2008; Zhao & Run-
ning, 2010), i.e. producing organic carbon from CO2
as well producing O2. This is where global biogeog-
raphy of unicellular plankton becomes important in
terms of global marine ecosystem productivity and
also climate change.
They become food for het-
erotrophic plankton and larger organisms, and are
necessary for all higher trophic level marine life in terms of nutrition and oxygen production. In the global
climate system, unicellular plankton are fueling the biological pump due to the carbon ﬁxation through pho-
tosynthesis. The biological pump is the vertical transfer of organic carbon, i.e. marine snow, faecal pellets,
dead organisms etc., from the surface ocean to the deep ocean. Here a fraction of the carbon is sequestrated
and buried for hundreds of years (Ducklow et al., 2001; Sanders et al., 2014). Therefore, an understanding
of unicellular plankton is important, in order to take into account the biological responses to a changing
climate. All in order to improve the predictive power of climate model scenarios.
Within unicellular plankton there are a number of diﬀerent trophic strategies, i.e. strategies for acquiring
carbon and nutrients.
Photoautotrophs use photosynthesis to acquire carbon directly from CO2 and to
convert the solar energy from photons to chemical energy.
This strategy is representing pure primary
production, comparable to plants on land, and is used by diatoms, coccholithophores, cyanobacteria and
some dinoﬂagellates and ciliates. Heterotrophs ingest organic material or eat other organisms to acquire
nutrients and carbon. These include most ciliates, some dinoﬂagellates and cyanobacteria under certain
conditions. Cyanobacteria then falls in under the sub-group of osmoheterotrophs which rely on diﬀusive
uptake rather than eating (phagotrophy). Mixotrophs are able to use a combination of photoautotrophy
and heterotrophy. They are able to perform both photosynthesis and phagotrophy (ingest or ”eat” organic
matter or organisms). Many dinoﬂagellates belong under this trophic strategy, but also some ciliates are able
to combine the strategies. Finally we have diazotrophs, which are able to ﬁxate N2, where other primary
producers need ﬁxed nitrogen. Some cyanobacteria are able to this, e.g. some species of Synechococcus.
One thing that makes this possible for Synechococcus is that they are able to do photosynthesis to produce
Page 4 of 62
==PAGE:6==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
energy. Diazotrophy is a very energy demanding process, both because it requires a lot of energy to break
down the triple bonds of N2, and it requires an oxygen free environment inside the cell (Kirchman, 2008;
Zehr & Paerl, 2008).
Diatoms stand out among the unicellular plankton for a number of reasons. First of all, they are encased
in a silica frustule while most other plankton only have a cell wall in terms of a soft membrane. The silica
frustule is argued to provide protection against grazing (Panˇci´c et al., 2019). Another feature of the diatoms
is that they have a water-ﬁlled vacuole separated from the rest of the cell by a membrane. This allows them
to inﬂate their size, so that their size in terms of radius becomes large compared to their carbon content.
The vacuolation also serves as grazing protection, as the predation pressure is larger on small organisms, but
it also provides an advantage in terms of resource acquisition (Hansen & Visser, 2019; Kooistra et al., 2008).
The inﬂation reduces the self shading of chloroplasts as they come closer to the shell, and it also allows for
increasing the surface area of the cell without increasing active biomass of the cell correspondingly, which
improves the speciﬁc nutrient aﬃnity (Raven, 1987). The vacuole may also provide buoyancy to the cell,
preventing it from sinking, and diatoms are also able to store excess nutrients in the vacuole to be used when
nutrients are depleted in the environment (Kooistra et al., 2008).
1.1
The trait-based approach to ocean ecology
The trait-based approach to ocean ecology is a framework developed to be able to describe ecosystems and
interactions in a more general and simpler way. This is done by focusing on individuals rather than species
when describing ecosystems. Individuals are in this context deﬁned by a set of essential functional traits, that
on the individual level are regulated through trade-oﬀs (Kiørboe et al., 2018). A trait of an organism can
essentially be anything describing characteristics , but in order for the trait-based approach to be successful
in simplifying ecosystem descriptions Kiørboe et al. (2018) argues that traits should be taxa transcending,
i.e. species independent. Therefore they identify three key traits as being: body size, resource acquisition
mode and defence; with body size as a ”master trait” (K. H. Andersen et al., 2015; K. Andersen et al., 2016).
A classical description of a plankton ecosystem, is the NPZ-type model, which describes the dynamics
between nutrients (N), phytoplankton (P) and zooplankton (Z). This description uses the assumption that
plankton may be divided into photoautotrophs and heterotrophs, even though this is not the case in real
plankton ecosystems, where mixotrophy causes these groups to be entangled to varying degrees (Flynn et
al., 2012). This is something that is handled in a more realistic way using the trait-based approach. This is
well suited for modelling unicellular plankton communities, as resource acquisition mode (i.e. autotrophy-
mixotrophy-heterotrophy) can be described as a more continuous trait emerging from cell size and resource
availability (K. H. Andersen et al., 2015; Chakraborty et al., 2017).
Page 5 of 62
==PAGE:7==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
1.2
Aim of this thesis
The aim of this project is to implement a trait-based model of unicellular plankton using size as the master
trait, and use it to investigate emerging trait biogeographies on a global scale.
The model is based on
the model described in Chakraborty et al. (2017) as implemented in K. H. Andersen (unpublished), which
describes an ecosystem of generalists. This is a model that takes the plasticity of trophic strategies into
account, and present a continuous mechanistic description of uptake processes and predator prey interactions.
This allows for photoautotrophy, mixotrophy and heterotrophy to occur to varying degree. In addition to
this I have taken the model of Hansen & Visser (2019), describing the purely photoautotrophic diatoms, and
merged the two models into the same model formulation. The idea is to take one step closer towards having
a model describing all primary production, and carbon ﬁxation, in the marine ecosystem. In the discussion
section I will address how the missing part for describing all unicellular plankton, diazotrophy, can be
implemented into the model framework in the future. The model results will be compared to biogeographies
as described in literature, in order to investigate the validity of the model.
1.3
Unicellular plankton biogeographies
A widely cited quote, and recognised paradigm, regarding the marine microbial environment is: ”Every-
thing is everywhere but environment selects.”(Becking, 1934) This means that the composition of marine
ecosystems emerge from the local environmental conditions. Plankton are to a large degree cosmopolitan,
but bipolar distributions are also common (Longhurst, 2010). The conditions are especially set by resource
availability, i.e. nutrients and light. Nitrogen has been identiﬁed as a limiting resource in the ocean, and it is
seen that low nitrogen concentrations favour small species (Chisholm, 1992). The nitrogen concentration in
the surface ocean is tightly coupled with the stratiﬁcation of the watercolumn. In stratiﬁed waters, nitrogen
gets depleted as it is used for primary production, which then favours small cell sizes. These conditions
occur in tropical environments where surface waters are warm. While this is valid for autotrophs, the low
nutrient conditions may also select for a mixotrophic strategy among larger cells, allowing them to occupy
the same region (Cullen et al., 2002). However, the trophic transfer of energy is not very eﬃcient during low
nutrient conditions, because part of the production is dependent on re-mineralization of nitrogen, the larger
cell sizes are again limited even if they adapt to mixotrophy. In well mixed regions, such as polar waters
during winter or coastal upwelling zones, nitrogen is re-supplied from deeper waters which makes it possible
for larger species to occur.
As photosynthesis is the carbon source for photoautotrophs, light is obviously also an important environ-
mental factor. As the solar irradiance is rather constant towards the equator, this is not so important here;
i.e. the supply is always there. Towards mid- and high latitudes, light becomes increasingly important, as
solar irradiance becomes increasingly varying with season. Therefore mid- and high latitudes show seasonal
succession in ecosystem structure, where the optimal trophic strategy and cell size vary throughout the
year.(Cullen et al., 2002)
Even though nitrogen is largely the most limiting resource in the ocean, there are areas where this is not
Page 6 of 62
==PAGE:8==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
the case. Especially in oﬀshore upwelling regions, such as parts of the equatorial Paciﬁc and especially the
Southern Ocean, iron is argued to be the limiting resource. Here we ﬁnd areas with plenty of nitrogen but
still low levels of chlorophyll (Martin et al., 1991), which is often used as a proxy for phytoplankton. The
reason for this is that iron is essential for producing e.g. chlorophyll and DNA/RNA and also for nitrogen
ﬁxation (Weinberg, 1989). Iron is largely supplied by atmospheric transport from terrestrial sources, e.g.
Sahara dust storms, which are far away in these oﬀshore regions (Martin et al., 1991).
In addition to this, diatoms have been proven to be limited by silicon availability in areas where other
nutrients are abundant (Azam & Chisholm, 1976). Also, diatoms are known to dominate spring blooms in
high latitudes and seasonal blooms in coastal upwelling systems (Smetacek, 1999).
To summarize the biogeographical patterns that come out of these limitation processes, ﬁrst of all there
is a general tendency of smaller cell sizes towards the equator and larger sizes towards the poles. Within
non-polar waters there is also a tendency of relatively larger cell sizes in upwelling regions such as the equator
and coastal upwelling zones along the eastern boundaries of the ocean basins.
These are some general biogeographical features. More detailed studies on plankton biogeographies tend to
have a focus on species, rather than general patterns or traits. In order to get trait biogeographies out of
these, one needs to do the eﬀort of digging through literature to translate species into traits. While this is
a time consuming procedure, this translation into traits has been done by Barton et al. (2013), where they
present a trait biogeography of the North Atlantic (detailed below) focusing on cell size and trophic strategy.
They also call for more studies revealing trait biogeographies.
1.3.1
North Atlantic diatom and dinoﬂagellate communities
Barton et al. (2013) have carried out a trait-based analysis of seasonal succession and biogeographical patterns
in North Atlantic diatom and dinoﬂagellate communities. The study is based on a long term data set of
consistent taxon-level measuring techniques collected by the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) operated
by the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science since 1958.
The CPR was towed by ”ships of
opportunity”, meaning e.g. volunteer merchant ships, on quasiregular routes and plankton was sampled
in a ﬁltering mesh with mesh size 270µm. Then the CPR was returned to laboratories where microscopic
analysis of the ﬁltering meshes recorded present taxa and cell number densities (cells volume−1). Samples
were also registered in terms of sampling region as illustrated in ﬁgure 2, and were collected within the years
1958-2006.
The study of Barton et al. (2013) focus on 62 diatom species and 51 dinoﬂagellate species from the data
set provided. These species were routinely surveyed throughout the years and across all survey areas, and
represent a subset of common diatoms and dinoﬂagellates. Each species were assigned traits within two
categories; cell size and trophic strategy. Cell sizes, meaning carbon mass and cell volume, were estimated
based on published literature where numerous estimates were collected to obtain an average cell size for each
species. Trophic strategies included photoautotrophs, mixotrophs and heterotrophs, and were also assigned
to each species based on published literature. Photoautotrophs were deﬁned as containing plastids and pho-
Page 7 of 62
==PAGE:9==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
tosynthetic pigments, alongside with no evidence of consumption of organic particles or prey. In this study,
only diatoms were classiﬁed as pure photoautotrophs due to the diﬃculty in ruling out some heterotrophic
behaviour in dinoﬂagellates. Dinoﬂagellates were therefore either mixotrophs or heterotrophs. Mixotrophs
were deﬁned as containing plastids or photosynthetic pigments and showing evidence of feeding, e.g. having
food vacuoles or by direct observation of feeding. The degree of photoautotrophy and heterotrophy in the
mixotrophs was not quantiﬁed. Finally, heterotrophs were deﬁned as containing no plastids or photosynthetic
pigments.
Mean annual cycles were calculated in three ways. First, mean annual cycle of abundance for each species
and area, weighted by sampling frequency. Second, a basin wide annual cycle was calculated for each species,
weighted by the geographic area of each sampling zone. Third, they calculated annual cycles over multiple
species categorized by the diﬀerent traits.
Figure 2: Survey areas from the CPR data set superimposed on annual mean sea surface temperature climatology
for 1971-2000 from Smith & Reynolds (2003). The letters indicate latitudinal areas. Figure from Barton et al. (2013)
The results of the study are summarized in ﬁgure 3. They show both basin wide and zonally averaged
seasonal succession of abundance in terms of trophic strategy and mean cell size.
With regards to trophic strategy (ﬁgure 3a) the basin wide average show a spring bloom of photoautotrophic
diatoms followed by a decline during summer and blooms of mixotrophic and heterotrophic dinoﬂagellates.
This is then followed by a decline in dinoﬂagellates and a fall bloom of diatoms. Looking at the zonally
averaged seasonal successions it is seen that mixotrophs and heterotrophs peak at the same time in the north
but in the south, mixotrophs peak up to two months earlier than the heterotrophs. Furthermore the summer
maximum of heterotrophs coincide with the diatom summer minimum, and heterotrophs show the strongest
seasonal variation.
Page 8 of 62
==PAGE:10==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
(a) Seasonal succession of trophic strategies
(b) Mean cell mass
Figure 3: Results of zonally averaged trait biogeographies in the North Atlantic by Barton et al. (2013)
Page 9 of 62
==PAGE:11==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
2
Method
2.1
Model
The model used for this thesis is a combination of two diﬀerent models describing unicellular plankton. The
ﬁrst model describes diatoms and is presented in Hansen & Visser (2019). The model describes resource
acquisition and synthesis processes of diatoms and how these are aﬀected by the degree of vacuolation. The
second model describes generalists, i.e. non-diatoms, and is a model developed in Centre for Ocean Life,
DTU Aqua. One version of the model is described in Chakraborty et al. (2017), where the investment in
diﬀerent traits is explicitly deﬁned in terms of resource allocation. The version of the generalist model used
for this thesis is described in K. H. Andersen (unpublished), and it is also the model behind the Plankton
Calculator (Plankton Calculator, n.d.). R-code used for the Plankton Calculator is available online on GitHub
(Size Based Plankton, n.d.). This version of the generalist model does not allocate resources in terms of
investments in diﬀerent traits. Instead the traits are emerging from cell size and environmental conditions.
The generalist model may be used to model both plankton and heterotrophic bacteria (osmoheterotrophs).
The two models have been combined into the same framework in MatLab, using the same formulations for
processes in the two plankton clades where appropriate. All in order to make sure that they are competing for
resources under the same terms. The new combined model framework uses the approach with traits emerging
from size, and using a ﬁxed vacuole volume fraction for diatoms. This makes the model computationally less
heavy, and also more adaptive when put into diﬀerent environmental conditions. A list of parameters and
constants used for the model is seen in Table 1.
2.1.1
The cell
The plankton are divided into a number of size classes which then constitute an ecosystem, where all are
competing for the same resources and having predator-prey interactions. Throughout this thesis eight size
classes of generalists and eight size classes of diatoms have been used. They are logarithmically equal spaced
in the range m ≈[10−8 : 101µgC], which spans heterotrophic bacteria, photoautotrophs, mixotrophs and
heterotrophic protists (K. Andersen et al., 2016).
In the model, cells are assumed to be spherical, and the equivalent spherical radius is calculated based on
the carbon mass. This is done diﬀerently for diatoms and generalists, due to the diﬀerent original model
formulations. For diatoms, it is the cytoplasm carbon mass that is deﬁned initially, and for generalists it is
the total carbon mass, i.e. cytoplasm carbon mass and membrane carbon mass (m = mcyto + mmem). This
causes a small shift in which size classes there are in terms of total carbon mass, but as the size classes are
set arbitrarily this does not aﬀect the model performance.
Page 10 of 62
==PAGE:12==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Figure 4: Physical attributes of the generalist- and diatom cells in the model. The generalists have the cytoplasm and
a membrane acting as cell wall. Diatoms have an additional membrane separating the cytoplasm from the vacuole,
and also have a silica shell that surrounds the outer membrane. The silica shell is not included in the radius though,
as the radius dependent uptake processes are located in the outer membrane.
The thickness of membranes is also deﬁned diﬀerently for diatoms and generalists. Diatoms are deﬁned to
have a ﬁxed membrane thickness of 8nm. Generalists also have a ﬁxed membrane thickness, but here it is
deﬁned as a fraction of the total cell mass, mmem,G = mGν, where ν = cm−1/3 and c = 1.5 · 10−3µgC1/3
is a scaling constant (K. Andersen et al., 2016).
This formulation is consistent with a ﬁxed membrane
thickness, which can be argued using the approximate volume of a spherical shell that is much thinner than
the radius of the sphere. Using ρC.tot as the carbon density of the cell and ρC.mem as the carbon density of
the membranes, r for cell radius and h for membrane thickness we get:
mtot
mmem
=
4
3πr3ρC.tot
4πr2hρC.mem
= ρC.mem
ρC.tot
3hr−1 ∝cm−1/3
The cell volume is then calculated based on these carbon masses and the carbon density of cytoplasm and
membranes, taking membranes and vacuole into account as illustrated in ﬁgure 4. The radius is then derived
from the volume. Notice that the radius of diatoms exclude the silica shell. This is because uptake sites are
in the membrane, so this is more appropriate when deﬁning uptake rates according to radius.
The radius of generalists then become
rG =
3π
4
mmem,G
ρC.mem
+ mcyto,G
ρC.cyto
1/3
(1)
where ρC.mem and ρC.cyto are the carbon densities for membranes and cytoplasm.
The radius of diatoms is a much more complex derivation, as we have a vacuole that takes up a volume fraction
of the total cell volume and two membranes (ﬁgure 4). Therefore this needs to be solved numerically, as
described in (Hansen & Visser, 2019). The diatom radius used for the model is taken from the code presented
in the appendix of Hansen & Visser (2019).
Page 11 of 62
==PAGE:13==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Cytoplasm- and membrane C:N ratios are assumed to be equal in both generalists and diatoms for simplicity.
This assumption is a simpliﬁcation, as membranes really have a higher C:N ratio than the cytoplasm (Raven,
1987). The assumption causes the total C:N ratio of diatoms and generalists to be equal, which becomes
convenient when describing predator-prey interactions.
The C:Si ratio of diatoms is calculated by dividing the silicon content of the shell by the total carbon mass
of the cell. The assumption here is that silicon is only found in the shell, and that there is no carbon in the
silica shell. The silicon content of the shell is found by multiplying the volume of the shell by the silicon
density of the shell, as done in Hansen & Visser (2019).
2.1.2
Resource uptakes
The model is built up describing the uptake of necessary resources in terms of mass ﬂuxes, and taking the
costs of metabolism and uptake of resources into account. Below follows a description of the details of the
model.
The uptake of resource X follows a type II functional response (Kiørboe, 2008), and is described as:
JX = ϵX
Jmax
RC:X
AXX
Jmax
RC:X + AXX
(2)
where ϵX is the uptake eﬃciency, AX is the aﬃnity for the given resource, RC:X is the cell content ratio
between carbon and the resource. Jmax is the maximum uptake ﬂux which is proportional to the mass of
the cytoplasm mass (including organelles) given by
Jmax = αmaxmcyto
(3)
where αmax is the maximum synthesis rate and mcyto is the cytoplasm mass.
The cell takes up nutrients through the outer membrane, which leads to depletion of nutrients near the cell
surface. Therefore the aﬃnity for diﬀusive uptake is limited by the rate molecules are transported to the
cell through diﬀusion, rather than the actual surface area of the cell (Kiørboe, 2008). The nutrient uptake
of the cell can thus be described as a perfect absorbing sphere, and then we can formulate the aﬃnity to
nutrient uptake:
AN = ASi = ADOC = 4πγr · 10−3
(4)
where γ is the diﬀusivity [m2/d] and r is the equivalent spherical radius of the cell [µm]. 10−3 is a conversion
factor for the unit of AX to be [l/d].
The aﬃnity for light scales with the cross section area of the cell (Chakraborty et al., 2017; Morel & Bricaud,
1981), i.e. a combination of the radius, and is also dependent on the degree of vacuolation. For a larger
vacuole fraction the cell can utilize more sunlight, due to less self shading, meaning that chloroplasts near
the cell wall are reducing light for chloroplasts farther inside the cell. The aﬃnity for light then becomes:
AL = cLπr2{1 −exp[−κφLr(1 −v)]}
(5)
Page 12 of 62
==PAGE:14==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
where cL is the photosynthetic quantum yield, r is the equivalent spherical radius of the cell, κ is the
absorption coeﬃcient of the cell for a given investment in photosynthesis, φL = 0.5. The investment in
photosynthesis, φL = 0.5, means that half of the cell’s biomass is allocated to photoharvesting. κφL ∼0.1
when φL = 0.5 (Raven, 1984). v is the vacuole volume fraction, and for generalists v = 0 (Hansen & Visser,
2019).
Generalist mixotrophs perform phagotrophy as an additional source of resources. The aﬃnity for food scale
with carbon mass (Kiørboe & Hirst, 2014)
AF = αFm
(6)
where αF is a scaling factor determined from the data analysis of Kiørboe & Hirst (2014).
A respiration rate is introduced as a fraction of Jmax
JR = cRJmax
(7)
but additional respiratory costs linked to diﬀerent uptake processes are also added to the respiration.
2.1.3
Flux balance and Liebig’s law of the minimum
Before determining the growth rate from the uptake ﬂuxes, we need to go through a regulation process. The
uptake of nitrogen and silicon is down-regulated so that it corresponds to the net carbon uptake stochiomet-
rically. However, if the uptake is either nitrogen- or silicon limited this will not lead to a stochiometrically
balanced uptake, which is why Liebig’s Law of the minimum is applied. Liebigs’s law of the minimum states
that the growth is dependent on the most limiting resource (de Baar, 1994). These processes is illustrated
in ﬁgure 5, and the implementation is described in detail below.
Page 13 of 62
==PAGE:15==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Figure 5: Illustration of the uptake and down-regulation processes in the cell. Full lines represent carbon, dashed
lines represent nitrogen and dotted lines represent silicon. The white triangles represent the functional responses of
the uptakes, and the grey triangles represent the down-regulation of nitrogen and silicon uptake. Finally, we apply
Liebig’s Law to the net uptake of the three resources to determine the growth rate (g). Any surplus uptakes leak out
of the cell after applying Liebig’s Law.
We can deﬁne the eﬀective carbon uptake ﬂux for diatoms if limited by one of the three resources:
JC.tot,D = JL,D(1 −βL) + JDOC,D(1 −βDOC) −θN,DJN,DβN −θSi,DJSi,DβSi −JR,D
(8)
JN.tot,D = θN,DJN,DRC:N
(9)
JSi.tot,D = θSi,DJSi,DRC:Si
(10)
where βX is the respiratory cost of taking up resource X, and maintaining the machinery for the uptake.
θN,D and θSi,D are factors that are adjusted to avoid surplus uptake of N and Si, and θN,D, θSi,D ∈[0 : 1].
Thus we assume co-limitation of the resources. Using the assumption of co-limitation allows us to set the
equations equal to each other and solve for θN,D and θSi,D.
JL,D(1 −βL) + JDOC,D(1 −βDOC) −θN,DJN,DβN −θSi,DJSi,DβSi −JR,D = θN,DJN,DRC:N
(11)
Page 14 of 62
==PAGE:16==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
θN,DJN,DRC:N
= θSi,DJSi,DRC:Si
(12)
Solving for θN and θSi gives
θN,D = max
"
0, min
(
1, JL,D(1 −βL) + JDOC,D(1 −βDOC)
JN,DRC:N(1 +
βN
RC:N +
βSi
RC:Si )
)#
θSi,D = max
"
0, min
(
1, JL,D(1 −βL) + JDOC,D(1 −βDOC)
JSi,DRC:Si(1 +
βN
RC:N +
βSi
RC:Si )
)#
(13)
Inserting these values of θN,D and θSi,D into the set of equations 8-10 will then make JC.tot,D, JN.tot,D and
JSi.tot,D equal. However, this is only the case when the uptake is carbon limited. If e.g. θN,D = 1 this means
that the uptake is limited by N and is therefore maximized. Then θSi,D should be determined based on
JN.tot,D instead. When the uptake is limited by Si it is of course θN,D that is determined by JSi.tot,D. The
new expressions for θN,D and θSi,D then become:
θ′
N,D = 1
θ′
Si,D = max

0, min

1, JN,DRC:N
JSi,DRC:Si

(14)
if N-limited, and
θ′′
N,D = max

0, min

1, JSi,DRC:Si
JN,DRC:N

θ′′
Si,D = 1
(15)
if Si-limited.
When the uptake is limited by Si or N the uptakes in equations 8-10 are not balanced anymore. There are
two reasons for this. First, we have imposed the restriction that θN,D and θSi,D are in the range [0 : 1], which
won’t be suﬃcient under N- or Si-limiting conditions (the factors might be greater than one). Second, there
is no factor adjusting the carbon uptakes which makes JC.tot,D diﬀer from JN.tot,D and JSi.tot,D.
It is also possible that both the Si and the N uptake needs to be maximised at the same time (θN,D = 1 and
θSi,D = 1). This is also due to the imposed range of the adjustment factors. In this case you need to ﬁgure
out which resource is the most limiting. To ﬁgure out whether to use the adjustment factors from equation
14 or equation 15, all you need to do is to choose the adjustment factors where only one of them is one. For
example: when N is limiting the uptake both θ′′
N,D = 1 and θ′′
Si,D = 1, and therefore θ′
N,D and θ′
Si,D will be
used.
Now that we have found the adjustment factors for the uptake ﬂuxes, we use Liebig’s law of the minimum
to determine the total carbon uptake ﬂux for diatoms.
Jtot,D = min{JC.tot,D, JN.tot,D, JSi.tot,D}
(16)
Page 15 of 62
==PAGE:17==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
The same procedure of ﬂux balance is performed for generalists, although it becomes much simpler as there
are only two resources. The eﬀective carbon uptake ﬂux for generalists can be determined from the following
set of equations.
JC.tot,G = JL,G(1 −βL) + JF,G(1 −βF) + JDOC,G(1 −βDOC) −θN,GJN,GβN −JR,G
(17)
JN.tot,G = θN,GJN,GRC:N + JF,G
(18)
where θN,G ∈[0 : 1]. If we set these equations equal to each other and isolate θN,G we get
θN,G = max

0, min

1, JL,G(1 −βL) + JDOC,G(1 −βDOC) −JF,GβF −JR,G
JN,G(RC:N + βN)

(19)
Inserting θN,G into equations 17 and 18 gives the carbon uptake under carbon- and nitrogen limited condi-
tions. We now use Liebig’s law of the minimum to determine the total carbon uptake ﬂux for generalists:
Jtot,G = min{JC.tot,G, JN.tot,G}
(20)
Jtot,D and Jtot,G now determines the carbon equivalent uptake ﬂux, and from this we can determine the
growth rate of the population by dividing by the cell mass
gD = Jtot,D/mD
gG = Jtot,G/mG
(21)
2.1.4
Losses and leakages
As Jtot,D and Jtot,G are set by the minimum uptake of one of the resources, this causes leakage of all
resources but the limiting. Also, the uptake ﬂuxes as deﬁned in equation 2 have an eﬃciency term ϵX which
also causes a loss to the environment from the uptake. This aﬀects photoharvesting(carbon leakage) and
food uptake(carbon and nitrogen leakage).
To limit the carbon leakage due to Liebig’s law the photoharvesting needs to be down-regulated.
The
down-regulation of photo harvesting assures that no excess carbon comes from photoharvesting. The basic
assumption here is that respiratory costs and growth should as far as possible be covered by other carbon
sources, i.e. DOC and food uptake. The down-regulated photo-harvesting then becomes
JL.real,D = min

JL,D, max

0, Jtot,D + JR,D + θSi,DJSi,DβSi + θN,DJN,DβN −JDOC,D(1 −βDOC)
1 −βL

(22)
JL.real,G = min

JL,G, max

0, Jtot,G + JR,G + θN,GJN,GβN −JF,G(1 −βF) −JDOC,G(1 −βDOC)
1 −βL

(23)
Page 16 of 62
==PAGE:18==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Now we can use JL.real to calculate the carbon loss from ineﬃcient photoharvesting and feeding, and from
leakage due to Liebig’s law of the minimum
JC.loss,D =
(1 −ϵL)JL.real,D
ϵL
|
{z
}
Loss from photoharvesting
+ max{0, JC.tot,D −JL,D −Jtot,D}
|
{z
}
Leakage due to Liebig′s law
(24)
JC.loss,G =
(1 −ϵL)JL.real,G
ϵL
|
{z
}
Loss from photoharvesting
+
(1 −ϵF)JF,G
ϵF
|
{z
}
Loss from sloppy feeding
+ max{0, JC.tot,G −JL,G −Jtot,G}
|
{z
}
Leakage due to Liebig′s law
(25)
The nitrogen losses and leakages are
JN.loss,D =
max{0, JN,D −Jtot,D
RC:N
|
{z
}
Leakage due to Liebig′s law
}
(26)
JN.loss,G = max{0, JN,G + JF,G
RC:N
−Jtot,G
RC:N
|
{z
}
Leakage due to Liebig′s law
} +
(1 −ϵF) JF,G
ϵFRC:N
|
{z
}
Loss from sloppy feeding
(27)
2.1.5
Predator-prey interactions and mortality
Generalists perform phagotrophy if there is prey of a preferred size. The prey can be both generalists and
diatoms. In the model, this is described by a size preference function.
Size preference for generalist of size i feeding on size j:
φ(ri, rj) = P exp
−ln2(βri/rj)
σ

(28)
where β is the preferred prey/predator size ratio, σ is the standard deviation of the size preference, ri and
rj is the equivalent spherical radius of the predator(i) and prey(j), and P is the paletability of the prey.
The paletability is a crude way of introducing the additional protection provided by the silica shell of the
diatoms. P = 1 for generalists and P = 0.5 for diatoms.
From this we can calculate the available food for size i:
Fi =
X
j
(φ(ri, rj)Gj + φ(ri, rj)Dj)
(29)
where G and D are the biomass of generalists and diatoms. We can also ﬁnd out how much is eaten of size
j:
ED.j =
X
i
JF.i
ϵF
Gi
mi
φ(ri, rj)Dj
Fi
(30)
EG.j =
X
i
JF.i
ϵF
Gi
mi
φ(ri, rj)Gj
Fi
(31)
Page 17 of 62
==PAGE:19==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
From this we can take the biomass of the prey outside the sum and divide by the biomass to get the predation
mortality rate:
µp,j =
X
i
JF.i
ϵF
Gi
mi
φ(ri, rj)
Fi
(32)
A mortality term that represents predation from higher trophic levels, µHTL is also introduced. This acts on
the size classes larger than or equal to the largest prey size in the system, and is quadratic to ensure that the
level of predation reaches a suitable level compared to the ”internal” predation. The minimum size aﬀected
by predation from higher trophic levels is deﬁned as
rHTL = β max(ri)
(33)
where β still is the preferred prey/predator size ratio and max(ri) is the radius of the largest predator.
In addition to µp and µHTL, there is also a quadratic mortality term, µ2 that represent mortality due to
virulysis.
2.1.6
Temperature eﬀects
Temperature is accounted for the same way as described in Serra-Pompei et al. (2019), where rates are
multiplied by a Q10 function:
JX = JXQ(T/10−1)
10
(34)
Serra-Pompei et al. (2019) argues that diﬀusive uptakes are proportional to molecular diﬀusion, which is
proportional to viscosity. Viscosity of seawater is doubled over a 20 degree temperature span, which leads
to Q10 = 1.5 for diﬀusive uptakes. Based on literature, Q10 = 2 for respiration rate and maximum synthesis
rates. All other rates are argued to be unaﬀected by temperature, for photosynthesis based on literature, and
for predator prey interactions (food uptake) due to lack of empirical estimates of the temperature scaling.
Page 18 of 62
==PAGE:20==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
2.1.7
Governing equations
The following set of equation describes the dynamics of the ecosystem, where subscript i indicates a speciﬁc
size class of either generalists or diatoms.
dGi
dt = [gG,i −(µp.G,i + µ2Gi + µHTL.G,iGi)] Gi
(35)
dDi
dt = [gD,i −(µp.D,i + µ2Di + µHTL.D,iDi)] Di
(36)
dN
dt =
X
i
(JN.loss,G,i −JN,G,i) Gi
mG,i
+
X
i
(JN.loss,D,i −JN,D,i) Di
mD,i
+ ϵremin
P
RC:N
(37)
dXDOC
dt
=
X
i
(JDOC.loss,G,i −JDOC,G,i) Gi
mG,i
+
X
i
(JDOC.loss,D,i −JDOC,D,i) Di
mD,i
+ ϵreminP
(38)
dXSi
dt
=
X
i
µp.D,i −gD,i
RC:Si,i
 Di
mD,i
+ ϵremin
X
i
µHTL.D,iD2
i
RC:SimD,i
(39)
where P is particulate organic matter (POM). The losses to higher trophic levels and to virulysis go into
the pool of POM, where a fraction of it, ϵremin, may be remineralized. This is, however, turned oﬀin the
models that are run throughout this thesis, i.e. ϵremin = 0. For silicon, it is formulated diﬀerently. Here the
assumption is that silicon dissolve quickly, and is not ingested, so therefore it goes directly back into the
pool (equation 39).
Table 1: Important parameters and constants used in the model.
Table 1.
Symbol
Description
Value and unit
Note/reference
G
Generalist biomass
µg C l−1
D
Diatom biomass
µg C l−1
N
Inorganic Nitrogen concentration
µgN l−1
XSi
Silicon concentration
µg Si l−1
XDOC
Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration µg Cl−1
mG
Generalist cell carbon mass
µg C
mD
Diatom cell carbon mass
µg C
mcyto
Cytoplasm carbon mass
µg C
mmem
Membrane carbon mass
µg C
v
vacuole volume fraction (diatoms)
0.6
RC:N
C:N ratio of cell
6:1
RC:Si
C:Si ratio of cell
(varying) µg C µg Si−1
Uptakes
and synthesis
JX
Uptake of resource X
µg X d−1
Jmax
Maximum uptake
µg C d−1
JR
Respiration
µg C d−1
αmax
Maximum synthesis rate
d−1
cR
basal respiration fraction of Jmax
0.05
ϵL
Uptake eﬃciency for photosynthesis
0.8
Continues...
Page 19 of 62
==PAGE:21==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Table 1. Continued
Symbol
Description
Value and unit
Note/reference
ϵF
Assimilation eﬃciency for phagotrophy
0.8
AL
Aﬃnity for light
µg C d−1 (W m2)−1
equation 5
Hansen & Visser (2019)
AN
Aﬃnity for nitrogen
l d−1
equation 4
ASi
Aﬃnity for silicon
l d−1
equation 4
ADOC
Aﬃnity for DOC
l d−1
equation 4
AF
Aﬃnity for food
µg C d−1
equation 6
cL
Quantum yield of photosynthesis
2.5 · 10−7 µg C d−1 (W m2)−1m−2
(0.0479 µmol C µE−1)
φL
Cell investment in photosynthesis
0.5
Chakraborty et al. (2017)
Raven (1984)
κ
Light absorption coeﬃcient
0.2µm−1
Hansen & Visser (2019)
Morel & Bricaud (1981)
Raven (1984)
γ
Diﬀusivity
1.62·10−4m2d−1
Hansen & Visser (2019)
JC.tot
Max. net carbon uptake
µg C d−1
equations 8 and 17
JN.tot
Max. nitrogen uptake (carbon equivalent)
µg C d−1
equations 9 and 18
JSi.tot
Max. silicon uptake (carbon equivalent)
µg C d−1
equation 10
Jtot
Total carbon uptake
µg C d−1
equations 16 and 20
g
Growth rate
d−1
equation 21
βL
Cost of photosynthesis
0.35 µg C µg C−1
Berge et al. (2017)
βDOC
Cost of DOC uptake
0.35 µg C µg C−1
βN
Cost of nitrogen uptake and synthesis
3 µg C µg N−1
Berge et al. (2017)
βSi
Cost of silicon uptake and siliciﬁcation
1.05 µg C µg Si−1
Hansen & Visser (2019)
βF
Cost of food uptake and synthesis
0.35 µg C µg C−1
θN
Nitrogen reduction factor
0 ≤θN ≤1
θSi
Silicon reduction factor
0 ≤θSi ≤1
JL.real
Downregulated photoharvesting
µg C d−1
equations 22 and 23
JC.loss
Carbon leakage from uptakes
µg C d−1
equations 24 and 25
JN.loss
Nitrogen leakage from uptakes
µg N d−1
equations 26 and 27
P
Paletability
0.5 for diatoms, 1 for generalists
F
Available food (for phagotrophy)
µg C l−1
equation 29
φ
Prey size preference
equation 28
Mortality
µp
Predation mortality (internal)
d−1
equation 32
µHTL
Predation mortality (Higher trophic levels)
0.0032 d−1 (µg C l−1)−1 (diat.)
0.0064 d−1 (µg C l−1)−1 (gen.)
µ2
Mortality from virulysis
0.0032 d−1 (µg C l−1)−1
Chemostat setup
d
Diﬀusion rate
d−1
N0
Baseline concentration of nitrogen
150µg N l−1
XSi,0
Baseline concentration of silicon
500µg Si l−1
Page 20 of 62
==PAGE:22==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
2.2
0D model - Chemostat
In order to see the model dynamics under diﬀerent conditions, and also to validate that the model is doing
what it is supposed to, it was run in a 0D setup using a chemostat formulation. The chemostat can be
seen as a closed box where plankton take up nitrogen, silica and DOC, and have predator-prey interaction.
Nitrogen and silica have ﬁxed baseline values outside the box, and enters/leaves the box through diﬀusion
at a diﬀusion rate d. The baseline value of DOC is zero, which is why DOC is only leaking out of the box.
Plankton are unaﬀected by diﬀusion, but biomass can be removed from the system through virulysis(µ2)
and higher trophic level predation(µHTL). Light and temperature are ﬁxed for each run of the chemostat
model, but may be changed between runs. A sketch of the chemostat setup is seen in ﬁgure 6. The setup is a
simple simulation of the top layer of a watercolumn, where the baseline concentrations of nitrogen and silica
describes the nutrient concentrations below the productive layer. The diﬀusion rate then becomes a measure
of the degree of mixing, i.e. if the conditions are stratiﬁed or mixed, which then determines the supply of
nutrients from deeper ocean layers. For the chemostat setup the governing equations are slightly modiﬁed
to include the diﬀusion by adding diﬀusion terms to equations 37-39. The diﬀusion terms are; d(N0 −N)
for equation 37, −dXDOC for equation 38 and d(XSi,0 −XSi) for equation 39.
Figure 6: Sketch of the chemostat setup for the model. Nitrogen, silica and DOC enter/leave the 0D box through
diﬀusion (blue arrows). Plankton biomass leave the box due to virulysis and predation from higher trophic levels
(red arrows).
Page 21 of 62
==PAGE:23==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
2.2.1
Numerical tests
In order to test the model two numerical tests were carried out. The ﬁrst test was to make sure that the total
amount of prey eaten by the mixotrophs correspond to the amount of biomass lost from internal predation.
This is done through the following equation for each time step:
COMpred.−mort. =
X
i
JF,i
ϵF
Gi
mG,i
−
X
j
µp.D,jDj −
X
j
µp.G,jGj
(40)
The other test was to check for conservation of mass. This was done by comparing the nitrogen equivalent
of the change in generalist and diatom biomass to the change in the nitrate pool, plus the total biomass lost
due to virulysis and predation from higher trophic levels at each time step:
COMN =
X
i
dGi/RC:N
dt
+
X
i
dDi/RC:N
dt
+ dN
dt +
X
i

µ2(G2
i + D2
i ) + µHTL.G,i
G2
i
RC:N
+ µHTL.D,i
D2
i
RC:N

(41)
The results of the tests are seen in ﬁgure 7. Both tests show that the model is consistent to near machine
precision.
Figure 7: Left: Amount of prey eaten minus the predation loss. Biomass is conserved to near machine precision.
Right: Conservation of mass. Nitrogen is conserved to near machine precision.
2.3
Global model
Running a marine ecosystem model in a global context using a Global Circulation Model (GCM) demands
a lot of computational power. Therefore, in order to put the model into a global circulation, I have used a
computational framework called the Transport Matrix Method (TMM) (Khatiwala et al., 2005; Khatiwala,
2007), which makes it possible to run simulations with global circulation on a laptop.
Page 22 of 62
==PAGE:24==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
2.3.1
Transport Matrix Method
I have previously carried out a special course during the fall of 2018, where a co-student and I looked into
the TMM framework. Here, we presented the method quite thoroughly in a report (Almgren & Kiaer, 2018),
which is why it will only be brieﬂy presented here.
The idea of the TMM framework is that the discrete transport from a GCM can be written as a sparse
matrix, A. Then the transport of a concentration ﬁeld c may be written as:
dc
dt = A(t)c + q(t)
(42)
where A(t) is the transport matrix, c is a vector representation of the 3D concentration ﬁeld and q(t) is a
source/reaction term. It is in q that the ecosystem interactions take place.
The transport matrix (TM) is constructed empirically from a GCM by:
1. inserting a probe concentration of 1 in a single grid cell of c
2. calculate one time step in the GCM
3. store the resulting concentration ﬁeld
4. reinitialize the concentration ﬁeld to 1 in the same grid cell and step forward in time again
5. repeat the procedure for a pre-deﬁned period of time, e.g. a month or a year
6. save the average transport as a column in the transport matrix (A)
7. repeat for all grid cells
The time period covered by the TM depends on the needs of the modelling application. In this thesis, where
the modelling application is an ecosystem model, it is important to include seasonality. Then the speciﬁed
time period is one month, and to do model simulations covering a whole year, 12 diﬀerent TM’s are needed.
This is the general principle of the TMM.
GCMs normally use explicit time stepping for horizontal transport and implicit time stepping for vertical
transport in order ensure stability while using larger time steps (Khatiwala, 2007). Therefore two separate
TM’s are needed; one for explicit transport, Ae and one for implicit transport, Ai. The discrete transport
then becomes:
cn+1 = Ai
n(Ae
ncn + qn)
(43)
where superscript n denotes the discrete time step.
The transport matrices used for this thesis are downloaded for free from github.com/samarkhatiwala/tmm
and are based on the MITgcm2.8 (Dutkiewicz et al., 2005) with 2.8 degrees horizontal resolution and 15
depth layers.
Page 23 of 62
==PAGE:25==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
These TM’s have a smallest possible time step of 12h. This is not suﬃcient for ecosystem interactions, which
is why time stepping occurs in two steps.
• Run 0D ecosystem model in each grid cell for 12h
• Transport the resulting concentrations using equation 43
Also, due to the numerical scheme of the GCM, there are some numerical instabilities stored in the transport
matrices. This is an artefact coming from the steep gradients when inserting probe concentrations in the
construction of the TMs. This may turn up as ”negative transport” which in turn may result in negative
concentrations. This is something we would like to avoid, ﬁrst of all because a negative concentration is
impossible, and second of all because the equations of the ecosystem model is not constructed to handle
negative concentrations.
This is handled by reversing the transport in the cells where it is negative, by modifying the TMs. This way
we manage to ensure both conservation of mass and positive transport. To do this we ﬁrst ﬁnd the negative
oﬀ-diagonals of the TM
Nij =
(
0
if i = j or Aij ≥0
Aij
if i ̸= j and Aij < 0
(44)
Then we move the negative oﬀdiagonals to their transpose and change sign
A′
ij = Aij −Nij + (−N⊺
ij)
(45)
To obtain mass balance after reversing the negative transport, we need to compensate for this on the diagonals
by adding the sum of both rows and columns of N for each diagonal element
Aij =
(
A′ij + P
k Nkj + P
k Nik
if i = j
A′ij
if i ̸= j
(46)
2.3.2
Global model setup
In order to get reasonable initial conditions for the global model, observed annual mean concentrations of
nitrate and silicate were downloaded from the World Ocean Atlas (WOA) (Garcia et al., 2019). The concen-
trations were then interpolated to ﬁt the grid of the TMs. Even though the coverage of the observations is
very sparse, it still gives a better estimate of the concentration levels than an arbitrarily chosen concentration
would give.
In order to include the eﬀect of temperature, monthly average temperature ﬁelds were also downloaded from
WOA (Locarnini et al., 2019) and interpolated to ﬁt the model grid.
Page 24 of 62
==PAGE:26==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Light is deﬁned as a function of latitude, time of year and depth as in K. H. Andersen (unpublished) inspired
by Evans & Parslow (1985):
L = L0 exp(−0.1z)

1 −A sin
 π
180ϕ

cos
 2π
365t

(47)
where L0 = 300Wm−2 and A = 0.8 are properties that set the amplitude and magnitude of the function, z
is depth, ϕ is latitude and t is time of the year. Light irradiance at the surface for all latitudes and times of
year, and light attenuation with depth is illustrated in ﬁgure 8
Figure 8: Left: Light as function of time and latitude. Right: Light as function of depth.
All plankton were initialized with a concentration of 0.1µgC/l in the top 170m of the ocean and zero
concentrations in the layers below (depth>= 290m). This choice was made to reduce computational power,
as this roughly corresponds to the maximum depth of the photic zone and almost no growth would occur at
these depths due to light limitation. Therefore any initial concentrations of plankton would slowly disappear
anyways. Also, the growth and predation terms in the governing equations (equations 35-39) are ignored
below a depth of 300m for the same reason, to increase computational speed and to speed up convergence.
As mentioned in the previous section, physical transport and ecosystem interactions are time stepped sepa-
rately. The ecosystem interactions are solved for 12h at the time using the MatLab ODE-solver ode23.
During the ﬁrst test runs of the global model setup, computational time was very long. This led to the
decision to exclude DOC from the model, which improved the computational time a lot. The reason for this
might be that concentrations of DOC were very low some places, which caused very small time steps in the
ODE-solver. Therefore the global results does not include the uptake of DOC as an additional source of
organic carbon.
Page 25 of 62
==PAGE:27==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
2.3.3
Convergence test
The global model setup was run for 6 years. In order to investigate the convergence of the model each
year after the ﬁrst year were compared to the previous year. The mean absolute diﬀerence compared to
the previous year for silica, nitrate, generalists and diatoms is shown in ﬁgure 9. It is seen that the year to
year diﬀerence is reduced very slowly in the last years, at least for generalists and diatoms. This makes me
conclude that the gains of running the model further is not proportional to the eﬀort of running the model,
as each year of simulation takes ∼8h, and therefore the model is considered to be approximately converged.
Figure 9: Diﬀerence between concentrations during one year compared to the previous year. What is shown is the
mean absolute diﬀerence from year to year, and the result indicates that the model is converging.
3
Results
3.1
0D model - Chemostat
The role of the chemostat setup, except for validation purposes, is to see how the model performs under
diﬀerent conditions. To investigate this, I have run the model under varying conditions. In order to get
a better overview over the results I have chosen to group the eight size-classes into the sub groups pico-
(r < 2µm), nano- (2µm< r < 20µm) and microplankton (r > 20µm) and present the mean concentration
within these size groups when the model has converged.
I have looked at the converged results during varying diﬀusion rate and light conditions. The diﬀusion rate
is heavily linked to the nutrient levels, as this is what sets the re-supply of nutrients when they are taken
up. Thus, high diﬀusion rate corresponds to high nutrient levels and vice versa. The ranges are chosen to
cover a large, realistic spectrum, and the results are seen in ﬁgure 10.
Starting with pico plankton it is seen that they are able to survive under any condition apart from the
complete absence of light or nutrients. It is also seen that pico diatoms are superior to pico generalists,
Page 26 of 62
==PAGE:28==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
roughly by a factor 2. This can be explained from the model formulation by looking at the paletability
factor in equation 28, which is chosen so that the protection from having a hard silica shell reduces the
predation pressure by a factor 0.5. This also suggests that pico plankton is top-down regulated, meaning
that the growth is limited by the predation pressure rather than resource limitation - which is denoted
bottom-up regulated.
Looking at nano- and micro plankton it is seen that they get increasingly nutrient limited with size. This
is especially seen for diatoms. This can be explained from the mass speciﬁc nutrient aﬃnity, i.e. equation 4
divided by the cell mass, which is decreasing with size. This is because mass is proportional to volume and
thus r ∝m1/3. Therefore the mass speciﬁc aﬃnity for nutrients will be proportional to m−2/3. However,
generalists compensate for the nutrient limitation through phagotrophy which provides additional nutrient,
allowing cells to survive under low nutrient conditions through trophic transfer.
The micro generalists
show lower concentrations than the nano generalists, which suggests that the larger they get, they become
increasingly dependent on phagotrophy as their primary source of resources. The nano- and micro plankton
can then be seen as bottom-up regulated.
(a) Diatoms
(b) Generalists
Figure 10: Generalist and diatom concentrations under diﬀerent diﬀusion rates and light conditions divided into size
groups pico- (r < 2µm), nano- (2µm< r < 20µm) and microplankton (r > 20µm).
Page 27 of 62
==PAGE:29==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
In order to get more details and to illustrate the eﬀect of temperature, I have chosen two extreme cases
to analyze more thoroughly. The ﬁrst case represents a temperate environment where the temperature is
5◦C, diﬀusion rate is high (mixed condition) and light is low. This could correspond to a spring bloom
situation in a temperate region, e.g. the North Atlantic at around the latitude of Denmark. Figure 11
shows the mass speciﬁc rates and the biomass for the diﬀerent size classes. Full lines represent generalists
and dashed lines are diatoms.
Starting with the top left ﬁgure this illustrates photoharvesting(JL) and
downregulated photoharvesting (JL.real). These two rates shows how dependent of photosynthesis as carbon
source each size class is. For small cell sizes photoharvesting is downregulated, but for diatoms this is not
the case for increasing sizes. The explanation for this is found in the top right ﬁgure, where the DOC is a
carbon source for the smaller size classes. When DOC uptake goes down, photoharvesting becomes the only
carbon source for diatoms, and thus the large diatoms in this case seem to be carbon limited. Generalists
are able to downregulate photoharvesting at all size classes, as the larger cell sizes are able to take up
carbon and nitrogen through phagotrophy as well. Looking at the bottom ﬁgures we are able to conﬁrm
that the predation pressure is a viable explanation for the diatom dominance among the smaller cells, and
that phagotrophy as additional source of nitrogen and carbon leads to generalist dominance among larger
cells. It should be noted that even though the conditions can be argued to correspond to a spring bloom
environment, these results are illustrating a steady state solution, while a spring bloom is under constant
change.
Page 28 of 62
==PAGE:30==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
(a) Photoharvesting and down-regulated photoharvest-
ing.
(b) Uptakes from diﬀusion and phagotrophy.
(c) Respiration and mortality.
(d) Biomass.
Figure 11: Mass speciﬁc rates in a temperate environment.
T=5◦C, d=0.5d−1, L=40W m−2.
Generalists are
illustrated with full lines and diatoms with dashed lines. Grey lines in the top panels are growthrates (equation 21).
The second case represents a tropical environment where the temperature is 25◦C, diﬀusion rate is low
(stratiﬁed condition) and light is high, e.g. the North Atlantic near the latitude of North Africa. This is
illustrated in ﬁgure 12. These stratiﬁed conditions lead to low nutrient levels, which favours the smaller size
classes. As seen from the top left ﬁgure carbon uptake is not the issue in this case, as the photoharvesting
is downregulated for all size classes. Instead, the nutrients are the limiting factor, which is why we see
that the small size classes are able to survive. We also see the eﬀect of trophic transfer in the generalist
biomass, as larger sizes of generalists can survive through phagotrophy. Looking at the scaling of uptakes
and respiration, we see the eﬀect of temperature corrections. There is 20◦C temperature diﬀerence between
ﬁgure 11 and 12, and respiration is seen to be 4 times higher in the tropic environment as it should with
Q10 = 2.
Page 29 of 62
==PAGE:31==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
(a) Photoharvesting and down-regulated photoharvest-
ing.
(b) Uptakes from diﬀusion and phagotrophy.
(c) Zoom of b).
(d) Respiration and mortality.
(e) Biomass.
Figure 12: Mass speciﬁc rates in a tropical environment.
T=25◦C, d=0.1d−1, L=300W m−2.
Generalists are
illustrated with full lines and diatoms with dashed lines. Grey lines in the top panels are growthrates (equation 21).
3.2
Global model
To be able to get an overview over the global results, they are visualized in a number of ways to get as much
information as possible in as few plots as possible. As size is considered a main trait, the ﬁrst results only
consider size and not whether it is generalists or diatoms. Further, the eight size classes of each plankton
clade has been divided into the broader size classes pico-, nano- and micro plankton, just as in the 0D results.
Page 30 of 62
==PAGE:32==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Figure 13: Mean biomass within the three size classes pico- (r < 2µm), nano- (2µm< r < 20µm) and micro plankton
(r > 20µm) for four seasons represented by February (top panel), May (second panel), August (third panel), November
(bottom panel). Please note that the colorbar of nano plankton has a diﬀerent scaling than the other two.
The result in terms of size classes is seen in ﬁgure 13, where monthly mean concentrations for February, May,
August and November are shown. These months are chosen to represent diﬀerent seasonal patterns. Starting
by the equator, we see rather steady concentrations, dominated by pico- and nano plankton. Looking towards
mid-latitudes and polar regions the seasonal succession is clear. In the northern hemisphere there are small
concentrations in February, that increase a lot in May for all size classes. Then in August there is a decline
of nano- and micro plankton, while pico plankton become more abundant. In November nano- and micro
Page 31 of 62
==PAGE:33==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
plankton return, though with a weaker signal than during the spring, to again decline when we are back in
February. For the southern hemisphere we see the same pattern, only lagged by half a year. Starting in
August we see the weakest concentrations, which are heavily increased in November, followed by a further
increase of pico plankton, and a decline in nano- and micro plankton in February. Then we see a small
increase in nano plankton in May before we return to the winter minimum in August. Further, it is seen
that nano plankton are by far the most abundant size bin.
A more general tendency is seen in ﬁgure 14, where the annual mean cell size is presented. Larger cell size
is seen in the polar- and sub-polar regions, and smaller towards the equator.
Figure 14: Annual mean cell size.
Page 32 of 62
==PAGE:34==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Figure 15: Diatom fraction of total biomass.
(a)
Observed annual mean silicon concentrations from
World Ocean Atlas.(Garcia et al., 2019)
(b) Annual mean silicon concentrations from the model.
Figure 16: Comparison between the silicon concentration observed in the ocean and the emerging silicon concentration
in the model.
Figure 15 illustrates how large a fraction of the total plankton biomass that are diatoms.
Here we see
that the spring blooms in May (northern hemisphere) and November (southern hemisphere) are dominated
Page 33 of 62
==PAGE:35==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
by diatoms. Around the equator the biomass seems to be rather equally divided between generalists and
diatoms. Finally we see that diatoms are present to some extent almost everywhere in the global oceans.
Figure 16 illustrates a comparison of observations and model result of the mean annual silicon content in
the surface ocean. The model, in general, displays higher concentrations than those observed, which is likely
to have an inﬂuence on the diatom abundance - indicating perhaps the importance of diatom sinking - a
feature not included in the model at present.
(a) Global model results.
(b) CPR data analysis
(Barton et al., 2013).
Figure 17: Comparison between the model results and CPR data analysis from Barton et al. (2013).
What is
compared is seasonal succession of the zonal mean abundance of plankton in the North Atlantic. ’Generalists’ in 17a
should be considered the combination of ’mix. dino.’ and ’het. dino.’ in 17b.
Figure 17 compares the model results to what Barton et al. (2013) found from their analysis of CPR data.
Page 34 of 62
==PAGE:36==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Note that the abundance from the CPR study (y-axis in ﬁgure 17b) doesn’t have units. In the paper, units
are speciﬁed as [#cells volume−1]. Through personal communication I have found out that the volume is
∼3m3, which is what I have used in 17a. The abundance is calculated by dividing biomass by the cell
carbon mass, and convert to the correct units. The zonal mean abundance is a weighted average.
4
Discussion
Looking at the seasonal patterns emerging from ﬁgure 13 they correspond well to what would be expected
from the understanding of plankton biogeographies. Seasonality occurs mainly in mid- and high latitudes as
might be expected, and ﬁgure 15 also show the expected diatom dominance in the spring bloom situations.
We also see the tendency towards smaller cell size near the equator, and that plankton are most abundant in
the upwelling areas; polar regions, eastern boundary upwelling and equatorial upwelling. Both ﬁgure 13 and
14 also conﬁrm that larger cells tend towards the polar regions, but also within non-polar regions, relatively
larger cells are seen in the eastern boundary upwelling areas. The reason for these non-polar upwelling
regions showing smaller cell sizes than the polar regions can be explained by the temperature eﬀects on
maximum growthrate and respiration, as warmer waters creates a higher demand on nutrients and especially
carbon.
The results in 13 also show that nano plankton are dominating the oceans in terms of abundance. This
corresponds badly with the fact that the smaller an organism get, the more abundant it should be. A likely
explanation for this is the lack of DOC in the global model, as this is an increasingly important resource for
smaller sizes.
In my model, the Southern Ocean exhibits intense blooms during the austral spring and summer (ﬁgure
13). It should be noted, however, that these blooms are likely to be over estimated, as it is known to be
iron-limited rather than nitrogen limited, which is the basis of this model.
Looking at the comparison to the results of Barton et al. (2013) in ﬁgure 17 the similarities are not convincing.
The model results are a bit oﬀboth in terms of seasonal patterns and order of magnitude in the abundance.
While this is of course unsatisfying, there are some possible explanations. First of all, there might be some
error in the process of converting the concentrations from the model to the ”abundance” used in Barton et
al. (2013). Had there been more time for this project, I would have dug deeper into this. Further, there is the
possibility that the model doesn’t represent the ecosystem to that degree of detail. The spatial resolution of
the model is rather coarse, which might exclude important production areas, such as shelves and areas near
coasts. Then comes the number of size classes used in the model. The sampled size range of Barton et al.
(2013) leave us with four classes of diatoms and two classes of generalists in the model. Thus it is possible
that the optimal size for growth is not even represented on this scale. Then we have the uncertainty of the
biogeography study. As mentioned, I have had some correspondence with the corresponding author, Andrew
Barton, regarding the units of ”abundance”. He stressed that the results were very uncertain and said: ”I
personally would not recommend taking the CPR abundance values too literally, for example by comparing
magnitudes from CPR to models, satellite data, or other observations”. However, I believe that it is an
Page 35 of 62
==PAGE:37==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
interesting thing to include in this thesis anyways, as it underlines the diﬃculty in verifying the results of a
global ecosystem model.
Other results I would have wanted to include, but were hindered to due to lack of time, is some kind of index
describing mixotrophy. One idea for this is to investigate the width of size ranges occupying this trophic
strategy, in order to illustrate the importance of this in diﬀerent regions. A starting point for such an index
could be to multiply the fraction of the total carbon uptake that comes from food (JF/Jtot) by the fraction
that comes from light (JL.real/Jtot. This product will ideally present some bell-like curve representing the
mixotrophic strategy.
Finally, I would like to extract a measure for primary production. In a NPZ-type model primary production
is just the growth of phytoplankton, but having mixotrophy in the model makes things more complicated,
as the growth of mixotrophs is a combination of primary and secondary production. This can of course be
extracted from the model, but due to lack of time this has not been done.
4.1
Model setup and parameters
As the model is based on two diﬀerent previous models, it has been necessary to make a number of choices
with regards to function formulations and parametrizations. During the writing process I have also become
aware of minor ﬂaws of the model, and also some things I would like to formulate diﬀerently. These things
will now be addressed.
As described in section 2.1.1, the cell carbon mass and radius is calculated diﬀerently for generalists and
diatoms. Especially the formulation of the diatom radius, which is a very long numerically solved expression
for which I do not know the origin. The expression is taken from the original code for the diatom model
presented in Hansen & Visser (2019). Even though both formulations are based on the same assumptions,
it still is something I would like to change to increase transparency and to convince any user of the model
that the formulations are indeed the same. My suggestion for a new formulation is to deﬁne the total cell
carbon mass, m, and deﬁne the cell volume based on membrane thickness, h, and vacuole volume fraction,
v. Together with the carbon densities of cytoplasm and membranes we then obtain the equations:
mD = 4
3π([(v1/3rD + h)3 −(v1/3rD)3
|
{z
}
Inner membrane
+ r3
D −(rD −h)3
|
{z
}
Outer membrane
]ρC.mem + [(rD −h)1/3 −(v1/3rD + h)3
|
{z
}
Cytoplasm
]ρC.cyto) (48)
mG = 4
3π([r3
G −(rG −h)3
|
{z
}
Membrane
]ρC.mem + (rG −h)3
|
{z
}
Cytoplasm
ρC.cyto)
(49)
which can be solved numerically to ﬁnd rG and rD.
Another thing regarding the cells is that the C:N ratio of membranes and cytoplasm is assumed to be the
same, which isn’t the case in reality. Actually the C:N ratio of membranes is more than ﬁve times higher
than that of the cytoplasm (Raven, 1987), which causes the total C:N ratio to be higher than the simpliﬁed
Page 36 of 62
==PAGE:38==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
assumption. This will of course alter the carbon demands of the cells, especially in diatoms as they have
two membranes. In carbon limited situations diatoms get an unrealistic advantage in the model due to this,
while in nitrogen limited situations they get a disadvantage instead. The reason for the assumption was to
simplify the carbon/nutrient ﬂuxes during predator prey interactions, as one would have to take into account
the individual total C:N ratio when ingested. While the eﬀect of this is assumed to be small, due to the
small volume fraction of membranes, this is still something that may be implemented in the future.
Moving on to parameter choices, these have been chosen to be the same for generalists and diatoms in the
model. This is not necessarily true. For example, Hansen & Visser (2019) states that diatom growth rates
are higher in general compared to non-diatoms. Then one can argue that the maximum growth rate (Jmax
should be diﬀerent for diatoms and generalists. The Jmax used in the model comes from Hansen & Visser
(2019), so one can argue that it might be set lower for generalists. The same could be the case for other
parameters, but determining this would need a thorough literature review on the topic.
One set of parameters that deﬁnitely could use this kind of review is the acquisition costs: βL, βDOC, βN, βSi, βF.
These costs are subject to diﬀerent values and approaches in diﬀerent models. The values used in this model
come from Hansen & Visser (2019), and originally from Berge et al. (2017) and Werner (1977), and in table
2 these values are compared to the values of Chakraborty et al. (2017). There is an important diﬀerence
between the costs used in the two models. That is that the costs from Hansen & Visser (2019) include the
uptake cost and the maintenance cost of the necessary machinery. The values from Chakraborty et al. (2017)
only represent the uptake cost, and the maintenance costs are parametrized separately, and are proportional
to the investment in diﬀerent uptakes. As investments are not a part of this model framework I have chosen
to use the values from Hansen & Visser (2019), and for the missing values, βF and βDOC I have chosen to
put them equal to βL. Ideally, these values should also be based on literature, and βF should probably be
slightly higher considering that it involves both carbon and nitrogen uptake.
Table 2: Comparison of uptake costs in Hansen & Visser (2019) and Chakraborty et al. (2017)
Parameter
Hansen & Visser (2019)
Chakraborty et al. (2017)
βL
0.35 µg C µg C−1
0.08 µg C µg C−1
βN
3 µg C µg N−1
0.0141 µg C µg N−1
βF
-
0.08 µg C µg C−1
βDOC
-
-
βSi
1.05 µg C µg Si−1
-
Another feature that I would like to implement diﬀerently is down-regulation of photoharvesting described
in equations 22 and 23. The current formulation is only regulating the leakage of DOC from the cell. I would
rather include this in the ﬂux balance calculations (section 2.1.3) as an extra adjustment factor, θL. This
way the plankton avoids paying the cost of excess photoharvesting.
In the current model framework, remineralization of organic matter is not implemented. Even though there
is a remineralization term in equations 37-39, this is set to zero in the current model implementation. The
Page 37 of 62
==PAGE:39==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
reason for this is that it would skew the nutrient concentrations, as remineralization of organic matter would
largely occur where production occurs. Then export to deeper waters would not be represented, as sinking of
POM would then need to be included. However, this lack of remineralization will eventually lead to complete
depletion of nitrogen in the model oceans, as primary production acts as a sink, with no corresponding source.
There are a number of ways to handle this problem. The simplest way would be to implement a Martin curve
(Martin et al., 1987), which is a power law function describing nutrient regeneration at diﬀerent depths based
on POM input in the surface ocean. POM may be generated in the model from the quadratic mortality term,
representing mortality due to virulysis, and a fraction of the higher trophic level mortality, representing faecal
pellet production and mortality. A more complicated way would be to explicitly describe the sinking and
degradation of particulate organic matter, but this is a complex and dynamic process and may be beyond
what is viable for this particular model, in terms of computational costs. However, it should be noted that
for the time scales modelled in this thesis, i.e a decade, the deep ocean nitrogen pool is assumed to be able
to maintain the re-supply of nitrogen to the productive surface ocean.
The excessive silicon concentrations emerging in the model may also be mitigated by either adding sinking
and degradation, or applying a Martin curve. Silicon is the only resource that is assumed to be remineralized
in the model, and this occurs instantly when diatoms are grazed upon. Therefore, this might be a crucial
addition to the model, in order to obtain more trustworthy.
A ﬁnal comment to the model setup is regarding the light used in the model to promote photosynthesis.
Equation 47 describes the solar irradiance at the surface in units of [Wm−2]. First of all, this should have
been deﬁned in terms of Photosynthetically Active Radiation (PAR), which is deﬁned as the energy carried by
the wave band between ∼400nm-700nm, which roughly corresponds to half of the solar irradiance (Stanhill
& Fuchs, 1977). This might have implications on the whole ecosystem dynamics. However, all plankton are
living under the same circumstances, so the eﬀect might have the most pronounced eﬀect in terms of the
magnitude of biomass, rather than on biogeographical patterns. Further, the units of light should ideally be
in units of [µmol photons m−2 s−1], as photons are carrying the energy used for photosynthesis. This is a
matter of converting the units of light, and adjusting the aﬃnity for light accordingly.
4.2
Implementing diazotrophy
Nitrogen gas (N2) is the most abundant element in the atmosphere, and is also dissolved into the ocean.
However, most unicellular organisms cannot use this, as they need ﬁxed nitrogen for growth, represented
by N in the model. Nitrogen ﬁxation through diazotrophy is considered the largest source of ﬁxed nitrogen
in the ocean (Gruber & Galloway, 2008), and is thereby fuelling other primary production, which is why it
would be ideal to include in the model.
Nitrogen ﬁxation in diazotrophs is analogue to the Haber-Bosch process used for producing synthetic fertil-
izers, and it is a highly energy demanding process to break the triple bonds of N2. Diazotrophs are able to
produce a reductant called nitrogenase which is needed for the process. Nitrogenase is sensitive to oxygen,
which is why an oxygen free environment is needed. These are the main requirements for N2 ﬁxation to
Page 38 of 62
==PAGE:40==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
occur; energy, nitrogenase and an oxygen free environment, which is another energy demanding part of dia-
zotrophy. Energy is either supplied from photosynthesis or DOC assimilation, and nitrogenase is produced
by the cell and requires iron. So far, diazotrophy has only been observed in prokaryotes. (Zehr & Paerl,
2008)
The degree of N2 ﬁxation is rapidly regulated, as it is a very costly process, so if there are ﬁxed inorganic
nitrogen available, this is preferred. There are a number of factors aﬀecting N2 ﬁxation, including inorganic
nitrogen concentration, energy availability (light or DOC), iron concentration, phosphate concentration and
temperature. Iron and phosphorus is considered limiting factors (Zehr & Paerl, 2008). Iron limitation is
also seen among non-diazotrophs, but the iron demand is even higher for diazotrophs as it is crucial for
producing nitrogenase, and ∼75% of the world oceans are possibly iron limited with regards to diazotrophy
(Berman-frank et al., 2001). The North Atlantic is phosphate and light limited (Zehr & Paerl, 2008).
The low oxygen demand causes a need for either spatial or temporal separation of N2 ﬁxation and photo-
synthesis, as oxygen is a product of photosynthesis. The spatial separation may be handled by creating a
heterocyst; an extra compartment separated from the rest of the cell, where N2 ﬁxation can occur in an
oxygen free environment. The temporal separation is to do photosynthesis during the day, building up high
levels of carbon compounds, which then can be used for energy during night. (Zehr & Paerl, 2008)
Implementing diazotrophy in the model requires a number of alterations to the current formulation. As it
is only recorded in prokaryotes, it would have to be implemented as an alternate strategy for the smallest
generalists in nitrogen depleted periods. The simplest possible way of implementing it would be to make
it only dependent on the nitrogen concentration (N), such that the size classes able to do diazotrophy
activates it when N-concentration falls below a threshold. Then a cost of diazotrophy would be introduced
as βdiaz., which would need to be higher than the rest of the processes to describe the high energy demand.
Something similar to this approach is presented in Rabouille et al. (2006) in a cellular model describing
the marine cyanobacterium Trichodesmium sp.. This approach would not be ideal, as diazotrophy on a
global scale is controlled by the iron- and phosphate availability as well as energy availability. This approach
would only be able to take energy demands into account. The next level of modelling would then be to take
phosphorus dynamics into account. Environmental concentrations of phosphate can be obtained from the
World Ocean Atlas (Garcia et al., 2019), similar to that of nitrogen used for this model. Then the cell model
formulation would also need to include phosphate uptake, and thus we are able to describe diazotrophy under
phosphate limitation as well, as have been done by Pahlow et al. (2013). However, as it is suggested that up
to 75% of the N2 ﬁxation in the world oceans is iron limited, this only accounts for some of the limitation,
even though Pahlow et al. (2013) manage to reproduce major global patterns of diazotrophy through their
approach. The ideal approach would then be to include iron into the model, which would also gain the other
parts of the model, as all primary producers are iron limited to some degree, at least at certain locations,
e.g. the Southern Ocean. This, however, would potentially complicate the model a lot, as the chemical
cycle of iron would then be needed to be taken into account including addition of terrestrial dust from the
atmosphere and oxidation of iron. The addition part could probably be handled similar to the seasonal
temperature changes in the model, using a seasonal average iron forcing from the atmosphere in the TMM.
Page 39 of 62
==PAGE:41==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Taking diazotrophy into account in the model would require an extensive eﬀort in terms of implementing
new processes, tuning parameters for all plankton clades (generalists, diatoms and diazotrophs) based on
experiments in literature and taking more biogeochemical cycles into account. However, as initial eﬀorts
of modelling diazotrophy has already been made, it is not unrealistic to aim for this implementation, even
though it is beyond the scope of this project.
5
Conclusion
Throughout this project I have implemented a trait-based model describing unicellular plankton in the ocean.
Even though the model to a large extent is able to reproduce global biogeographic patterns, there are still
work to be done. Towards the end of the process, I have become aware of diﬀerent aspects to improve
in the model, as described in the discussion. Also, the attempt to compare results to the more detailed
biogeographical study of Barton et al. (2013) were not as successful as the more general patterns. From this
we may conclude that the level of detail in the model may be improved.
Though the model is computationally quite heavy to run, it is remarkable that it is possible to run a
global ecosystem model without using high performance computing. This illuminates the great advantage
of working with the transport matrix method.
In summary, the model is able to reproduce major patterns of unicellular plankton biogeographies, both in
terms of seasonal patterns in mid- and high latitudes, and more consistent patterns towards low latitudes.
The model also display clear diﬀerences between diatoms and generalists, to a great extent consistent with
observations.
Page 40 of 62
==PAGE:42==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
References
Almgren, P. A. V., & Kiaer, C. M. R. (2018). Modelling global plankton biogeography using transport
matrices.
(unpublished)
Andersen, K., Berge, T., Gon¸calves, R., Hartvig, M., Heuschele, J., Hylander, S., . . . Kiørboe, T. (2016).
Characteristic sizes of life in the oceans, from bacteria to whales. Annual Review of Marine Science,
8(1), 217-241. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-marine-122414-034144
(PMID:
26163011) doi: 10.1146/annurev-marine-122414-034144
Andersen, K. H. (unpublished). A minimal size-based model of unicellular plankton.
Andersen, K. H., Aksnes, D. L., Berge, T., Fiksen, , & Visser, A. (2015, 08). Modelling emergent trophic
strategies in plankton. Journal of Plankton Research, 37(5), 862-868. Retrieved from https://doi.org/
10.1093/plankt/fbv054 doi: 10.1093/plankt/fbv054
Azam, F., & Chisholm, S. W. (1976). Silicic acid uptake and incorporation by natural marine phytoplankton
populations.
Limnology and Oceanography, 21(3), 427–435.
Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2835277
Barton, A. D., Finkel, Z. V., Ward, B. A., Johns, D. G., & Follows, M. J. (2013). On the roles of cell size and
trophic strategy in North Atlantic diatom and dinoﬂagellate communities. Limnology and Oceanography,
58(1), 254–266. doi: 10.4319/lo.2013.58.1.0254
Becking, L. (1934). Geobiologie of inleiding tot de milieukunde. W.P. Van Stockum & Zoon. Retrieved from
https://books.google.dk/books?id=JpYLAQAAIAAJ
Berge, T., Chakraborty, S., Hansen, P. J., & Andersen, K. H. (2017). Modeling succession of key resource-
harvesting traits of mixotrophic plankton. The ISME Journal, 11(1), 212–223. Retrieved from https://
doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2016.92 doi: 10.1038/ismej.2016.92
Berman-frank, I., Cullen, J. T., Shaked, Y., Sherrell, R. M., & Falkowski, P. G. (2001). Iron availability,
cellular iron quotas, and nitrgen ﬁxation in trichodesmium. Limnol. Oceanogr, 1249–1260.
Chakraborty, S., Nielsen, L. T., & Andersen, K. H.
(2017).
Trophic strategies of unicellular plankton.
The American Naturalist, 189(4), E77-E90. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1086/690764 (PMID:
28350501) doi: 10.1086/690764
Chisholm, S. W. (1992). Phytoplankton size. In P. G. Falkowski, A. D. Woodhead, & K. Vivirito (Eds.),
Primary productivity and biogeochemical cycles in the sea (pp. 213–237).
Boston, MA: Springer US.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-0762-2 12 doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-0762-2 12
Cullen, J. J., Franks, P. J., Karl, D. M., & Longhurst, A. (2002). Physical inﬂuences on marine ecosystem
dynamics. In A. R. Robinson, J. J. McCarthy, & B. J. Rothschild (Eds.), The sea, vol. 12 (pp. 297–336).
John Wiley Sons, Ltd.
Page 41 of 62
==PAGE:43==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
de Baar, H.
(1994).
von liebig’s law of the minimum and plankton ecology (1899ˆa1991).
Progress in
Oceanography, 33(4), 347 - 386. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0079661194900221 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0079-6611(94)90022-1
Ducklow, H. W., Steinberg, D. K., & Buesseler, K. O. (2001). Upper ocean carbon export and the biological
pump. Oceanography, 14. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2001.06
Dutkiewicz, S., Follows, M. J., & Parekh, P. (2005). Interactions of the iron and phosphorus cycles: A
three-dimensional model study. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 19(1). Retrieved from https://agupubs
.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2004GB002342 doi: 10.1029/2004GB002342
Evans, G. T., & Parslow, J. S. (1985). A model of annual plankton cycles. Biological oceanography, 3(3),
327. doi: 10.1016/0198-0254(85)92902-4
Flynn, K. J., Stoecker, D. K., Mitra, A., Raven, J. A., Glibert, P. M., Hansen, P. J., . . . Burkholder,
J. M. (2012, 09). Misuse of the phytoplankton–zooplankton dichotomy: the need to assign organisms as
mixotrophs within plankton functional types. Journal of Plankton Research, 35(1), 3-11. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1093/plankt/fbs062 doi: 10.1093/plankt/fbs062
Follows, M. J., & Dutkiewicz, S. (2011). Modeling diverse communities of marine microbes. Annual Review
of Marine Science, 3(1), 427-451. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-marine-120709
-142848 (PMID: 21329212) doi: 10.1146/annurev-marine-120709-142848
Garcia, H., Weathers, K., Paver, C., Smolyar, I., Boyer, T., Locarnini, R., . . . Reagan, J. (2019). Noaa
atlas nesdis 84 world ocean atlas 2018 volume 4: Dissolved inorganic nutrients (phosphate, nitrate and ni-
trate+nitrite, silicate) noaa national centers for environmental information world ocean atlas 2018 volume
4: Dissolved inorganic nutrients (phosphate, nitrate and nitrate+nitrite, silicate).
Gruber, N., & Galloway, J. N.
(2008).
An Earth-system perspective of the global nitrogen cycle. Na-
ture, 451(7176), 293–296.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06592
doi:
10.1038/
nature06592
Hansen, A. N., & Visser, A. W. (2019). The seasonal succession of optimal diatom traits. Limnology and
Oceanography, 64(4), 1442-1457. Retrieved from https://aslopubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/lno.11126 doi: 10.1002/lno.11126
Khatiwala, S. (2007). A computational framework for simulation of biogeochemical tracers in the ocean.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 21(3). Retrieved from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1029/2007GB002923 doi: 10.1029/2007GB002923
Khatiwala, S., Visbeck, M., & Cane, M. A.
(2005).
Accelerated simulation of passive tracers in ocean
circulation models. Ocean Modelling, 9(1), 51 - 69. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1463500304000307 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocemod.2004.04.002
Kirchman, D. L. (2008). Introduction and overview. In Microbial ecology of the oceans (p. 1-26). John Wiley &
Page 42 of 62
==PAGE:44==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Sons, Ltd. Retrieved from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9780470281840.ch1
doi: 10.1002/9780470281840.ch1
Kiørboe, T. (2008). A mechanistic approach to plankton ecology. Princeton University Press.
Kiørboe, T., & Hirst, A. G. (2014). Shifts in mass scaling of respiration, feeding, and growth rates across
life-form transitions in marine pelagic organisms. The American Naturalist, 183(4), E118-E130. Retrieved
from https://doi.org/10.1086/675241 (PMID: 24642502) doi: 10.1086/675241
Kiørboe, T., Visser, A., & Andersen, K. H. (2018, 07). A trait-based approach to ocean ecology. ICES Journal
of Marine Science, 75(6), 1849-1863. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsy090 doi:
10.1093/icesjms/fsy090
Kooistra, W. H. C. F., Gersonde, R., Medlin, L. K., & Mann, D. K. (2008). The origin and evolution of the
diatoms: Their adaptation to a planktonic existence. In P. G. Falkowski & A. H. Knoll (Eds.), Evolution
of primary producers in the sea (pp. 207–249). Elsevier Academic Press.
Locarnini, R., Mishonov, A., Baranova, O., Boyer, T., Zweng, M., Garcia, H., . . . Locarnini, R. (2019).
World ocean atlas 2018, volume 1: Temperature.
Longhurst, A. R. (2010). Ecological geography of the sea. Elsevier.
Martin, J. H., Gordon, R. M., & Fitzwater, S. E. (1991). The case for iron. Limnology and Oceanography,
36(8), 1793–1802. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2837715
Martin, J. H., Knauer, G. A., Karl, D. M., & Broenkow, W. W. (1987). Vertex: carbon cycling in the
northeast paciﬁc. Deep Sea Research Part A. Oceanographic Research Papers, 34(2), 267 - 285. Retrieved
from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0198014987900860 doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/0198-0149(87)90086-0
Morel, A., & Bricaud, A. (1981). Theoretical results concerning light absorption in a discrete medium, and
application to speciﬁc absorption of phytoplankton. Deep Sea Research Part A. Oceanographic Research
Papers, 28(11), 1375 - 1393. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
019801498190039X doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0198-0149(81)90039-X
Pahlow, M., Dietze, H., & Oschlies, A.
(2013).
Optimality-based model of phytoplankton growth and
diazotrophy . Marine Ecology Progress Series, 489, 1–16. Retrieved from https://www.int-res.com/
abstracts/meps/v489/p1-16/
Panˇci´c, M., Torres, R. R., Almeda, R., & Kiørboe, T.
(2019).
Siliciﬁed cell walls as a defensive trait
in diatoms.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 286(1901), 20190184.
Retrieved
from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rspb.2019.0184
doi: 10.1098/rspb
.2019.0184
Plankton calculator. (n.d.). http://oceanlife.dtuaqua.dk/Plankton/. (Source: Centre for Ocean Life,
DTU Aqua)
Page 43 of 62
==PAGE:45==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Rabouille, S., Staal, M., Stal, L. J., & Soetaert, K. (2006). Modeling the dynamic regulation of nitrogen
ﬁxation in the cyanobacterium trichodesmium sp. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 72(5), 3217–
3227.
Retrieved from https://aem.asm.org/content/72/5/3217
doi: 10.1128/AEM.72.5.3217-3227
.2006
Raven, J. A. (1984). A cost-beneﬁt analysis of photon absorption by photosynthetic unicells. New Phy-
tologist, 98(4), 593-625.
Retrieved from https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/
j.1469-8137.1984.tb04152.x doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.1984.tb04152.x
Raven, J. A. (1987). The role of vacuoles. The New Phytologist, 106(3), 357–422. Retrieved from http://
www.jstor.org/stable/2434809
Sanders, R., Henson, S. A., Koski, M., De la Rocha, C. L., Painter, S. C., Poulton, A. J., . . . Martin, A. P.
(2014, DEC). The Biological Carbon Pump in the North Atlantic. PROGRESS IN OCEANOGRAPHY ,
129(B, SI), 200-218. doi: {10.1016/j.pocean.2014.05.005}
Serra-Pompei, C., Hagstrom, G. I., Visser, A. W., & Andersen, K. H. (2019). Resource limitation determines
temperature response of unicellular plankton communities. Limnology and Oceanography, 64(4), 1627-
1640. Retrieved from https://aslopubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/lno.11140 doi:
10.1002/lno.11140
Size based plankton. (n.d.). https://github.com/Kenhasteandersen/SizeBasedPlankton. (Author: Ken
Haste Andersen, Accessed: summer 2019)
Smetacek, V.
(1999).
Diatoms and the ocean carbon cycle.
Protist, 150(1), 25 - 32.
Retrieved from
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1434461099700064
doi: https://doi.org/10
.1016/S1434-4610(99)70006-4
Smith, T. M., & Reynolds, R. W. (2003). Extended reconstruction of global sea surface temperatures based
on coads data (1854-1997). Journal of Climate, 16(10), 1495-1510. Retrieved from https://journals
.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0442%282003%29016%3C1495%3AEROGSS%3E2.0.CO%3B2
doi: 10
.1175/1520-0442(2003)016⟨1495:EROGSS⟩2.0.CO;2
Stanhill, G., & Fuchs, M. (1977). The relative ﬂux density of photosynthetically active radiation. Journal
of Applied Ecology, 14(1), 317–322. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2401848
Weinberg, E. D. (1989). Cellular regulation of iron assimilation. The Quarterly Review of Biology, 64(3),
261–290. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2831092
Werner, D. (1977). The biology of diatoms. University of California Press.
Westberry, T., Behrenfeld, M. J., Siegel, D. A., & Boss, E. (2008). Carbon-based primary productivity
modeling with vertically resolved photoacclimation.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 22(2).
Retrieved
from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2007GB003078
doi:
10.1029/
2007GB003078
Page 44 of 62
==PAGE:46==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Zehr, J. P., & Paerl, H. W. (2008). Molecular ecological aspects of nitrogen ﬁxation in the marine environ-
ment. In Microbial ecology of the oceans (pp. 481–525). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Retrieved from https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9780470281840.ch13 doi: 10.1002/9780470281840.ch13
Zhao, M., & Running, S. W. (2010). Drought-induced reduction in global terrestrial net primary production
from 2000 through 2009. Science, 329(5994), 940–943. Retrieved from https://science.sciencemag
.org/content/329/5994/940 doi: {10.1126/science.1192666}
Page 45 of 62
==PAGE:47==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
Appendix
A
Matlab scripts
Ecosystem model
1 function [dudt , rates] = calcrates_anton (t,u, x, p, bReturnRates )
2
3 if (nargin ==5)
4
bReturnRates = true;
5 else
6
bReturnRates = false;
7 end
8
9 N
= u(1: length(p.LYR)) ’;
10 DOC = u(length(p.LYR)+1: length(p.LYR)*2) ’;
11 Si
= u(length(p.LYR)*2+1: length(p.LYR)*3) ’;
12 D
= reshape(u(length(p.LYR)*3+1: length(p.LYR)*(3+p.n_d)) ,[],p.n_d) ’;
13 G
= reshape(u(length(p.LYR)*(3+p.n_d)+1: length(p.LYR)*(3+p.n_d+p.n_g)) ,[],p.n_g) ’;
14
15 if x >300
16
17
dGdt =
- ( p.mort2*G + p.mortHTL_g .*(p.r_g >=p.rHTL).*G).*G;
18
dDdt =
- ( p.mort2*D + p.mortHTL_d .*(p.r_d >=p.rHTL).*D).*D;
19
20
dGdt(G<1e-6 & dGdt <0) = 0; % Impose a minimum
concentration
even if it means
loss of
mass
balance
21
dDdt(D<1e-6 & dDdt <0) = 0;
22
mortloss_g = sum(G.*(p.mort2 .*G + p.mortHTL_g .*(p.r_g >=p.rHTL).*G)); %POM
23
mortloss_d = D.*(p.mort2 .*D + p.mortHTL_d .*(p.r_d >=p.rHTL).*D); %POM nb! sum is taken
later
due to
individual p.RCN_d
24
dNdt
=
p.remin*mortloss_g ./p.RCN_g + sum(p.remin* mortloss_d ./p.RCN_d);
25
dDOCdt =
p.remin*mortloss_g + p.remin*sum(mortloss_d );
26
dSidt
=
sum(p.remin*mortloss_d ./p.RCSi);
27
28
dDOCdt =dDOCdt *0;
29
30
dGdt = reshape(dGdt ’,[],1);
31
dDdt = reshape(dDdt ’,[],1);
32
33
34
dudt = [dNdt ’; dDOCdt ’; dSidt ’ ; dDdt ; dGdt ];
35 else
36
37 if length(p.LYR)==1
38
%p.i=t;
39
L = p.L;
40
else
Page 46 of 62
==PAGE:48==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
41
L = p.L*exp ( -0.1*x)*(1-p.Lamplitude *sin(pi.*p.phi ./180)*cos (2* pi*p.i/365)); % Light w.
latitude
42 end
43 %L = p.L*exp ( -0.1*x)*(1-p.Lamplitude*sin(pi.*p.phi ./180)*cos (2* pi*p.i/365)); % Light w.
latitude
44
45 %
46 % % Temperature
corrections : put
outside
the
function
47 % %
48 % ANdT = p.AN_d .*1.5.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
49 % ANgT = p.AN_g .*1.5.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
50 % JmaxdT = p.Jmax_d .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
51 % JmaxgT = p.Jmax_g .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
52 % JRd = p.Jresp_d .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
53 % JRg = p.Jresp_g .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
54 %
55 %% --------------- Uptakes
----------------------
56 % Diffusive
Nitrogen
uptake (in units of N/time)
57
58 JN_d =
p.JmaxdT ./p.RCN_d .* p.ANdT .*N ./ (p.JmaxdT ./p.RCN_d + p.ANdT .*N);
59 JN_g =
p.JmaxgT ./p.RCN_g .* p.ANgT .*N ./ (p.JmaxgT ./p.RCN_g + p.ANgT .*N);
60
61 JN_d(:,N <0) = 0;
62 JN_g(:,N <0) = 0;
63
64 % Diffusive
Silica
uptake (in units of Si/time)
65
66 JSi=
p.JmaxdT ./p.RCSi .* p.ANdT .*Si ./ (p.JmaxdT ./p.RCSi + p.ANdT .*Si);
67
68 JSi(:,Si <0) = 0;
69
70 % Diffusive
DOC
uptake (in units of C/time)
71
72 JDOC_g = p.JmaxgT .* p.ANgT .*DOC ./ (p.JmaxgT + p.ANgT .* DOC);
73 JDOC_d = p.JmaxdT .* p.ANdT .*DOC ./ (p.JmaxdT + p.ANdT .* DOC);
74
75 JDOC_g (:,DOC <0) = 0;
76 JDOC_d (:,DOC <0) = 0;
77
78 % Photoharvesting
79
80 JL_d =
p.epsilonL * p.JmaxdT
.* p.AL_d .*L’ ./ (p.JmaxdT + p.AL_d .*L’);
81 JL_g =
p.epsilonL * p.JmaxgT
.* p.AL_g .*L’ ./ (p.JmaxgT + p.AL_g .*L’);
82
83 % Feeding
84
85 F = p.theta_g * G + p.theta_d * D; % available
food
86 JF = p.epsilonF * p.JmaxgT .* p.AF.*F ./ (p.JmaxgT + p.AF.*F);
87
88
Page 47 of 62
==PAGE:49==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
89 %% ----------- Liebigs
law
---------------
90 % DIATOMS
91
92 % Down
regulation / flux
balance / photo
acclimation
93
94 %if C limited;
95
96 thetaN_Cd = max(0,min(1,( JL_g *(1-p.betaL)+JDOC_d *(1-p.betaDOC))./...
97
(JN_d .*p.RCN_d .*(1+p.betaN ./p.RCN_d+ p.betaSi ./p.RCSi))));
98 thetaSi_Cd = max(0,min (1,( JL_g *(1-p.betaL)+JDOC_d *(1-p.betaDOC))./...
99
(JSi .*p.RCSi .*(1+p.betaN ./p.RCN_d+ p.betaSi ./p.RCSi))));
100
101 % if N limited
102 thetaSi_Nd =max(0,min(1,( JN_d .*p.RCN_d)./( JSi .*p.RCSi)));
103 thetaN_Nd = 1;
104 %thetaSi_d(thetaN_d ==1) = thetaSi_Nd(thetaN_d ==1);
105
106
107 % if Si
limited
108 thetaN_Sid = max(0,min (1,(JSi.*p.RCSi)./( JN_d .*p.RCN_d)));
109 thetaSi_Sid = 1;
110 %thetaN_d(thetaSi_d ==1) = thetaN_Sid(thetaSi_d ==1);
111
112 thetaN_d = zeros(size(thetaN_Cd));
113 thetaN_d(thetaN_Cd <1 & thetaSi_Cd <1) = thetaN_Cd(thetaN_Cd <1 & thetaSi_Cd <1); %C-lim
114 thetaN_d(thetaN_Sid <1 & thetaSi_Cd ==1)= thetaN_Sid(thetaN_Sid <1 & thetaSi_Cd ==1); %Si -lim
115 thetaN_d( thetaN_Sid ==1 & thetaN_Cd ==1)= 1;
116
117 thetaSi_d = zeros(size(thetaN_Cd));
118 thetaSi_d(thetaN_Cd <1 & thetaSi_Cd <1) = thetaSi_Cd(thetaN_Cd <1 & thetaSi_Cd <1);%c-lim
119 thetaSi_d( thetaSi_Nd ==1 & thetaSi_Cd ==1)= 1; %Si -lim
120 thetaSi_d(thetaSi_Nd <1 & thetaN_Cd ==1) = thetaSi_Nd (thetaSi_Nd <1 & thetaN_Cd ==1);
121
122 % uptakes
after
down
regulation (units of carbon)
123 JCtot_d = JL_d *(1-p.betaL) + JDOC_d *(1-p.betaDOC)-thetaN_d .* JN_d .*p.betaN ...
124
-thetaSi_d .*JSi.*p.betaSi -p.JRd;
125
126 JNtot_d = thetaN_d .* JN_d .*p.RCN_d;
127
128 JSitot_d = thetaSi_d .* JSi.*p.RCSi;
129
130 liebMATRIX_d (:,:,1) =JCtot_d;
131 liebMATRIX_d (:,:,2) =JNtot_d;
132 liebMATRIX_d (:,:,3) =JSitot_d;
133
134 Jtot_d = min(liebMATRIX_d ,[] ,3);
%finding
the
minimum
uptake in each
grid
cell
135
136 %=========
137 % GENERALISTS
138
Page 48 of 62
==PAGE:50==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
139 %down
regulation /flux
balance / photo
acclimation
140
141 thetaN_g = max(0,min(1,( JL_g *(1-p.betaL)+JDOC_g *(1-p.betaDOC)-JF*p.betaF -p.JRg)./...
142
(JN_g .*(p.RCN_g+p.betaN))));
143
144 % Uptakes
after
down
regulation (units of carbon)
145
146 JCtot_g = JL_g *(1-p.betaL)+JF*(1-p.betaF)+JDOC_g *(1-p.betaDOC)-thetaN_g .* JN_g .*p.betaN -p.JRg
;
147
148 JNtot_g = thetaN_g .* JN_g .*p.RCN_g + JF;
149
150 Jtot_g = min(JCtot_g ,JNtot_g);
151
152 %% ------------ Losses/leakage
-----------------
153
154 % Incomplete
feeding (units of carbon
per
time)
155 JCloss_feeding = (1-p.epsilonF)/p.epsilonF*JF;
156
157 % Incomplete
Photoharvesting (units of carbon
per
time)
158 JLreal_g = min(JL_g ,max (0,( Jtot_g+thetaN_g .* JN_g .*p.betaN - JF*(1-p.betaF)...
159
-JDOC_g *(1-p.betaDOC))/(1-p.betaL))); % downregulated
photoharvesting
160 JLreal_d = min(JL_d ,max (0,( Jtot_d + p.JRd + thetaSi_d .* JSi .*p.betaSi+thetaN_d .* JN_d .*p.betaN
...
161
-JDOC_d *(1-p.betaDOC))/(1-p.betaL))); % Downregulated
photoharvesting
162
163 JCloss_photouptake_g = (1-p.epsilonL)/p.epsilonL*JLreal_g;
164 JCloss_photouptake_d = (1-p.epsilonL)/p.epsilonL*JLreal_d;
165
166 % Carbon
leakage
from
liebigs
law
167 % JClossLiebig_g = max(0,JCtot_g -JLreal_g -Jtot_g); % photoharvested
light is downregulated , i
.e. not
leaking
168 % JClossLiebig_d = max(0,JCtot_d -JLreal_d -Jtot_d);
169
170 JClossLiebig_g = max(0,JCtot_g -JL_g -Jtot_g); % photoharvested
light is
downregulated , i.e.
not
leaking
171 JClossLiebig_d = max(0,JCtot_d -JL_d -Jtot_d);
172
173
174 % N Leakage
from
liebigs
law
175 JNlossLiebig_g = max(0,JN_g+JF./p.RCN_g -Jtot_g ./p.RCN_g);
176 JNlossLiebig_d = max(0,JN_d -Jtot_d ./p.RCN_d);%Not
needed
because
there
177
%is only
one N source.
178
%Jtot
may be used in dNdt ..
179
180 % Si
leakage
from
liebigs
law
181 % JSilossLiebig = max(0,JSitot_d -Jtot_d)./p.RCSi; %Not
needed
182
183
184 JNloss_g = JCloss_feeding ./p.RCN_g + JNlossLiebig_g
;
Page 49 of 62
==PAGE:51==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
185 JCloss_g = JCloss_feeding + JCloss_photouptake_g + JClossLiebig_g ;
186
187 JNloss_d = JNlossLiebig_d ;
188 JCloss_d = JCloss_photouptake_d + JClossLiebig_d ;
189
190 %% --------Mortality
-------------
191
192 mortpred_g =
p.theta_g ’ * (JF/p.epsilonF .*G./p.m_g ./F);
193 mortpred_d =
p.theta_d ’ * (JF/p.epsilonF .*G./p.m_g ./F);
194 %fixing
NaNs
from
dividing
by zero
195 mortpred_g (F==0) = 0;
196 mortpred_d (F==0) = 0;
197
198 %% ------------ System
-----------------
199 %
200 dGdt = (Jtot_g ./p.m_g
- (mortpred_g + p.mort2*G + p.mortHTL_g .*(p.r_g >=p.rHTL).*G)).*G;
201 dDdt = (Jtot_d ./p.Ctot
- (mortpred_d + p.mort2*D + p.mortHTL_d .*(p.r_d >=p.rHTL).*D)).*D;
202
203 dGdt(G<1e-6 & dGdt <0) = 0; % Impose a minimum
concentration
even if it means
loss of mass
balance
204 dDdt(D<1e-6 & dDdt <0) = 0;
205 mortloss_g = sum(G.*(p.mort2 .*G + p.mortHTL_g .*(p.r_g >=p.rHTL).*G)); %POM
206 mortloss_d = D.*(p.mort2 .*D + p.mortHTL_d .*(p.r_d >=p.rHTL).*D); %POM nb! sum is taken
later
due to
individual p.RCN_d
207 dNdt
=
- sum(JN_g .*G./p.m_g) -sum(JN_d .*D./p.Ctot)
+ sum(JNloss_g .*G./p.m_g)...
208
+sum(JNloss_d .*D./p.Ctot)+ p.remin*mortloss_g ./p.RCN_g + sum(p.remin* mortloss_d ./p.
RCN_d);
209 dDOCdt =
- sum(JDOC_g .*G./p.m_g) - sum(JDOC_d .*D./p.Ctot) + sum(JCloss_g .*G./p.m_g)...
210
+ sum(JCloss_d .*D./p.Ctot) + p.remin*mortloss_g + p.remin*sum(mortloss_d );
211 dSidt
= - sum(Jtot_d .*D./p.Ctot ./p.RCSi) + sum( mortpred_d .*D./p.RCSi) +...
212
sum(p.remin*mortloss_d ./p.RCSi);
213
214 %dDOCdt =dDOCdt *0; %use for
global
runs ...
215
216 dGdt = reshape(dGdt ’,[],1);
217 dDdt = reshape(dDdt ’,[],1);
218
219
220 dudt = [dNdt ’; dDOCdt ’; dSidt ’ ; dDdt ; dGdt ];
221 if ~isempty(find(isnan(dudt) ,1))
222
keyboard
223 end
224
225 if
bReturnRates
226
rates.JF = JF;
227
rates.JN_g = JN_g;
228
rates.JN_d = JN_d;
229
rates.JDOC_g = JDOC_g;
230
rates.JDOC_d = JDOC_d;
231
rates.JL_g = JL_g;
Page 50 of 62
==PAGE:52==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
232
rates.JL_d = JL_d;
233
rates.JLreal_g = JLreal_g;
234
rates.JLreal_d = JLreal_d;
235
rates.JSi = JSi;
236
rates.Jtot_g = Jtot_g;
237
rates.Jtot_d = Jtot_d;
238
rates.JRg = p.JRg;
239
rates.JRd = p.JRd;
240
rates.mortpred_g = mortpred_g;
241
rates.mortpred_d = mortpred_d;
242
rates.mort2_g = p.mort2*G;
243
rates.mort2_d = p.mort2*D;
244
rates.mortHTL_g =
p.mortHTL_g .*(p.r_g >=p.rHTL).*G;
245
rates.mortHTL_d =
p.mortHTL_d .*(p.r_d >=p.rHTL).*D;
246
rates.mortlosses = (1-p.remin)*mortloss_g ./p.RCN_g + sum ((1-p.remin)* mortloss_d ./p.RCN_d)
;
247
rates.JCloss_g
= JCloss_g;
248
rates.JCloss_d = JCloss_d;
249
250 end
251 end
Parameter setup
1 function p = parameters_Anton ()
2 %% Defining
no of size
classes
3
4 p.n_g = 8; % No of
generalist
size
classes
5 p.m_g = logspace (-8,1,p.n_g) ’;
% Mass
bins in mugC , Generalist
6
7
8 p.n_d = 8; %no of diatom
size
classes
9 p.m_d = logspace (-8,1,p.n_d) ’; %mass
bins in mugC , Diatom (cytoplasm
only)
10
11 %% Constants
12 % carbon
density
13 ccb_g
= 0.125*10^ -6;
% cytoplasm
carbon
density (mu g C mu m -3)(agnethe)
14 rhoCtono
= 600*10^9/10^18;
% carbon
density
of
tonoplast (mu g C/mu m3)(agnethe)
15
16
17 %diatom:
18 RNCmol
= 1/7;
% cytoplasm N:C ratio (mol N (mol C) -1 )
19 RCNmol
= 7;
% cytoplasm C:N ratio (mol C (mol N) -1 )
(says
1:6 in
paper ...)
20 RCNcyt_d
= RCNmol *12/14;
% cytoplasm N:C ratio (g C (g N) -1 )
21 RNCcyt_d
= RNCmol *14/12;
% cytoplasm N:C ratio (g N (g C) -1 )
22 CNtono
= RCNcyt_d;%48*12/14;
% CN ratio in
membrane
material (g N/ gC)
23
24 % generalist
25 p.RCN_g = RCNcyt_d;%5.68; % C:N mass
ratio
Page 51 of 62
==PAGE:53==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
26
27
28 % densities ( potentially
for
sinking
velocities )
29 % rhoW
= 1027;
% Density
of
seawater (kg/m3)
30 % rhoB
= 1200;
% Density
of
biomass (kg/m3) SA
31
rhoS
= 2600;
% Density
of shell (kg/m3) (max) SA
32 % rhoV
= 1010;
% Density
of
vacuole (kg/m3)
33
34 %% Diatom
parameter
setup
35
36 vfrac_d = zeros(p.n_d ,1) +0.6; %vacuole
fraction
37
38 % Radius , volume :
39
40 Vb
= p.m_d./ ccb_g;
% biovolume
41 r0
= (Vb ./(4/3* pi)).^(1/3); % equvalent
spherical
radius of
biovolume
(?m)
42 tm_d
= 8*10^ -3;
% membrane
thickness
(?m)
43 % equvalent
spherical
radius (including
outer
membrane , but no shell)
44 ESR
= (tm_d ^2./( vfrac_d
- 1) + tm_d ^2./( vfrac_d
- 1) .^2) ./((((3* tm_d ^3) ./(2*( vfrac_d
-
1) .^2) ...
45
+ tm_d ^3./( vfrac_d
- 1).^3 + (tm_d ^3 + r0 .^3) ./(2* vfrac_d
- 2)).^2 - (tm_d ^2./(
vfrac_d
- 1) ...
46
+ tm_d ^2./( vfrac_d
- 1) .^2) .^3) .^(1/2)
- (3* tm_d ^3) ./(2*( vfrac_d
- 1) .^2) ...
47
- tm_d ^3./( vfrac_d
- 1) .^3 - (tm_d ^3 + r0 .^3) ./(2* vfrac_d
- 2)).^(1/3)
...
48
- tm_d ./( vfrac_d
- 1) + ((((3* tm_d ^3) ./(2*( vfrac_d
- 1) .^2) + tm_d ^3./( vfrac_d
-
1) .^3 ...
49
+ (tm_d ^3 + r0 .^3) ./(2*( vfrac_d
- 1))).^2 - (tm_d ^2./( vfrac_d
- 1) ...
50
+ tm_d ^2./( vfrac_d
- 1) .^2) .^3) .^(1/2)
- tm_d ^3./( vfrac_d
- 1) .^3 ...
51
- (tm_d ^3 + r0 .^3) ./(2*( vfrac_d
- 1)) - (3* tm_d ^3) ./(2*( vfrac_d
- 1) .^2)).^(1/3)
;
52 p.r_d
= ESR;
53 V0
= 4/3* pi*ESR .^3;
% total
volume (outer
membrane , no shell)
54
55 %
56 Vmem
= 4/3* pi*(ESR).^3 -4/3* pi*(ESR -tm_d).^3; % outer ( plasmalemma ) membrane
volume
57 Vv
= V0 - Vb - Vmem;
% Vacuole
volume (inkluding
inner
totnoplast
membrane)
58 rv
= (Vv ./(4/3* pi)).^(1/3); % radius of
vacuole
59 t
= (10.^(0.24* log10(V0)+0.21))*10^ -3; % Shell
thickness
(?m)
60 Vs
= (4/3* pi*(ESR+t).^3) -4/3*pi*( ESR).^3;% shell
volume (?m3)
61 Ncyto
= p.m_d*RNCcyt_d;
% ?g N/cell
cytoplasm (no
tonoplast)
62 Vtono
= 4/3* pi*(rv).^3 -4/3* pi*(rv -tm_d).^3; % volume of (inner) tonoplast
membrane
63
64 % diatom
overall
density (r,v)
65 %rhoD
= rhoS*Vs./( V0+Vs)+rhoV*Vv ./( V0+Vs)+rhoB *(Vb+Vtono+Vmem)./( V0+Vs);
66
67 % Carbon , nitrogen
and
Silica
content:
68
69 ctono
= Vtono*rhoCtono;
% carbon in
tonoplast ?g C
70 cmem
= Vmem*rhoCtono;
% carbon in
plasmalemma ?g C
71 Ntono
= ctono ./ CNtono;
% Nitrogen
in
tonoplast
mu g N
Page 52 of 62
==PAGE:54==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
72 Nmem
= cmem ./ CNtono;
% Nitrogen
in
plasmalemma
mu g N
73 Ntot
= Ncyto+Ntono+Nmem;
% Total
nitrogen
in cell (?g N cell -1)
74 p.Ctot
= p.m_d+ctono+cmem;
% Total
carbon in cell (?g C cell -1)
75 p.RCN_d
= p.Ctot ./ Ntot;
% effective
CN ratio ?g/?g
76
77 gammaSi
= rhoS *10^3/60.08*10^ -18 * 28;% g Si (mu m3 shell) -1
78 p.RCSi
= (p.Ctot *1e -6) ./( gammaSi .*Vs);% g C (g Si) -1
79
80
81 %% Generalist
parameter
setup
82
83
84 % Cell
wall
fraction
of mass:
85
86 p.c = 0.0015; % the
constant
is
increased a bit to limit
the
lower
cell
size
87 nu = p.c * p.m_g .^( -1/3);
88
89 % Cell
radius (mu m)
90 p.r_g = ((3/(4* pi)).*(( nu.*p.m_g)/rhoCtono +(p.m_g .*(1 -nu))./ ccb_g)).^(1/3);
91
92 % membrane
thickness(mu m)
93 tm_g = p.r_g -((3/(4* pi))*((p.m_g .*(1 -nu))./ ccb_g)).^(1/3);
94
95 %% Outputs
96
97 % efficiency
98 p.epsilonL = 0.8; % Light
uptake
efficiency
99 p.epsilonF = 0.8; % Assimilation
efficiency
100
101 % Affinities (to be
expressed
in the
same
way for
diatoms
and
general .)
102 theta
= 0.2;
% Absorbtion
coefficient
(?m -1)
103 phiL
= 0.5;
% Investment
in
photosynthesis
machinery (-)
104
105 %----diatoms ----
106 cL0
= 0.01;
% Maximum
light
affinity
(?g C day -1 (W m -2) -1 (?g C -2/3))
107 cL_d
= cL0*( ccb_g)^(2/3); % Maximum
light
affinity
(?g C day -1 (W/m2) -1 ?m3 ^( -2/3))
/ quantum
yield of
photosynthesis
(0.0478 ?g C ?E -1)
108 p.AL_d
= cL_d *(4/3* pi)^(2/3)*p.r_d .^2.*(1 - exp(-theta*phiL*r0.*(1 - vfrac_d).^(2/3)));
109
110 r_dM
= (ESR)*10^ -6;
% radius in meters
111 D
= 1.88*10^ -5*10^ -4*60*60*24;% nutrient
diffusivity (m2/day) (1.62*10^ -4)
112 p.AN_d
= 4*pi*D*( r_dM)*10^3;% Nitrogen
affinity (l/day)
113 p.ASi
= 4*pi*D*( r_dM)*10^3;% Silica
affinity (l/day)
114
115 %--generalists ---
116 alphaF
= 0.018;
%
Fits to TK data
for
protists
117
118 r_gM
= p.r_g *1e-6;
119 p.AN_g
= 4*pi*D*( r_gM)*10^3;% Nitrogen
affinity (l/day)
120 p.AL_g
= cL_d *(4/3* pi)^(2/3)*p.r_g .^2.*(1 - exp(-theta*phiL*p.r_g));
Page 53 of 62
==PAGE:55==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
121
122 p.AF = alphaF*p.m_g;
123
124 % ----Feeding
preference -----
125 beta
= 0.1; % prey/predator
size
ratio
126 sigma = 0.2;
%
127
128 p.SP = 0.5; %shell
protection. reducing
palatability .
129
130 % feeding
on
diatoms
131 for i = 1:p.n_g
132
p.theta_d(i ,:) = exp( -(log(beta*p.r_g(i)./p.r_d)).^2/( sigma) );
133 end
134 p.theta_d = p.theta_d*p.SP;
135 % feeding
on
generalists
136 for i = 1:p.n_g
137
p.theta_g(i ,:) = exp( -(log(beta*p.r_g(i)./p.r_g)).^2/( sigma) );
138 end
139
140
141 % ----Metabolism ----
142
143 % max
synthesis
rate
144 alpha_max = 3.3;
%agnethe
145 p.Jmax_d
= alpha_max * p.m_d;
% Note
that p.m_d is
cytoplasm
carbon
mass. To be
changed
...
146 p.Jmax_g
= alpha_max * p.m_g .* (1-nu); % mugC/day
147
148 % respiration
rate
149 cR = 0.05; %from
ken: 0.1.
0.05 in
agnethes ...
150 p.Jresp_d = cR * p.Jmax_d;
151 p.Jresp_g = cR * p.Jmax_g;
152
153 % costs
154 p.betaL
= 0.35;
% Cost of
photosynthetic
uptake
and
synthesis
(?g C (?g C)
-1)
155 p.betaN
= 3;
% Cost of
nitrogen
uptake
and
synthesis
(?g C (?g N) -1)
SAT NED FRA 3.5
156 p.betaSi
= 1.05;
% Cost of
silicification
(?g C (?g Si) -1)
157 p.betaF
= 0.35;
% Cost of food
uptake
158 p.betaDOC
= 0.35;
% cost of DOC
uptake
159
160 % Losses
161 p.mort2 = 0.0002*(p.n_g+p.n_d);
162 p.mortHTL_g = p.mort2 *2;%0.005;
163 p.mortHTL_d = p.SP*p.mortHTL_g;
164 p.rHTL = beta*max(p.r_g); %the
smallest
size
that
get
affected
by HTL
mortality
165
166
167 p.remin = 0.0; % fraction
of
mortality
losses
reminerilized
to N and DOC
Page 54 of 62
==PAGE:56==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
168
169 % Initial
conditions:
170 %
171 p.DOC0 = 0;
172 p.G0 = 0.1* ones(1, p.n_g);
173 p.D0 = 0.1* ones(1,p.n_d);
174 p.N0 = 10;
175 p.Si0 = 10;
176 %
177 % Light:
178 %
179 p.L = 300;
% W/m^2
180 p. Lamplitude = 0.8;
181
182 % Temperature
if not
provided
183
184 p.T = 10;
185
186 % Chemostat
187 p.phi = 45; %latitude
188 p.diff = 50; % Diffusion
for
chemostat
189
190 end
Chemostat model
1 clear
all
2 close
all
3 %%
4
5 p = parameters_Anton ;
6
7 p.LYR =1;
8 p.i = 1;
9 x = 10; %depth
10 p.DOC0 = 0;
11 p.N0 = 150;
12 p.Si0 = 500;
13 p.L = 40;
14 p.diff
=0.5;%0.1 ;
15 p.T = 5;
16 % Temperature
corrections:
17 %
18 p.ANdT = p.AN_d .*1.5.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
19 p.ANgT = p.AN_g .*1.5.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
20 p.JmaxdT = p.Jmax_d .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
21 p.JmaxgT = p.Jmax_g .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
22 p.JRd = p.Jresp_d .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
23 p.JRg = p.Jresp_g .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
24
Page 55 of 62
==PAGE:57==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
25
26 tic
27 [t, u] = ode23(@deriv , [0:365] , [p.N0 , p.DOC0 , p.Si0 , p.D0 , p.G0],[],x,p);
28 toc
29
30 %%
31 N = u(: ,1);
32 DOC = u(: ,2);
33 Si = u(: ,3);
34 D
= reshape(u(: ,4:4+p.n_d -1),length(t),p.n_d) ’;
35 G
= reshape(u(: ,4+p.n_d:end),length(t),p.n_g) ’;
Global model
1 %% Global
generalist+diatom
model. MSc
thesis
2 %
3 % Anton
Almgren
4 clear
all
5 close
all
6 clc
7 %% Load
Initial
January
TM and
configuations
8 load(’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/TMs/ matrix_nocorrection_01 .mat ’);
9 load(’../ bin/MITgcm/grid.mat ’);
10 load(’../ bin/MITgcm/ config_data .mat’);
11 load(’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’)
12
13 % Load
paths
for
switching
TM
14 loadPath = ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/TMs/ matrix_nocorrection_0 ’;
15 loadPath1 =
’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/TMs/ matrix_nocorrection_ ’;
16
17 % Preparing
for
timestepping . Using
43200
sec
timesteps
(0.5
days)
18 Ix = speye(nb ,nb);
19 Aexp = Ix + (12*60*60)*Aexp;
20 Aimp = Aimp ^(36);
21
22 % load
indices
for
watercolumns
23
24 load(’WCind.mat’)
25
26 % number of
elements
in each
layer
27
28 lyr_n = permute(sum(sum(bathy)) ,[3,1,2]);
29
30 lyr_ind = [1 ; cumsum(lyr_n (1:end -1))+1];
31
32 lyr_end = cumsum(lyr_n);
33
34 % simulation
time
half
days
35
36 simtime = 730*3;
Page 56 of 62
==PAGE:58==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
37
38 %% Parameter
setup
39 p = parameters_Anton ;
40 p.iWC = WCind;
41 %p.mortHTL = 0;
42 % p.phi = Ybox;
43 % p.Z = Zbox;
44
45 % temperature
46 load(’../ bin/T_oceandata.mat ’)
47 for i = 1:12
48
Tmat(:,i) = gridToMatrix (T(:,:,:,i), [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin
/MITgcm/grid.mat’);
49 end
50 %% Initial
conditions
51 load(’init_cond_n8_noDOC .mat ’)
52
53 %if no
initial
conditions
available:
54
55 % %N = zeros(nx ,ny ,nz) + p.N0;
56 % DOC = zeros(nx ,ny ,nz) + p.DOC0;
57 % %Si = zeros(nx ,ny ,nz) + p.Si0;
58 %
59 % load ( ’../ bin/ N_oceandata .mat ’)
60 % load ( ’../ bin/ Si_oceandata .mat ’)
61 %
62 %
63 %
64 %
G = zeros(nx ,ny ,nz ,p.n_g);
65 % D = zeros(nx , ny , nz , p.n_d);
66 %
67 % for i = 1:p.n_g
68 %
69 %
G(:,:,1:3,i) = G(:,:,1:3,i)+p.G0(i);
70 %
71 % end
72 % for i = 1:p.n_d
73 %
74 %
D(:,:,1:3,i) = D(:,:,1:3,i)+p.D0(i);
75 %
76 % end
77
78 % Convert
from
grid
form to
matrix
form
79 N
= gridToMatrix (N, [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin/MITgcm/grid.mat ’);
80 DOC = gridToMatrix (DOC , [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin/MITgcm/grid.mat’
);
81 Si
= gridToMatrix (Si , [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin/MITgcm/grid.mat ’
);
82
83 Gmat = zeros(nb ,p.n_g);
Page 57 of 62
==PAGE:59==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
84 for i = 1:p.n_g
85
Gmat(:,i) = gridToMatrix (G(:,:,:,i), [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin
/MITgcm/grid.mat’);
86 end
87
88 Dmat = zeros(nb ,p.n_d);
89 for i = 1:p.n_d
90
Dmat(:,i) = gridToMatrix (D(:,:,:,i), [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin
/MITgcm/grid.mat’);
91 end
92
93
94 month = 0;
95
96 % save
matrices
half
daily
97 % Nd = zeros(nb ,simtime);
98 % DOCd = zeros(nb ,simtime);
99 % Sid = zeros(nb ,simtime);
100 %
101 % Gmatd= zeros(nb ,p.n_g ,simtime);
102 % Dmatd= zeros(nb ,p.n_d ,simtime);
103
104 % save
matrices
monthly
105 Nm = single(zeros(nb ,12));
106 DOCm = single(zeros(nb ,12));
107 Sim = single(zeros(nb ,12));
108
109 Gmatm= single(zeros(nb ,p.n_g ,12));
110 Dmatm= single(zeros(nb ,p.n_d ,12));
111
112
113 YEAR = 0; % current
year of
simulation
114
115 mon = [0 31 28 31 30 31 30 31 31 30 31 30 ];
116 ticks = (1+ cumsum(mon))*2;
117 ticks (1) = 1;
118 labels = [{’J’} {’F’} {’M’} {’A’} {’M’} {’J’} {’J’} {’A’} {’S’} {’O’} {’N’} {’D’}];
119
120 mon2 = [31 28 31 30 31 30 31 31 30 31 30 31]*2;
121
122
123 %% Running
the TM with
the
Generalist +Diatom
model
124 elapsed_time = zeros (1, simtime);
125 tic
126 for i=1: simtime
127
telapsed = tic;
128
129
130
131
% Test
for
time to change
monthly
TM
Page 58 of 62
==PAGE:60==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
132
if
ismember(i, ticks +730* YEAR)%
133
month = month + 1;
134
TIMESTEP = 0;
135
% Reset to Jan
136
if month > 12
137
month = 1;
138
end
139
% Load TM
140
if month < 10
141
load(strcat(loadPath , num2str(month), ’.mat ’));
142
disp(strcat(loadPath , num2str(month), ’.mat ’))
143
else
144
load(strcat(loadPath1 , num2str(month), ’.mat ’));
145
disp(strcat(loadPath1 , num2str(month), ’.mat ’))
146
147
end
148
149
Aexp= function_convert_TM_positive (Aexp);
150
Aimp= function_convert_TM_positive (Aimp);
151
152
% Preparing
for
timestepping . 43200s.
153
Aexp = Ix + (12*60*60)*Aexp;
154
Aimp = Aimp ^(36);
155
156
% Set
monthly
mean
temperature
157
p.T = Tmat(:, month);
158
159
% Temperature
corrections :
160
%
161
ANdT = p.AN_d .*1.5.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
162
ANgT = p.AN_g .*1.5.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
163
JmaxdT = p.Jmax_d .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
164
JmaxgT = p.Jmax_g .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
165
JRd = p.Jresp_d .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
166
JRg = p.Jresp_g .*2.^(p.T ’./10 -1);
167
168
end
169
170
p.i = i/2;
%set
time of year [days] (for
light)
171
172
for j=1: length(lyr_n)
173
p.LYR = lyr_ind(j):lyr_end(j);
%current
layer
indices
174
p.phi = Ybox(p.LYR);
%set
latitude
175
176
p.ANdT = ANdT(:,p.LYR);
177
p.ANgT = ANgT(:,p.LYR);
178
p.JmaxdT = JmaxdT (:,p.LYR);
179
p.JmaxgT = JmaxgT (:,p.LYR);
180
p.JRd = JRd(:,p.LYR);
181
p.JRg = JRg(:,p.LYR);
Page 59 of 62
==PAGE:61==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
182
183
IC = [N(p.LYR) DOC(p.LYR) Si(p.LYR) Dmat(p.LYR ,:)
Gmat(p.LYR ,:) ];
%initial
conditions
for ode
184
185
[t,u] = ode23(@calcrates_anton , [0 0.5] , [IC ],[],z(j),p);
186
187
188
189
% only
final
results
for now ....
190
N(p.LYR)
= u(end ,1: lyr_n(j));
191
DOC(p.LYR)
= u(end ,lyr_n(j)+1: lyr_n(j)*2);
192
Si(p.LYR)
= u(end ,lyr_n(j)*2+1: lyr_n(j)*3);
193
Dmat(p.LYR ,:)
= reshape(u(end ,lyr_n(j)*3+1: lyr_n(j)*(3+p.n_d)) ,[],p.n_d);
194
Gmat(p.LYR ,:)
= reshape(u(end ,lyr_n(j)*(3+p.n_d)+1: end) ,[],p.n_g);
195
196
197
end
198
TIMESTEP = TIMESTEP +1;
199
% Transport
200
N
= Aimp * ( Aexp * N);
201
DOC = Aimp * ( Aexp
* DOC);
202
Si
= Aimp * ( Aexp
* Si);
203
204
for k = 1: size(Dmat ,2)
205
Dmat(:,k) =
Aimp * ( Aexp
* Dmat(:,k));
206
end
207
208
for k = 1: size(Gmat ,2)
209
Gmat(:,k) =
Aimp * ( Aexp
* Gmat(:,k));
210
end
211
212
213
N(N < 0) = 0;
214
DOC(DOC < 0) = 0;
215
Si(Si <0) = 0;
216
Gmat(Gmat < 1e-6 ) = 0;
217
Dmat(Dmat < 1e-6) = 0;
218
219
220
%save
timeseries
221 %
Nd(:,i) = N;
222 %
DOCd(:,i) = DOC;
223 %
Sid(:,i) = Si;
224 %
Dmatd (:,:,i)= Dmat;
225 %
Gmatd (:,:,i) = Gmat;
226
227
Nm(:, month) = (Nm(:, month)*( TIMESTEP -1) + single(N))/TIMESTEP;
228
DOCm(:, month) = (DOCm(:, month)*( TIMESTEP -1) + single(DOC))/TIMESTEP;
229
Sim(:, month) = (Sim(:, month)*( TIMESTEP -1) + single(Si))/TIMESTEP;
230
Dmatm (:,:, month)= (Dmatm (:,:, month)*( TIMESTEP -1) + single(Dmat))/TIMESTEP;
Page 60 of 62
==PAGE:62==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
231
Gmatm (:,:, month) = (Gmatm (:,:, month)*( TIMESTEP -1) + single(Gmat))/TIMESTEP;
232
233
234
if
ismember(i,cumsum(mon2)+730* YEAR)
235
236
save ([ num2str(YEAR +10) ,’yr_n8_noDOC .mat ’],’Dmatm ’,’Gmatm ’,’Sim ’,’Nm’,’DOCm ’,’
elapsed_time ’,’p’)
237
%save ([ num2str(YEAR),’yr_n8.mat ’],’Dmatm ’,’Gmatm ’,’Sim ’,’Nm ’,’DOCm ’,’elapsed_time
’,’p’)
238
239
end
240
241
242
243
%
244
elapsed_time (i) = toc(telapsed);
245
if mod(i ,30) == 0
246
disp ([’t=’,num2str(i)]);
247
248
end
249
if mod(i ,730) ==0
250
251
save ([ num2str(YEAR +10) ,’yr_n8_noDOC .mat ’],’Dmatm ’,’Gmatm ’,’Sim ’,’Nm’,’DOCm ’,’
elapsed_time ’,’p’)
252
%save ([ num2str(YEAR),’yr_n8.mat ’],’Dmatm ’,’Gmatm ’,’Sim ’,’Nm ’,’DOCm ’,’elapsed_time ’,’
p’)
253
%reset
monthly
results
for new
year
254
Nm = single(zeros(nb ,12));
255
DOCm = single(zeros(nb ,12));
256
Sim = single(zeros(nb ,12));
257
258
Gmatm= single(zeros(nb ,p.n_g ,12));
259
Dmatm= single(zeros(nb ,p.n_d ,12));
260
261
YEAR = YEAR + 1;
262
end
263 end
264 solvingtime = toc;
265 disp ([’solvingtime = ’,num2str( solvingtime /3600) , ’ hours ’]);
266
267 %% Convert
back to grid
format (december)
268 N = matrixToGrid (Nm(: ,12) , [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin/MITgcm/grid.
mat ’);
269 DOC = matrixToGrid (DOCm (: ,12) , [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin/MITgcm/
grid.mat ’);
270 Si = matrixToGrid (Sim (: ,12), [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’../ bin/MITgcm/grid
.mat ’);
271 %%
272 for i = 1:p.n_d
273
D(:,:,:,i) = matrixToGrid (Dmatm (:,i ,12) , [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’
Page 61 of 62
==PAGE:63==
Global distribution of unicellular plankton traits
November 17, 2019
../ bin/MITgcm/grid.mat ’);
274 end
275
276 for i = 1:p.n_g
277
G(:,:,:,i) = matrixToGrid (Gmatm (:,i ,12) , [], ’../ bin/MITgcm/Matrix5/Data/boxes.mat ’, ’
../ bin/MITgcm/grid.mat ’);
278 end
1 function
A3= function_convert_TM_positive (A)
2
3 N = A - diag(diag(A));
4 N(N >0) =0;
5
6 A2= A- N + (-N’);
7
8 DA=diag(A2) ’+ sum(N,1) +sum(N ,2) ’;
9
10 A3= A2 - diag(diag(A2)) + diag(DA);
11
12 end
Page 62 of 62
