==PAGE:1==
Decision Support System for Ballast
Maintenance in Railways
Hussain Ramahi (s127629)
Master of Science in Engineering
2019
==PAGE:2==
Decision Support System for Ballast
Maintenance in Railways, Master Thesis
Report written by:
Hussain Ramahi (s127629)
Advisor(s):
Roberto Galeazzi, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Seyed Mohammad Asadzadeh, Postdoc at Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
14. May- 14. November
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Transportation and Logistics
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Hussain Ramahi, 2019
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The project aims at decision support tools to help railway infrastructure managers plan
preventive maintenance and track renewal. In particular, tamping as a preventive ac-
tion to restore track geometry is considered. A simulation tool integrating models of
track subgrade deterioration, ballast settlement, and track geometry degradation is de-
veloped. The models are based on experimental results found in the literature. The
simulation model generates the evolution of track structure condition through its life-
time. A decision between preventive maintenance or track renewal is made with respect
to the current and predicted condition of the track. Feasible scenarios of preventive
maintenance and track renewal are evaluated based on cost and safety indicators. A
multi-attribute decision-making tool is formulated to determine best feasible scenarios.
The results show that the time for track renewal could be optimally determined by
monitoring of track longitudinal level and frequency of tamping events.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The research presented in this master thesis was prepared with the Department of Elec-
trical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark under the supervision of
Associate Professor Roberto Galeazzi and Postdoc Seyed Mohammad Asadzadeh. In
fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s degree in science.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to dedicate this research to my dear mother, Afrah Mirza Hussain, for the
love, belief, and support she has given me through my entire university study.
I would also especially like to extend the sincerest gratitude for my supervisors,
Roberto and Seyed, for their guidance, encouragement, and support during my research.
Thank you for believing and trusting me with the freedom to steer the research process.
I appreciate the opportunity you have made available for me, and I will cherish this
learning experience for as long as possible.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Purpose of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Objectives of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Scope and limitations of research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Research Methodlogy
5
2.1
Research Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Research Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Theoretical Framework
7
3.1
Track Structure and Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Track Support Stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Track Geometry Degradation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Track Quality Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Maintenance Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Tamping Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Literature review
15
4.1
Track geometry gegradation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Effect of ballast tamping on track geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Track stiffness and modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Decision Support Model
21
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.1
Model assumptions and parameter estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Results and Discussion
31
7
Conclusion and contribution
39
Appendices
41
A Banedanmark Annual Traffic Density
44
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Research process used to develop Decision support model . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Track structure components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Relationship between the axes of the track co-ordinate system (DS/EN 13848-
1: 2003+A1 2008)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Longitudinal Level (DS/EN 13848-1: 2003+A1 2008) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Track deterioration process due to variations in track modulus . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Impact of track components on track modulus (Selig and Li 1994) . . . . . .
9
3.6
Maintenance zones based on maintenance limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Schematic illustration of tamping process (Zaayman 2017) . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.8
Schematic view of different tamping types (Selig and Li 1994)
. . . . . . . .
13
5.1
Simulated recovery values SDLL after tamping (Soleimanmeigouni et al. 2018) 24
5.2
Main statistics of the dependent and independent variables. (Grossoni et al.
2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Distribution of profile defects per km (Roghani and Hendry 2017) . . . . . .
26
5.4
Simulation process flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1
Simulated degradation path for 15 annual MGT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Evolution of track geometry degradation rate and variance . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Track support stiffness mean value and standard deviation . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.4
Sample convergence of mean maintenance cost per. MGT . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.5
Contour plot for mean maintenance cost (DKK/MGT) for 15 MGT/year . .
34
6.6
Contour plot for average SDLL (mm) for 15 MGT/year . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.7
Contour plot for PM Ratio for 15 MGT/year
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.8
Contour plot for MCDA score when maintenance cost is dominant, 15 MGT/year 35
6.9
Contour plot for MCDA score when SDLL is dominant, 15 MGT/year
. . .
36
6.10 Contour plot for MCDA score when Cost and SDLL is weighted equally, 15
MGT/year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
List of Tables
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The following chapter presents the aspects that cover the research problem and defines
the objectives and limitations of the thesis. In order to make the reader more acquainted
with the area of research.
1.1
Background
Railways play a significant role in the infrastructure and public transportation, while
also being vitally importation for economic growth. Railway infrastructure is purposely
built only for trains to run on them, and while this fact is evident to modern society,
running trains safe is a complex effort and economically expensive. After all, reliability
and safety are the leading fundamental factors in providing public transportation, and
for railway services, this means that both railway infrastructure and rolling stock must
provide a high level of safety and reliability to function purposely.
Railway tracks degrade over time through aging and usage, and while this degrada-
tion is generally slow, it can be a leading factor in failures associated with functionality
and reliability, and with significant maintenance expenses. The accumulated static and
dynamic forces from traffic will over the long-term result in permanent deformation in
the ballast and subgrade (track substructure) and lead to settlements for the railway
track. The consequence of these settlements compromises the support conditions and
railway track geometry, which affects the ability to provide the needed safety and ride
comfort (Tzanakakis 2013). In order to restore track geometry conditions, infrastructure
owners plan maintenance actions to regain an acceptable state for geometry.
Therefore it is in the interest of infrastructure owners to employ efficient and cost-
effective maintenance strategies that provide a higher level of flexibility against failures
that result in a more robust and available infrastructure. The implementation of effective
and efficient maintenance strategies requires a detailed understanding of the track geom-
etry degradation process and various factors affecting it, such as dynamic vehicle load,
track stiffness, and restoration effect after maintenance (Tzanakakis 2013). Although
extensive research has been carried out in the field of track geometry degradation, no sin-
gle study exists which evaluates the complexity of the degradation mechanism with the
interaction of track stiffness degradation and the effect of maintenance in that respect.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Problem Statement
Worldwide railway traffic has been increasing remarkably over recent decades, and this
is a result of significant investments in different facets of the railway sector and changes
in the demographics of society. The railway traffic is expected to grow further as both
passenger and cargo transportation is shifting from road to rail, due to the increasing
demands for emission reduction, rise in energy costs and level of congestion of roads
(Commission 2011). To clarify this, the European Commission presented some primary
goals for the transport system of Europe, which states that 50 % of medium intercity
passenger and freight tours should shift from road to rail and maritime transport and that
GHG emissions from the transportation sector be reduced 60% by 2050 (Commission
2011).
Altogether this led to an increase in the use of the railways and the require for
more capacity. The railway network capacity is influenced mainly by the railway in-
frastructure, number of available tracks but also the stopping pattern, timetable, and
requirements for punctuality. Studies confirm that railway capacity can be enhanced
by (postulation): expanding infrastructure, improving the efficiency and effectiveness
of operations and maintenance, and by introducing better technology (Stenström and
Parida 2013). Thus, will infrastructure managers face an increase in demands by traffic
operators and passengers and be required to ensure safe, reliable and comfortable railway
service (Patra 2009).
Providing safe and reliable train transportation is a rather complicated task; for
infrastructure owners, the ability to meet those requirements rely on the capability of
evaluating the occurrence of geometry defects in the decision-making process supporting
the maintenance and renewal. Evaluating track geometry conditions by capturing the nu-
merous factors affect the degradation process is challenging, and the need for developing
proper models that address the critical aspects of railway track geometry degradation be-
comes more urgent (Andrade and Teixeira 2015.Elkhoury et al. 2018). These effects are
therefore essential to assess when modeling the evolution of track geometry degradation
over multiple maintenance actions.
Though maintenance restores the track geometry condition to a safe and accept-
able level, there are still some disadvantages associated with post-restoration. Ballast
tamping is a remedy for geometry failures and will improve the condition of the track
geometry. Although ballast tamping provides improvements in the geometry condition,
it cannot rejuvenate the track condition to as-good-as-new state. Recent studies study
evaluating the effect of tamping on track geometry conditions, observe that the degrada-
tion rate increases after tamping (Soleimanmeigouni et al. 2018,Audley and JD Andrews
2013).
Another challenge that arises related to the degradation of the substructure is mod-
eling how the change in track modulus affects track geometry defects. Previous studies
have identified that low track modulus and significant variations in track modulus causes
an increase in the rate of track geometry degradation and subsequent development of
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Purpose of research
3
irregularities (Roghani and Hendry 2017,Grossoni et al. 2019).
However, there have
been limited studies attempting to evaluate the track geometry condition based on the
quantification of substructure condition, due to the limited means to measure the track
modulus. Therefore it is a critical factor to consider as a degradation parameter when
modeling the track geometry degradation.
Planning of maintenance actions is dependent on the infrastructure managers’ ability
to assess the track quality and allocation of maintenance limits. Inappropriate mainte-
nance limits can cause an increase in premature inventions and impose higher mainte-
nance costs, improve track geometry quality in the short-term and destroy the ballast
layers faster (John Andrews 2013). Overdue maintenance actions, in contrast, comprise
safety, reliability, which may lead to increased risk of derailment and potential line
closure. Therefore a crucial factor for maintenance performance is allocating adequate
maintenance limits for tamping and renewal that are cost-effective and provide optimal
safety and reliability. However, the maintenance limits are only as effective as the ability
to represent the track geometry condition.
1.3
Purpose of research
The purpose of research for this thesis is to develop an integrated degradation model
for simulating track geometry degradation considering the influences of substructure
deterioration and recovery effect of tamping.
The model is intended to provide the
input for a decision support system in order to advance the decision-making process of
preventive maintenance and track renewal.
1.4
Objectives of research
In this thesis, the following objectives are formulated to pursue the research purpose:
• To develop an integrated degradation model that can simulate the degradation
path of the longitudinal level for track geometry, by considering the degradation
of subgrade, ballast settlement as dominant parameters subject to accumulated
load.
• To propose a decision support tool for determining when to plan for preventive
maintenance and track renewal, based on maintenance performance indicators gen-
erated from modeling the evolution of the track geometry condition.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.5
Research questions
In order to satisfy the research objectives, this study seeks to address the following
questions:
• How can the track geometry degradation be modeled, taking into account the
deterioration of track modulus and recovery effect of tamping?
• How do different maintenance limits affect the track geometry condition and sub-
sequently decision-making process for tamping or renewal ?
1.6
Scope and limitations of research
In accordance with the research purpose and objectives the scope and limitations of this
research are as follows:
• For this research, the geometry parameter of the longitudinal level is the main
parameter for modeling track geometry degradation. Other geometry parameters,
i.e., alignment, cant, twist, and gauge, are briefly defined but excluded in the scope
of this study.
• Ballast Tamping is the only preventive maintenance activity considered in this
study; other activities e.g., stone blowing and ballast cleaning, are above the scope
of this thesis.
• For this research, maintenance planning is defined as the process of establishing
what type of maintenance need to be completed; allocation of time and resources
is above the scope of this thesis.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Research Methodlogy
The following chapter describes the aspects of the research approach, methodology, and
data collection.
2.1
Research Purpose
Research can be defined in different ways but is also commonly recognized as a scien-
tific and systematic examination of observed information to answer a specific problem
(Kothari 2004). The purpose of research falls into different perspectives, such as ex-
ploratory, explanatory, or descriptive research (H Russell Bernard and Harvey Russell
Bernard 2013). Exploratory research is useful when the researcher lack to conceptualize
a clear idea of the research problem; the aim of this approach is dedicated to gain greater
familiarity with the specific research phenomenon (Kothari 2004). Descriptive research
used to categorize the present level of knowledge in the field of interest to describe
the research phenomenon more detailed with techniques comparable with the existing
knowledge (Kothari 2004).
The research methodology selected for this thesis is a combination of the approaches
referenced above. The exploratory approach was adopted in the initial phase of becoming
familiar with the level of knowledge concerning track geometry degradation modeling
and track substructure degradation modeling, to identify gaps and opportunities for
extending proposed modeling approaches in the existing literature. The knowledge ob-
tained by the exploratory research is also used to formulate the research questions in
the thesis. A descriptive and explanatory approach was applied when developing an
integrated degradation model that captures the aspects of track geometry and subgrade
degradation, tamping recovery effect, and how to evaluate different maintenance limits
for decision support of ballast tamping and track renewal.
2.2
Research Approach
Research can be either applied or fundamental, which relates to finding a solution to a
problem in society or an industrial/business organization (Kothari 2004). In contrast,
research primarily concerned with generalization and formulation of a theory viewed
as ‘fundamental’ (Kothari 2004). This thesis is considered as applied research as the
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Research Methodlogy
research phenomenon is a real practical issue for railway infrastructure owners and re-
quires an appropriate solution; the purpose is to develop an integrated railway track
degradation model capturing the research phenomenon with the means to support the
decision-making process of ballast tamping and track renewal.
2.3
Data Collection
The data collected for this present thesis is mostly secondary data, which refers to data
and estimates found in the literature review, and also by consulting railway track experts.
2.4
Research Process
The following figure presents the different steps used in the research process, and their
sequence in order to reach the desired objectives:
1.Define research statement
2.Specify research purpose
3.Specify model criteria and
constraint conditions
Background
4.Identify alternative
methodologies
Existing methodologies
Extension to the
methodologies
5.Construction of
methodology
6.Estimation of model
paramters
7.Evaluation of
proposed model
8.Required model
modification
Research demand
Figure 2.1: Research process used to develop Decision support model.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Framework
The following chapter describes the theoretical framework and basic concepts related to
the research area and thesis in particular.
3.1
Track Structure and Geometry
3.1.1
Railway Track Structure
Railway infrastructure is a complex system and comprised of several subsystems, track
system, telecommunication and signaling system, OCS and power supply system. The
railway track includes superstructure and substructure as illustrated in (Figure 3.1). The
Figure 3.1: Track structure components.
superstructure includes rails, fastenings system, ties, fasteners, while the substructure
consists of ballast, sub-ballast, and subgrade. The super- and substructure are disjointed
by the tie-ballast interface.The fundamental purpose of the track is to provide safe train
transportation and support by distributing the load through track components to the
subgrade. The support capacity and durability of the track structure depends on the
interaction between the superstructure and substructure subject to train load and en-
vironmental impact(Attoh-Okine 2017). Besides, the subgrade act as the foundation
layer of the track structure, and its particular quality has a direct impact on the prece-
dent components. Maintaining track geometry becomes difficult if the subgrade does
not provide necessary support stiffness, and will consequently require more frequent
maintenance interventions
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Theoretical Framework
.However, these interventions commonly directly affect the superstructure and dis-
regarding the fact that the majority of geometry defects observed in the superstructure
are traceable to the subgrade(Tzanakakis 2013).
3.1.2
Track Geometry
The track geometry relates to the three-dimensional geometry of the track and the asso-
ciated measurements used in the design, construction, and maintenance planning. Track
geometry is as structure also affects by the operational and environmental conditions
and maintenance. According to European standard 13848-1:2003, the track geometry
quality is defined as “assessment of excursions from the mean or designed geometrical
characteristics of specified parameters in the vertical and lateral planes which give rise
to safety concerns or have a correlation with ride quality”. The main track geometric pa-
rameters considered for assessment of track quality, track irregularities and maintenance
planning are the alignment, longitudinal level, gauge, cant and twist. For this study the
main track geometry parameter used to evaluate the track quality is the longitudinal
level as illustrated in (Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.2: Relationship between the axes of the track co-ordinate system (DS/EN
13848-1: 2003+A1 2008).
Figure 3.3: Longitudinal Level (DS/EN 13848-1: 2003+A1 2008).
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Track Support Stiffness
9
3.2
Track Support Stiffness
Track support stiffness is used to describe the support condition and stability of the
track. ( Tzanakakis 2013) Mention that the general understanding for track stiffness is
the ratio of load applied to the rail over vertical rail deflection. Track modulus, on the
other hand, refers to the track and is a measure of vertical stiffness between the rail base
and track foundation (Selig and Li 1994). The track modulus has a significant impact on
the overall track performance, and affect the deterioration process of the track. Changes
and variations in track modulus will induce changes in contact force between wheel and
rail, and this acts as a catalyst for track degradation and increases track settlement as
a consequence of permanent deformation in the substructure ( Tzanakakis 2013). The
following figure illustrates the process:
Changes in track
modulus
Changes in wheel/rail
contract force
Wheel/rail interaction
forces increases
Track degradation
Track deterioration
rate increases
Figure 3.4: Track deterioration process due to variations in track modulus.
The collective substructure components contribute to the track modulus; several
studies have investigated (Stewart and Selig 1982), (Shahin and Indraratna 2006) the
significance of each substructure component to the track response. Based on static and
dynamic models, the conclusion is that the subgrade contributes to the most significant
influence on the overall track responds.( Selig and Li 1994) identifies that a factor 10
increase in subgrade modulus corresponds to an increase in overall track modulus by a
factor 8. The following figure show the impact of track components on track modulus:
Figure 3.5: Impact of track components on track modulus (Selig and Li 1994).
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Theoretical Framework
3.3
Track Geometry Degradation
Track geometry degradation is a complex phenomenon that is influenced by various
factors and the interaction amongst them. Track irregularities develop as a result of dy-
namic, static and semi-static contact forces produced by the wheel-rail interface. These
contact forces contribute to the dynamic track loads that cause the track geometry
to deviate from the horizontal and vertical design profile(Tzanakakis 2013 and Esveld
2001). Dynamic track forces result in longitudinal loads that are parallel to the track
and affect the degradation of track geometry and track stiffness. The long-term effect
of the loading process results in permanent deformation in the track substructure layers
caused by the inelastic behavior of these layers and their ability to recover deformations
upon unloading (Tzanakakis 2013). The magnitude of track settlements depends on the
quality and support stiffness of ballast, sub-ballast, and subgrade. Due to the variation
in support stiffness, the load is consequently not uniformly distributed, which causes
differential settlement along the track, thus more standard deviation in the longitudinal
level.
3.4
Track Quality Index
Railway track geometry condition is evaluated through quantification of the track qual-
ity index, which characterizes the track geometry quality of a track section based
on measured irregularities of the relative track geometry parameters( DS/CEN/TR-
16513 2014).The standard deviation is the track quality indicator commonly used to
describe the track geometry quality and refers to the deviations of rail positions in three-
dimensional space to the geometry parameters. The standard deviation also explains the
variation of track geometry measurements and usually calculated for track sections with
a 200m length filtered for a specific wavelength. For calculating the standard deviation
of a signal over a track section the following expression is used:
SD =
v
u
u
t
∑N
i=1 (xi −x)2
N −1
(3.1)
where xi and x is the current and mean value of the signal, and N is the number of
samples. In the European standard (DS/EN-13848–5 2017) three ranges of wavelengths
are defined:
• D1 : 3 m < λ ≤25 m
• D2 : 25 m < λ ≤70 m
• D3 : 70 m < λ ≤150 m
==PAGE:23==
3.5 Maintenance Limits
11
In this study the scope is limited to defects in the longitudinal level, and the wave-
length range used to calculate standard deviation in longitudinal level is D1, that sup-
ports short-term maintenance planning (DS/EN-13848–5 2017).The various track geom-
etry irregularities affect the train running behavior, safety and ride comfort differently.
A high amplitude for short wavelengths in the longitudinal level results in the experience
of bounce and pitch for the train vehicle, while also contributing to larger vibrations
and noise inside and outside the environment of the train (Iwnicki 2006). The longitu-
dinal level relates to the vertical forces and, thus, vertical acceleration, which the train
passengers can experience in ride discomfort.Therefore for track geometry quality assess-
ment the three indicators defined by the European standards (DS/EN-13848–5 2017)
are taken into consideration for longitudinal level defects:
• Mean to peak value in the wavelength range 3 to 25 m.
• Standard deviation over a defined length, typically 200 m track section.
• Zero to peak value of (isolated defects) that exceed threshold.
If the standard deviation is low, it indicates that the track geometry measurements
variate less around the mean value and the inverse relationship for high standard de-
viations.This suggest that for a track geometry with a higher standard deviation can
expect more irregularities and variability in vertical support stiffness.
3.5
Maintenance Limits
The previous subsection defines the track quality index for track geometry. The standard
deviation value provides, in other words, the level of defects. Based on the magnitude
of defect, defect type, and maximum allowed line speed, the European standard desig-
nates the threshold limits for three levels of intervention(maintenance limits)(DS/EN-
13848–5 2017). The values for these limits are given as a function of speed which is
significantly important in the deterioration process of track geometry. The maintenance
limits provided by the European standards are discrete threshold values proposing differ-
ent measures of action. The objective is to assist the infrastructure manager in planning
preventive and corrective maintenance of track geometry. For quality indicators based
on standard deviation the proposed threshold limits are intended for preventive mainte-
nance, while for isolated defects the purpose is to support the decision of intermediate or
immediate corrective maintenance depending on the amplitude of wavelength. In sum-
mary the following maintenance limits and description are determined by the European
standard (DS/EN-13848–5 2017):
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Theoretical Framework
• Immediate action limit (IAL): The IAL ‘refers to the value which, if exceeded,
requires taking measures to reduce the risk of derailment to an acceptable level.This
can be done either by closing the line, reducing speed or by correction of track
geometry’.
• Intervention limit (IL): The IL ‘refers to the value which, if exceeded, requires cor-
rective maintenance in order that the immediate action limit shall not be reached
before the next inspection’.
• Alert limit (AL): The AL ‘refers to the value which, if exceeded, requires that
the track geometry condition is analysed and considered in the regularly planned
maintenance operations’.
Figure 3.6 illustrate the maintenance zones based on determined limits related to the
track quality index of a isolated defects.
PM Zone
No action zone
CM Zone
Safety zone
AL
IL
IAL
Track Quality Index
Indicator of Isolated Defect
Figure 3.6: Maintenance zones based on maintenance limits.
==PAGE:25==
3.6 Tamping Process
13
3.6
Tamping Process
Ballast tamping is the process used to restore irregularities of the track geometry by
rearranging the ballast under sleeper to provide the desired profile level and alignment.
Also, the tamping process contributes to reducing the dynamic forces on the track,
which restores the support condition of the ballast layer and influences the track stiff-
ness(Lichtberger 2005). In order to understand the ballast tamping process and practical
execution, a principal sketch is provided in 3.7:
Figure 3.7: Schematic illustration of tamping process (Zaayman 2017).
Ballast tamping is the most common track maintenance activity and planned when
the standard deviations for the geometry measures exceed the maintenance threshold lim-
its. Depending on the magnitude of standard deviation and defect classification, tamping
can be either preventive or corrective maintenance action.There is also in that regard a
distinction between partial and complete tamping, referring to a particular segment of
the track section (partial) and complete tamping of the entire section (Soleimanmeigouni
et al. 2018). Partial tamping can additionally be classified into four types as illustrated
in 3.8:
Figure 3.8: Schematic view of different tamping types (Selig and Li 1994).
==PAGE:26==
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Literature review
The following chapter presents a review of existing literature covering track geometry
degradation models, methods for evaluating the effect of tamping and quantification
of track stiffness. The aim of the literature review is to become familiar with railway
track degradation models, and to identify methods adequate for modelling the research
phenomenon.
4.1
Track geometry gegradation models
Track geometry degradation models can be classified as deterministic or stochastic mod-
els. Based on the existing literature, there are different statistical approaches used to
model the degradation behavior of track geometry.
4.1.1
Deterministic models
Deterministic models apply when the input and output variables of the system are
assumed to be constant, and disregards any uncertainty associated with the degradation
path. Moreover, this means that the model output is only dependent on the initial
track condition and constant parameter values. In other words, deterministic models
suggest that track geometry degradation can follow a linear or non-linear (polynomial,
exponential etc.)
relationship considering the model parameters to be fixed (Guler,
Jovanovic, and Evren 2011, Öberg 2006). For linear models, the degradation parameters
considered to be linear, which infer that the track degrades at a constant rate, and once
the track condition reaches a specific quality threshold, maintenance is performed. By
contrast, non-linear degradation models assume the model parameters not to be linear.
(Chang, Liu, and Wang 2010) Propose a multi-stage linear model to forecast the changes
in track quality, by modeling the track irregularities over multiple stages and considering
the track geometry degradation rate to increase exponentially with the accumulated
traffic load. The deterministic approach requires large amounts of data sets about track
geometry and operations and focuses in general about the differential ballast settlement
as the main failure mechanism for track geometry.
However, being that the governing model variables and parameters are assumed to be
known, it also suggests the model output is unique by not accounting for any uncertainty.
Although these models are understandable and simple, they are not suitable for the
==PAGE:28==
16
4 Literature review
research in this thesis, because it requires large amounts of recorded data and lack
capture the uncertainty associated with different aspects of degradation.
4.1.2
Stochastic models
Stochastic approaches assume the uncertainty associated with modeling track geometry
degradation, through applying concepts from stochastic processes, probability theory,
and methods from the theory of statistics. These models are generally statistical mod-
els based on recorded track geometry data and represent actual events. The intent is
to determine the distribution of times for degradation events and forecast their path
(Andrews 2012). Statistical models have the capability of considering a large number of
descriptive factors that influence the track degradation process as input variables and
requires a significant amount of track performance data as an output variable, to con-
struct a relationship(Yousefikia et al. 2014, Zhang, Murray, and Ferreira 2000). Since
real data is used to develop the degradation model, it allows for a more accurate estima-
tion of the track degradation, which is an advantage of statistical models (Sadeghi and
Askarinejad 2010).
Different researchers have developed stochastic models for track geometry degrada-
tion, including methods like the Gamma process, Wiener process, etc. (Meier-Hirmer,
Senee, et al. 2006) evaluates the track geometry degradation using the gamma process
to model the changes in the standard deviation of the longitudinal level. The author
assumes that the degradation rate is dependent on variables such as ballast type, speed,
environmental, accumulated tonnage, and longitudinal gradient. The evolution of degra-
dation path for the Gamma process is monotonic and suitable for a system where the
degradation is the form of cumulative damage and caused by external shocks (Ye and
Xie 2015). The method is useful for degradation processes where the increments are
non-negative and monotonically increasing; however, if the degradation path has both
positive and negative increments, the gamma process may produce a wrong projection
of the degradation path (Ye and Xie 2015). For track geometry degradation, this case is
not uncommon, and the Wiener process can be applied. The Wiener process has been
applied to various industrial fields and in comparison with the Gamma process able to
handle non-homogeneous behaviors in the degradation process (Tang, Guo, and Zhou
2014).
In particular, for track geometry degradation, the stationary Wiener process with a
linear increase over time with random noise is adequate (Si et al. 2013). Another stochas-
tic approach considers both the longitudinal level and transversal as track quality pa-
rameters for modeling track geometry degradation (Mercier, Carolina Meier-Hirmer, and
Michel Roussignol 2012). The author applies a Bivariate Gamma process constructed
with the trivariate reduction to model the track geometry degradation as the selected
track parameters are dependent. Modeling the track geometry degradation with stochas-
tic processes allows capturing a certain level of uncertainty and can provide a more robust
maintenance plan, but there are some drawbacks with their application. In cases where
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Effect of ballast tamping on track geometry
17
the variance term in the degradation model exceeds the mean term significantly, the
stochastic process could result in inaccurate projections of the degradation path (Ye
and Xie 2015). Another drawback of the stochastic models relates to the complexity of
application and computation.
4.2
Effect of ballast tamping on track
geometry
Though maintenance restores the track geometry condition to a safe and acceptable level,
there are still some disadvantages associated with post-restoration. Ballast tamping is
a remedy for geometry failures and will improve the condition of the track geometry.
Although ballast tamping provides improvements in the geometry condition, it cannot
rejuvenate the track condition to as-good-as-new state. Recent studies study evaluating
the effect of tamping on track geometry conditions, observe that the degradation rate
increases after tamping (Soleimanmeigouni et al. 2018,Audley and JD Andrews 2013).
Therefore when modeling the evolution of track geometry degradation over multiple
maintenance interventions considering tamping effectiveness is necessary for capturing
the relative degradation behavior. Therefore when modeling the evolution of track ge-
ometry over multiple maintenance interventions considering tamping effectiveness is
necessary for capturing the relative degradation behavior. Modeling the recovery effect
after tamping can be done by deterministic or probabilistic approaches. The general dif-
ference relates to the level of uncertainty expected for the recovery values after tamping.
For deterministic approaches, modeling the recovery effect is a function of influencing
variables which includes, track geometry condition before tamping, speed, and mainte-
nance history (Meier-Hirmer, Sourget, and Roussignol 2005, Vale, Ribeiro, and Calçada
2011). Several studies have estimated the recovery effect of tamping with a determinis-
tic approach using linear regression models where the effect of tamping depends on the
track geometry condition before the intervention. These models are often adopted due
to their simplicity and used for the development of track maintenance models.
Probabilistic approaches aim to capture the uncertainty through modeling the re-
covery values after tamping by following a proper distribution, assuming the values are
random variables following a given distribution (Soleimanmeigouni et al. 2018,Audley
and JD Andrews 2013). The parameters of the distribution are a function of the in-
fluencing variables, and for each input variable, a specific distribution is fitted for the
recovery value. (Audley and JD Andrews 2013) Propose a probabilistic approach with
a linear function that is used to represent the relationship between the track geometry
quality, and the time taken to achieve that state. The authors suggest that this expres-
sion can be inverted to establish the time at which any standard deviation is obtained.
In this way, samples are generated to determine the distribution of times taken to reach
a certain track quality (standard deviation) for any given maintenance history. The
degradation data is analyzed for track belonging to four different speed and standard
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Literature review
deviation intervals for life phase maintenance covering from full renewal up to three
tamping interventions. The results of the analyzed distributions for times to a given
standard deviation show that the Weibull 2-parameter distribution provides the best for
the data and is used to determine the distribution of times to deteriorate to specified
track quality. The results show that the Weibull distribution parameters vary depending
on speed, maintenance history, and level of performance. It is observed that the charac-
teristic life parameter (Eta) decreases with the number of tamping interventions, which
support the theory that tamping damages the ballast quality and causes the geometry
to deteriorate faster. The results also observe that the shape parameter (Beta) indicat-
ing the rate of degradation increases with (sigma) the standard deviation implying that
the more the track geometry degrades, the higher the rate of degradation. The study
also investigates the chances of a particular performance level (a higher level for (sigma)
than specified) not being achieved following renewal and up to two tamps, for each line
speed category. For fitting the probabilities of not achieving a specified level of track
performance, the two-parameter log-normal distribution was found to provide the best
fit. The results show the probability of not achieving a certain performance level follow-
ing renewal, one and two tamps decreases for tracks with a poor track condition (higher
standard deviations) and increased operating line speed. The study demonstrates that
the effect of tamping is very depended upon both operating conditions (line speed and
load) and the maintenance history. The results imply that for increased line speeds, the
track will require more maintenance to obtain an acceptable standard than for slower
tracks.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Track stiffness and modulus
19
4.3
Track stiffness and modulus
Track modulus has a significant influence on the support conditions for the track and
also on the degradation process. In a recent study (Roghani and Hendry 2017) quantify
of the impact of subgrade stiffness on the development of track geometry defects and
degradation of track quality indices. Measurements of vertical track deflections (VTD)
are used to derive two indices to quantify the subgrade condition and track modulus.
The derived VTD parameters are used to quantify the impact on the development of dif-
ferent types of defects. The result presented in the analysis shows that the track quality
has an underlying relationship with the changes in subgrade conditions, more specifically
with changes in track modulus. The comparison analysis indicates a strong correlation
between the development of different track geometry defects subject to changes in track
stiffness. Also, the results imply that locations with lower track modulus (higher ob-
served VTD) and high variability in the changes of modulus are more challenging to
maintain, and at which maintenance interventions are not able to control the degrada-
tion of the track geometry.
(Grossoni et al. 2019) evaluate the role of track stiffness and its spatial variability
by several computational experiments. The author obtains the track support stiffness
by sampling from an ARIMA model to generate representative data sets from measured
support stiffness data. The computational experiments vary in different structural and
mechanic variables and integrate a VTI (Vehicle-track interaction) model to estimate
the track geometry degradation rates. Several log-linear regression models are used to
analyze the influence of different variables on track degradation rates.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Decision Support Model
The following chapter describes the proposed integrated degradation model and approach
for decision support.
5.1
Model assumptions and parameter
estimation
Developing an integrated track degradation model can be proposed in different ways
and by implementing different models related to partial aspects of the degradation phe-
nomenon. This research aims to evaluate the track geometry degradation in the longitu-
dinal level, by considering deterioration in subgrade as the dominant influencing factor
for the track geometry quality. More particular, the track geometry index should be
determined as a function of the subgrade condition. The subgrade is the dominant fac-
tor, but not independently responsible for the degradation observed in the track surface
level. When the track geometry condition exceeds the maintenance limit for standard
deviation in the longitudinal level, preventive maintenance (Ballast tamping) should be
planned according to the model. Furthermore, the recovery effect of tamping has to be
modeled to capture the track geometry restoration. Tamping action is also assumed to
reduce the rate of degradation temporarily at the surface level; however, the subgrade
condition continues to degrade over time, as tonnage accumulates. It is essential to re-
mind that no measurement data is used for simulating the evolution of degradation. All
data used for the integrated model is simulated and sampled from a different distribution.
As the model is expected to generate simulated data, it is important to consider a cer-
tain level of randomness and uncertainty. The different degradation mechanisms should
be integrated into a simulation model that can sample the evolution of the degradation
process, using traffic intensity, subgrade condition, initial track geometry condition, and
maintenance limits as input variables.
==PAGE:34==
22
5 Decision Support Model
5.1.1
Track geometry degradation model
For this study, the random coefficient Wiener process-based approach is used to model
the track geometry degradation. As mentioned in previous sections, the track geom-
etry degradation process is complicated. While some influencing stress factors can be
measured and quantified, there are still independent external effects that result in degra-
dation increments, disarranged time intervals, and can be considered as random noise.
The particular approach has some attractive characteristics that are proper for the degra-
dation phenomenon defined for this research. The stationary Wiener process allows for
simulating random degradation paths representing the evolution of track geometry by a
linear increase over time with random noise. This Wiener process has continuous sample
path and independent normally distributed increments (Si et al. 2013). Moreover, the
Wiener process is characterized by a drift parameter denoting the degradation rate and
by a Brownian motion reflecting stochastic and non-monotonic behavior of the degra-
dation process (Letot et al. 2016). Based on this characteristic, the Wiener process can
generate both positive and negative increments in the degradation path. The Wiener
process-based degradation model can be formulated as Z(t) according to (Kahle and
Lehmann 2010):
Z(t) = z0 + µt + σW(t)
(5.1)
Z(t) = N
(
z0 + µt, σ
√
t
)
(5.2)
t = N
(MGT/year
4
, MGT/year
4 · 10
)
(5.3)
W(t) = N
(
0,
√
t
)
(5.4)
σ ∼lognormal(log(µ), 0.592)
(5.5)
where Z(t) denotes the track geometry degradation value corresponding to the stan-
dard deviation in the longitudinal level, z0 is the initial track geometry condition, µ is
the random drift parameter denoting the degradation rate, σ is the random diffusion
parameter representing the variance of the degradation rate and W(t) is the standard
Brownian motion. Due to the Wiener process model link to the normal distribution,
equation 5.1 formulated as 5.2. The increments of the model (t) is defined by train load
(MGT), the annual traffic load is divided by the number of inspections (measurement
campaigns) for track quality class A (DS/EN-13848–5 2017), which is approximately
equivalent to three months.
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Model assumptions and parameter estimation
23
5.1.2
Track geometry degradation rate
The track geometry degradation rate is according to the literature (Grossoni et al. 2019)
mainly influenced by the track support stiffness condition, and Roghani and Hendry
2017 found that profile defects (standard deviations in longitudinal level) have a strong
correlation with subgrade modulus. For estimating the track geometry degradation rate,
we assumed that the main contribution to that effect is associated with the track support
stiffness from subgrade and partially from the ballast layers.
The track geometry degradation rate is estimated using a log-linear regression model
presented in (Grossoni et al. 2019). The log-linear regression model estimates the degra-
dation rate as a function of track support stiffness mean and standard deviation, as
expressed in equation (5.7). Furthermore, the degradation rate increase as the support
stiffness decreases over accumulated tonnage between maintenance actions.
Another assumption is that the degradation rate effective at the ballast level will
experience a short-term restoration, but will increase subsequently due to the continu-
ous loss in track support stiffness in the subgrade. Equation (5.8) is implemented to
consider this degradation mechanism, where θ denote the estimate for the increase in
track geometry degradation rate per million gross tonnes (mm/MGT 2).
µ(t) = α · f( µKz, σKz) + (1 −α) · g(MGT(t) −MGT(nt))
(5.6)
f( µKz, σKz) = exp(λ0 + λ1 · µKz + λ2 · σKz)
(5.7)
g(∆MGT) = θ · ∆MGT
(5.8)
θ = 0.01
2 · 15 , λ0 = −6.0912, λ1 = −0.0193, λ2 = 0.053
(5.9)
5.1.3
Tamping Recovery Effect
The recovery effect of tamping must be considered when modeling the long-term behavior
of the track geometry degradation over multiple maintenance interventions. The recovery
effect of tamping is dependent on the track geometry condition before maintenance,
restoration rate, and type of tamping (partial or complete) referring to 3.8. The recovery
effect of tamping is modeled using a linear regression model with a Gaussian error term
according to (Khajehei et al. 2019):
RLL = a + b · Z(t) + c
(5.10)
d = 0.07 + 0.16 · Z(t)
(5.11)
c = N
(
0, d
4
)
(5.12)
where RLL denote the recovery value for the longitudinal level, a is the regression
coefficient, b denote the restoration rate, and c is the Gaussian error term with a mean
==PAGE:36==
24
5 Decision Support Model
of zero, considering the uncertainty associated with tamping. The variance of the error
term is estimated using linear regression by sampling from (Soleimanmeigouni et al.
2018) simulated recovery data fitted to real recovery values. The estimate provide the
range of variance for recovery values, that accounts for noise for the recovery values.
1
2
1
2
Recovery values after tamping SDLL (mm)
SDLL before tamping (mm)
c = 0.07 + 0.16 · SDLL
Range of variance for recovery values
(1, 0.23)
(0.5, 0.15)
Figure 5.1: Simulated recovery values SDLL after tamping (Soleimanmeigouni et al.
2018).
5.1.4
Change in track support stiffness
The track geometry condition is estimated from the support stiffness and expected to
degrade over time with the accumulation of load. Vertical irregularities depend on the
variation and change support stiffness. Therefore exponential regression models were
applied to model the change in support stiffness from a maximum state to a minimum
giving by the main statistics presented in figure 5.2. For the mean support stiffness
µKz, the track will decrease from maximum to minimum over one hundred years with 15
million gross tonnes annually. Also, for the standard deviation of support stiffness, the
same regression model is estimated. The difference is that the standard deviation will
increase with variations in support stiffness. These two regression models are relevant
because when the Wiener process uses the mean and standard deviation of support
stiffness to estimate the track geometry degradation rate, which is dependent on MGT
as presented in the following expressions:
µKz(t) = 159.98 · exp(−0.223 · MGT(t)0.25)
(5.13)
σKz(t) = 30 −25.075 · exp(−0.007 · MGT(t))
(5.14)
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Model assumptions and parameter estimation
25
Figure 5.2: Main statistics of the dependent and independent variables. (Grossoni et
al. 2019).
5.1.5
Initial track geometry condition
In order to initialize the track geometry degradation process, the initial geometry condi-
tion z0 for the Wiener process must be estimated. (Roghani and Hendry 2017) Evaluate
the prevalence of different geometry defects compared with the level of vertical track
deflection for subgrade and changes in track stiffness. From the support stiffness vari-
ables µKz and σKz, they represent the same quality index as V TDsub and ∆V TDsub,
particularly the track stiffness. Therefore the values are normalised by range:
V TDsub = (µKz −40) · (6 −2)
(160 −40) + 2
(5.15)
∆V TDsub = (σKz −5) · (0 −1.5)
(30 −5) + 0
(5.16)
V TDsub : [2 : 6]
∆V TDsub : [0 : 1.5]
µKz : [40 : 160]
σKz : [5 : 30]
==PAGE:38==
26
5 Decision Support Model
Figure 5.3: Distribution of profile defects per km (Roghani and Hendry 2017).
From 5.3 a regression model is fitted to the data presented in the figure, in order
to estimate the level of profile defect for the normalised values. The estimated defect
level is assumed to be the initial track geometry condition, that express the standard
deviation in longitudinal level.
5.1.6
Cost model
Maintenance limits can affect the long-term track performance, with low thresholds
maintenance is expected to be planned more frequent, this may provide the desired
track geometry quality in short-term, while also destroying the ballast layer faster. Con-
sidering this from an economic aspect it increases the maintenance costs. Therefore is
the proposed maintenance limits for track geometry considered a decision variable, be-
cause it can affect both maintenance cost and long-term reliability. Hence a cost model
is developed to evaluate the maintenance cost for different maintenance limits, taking
into account the costs associated with inspection (as time-steps simulated by the Wiener
process), preventive maintenance and track renewal. The proposed cost model presented
in the following:
Ctot = Cins ·
∑
(Ni) + Cpm
∑
(Npm) + CR
(5.17)
where Ctot is the total maintenance cost over the simulated degradation path, Ni denote
the number of inspections, Npm is the number of tampings, Cins, Cpm, CR are arbitrary
unit costs for inspection, tamping and renewal.
==PAGE:39==
5.1 Model assumptions and parameter estimation
27
5.1.7
Multi-criteria decision analysis and Simulation
model
The factors that influence the decision for ballast tamping and track renewal can be
related to safety, reliability, cost, and maintenance operation. The value/performance of
these influences can be provided from the degradation modeling, and hold a significant
strategic impact on the infrastructure and surrounding environment. These types of
indicators/influences are evaluated based on multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA).
The maintenance cost cannot be the primary driver for supporting the decision for
maintenance or renewal. Therefore the MCDA can improve the satisfaction and quality
of the decision-making process. The aim of using this approach for decision making is
to break down the complicated decisions into convenient segments that can be assessed
individually and recombined through a logical approach. The general structure of an
MCDA is comprised of the aspects:
1. Set of available alternatives (Different maintenance limits)
2. Set of criteria (Representing the characteristics of the alternatives)
3. The preference structure of the decision-maker (Reflected in criteria weight)
The set of alternatives is related to different maintenance limits for ballast and re-
newal. The maintenance limit for track geometry is the threshold for standard deviation
in the longitudinal level. Track renewal is associated with the support condition of the
track substructure and is usually not measured by any geometric quality index. There-
fore a new renewal threshold is introduced for supporting the decision for track renewal
and is defined as ’Tamping frequency.’ This threshold represents the time ’MGT’ be-
tween ballast tamping. An alternative for this study is a combination of maintenance
limit (AL) and tamping frequency (TF). The following ranges define the total number
of combinations (scenarios) evaluated by simulation:
AL = [0.8 : 0.1 : 2] TF = [20 : 2.5 : 40] MGTyear = [5 : 1 : 35]
(5.18)
The last range defines the annual traffic load and is intended for testing model robustness,
and to evaluate how sensitive the degradation of track geometry is to changes in traffic
intensity. The method used for performing the MCDA is the additive AHP method.
The intent behind the use of additive AHP is to enable a pair-wise comparison between
different criteria to express the relative preference.
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Decision Support Model
For this MCDA, the following criteria are considered:
1. Maintenance cost - that is a unit price describing the average cost of maintenance
per. Million gross tonnes (DKK/MGT).
2. Mean SDLL - this describes the average standard deviation in the longitudinal
level.
3. PM Ratio - This ratio is a risk indicator, and is estimated from the amount of
standard deviation above and below the maintenance limit (AL).
The pair-wise comparison requires a panel of experts to make a comparison between
the selected criteria and adequately assess them.
However, it is essential to discuss
speed in this part of the process. Speed is the most crucial part of assessing different
maintenance limits because of the limit value is a function of speed. Also, for safety and
reliability, speed plays an important role.
The integrated degradation model is illustrated in the simulation framework pre-
sented in figure 5.4.The simulation model is designed to output the values required for
the MCDA criteria. At simulation start the model initializes the track geometry condi-
tion and track support stiffness, and this is only executed for the first time-step. From
the initial values of the track geometry degradation rate, and standard deviation are
estimated and enters the Wiener Process. The Wiener process continues to sample the
degradation path as long as the maintenance limit (AL) is not exceeded while updating
its model parameters for (MGT) for every time-step. Otherwise, tamping is executed,
and the recovery effect is determined, and the track geometry condition is updated.
The simulation proceeds within those loops until the threshold for tamping frequency
(TF) is reached, then the simulation ends. The simulation stores all the variables and
parameters presented in the flowchart.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Model assumptions and parameter estimation
29
Determine Track Geometry
Degradation rate:
µTG(k −1)
Determine Standard Deviation
Track Geometry Degradation rate:
σTG(k −1)
Start simulation
Initialize Track Support Stiffness:
µKz and σKz
Vertical Track Deflection in Subgrade:
V TDsub and ∆V TDsub
Determine level of profile defects:
DLL
Determine initial Track Geometry
Condition:
SDLLint(k −1)
Update Track Geometry Degradation
by Wiener Process-Based Model:
Z(k) = N
(
z0 + µt, σ
√
t
)
Update Track Geometry
Degradation rate:
µTG(k)
Update Standard Deviation
Track Geometry
Degradation rate:
σTG(k)
Z(k) > ALi
Time Step:
k = k + 1
Threshold for track geometry
maintenance alert limit:
AL = SDLL(mm)
Threshold for tamping
frequency:
TF = 1/MGT
FT >= TF
End Simulation
Tamping frequency:
FT = NT/MGT
Execute tamping: NT
Evaluate Recovery effect of tamping
for Track Geometry Condition:
SDLL(k) −RLL(k)
Update initial Track Geometry Condition:
SDLL(k −1) = SDLL(k) −RLL(k)
Simulation Output:
PMRatio
Maintenance cost DKK/MGT
Mean SDLL
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Initialization of track geometry condition
Figure 5.4: Simulation process flowchart.
==PAGE:42==
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Results and Discussion
The following chapter discusses the results from the simulation model results.
Figure 6.1 show the track geometry degradation path simulated by the Wiener pro-
cess.
The degradation behaves according to the Wiener process stochastic behavior.
Also the effect of tamping is modeled in this plot. From the beginning the degradation
evolves slow, due to the stiffness of the subgrade. After the first tamping one can assume
the track stiffness is starting to decrease and show in the behavior of the track geometry.
0
100
200
300
400
500
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
Figure 6.1: Simulated degradation path for 15 annual MGT.
==PAGE:44==
32
6 Results and Discussion
Figure 6.2 these two plots illustrate the track geometry degradation rate and standard
deviation of that rate. It is interesting to evaluate how the degradation rate is behaving
with respect to MGT and tamping.Between maintenance actions the rate increases with
the increase in MTG, however the is reduced right at tamping and gains momentum
again until the next point of maintenance. This confirms the assumption that tamping
can restore the track geometry condition and rate, but with a increasing trend in the long-
term. Considering the standard deviation for magnitude is smaller than the degradation
rate along the degradation path. This is why the degradation do not demonstrate many
negative increments before any maintenance.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Figure 6.2: Evolution of track geometry degradation rate and variance.
==PAGE:45==
6 Results and Discussion
33
Figure 6.3 represent the change in subgrade support stiffness mean and standard
deviation over MGT.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
50
100
150
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
10
20
30
Figure 6.3: Track support stiffness mean value and standard deviation.
Figure 6.4 show a simulation scenario where the mean maintenance cost per. MGT
for AL=1mm and TF=1/30 starts to converge after 300-400 simulation runs.
0
100
200
300
400
500
570
580
590
600
610
620
630
640
650
Figure 6.4: Sample convergence of mean maintenance cost per. MGT.
==PAGE:46==
34
6 Results and Discussion
400
400
400
500
500
600
600
700
700
800
800
900
900
1000
20
25
30
35
40
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
Figure 6.5: Contour plot for mean maintenance cost (DKK/MGT) for 15 MGT/year.
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
1
1
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
20
25
30
35
40
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
Figure 6.6: Contour plot for average SDLL (mm) for 15 MGT/year.
==PAGE:47==
6 Results and Discussion
35
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
20
25
30
35
40
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Figure 6.7: Contour plot for PM Ratio for 15 MGT/year.
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
1
1
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
20
25
30
35
40
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Figure 6.8: Contour plot for MCDA score when maintenance cost is dominant, 15
MGT/year.
==PAGE:48==
36
6 Results and Discussion
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
1
1
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
20
25
30
35
40
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Figure 6.9: Contour plot for MCDA score when SDLL is dominant, 15 MGT/year.
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
1
1
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
20
25
30
35
40
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Figure 6.10: Contour plot for MCDA score when Cost and SDLL is weighted equally,
15 MGT/year.
==PAGE:49==
6 Results and Discussion
37
Figure 6.5 shows how maintenance costs are affected by the allocating different lim-
its for maintenance and renewal. The plot provides that average maintenance cost is
sensitive to the level of AL, but not so sensitive to TF, as the average price variates over
AL.
Figure 6.6 shows how the average standard deviation of the longitudinal level is
affected by the different limits.
It is clear to observe that TF do not influence the
average of SDLL as much as the AL. Another observation is that the average SDLL is
almost the same as AL, and this reflects the behavior of the degradation model.
Figure 6.8 and 6.9 represents the MCDA score when the criteria weights for mainte-
nance cost and standard deviation in longitudinal level is set to be completely dominant.
If the dominant factor is cost, the objective is to minimize the maintenance cost, and
the result of the simulation for all scenarios independent annual traffic load proposes the
highest level of AL=2mm and TF=1/40 MGT. Allowing the track geometry operates at
a high level of standard deviation, and minimizing the need for maintenance.
When the SDLL is the dominant criteria the model results suggest the lowest value
for AL=0.8mm and highest value for TF = 1/40 MGT. The criteria weight (SDLL=1)
suggest that the simulation scenario with the highest average level of standard deviation.
When the maintenance limit is at 0.8mm the track geometry will require maintenance
more frequent, which makes it difficult to reach renewal, but provides a high mean SDLL.
The evaluation of these two extremes provide that the simulation model is robust
and consistent in the results, as it reflects the relative degradation behavior and suggest
the same scenarios for all annual traffic load, although the illustrated figures is only show
15 MGT.
Figure 6.10 show that by weighting the criteria equally the best score is around
AL=1mm and TF=1/22.5 MGT from 5 to 35 MGT/year.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and
contribution
An integrated degradation model and decision support system for ballast maintenance
or renewal is proposed. The track geometry degradation was modeled using a Wiener
process-based model, and the geometry condition was built as a function of the subgrade
condition. A simulation model was developed to model the degradation of track geom-
etry influenced by subgrade, while also considering the recovery effect of tamping. The
proposed model uses both stochastic processes and linear regression models. Upon devel-
oping the model, some modification was made to represent the real degradation behavior
of track geometry and subgrade. It was observed that when the variance (stand devia-
tion) of the degradation rate becomes of a larger magnitude than the rate of degradation,
the increments of the Wiener process will not represent a realistic degradation behavior.
The negative increments of the Wiener process can be controlled if the variance (sigma)
is appropriately estimated.
An approach based on multi-criteria decision analysis is proposed to support the
decision-making process for ballast tamping and track renewal by evaluating different
maintenance limits. The MCDA uses the AHP method to estimate normalized weights
to the set of criteria. The effect of different criteria weights has been addressed and is
essential to consider when a proper pair-wise comparison is made. However, the model
is applied successfully and responds to input according to the assumptions.
7.0.1
Contribution
• Evaluating the track geometry condition based on track support stiffness and track
modulus.
• Propose an integrated degradation model to evaluate the track geometry condi-
tion based on subgrade deterioration while also considering the recovery effect of
tamping.
• Introducing a threshold for track renewal, name ’Tamping frequency’.
• Developing a simulation model capable of capturing the degradation phenomenon
and evaluating the effect of different maintenance limits.
==PAGE:52==
40
==PAGE:53==
Appendices
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX A
Banedanmark Annual
Traffic Density
==PAGE:56==
44
A Banedanmark Annual Traffic Density
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Andrade, António Ramos and P Fonseca Teixeira (2015). “Statistical modelling of rail-
way track geometry degradation using Hierarchical Bayesian models”. In: Reliability
Engineering & System Safety 142, pages 169–183.
Andrews, John (2013). “A modelling approach to railway track asset management”. In:
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and
Rapid Transit 227.1, pages 56–73.
Attoh-Okine, Nii O. (2017). Big Data and Differential Privacy. isbn: 9781119229049.
doi: 10.1002/9781119229070.
Audley, M and JD Andrews (2013). “The effects of tamping on railway track geometry
degradation”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part F:
Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit 227.4, pages 376–391.
Bernard, H Russell and Harvey Russell Bernard (2013). Social research methods: Quali-
tative and quantitative approaches. Sage.
Chang, Huan, Rengkui Liu, and Wei Wang (2010). “Multistage linear prediction model
of track quality index”. In: Traffic and Transportation Studies 2010, pages 1183–1192.
Commission, European (2011). Roadmap to a Single European Transport Area – Towards
a competitive and resource efficient transport system. European Union.
DS/CEN/TR-16513 (2014). Railway applications – Track – Survey of track geometry
quality. Volume 1. Brussels, Belgium: CEN (European Committee for Standardiza-
tion).
DS/EN-13848–5 (2017). Railway applications – Track – Track geometry quality – Part 5:
Geometric quality levels. Volume 3. Brussels, Belgium: CEN (European Committee
for Standardization).
Elkhoury, Najwa et al. (2018). “Degradation Prediction of Rail Tracks: A Review of the
Existing Literature”. In: The Open Transportation Journal 12.1.
Esveld, Coenraad (2001). Modern railway track. Volume 385. MRT-productions Zalt-
bommel.
Grossoni, Ilaria et al. (2019). “The role of track stiffness and its spatial variability on
long-term track quality deterioration”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit 233.1, pages 16–32.
Guler, Hakan, Stanislav Jovanovic, and Gungor Evren (2011). “Modelling railway track
geometry deterioration”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers-Transport.
Volume 164. 2. Thomas Telford Ltd, pages 65–75.
Iwnicki, Simon (2006). Handbook of railway vehicle dynamics. CRC press.
==PAGE:58==
46
Bibliography
Kahle, Waltraud and Axel Lehmann (2010). “The Wiener process as a degradation
model: Modeling and parameter estimation”. In: Advances in degradation modeling.
Springer, pages 127–146.
Khajehei, Hamid et al. (2019). “Allocation of effective maintenance limit for railway
track geometry”. In: Structure and Infrastructure Engineering, pages 1–16.
Kothari, Chakravanti Rajagopalachari (2004). Research methodology: Methods and tech-
niques. New Age International.
Letot, Christophe et al. (2016). “An adaptive opportunistic maintenance model based on
railway track condition prediction”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 49.28, pages 120–125.
Lichtberger, Bernhard (2005). “Track Compendium: Formation, Permanent Way, Main-
tenance”. In: Economics 1.
Meier-Hirmer, C, A Senee, et al. (2006). “A decision support system for track mainte-
nance”. In: Computers in railways X, pages 217–226.
Meier-Hirmer, C, F Sourget, and M Roussignol (2005). “Optimising the strategy of track
maintenance”. In: Advances in Safety and Reliability-Proceedings of the European
Safety and Reliability Conference, ESREL. Volume 2, pages 1385–1391.
Mercier, Sophie, Carolina Meier-Hirmer, and Michel Roussignol (2012). “Bivariate Gamma
wear processes for track geometry modelling, with application to intervention schedul-
ing”. In: Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 8.4, pages 357–366.
Öberg, Johan (2006). Track deterioration of ballasted tracks: marginal cost models for
different railway vehicles. Rail Vehicles, Aeronautical and Vehicle engineering, Royal
Institute of …
Patra, Ambika Prasad (2009). “Maintenance decision support models for railway infras-
tructure using RAMS & LCC analyses”. PhD thesis. Luleå tekniska universitet.
Roghani, Alireza and Michael T Hendry (2017). “Quantifying the impact of subgrade
stiffness on track quality and the development of geometry defects”. In: Journal of
Transportation Engineering, Part A: Systems 143.7, page 04017029.
Sadeghi, Javad and Hossein Askarinejad (2010). “Development of improved railway track
degradation models”. In: Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 6.6, pages 675–688.
Selig, Ernest T and Dingqing Li (1994). “Track modulus: Its meaning and factors influ-
encing it”. In: Transportation Research Record 1470.
Shahin, Mohamed A and Buddhima Indraratna (2006). “Parametric study on the re-
silient response of ballasted railway track substructure using numerical modeling”.
In: GeoCongress 2006: Geotechnical Engineering in the Information Technology Age,
pages 1–6.
Si, Xiao-Sheng et al. (2013). “A Wiener-process-based degradation model with a recur-
sive filter algorithm for remaining useful life estimation”. In: Mechanical Systems and
Signal Processing 35.1-2, pages 219–237.
Soleimanmeigouni, Iman et al. (2018). “Evaluation of the effect of tamping on the track
geometry condition: A case study”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit 232.2, pages 408–420.
Stenström, Christer and Aditya Parida (2013). Link and effect model for maintenance
of railway infrastructure. Luleå tekniska universitet.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
47
Stewart, Harry E and Ernest T Selig (1982). “Predicted and measured resilient response
of track”. In: Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division 108.11, pages 1423–
1442.
Tang, Shengjin, Xiaosong Guo, and Zhijie Zhou (2014). “Mis-specification analysis of
linear Wiener process–based degradation models for the remaining useful life estima-
tion”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part O: Journal of
Risk and Reliability 228.5, pages 478–487.
Tzanakakis, Konstantinos (2013). The railway track and its long term behaviour: a hand-
book for a railway track of high quality. Volume 2. Springer Science & Business Media.
Vale, Cecı́lia, Isabel M Ribeiro, and Rui Calçada (2011). “Integer programming to op-
timize tamping in railway tracks as preventive maintenance”. In: Journal of Trans-
portation Engineering 138.1, pages 123–131.
Ye, Zhi-Sheng and Min Xie (2015). “Stochastic modelling and analysis of degradation
for highly reliable products”. In: Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry
31.1, pages 16–32.
Yousefikia, Mohammad et al. (2014). “Modeling degradation of tracks for maintenance
planning on a tram line”. In: Journal of Traffic and Logistic Engineering 2.2.
Zaayman, Leon (2017). The Basic Principles of Mechanized Track Maintenance. Vol-
ume 3rd edition. Germany: PMC Media House.
Zhang, Yu-Jiang, Martin H Murray, and Luis Ferreira (2000). “Modelling rail track
performance: an integrated approach”. In: Transport Journal, pages 187–194.
==PAGE:60==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej 326
Building 326
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
