==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Meta-Learning Few-Shot Generative
Models
Robert Scholes Lyck (s072892)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis an approach for meta-learning few-shot generative models is explored.
Existing promising few-shot meta-learning algorithms are described, and modified to
fit with the final goal of image generation. Simplified versions of these algorithms are
implemented from scratch and the process of incrementally developing and extending
them is described in detail. Four image datasets are used: Omniglot, MNIST, Fashion-
MNIST and (a subset of) ”Quick, draw!”. An autoencoder setup is developed for pure
image recostruction, to serve as an implementation stepping stone for the variational
autoencoder setup, with generative capabilities. While both setups succeed in image
reconstructions, the generative setup ultimately fails to generate satisfying new images.
This deficiency is explored in qualitative detail, but never fully understood.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master’s degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, December 1, 2019
Robert Scholes Lyck (s072892)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor professor Ole Winther and assisting supervisor PhD
student Andrea Dittadi, for supervising my thesis and for the many interesting and
productive conversations and discussions along the way.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Road Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Artificial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Encoder-Decoder Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Few-Shot Meta-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Related work
15
3.1
MAML: Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
LEO: Latent Embedding Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
LEO-lite
21
4.1
Generative Learning Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
LEO-lite Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Generative Learner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Developed Software
29
5.1
Setup and Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
MAML Notebook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
LEO-lite Notebook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Autoencoder Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
VAE Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Data
47
6.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Combining Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Results
53
7.1
How To Read The Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Shared Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.3
Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.4
All-Layers Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.5
Some-Layers Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.6
Pre-Trained Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8
Discussion
73
8.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9
Conclusion
79
A LEO-lite algorithm for Some-Layers model
81
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Link to GitHub repo with all thesis code[Lyc19]:
https://github.com/roschly/dtu-thesis-2019.git
1.1
Motivation
Deep learning systems can do things today, that just a decade or two ago, was gener-
ally thought to belong exclusively in the human domain. Including areas as diverse as:
playing classical games like Go and chess, image classification, near-autonomous driving,
language translation and very human-like text and voice generation.
Besides their impressive capabilities, two things generally characterize these systems: an
over-specialized focus and a vast data requirement.
Time and again researchers have been surprised by the way these systems achieve their
results. How our own familiarity with our own ways of solving problems in these areas,
bias our intuitions for how deep learning systems do it. A classic example is that of im-
age classification, where adding random noise to an image in a way that is undetectable
by a human, can throw off a deep image classifier. These systems are very specialized in
the specific problem domains they have been trained on, and biased by datatsets that
humans might have thought to be a good general representation of a task. Furthermore,
a system designed to excel at Go, will not only perform poorly at chess, but not even
understand the basic problem to be solved. There is very little in the way of general
problem solving skills acquired by these systems.
The second issues with current deep learning systems is the need for huge amounts
of data. This makes deep learning less useful for areas where very large datasets are not
easy (or perhaps impossible) to obtain or rapid adaptation is needed. This includes areas
of rare occurrences, including rare diseases, animals or natural phenomena. And areas
of novel music genres, images of new products and novel environments for autonomous
robots.
These limitations are what few-shot meta-learning is trying to overcome. Meta-learning
deals with the concept of learning to learn. It’s an attempt to instill a general prob-
lem solving ability into deep systems, by training them on many smaller problems or
tasks. Since the system is dealing with many smaller tasks, it becomes advantageous
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
for it to develop a high-level strategy for modelling each new task. Few-shot learning in
combination with meta-learning, limits the size of each task to only a few examples. I.e.
the system must learn to learn, and do so quickly and efficiently from its few available
examples.
1.2
Road Map
A note to the reader. This report does things a bit differently when it comes to the order
and placing of images, diagrams, equations and so on. They are placed in the order they
should be read. This means they are referenced in text a lot less than usual, since they
are mostly relevant in the exact context in which they are placed.
What follows is an outline of the chapters in this thesis, with a brief description of
each.
1. Introduction: Motivation for topic of this thesis along with this road map.
2. Theory: Covers the basic theory underpinning the areas of mechine learning used
in this work. It introduces basic artificial neural networks - how they work and
how they’re trained - along with the encoder-decoder architecture used for the final
generative model. As well as the a formal description of few-shot meta-learning.
3. Related work: Two algorithms, MAML and LEO, are described in enough detail
to understand how this work implements and builds upon them.
4. LEO-lite: Describes the generative learning problem that this thesis ultimately
tries to tackle, and the approach taken.
5. Developed Software: Outlines the software development process, with its choice,
intermediate results and the general progression.
6. Data: An overview of the four datasets used and how they are combined in
different ways to create new datasets.
7. Results: The results of the final generative model implementation along with
baselines for comparison.
8. Discussion: A discussion of the different aspects of the thesis work: choices made,
trade-offs, errors and things that should be done differently. Along with a list of
the most obvious or promising next steps for any potential future work.
9. Conclusion: A concluding evaluation of the work and of the results of the models.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Artificial Neural Networks
Figure 2.1: Example of a simple deep network with 2 hidden layers.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are algorithms inspired by the simplified under-
standing of biological neurons that existed when they were invented. Today, with our
increased understanding of the complexity of biological networks, the analogy only holds
on a very superficial level. The ANNs mimic the thresholded signaling of biological neu-
rons, where the firing of a neuron is determined by its’ incoming neurons activations.
In this manner, a hierarchy of increasingly complex patterns is created. As an example,
in image classification networks, the first layers look for basic lines and curves, followed
by simple shapes and textures composed of those lines and curves. This composition
repeats through the network until you end up with, for instance, neurons dedicated to
activating on human faces.
In contrast to Good Old-Fashioned Artificial Intelligence (GOFAI), where intelligent
behavior is described in symbolic terms, ANNs can learn tasks without any prior knowl-
edge, in a sub-symbolic way. And for this reason ANNs are trained rather than pro-
grammed.
This sub-symbolic approach, combined with increased GPU computing power (thank
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Theory
you, gaming community), has allowed us to create programs that can achieve human
level performance (and beyond), in areas previously thought to be either completely out
of reach of computers, or not probable until a more distant future.
2.1.1
The fully-connected case
A fully-connected (or dense) layer, is one in which every node in a layer is connected to
every node in the previous layer. A neuron is also known as a node or unit.
Figure 2.2: The weighted sum of incoming activations (or raw input), is sent through
an activation function. Historically, the first activation function used was a
step function, that resulted in a neuron being either activated or not. This
matched the observed behavior of biological neurons, but proved difficult
to train.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Artificial Neural Networks
5
Figure 2.3: Every node is the weighted sum of it’s connected nodes from the previous
layer, sent through an activation function. Notice the bias units, x0, z0 (in
solid blue). They can play a vital role as inhibitors, serving as a constant
threshold the combined level of activations must pass, in order to properly
activate the node.
Computing with an ANN is equivalent to doing a forward pass, from the input data
to the output of the nodes in the last layer, as illustrated in figure 2.3
A forward pass of the first hidden node (that is not the bias):
z1 = σ
( D
∑
d=0
w(1)
1,dxd
)
The easiest way to read this is from right to left: activation from node xd is sent through
weights, w1,d, from d to node z1, via activation function σ.
Forward pass for any hidden node:
zm = σ
( D
∑
d=0
w(1)
m,dxd
)
The equation for a forward pass of an output node is similar to a hidden node, just
with changed variable letters and indices.
Forward pass of any output unit yk expressed with hidden nodes:
yk = σ
( M
∑
m=0
w(2)
k,mzm
)
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
Forward pass of any output unit yk expressed with input nodes:
yk = σ
( M
∑
m=0
w(2)
k,mσ
( D
∑
d=0
w(1)
m,dxd
))
Activation function
The first activation function was the step function, which is a piece-wise linear function,
that is either 0 or 1. A natural extension is the sigmoid function, represented by the
symbol σ. It is a continuous function that preserves the on/off activation notion of the
step function.
Figure 2.4: Sigmoid activation function. A continuous version of the step function.
The sigmoid function helped unlock the potential of neural networks and was ubiq-
uitous in the beginning. For this reason, the σ symbol is often used as the symbol for
an activation function, even if today, it represents other functions.
The ability of neural networks to approximate, in theory, any function, is made possible
by a non-linear activation function. With a linear activation, a network can only perform
linear transformations, which limits the expressiveness of the network substantially.
The sigmoid used to be the most popular activation function, but has been replaced by
others that don’t suffer from the vanishing-gradient problem [WIK19b]. The vanishing
gradient problem refers to the case where, the input to an activation function results
in near-zero outputs, e.g. for a sigmoid value of −5 or below. This means the node’s
contribution to the network is minimal and further training of the network does not
affect this node. Resulting in a dead node.
Sigmoid is still widely used for output nodes, where it allows for a probabilistic interpre-
tation.
Training a network
In order to train the network, the first thing needed is a way to measure its performance
- a way to evaluate it. This function has many names: objective, cost or loss function.
The loss function measures the loss (or difference) between the desired output y and the
output of a forward pass of the network f(x) = ˆy, given the input x.
L(y, f(x)) = L(y, ˆy)
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Artificial Neural Networks
7
In the regression case, the desired output will be some N-dimensional real number
y ∈RN
The mean squared error (MSE) is a common choice of loss function, since it implies
Gaussian noise, which is, on average, a reasonable assumption.
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
To actually train the network, we need a way to update the weights of the network,
so that it minimizes the value of the loss function. A key property of a neural network
is that it is differentiable. This implies that it is possible to calculate the partial deriva-
tive of the loss function w.r.t. a variable present in the function, and determine how
changing the variable affects the overall loss. Generally, there can be other parameters
than weights in a network, so we can denote all parameters of a network with θ.
Updating a parameter of a network:
θi ←θi −α ∂
∂θi
L(y, fθ(x))
The learning rate α determines the size of the update, e.g. how large a gradient step
we take in the new direction.
Backpropagation is the name of the method used for updating every parameter in an
iterative way, working backwards through the model via the chain rule.
2.1.2
Other activation functions
The sigmoid activation function has two major disadvantages. First, it has the previously
mentioned problem of gradients vanishing in very deep layers, because regardless of the
size of the weighted sum of inputs to a node, the activation will be squashed between 0
and 1. Second, it does not allow for negative values, which can be a limiting factor for
nodes in the following layers. A negative value could act as an inhibitor, as opposed to
the [0, 1] range that only measures the degree of absence or presence.
Hyperbolic tangent (tanh)
Shares the same properties of sigmoid, since it is just a scaled version of it. It alleviates
the sigmoid’s problem of no negative activations, but still suffers from vanishing gradi-
ents. It is useful for the last layer of a network, when you want values within a certain
range (though without the probabilistic interpretation of sigmoid).
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
Figure 2.5: Hyperbolic tangent activation function. Notice the y-axis range of [−1, 1].
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
ReLU solves the vanishing gradient problem, by allowing any positive value. It does not
allow for negative values, similar to sigmoid. This can lead to dead ReLU nodes, where
the parameters has reached 0. This means that the parameter no longer contributes to
the loss, causing it to no longer be updated - i.e. stop learning.
The LeakyReLU tries to solve this, by allowing negative values.
Figure 2.6: Top:
ReLU. Bottom:
LeakyReLU [Jai19].
As the name implies
LeakyReLU is one in a family of parametric ReLU activation functions,
aimed at improving the very successful ReLU..
2.1.3
Optimizers
The general optimization problem of machine learning deals with minimizing a sum over
the losses of each data point in the training data set.
Q(w) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
Qi(w),
with the goal of estimating the parameter w that minimizes the objective Q(w) [WIK19a].
The optimal, or true, gradient of the loss w.r.t. the data set, is the one that evaluates
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Encoder-Decoder Architecture
9
all the summand functions’ gradients. For most real-world, complex problems, this is at
best, a very computationally expensive operation or, at worst, infeasible due to memory
constraints.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
A solution is to find the approximate gradient. One way to do this, is to use a subset (or
a batch) of the full data set. Since the batch gradient is an estimate of the true gradient
- based on a random subset of the data set - it has a stochastic nature. This can result
in unstable training, with more gradient zigzaging around the global (or desirable local)
minimum.
But because of it’s erratic behavior, SGD can also help with getting out of local unde-
sirable minima, in a way that resembles simulated annealing.
Adam (not an abbreviation)
The basic SGD algorithm keeps a single and static learning rate for all parameters of
the model. Several different optimization schemes have been developed to improve upon
this, including using separate learning rates for each parameter and determining how to
alter the learning rate(s) based on training progression and properties of the gradients
themselves.
Adam [KB15] combines the advantages from AdaGrad and RMSprop, which are per-
parameter learning rates that adapt based on the recent gradient magnitudes.[Bro19]
Adam is one of several optimizers in recent years, trying to improve upon vanilla SGD.
Different optimizers perform better on different tasks, but Adam has been suggested as
one of the best default optimizers [Rud17; KB15].
2.2
Encoder-Decoder Architecture
2.2.1
Autoencoder
An autoencoder is a type of ANN that learns to compress data in an unsupervised
way. It consists of an encoding and decoding part, usually in the form of symmetric
network architectures. The loss measures the difference between the original data and
a reconstruction of it: L(x, f(x)) = L(x, ˆx).
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
Figure 2.7: Typical example of a convolutional autoencoder arhcitecture on MNIST
[Guo+17]. The image is compressed into a 10-dimensional space, which is
a significant reduction from the 28 × 28 dimensional data space.
The encoded space size acts as an information bottleneck, constraining the network.
But autoencoders have a tendency to overfit despite relatively small encoding sizes, if
no other regularizations are placed on it. A common problem is that of memorization,
i.e. that the network has enough parameters to implicitly memorize all the data points
in its’ weights. The deeper the network and the smaller the dataset, the more likely this
is. Regularizing the network in other ways and keeping a separate test set, are obvious
approaches to combat the overfitting.
2.2.2
Variational Autoencoder
The variational autoencoder (VAE) shares the architectural style of the autoencoder,
hence the name. But differs significantly in other ways. A major difference is that the
VAE is a generative model, as opposed to the discriminative AE. Additionally, VAEs
use a probabilistic framework, to simulate the underlying data generation process.
The VAE is a Variational Bayesian method that belongs to a family of techniques that
allows us to re-write statistical inference problems as optimization problems [WIK19c;
Jan16].
The VAE employs both an encoder and decoder, in the form of probability distribu-
tions p(Z|X) and p(X|Z) that encode from data space X to latent space Z and decode
back to data space again.
The generative capability of the VAE lies in the ability to sample from the decoding pro-
cess x ∼p(X|Z). However, for problems like MNIST, it is not obvious how to construct
the encoding process p(Z|X).
The trick to a VAE is to re-write the encoding process as an optimization problem,
by choosing an approximate distribution qθ(Z|X) (the variational encoder), that is pa-
rameterized by θ and use deep learning as an optimization technique to determine θ.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Encoder-Decoder Architecture
11
The choice of distribution for the variational encoder is often a well-known and easy to
parameterize distribution, like a Gaussian.
Figure 2.8: Illustration of an overlap between the approximate Gaussian posterior
(green) and the true posterior (blue) [Jan16] .
The Evidence Lower Bound
The objective function for a VAE is the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO) [FAD19].
ELBO(x) ≡
∫
dz q(z|x) log p(x|z) +
∫
dz q(z|x) log q(z|x)
p(z)
Besides the already discussed variational encoder p(z|x) and decoder p(x|z), a third
probability distribution appears in the ELBO: the prior p(z). It is used to encode prior
knowledge or assumptions we might have about the latent representation z. When we
know nothing specific, it is common to assume a simple prior, often an isotropic Gaus-
sian, i.e. with independent variables.
The ELBO itself consists of two parts:
• Left: the reconstruction term. It measures how likely the image x is in the distri-
bution that depends on the encoding process.
• Right: the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. It’s a measure of similarity between
the variational encoder q(z|x) and the prior p(z). It’s a constraint on the latent
code z, trying to force it to fit the prior distribution, if there isn’t a significant
reconstruction advantage of not doing so.
The KL divergence is the key to the generative capabilities of the VAE. It ensures
the latent code follows the prior distribution, meaning encoded data points are likely
under the prior distribution. This entails that it is possible to generate new data points
by sampling from the prior, when the VAE is properly trained.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
With the ELBO, the purpose is the maximize it - maximizing the likelihood of the
data and the latent representation following the prior. However, when optimizing it is
customary to minimize a loss function. Minimizing the negative ELBO is equivalent to
maximizing the ELBO.
2.3
Few-Shot Meta-Learning
Few-shot meta-learning is the process of learning to learn from both few examples and
with few adaptations. More specifically, the goal of few-shot meta-learning is to train a
model to be able to quickly (few adaptations) and efficiently (few examples) adapt to a
new task.
A task is, simply put, a batch of data points that was produced by the same process. If
the learning-problem is that of image classification, each task consists of K images from
a class, e.g. K = 5 images of dogs, 5 images of cats, etc.
When testing the model, it is shown types of tasks it has not encountered during training,
i.e. an entirely new type of images. Say it was trained on tasks sampled from images
of 10 different breeds of dogs. During testing, it would be shown tasks sampled from
images of a new breed of dog (the 11.), or perhaps cats.
Figure 2.9: An example of a learning-domain is N-way K-shot image classifica-
tion[Fin17]. Each task consists of N × K training data, with N being
the number of classes with K examples from each, and test data with ex-
amples from a subset of the N classes. The purpose of the meta-training
is to produce a model that, from a few iterations, can adapt to the given
task and correctly label the images in the test set.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Few-Shot Meta-Learning
13
2.3.1
Problem Definition
I follow the style of problem definition and formal notation used in [Rus+19].
Formally, a task instance, Ti, is sampled from a task distribution p(T). In practice, the
task distribution is usualy represented by a finite dataset, which is split into three non-
overlapping sets: training meta-set, validation meta-set and test meta-set: (Str, Sval, Stest) =
Dataset. The validation and test meta-sets would be used in their customary way, for
model selection and final evaluation respectively.
Each task instance is sampled from the appropriate meta-set, e.g. training meta-set
during training, Ti ∼Str.
The task instance is further split into a training set and validation set: (Dtr, Dval) = Ti,
which are also non-overlapping Dtr ∩Dval = ∅.
The task instance training set Dtr is used to optimize a learning objective, with the
validation set Dval used to optimize a meta-learning objective.
The validation set, Dval, from a task instance should not be confused with the validation
meta-set Sval (used for model selection).
For an N-way K-shot image classification learning-domain, the training and valida-
tion sets would consist of the N classes with K example images and their corresponding
labels.
Dtr =
{(
x(n)
k , y(n)
k
)
|k = 1..K; n = 1..N
}
For a regression learning-domain, with the goal of learning to model a function that
maps from a single real-valued input to a single real-valued output, the sets would consist
of K sized input/output pairs.
Dtr = {(xk, yk) |k = 1..K}
A regression example: sine waves
A simple regression problem was introduced in [FAL17] to serve as a simple demonstra-
tion of few-shot meta-learning. It will be referenced several times in the rest of this
thesis, so it will be properly described here.
The learning problem is that of modelling a sine wave function. A model should be
able to take on the form of the sine wave that created the K data points comprising
a given task. Each task is sampled from this problem, with varied values of amplitude
and phase. Amplitude varies in the range [0.1, 5.0] while phase varies within [−5.0, 5.0].
During training and test, data points x are uniformly sampled from [−5.0, 5.0]. The loss
is the MSE between the predicted value f(x) and the true value y.
The neural network consists of 2 hidden layers of size 40 with ReLU activations. The
network is trained with K = 10 examples, with a fixed learning rate a.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
Figure 2.10: Three examples of sine waves with K=10 data points (dots) uniformly
sampled from each. The K input/output pairs from each wave makes up
a task, and the goal is to learn the underlying sine function from those
K points.
Baselines
In order to evaluate the usefulness of a meta-learning algorithm, it should have baselines
that it compares favorably to.
The simplest type of baseline is one that completely disregards data points’ membership
in different tasks. Shuffle all data points across all tasks. In the regression case, each
batch update would contain X data points from randomly chosen sine waves.
Another type of baseline could take advantage of the data point task membership by
setting the batch size of each update equal to K. Both of these baselines should cause
the network to converge towards the average of all waves, since each update will pull
the network in different directions, ending up at the average.
Both types of baselines should find it difficult to quickly adapt to a new sine wave, since
they start from the average wave and only take a few small steps in the new direction.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Related work
3.1
MAML: Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
Model-agnostic meta-learning [FAL17] is an optimization based approach to meta-learning.
It is general and model-agnostic in the sense that it can be applied to any learning prob-
lem and parametric model, fθ, where the model is trainable with gradient descent. This
encompasses problems of classification, regression and reinforcement learning, with both
feed-forward and recurrent models. MAML works by trying to find a single set of pa-
rameters θ, that serve as a common starting point for quick adaptation to any novel task
from the same task distribution. The model is adapted to each task instance, producing
task-specific model parameters θ∗
i .
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the basic adaptation approach of the MAML algorithm.
The model parameters θ is the common point from which each adapta-
tion starts, and branches out to task-specific parameters θ∗
i .
If we consider MAML form the point of view of models instead of parameters, then
MAML has an initial model with some weights. A copy of this model is created for each
task in a batch, and this copy is adapted to its task via a few gradient steps. Afterwards,
the initial model has its weights adjusted according to the results of the individual task
adaptations, so that its weights have a better starting point for the next meta-update.
This MAML meta-update goes through the following phases:
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Related work
1. initialization: keep an explicit, initial set of model parameters θ for each task
adaptation.
2. adaptation/inner loop: takes the initial parameters θ as input and returns the task
specific adapted parameters after one θ
′
i or more θ∗
i adaptation steps.
3. outer loop: update the model parameters θ via the meta-objective on the adapted
tasks.
In the inner loop, the task-specific model parameters θ∗
i are computed using one or
more gradient descent updates.
Using a single gradient update with step size α,
θ
′
i = θ −α∇θLTi(fθ).
In the outer loop, the initial parameters θ are updated via back-propagation through
the inner loop, with adaptation performance evaluated on the respective task-specific
validation sets Dval
i .
θ ←θ −β∇θ
∑
Ti∼p(T)
LTi(fθ′
i)
If you expand the meta-update from the outer loop with it’s inner loop parameter
update, it becomes clear that the meta-update involves a gradient through a gradient,
a 2nd-order derivative.
θ ←θ −β∇θ
∑
Ti∼p(T)
LTi(fθ−α∇θLTi(fθ))
This is computationally expensive, since it requires an additional backwards pass
through f. But it is the central element of MAML, as it allows the meta-update to
adjust the initial parameters in a way that facilitates better adaptation. And it is sup-
ported by standard machine learning frameworks like Tensorflow.
Algorithm 1 Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
Require: p(T): distribution over tasks
Require: α, β: step size hyperparameters
1: randomly initialize θ
2: while not done do
3:
Sample batch of tasks Ti ∼p(T)
4:
for all Ti do
5:
Evaluate ∇θLTi(fθ) w.r.t. K examples
6:
Compute adapted parameters with gradient descent: θ′
i = θ −α∇θLTi(fθ)
7:
end for
8:
Update θ ←θ −β∇θ
∑
Ti∼p(Ti) LTi(fθ′
i)
9: end while
==PAGE:27==
3.2 LEO: Latent Embedding Optimization
17
3.1.1
Sine wave regression case
Figure 3.2: Test evaluations of a baseline and MAML. Top: baseline has a hard time
adaptating to the true wave from the limited data points. Bottom: MAML
fits the wave much better, even in areas where there are no data points..
3.2
LEO: Latent Embedding Optimization
The purpose of LEO is to show that is possible and beneficial to extend MAML by
relaxing it’s primary constraint: the reliance on a single set of parameters θ as a start-
ing point for all novel task adaptations from the same task distribution. LEO tries to
do this by decoupling the meta-learning step from the high-dimensional space of model
parameters. With MAML, the adaptations in the inner loop produces new model pa-
rameters. Assuming the model is a deep neural network, the number of parameters can
easily reach the hundreds of thousands or millions. The outer loop of MAML has to
back-propagate the error w.r.t. all these parameters.
LEO instead creates an intermediate low-dimensional layer, a latent embedding, in which
to perform the adaptations of the inner loop. An encoding network maps the training
set Dtr from data space to latent space, while a decoding network decodes the latent
code into model parameters in parameter space θ
′
i ∈Θ.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Related work
Figure 3.3: ”High-level intuition for LEO. While MAML operates directly in a high
dimensional parameter space Θ, LEO performs meta-learning within a
low-dimensional latent space Z, from which the parameters are generated.”
[Rus+19].
More specifically, LEO learns a generative distribution of model parameters, by in-
troducing a stochastic latent space from which to sample model parameters. Further
more, the latent representation is conditioned on the data of the particular task, helping
to better initialize the latent parameters before adaptation.
A LEO meta-update step goes through phases similar to MAML:
1. initialization: Encode task data to initialize a latent code z.
2. adaptation/inner loop: takes as input the latent code z and returns the task-specific
latent-space adapted code z
′.
3. outer loop: update the encoder/decoder network via the meta-objective, which
evaluates the performance of the from-z-generated parameters on the validation
set of each task.
LEO is demonstrated primarily on a supervised image classification problem, for
which they have added a relation network that compares the images of a task in a
pair-wise fashion. This means the ”encoding process also exploits a relation network
that allows the latent code to be context-dependent, considering the pairwise relationship
between all classes in the problem instance” [Rus+19].
==PAGE:29==
3.2 LEO: Latent Embedding Optimization
19
Figure 3.4: Overview of the LEO architecture [Rus+19]. The inner loop only opti-
mizes the latent code z w.r.t. the training set Dtr, while the outer loop
(meta update step) updates the encoder/decoder network w.r.t. the vali-
dation set Dval. Notice how, in contrast to MAML, the model fθ, or more
specifically it’s parameters θ, are never optimized directly, but only used
as a transformation step for evaluation during training..
The LEO paper [Rus+19] demonstrates the algorithm on a small regression problem
and supervised image classification. For the small regression problem, every parameter
of the model is generated from latent space. For the supervised image classification
problem, several additional steps were added to LEO in the original paper:
• The generator network only generates weights for the final layer of the classifier
• The classifier is pre-trained on the image dataset. This takes longer than the actual
meta-learning.
• The model is fine-tuned in parameter-space. This means that after gradient steps
in latent space, gradient steps are performed in parameter space (similar to what
MAML does).
3.2.1
LEO loss function
The LEO loss function consists of three main parts, plus additional regularizations de-
noted by R in the following equation.
min
ϕe,ϕr,ϕd
∑
Ti∼p(T)
[
Lval
Ti (f ′
θi) + βDKL(q(zn|Dtr
n ) || p(zn)) + γ||stopgrad(z′
n) −zn||2
2
]
+ R
The first part is validation loss for the inner loop. The form of this depends on the
problem, e.g. MSE for a regression case. The second is a weighted, β, KL divergence
constraint between the variational encoder q and the prior p(zn). It encourages disentan-
gled representations, which should help the inner loop as it removes correlations between
latent space gradient dimensions. The third part minimizes the difference between the
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Related work
adapted z′
n code and the initial zn code, thus trying to takes some of the load of the
adaptation step by encouraging the encoding process to create a better initial code. The
stopgrad part stops the gradients from the adapted code and simply uses the value as-is.
For the R part of the equation: ”L2 regularization was used with all weights of the
model, as well as a soft, layer-wise orthogonality constraint on decoder network weights,
which encourages the dimensions of the latent code as well as the decoder network to be
maximally expressive. In the case of linear encoder, relation, and decoder networks, and
assuming that Cd is the correlation matrix between rows of ϕd, then the regularization
term takes the following form:”
R = λ1
(
||ϕe||2
2 + ||ϕr||2
2 + ||ϕd||2
2
)
+ λ2||Cd −I||2
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
LEO-lite
4.1
Generative Learning Problem
The generative learning problem can be defined as a K-shot M-adaptation steps problem.
In other words, the model will be meta-trained on tasks that each contain K training
examples and K validation examples, Ti = (Dtr, Dval), Dtr = {xk|k = 1..K}, Dval =
{xk|k = 1..K}. It is allowed M adaptation steps on the training examples and evaluated
on the validation examples. For example, MNIST could be partitioned into tasks, each
containing 2 × K examples of a particular digit, with all tasks containing a particular
digit class held-out for meta-testing.
Figure 4.1: Example data for a K-shot image generation problem with MNIST, with
the digit 8 held-out. No training data is required for meta-testing .
The goal then, exemplified by the MNIST case, is a model that could be successfully
trained on tasks of for instance 9 out of 10 digits, and when presented with the held-out
digit during testing, could quickly adapt to it and generate new examples of that digit.
From this goal the following (perhaps a bit obvious) requirements follow:
1. The meta-training paradigm should allow for evaluating and optimizing the learner
model’s representational and generative capabilities on a task-to-task basis.
2. The learner model must be a generative model.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 LEO-lite
3. The test images (not seen during training) are visually and structurally similar to
the training tasks, such that the model has become expressive enough to represent
them with zero to a few number of adaptations.
For MNIST, the last requirement seems reasonable to assume since the individual parts
of the stroke pattern of a any digit can be found in multiple of the other digits.
Conversely, it seems implausible that any currently known generative model trained
solely on small gray-scale images could have learned to express a high-definition real-
world color image.
There is no notion of class in this setup. A task could in some cases be considered
a class, but not always. It is purposefully left out in order to arrive at a model that is
not restricted by having to receive explicit class information.
4.2
LEO-lite Algorithm
LEO, like MAML, fulfills the 1st requirement from the previous section, since it is basi-
cally what they are designed for. And since LEO inherits MAML’s model-agnostic part
- by generating weights for any parametric differentiable function - the 2nd requirement
is ”just” a matter of model choice.
However, there are parts of the LEO algorithm that ought not be necessary for this type
of problem, and so only serves to increase complexity in an already fairly complex setup.
Omitting these parts results in what I will call the LEO-lite algorithm.
Main differences between LEO and LEO-lite:
• Removal of the relation network. It’s primary purpose is to make pair-wise compar-
ison between images from different classes, essentially creating a similarity function.
This helps with the classification problem, but not obviously with a generative
problem.
• Removal of the generative part of the latent/meta-learner model. It was introduced
in LEO in order for the model to capture ambiguities. This capability should not
be a necessary requirement for this type of image generation problem.
• Inner loop learning rate is no longer a learned parameter. Removed for simplicity’s
sake.
The LEO-lite pseudo code (algorithm 2) is almost identical to the original from the
LEO paper [Rus+19], except for the omission of variables related to the removed relation
network and not having the inner learning rate be part of the trainable variables.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Generative Learner
23
Algorithm 2 LEO-lite
Omissions from the original LEO algorithm are colored red
Require: Training meta-set Str
Require: Learning rates α, β
1: Randomly initialize ϕe, ϕr, ϕd
2: Let ϕ = {ϕe, ϕr, ϕd, α}
3: while not converged do
4:
for number of tasks in batch do
5:
Sample task instance Ti ∼Str
6:
Let (Dtr, Dval) = Ti
7:
Encode Dtr to z using gϕe and gϕr
8:
Decode z to initial params θi using gϕd
9:
Initialize z′ = z, θ
′
i = θi
10:
for number of adaptation steps do
▷Inner loop
11:
Compute training loss Ltr
Ti(fθ′
i)
12:
z′ ←z′ −α∇z′Ltr
Ti(fθ′
i)
▷Perform gradient step w.r.t. z′
13:
Decode z′ to obtain θ′
i using gϕd
14:
end for
15:
Compute validation loss Lval
Ti (fθ′
i)
16:
end for
17:
ϕ ←ϕ −β∇ϕ
∑
Ti Lval
Ti (fθ′
i)
▷Perform gradient step w.r.t. ϕ
18: end while
The majority of the thesis work lay not in designing a new high-level algorithm, but
in its implementation, such as how to compute the loss functions, performing the gradi-
ent steps and determining the respective network architectures.
4.3
Generative Learner
It is important at this point to stress the two distinct components of LEO, alluded to
in the LEO architecture figure 3.4. The algorithm consists of the meta-learner that
generates the weights for learner. The meta-learner contains the latent embedding z
where adaptations are performed, and it’s model is updated in the meta-update. The
learner is the actual generative model that will be used to generate new images.
A VAE with convolutional layers is chosen as a model for the learner. It fulfills the
requirements of being a generative, parametric and differentiable model. It is a pow-
erful model used in many different applications, and often in image generation [Guo+17].
As described in the Theory section, the objective of a VAE is the ELBO. It consists
==PAGE:34==
24
4 LEO-lite
of three different distributions: prior, variational encoder and decoder. It is natural to
model these three distributions in distinct ways [FAD19].
• Prior: the simple isotropic Gaussian distribution is used.
• Variational encoder: A full-covariance Gaussian distribution is used, parameterized
by the previous layers of the network.
• Decoder: A pixel-independent Bernoulli distribution, likewise parameterized by
the preceding layers of the decoder network. A Bernoulli distribution models the
outcome of a yes/no (or 0/1) experiment, with probabilities p and 1 −p. Pixel-
independent entails that such an experiment is carried out independently for each
pixel in the image. This also requires binarized images, since each pixel can only
take on the value of 0 or 1.
4.3.1
Generating weights
Two types of meta-learner architectures are considered in this work: generating weights
for all (figure 4.2) or only some (figure 4.3) of the layers in the learner network. It is
important to note, that LEO-lite does not contain a stochastic layer in the meta-learner,
unlike LEO. A stochastic layer is present in the learner in LEO-lite.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Generative Learner
25
Figure 4.2: Weights for all layers in the learner network are generated by the meta-
learner. The meta-update (outer loop) only affects the meta-learner. The
number of output layers in the meta-learner is equal to 2× the number of
trainable layers in the learner model (one for the kernel and one for the
bias)..
==PAGE:36==
26
4 LEO-lite
Figure 4.3: Weights for some of the layers in the learner network are generated by the
meta-learner. These are never optimized directly (shown in white). These
layers are chosen to be immediately before and after the the bottleneck.
Or in other words, the last layers of the encoder and the first layers of the
decoder. They contain the most high-level concepts in the network, which
seem like reasonable places to adapt to novel tasks, since we can assume
that the most low-level features are common to all images.
The other
layers are optimized in the outer loop together with the meta-learner.
An altered version of the LEO-lite algorithm for only generating a subset of the
learner layers, is available in appendix A algorithm 3.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Generative Learner
27
4.3.2
LEO-lite loss
Recall from the LEO-lite algorithm [2], that each task consists of a training and valida-
tion set: Ti = (Dtr
i , Dval
i ). And that the parameter generating meta-learner, first encodes
the training set into the initial latent code: z = gϕe(Dtr
i ). Followed by the decoding of
the code into the initial parameters: θi = gϕd(z).
This is followed by adapting the latent code z′ w.r.t. the training loss Ltr
i , for a number
of steps. Culminating in updating the meta-learner w.r.t. the validation loss Lval
i .
The letter z was used to denote the output of a stochastic layer in the original LEO
algorithm. This notation is kept in the LEO-lite algorithm, despite the meta-learner
latent embedding no longer being stochastic. Instead, a stochastic layer has been added
in the learner, by it being a VAE. Since z is already in use, the letter c will denote the
stochastic layer output of the learner VAE. Note, there is no concept of classes in this
work, so c should not be confused with that common use.
The learner objective is to minimize the negative ELBO.
Ltr
Ti(fθ′
i) = −ELBO
The ELBO consists of the reconstruction and KL terms. With the learner encoder
and variational decoder parameterized by θ.
ELBO =
∫
dc qθ′
i(ck|xk) log pθ′
i(xk|ck) +
∫
dc qθ′
i(ck|xk) log qθ′
i(ck|xk)
p(ck)
,
xk ∈Dval
i
∈Ti, fθ = {qθ(c|x), pθ(x|c)}
The meta objective, used in the outer loop, attempts to minimize the parameters
of the meta-learner encoder, ϕe, and decoder ϕd. As well as minimizing the distance
between the initial meta-learner latent code z and the final adaptation z′.
min
ϕe,ϕd
∑
Ti∼p(T)
[
Lval
Ti (f ′
θi) + γ||stopgrad(z′
n) −zn||2
2
]
+ R
Additional L2 regularization attempts to minimize the overall size of the meta-learner
parameters.
R = λ
(
||ϕe||2
2 + ||ϕd||2
2
)
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Developed Software
5.1
Setup and Development
5.1.1
Technology and Platform Choices
The code for this work has been developed with Python and Tensorflow. They are pop-
ular choices with a very large ecosystem supporting machine learning. It is also the
technologies that I have the most experience with.
A new major version of Tensorflow (2.0) went into alpha in the beginning of 2019. By
the time the thesis work started in June 2019 it was in beta.
Tensorflow 2.0 is a significant departure from the implementation style of its predecessor
1.x.
The major changes and improvements include:
• Static to eager execution. Tensorflow 1.x required you to build a static computation
graph and then evaluate or train it.
In 2.0 every operation can be evaluated
immediately after it has been declared. No need to add it to a static graph and
wait for it to be build.
• Easier to debug. Eager execution has made it a lot easier to debug models, since
you have direct access to it.
• More Pythonic design.
Designed to follow the conventions of Python, e.g.
by
enabling subclassing of models and building models dynamically.
• AutoGraph. Python functions and operations are automatically transformed to
their Tensorflow counterparts, as opposed to 1.x where they had to be explicitly
used. This makes the code a lot easier to read and less error-prone.
For these reason Tensorflow 2.0 was chosen over it predecessor.
However, due to its recent release, few implementations existed in this new version in
general. I will address the issues with this choice in the Discussion section.
5.1.2
Evolution of the Thesis
The purpose of this thesis was to explore the relatively new ML topic of meta-learning,
more specifically the learning to learn interpretation.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Developed Software
The MAML paper [FAL17] was the inspiration for the thesis and the starting point be-
cause of it’s popularity, conceptual simplicity and flexibility. And it had some promising
results in both regression, classification and reinforcement learning.
The LEO paper [Rus+19] was brought to my attention sometime in the beginning of
the thesis. It became the new main inspiration for the following reasons:
• It attempted to alleviate the main limitation of the MAML algorithm: it’s depen-
dence on a single set of parameters in the high-dimensional weight space.
• Another paper [ASE19] illustrated the difficulties of training a MAML model in
general, and in reproducing the results of the original MAML paper.
The initial idea was to apply MAML to other types of reinforcement learning prob-
lems. But as I became aware of the difficulties of training a MAML model, and LEO
came to my attention, another thing became apparent: neither MAML nor LEO ad-
dressed generative models.
In this way the focus became meta-learning few-shot generative models.
5.1.3
Design Philosophy
The choice of using the recently released Tensorflow 2.0 (alpha/beta) resulted in having
to implement the basic algorithms from scratch. And becoming familiar with the Ten-
sorflow framework itself.
A guiding principle thus became to start with the simplest implementation and add
complexity in an iterative manner, on the way towards the final architecture.
The work began with a MAML implementation of a simple regression problem demon-
strated in [FAL17]. It was implemented in a Jupyter Notebook [Jup19], which is an
open-source web application that allows for combining live code execution, equations
and text, for easy demonstration and prototyping purposes.
This was followed by another notebook. A simplified version of the LEO algorithm,
tested on the same regression problem.
These notebooks served as an excellent way of learning the meta-learning paradigm,
learning Tensorflow 2.0 and creating the code that would serve as the template for later
implementations.
Notebooks are great for iteratively developing and exploring models and algorithms.
But a proper experimentation framework required a different setup. One backed by a
high-performance cluster, where multiple jobs can run simultaneously and without hin-
dering further development. DTU provides such a backend with their High-Performance
Computing (HPC) Cluster [Com19]. The code was refactored with experimentation in
mind and structured in a more traditional object-oriented way.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 MAML Notebook
31
Because of the structural similarities between autoencoders and variational autoencoders,
a pure non-generative autoencoder implementation was created first. The rationale be-
ing, that once the setup works for autoencoders, it should be relatively simple to extend
it to work for VAEs as well.
5.2
MAML Notebook
A jupyter notebook implementation of the sine wave regression problem described in
section 2.3.1. It creates a dataset of 10,000 tasks, each with a different combination of
amplitude and phase values. It is split into a training set of 9,000 tasks and test set of
1,000 tasks. Two models are trained on batches of tasks for one epoch. A baseline model
with no meta-learning and a MAML model with meta-learning. Both models share the
same network architecture.
Figure 5.1: Regressor network for the sine wave regression problem, used for both
baseline and MAML models. The question marks ”?” indicate the batch
dimension.
The model that is being meta-learned, the model denoted as f in figure 3.4, has to
be differentiable in order to obtain the necessary 2nd order derivatives. This is repre-
sents a hurdle when implementing MAML (and LEO-lite later on) in the Tensorflow
2.0 framework, where the optimizers used for traditional deep learning, are not easily
differentiable (if at all). Therefore the gradient steps has to be implemented in a differ-
entiable way. As a consequence, all inner loop adaptations are performed with a simple
SGD algorithm with a fixed learning rate.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Developed Software
Figure 5.2: Test results from both models. Each plot displays a trained model
evaluated on the test set. The test set contains 1000 data points, which
for clarity, has been reduced to 100 points by taking the mean of 10 points.
Each line represents the test loss after 0, 1 and 10 gradient updates (adapta-
tions). TOP: Baseline. Displays the gradual improvement that we would
expect from a model trained in a standard way. BOTTOM: MAML. A
clear difference from the baseline. Performs similarly to the baseline be-
fore any adaptations. But after just a single adaptation, it clearly improves
more and differently than the baseline..
==PAGE:43==
5.2 MAML Notebook
33
Figure 5.3: Visualizing baseline adaptations.
Adapting to two random tasks.
With no adaptations (green) the baseline models an average sine wave.
With each adaptation step, it gradually moves closer to the true wave.
But even after 10 steps (purple), it is still far from modelling the true
wave .
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Developed Software
Figure 5.4: Visualizing MAML adaptations.
Adapting to two random tasks.
With no adaptations (green), MAML models a kind of average sine wave,
like the baseline, but less smooth. MAML demonstrates its non-gradual
nature also seen in the test losses in figure 5.2. After 1 or 10 adaptation
steps it appears to ”snap” to the true wave, instead of gradually moving to-
wards it. The model was only trained with 1 adaptation step, yet displays
improved performance after 10 steps..
5.3
LEO-lite Notebook
Notebook implementing the LEO-lite algorithm and testing it on the same regression
problem as the one used in the MAML notebook.
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Autoencoder Implementation
35
Figure 5.5: Visualizing LEO-lite adaptations.
Adapting to two random tasks.
LEO-lite displays a behavior similar to MAML, as expected. It has the
same jagged average sine wave before any adaptations, and ”snaps” to the
true wave in 1 to 10 adaptation steps.
5.4
Autoencoder Implementation
After the MAML and LEO-lite implementations on the simple regression case, an au-
toencoder setup was the next natural step towards the generative VAE setup.
The
autoencoder has no generative capabilities, so the objective is simply reconstruction.
Initially the loss was the MSE with non-binarized images, which amounts to regressing
towards each pixel value - a grayscale value between 0 and 1.0. In order to improve re-
sults and prepare it for the VAE with a pixel-independent Bernoulli distribution, Binary
Cross-Entropy (BCE) was eventually used together with binarized images.
Autoencoders are prone to overfitting and this was the main issue when starting with
non-binarized black-on-white Omniglot images.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Developed Software
Figure 5.6: 1st row: Input images (K=5) from a novel Omniglot task. 2nd row:
reconstructions without any adaptations. 3rd and 4th rows: after 1 and
5 adaptations respectively. Essentially the reconstruction is almost perfect
without any adaptations and only trained on K=5 examples.
Figure 5.7: The test losses for a test set conveys the same problem. Adaptations does
almost nothing to improve the loss. Ideally this should look something like
the test loss plot from the MAML notebook, figure 5.2.
Adjusting the network architecture, size of the latent bottleneck and other hyper-
parameters helped constrain the overfitting of the autoencoder.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Autoencoder Implementation
37
Figure 5.8: Each row represents a separate task. 1st column: A single image chosen
at random to represent the K task images.
Used as input.
2nd-5th
column: Reconstructions after 0 to 3 adaptations.
The model appeared to have learned how to adapt to a novel task in a non-overfitting
way. The reconstructions before any adaptations display a common nonsensical starting
point, that can quickly be adapted to the novel task. However, the reconstructions before
any adaptations (0 steps) across tasks appeared very similar. Almost like it had found a
single set of starting weights for any task. Similar to the MAML approach, but not the
LEO approach (and this was a LEO-lite implementation). In order to investigate these
initial weights, a cross-input task approach was taken. Meaning, the meta-learner would
use its data-dependent encoder to initialize the weights according to a task. But instead
of adapting to this task as usual, a different task (denoted cross-task) was injected as
the adaptation target. If the adaptation results were similar, regardless of using the task
or cross-task dependent initialization, it would seem to indicate a very similar starting
point.
Figure 5.9: Each row represents a separate task. 1st and 2nd column: A single
image chosen at random to represent the K task images. And the recon-
struction after 0 adaptations (before adaptations). 3rd and 4th column:
A different novel task chosen as cross-input. And its reconstruction after
0 adaptations. Remaining columns: Reconstructions after 1,2 and 3
adaptation steps.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Developed Software
Indeed, the initialization appeared to be task indifferent. At this point the dataset
was inverted to a white-on-black scheme.
This facilitated faster training and better
results. The test performance started to match what was expected, with marked im-
provements with just a few adaptations.
Figure 5.10: Each row represents a separate task. The columns once again represent
input and reconstructions after 0-3 adaptations.
Figure 5.11: The reconstruction losses after just 1 and 2 adaptations are significantly
better than with no adaptations. This is what you would expect from
meta-learned model, with better than just gradual improvements.
However, the task indifferent initialization, highlighted with the cross-task visualiza-
tion, still persisted.
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Autoencoder Implementation
39
Figure 5.12: Task indifferent initialization.
Baseline performance
Two baselines were trained on the same data and with identical networks. As explained
in section 2.3.1, the two baselines were: one with all images shuffled between tasks and
with a batch-size different from K, effectively disregarding tasks. The other with tasks
as mini-batches.
Figure 5.13: Baseline without tasks. Top: Each row is a task represented by a single
image. First column is input, followed by reconstructions after 0 to 3
adaptations. Bottom: Test losses on unseen tasks. It is clear that the
baseline is able to very accurately reconstruct a novel task without any
adaptations.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Developed Software
Figure 5.14: Baseline with tasks. Top: Each row is a task represented by a single
image. First column is input, followed by reconstructions after 0 to 3
adaptations. Bottom: Test losses on unseen tasks. It is clear that this
baseline is also able to very accurately reconstruct a novel task without
any adaptations.
The AE implementation was meant to serve as a gradual stepping stone towards the
VAE implementation. It was unclear whether this cross-task problem would even be an
issue with a VAE, so further investigation into it was dropped in favor of moving on.
And the AE baselines’ on-par performance could just be a matter of either Omniglot
being to easy and perhaps a too expressive model.
Either way, the framework was
capable of training a model sufficiently and was modular enough to extend to a VAE
implementation with relatively few code alterations.
5.5
VAE Implementation
The VAE implementation constitutes the final generative model. The results of this
setup are shown in the Results section (7).
==PAGE:51==
5.5 VAE Implementation
41
5.5.1
From AE to VAE
As per intent, extending the AE setup to a VAE one, is straight forward. They share
the same basic architecture and training loop, and only the learner model changed to a
VAE, with the meta-learner model remaining the same encoder-decoder setup (inspired
by an AE, but not exactly the same). The changes needed to make this transition were:
• Adding stochastic layers as the final layer in both learner encoder and decoder,
together with defining a prior distribution - see figure 4.2.
• Re-writing the loss function with a different type of reconstruction loss (negative
log likelihood) and adding the KL divergence term.
• Adding a generative component in the testing and visualization of adaptations,
demonstrating the trained models ability to generate new images.
Tensorflow contains a library called Tensorflow Probability [Dil+17] that makes it
easy to combine probabilistic models and traditional deep learning ones. With it, it
is as simple as defining a distribution layer and inserting it directly into the model at
the desired location. Behind the scenes it handles when to act as a normal layer (with
Tensor output) and when to act as a distribution that can be sampled from.
Standard regularization techniques can be enabled on a per-layer basis, including L2
regularization and the KL divergence regularization (with a simple β weight parameter).
This makes the explicit loss function very simple. In this case, it is simply the negative
log likelihood of the input image under the Bernoulli pixel output distribution.
5.5.2
Coupling between meta-learner and learner
The meta-learner generates all or some of the layer weights of the learner, as illustrated
in figures 4.2 and 4.3. In order to do this, the output of the meta-learner must match
perfectly with the required number and dimensions of weights of the learner layers. This
is handled by having the decoder of the meta-learner have an output layer equal to 2 ×
the number of layers with generated weights. One for each of the kernel and bias values
for each layer.
In code this is done by instantiating the learner network first.
Then passing it to
the meta-learner object, where it is traversed and the total number of weights and their
shapes are calculated, along with a mapping between an output layer and the associated
learner network layer. This mapping is needed, since the learner network will contain
layers without parameters (kernel and bias) that should be skipped, e.g. a Flatten-layer
to connect convolutional layers with fully-connected ones.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Developed Software
5.5.3
Handling unstable training
Unstable training, in the form of exploding gradients, was an issue throughout the whole
project. Choosing a proper learning rate is almost always essential to training speed and
convergence. This is exacerbated when it isn’t the gradients themselves that are gradu-
ally changed (from the learner model perspective), but the gradients of the network that
produce them. This means the learner network can change quite rapidly, leading to the
exploding gradients. Choosing a proper learning rate was necessary, but not sufficient to
control the instability. Two other techniques were instrumental: the output activation
function of the meta-learner and gradient clipping.
The output activation function for the meta-learner determines the range that all learner
model weights can inhabit, because the meta-learner generates the weights for the learner.
The ReLU activation allows for arbitrary large positive values and no negative values,
which didn’t prevent large changes in generated weights. And not having negative val-
ues could also reduce the expressiveness of the learner network. Sigmoid capped the
positive values, but also didn’t permit negative ones. The tanh activation worked the
best, with its squeezing of the output between [−1.0, 1.0], allowing both positive and
negative values and capping them both.
Gradient clipping is a common strategy in deep learning and especially with RNN train-
ing. And in some ways this meta-learning approach seem to resemble RNN training,
because of the unrolling in RNNs and the unrolling of adaptation steps in this. Gradi-
ent clipping is a way to cap the values of the gradients before they are used to update
model weights. You can either clip by value, thereby not allowing the absolute value of
a gradient to exceed some limit. Or clip by norm, where any gradient that exceeds a
limit, is normalized. Gradient clipping doesn’t help with convergence, it might actually
slow it down by capping gradient updates by too much. But it helps with exploding
gradients by capping too large gradients.
Gradient clip norm was used on the learner network.
5.5.4
Network architectures
The network architectures in this section constitutes the default setup. This was used
for models in the Results section, with whatever alterations are listed there.
The diagrams of the networks are drawn by Tensorflow. The questionsmark (?) indicate
the unknown batch size.
==PAGE:53==
5.5 VAE Implementation
43
Meta-learner networks
Figure 5.15: Meta-learner encoder. As can be seen by the number of stacked input
images, K=10. And the output size of the last layer equals the meta
latent size, which is 16 in this case. There will also be dropout layers
between each layer.
These select a pre-defined number of nodes in a
connected layer to switch off. This acts as a regularization technique to
help combat overfitting, but removing the complete reliance on a few very
specialized nodes (as they will be turned off occasionally). The dropout
layers are not shown here for simplicity’s sake.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Developed Software
Figure 5.16: Meta-learner decoder.
The version that only produces weights for
a subset of the learner network layers. And cropped, to fit the page. It
takes the latent code as input, sends it through two fully-connected layers
and then splits off into a large amount of dense output layers. Each with
varying degrees of output sizes depending on whether it is going to be
applied to a kernel or a bias. And the position of the layer in the learner
network.
==PAGE:55==
5.5 VAE Implementation
45
Learner networks
Figure 5.17: Learner encoder. Takes as input a single 28×28 one channel image,
passes it through a series of convolutions and outputs a distribution via
the multivariate normal distribution layer. From this, it is possible to
draw a learner latent sized sample. Despite the double parenthesis in the
last layer, only a single (?,16) sample is actually drawn. I do not know
why it displays two.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Developed Software
Figure 5.18: Learner decoder.
Takes the learner latent size as input, passing it
through upscaling convolutional layers (Transpose Conv) and outputting
a Bernoulli distribution. From which to draw image sized samples (again,
only one sample is drawn despite double parenthesis).
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Data
6.1
Preprocessing
Four different datasets are used in this work: Omniglot, ”Quick, draw!”, MNIST and
Fashion-MNIST. All images are preprocessed in the following ways:
• Fit and converted to 28x28 binary black and white bitmap images.
They are
normalized, and a threshold of 0.5 is used for binarizing them. With the exception
of Fashion-MNIST (see below).
• All data sets have been converted to the original MNIST style of white pixels
indicating a part of the pattern and the black pixels as part of the background.
However it is easier for humans to read when the background is white, so the
images in this section are displayed inverted.
6.2
Datasets
6.2.1
Omniglot
Omniglot [LST15] is a dataset designed specifically for few-shot learning. It contains
1623 different classes of characters from 50 different alphabets, drawn online by 20
different people. These alphabets originates both from real and fictional languages.
Figure 6.1: There is little visual difference between omniglot normal (this) and om-
niglot binarized because they are simple characters and drawn online.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Data
6.2.2
Quick, draw!
The Quick Draw Dataset [Qiu17] is a collection of 50 million drawings across 345 cate-
gories, contributed by players of the game ”Quick, Draw!”. In this game, users worldwide
had a very limited time to draw on-screen a drawing/doodle of a certain type. E.g. plane,
carrot, car, frog, etc. Only a small subset of the large dataset is used. Approx. 100
randomly chosen examples from each category. This is not a dataset that is tradition-
ally used for deep learning in general nor meta-learning specifically. And the number of
classes makes it less ideal than Omniglot. But it is visually similar to both Omniglot and
MNIST, yet contains a greater range of variation due to the time limit and the many dif-
ferent people and their skills and interpretations of the different categories. This makes
it an interesting addition.
Figure 6.2: Non-binarized images of sofas, frogs, carrots and others.
Figure 6.3: Binarized version. These drawing were drawn online like Omniglot, but
the way they have been down sampled and because of their more abstract
and varied content, they become more jagged when binarized.
6.2.3
MNIST
MNIST [LCB] hardly needs an introduction given how ubiquitous it is in machine learn-
ing literature. But here is a short one anyway: it contains scanned handwritten digits
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Datasets
49
(0-9). It contains 7,000 examples of each digit.
Figure 6.4: Non-binarized MNIST. A pretty familiar sight.
Figure 6.5: Binarized digits. MNIST becomes noticeably more jagged when binarized,
but not to a degree that it is a problem.
6.2.4
Fashion-MNIST
Fashion-MNIST [XRV17] was developed to replace MNIST. It is designed to mirror
the setup of MNIST (same format, size, train-test split etc.)
in order to make the
proposed replacement as smooth as possible. It contains 10 classes of clothing items
from the Zalando webshop. The other dataset are binarized with a threshold of 0.5
(are normalization). For Fashion-MNIST however this caused problems with the great
range of grayscale values it contains, due to the real world objects they depict and their
nuanced textures. Seeing as no other dataset has this type of texture, it would stand
out to much and it would be unreasonable to assume models trained only on the other
datasets would learn to represent both these novel shapes and textures. So Fashion-
MNIST was binarized with a threshold of 0.1, so that it essentially is only a matter of
learning the rough shape of the object.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Data
Figure 6.6: Non-binarized images of shoes, bags, pants etc.
Figure 6.7: This is the only dataset used that contains texture. However in a binarized
version that texture is lost and only the rough shape remains.
6.3
Combining Datasets
Of the four datasets, Omniglot is the only one that has been specifically designed for
few-shot learning. And given the nature of the current deep learning models, where a
large number of examples is more important than a large number of classes, few-shot
datasets are not abundant. Especially not when limiting it to images that are MNIST-
like, e.g. small, grayscale and with simple patterns - which are good for testing new
algorithms on image problems.
The datasets can be combined in various ways to create a training dataset. This should
help create a more robust model, less prone to overfitting and capable of handling a more
diverse range of tasks. However with datasets with a number of classes ranging from
10 to 1600, with only K examples of each permitted, it is relevant to consider dataset
imbalance. Some of the approaches to handle this imbalance includes:
• Strict dataset balance. E.g. MNIST only contains 10 different classes, so every
other dataset is only allowed 10 randomly chosen classes. With 4 datasets this
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Combining Datasets
51
amounts to 4 × 10 × K = 10 = 400 images in total. This is extremely small for a
deep learning problem, so this is not an option.
• Class balance. Use as many classes as possible from each dataset. With only 10
classes in MNIST and Fashion-MNIST, compared to 1623 and 345 in Omniglot and
Quickdraw, this would bias the model towards Omniglot and Quickdraw, almost
making the addition of the other two pointless.
• Fake balance. Create new ”fake” tasks by splitting exisiting classes into new ones.
E.g.
MNIST has 7,000 examples of each digit.
Each digit could be split into
7, 000/(2 × K) different tasks. This would ensure an equal number of classes from
each dataset, with the limiting factor being either the dataset with the highest
number of natural classes, or the maximum number of fake classes a dataset could
produce. This runs the risk of biasing the model towards the dataset with fake
classes, if the classes are too similar.
• No dataset combination.
E.g.
a model could be trained only on Omniglot or
Quickdraw and MNIST and Fashion-MNIST purely used for testing and evaluation.
Limiting the usefulness of the latter two.
• Train on the full dataset. E.g. train a the full MNIST dataset, but still converted
into tasks. Hoping the task’ing of the dataset, combined with a random order, will
be sufficient for the model to perform well on an unseen Omniglot task.
All of the above have their pros and cons, and it seems only empirical tests can determine
which is the better. Generally, the first 2 approaches have been ignored in this work.
The first one because the training set would be too small, and the second, because it
makes 2 out of the 4 datasets almost useless.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Results
All experiments are performed on the High-Performance Cluster (HPC) provided by
DTU. With each experiment using an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU with 16 GiB of mem-
ory [DTU19].
A clear preference has been put on experiments with MNIST, since it is considered
the easiest to learn. And given the difficulties with training these models, MNIST was
prioritized in order to try and get decent results.
To avoid confusing Fashion-MNIST with MNIST, Fashion-MNIST will simply be re-
ferred to as Fashion.
7.1
How To Read The Results
All models are trained on K=10. For brevity, only 4 images from each task of K images
are shown. When a model was trained on two datasets combined, two example tasks
are shown next to each other. Visualizations of model results will be shown in the setup
shown in figure 7.1.
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Results
Figure 7.1: Example of results. The annotations will not be present on the actual
results.
Generating new images is a matter of sampling from the prior, sending it through the
learner decoder and sampling from the resulting pixel-independent Bernoulli distribution.
I.e. the sample, mean and mode in figure 7.1 constitute the new generated images.
7.2
Shared Settings
These are the default settings that all experiments share, where applicable and if ex-
plicitly varied as part of the experiment. E.g. a baseline does not have a meta-learner,
so those settings do not apply. See section 5.5.4 for an overview of default network
architectures.
==PAGE:65==
7.3 Baselines
55
Setting
Value
K
10
Num adaptations
3
α: Inner loop learning rate
0.01
Outer loop and baseline optimizer
Adam
Outer loop learning rate
0.001
Clipnorm for inner loop
1.0
Dataset combination policy
Fake Balance
Dropout rate
10 %
γ: z adaptation penalty
0.1
L2 regularization on meta-learner
0.01
Test size
10 %
Meta-learner output activation
tanh
Meta-learner hidden activation
tanh
Learner hidden activation
Leaky ReLU
Batch size
12
Batches in epoch
20
Meta encoded size (size of z)
8
Table 7.1: List of default settings for experiments.
Notes regarding some of the settings:
• Batch size: For meta-learned models, refers to the number of tasks in a batch. For
baseline models, this number is multiplied by K to include the same number of
images as meta-learned models.
• Batches in epoch: Only affects meta-learned models. Because of the very slow
training times, the entire dataset could not be trained on for every epoch. This
defines the randomly selected number of batches in an epoch.
• Clipnorm only affects meta-learned models.
• ”Fake Balance” dataset combination policy refers to the one listed in section 6.3.
7.3
Baselines
All baselines are trained with no task information. I.e. all images are shuffled across
tasks. A baseline only trains the learner network and are used to validate the expres-
siveness of the learner networks. If they can be trained to a sufficient level for recon-
structing and generating new images, the learner network architecture is sufficient. So,
if the meta-trained models fail, it is due to the actual training and not the generative
(learner) network.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Results
7.3.1
Table
Train dataset(s)
Val loss
Epochs
β
Batchsize
fashion
106
50
1
12
fashion
113
15
25
5
fashion, mnist
112
25
1
12
fashion, mnist
112
25
25
5
fashion, mnist
113
25
25
5
fashion, mnist
118
15
25
5
fashion, omniglot
120
25
25
5
fashion, quickdraw
122
25
25
5
fashion, quickdraw
125
25
1
12
mnist
99
50
1
12
mnist
105
15
25
5
mnist, omniglot
117
25
1
12
mnist, omniglot
118
25
25
5
mnist, quickdraw
118
25
1
12
mnist, quickdraw
118
25
25
5
omniglot
131
50
1
12
omniglot
137
15
25
5
omniglot, quickdraw
147
50
1
12
omniglot, quickdraw
150
25
25
5
omniglot, quickdraw
152
25
1
12
quickdraw
225
50
1
12
quickdraw
233
15
25
5
Table 7.2: Baselines results. Grouped by training datasets and sorted, within groups,
by validation loss.
The baseline results in table 7.2 generally show that the more epochs and the larger the
batch size, the better - which is in no way surprising. Adding a beta weight to the VAE
does not immediately seem to improve the model, but it because of the differences in
batch size, it is not possible to say with certainty.
==PAGE:67==
7.3 Baselines
57
7.3.2
Visualizations
Two of the baseline models have been chosen to illustrate the general trend among the
baselines w.r.t. reconstructions, adaptations and generating new images.
Fashion, Omniglot
Figure 7.2: Trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Reconstructions of seen tasks.
Figure 7.3: Trained on Fashion and Omniglot.
Generated images from seen tasks
after adaptations.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Results
Figure 7.4: Trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Reconstructions of unseen task.
Figure 7.5: Trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Generated images from unseen task
after adaptations.
Reconstructions are fairly good for Fashion images and less so for Omniglot ones. As
a likely consequence, it does not reconstruct MNIST images particularly well.
The
generated images clearly illustrate that the model has, at least, learned a decent repre-
sentation of Fashion images. Yet, it shows no task adaptation ability. Meaning the task
images it adapted to does not seem to have influenced what kind of images it generates,
neither for a seen nor unseen task. This is not surprising for a baseline model, since it
was trained with a random combination of images from the two datasets at each batch.
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Baselines
59
MNIST
Figure 7.6: Trained on MNIST. Reconstructions of seen task.
Figure 7.7: Trained on MNIST. Generated images from seen task after adaptations.
Figure 7.8: Trained on MNIST. Reconstructions of unseen task.
Figure 7.9: Trained on MNIST. Generated images from unseen task after adaptations.
The MNIST baseline model fairs similarly to the Fashion-Omniglot baseline.
It has
learned a pretty good representation of MNIST, but also does not show any sign of
adapting to a task. The reconstruction of a Fashion task in figure 7.8 shows the model
trying to match an MNIST digit, likely ”8”, to the Fashion image.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Results
7.4
All-Layers Model
For both the All-Layers and Some-Layers models, the ”Symmetric” property is the
result of an oversight when performing the experiments. Some experiments had learner
networks with a slightly (2 layers) larger decoder than encoder, i.e. not symmetric. This
was never the intention. But because of time constraints, it was not possible to perform
those experiments again with a symmetric architecture.
7.4.1
Table
Train dataset(s)
Val loss
Epochs
β
Symmetric
mnist
49
75
1
No
mnist
50
50
150
Yes
mnist
51
50
10
No
mnist
51
50
25
Yes
mnist
53
50
25
No
mnist
54
50
100
Yes
mnist
54
50
50
Yes
mnist
60
50
1
No
mnist
62
50
200
Yes
mnist, omniglot
67
75
1
No
mnist, omniglot
69
75
1
No
omniglot
88
75
1
No
omniglot
89
50
50
Yes
Table 7.3: Results from experiments using the meta-learner that generates all weights
for the learner, referred to as All-Layers model.
In table 7.3 the asymmetry in the models does not appear to have had much of an
impact. The β weight also does not appear to correlate with a specific performance.
7.4.2
Visualizations
There are three groups training datasets combinations. The two best models have been
chosen from the MNIST group, and one from each of the others, to visualize the general
performance of the trained models.
==PAGE:71==
7.4 All-Layers Model
61
MNIST
Figure 7.10: Trained on MNIST. Reconstructions of seen task.
The best MNIST
model with a validation loss of 49 and a β weight of 1.0 (a normal VAE).
Figure 7.11: Trained on MNIST. Generated images from seen task after adaptations.
The best MNIST model with a validation loss of 49 and a β weight of 1.0
(a normal VAE).
Figure 7.12: Trained on MNIST. Reconstructions of seen task.
The second best
MNIST model with a validation loss of 50 and a β weight of 150.
Figure 7.13: Trained on MNIST. Generated images from seen task after adaptations.
The second best MNIST model with a validation loss of 50 and a β weight
of 150.
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Results
MNIST, Omniglot
Figure 7.14: Trained on MNIST and Omniglot. Reconstructions of seen tasks.
Figure 7.15: Trained on MNIST and Omniglot. Generated images from seen tasks
after adaptations.
Omniglot
Figure 7.16: Trained on Omniglot. Reconstructions of seen task.
Figure 7.17: Trained on Omniglot. Generated images from seen task after adapta-
tions.
==PAGE:73==
7.4 All-Layers Model
63
7.4.3
Summarizing visualization results
For all models it is clear, that while they can achieve pretty good reconstructions, they
fail at generating new images. There is little to no activity in all the generated images. It
is impossible to say anything about task adaptation abilities, since the generated images
are mostly empty, with mostly non-sensical activation. Additionally the large β weight
difference between the two MNIST models is not visible in the generated images.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Results
7.5
Some-Layers Model
7.5.1
Table
Train dataset(s)
Val loss
Epochs
β
size of z
Symmetric
fashion
67
50
1
16
Yes
fashion, mnist
68
50
1
16
Yes
mnist
44
75
1
8
No
mnist
47
50
100
8
Yes
mnist
48
50
150
8
Yes
mnist
48
50
25
8
Yes
mnist
48
50
1
8
Yes
mnist
49
50
1
16
Yes
mnist
49
50
200
8
Yes
mnist
50
50
25
8
No
mnist
51
50
10
8
No
mnist
52
50
50
8
Yes
mnist
54
50
50
8
No
mnist
56
35
1
8
No
omniglot
77
50
50
8
Yes
omniglot
79
50
25
8
No
omniglot
79
50
50
8
No
omniglot
81
50
1
16
Yes
omniglot
82
50
25
8
No
omniglot
85
50
50
8
No
omniglot
86
75
1
8
No
omniglot, quickdraw
97
75
1
8
No
omniglot, quickdraw
101
50
1
16
Yes
quickdraw
146
50
1
16
Yes
Table 7.4: Results from experiments using the meta-learner that generates some
weights for the learner, referred to as Some-Layers model.
In table 7.4 it is clear that, similarly to the All-Layers model experiments, both the
symmetric property and the β weight value do not appear to correlate with higher or
lower validation loss.
==PAGE:75==
7.5 Some-Layers Model
65
7.5.2
Visualizations
There are six groups of training datasets combinations. The best (or only) model from
each group is chosen to visualize the general performance of the trained models.
Fashion
Figure 7.18: Trained on Fashion. Reconstructions of seen task.
Figure 7.19: Trained on Fashion. Generated images from seen task after adaptations.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Results
Fashion, MNIST
Figure 7.20: Trained on Fashion and MNIST. Reconstructions of seen tasks.
Figure 7.21: Trained on Fashion and MNIST. Generated images from seen tasks after
adaptations.
MNIST
Figure 7.22: Trained on MNIST. Reconstructions of seen task.
Figure 7.23: Trained on MNIST. Generated images from seen task after adaptations.
==PAGE:77==
7.5 Some-Layers Model
67
Omniglot
Figure 7.24: Trained on Omniglot. Reconstructions of seen task.
Figure 7.25: Trained on Omniglot. Generated images from seen task after adapta-
tions.
Omniglot, Quickdraw
Figure 7.26: Trained on Omniglot and Quickdraw. Reconstructions of seen tasks.
Figure 7.27: Trained on Omniglot and Quickdraw. Generated images from seen tasks
after adaptations.
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Results
Quickdraw
Figure 7.28: Trained on Quickdraw. Reconstructions of seen task.
Figure 7.29: Trained on Quickdraw. Generated images from seen task after adapta-
tions.
7.5.3
Summarizing visualization results
Similarly to the All Layers models, these Some Layers models can achieve pretty decent
reconstructions and still fail at generating proper new images. But unlike the All Layers
model, there is more activity in the generated images, especially the samples and means.
7.6
Pre-Trained Model
The purpose of these pre-trained model experiments is to do a simple investigation into
whether a Some-Layers model can be used to improve the performance of a baseline
model.
The the Some-Layers model is initialized with the weights from the trained
baseline. The performance of the baseline alone is compared to that of the pre-trained
Some-Layers model. It only makes sense to pre-train a Some-Layers model, since an
All-Layers model has all its layer weights generated from the meta-learner.
So the
initialization would be overridden before every being used.
==PAGE:79==
7.6 Pre-Trained Model
69
7.6.1
Table
Train dataset(s)
Pre val loss
Val loss
Val loss diff
Epochs
β
fashion, mnist
116
216
-100
10
25
fashion, omniglot
126
168
-42
10
25
mnist
107
155
-48
10
25
mnist, omniglot
119
171
-52
10
25
omniglot, quickdraw
149
136
13
25
25
omniglot, quickdraw
155
185
-30
10
25
quickdraw
237
237
0
10
25
Table 7.5: Results from experiments using a pre-trained Some Layers model. A base-
line model is trained on the same dataset(s) and the weights of the trained
baseline are used to initialize the Some Layers model. Batch size = 6 and
”Batches in epoch” = 10.
There are neither enough experiments nor epochs per experiment to say anything con-
clusive about these results. But generally the meta-trained Some-Layers model does not
improve the validation loss of the baseline.
7.6.2
Visualizations
Only a single model is shown as it represents the general trend with all the pre-trained
models. The first 4 images show the results of training a baseline model. The last 4
images show the results of a meta-trained Some-Layers model, that has been initialized
with the trained baseline’s weights.
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Results
Fashion, Omniglot
Figure 7.30: Baseline: trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Reconstructions of seen
tasks.
Figure 7.31: Baseline: trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Generated images from
seen tasks after adaptations.
Figure 7.32: Baseline: trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Reconstructions of unseen
task.
Figure 7.33: Baseline: trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Generated images from
unseen task after adaptations.
==PAGE:81==
7.6 Pre-Trained Model
71
Figure 7.34: Some Layers model: pre-trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Recon-
structions of seen tasks.
Figure 7.35: Some Layers model: pre-trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Generated
images from seen tasks after adaptations.
Figure 7.36: Some Layers model: pre-trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Recon-
structions of unseen task.
Figure 7.37: Some Layers model: pre-trained on Fashion and Omniglot. Generated
images from unseen task after adaptations.
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Results
7.6.3
Summarizing visualization results
The baseline results match those of the other baselines in section 7.3, to no surprise. It
achieves decent reconstructions and some decent generations (after only being trained for
10 epochs). The ”Some Layers” model achieves a worse validation loss than the baseline,
as seen in table 7.5. The generated images are markedly worse and the reconstructions
also appear to be getting worse.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
Choice of Tensorflow 2.0
Tensorflow 2.0 was chosen over its predecessor for the reasons listed in section 5.1.1. At
the start of this work I was not very experienced with Tensorflow 1.x, so the choice of
either major version, required a considerable amount of time. The challenges with using
2.0 was that it had few online resources available, given its recent release. And its alpha
and beta releases had some bugs and compatibility issues, along with having to imple-
ment the algorithms more or less from scratch. Had I chosen version 1.x instead, some
of these problems might have been avoided. But others might have taken their place.
Especially given the debug difficult nature of 1.x in combination with the unmaintained
pre-existing implementations of MAML and LEO, and the fact that specififally LEO
was designed for a very different learning problem.
Software development process
Implementation:
Extending the autoencoder implementation into a VAE one, was
initially as simple as expected. However, the difficulties in training a sufficient VAE
model required more modularity, specifically w.r.t. only generating weights for a subset
of the learner model.
Using Jupyter Notebooks for the initial MAML and LEO-lite implementations and gen-
eral exploration was useful and easy to iterate on. But the transition from notebooks
to High-Performance Cluster (HPC) implementation was not as smooth as hoped. The
nature of notebooks lead me to less structured code for quick and dirty experimentation,
which reached an unwieldy mass of entangled code. Disentangling and restructuring
it took longer than anticipated. Several popular code editors including Visual Studio
Code [VSC19], are starting to offer notebook capabilities with live execution of code bits
in-editor. I would have explored this approach, were I to redo it.
Refactoring:
Some parts of the code are very brittle and would benefit a lot from a
refactoring. Especially the way datasets are prepared and combined, and how to swap
out network architectures of both the meta-learner and learner. However, these things
are never as easy to do as they sound. E.g. the meta-learner output layers need to
match up perfectly with all the learner layers that need to have their weights generated.
In general, there was a constant push towards higher modularity in order to be able to
easily experiment with different combinations, and much could still be done in this vein.
==PAGE:84==
74
8 Discussion
Testing:
No unit or integration test was created during this project. Obviously a lot
of ad hoc testing and verification took place, but not in the rigid form of a test suite.
Test suites is a best practice in traditional software development, but less so in research
and exploration based projects, and especially within deep learning. E.g. neither of
the original open-sourced (GitHub) implementations of MAML and LEO feature tests.
Deep learning as field seems to lack a best practice for writing sufficient tests, likely due
to its relative immaturity and rapid pace of development.
Writing unit test for especially data wrangling, weight generation and the manual process
of applying gradients in the inner loop, is something I would do if I had to do it again.
It would probably have saved me a lot of debugging time.
Training, experimentation and results
Results:
The poor results of the generative learner is somewhat surprising, in light of
the following facts:
• The autoencoder setup managed to almost perfectly reconstruct novel tasks, most
likely to the point of overfitting if considering using it for tasks from the other
datasets (though never tested).
• The generative baselines managed reasonable results with the identical network
architecture, proving that the network is expressive enough. They used the same
prior and was constrained with the same KL term.
• Even meta-trained generative models that managed reasonable reconstructions,
had very poor generated results. Several different magnitudes of β-weighted KL
terms didn’t produce better generations.
The generated weights were constrained to be within [-1.0, 1.0] (by a tanh output acti-
vation function). Maybe this constraint was too punishing. Mapping the distribution
of learned weights for a reasonable performing baseline, might give an indication as to
whether it is a proper range. I tried this with the MAML notebook implementation for
the regression case, where the wast majority of weights were within the range. It would
be interesting to explore why this setup performed so poorly, and it is exactly the main
focus of the future work section.
Besides the poor results, there are a number of different and disjoint considerations and
observations worth discussing:
• Out-of-the-box optimizers in Tensorflow are not dfferentiable, so the manual and
simple SGD update was implemented for the inner loop. But perhaps no benefit
would come from traditional optimizers in the inner loop, seeing as how it proba-
bly cannot rely on gradient information between tasks which is normally used to
improve training speed.
• The original LEO has a lot of fine tuning steps, including pre-training a visual
representation of data and performing additional adaptations steps in parameter
==PAGE:85==
8.1 Future Work
75
space. My working assumption was that these were not necessary for a reasonable
generative model on simpler data (e.g. MNIST etc), and only included to achieve
state-of-the-art results. Perhaps at least more time should have been spent trying
to pre-train the model.
• K=10 was used for a vast majority of results with the generative model. Simply
because this was the maximum set by Omniglot (10 for train and 10 for validation),
and an upper limit on what can reasonably be considered few-shot learning. A
lower K wasn’t really explored because of the difficulties with training a decent
model with K=10.
• The autoencoder setup had little difficulty learning (and overfitting to) Omniglot,
especially after switching to a white-on-black scheme.
The baseline performed
just as well as the meta-trained one.
It seemed Omniglot alone was too easy
a problem. This motivated adding the additional datasets. Combining these in
meaningful ways both took time and happened to result in a brittle software design.
In hindsigt, with the difficulties with training the VAE, sticking to Omniglot (and
perhaps just MNIST as an extra) might have been a good idea.
• Slow and unstable training, combined with many hyper-parameters, made experi-
mentation slower than usual.
• A better way to judge the weight initializations. With the autoencoder setup, I
tried with the cross-task to investigate this, but I never moved beyond looking at
images. No quantitative approach by which to relate all the initial weights for a
test set. I moved on because the generative VAE was the real target. Though, it
is not obvious what approach to take, since it is not a simple matter of comparing
weights, but their resulting behavior.
8.1
Future Work
Given the surprisingly poor results of the generative learner, it is natural to consider
ways to understand this deficiency. Obviously providing full test coverage for all the
code would be a way to rule out implementation errors. But assuming that isn’t the
problem, there are two natural directions for future work.
First,
increasing training speed. This is always a desirable goal, as it helps with hyper-
parameter experimentation. But it is not always clear how feasible it is (besides just
adding more compute power). In this case it should be quite possible, with substantial
increases possible. The current implementation is not parallel, but both of the original
MAML and LEO implementations are. This alone should provide a very significant
increase. Additionally, MAML has a 1st order approximation (using ”stop gradient”),
that does not require the gradient-through-a-gradient. They found this method to per-
form similar to the 2nd order MAML approach, at 33% decreased computation time. I
==PAGE:86==
76
8 Discussion
experimented briefly with both of these techniques, but didn’t see a significant speed
increase with the 1st order approximation. And experienced too many implementation
errors (and possibly bugs) when trying to convert the code to the parallel execution
scheme in Tensorflow 2.0. These failed attempts are very likely a consequence of my
lack of experience with Tensorflow.
Second,
exploring the latent code representation of the learner VAE in more detail.
The reasonable reconstructions from the generative models prove that the encoder-
decoder setup works. But the failed generative process indicates that it is the constraint
of the KL term that is causing the issues. The latent code of encoded images simply
aren’t very likely under the prior, given that, when sampling from the prior, the gen-
erated images don’t look similar to the trained examples. Yet the baselines performed
much better with the same KL term and prior, ruling out those as conceptual problems.
The primary difference between LEO-lite and the baselines is the actual training. But
since reconstructions are possible, it would be interesting to capture the development of
the KL constraint and likelihood of the encoded images under the prior, during training.
Of course, it can’t be ruled out that this simply is an implementation error.
Besides these two major directions, there are several smaller, but noteworthy additions
that could be made:
• Change the number of layers that the meta-learner generates weights for. I tested
with generating all of them and the two inner most. There are many more to try.
• A kind of curriculum learning, where the meta-learner is gradually either increasing
or decreasing the number of layers it generate weights for. It seems plausible that
if starting from a pre-trained baseline and only generating the inner most layer, the
meta-learner could be gradually pushed to generate more and more layers, until a
sweet spot was found.
• Making the meta-learner encoder explicitly image-order invariant.
It currently
isn’t, though it is possible that it learns to be during training simply due to the
fact that the images are shuffled within tasks, between epochs.
This could be
achieved in Tensorflow with a TimeDistributed layer.
• Values of β for the KL term were static during training. It has been shown that
gradually increasing it during training achieves better results.
• The learner network architecture employs a fully-connected layer to map the con-
volutional layers of the encoder/decoder to the latent bottleneck. The positional
information is lost in this process. It might be easier to train with a pure convolu-
tion architecture instead, though it will require more care to align the final convo-
lution output dimensions with the required input size to parameterize a stochastic
layer.
==PAGE:87==
8.1 Future Work
77
• The meta-learner as a VAE, similar to LEO. I.e. a stochastic embedding layer
could act as a regularizing term. Also re-introduce the inner loop learning rate as
a learnable parameter.
• Being able to adjust the prior, by learning its parameters. This way the model
could ”jump” around on the learned manifold, according to the current type of data.
E.g. for a Gaussian prior, MNIST images would have one mean and Omniglot
images another. This might function somewhat like a Gaussian Mixture Model,
with the network learning the optimal number of clusters and their parameters.
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The process of incrementally developing the MAML and LEO-lite algorithms, from sim-
ple regression cases, via the autoencoder setup to the final VAE setup, did not work
out as intended. The standard VAE loss, with its reconstruction and KL divergence
parts, seemed sufficient to ensure decent generative capabilities in the baseline mod-
els. However, it failed to produce it for the meta-trained models, even in those that
achieved a lower validation loss than the any of the baselines. A low validation loss for
a meta-trained model only insured good reconstructions. This made the results difficult
to compare in a quantitative way and resulted in the Results section (7) being a qualita-
tive examination and display of the many different trained models’ failures to generate
decent new images. Since it is not clear what caused the poor results, this should be
the prime focus of any further work, along with the general need to increase the training
speed.
Unfortunately, many aspects of this setup was not explored to a greater extent because
of the difficulties with the training process. Among them are experimenting significantly
with different network architectures and utilising the different combinations of datasets.
Applying latent embedding optimization - in the form of a simplified version of the
LEO algorithm (known as LEO-lite in this work) - to few-shot image generation was
never an idea without issues. The combination of 2nd order derivatives and generating
a vast number of weights for a network, always posed a challenge. This work has demon-
strated the difficulties in trying to overcome this challenge.
Ultimately this work has not been successful in demonstrating the feasibility of meta-
learning few-shot generative models.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
LEO-lite algorithm for
Some-Layers model
Algorithm 3 LEO-lite for Some-Layers model
Changes to the first LEO-lite algorithm are colored blue
Require: Training meta-set Str
Require: Learning rates α, β
1: Randomly initialize ϕe, ϕd, ω
2: Let ϕ = {ϕe, ϕd}
3: Let Ω= {θ, ω}
▷Set of all parameters of fΩ
4: Apply partial params ω to f
5: while not converged do
6:
for number of tasks in batch do
7:
Sample task instance Ti ∼Str
8:
Let (Dtr, Dval) = Ti
9:
Encode Dtr to z using gϕe
10:
Decode z to initial params θi using gϕd
11:
Initialize z′ = z, θ
′
i = θi
▷θ is a subset of all params in f
12:
for number of adaptation steps do
▷Inner loop
13:
Compute training loss Ltr
Ti(fθ′
i)
14:
z′ ←z′ −α∇z′Ltr
Ti(fθ′
i)
▷Perform gradient step w.r.t. z′
15:
Decode z′ to obtain θ′
i using gϕd
16:
end for
17:
Compute validation loss Lval
Ti (fθ′
i)
18:
end for
19:
ϕ ←ϕ −β∇ϕ
∑
Ti Lval
Ti (fθ′
i)
▷Perform gradient step w.r.t. ϕ
20:
ω ←ω −β∇ω
∑
Ti Lval
Ti (fθ′
i)
▷Perform gradient step w.r.t. ω
21: end while
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[ASE19]
Antreas Antoniou, Amos Storkey, and Harrison Edwards. “How to train
your MAML”. In: 7th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2019. 2019. arXiv: 1810.09502. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
09502.
[Bro19]
Jason Brownlee. Gentle Introduction to the Adam optimization algorithm for
deep learning. 14 November 2019. url: https://machinelearningmastery.
com/adam-optimization-algorithm-for-deep-learning/.
[Com19]
DTU Compute. 2019. url: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/.
[Dil+17]
Joshua V. Dillon et al. TensorFlow Distributions - TensorFlow Probability.
2017. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/probability.
[DTU19]
DTU-HPC. DTU-HPC GPU nodes. 2019. url: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
?page_id=2129.
[FAD19]
Ian Fischer, Alex Alemi, and Joshua V. Dillon. Variational Autoencoders
with Tensorflow Probability Layers. 2019. url: https : / / medium . com /
tensorflow/variational-autoencoders-with-tensorflow-probability-
layers-d06c658931b7.
[FAL17]
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. “Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks”. In: 34th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2017. 2017. isbn: 9781510855144. arXiv:
1703.03400. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03400.
[Fin17]
Chelsea Finn. Learning to Learn. July 2017. url: https://bair.berkeley.
edu/blog/2017/07/18/learning-to-learn/.
[Guo+17]
Xifeng Guo et al. “Deep Clustering with Convolutional Autoencoders”. In:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). 2017. isbn:
9783319700953. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 319- 70096- 0_39. url: https:
//xifengguo.github.io/papers/ICONIP17-DCEC.pdf.
[Jai19]
Pawan Jain. Complete guide of activation functions. 12 June 2019. url:
https://towardsdatascience.com/complete-guide-of-activation-
functions-34076e95d044.
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[Jan16]
Eric Jang. A Beginner’s Guide to Variational Methods: Mean-Field Approx-
imation. 7 August 2016. url: https : / / blog . evjang . com / 2016 / 08 /
variational-bayes.html.
[Jup19]
Project Jupyter. Jupyter. 2019. url: https://jupyter.org/.
[KB15]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings. 2015. arXiv: 1412.6980. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[LCB]
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher J.C. Burges. THE MNIST
DATABASE of handwritten digits. url: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
mnist/.
[LST15]
Brenden M. Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. “Human-
level concept learning through probabilistic program induction”. In: Science
(2015). issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.aab3050. url: https://
science.sciencemag.org/content/350/6266/1332.
[Lyc19]
Robert Lyck. GitHub thesis repository. 2019. url: https://github.com/
roschly/dtu-thesis-2019.git.
[Qiu17]
Qiuck. The Quick, Draw! Dataset. 2017. url: https : / / github . com /
googlecreativelab/quickdraw-dataset.
[Rud17]
Sebastian Ruder. “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms”.
In: (2017). url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747.
[Rus+19]
Andrei A. Rusu et al. “Meta-learning with latent embedding optimization”.
In: 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019.
2019. arXiv: 1807.05960. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.05960.
[VSC19]
VSC. Visual Studio Code. Code editing. Redifined. 2019. url: https://
code.visualstudio.com/.
[WIK19a]
WIKISGD. Stochastic gradient descent. 2019. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Stochastic_gradient_descent.
[WIK19b]
WIKIVAN. Vanishing gradient problem. 2019. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Vanishing_gradient_problem.
[WIK19c]
WIKIVB. Variational Bayesian methods. 2019. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Variational_Bayesian_methods.
[XRV17]
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-MNIST: a Novel
Image Dataset for Benchmarking Machine Learning Algorithms. 28 August
2017. arXiv: cs.LG/1708.07747 [cs.LG].
