==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Evaluation of Deep Learning Methods for
Fingerprint Presentation Attack Detection
Alexandru-Cosmin Vasile (s173001)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The usage of biometric systems for automating identification and verification of
individuals represents an increasing trend. It is critical that the security of those
systems is optimal in order to prevent misuse. Presentation Attack Detection (PAD)
methods need to be employed for an increased security on various types of biometric
data such as fingerprints. This thesis explores the feasibility of using deep learning
techniques as PAD methods, working on fingerprint Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging
(LSCI) data. The focus is on utilising Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks
in order to effectively process the temporal information that is present in the data.
Fourteen deep neural network models are implemented and evaluated on a private
data set comprising LSCI fingerprint data. The data set comprises 2302 samples,
with 1146 Presentation Attack (PA) samples and 1156 bona fide samples. Five of
the trained and evaluated models achieve a classification accuracy above 97%. The
best performing model achieves a classification accuracy of 97.86%, with an Attack
presentation classification error rate (APCER) of 1.92% and Bona fide presentation
classification error rate (BPCER) of 2.35%. The study concludes that it is imper-
ative to use a convolutional base together with a LSTM block in order to achieve
high classification accuracy. Out of the 36 Presentation Attack Instruments (PAI)
species present in the data set, the overlay type represents the biggest challenge in
classification for all evaluated models.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration with the
Center for Research in Security and Privacy (CRISP) in Darmstadt, Germany in
fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree
in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis explores the possibility of using recurrent neural networks, specifically
Long Short-Term Memory neural networks as a robust fingerprint presentation attack
detection system, therefore representing a supervised learning binary classification
problem.
Kongens Lyngby, December 1, 2019
Alexandru-Cosmin Vasile (s173001)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Professor Christian Dams-
gaard Jensen, Professor Christoph Busch and Jascha Kolberg (Ph.D. Student) for a
fruitful learning experience and the fulfilment of this thesis.
I am thankful to Associate Professor Christian Damsgaard Jensen, Head of Section
at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical
University of Denmark for his guidance and administrative help with organising and
defending the thesis.
I am grateful to Professor Dr.
Christoph Busch, Principal Investigator at the
Center for Research in Security and Privacy (CRISP), for raising my interest in
the field of biometrics, by teaching the Biometrics Systems course at the Technical
University of Denmark. He provided valuable feedback to my writing and ideas, while
positively impacting my knowledge in the field.
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation for the day to day guidance
provided by Jascha Kolberg, Ph.D. Student Member of the Center for Research in
Security and Privacy.
He provided invaluable guidance during the full period of
my thesis, with insightful conversations and constant feedback at every step of my
research journey. I gained a tremendous amount of knowledge and this experience
would not be as constructive without his supervision.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Biometric Authentication with a Timeless Learner
. . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Biometric Systems Fundamentals
7
2.1
List of standardised terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Overview of a generic biometric system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Presentation attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Related work
13
4
Research questions
17
5
LSTM approach
19
5.1
Introduction to neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Introduction to recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Long Short-Term Memory networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
LSTM optimisation
25
6.1
Combining CNNs with RNNs for sequence processing
. . . . . . . . .
26
7
Experimental setup
29
7.1
Data set splits and cross-validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.1.1
K-fold validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.1.2
Leave-One-Out cross-validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Hyperparameter configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7.3
Description of developed models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3.1
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.2
Baseline model with two stacked layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3.3
Baseline model with three stacked layers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3.4
Re-implemented model from published paper . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.5
Basic CNN combined with LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3.6
Basic CNN combined with a stacked LSTM . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3.7
Basic CNN combined with a wider LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3.8
Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network
. . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3.9
LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained InceptionV3
.
47
7.3.10 Fine-tuned InceptionV3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.3.11 LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned InceptionV3 . .
51
7.3.12 LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained Xception . . .
51
7.3.13 Fine-tuned Xception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.3.14 LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned Xception . . . .
52
7.4
Evaluation of developed models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.5
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8
Results & Discussion
55
8.1
Results obtained by each approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.1.1
Baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.1.2
Baseline model with two stacked layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.1.3
Baseline model with three stacked layers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.1.4
Re-implemented model from published paper . . . . . . . . . .
60
8.1.5
Basic CNN combined with LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.1.6
Basic CNN combined with a stacked LSTM . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.1.7
Basic CNN combined with a wider LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.1.8
Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network
. . . . . . . . . .
67
8.1.9
LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained InceptionV3
.
69
8.1.10 Fine-tuned InceptionV3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.1.11 LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned InceptionV3 . .
73
8.1.12 LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained Xception . . .
75
8.1.13 Fine-tuned Xception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.1.14 LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned Xception . . . .
79
8.2
Summary of obtained results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
8.3
Analysis of top two best performing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
9
Conclusion
89
10 Further work
91
A Conda environment
93
B Confusion matrices
97
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
C ROC curves
111
Bibliography
113
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Information systems are becoming increasingly ubiquitous in every aspect of mod-
ern life.
They ease a multitude of various tasks and aid development of further
technologies. Often, such systems need to be secure, due to the sensitive nature of
the information that they contain. Security can be obtained through different means,
each with its own advantages and disadvantages. Authentication is frequently used
in order to confirm an individual’s identity, needed to provide access to a specific set
of digital actions or data. Authentication techniques such as the use of passwords,
two factor authentication, biometric authentication or public key authentication are
widely used. Biometric authentication uses unique biological characteristics of indi-
viduals, with the advantage that the biometric data cannot be forgotten or lost. The
global biometric systems market is estimated to grow from USD 33.0 billion in 2019 to
USD 65.3 billion by 2024 [53], the trend showing a growing interest in this technology.
The factors that drive this development include the increasing number of government
initiatives to employ biometrics, the growing need for security and surveillance due to
possible threats, the rising use of biometrics in consumer electronics devices in order
to provide convenient access to various applications and the increasing penetration
of biometrics in enterprise and automotive applications.
In order to increase accuracy in identifying individuals, multimodal biometrics [27]
can be used, which combines multiple biometric modalities such as fingerprint and
face. This technique can overcome the limitations that occur in unimodal systems
and has the potential to significantly reduce error rates.
India’s Aadhaar’s project [27, 39] is the world’s largest biometric identification
system and is used for civil identity purposes in connection to Indian government
services. A unique Aadhaar identity number is issued to all Indian residents, which
is based on biographic and biometric information (ten fingerprints, two iris scans and
a facial photograph). As of November 2019, more than 1.24 billion people [38] have
an Aadhaar number, therefrom the biometric data of 1.24 billion individuals was
collected and stored.
The US Department of Homeland Security expects to collect the biometric data
of over 259 million people for its biometrics database [69] by 2022, which would also
represent a sizeable biometrics database. The biometric data collected comprises iris,
fingerprint and facial scans. The database is used to accurately confirm the identity
of travellers at whichever point in their travel.
The European Union, comprising 513 million people [87], makes use of biometric
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
data in its biometric passports in order to uniquely identify its citizens across borders
and in different member states. The biometric identifiers present in the passports are
face and fingerprints [15]. Moreover, the European Parliament has recently approved
[67] the creation of a new large biometrics database, namely the Common Identity
Repository [16], which is set to bring together records of over 350 million people,
interconnecting a series of border-control, law enforcement and migration systems.
The biometric data used will be fingerprints and facial scans. Additionally, a new
scheme named the Entry/Exit System (EES) [17] is scheduled to take effect in the near
future, at the level of the European Union. The purpose of the EES is to strengthen
and protect the borders of the Schengen area, while increasing the security for its
citizens. The system is to register the entry and exit data of non-EU nationals that
are crossing the borders of EU member states. As part of the EES, fingerprint and
facial biometric modalities will be employed.
All these biometric systems using vast centralised databases must employ strong
means of security in order to defend against various attack vectors. Amongst all the
different points of attack that can be exploited in a biometric system, one attack
could occur at the phase of biometric data collection by the biometric sensor. This
thesis focuses on Presentation Attack Detection (PAD) methods, which have the role
of defending against this type of attacks. Impersonation would be one typical attack
scenario, where an impostor would seek to be recognised incorrectly as a different and
legitimate individual. Identity concealing represents another attack scenario, where
an impostor would attempt to avoid being matched to his corresponding biometric
reference. All biometric terms and concepts that are of interest for this thesis are
introduced in chapter 2.
1.1
Biometric Authentication with a Timeless Learner
Governments and private companies can make use of biometric data in order to
identify persons of interest. An occurring issue is that biometric presentation attacks
can hinder correct identification of individuals.
The Odin research program [37]
has the goal of using PAD methods to identify known and unknown Presentation
Attacks (PA) in the context of a biometric collection system. A Presentation Attack
is a technique that intends to obstruct the desired operation of a biometric capture
device by interfering with the recording of the true biometric data of an individual,
fundamentally preventing the subject from being correctly identified. The PA term is
standardised in ISO/IEC 30107-1:2016 [81]. Currently used technology mainly relies
on human presence in order to protect the integrity of the biometric capture process
and to make sure that Presentation Attacks are not utilised. Since it is expected that
the usage of biometric identification will increase, it is of utter importance to utilise
automated defense mechanisms that would ensure the technology cannot be easily
fooled by Presentation Attacks. The hardware typically used for capturing biometric
data often lacks the capacity to acquire information that would allow a system to
identify unknown Presentation Attacks, therefore a need arises for capturing more
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Biometric Authentication with a Timeless Learner
3
diverse biometric data in order to increase the likelihood of detecting an attack. A
preferred approach would be one where a system would learn the patterns of true
biometric samples and gain the capability to flag an attack where the learned pattern
would not match with a given sample.
The Biometric Authentication with a Timeless Learner (BATL) project [2] is part
of the Odin research program and has the goal of developing a Presentation Attack
Detection system (per biometric modality) that will deliver accurate, timely and
robust detection of known and unknown Presentation Attacks. In order to achieve
this goal, machine learning techniques are to be used in combination with new and
existing biometric sensors. For each of the three biometric modalities (face, iris and
fingerprint) used in the project, PAD modules are to be used, which will extract
various types of data from the input.
The results from all the modality-specific
PAD modules will be fused in order to discriminate in a robust manner between
Presentation Attacks and bona fide presentations.
SWIR & VIS 
LEDs 
VIS / NIR 
Camera 
SWIR / LSCI 
Camera 
NIR LEDs 
1310 nm fiber 
illuminator 
Light guide 
Figure 1.1: Sensor diagram of the developed multi-modal capture device [31, 36].
Several types of finger data can be captured and used towards safeguarding against
attacks.
A multi-modal finger capture device [31, 36] has been developed under
the BATL project, which has the capability to capture five different kinds of finger
data: finger photos, finger vein samples, near-infrared (NIR) frontal images, multi-
spectral short wave infrared (SWIR) images and Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging
(LSCI) sequence samples, by using a sensor for each type of data. Figure 1.1 shows a
diagram of the sensors utilised in the first version of the capture device. As it can be
observed, the cameras and illumination sources are placed in fixed positions inside a
closed box that includes a finger slot in the middle. During the data collection period
a subject places its finger in the slot, all ambient light is obstructed and only the
desired wavelengths are used for image acquisition. Since capturing the fingerprint
data takes place in a controlled environment, the region of interest is always fixed in
the images obtained at capture. In the sensor diagram, VIS refers to visible light and
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
NIR refers to near infrared, representing different sources of illumination needed for
the specific data capturing.
1.2
Thesis contribution
This thesis aims to contribute towards a robust multi-modal finger PAD method,
based on the capture device developed under the BATL project. Specifically, it ex-
plores the feasibility of using finger data in the form of Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging
(LSCI) sequence samples collected by the capture device. LSCI data is one of the
less used types of fingerprint data within the biometrics community and fingerprint
PAD systems, despite its interesting features. LSCI delivers information on the blood
flow beneath the skin through the dynamics of the speckle pattern. This information
can be used to differentiate between bona fide and Presentation Attack samples. One
study [9] carried out over the physics and hardware component of LSCI for fingerprint
PAD found that there is a substantial difference between the biospeckle patterns of
real fingers compared to the patterns of presentation attack samples. One interesting
application of this would be a temporal approach where multiple laser speckle images
are examined to observe how a single pixel changes over time.
Deep learning methods will be evaluated with LSCI data as input, in machine
learning terms this representing a supervised learning problem, specifically image
sequence binary classification. The contributions made to this project that are com-
prised within this thesis are mentioned next.
A literature review of fingerprint PAD method based on LSCI data is carried out.
Moreover, a literature review of the state-of-the-art of image sequence classification
is also realised, in connection with finger LSCI data and independent of it. Further
on, a list of research questions is derived from the literature review. Afterwards, a
theoretical overview of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks (a type of
recurrent neural networks) is presented. This is the main building block of the deep
learning techniques to be evaluated. Subsequently, a search of possible optimisations
for deep learning models is carried out, where LSTM networks are used. Based on the
theory presented, an implementation of different LSTM based models is completed,
with the LSCI data being used as input. The output is a binary classification between
a bona fide and a Presentation Attack. Next, a set of experiments is carried out,
where the implementation of different LSTM based models is utilised, in an attempt
to maximise the classification accuracy. Finally, a discussion based on the results of
the completed experiments is presented, followed by a conclusion about the capability
of using LSTM based models for this task.
1.3
Thesis overview
This serves as a guide for the reader and mentions how the content of the thesis
is organised.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Thesis overview
5
Chapter 1 introduces the relevance of the problem and the context of the thesis, as
a part of a bigger project. Presented next is chapter 2 that outlines the fundamentals
of a biometric system and mentions the attack vector for which a defense mechanism
is built. This includes standardised biometric terms. Chapter 3 provides a literature
survey in the context of the problem and chapter 4 formulates research questions
that will be explored, questions resulting from the literature survey.
Further on,
chapters 5 and 6 dive into the theory of using LSTM based models and explore
possible optimisations that can be employed to maximise classification accuracy on
the given data. Next, chapters 7 and 8 are based on the theory previously mentioned
and present the experimental setup needed for the experiments carried out, then
discussing the results of those experiments. Finally, chapters 9 and 10 interpret the
overall meaning of the results obtained and suggest further work, from which the
project could benefit.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Biometric Systems
Fundamentals
This chapter has the role of placing this thesis in the context of biometric systems.
Standardised biometric terms of interest that are referred to throughout the thesis
are also presented.
The technical committees from the International Organisation for Standardisation
(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) collaborate in order
to produce and review worldwide standards. Four standards are of particular interest
for this thesis and they are presented next.
ISO/IEC 2382-37:2017 (Information Technology - Vocabulary - Part 37: Biomet-
rics) [79] provides a systematic description of the concepts in the field of biometrics.
Moreover, it explains the appropriate use of the terms in the subject field.
ISO/IEC 24745:2011 (Information Technology — Security Techniques — Bio-
metric Information Protection) [80] offers guidance for the protection of biometric
information under various requirements.
ISO/IEC 30107-1:2016 (Information Technology — Biometric Presentation Attack
Detection — Part 1: Framework) [81] establishes terms and definitions for the speci-
fication, characterisation and evaluation of presentation attack detection methods.
ISO/IEC 30107-3:2017 (Information Technology — Biometric Presentation Attack
Detection — Part 3: Testing and Reporting) [82] defines terms related to biometric
presentation attack detection testing and reporting and specifies principles and meth-
ods of assessing performance of biometric presentation attack detection, together with
metrics.
2.1
List of standardised terms
Standardised biometric terms of interest are listed next, grouped according to
the standard of origin and ordered alphabetically. Moreover, the terms are stated
precisely as they are defined in the corresponding standard.
ISO/IEC 2382-37:2017 [79] specifies the following terms:
• biometric capture: obtain and record, in a retrievable form, signal(s) of
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Biometric Systems Fundamentals
biometric characteristic(s) directly from individual(s), or from representation(s)
of biometric characteristic(s)
• biometric capture device: device that collects a signal from a biometric char-
acteristic and converts it to a captured biometric sample. A biometric capture
device can be any piece of hardware (and supporting software and firmware).
A biometric capture device may comprise components such as an illumination
source, one or more biometric sensors, etc.
• biometric capture process: series of actions undertaken to affect a biometric
capture
• biometric capture subject: individual who is the subject of a biometric
capture process
• biometric capture subsystem: biometric capture devices and any sub-processes
required to execute a biometric capture process
• biometric characteristic: biological and behavioural characteristic of an indi-
vidual from which distinguishing, repeatable biometric features can be extracted
for the purpose of biometric recognition
• biometric data: biometric sample or aggregation of biometric samples at any
stage of processing, e.g. biometric reference, biometric probe, biometric feature
or biometric property
• biometric data subject: individual whose individualised biometric data is
within the biometric system
• biometric enrolment: act of creating and storing a biometric enrolment data
record in accordance with an enrolment policy
• biometric enrolment data record: data record attributed to a biometric data
subject, containing non-biometric data and associated with biometric reference
identifier(s)
• biometric identification: process of searching against a biometric enrolment
database to find and return the biometric reference identifier(s) attributable to
a single individual
• biometric presentation: interaction of the biometric capture subject and the
biometric capture subsystem to obtain a signal from a biometric characteristic
• biometric recognition: automated recognition of individuals based on their
biological and behavioural characteristics
• biometric sample: analogue or digital representation of biometric character-
istics prior to biometric feature extraction
==PAGE:21==
2.1 List of standardised terms
9
• biometric system: system for the purpose of the biometric recognition of
individuals based on their behavioural and biological characteristics
• biometric verification: process of confirming a biometric claim through bio-
metric comparison
• captured biometric sample: biometric sample resulting from a biometric
capture process
• mode: combination of a biometric characteristic type, a sensor type and a
processing method
• multi-modal: multiple in at least 2 out of 3 constituents of a mode in a single
biometric system
ISO/IEC 30107-1:2016 [81] provides the following terms:
• artefact: artificial object or representation presenting a copy of biometric char-
acteristics or synthetic biometric patterns
• presentation attack: presentation to the biometric data capture subsystem
with the goal of interfering with the operation of the biometric system
• presentation attack detection (PAD): automated determination of a pre-
sentation attack
• presentation attack instrument (PAI): biometric characteristic or object
used in a presentation attack
ISO/IEC 30107-3:2017 [82] mentions the following terms:
• bona fide presentation: interaction of the biometric capture subject and the
biometric data capture subsystem in the fashion intended by the policy of the
biometric system
• attack type: element and characteristic of a presentation attack, including
PAI species, concealer or impostor attack, degree of supervision, and method of
interaction with the capture device
• PAI species: class of presentation attack instruments created using a common
production method and based on different biometric characteristics
• attack presentation classification error rate (APCER): proportion of
attack presentations using the same PAI species incorrectly classified as bona
fide presentations in a specific scenario
• bona fide presentation classification error rate (BPCER): proportion of
bona fide presentations incorrectly classified as presentation attacks in a specific
scenario
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Biometric Systems Fundamentals
2.2
Overview of a generic biometric system
Biometric systems enable the automated recognition of individuals based on phys-
iological characteristics (fingerprint, face, iris, retina, etc.) and/or behavioural char-
acteristics (signature, gait, voice, etc.).
Figure 2.1: A generic biometric system as per ISO/IEC 24745:2011 [80].
As specified in ISO/IEC 24745:2011 [80], the structure of a generic biometric
system (illustrated in figure 2.1) generally comprises five subsystems:
• A biometric data capture subsystem, that embodies biometric capture
devices or sensors capable of collecting signals from a biometric characteristic
and then converting them into a biometric sample.
• A signal processing subsystem, that extracts biometric features from a
biometric sample. The biometric feature extracted in the enrolment process is
then stored as a biometric reference for identification and verification procedure.
• A data storage subsystem, with the primarily role as an enrolment database
where the connection of the enrolled biometric references to the identity refer-
ence occurs.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Presentation attacks
11
• A comparison subsystem, that determines the similarity between captured
biometric samples and stored biometric references.
• A decision subsystem, which determines if the captured biometric sample
and the biometric reference have the same source.
Fundamentally, there are three functional procedures inside a biometric system
(as depicted in the legend of figure 2.1):
• Enrolment procedure.
The subject of a biometric capture process has a
corresponding enrolment data record created and stored in accordance with the
enrolment policy.
• Identification procedure. The enrolment database is searched with the cap-
tured and extracted biometric features in order to return a candidate list, which
consists of individuals whose references match with the feature in the compari-
son subsystems.
• Verification procedure.
An individual who is the subject of a biometric
capture process makes a claim that he/she is the source of a specified biometric
reference. The verification procedure tests whether this claim is genuine.
2.3
Presentation attacks
ISO/IEC 30107 (all parts) [81, 82] focuses on the attacks that take place at the
sensor during the presentation and collection of biometric characteristics. However,
attacks on a biometric system can occur in several other scenarios, as depicted in
figure 2.2. This thesis focuses only on attacks at data capture, as pointed by arrow
”1” in the figure. In this case, a biometric characteristic or PAI is presented to a
sensor that is operating optimally within a biometric system.
Presentation attacks can be carried out either by a biometric imposter or a bio-
metric concealer. The former intends to be recognised as an individual other than
him/herself, while the latter intends to evade being recognised as any individual
known to the biometric system at hand. A PAD subsystem needs to be used in order
to detect and react to those attacks. In a presentation attack detection process, the
first step is to capture raw data from a subject by using the biometric data capture
subsystem. Next, features are extracted from the PAD data and are compared to the
(decision) criteria. Finally, a result represents the output of the comparison, which
can be a detection, a non-detection, a score or other. This process is illustrated in
figure 2.3. In this thesis, deep learning methods are evaluated as possible PAD meth-
ods. The parts ’PAD Feature Extractor’ and ’Stored PAD Criteria’ correspond to
the trained deep neural networks, which acquire a discriminating capability between
bona fide samples and PA samples.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Biometric Systems Fundamentals
Figure 2.2: Possible points of attack in a biometric system as per ISO/IEC IS 30107-
1:2016 [81].
Figure 2.3: Components in a general presentation attack detection subsystem as
per ISO/IEC IS 30107-1:2016 [81].
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Related work
This chapter summarises previous work related to fingerprint Presentation Attack
Detection (PAD) methods, focusing on various machine learning techniques involving
LSCI data or similar fingerprint data.
Software only approaches are appealing due to their low cost and applicability on
the legacy fingerprint sensors used widely. However, with the increased complexity of
the presentation attacks, it is important to explore hybrid solutions that also use other
dedicated sensors for fingerprint PAD. One approach is the work of Gomez-Barrero et
al. [31], which presents a multi-modal PAD approach based on a recently developed
capture device, which is able to obtain five different types of finger data (fingerprint-
photo, finger vein, NIR frontal images, SWIR and LSCI samples). The study applies
thresholding or Support Vector Machines (SVM) to the features extracted from the
different types of data and then fuses the results for increased robustness. The fused
approach achieves an APCER of 6.6% and BPCER of 0.2% on a private data set of
4700 samples. Some of the presentation attack instruments (PAIs) are only used at the
testing phase, in order to represent unknown attacks and to simulate a more realistic
scenario. Another approach [44] uses LSCI data solely and applies SVM classifiers on
a set of hand crafted features such as Local Binary Pattern (LBP) [64], Histogram of
Oriented Gradients (HOG) [19] and Binarized Statistical Image Features (BSIF) [42].
A majority voting fusion is used, which achieves a BPCER of 0.21% with an APCER
of 15.48%, on a private data set of 770 samples. One limitation observed is that this
approach is not capable of detecting thin and transparent overlays (such as dragon
skin), the majority of the samples being classified incorrectly being of this type.
CNNs have been applied successfully also to fingerprint images, as one study [51]
mentions, towards the implementation of a robust PAD system.
Two pre-trained
models (with fine-tuning) are used (CaffeNet [48] and GoogLeNet [84] with an accu-
racy of 96.5% and 96.6% respectively. The public data sets used are LivDet 2009 [52],
LivDet 2011 [89] and LivDet 2013 [29]. The best performance is shown by GoogLeNet
with an APCER of 4.3% and a BPCER of 2.5%. Another study [46] trains a CNN
from scratch on LivDet 2011, 2013, 2015 databases [29, 57, 89] and achieves an aver-
age detection error rate of 1.57%. Nguyen et al. [62] also evaluates a CNN (consisting
of Fire and Gram-K modules) called fPADnet on the same LivDet databases (2011,
2013, 2015) and achieves an average detection error rate of 2.61%.
The work of Tolosana et al. [86] uses a CNN classifier on SWIR finger samples.
Due to a lack of public databases of SWIR finger images and insufficient private data,
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Related work
transfer learning is used by making use of the VGG-19 [76] pre-trained CNN model,
which is further fine-tuned for the SWIR data used. Another study [30] implemented
a PAD system where SWIR data (surface of the skin) is used complementary to LSCI
data (beneath the skin). Two CNN models are applied to the SWIR data, one being
the pre-trained VGG19 model and the second one being a shallow residual network
trained from scratch. For the LSCI data, the SVM classifier is used, which achieves
an APCER of 17.12% and BPCER of 0.07%, for a private data set of 4700 samples.
The results from the methods applied to the LSCI and SWIR data are fused together,
therefore increasing the classification accuracy with an APCER of 3.15% and BPCER
of 0.12%. Further work by Hussein et al. [36] uses patch-based CNN approaches on
both LSCI and SWIR data, on a data set of 778 samples. The CNN architecture
used is a simplified version of AlexNet [48] with a modified input layer containing
patches.
The patch-based approach is used due to insufficient data available for
training of the CNN models. The results of the two CNNs are fused into an overall
performance of an Area Under the ROC curve (AUC) of 1.0. The study notes that
it’s worth investigating using a 3D CNN that could potentially capture the temporal
characteristics of LSCI more effectively.
Mirzaalian et al. [56] conducted a thorough evaluation of five different types of
deep neural networks applied on a data set of 3961 samples, comprising of LSCI data.
The goal was to make the best use of the spatial and temporal information in the LSCI
data, therefore each deep neural network receives as input data the suitable spatio-
temporal representation for its architecture. All the models used are patch-based, for
the purpose of training data augmentation. The architecture proposed by Hussein et
al. [36] is used as the baseline network (BaseN), consisting of 2D convolution layers.
The second network (ResN) is constructed by adding residual connections between
every two 2D convolution layers of the BaseN. The structure of the third network
(IncpN) is inspired by GoogLeNet [84] and it contains inception modules. In order
to capture discriminative features along both temporal and spatial dimensions of the
LSCI data, the forth network is constructed as a 3D version of the BaseN model by
using 3D convolution and pooling layers. The last network is made of a double layer
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units with a hidden state. The best performance
is achieved by the LSTM network with an APCER of 0.097% and a BPCER of 0.006%.
A leave-one-attack out strategy is applied in order to observe the effect of the presence
of an unseen attack. The study notes that the most challenging attack in the data
set is the dragon-skin overlay.
One study [41] conducted a thorough architecture search within Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) in order to determine whether the LSTM architecture is optimal
or whether better architectures exist.
In contrast with RNNs which are powerful
sequence models often difficult to train, the LSTM is a specific RNN architecture
whose design makes it much easier to train, in terms of parameter tuning and com-
puting power needed. Over ten thousand different RNN architectures were evaluated
and one architecture was identified to outperform both the LSTM and the Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) on some, but not all tasks.
Finally, Donahue et al. [21] investigated using Long-term Recurrent Convolutional
==PAGE:27==
3 Related work
15
Network (LRCN) for visual recognition and description. The recurrent sequence mod-
els are directly connected to modern visual CNN models and can be jointly trained to
learn temporal dynamics and convolutional perceptual representations. LRCNs are
proposed, combining convolutional layers and long-range temporal recursion, being
end-to-end trainable. The study shows a high classification accuracy for tasks such
as activity recognition (sequences in the input), image captioning (sequences in the
output) and video description (sequences in the input and output).
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Research questions
The literature survey conducted has been presented in chapter 3. With the input
from the literature surveyed, a list of research questions has been defined, to serve as
a guide regarding areas to explore during the thesis work. The research questions are
intended to be answered by the end of the thesis timeline.
The purpose of this thesis is to implement and evaluate deep neural network(s)
over a private data set comprising fingerprint LSCI data. A first approach considered
is the implementation of a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network, due to the
LSTM’s ability to learn the inherent temporal dynamics of the bona fide samples and
hence detect PA samples. A second possible approach considered is the implementa-
tion of a Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network (LRCN), which processes the
visual input with a CNN, whose outputs are fed into a stack of recurrent sequence
models (LSTMs), which finally produce a classification. This is done in an attempt
to achieve a higher classification accuracy of bona fide and PA samples compared to
the state of the art methods mentioned in the literature.
1. How to implement a LSTM network as a feasible fingerprint PAD method, using
Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging (LSCI) data as input data?
2. What is an optimal architecture for the LSTM network (suited for the input
data), in order to maximise classification accuracy?
3. What optimisation techniques and fine tuning for the training of the LSTM
network would lead to better results in APCER and/or BPCER?
4. Does additional pre-processing of the input data lead to better results in APCER
and/or BPCER?
5. What is the optimal way to make use of the temporal information in the LSCI
data?
6. Would the neural network be able to correctly classify unknown PA samples
from PAIs not previously seen at the training phase?
7. Would a patch-based neural network architecture lead to a better classification
accuracy? Would this be a viable data augmentation technique adopted due to
possibly insufficient large enough training data?
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Research questions
8. How to implement a LRCN as a feasible fingerprint PAD method, using LSCI
data as input data?
9. How can the results from possibly multiple implemented fingerprint PAD meth-
ods (LSTM and LRCN) and evaluated on the same LSCI data be combined in
fusion schemes [83] for a more robust PAD system?
10. Can a transfer learning approach (pre-trained model on another problem) be
used for improving classification accuracy?
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5
LSTM approach
The Deep Learning with Python [11] book has been used extensively for gaining a
theoretical understanding of the necessary concepts that were used in the implemen-
tation discussed in chapter 7. These concepts are presented below.
Deep learning approaches the concept of learning representations from data by em-
phasising the learning of successive layers of increasingly meaningful representations.
The number of layers that contribute to a model of the data is what represents the
depth of the model. The layered representations are learned with models called neural
networks, which comprise layers stacked on top of each other. In other words, deep
learning is a mathematical framework for learning representations from data, the rep-
resentations being learned automatically from exposure to training data. Moreover,
deep learning makes problem-solving much easier, due to completely automating the
step of feature engineering. This means that it enables a model to learn all layers
of representation jointly, rather than in succession.
Therefore, whenever a model
adjusts one of its internal features, all other features that are connected to it adapt
to the change accordingly. To summarise, these two concepts is what makes deep
learning so powerful: the incremental way (layer by layer) in which increasingly com-
plex data representations are formed and the fact that the intermediate incremental
representations are learned jointly.
5.1
Introduction to neural networks
The anatomy of a neural network comprises layers, input data and corresponding
targets, a loss function and an optimiser. The way they interact together is illustrated
in figure 5.1. The model (or network) that is composed of layers that are stacked
together, maps the input data to predictions. Next, the loss function compares the
predictions to the targets and produces a loss value, which is a success measure of
the match between the network’s predictions and what was expected. The loss value
is then used by the optimiser to update the network’s weights.
The fundamental building blocks in neural networks are the layers, which are
combined into a network. A layer is a data processing module that extracts repre-
sentations out of the data that is fed into it. The layer’s weights (or parameters)
are tensors learned with stochastic gradient descent and they contain the network’s
knowledge.
==PAGE:32==
20
5 LSTM approach
Figure 5.1: The anatomy of a neural network, as in chapter 3.1 of [11].
A learning process occurs in order to find a set of values for the weights of all the
layers in the network, such that the network can correctly map the example inputs to
their corresponding targets. Due to the fact that a deep neural network can contain
millions of parameters, this needs to be done in an efficient way. A loss function
is employed for this purpose, it takes the network predictions and the true target
and calculates a distance score, representing how successful the network was on this
specific example. The computed score is then used as a feedback signal in order to
adjust the value of the weights, such that the loss score for the current example will
be lowered.
The adjustment of the weights is performed by the optimiser, which
implements the Backpropagation algorithm. The magnitude with which the weights
are updated is defined by the learning rate.
At the beginning of a training process, the weights of the network are assigned a
random value, therefore the network performs a series of arbitrary transformations.
As a result of this, the loss score is correspondingly very high.
However, as the
network processes more examples, the weights are adjusted marginally in the correct
direction, resulting in a decrease in the loss score. This represents the training loop
of the network, which if repeated an optimal number of times, it results in weight
values which minimise the loss function. A network is said to have minimal loss in
the case where the outputs are as close as they can be to the targets.
The learning process is possible due to the fact that neural networks are chains
of differentiable tensor operations, therefore the chain rule of derivation can be ap-
plied in order to find the gradient function mapping the current parameters and the
current batch of data to a gradient value. The gradient descent is stochastic due to
each batch of data being drawn at random, in the training process. Multiple vari-
ants of Stochastic Gradient Descent have been developed, such as Adaptive Gradient
Algorithm (AdaGrad) [22] and adaptive moment estimation (Adam) [47].
Another important concept to mention is the activation function. The layers of a
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Introduction to recurrent neural networks
21
neural network make use of activation functions in order to constrain their outputs
within specific values. For example, the Sigmoid activation function outputs a value
within the [0, 1] interval.
Furthermore, the concepts of underfitting and overfitting are presented. Under-
fitting occurs when a model cannot learn useful representations from the input data
and therefore cannot generalise to new data. This translates to suboptimal perfor-
mance. Several techniques can be used to fight underfitting, such as increasing the
complexity of the model, training the model longer or choosing a more appropriate
learning rate. On the other hand, overfitting represents the scenario when the model
memorises the training data too well and cannot generalise as well to new data. Tech-
niques to fight overfitting include usage of Dropout [78] or reducing the complexity
of the model. When applied to a layer, Dropout consists of randomly dropping out a
number of output features of the layer, during training (as mentioned in sub-section
4.4.3 of [11]).
5.2
Introduction to recurrent neural networks
A defining property of the neural networks mentioned previously (also called feed-
forward networks) is that they have no memory. There is no state kept in between
processing input data points, due to each input being processed independently. There-
fore, in order to process a temporal series of data points or a sequence, it is necessary
to transform it into a single data point.
Figure 5.2: The loop of a recurrent neural network, as depicted in [65].
A recurrent neural network (RNN) processes sequences by iterating through the
elements of the sequence, while maintaining a state containing information regarding
the data points seen previously. In other words, information is processed incremen-
tally while maintaining an internal state of what is being processed, state that is built
from previous information and constantly updated as new information is being pro-
cessed. Essentially, a recurrent neural network is a neural network with an internal
loop, as depicted in figure 5.2. In the diagram, A represents a layer of a neural net-
work, ht represents input point x at timestep t and ht represents output h at timestep
t. This internal loop enables the passing of information from one step of the network
to the next one. As stated in [65], a recurrent neural network can be imagined as
==PAGE:34==
22
5 LSTM approach
multiple copies of the same network, where each copy passes a message to a successor.
Figure 5.3 illustrates the unrolling of the internal loop, where it can be seen that a
chain structure results, which is closely related to the structure of sequences and lists.
Intuitively, RNNs represent the natural choice of architecture for such data, due to
their structure.
Figure 5.3: An unrolled RNN, as depicted in [65].
The internal state of the RNN is reset between processing two independent se-
quences, therefore one sequence is still considered a single data point. However, the
single data point is no longer processed in a single step, but instead the network
internally loops over the sequence elements.
Unfortunately, this type of rather simple RNN architecture demonstrates a se-
rious issue.
Theoretically, the network should be able to retain, at any timestep,
information about the previously seen data points. However, this proves impossible
in practice, namely long-term dependencies between data points cannot be learnt.
In the processing of a sequence, as the gap grows between the relevant information
and the timestep where it is needed, a recurrent neural network becomes unable to
learn how to adequately connect the information. This issue is explored in depth in
the work of Bengio et al. [1]. Essentially, the vanishing gradient and the exploding
gradient problems are at fault for the inability to learn long-term dependencies. The
vanishing gradient problem occurs when very small gradients are calculated during
the training of a neural network, resulting in insignificant updates for the network’s
weights. On the other hand, the exploding gradient problem emerges when large gradi-
ents are calculated, resulting in major updates to a network’s weights and disrupting
the learning process.
One solution for dealing with these problems is to apply gradient clipping [68],
where a threshold is used to prevent the value of the gradients from changing in an
undesired way. Another solution is to employ the use of another RNN architecture,
as discussed next.
5.3
Long Short-Term Memory networks
The work of Hochreiter & Schmidhuber [35] presents an alternative RNN archi-
tecture, namely a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network, which is capable of
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Long Short-Term Memory networks
23
learning long-term dependencies.
The LSTM is specifically designed to avoid the
vanishing gradient and exploding gradient problems. The differentiating aspect for
the LSTM is the addition of a way to carry information across several timesteps.
By saving information for later during processing, older signals are prevented from
gradually vanishing.
Figure 5.4: The internal structure of a LSTM, as depicted in [61].
The LSTM has a comparable control flow as the previously described recurrent
neural network.
As it processes data, information is passed on as it propagates
forward. The difference compared to a recurrent neural network is in the operations
that are carried inside the cells of the LSTM. The purpose of those operations is to
enable the LSTM to forget or to keep information. Figure 5.4 illustrates the structure
of a LSTM, with its four components: a forget gate, an input gate, a cell state and
an output gate.
The cell state represents the memory of the network and it can carry information
throughout the processing of a sequence. This makes it possible for information from
earlier timesteps to not vanish before being used at later timesteps. As processing
occurs, the three gates are used to add or remove information from the cell state. Each
gate is a different neural network, deciding which information should be kept by the
cell state. The gates have the ability to learn which information is relevant to keep
or discard during training. The gates contain Sigmoid activation functions, which
output values in a [0, 1] interval. This mechanism is used to either forget information
(a value close to 0.0) or to remember information (a value close to 1.0).
The four internal components of a LSTM are discussed next:
==PAGE:36==
24
5 LSTM approach
• Forget gate. This gate decides which information should be kept or discarded,
during the processing of a sequence. The Sigmoid function is fed information
from the previous hidden state and information from the current input. The
closer the output value of the Sigmoid function is to 0.0, the more information is
discarded. In contrast, a value closer to 1.0 results in keeping more information.
• Input gate. The role of the input gate is to update the cell state. The first step
is to pass the previous hidden state and the current input through the Sigmoid
function. Next, the same information is passed through the Hyperbolic tangent
function, the output being a value within the [−1, 1] interval. The final step is
to multiply the output of the two activation functions. Therefore, the Sigmoid
function decides which information is kept from the output of the Hyperbolic
tangent function.
• Cell state. With the information calculated above, the cell state can be com-
puted. The first operation is to pointwise multiply the cell state by the forget
vector. At this point, it’s possible to drop values from the cell state, if it gets
multiplied by values close to 0.0. The next operation is to perform a pointwise
addition with the output of the input gate. This has the effect of updating the
cell state to new values that are relevant for the neural network. The obtained
result represents the new cell state.
• Output gate. The role of the output gate is to decide what should be the
next hidden state, which contains information about the previous inputs and is
also used for predictions. The first step is to feed the previous hidden state and
the current input to a Sigmoid function. Next, the cell state that was recently
modified is passed to the Hyperbolic tangent function. Finally, the output of
the two activation functions is multiplied, in order to decide what information
should be carried by the hidden state. The hidden state represents the output.
The newly calculated hidden state and the newly calculated cell state are then
carried over to the next timestep.
To summarise, the forget gate decides which information is relevant from previ-
ous timesteps and should be kept. The input gate has the role of deciding which
information should be added from the current timestep. The output gate then cal-
culates what should be the next hidden state. Together, these components offer the
capability of learning long-term dependencies.
Due to this capability, LSTM networks are widely used for temporal information
processing, in problems such as speech recognition, language translation, language
modelling and image captioning [43].
The work of Christopher Olah [35] and Michael Nguyen [61] has been used exten-
sively in order to gain a thorough understanding of the LSTM and to summarise the
concepts presented above.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
LSTM optimisation
The previous chapter introduces LSTM networks as a powerful alternative to
recurrent neural networks, capable of learning long-term dependencies.
Several LSTM architectures have been developed since their introduction by Hochre-
iter & Schmidhuber [35]. One LSTM variant was introduced by Gers & Schmidhu-
ber [28] and it differentiates itself by adding the concept of peephole connections. This
translates to the added capability of the gate layers to access the cell state. Other no-
table LSTM variants include Depth-gated LSTM [91] and the Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) [14]. The GRU architecture embodies fewer parameters, therefore requiring
less computational resources for training, compared to a LSTM. However, LSTM
provides better performance, due to the increased complexity of its architecture.
An elaborated empirical evaluation of LSTM variants has been conducted in the
work of Greff et al. [33], with 5400 experimental runs carried out on three bench-
mark problems: handwriting recognition, polyphonic music modelling and acoustic
modelling. The study concludes that none of the variants improve significantly on
the results obtained by the standard LSTM architecture [35] and determines that the
forget gate and the output activation function are the most important components.
With this aspect in mind, this thesis focuses on using the standard LSTM architecture
and does not explore any variants of it. However, other techniques are explored for
improving the performance and generalisation power of a LSTM.
Recurrent dropout is a regularisation technique for fighting overfitting in recurrent
layers. It is suboptimal to apply dropout before a recurrent layer, because it prevents
learning instead of helping with regularisation. The work of Yarin Gal [26] specifies
the adequate way of applying dropout in a recurrent neural network. As mentioned in
sub-section 6.3.6 of [11], the same dropout mask should be applied at every timestep,
instead of using a dropout mask that varies arbitrarily from timestep to timestep.
The same pattern of dropped units is referred to as a dropout mask. Moreover, a
temporally constant dropout mask needs to be applied to the inner recurrent activa-
tions of the layer. The network is capable of properly propagating its learning error
through time, by using the same dropout mask at every timestep. In contrast, a
temporally arbitrary random dropout mask would disrupt the error propagation.
The capacity of a network can be increased by stacking several layers on top of each
other, this resulting in more data transformations occurring. In the case of recurrent
neural networks, the capacity can be increased by either increasing the number of
units used in the layers or simply adding more layers to the model. When two or more
==PAGE:38==
26
6 LSTM optimisation
LSTM layers are stacked on top of each other, all of the LSTM layers except the last
one will output a sequence, whereas the last layer will output the corresponding value
at the last timestep. A bidirectional LSTM exploits the order dependence of LSTMs
and it embodies using two regular LSTMs, each processing the input sequence in
one direction (chronologically and reverse), then merging their representations. Due
to processing a sequence in both directions, a bidirectional LSTM has the ability to
notice patterns that may have been missed by a unidirectional LSTM.
6.1
Combining CNNs with RNNs for sequence
processing
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are the state-of-the-art technology for
image classification tasks. A CNN embodies convolution layers and pooling layers.
A convolution layer extracts features from an input image and a pooling layer pro-
gressively reduces the spatial size of the data representation. Together, they learn
hierarchical feature representations. In a complex CNN model, the bottom layers
learn features that are more general in relation to the data set used, whereas the top
layers learn more specialised features.
One strategy would be combining the ability of CNNs to extract features from
spatial data with a recurrent neural network’s capability of processing the temporal
information present in the data. In this case, the CNN also down samples the data
from possibly long input sequences into shorter sequences of higher-level features.
Therefore, the sequence of extracted features represents the input data to the RNN
part of the network.
Figure 6.1: LRCN architecture, as depicted in [21].
==PAGE:39==
6.1 Combining CNNs with RNNs for sequence processing
27
Donahue et al. [21] explore the usage of such an architecture, for visual recognition
and description tasks: activity recognition, image captioning and video description.
They propose an architecture called Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks
(LRCNs), which is illustrated in figure 6.1. Additionally, Xu et al. [88] also success-
fully use a similar architecture for describing the content of images, where temporal
information can be exploited.
Furthermore, transfer learning can be used as an effective technique in order to
leverage the representational power learned by a pre-trained model, as mentioned
in section 5.3 of [11].
The complex CNN models VGG-16 [76], InceptionV3 [85]
and Xception [13] are explored in chapter 7 due to the high performance that they
demonstrated on image classification at large scale, specifically in the Large Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge [72] on the ImageNet data set [20].
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Experimental setup
This chapter introduces the data set used for the experiments, together with the
aspects of the setup established.
As previously mentioned, the aim of this thesis is to apply deep learning meth-
ods as a Presentation Attack Detection (PAD) mechanism on captured biometric
fingerprint data in an attempt to distinguish between bona fide (BF) samples and
Presentation Attacks (PA). From all the various types of fingerprint data that can be
utilised for this purpose, Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging (LSCI) data will be used.
The ideal scenario for training deep neural networks would be to have a large
data set, from which a deep neural network would be able to learn patterns and
subsequently have the capability to classify previously unseen data, according to
different classes desired. In this thesis, the problem presented is a supervised learning
one, specifically binary classification, where the two possible classes are BF and PA,
since for PAD it is not important which material is used for the PAI but rather
whether there is an attack or not.
A short description of publicly available fingerprint data sets is presented, followed
by the reasoning of why they cannot be used for this specific task. A larger data set
would be more effective, since the trained deep neural network(s) would achieve a
better generalisation capability.
The International Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition (LivDet) [90] has
the goal of discriminating between real fingerprints and images obtained from repro-
ductions of fingerprints made of artificial materials. The 2019 edition (sixth) [66] of
LivDet uses a subset of the previous LivDet editions as the training set, specifically
from the 2015 and 2017 editions, in total comprising of 6400 images. The fake finger-
prints were produced by using different materials such as wood glue, Ecoflex, latex
and gelatine. The fingerprint capturing devices used to create this data set are Green
Bit DactyScan84C [60], Orcanthus Certis2 Image [58] and Digital Persona U.are.U
5160 [59]. These capturing devices are Commercial Off-The-Shelf products which use
either optical technology or capacitive technology and they have limited data type
capturing capabilities.
Another publicly available biometric fingerprint database is the Sokoto Coven-
try Fingerprint Dataset (SOCOFing) [75], which contains 6000 fingerprint images
captured from 600 subjects. These images are also synthetically altered, using oblit-
eration, central rotation and z-cut.
Unfortunately, neither of those publicly available databases contain fingerprint
==PAGE:42==
30
7 Experimental setup
LSCI data, therefore a need for creating such a database arises.
As part of the BATL project [2], a multi-modal finger capture device has been de-
veloped, as mentioned in section 1.1. This device has been used to capture fingerprint
data, amongst which LSCI data. A Xenics Bobcat 320 [77] camera in combination
with a 1310 nm laser illumination was utilised for this purpose. The setup is capable
of capturing (per finger) 100 frames of images sized 320×256 pixels, in a 16 bit depth
and in a greyscale channel. The private data set created contains 2302 samples of
fingerprint LSCI data, comprising 1146 PA samples and 1156 BF samples. The data
set used for this thesis was captured from 249 subjects in two rounds: in the first
round, bona fide samples were collected and in the second round, the fingerprint data
was collected in the presence of various Presentation Attack Instruments (PAI) that
were provided to the subjects.
One set of fingerprint PAIs contained basic finger attacks while the other set
contained overlay attacks. The materials used for producing these PAIs were mainly
silicone, dragon-skin (various types), Ecoflex, monster latex and dental-mold material.
For the collected PA samples, a number of 36 different PAI types were used, for which
a breakdown is provided in table 7.1. It should be noted that the two fingervein PAIs
do not include a fingerprint pattern, but were used within this project to spoof the
vein detection part.
This breakdown can be used for analysing the results obtained, in an attempt to
identify which PAI types raise a more difficult challenge for the PAD method used.
Figure 7.1 illustrates the appearance of a PAI made from latex material.
Figure 7.1: Illustration of a possible fingerprint PAI made from latex material [24].
Further on, a visual representation of six samples of fingerprint LSCI data is
presented in figure 7.2. Part a) of the figure shows a bona fide sample, while the
other parts show different PAI samples, made with different materials.
One can
observe the visual differences between samples, parts b), c), d) and f) presenting a
significant difference compared to the bona fide in part a), while the PAI in part e)
==PAGE:43==
7 Experimental setup
31
Table 7.1: Breakdown of PAI types present in the collected data.
resembles a closer appearance to the bona fide sample. The samples were chosen
randomly from this data set, with the intent of showcasing the diversity of the data.
The figure shows one frame per sample, however the data set contains 100 frames
per sample, captured at a frame rate of 100 frames per second. Visually, there are
no significant changes between the frames, therefore only one frame is displayed here.
The most important changes between frames that were observed are changes in pixel
intensity and possibly minor subject movements during data capturing.
==PAGE:44==
32
7 Experimental setup
Figure 7.2: A visual representation of six arbitrary samples of LSCI data from the
data set used.
As part of the data set creation, the captured data has been cleaned by removing
unwanted samples that were caused due to various errors at capture, such as an
improper placement of a subject’s finger. All of the samples were visually inspected
and the suboptimal ones were discarded.
Subsequently, all the samples (with all
their frames) have been labelled as either bona fide or PA. This was performed due
==PAGE:45==
7.1 Data set splits and cross-validation
33
to the need of framing the problem as binary classification, where a training stage
of a PAD method would be carried out first, followed by a test stage where the
PAD method would be tested against data unseen at the training stage. In order to
apply this scenario, the samples in the data set need to be labelled correspondingly.
In machine learning terms, this represents a supervised learning problem, where a
mapping function is inferred from labelled training data that consists of a set of
training examples. Neither data capturing nor data labelling were performed as part
of this thesis.
The next step is to extract the region of interest from every frame in order to
reduce noise in the data, allowing the deep neural networks to focus on the image
part of significant importance, with the input size being diminished. The same region
of interest is considered for all the samples (with all their frames) across the data set.
Figure 7.3 shows the process of extracting the region of interest from a frame. The
red bordered rectangle represents the chosen region of interest and all of the frames
are reduced from a size of 320×256 pixels to a size of 300×100 pixels, containing only
this region. The image part that is outside the red bordered rectangle is considered
noise and is discarded.
Figure 7.3: Extracting the region of interest from a captured frame.
Additional image pre-processing steps are performed to the samples, according
to the specific deep neural network approach used, conforming to the input shape
required. This is mentioned in section 7.3.
7.1
Data set splits and cross-validation
Cross-validation is a statistical technique in which the available data is partitioned
into subsets, the training of the deep neural network model used happening on a subset
while the other subset is used to evaluate the model’s performance [45]. Due to the
sample variability between a training and a test set, a model could be inclined to give
a better performance on training data, while failing to generalise on the test subset.
==PAGE:46==
34
7 Experimental setup
This would translate into a low training error rate and a high test error rate. In
order to reduce variability, multiple rounds of cross-validation can be performed with
different subsets of the same available data. Cross-validation can be used to obtain a
more precise estimate of a model’s performance.
A necessary step in evaluating a model is to split the available data into three
subsets: training, validation and test. Developing a model always involves tuning its
configuration by doing hyperparameter optimisation. A hyperparameter is a param-
eter whose value is used to guide the learning procedure. This tuning is performed
by using as a feedback signal the performance of the model on the validation data. A
possible result of this could be overfitting to the validation subset, due to tuning the
configuration of the model by using the performance on the validation subset as the
basis. The concept of information leaks is of high importance here, as mentioned in
section 4.2.1 of [11]. Each time a hyperparameter of a model is tuned based on the
model’s performance on the validation subset, there is a risk that information about
the validation data leaks into the model. If this is performed repeatedly, the risk
of leaking a significant amount of information about the validation subset into the
model increases. The result would then be a model that performs artificially good
on the validation subset, since that’s what the model has been optimised for. The
performance of a model on completely new data is of utter importance, therefore a
need for a completely distinct subset arises, in order to accurately evaluate the model.
With this approach, the measurement of generalisation will not be flawed, since the
model would not be tuned based on the test subset performance.
The following is a precise description (as mentioned in [7, 70]) of the three subsets
obtained from partitioning the available data:
• Training subset. The sample of data used to fit a deep neural network model.
The model is trained directly on this data, where the parameters (weights) of a
model are continuously updated according to the data.
• Validation subset. The sample of data that is used to provide an unbiased
evaluation of a model that was fit on the training subset, while possibly tuning
the model’s hyperparameters. The bias of the evaluation increases as informa-
tion from the validation subset leaks into the model configuration. In practice,
the validation loss on the validation subset is also used as a measure to prevent
overfitting and stopping the training of the model at an optimal trade-off point
of low variance and low bias.
• Test subset. The sample of data that is used to provide an unbiased evaluation
of a final version of a model that was fit on the training subset.
Further on, two evaluation protocols (cross-validation techniques) will be used
in order to reliably evaluate a model: K-fold validation and a adapted version of
Leave-One-Out (LOO) validation.
==PAGE:47==
7.1 Data set splits and cross-validation
35
7.1.1
K-fold validation
As mentioned in section 4.2.1 of [11], in order to perform K-fold validation, the
available data is split into K partitions that are of equal size. For each partition p, a
model is trained on the remaining K-1 partitions and then evaluated on partition p.
The final test accuracy score is the average of the K scores obtained. This technique
proves helpful when the performance of a model shows significant variance based on
the chosen data set splits.
Additionally, K-fold validation can reliably evaluate a
model if relatively little data is available, as in the case of the current data set used
for the carried experiments, which contains only 2302 samples.
A common approach when training deep neural networks is to choose K = 3 and
perform a 3-fold validation. This is also the approach taken here and the resulted
three folds can be visualised in figure 7.4. The figure depicts the total amount of
samples used in each fold (numbered 0, 1, 2) and the amount of samples distributed
in each subset (train, validation, test).
Figure 7.4: Data set splits and 3-fold validation.
Theoretically all of the three folds should have the same total amount of 2302
samples.
Unfortunately, when this step was performed, an error initially slipped
unnoticed and the training and validation subsets were produced such that the number
of samples per subset would be divisible by 20.
As a result of this, a couple of
samples were removed erroneously from the data set in each fold.
Subsequently,
all of the developed models were evaluated on these three folds. A description of
all the developed models is provided in section 7.3.
The mistake in creating the
three folds was unfortunately noticed too late in the thesis timeline and a patch
could not be applied due to time constraints. However, due to the small number
of samples discarded per fold (at most 18 in fold 0), the general observations of the
carried experiments still hold and correcting the three folds would only result in minor
changes in the results obtained. Therefore, the results obtained are considered valid,
despite this error.
Each fold obtained was created such that it contains a balanced number of samples
from each class (BF or PA), in order to represent a balanced binary-classification
problem, so that classification accuracy can be used as an appropriate measure of
success, as mentioned in section 5.2.2 of [11]. The distribution of samples in each
fold can be observed in table 7.2. One can notice that the samples distribution per
split type is roughly 50%-50% between BF and PA samples. As mentioned previously
==PAGE:48==
36
7 Experimental setup
and illustrated in table 7.1, the data set contains PA samples obtained by using 36
different PAI types. When creating these three folds, a priority was to balance the
representation of the different PAI types, such that samples of each PAI type would
be present in each subset (train, validation, test).
Table 7.2: Sample distribution in each fold for a balanced representation.
7.1.2
Leave-One-Out cross-validation
As mentioned in [73], Leave-One-Out cross-validation is a distinct type of cross-
validation where the number of folds is equal to the number of samples in the data set.
Therefore, a model is trained once for each instance, using all other instances as part
of the training subset, while the selected instance is used as a single item test subset.
The idea behind this process closely relates to the statistical method of jack-knife
estimation [23]. Since the BATL project [2] aims for the detection of both known
and unknown PAs, an adaptation of Leave-One-Out cross-validation can be used in
order to evaluate a model’s ability to generalise when presented at testing with PAI
types that it has not seen during the learning process. The adaptation consists in
the aspect that instead of training a model on N-1 samples from the dataset (where
N represents the number of the total samples available in the data set) and then
evaluating it on one sample, a group of PAI types is removed from the data used for
learning (training and validation splits) and is exclusively used in the test split. In
other words, a group of PAI types will not be seen by the model during its training
process and afterwards the trained model will be evaluated on a test set that contains
that group.
The number of folds is chosen to be five, in order to perform Leave-One-Out cross-
validation. Three of the folds use a transparency type as the grouping criteria, while
two of the folds use a PAI type as the grouping criteria. Samples from the data set
==PAGE:49==
7.2 Hyperparameter configuration
37
can be simultaneously part of the two grouping criteria. The groups formed are a
subset of the PAI types mentioned in table 7.1 and they are described below:
• Opaque transparency.
This group comprises of PA samples that present
the property of opaque transparency. It includes 28 PAI types, such as ecoflex
fleshstone, dental mold material, dragon skin + conductive, fingervein matte
paper or overlay wax.
• Semi transparency. This group is formed of PA samples that present the
property of semi transparency. It includes six PAI types, namely silicone, mon-
ster latex, dragon skin, overlay dragonskin, overlay monster latex and overlay
silicone.
• Transparent transparency. This group encompasses PA samples that present
the property of transparent transparency. It only includes one PAI type, specif-
ically transparent print.
• FakeFinger PAI type. This group comprises of PA samples that are of type
FakeFinger, where a sample is a result of a completely fabricated PAI. It includes
23 PAI types, such as ecoflex fleshstone, dental mold material, wax, silly putty
or Silicone + graphite.
• Overlay PAI type.
This group is formed of PA samples that are of type
Overlay. These samples are obtained by instructing a subject to add the PAI to
its finger before a capture occurs. In other words, a real finger with an artificial
overlay is used during the capturing process. The group includes 12 PAI types,
such as overlay wood glue, overlay dragonskin, overlay monster latex, overlay
wax or transparent print.
7.2
Hyperparameter configuration
In the context of artificial neural networks, a model’s parameters are the weights of
a network. Those weights are internal to the model and their values can be estimated
from the data the model is trained on [6]. The result of the learning process is a set of
weights, which in a predictive model can be used to make predictions on data unseen
during the training stage.
On the other hand, a model’s hyperparameters have the role of guiding the train-
ing process of an artificial neural network [49].
The hyperparameters represent a
configuration that is external to the model and whose values cannot be inferred from
the data used for training. In contrast to the model’s parameters, the hyperparam-
eters need to be specified explicitly before the training of a model occurs. These
hyperparameters can be optimised specifically for the used data set, in an attempt
to reach a high performance.
Below is a list of hyperparameters used for training the deep neural network
models developed for the purpose of binary classification between BF and PA samples.
==PAGE:50==
38
7 Experimental setup
The values used have been found mostly by trial and error, without performing a
thorough hyperparameter optimisation.
In the cases where one of the developed
models uses different hyperparameters than the ones mentioned below, it is mentioned
in section 7.3.
• Number of epochs. A model is trained for a number of epochs, where an
epoch represents the point when the full data set has been passed through
a neural network model once [74]. Since gradient descent [50] is an iterative
optimisation algorithm used in deep learning in order to find the best results,
the data set is passed multiple times through a neural network model. 60 epochs
are used for the training process. Moreover, early stopping [8] is used, in order
to prevent overfitting and to reduce computation time. The metric tied to early
stopping is the result obtained from the used loss function on the validation
split of the data set. The training process is interrupted when the result of the
loss function has not improved for the past 20 epochs.
• Batch size. The number of data samples present in a single batch represents
the batch size.
A batch corresponds to a subset of a data set.
The batch
size is set to 50, so in the Mini-Batch Gradient Descent [71] approach used, 50
data samples are used in every iteration in order to compute the gradient. An
iteration is the number of batches needed to complete one epoch of training.
• Prediction layer. All of the developed models have the same prediction layer,
capable of outputting a prediction score for a data sample. This prediction score
represents the classification within one of the two classes defined: BF or PA.
The Sigmoid function [63] is used as the activation function for the prediction
layer, since it has the capability to output a result within the [0, 1] interval.
Because the result obtained is within an interval, a prediction threshold needs
to be defined. This threshold is set naively to be equal with 0.5, therefore if the
result is below or equal to 0.5, a sample is classified as BF and if the result is
above 0.5, then a sample is classified as PA.
• Loss function. As mentioned in section 3.1.3 of [11], a loss function represents
a measure of success for the task at hand. It corresponds to the quantity that
will be minimised during the training of a neural network model. In other words,
it is used to measure the difference between the predictions of a model and the
actual labels of the data. The loss function used is binary cross-entropy, being
the intuitive choice when presented with a binary classification task. When op-
timising classification models, cross-entropy is widely used as a loss function [3].
• Optimisation algorithm. An optimisation algorithm implements a specific
version of Stochastic Gradient Descent [4] and it determines how the weights
of a neural network will be updated based on the results obtained from the
loss function used, as mentioned in section 3.1.3 of [11].
Adam [47] stands
for adaptive moment estimation and it represents the choice of optimisation
==PAGE:51==
7.3 Description of developed models
39
algorithm. As shown in [47], empirical results demonstrate that Adam works
well in practical applications.
• Learning rate. The learning rate controls how much to change the weights
of a neural network model, as a response to the result of the loss function, at
every iteration [5].
The learning rate is used in accordance with the Adam
optimisation algorithm and is set to 0.0001, being 10 times smaller than the
default learning rate used for the empirical results obtained in [47].
7.3
Description of developed models
A number of 14 deep neural network models have been implemented and evaluated
within this thesis. An empirical exploration has been conducted in search for models
that would exhibit a high classification performance on the presented binary classifi-
cation problem, by using the data set given as input data. The basis for the different
approaches taken is the theory described in chapters 5 and 6. Each of those models
is presented in details in this section and their corresponding results are mentioned
in chapter 8, by using the performance metrics described in section 7.4.
A similar pipeline is used in the case of every model, as mentioned below:
1. Data pre-processing. In additional to extracting the region of interest as
shown in figure 7.3 from each frame of each sample contained in the data set,
there are other pre-processing operations performed on the data, according to
the needs of each model. Due to different architectures used in each case, the
data must be transformed into a specific form before being fed as input data
to a deep neural network model. These operations are mentioned in section 7.3
for each model. Before this additional data pre-processing, the images in the
data set are of size 300 × 100 pixels, in 16bit depth and in greyscale channel.
2. Learning process. Each model is subjected to a training process where the aim
is to gain the capability of accurately discriminating between bona fide samples
and Presentation Attack samples. Depending on the approach used, there can
be multiple training processes involved, where data would be transformed in
an intermediary representation. Afterwards, this data would be used by a final
training process that would result in a model capable to discriminate between
the two classes. The details for each approach are mentioned in section 7.3.
3. Evaluation of the trained model. Each model is trained and evaluated in
a 3-fold validation approach as mentioned in section 7.1.1. This represents a
robust method of evaluating the performance achieved per model. Additionally,
the top two best performing models are trained and evaluated in a Leave-One-
Out validation approach as mentioned in section 7.1.2. The latter validation
approach was not performed on all the 14 developed models since results would
be insignificant when models already perform worse on the 3-fold evaluation.
==PAGE:52==
40
7 Experimental setup
However, the same technical procedure could be applied to the rest of the mod-
els, if desired.
The developed models can be grouped into three main categories, according to the
general direction utilised: i) naive approaches, ii) usage of model architectures proven
in image classification at large scale and iii) re-purposing pre-trained models for the
image classification task at hand. The theory for each of those categories has been
presented in chapters 5 and 6. For the naive approaches, it has to be specified that
those models employ modest architectures and they serve as a baseline for developing
further models of categories ii) and iii).
A detailed description of the 14 deep neural network models is provided next,
serving as an overview of the empirical exploration performed.
7.3.1
Baseline model
The baseline model comprises a single Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) hidden
layer, followed by a prediction layer that consists of one neuron and capable to output
a prediction score. This is the simplest model developed and it serves as a building
block for the rest of the models. Its architecture is shown in figure 7.5. The specifics
are presented below:
Figure 7.5: Architecture of the baseline model.
• Data pre-processing. An image is represented as a 3D tensor of shape (height,
width, channels). In order to minimise the number of parameters used by the
model, the images have been resized from shape (100, 300, 1) to (100, 100, 1).
The value of 1 for the channels corresponds to greyscale.
• Input shape. The input shape required for a LSTM layer is a 3D tensor of
shape (batch size, time steps, input dimension). Here, the input data is shaped
as (50, 100, 10.000) as it can be seen in figure 7.5 for the input layer. 50 is
==PAGE:53==
7.3 Description of developed models
41
the value of the batch size (as mentioned in section 7.2) and 100 is the value of
the temporal dimension (number of frames per sample). The third dimension
corresponds to the input dimension, respectively an image that is flattened from
a 3D tensor of shape (100, 100, 1) to a 1D tensor of shape (10.000, ).
• Number of parameters. The configuration of this model leads to a number
of 4.040.501 parameters. Those are the weights that are constantly adjusted
during the training of the model.
A higher number translates to increased
complexity and capability to learn patterns, however it also translates to a
need for increased computational power.
7.3.2
Baseline model with two stacked layers
This is an incremental update for the first model, with the only distinction that two
LSTM hidden layers are used instead. This can also be perceived as hyperparameter
tuning of the first model. Stacking two LSTM layers increases the complexity of the
model and the number of parameters increments to a value of 4.120.901. A depiction
of the model is presented in figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Architecture of the second model.
7.3.3
Baseline model with three stacked layers
This is an incremental update for the second model, with the addition of yet
another LSTM hidden layer. The complexity of the model is further increased, to
a total number of 4.201.301 parameters.
Otherwise, the specifics are identical to
==PAGE:54==
42
7 Experimental setup
the ones described for the first model. The architecture of the model is shown in
figure 7.7.
Figure 7.7: Architecture of the third model.
7.3.4
Re-implemented model from published paper
The work of Mirzaalian et al. [56] presents several deep neural network models
that were applied on fingerprint LSCI data captured with the first version of the
multi-modal capture device developed under the BATL project [2].
Amongst the
five models presented, a LSTM based model is reported to demonstrate the highest
performance in classification accuracy.
The data set used in the published paper
contains raw data that is different from the one used in this thesis. This is mainly
due to different sensors used in the fingerprint capture device. The reported data set
contains 3961 samples of fingerprint LSCI data. The size of the captured samples
is 64 × 64 pixels with 100 frames per sample. The results of several configurations
are presented in the published paper, where a patch-based approach is used and each
image is split into patches. The best results reported are by using patches of size
8 × 8 pixels and 100 frames as the temporal dimension.
This is an attempt to re-implement the LSTM model mentioned in the published
paper, by taking note of all the implementation details mentioned. Hopefully, this
will lead to a similar high performance. The model architecture is identical to the
==PAGE:55==
7.3 Description of developed models
43
second model described in sub-section 7.3.2. The differences in implementation are
enumerated below:
• Input shape. Following the patch-based approach, the images in the data
set used in this thesis are split into patches of size 10 × 10 pixels. Therefore
the resulted input 3D tensor is of shape (batch size * 10, time steps, height *
width * channels) with the corresponding values of (640, 100, 100). The input
dimension is flattened from the image shape of (10, 10, 1) to a 1D tensor of
shape (100).
• Hyperparameter configuration. The Adam optimiser is used with a learn-
ing rate of 0.0002. The batch size is set to 64 and the model is trained for 50
epochs.
7.3.5
Basic CNN combined with LSTM
Figure 7.8: Architecture of the fifth model.
Another direction is explored with the fifth model. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are introduced due to their ability to effectively process the spatial dimension
of the input data.
In this model, a basic CNN is combined with a LSTM layer,
==PAGE:56==
44
7 Experimental setup
therefore having the capability to effectively process the spatial input and also the
temporal aspect of the data. The architecture used for this model can be observed
in figure 7.8.
The hyperparameters used are the same as for the first model, together with the
data pre-processing performed. There is a difference in the input shape though, the
input dimension not being flattened any longer, therefore the 3D tensor shape (height,
width, channels) is preserved. This is done due to introducing the convolutional part
in the model, before the LSTM. The number of parameters is 1.040.506, which is
significantly lower than the previous models.
7.3.6
Basic CNN combined with a stacked LSTM
Figure 7.9: Architecture of the sixth model.
==PAGE:57==
7.3 Description of developed models
45
This is an incremental update for the fifth model, with the only distinction that
ten LSTM hidden layers are used instead. Stacking multiple LSTM layers increases
the number of parameters to a value of 1.764.106. The model architecture is shown
in figure 7.9.
7.3.7
Basic CNN combined with a wider LSTM
This is also an incremental update for the fifth model, this time with the only
distinction that the number of units has been adjusted from 100 to 1000, representing
an increase in the width of the network. This corresponds to a significant increase in
the total number of parameters, to a value of 14.005.006. The architecture used by
the seventh model can be observed in figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10: Architecture of the seventh model.
7.3.8
Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network
The previous seven models were developed using a naive approach, resulting in
rather modest architectures. The eighth model utilises a Long-term Recurrent Con-
volutional Network (LRCN) [21] architecture that embodies a complex CNN and one
==PAGE:58==
46
7 Experimental setup
LSTM hidden layer followed by a prediction layer. The CNN architecture used is
heavily influenced by the VGG-16 [76] CNN model proven to be of high performance
in image classification at large scale, specifically on the ImageNet [20] image database.
Figure 7.11: Architecture of the eighth model.
A smaller version of VGG-16 was used where several convolution blocks were
==PAGE:59==
7.3 Description of developed models
47
removed, due to computational limitations and time constraints.
The modularity
of the model was also a deciding factor. One important aspect to mention is that
the model is trained from scratch, in contrast with the models that are described in
the next sub-sections. The architecture used by the LRCN is presented in figure 7.11.
The model embodies a number of 5.511.713 parameters. Five convolution blocks form
the CNN unit that process the spatial information, followed by a layer that flattens
the data before feeding it to a LSTM layer that processes the temporal information.
As the previous models described, a prediction layer is then used to obtain a binary
classification. The implementation details are mentioned below:
• Data pre-processing. The images representing the input data are resized to
a size of 100 × 100 pixels. Next, a transformation is applied, so that the RGB
channel is used instead of greyscale. Moreover, the data is normalised from 16bit
depth to 8bit depth. The VGG-16 architecture was optimised to handle image
data in 8bit depth, hence this normalisation is necessary. Additionally, those
operations performed reduce the search space of the learning process, therefore
maximising efficiency.
• Input shape. The input data is a 5D tensor of shape (batch size, time steps,
height, width, channels) with the corresponding values of (50, 100, 100, 100,
3).
• Hyperparameter configuration. The Adam optimiser is used with a learn-
ing rate of 0.00001, which is smaller than the learning rate used by the previous
models described. This is done in order to increase the optimisation space of
the learning process. However, this also increases the duration of the model
training.
7.3.9
LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained InceptionV3
This approach re-purposes a pre-trained model for the image classification task
tackled in this thesis. The pre-trained CNN model utilised is InceptionV3 [85], which
demonstrated high performance in image classification at large scale. First, bottleneck
features are extracted from the data set by using the pre-trained CNN model. This
is illustrated in figure 7.12.
An intermediary layer is used for feature extraction, situated right before the fully
connected layers representing the classifier. Second, these extracted features serve as
input data to a rather simple LSTM based model that contains one LSTM layer, one
fully connected layer, a Dropout layer (used for regularisation) and a prediction layer.
This simple LSTM model is trained and evaluated on the extracted features. It can
be observed in figure 7.13.
The model has a significant higher number of parameters, in contrast with the pre-
vious models, amounting to a total of 34.612.225 parameters. One important aspect
to touch upon is that this approach leverages the representational power learned by
==PAGE:60==
48
7 Experimental setup
Figure 7.12: Feature extraction from the pre-trained InceptionV3 model, using an
intermediate layer.
a model pre-trained on a large data set. The implementation specifics are mentioned
below:
• Data pre-processing.
Specific data pre-processing needs to be applied to
the data set before feature extraction. In essence, the data format needs to be
transformed to the same data format the pre-trained CNN model used as input
data during its training. The images are resized to a size of 299×299 pixels and
adjusted to use the RGB channel. Moreover, the values are normalised from
16bit depth to the [0, 1] interval.
==PAGE:61==
7.3 Description of developed models
49
Figure 7.13: Architecture of the LSTM model used for this approach.
• Input shape. The extracted features are represented in a 2D tensor of shape
(100, 2048) where 100 corresponds to the temporal dimension and 2048 corre-
sponds to the number of features extracted from a frame. With the batch size
as the first dimension, the final input shape becomes (500, 100, 2048).
• Hyperparameter configuration. The Adam optimiser is used with a learn-
ing rate of 0.00001, this being the same as for the eighth model described.
7.3.10
Fine-tuned InceptionV3
This approach also makes use of the pre-trained InceptionV3 model, but in a
different way. Instead of using the pre-trained model to extract bottleneck features,
the model is fine-tuned on the data set used in this thesis and then predictions are
obtained by using the fine-tuned model. It is important to note that this approach
is not LSTM based. The reason for having this approach is to serve as a comparison
with the ninth and eleventh model. The idea is to observe the change in performance
in the presence or absence of a LSTM block. The steps involved in this approach are
mentioned below are illustrated in figure 7.14.
• Data pre-processing. As no LSTM block is used in this approach, the data
needs to be pre-processed to be suitable input data for the pre-trained CNN
model used, InceptionV3.
The absence of LSTM translates to an incapabil-
ity of processing temporal information, therefore only one frame (out of 100
==PAGE:62==
50
7 Experimental setup
Figure 7.14: Fine-tuning of the InceptionV3 model in three stages: a) load the pre-
trained model and remove the top layers that represent the classifier,
b) freeze the convolutional base, add a new classifier and train it, c)
unfreeze the top two Inception blocks and fine-tune them together with
the classifier.
frames, the frame at index 50) is used per sample. Afterwards, the same image
pre-processing is performed as described in sub-section 7.3.9. The images are
adjusted to use the RGB channel and resized to 299 × 299 pixels. Subsequently,
their values are normalised from 16bit depth to the [0, 1] interval.
• Input shape. The input shape of the data is a 4D tensor of shape (batch size,
height, width, channels) with the corresponding values of (50, 299, 299, 3).
• Stage one of the fine-tuning process. The step first is to load the pre-
trained InceptionV3 model and remove the top two layers that represent the
classifier. This needs to be done in order to re-purpose the pre-trained model,
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Description of developed models
51
since it has been trained on another problem and data set, which is different
from the problem presented in this thesis.
• Stage two of the fine-tuning process. A new classifier is added on top of
the convolutional base, having the capability to output a binary classification,
as needed for the thesis problem. The layers of the convolutional base are then
frozen in order to preserve the hierarchical feature representations that were
learned during the initial training of the model. Further on, the first training
process is performed on the model, where basically only the weights in the
added classifier are updated.
The RMSprop optimisation algorithm is used
with a learning rate of 0.001. The model is trained for 10 epochs.
• Stage three of the fine-tuning process. The next step is to unfreeze the
top two Inception blocks of the convolutional base and fine-tune them together
with the added classifier, this representing the second training process in this
approach. Only the top two Inception blocks are chosen to be fine-tuned (in-
stead of the full convolutional base) in order to prevent overfitting [10]. The
fine-tuning process is carried out with a very small learning rate in order to not
disrupt the previously learned features. The Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
optimisation algorithm is used with a learning rate of 0.0001. The SGD opti-
miser ensures that the magnitude of the updates remains very small, whereas
an adaptive learning rate optimiser (such as Adam) would not be as effective.
The model is trained for 60 epochs.
• Predictions. The fine-tuned model is used to obtain classifications for the test
split of the data set. One aspect to note is that only one frame (at index 50 out
of 100 frames) per sample is used to obtain a classification.
7.3.11
LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned InceptionV3
This approach combines the ideas of the previous two approaches. First, the pre-
trained InceptionV3 model is fine-tuned following the same steps as in sub-section
7.3.10. Second, the fine-tuned model is used to extract features from the data set, as
the approach described in sub-section 7.3.9 and illustrated in figure 7.12. The LSTM
based model shown in figure 7.13 is then trained by using the extracted features as
input data. The model outputs a binary classification between BF and PA samples.
One aspect to note is that this approach makes use of a LSTM unit, compared to the
previous approach from sub-section 7.3.10.
7.3.12
LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained Xception
This approach is identical with the approach described in sub-section 7.3.9, with
the distinction that another pre-trained CNN model is used instead of InceptionV3.
Namely, the CNN model used is Xception [13], which demonstrated higher perfor-
mance compared to InceptionV3, on the same image classification at large scale. The
==PAGE:64==
52
7 Experimental setup
main interest is to observe if the classification accuracy on the data set used in this
thesis increases due to a more powerful pre-trained CNN model.
7.3.13
Fine-tuned Xception
This approach is the equivalent of the approach described in sub-section 7.3.10,
with the distinction that Xception is used as the pre-trained model.
7.3.14
LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned Xception
This approach mirrors the approach described in sub-section 7.3.11, with the
difference that the Xception model is used as the pre-trained model.
7.4
Evaluation of developed models
The performance obtained by each of the 14 models developed is evaluated in a
robust manner and presented in chapter 8.
First, the K-fold validation technique is used, this is being discussed in section
7.1.1. The mean of the results obtained from the three folds is presented, along with
the corresponding standard deviation.
Second, a confusion matrix will be presented for each model. One confusion matrix
is produced for each of the three folds evaluated per model, however only one confusion
matrix will be presented in chapter 8, the full sets of confusion matrices being available
in appendix B. The reason behind this is that the conclusions drawn from a set of
confusion matrices corresponding to a model would be fairly similar. A confusion
matrix [40] is a method that can be utilised to represent the performance obtained
by a classification algorithm. An illustration of a confusion matrix is displayed in
figure 7.15. The diagonal of a confusion matrix corresponds to the correctly classified
samples, with its anti-diagonal corresponds to falsely classified samples. In accordance
to the binary classification problem tacked in this thesis, the incorrectly classified
samples can be false positives (BF samples classified as PA) or false negatives (PA
samples classified as BF).
Further on, the developed models will be evaluated according to the ISO/IEC
30107-3:2017 standard [82], by measuring the attack presentation classification er-
ror rate (APCER) and the bona fide presentation classification error rate (BPCER).
APCER is the percentage of attack presentations wrongly classified as bona fide pre-
sentations and BPCER is the percentage of bona fide presentations wrongly classified
as presentation attacks.
The models are also evaluated by employing Detection Error Tradeoff (DET)
curves [54]. A DET curve can be used for the performance evaluation of a binary
classification algorithm and it shows the APCER against the BPCER. The perfor-
mance of the developed models is compared simultaneously by using DET curves,
==PAGE:65==
7.5 Implementation details
53
Figure 7.15: A confusion matrix with its elements.
with one plot for each of the three folds used. Moreover, the top two models that
achieve the best performance are compared in a single DET curve plot, across all
three folds.
Additionally, a sample misclassification analysis is carried out for the top two best
performing models, where the focus is on identifying the types of samples that are
incorrectly classified.
Finally, a search is performed for an optimal prediction threshold. Initially, as
mentioned in section 7.2, the prediction threshold has been naively set to 0.5. Af-
ter obtaining the classification results from the developed models, it is possible to
calculate the optimal prediction threshold such that the minimum for APCER and
BPCER is found. For this purpose, the Youden Index [25] has been utilised. This
calculation has only been performed for the top two best performing models.
7.5
Implementation details
Keras [12] is a deep learning framework for Python, which provides a modular way
to define, train and evaluate various types of deep learning models. Keras enables
fast experimentation due to providing high-level building blocks for developing deep
learning models, initially being developed for researchers, as mentioned in section
3.2 of [11]. It has built-in support for convolutional neural networks and recurrent
neural networks. The framework does not handle low-level operations such as tensor
manipulations, instead it relies on a specialised tensor library to do so. TensorFlow[55]
was used as tensor library.
==PAGE:66==
54
7 Experimental setup
As part of this thesis, Keras was used for the implementation, training and eval-
uation of the fourteen developed models.
Conda [18] is an open source package management system and environment man-
agement system.
It was used in this thesis in order to manage the environment
utilised for the experiments performed and also for managing the different packages
used. This environment can be re-created by using the listing in appendix A.
Computational limitations were taken into consideration during the development
of the models as the computations were performed on a cluster of CPU units. The
main concern has been the possibility of running out of memory. The duration of an
experiment (training and evaluation of a model) varied from 63 minutes to five days,
depending on the complexity of the used model.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8
Results & Discussion
This chapter presents the results obtained from each of the approaches described
in section 7.3. First, the results are discusses per approach, followed by a summary
with a comparison between the performances obtained. Finally, a deeper analysis is
carried out for top two best performing approaches.
8.1
Results obtained by each approach
The corresponding graph(s) of the training process will be discussed for each of the
approaches. As the training graphs are fairly similar between the three folds evaluated,
only the one affiliated with the first fold (fold 0) will be examined. The three folds are
the product of the K-fold validation protocol, mentioned in section 7.1.1. Moreover,
the confusion matrix resulting from fold 0 evaluation will be specified. Additionally
obtained confusion matrices obtained are listed in appendix B. Finally, an overview is
presented for the classification accuracy obtained on the test split of the data set for
each fold. The APCER and BPCER biometrics performance metrics are also listed.
Each of the following sub-sections corresponds to sub-sections 7.3.1-7.3.14, the
numbering and the naming being mirrored.
8.1.1
Baseline model
Figure 8.1 illustrates the training process of the first model. The X axis corre-
sponds to the number of epochs, while the Y axis corresponds to the value obtained
by the loss function used (binary cross-entropy). In this plot, both the training and
validation loss are depicted. The validation loss is of interest, as it contains valuable
information about the generalisation capability acquired by the model at a specific
epoch. Here, it can be observed that the model is steadily improving as the value of
the validation loss is decreasing as expected. The training process is stopped after 60
epochs and it can be seen that the model was on the optimal direction towards further
improvement. This signifies that the model is underfitted and could be additionally
improved with more training. However, the model is learning at a suboptimal pace
and will likely not improve significantly with more training. Another training process
was performed with the same setup where the model was trained for 150 epochs and
the classification accuracy increased with only 6%. Since the model does not demon-
==PAGE:68==
56
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.1: The training plot of the first model.
strate a good generalisation capability, it is concluded that the model complexity
needs to be increased for better performance.
Table 8.1 shows the performance for each of the three folds, together with the
mean and standard deviation for the classification accuracy, APCER and BPCER.
The mean classification accuracy obtained is 64.12%, with a mean APCER of 61.94%
and mean BPCER of 9.89%. The standard deviations are not very high, somewhat
indicating a stability in the generalisation capability of the model.
Table 8.1: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the first model.
The confusion matrix obtained after evaluating the trained model is pictured in
figure 8.2. The four rectangles situated in the top left corner correspond to the content
of the confusion matrix, while the rest of the rectangles contain statistics per row,
column or total. The percentage below each of the metrics in the top left corner (true
positives, true negatives, false positives, false negatives) represents the percentage
value out of the total number of samples and not rates such as true positive rate
or false positive rate. 289 out of 764 samples are classified incorrectly, leading to a
classification accuracy of 62.17%. The bigger part of the misclassified samples account
==PAGE:69==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
57
to false negatives, 262 PA samples being classified as bona fide.
Figure 8.2: Confusion matrix for the first model.
8.1.2
Baseline model with two stacked layers
The training process of the second model is depicted in figure 8.3.
Both the
validation and training loss show very little improvement during the 60 epochs. This
translates to the model being incapable to learn any useful representations from the
data set. The model architecture with two stacked LSTM layers performs worse than
its predecessor with one layer, implying that important information is lost when the
data is processed with the two LSTM layers.
The performance for each of the three folds is shown in table 8.2 for the second
model. It can be noted that the standard deviations for all three performance metrics
are high, therefore the model did not acquire a stable generalisation capability. The
mean classification accuracy obtained is 58.50%, which is a regression of 5.62% from
the first model. The mean APCER and BPCER obtained also show a suboptimal
performance.
Table 8.2: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the second model.
==PAGE:70==
58
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.3: The training plot of the second model.
Figure 8.4 illustrates the confusion matrix corresponding to the results of the
second model.
It can be observed that the classification accuracy has decreased
compared to the first model, from 62.17% to 55.10%. Moreover, most of the samples
are classified as bona fide, with only 55 out of 764 samples being classified as PA.
Therefore, the model shows a bias towards the bona fide class.
Figure 8.4: Confusion matrix for the second model.
==PAGE:71==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
59
8.1.3
Baseline model with three stacked layers
Figure 8.5 pictures the training process of the third model.
The training was
stopped early, after 35 epochs (out of 60) due to the fact that the validation loss
stopped improving. The learning curves for both the training and validation loss are
oscillating a fair amount, while amounting to a minor improvement in validation loss.
Adding another LSTM layer seems to improve performance compared to the second
model, however this proves insufficient.
Figure 8.5: The training plot of the third model.
Table 8.3 shows that the mean classification accuracy obtained is 52.76% with a
fairly small standard deviation. The mean APCER is a high 84.75%, while the mean
BPCER is equal to 0.87%. The low value of BPCER does not translate to a good
performance of the model, due to it being biased towards the bona fide class.
Table 8.3: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the third model.
The confusion matrix resulted from evaluating the third model is illustrated in
figure 8.6. It can be observed that most of the samples have been classified as bona
fide, with only 70 samples out 764 being classified as PA. The classifier is therefore
==PAGE:72==
60
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.6: Confusion matrix for the third model.
biased towards bona fide predictions. This was also the case for the previous model
evaluated.
8.1.4
Re-implemented model from published paper
As mentioned in sub-section 7.3.4, the fourth model is a re-implementation of
the LSTM based model reported by the work of Mirzaalian et al. [56]. A three fold
validation protocol is used and the reported results for the LSTM based model on
their LSCI data amount to a mean APCER of 9.7%, with a mean BPCER of 0.6%.
Amongst the five deep neural network models evaluated in the published work, those
are the best results obtained by a model. The standard deviations are fairly low, 4.2%
for APCER and 0.5% for BPCER, indicating a stable generalisation capability.
The training plot for the re-implementation of the model, as part of this thesis, is
presented in figure 8.7. A noisy but positive learning curve can be observed, however
the validation loss stagnates at approximately 0.64. The training process is stopped
after 48 epochs, due to a stop in the improvement of the monitored metric. Another
important consideration is that the validation loss achieves a lower value than the
training loss, which is unusual for a training process. This could be due to the model
finding the validation set easier to classify, compared to the training set.
==PAGE:73==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
61
Figure 8.7: The training plot of the fourth model.
Table 8.4 illustrates the results obtained for each of the three folds. The mean
classification accuracy achieved is a low 55.56%, which is close to random. The mean
APCER obtained is a high 87.18% with a mean BPCER of 1.84%. These results are
not mirroring the high performance obtained by the LSTM based model reported in
the work of Mirzaalian et al., instead showing a significant difference between the
two set of results. This could be due to the model being applied on a different data
set or implementation details being left out in the published paper, which leads to a
different setup implemented in this thesis.
Table 8.4: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the fourth model.
The confusion matrix corresponding to the classification performance achieved by
the fourth model is depicted in figure 8.8. The model shows a strong bias towards the
bona fide class, with 89.4% of the samples being classified as bona fide. The previous
two models demonstrated a similar characteristic.
==PAGE:74==
62
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.8: Confusion matrix for the fourth model.
8.1.5
Basic CNN combined with LSTM
The training plot corresponding to the fifth model is presented in figure 8.9. Both
the training and the validation loss curves show a decreasing direction, however the
training loss shows a much more aggressive descent. The model is heavily overfitting,
basically memorising the training set and demonstrating a lack of generalisation ca-
pability when evaluating on the validation set. Moreover, the improvement in the
validation loss stagnates after 40 epochs of training and the model at epoch 41 is the
version used for evaluating the test set.
Table 8.5 exhibits the values obtained for the performance metrics of classifica-
tion accuracy, APCER and BPCER. A higher mean classification accuracy is demon-
strated compared to the previously evaluated models, with a value of 72.19%. How-
ever, the standard deviation is as high as 7.73%, illustrating an instability in generali-
sation capacity. The mean APCER value of 47.40% also shows improvement from the
previous models, however it does not represent an optimal value. The mean BPCER
obtained is 8.25% with a modest standard deviation of 1.57%.
Table 8.5: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the fifth model.
==PAGE:75==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
63
Figure 8.9: The training plot of the fifth model.
The confusion matrix resulted illustrated in figure 8.10 shows that the model
has difficulty in classifying PA samples correctly, with 153 samples out of 764 being
classified wrongly as bona fide.
Figure 8.10: Confusion matrix for the fifth model.
One aspect to notice is that this is the first model that achieves a classification
accuracy higher than 65%, which can be attributed to the introduction of the CNN
==PAGE:76==
64
8 Results & Discussion
block capable to process the spatial data with a superior capacity.
8.1.6
Basic CNN combined with a stacked LSTM
Figure 8.11 pictures the training process that corresponds to the sixth model,
which is an incremental update for the previous model, with nine added LSTM hid-
den layers.
It can be observed that this incremental update does not result in a
meaningful improvement for the validation loss curve. A rather considerable differ-
ence in skill gained is displayed between the training and the validation loss. The
model is overfitting slightly less than the the previous model, with a difference of
approximately 0.1 in training loss. Additionally, the training process is stopped after
22 epochs, the best performance obtained being demonstrated in the second epoch.
Figure 8.11: The training plot of the sixth model.
The mean classification accuracy obtained is also slightly higher than the previous
model, with a value of 74.87% and a standard deviation of 5.49%, a marginal improve-
ment of 2.24%. Moreover, the mean APCER is lower with 8.4% and a slightly higher
mean BPCER of 11.35%. This is illustrated in table 8.6. The results signify that
increasing the complexity of the model by simply adding multiple LSTM layers leads
to a rather insignificant performance gain.
Figure 8.12 depicts a similar model behaviour as the previous model, on fold 0.
The percentage of incorrectly classified samples is slightly higher, with a difference of
2.62% and a value of 27.49%. Most of the wrong classifications are for the PA class,
with 150 PA samples misclassified as bona fide.
==PAGE:77==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
65
Table 8.6: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the sixth model.
So far, this is the highest classification accuracy obtained amongst the models
evaluated. However, a value of 74.87% is considered suboptimal and further progress
is desired, an ideal result representing a classification accuracy above 95%.
Figure 8.12: Confusion matrix for the sixth model.
8.1.7
Basic CNN combined with a wider LSTM
The seventh model is also an incremental update to the fifth model, with an
increase in network width rather than depth being performed, the number of units
used in the LSTM layer being raised from 100 to 1000. The pattern for the evolution
of the training and validation loss in this model matches closely the pattern of the
fifth model, as depicted by figure 8.13.
The model is overfitting in an aggressive
manner, reaching almost 0.0 training loss on the training set. However, the training
process is stopped after 36 epochs, due to the a lack of improvement in the validation
loss, stagnating around an approximate value of 0.4.
The performance metrics illustrated in table 8.7 show a regression in the perfor-
mance of the seventh model compared to the fifth model. The mean classification
==PAGE:78==
66
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.13: The training plot of the seventh model.
accuracy deteriorated with 1.37%, amounting to a value of 70.82%.
Furthermore,
the mean APCER and BPCER obtained also show worse performance, with higher
APCER and BPCER values of 49.05% and 9.44% respectively.
Table 8.7: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the seventh model.
The resulted confusion matrix can be observed in figure 8.14 for fold 0. Here, the
seventh model does demonstrate a higher classification accuracy, with a difference of
9.42%, however this is not consistent across the three folds evaluated. In contrast,
a classification accuracy of only 59.30% is obtained for fold1. This translates to a
rather suboptimal generalisation capability.
This model concludes the category of naive approaches explored and sets the
direction towards a search for a radically different model architecture that would be
capable of a better performance.
==PAGE:79==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
67
Figure 8.14: Confusion matrix for the seventh model.
8.1.8
Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Network
The eighth model utilises a CNN architecture that demonstrated high performance
on image classification at large scale. A LSTM block is added on top of the convolu-
tional base, together representing a model capable of classifying the image sequences
present in the data set.
Figure 8.15: The training plot of the eighth model.
==PAGE:80==
68
8 Results & Discussion
The resulting model is trained from scratch, with the training process being de-
picted in figure 8.15. Both of the training and validation loss curves follow a descend-
ing trend through the 60 epochs trained, which is desired. The loss obtained on the
validation set is initially better until epoch 25 when a change in dynamics occurs
and the training loss achieves a lower value as expected. The model is essentially
underfitted, since the curves show potential of further improvement past a training of
60 epochs. However, a longer training was not performed due to time constraints and
computational limitations, this model being the most computationally demanding
and the slowest in improving out of all the models evaluated.
Table 8.8: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the eighth model.
The performance metrics obtained are illustrated in table 8.8. The mean clas-
sification accuracy resulted is an astounding high value of 97.86%.
The standard
deviation is a very low 0.6%, denoting strong stability across the three folds evalu-
ated. This pattern can also be seen in the obtained values for APCER (1.92%) and
BPCER (2.35%). All of the three performance metrics demonstrate that the model
has successfully acquired a high generalisation capability.
Figure 8.16: Confusion matrix for the eighth model.
A further analysis on the confusion matrix displayed in figure 8.16 indicates that
==PAGE:81==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
69
only eleven samples have been misclassified. Six PA samples have been misclassified
as bona fide and five bona fide samples have been misclassified as PA, therefore there
is no imbalance exhibited in the misclassifications.
The eighth model demonstrates the highest performance of all the models evalu-
ated thus far, with an optimal classification accuracy of 97.86%. Further experiments
are carried, with a desire to push this result closer to 100%.
8.1.9
LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained InceptionV3
The eighth model leverages the representational power acquired by the pre-trained
InceptionV3 model. Features are extracted from an intermediary layer of the pre-
trained model and they are fed as input data to a LSTM based model. The process
of training the LSTM based model is illustrated in figure 8.17.
Both of the loss
curves are on a descending trend, however the validation loss is much noisier than
the training loss. The position is the graph is the ideal scenario, with the training
loss lower than the validation. The model shows potential of further improvement
past the 60 epochs trained, with the model at epoch 58 being the most performant.
However, the possibility of further training is not explored due to the training of the
model being time consuming and computationally demanding.
Figure 8.17: The training plot of the ninth model.
Table 8.9 displays the performance metrics obtained by the model. A strong gen-
eralisation capacity is demonstrated, with a mean classification accuracy of 97.35%
and a standard deviation of 1.15%. Those values represent a decrease in performance
compared to the previous model, by a very low margin, the difference in classifica-
tion accuracy being 0.51%. The mean APCER obtained is slightly higher than the
==PAGE:82==
70
8 Results & Discussion
previous model, with an increase of 1.9%. However, the mean BPCER resulted has
improved with a decrease of 0.87%.
Table 8.9: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the ninth model.
An analysis of the confusion matrix obtained (depicted in figure 8.18) denotes that
only thirteen samples have been misclassified. This is an increase with two samples,
in comparison with the previous model. Moreover, a change in the misclassification
dynamics can be observed, with the model having misclassified eleven PA samples as
bona fide and two bona fide samples being classified as PA. This indicates that the
model has more difficulty in classifying PA samples correctly.
Overall, the results obtained are considered satisfactory, even if they represent a
minor regression compared to the previous model.
Figure 8.18: Confusion matrix for the ninth model.
8.1.10
Fine-tuned InceptionV3
The previous approach demonstrated a high performance in classification accuracy,
by using the pre-trained InceptionV3 model. This approach attempts to push further
for a better result, by fine-tuning the pre-trained model, such that the model can
==PAGE:83==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
71
Figure 8.19: The training plot of the tenth model, stage one of fine-tuning.
learn the features specific to the data set used in this thesis. Two training processes
are carried out, first fine-tuning a newly added classifier on top of the convolutional
base. The evolution of the training and validation loss curves can be seen in figure
8.19. The training process is stopped after ten epochs, as the training loss stabilises
quickly. The validation loss curve is noisier, however it also has a descending trend,
which is the expected behaviour. The purpose of this training session was to prepare
for the second training session, such that the latter does not start with random weights
for the newly added classifier.
The second training process is depicted in figure 8.20. It can be observed that
both of the curves stabilise in improvement after approximately 15 epochs. However,
there is a significant different between the two, with the validation loss having a much
higher value. This signifies that the model is overfitting, essentially memorising the
training set, since the training loss achieves a value close to 0.0. The outcome of this
is that the model does not acquire a good generalisation capability.
Table 8.10: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the tenth model.
The performance metrics obtained by the model are shown in table 8.10.
A
==PAGE:84==
72
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.20: The training plot of the tenth model, stage two of fine-tuning.
surprisingly low mean classification accuracy is achieved, with a value of 60.61%.
The standard deviation is as low as 1.26%, however the stability does not represent a
good result when the classification accuracy is suboptimal. Moreover, a mean APCER
of 51.17% is obtained, with a mean BPCER of 27.68%. Those are considered high
values, denoting inferior performance.
Figure 8.21: Confusion matrix for the tenth model.
==PAGE:85==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
73
The confusion matrix resulted can be observed in figure 8.21. The model misclas-
sified 303 samples out of 764. The number of PA samples misclassified as bona fide
is roughly double the amount of bona fide samples misclassified as PA samples.
This represents a significant regression from the previous model evaluated. It is
worth noting that in this approach no LSTM block was used, therefore no temporal
information was processed.
8.1.11
LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned InceptionV3
The eleventh model combines the previous two approaches and embodies three
training processes. The same pre-trained InceptionV3 model is used and it is fine-
tuned in two stages, following the exact same steps as the previous model.
The
training plots corresponding to the two training stages also present similar patterns
for the training and validation loss curves. However, they are not depicted in this
sub-section as they are not considered of high relevance to the final result. This is
due to the fact that the fine-tuned model is used to extract features from the data
set, by utilising an intermediary layer of the model and not the output layer. The
two training plots correspond to the performance obtained by the output layer.
Figure 8.22: The training plot of the eleventh model, third stage.
Further on, the simple LSTM model is trained on the extracted features, with
the corresponding training plot illustrated in 8.22. The LSTM block is identical to
the one used in model nine.
The training plot shows that both the training and
validation loss curves have a descending trend, however the validation loss curve is
much noisier. The training process is stopped after 59 epochs, since the validation
==PAGE:86==
74
8 Results & Discussion
loss has not improved past epoch 39. Both of the loss values obtained are below 0.1,
which is considered optimal.
Table 8.11: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the eleventh model.
Table 8.11 displays the performance metrics obtained by the model. The mean
classification accuracy obtained is an astonishing high value of 97.57%, with a very
low standard deviation of 0.77%. This indicates both a powerful generalisation ca-
pacity and stability across the three folds evaluated.
The value obtained for the
mean classification accuracy is comparable with model eight (97.86%) and model
nine (97.35%). So far, model eleven performs second best in terms of classification
accuracy, with a difference of only 0.29% in comparison to model eight. The mean
APCER and BPCER values obtained are also considered optimal, with a value of
3.92% and 0.96% respectively.
Figure 8.23: Confusion matrix for the eleventh model.
The confusion matrix obtained is depicted in figure 8.23.
It can be seen that
the model misclassified only thirteen samples, amounting to an increase of two mis-
classified samples, in comparison to model eight, so far the best performing model.
Another observation worth making is that model eleven presents more difficulty in
==PAGE:87==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
75
classifying PA samples correctly, having misclassified twelve PA samples as bona fide
and only one bona fide sample misclassified as PA.
A direct comparison in the achieved mean of classification accuracy is of interest,
between model nine and model eleven. This is due to the fact that they both extract
features with the pre-trained InceptionV3 model and feed them as input data to a
simple LSTM model.
The difference is that model eleven also fine-tunes the pre-
trained InceptionV3 before using it to extract features. This fine-tuning amounts
to an increase of 0.22% in classification accuracy. Therefore, it can be considered
that the additional step of fine-tuning has a positive outcome for the performance
obtained.
8.1.12
LSTM with extracted features using pre-trained Xception
The previous three approaches all leveraged the representational power acquired
by the pre-trained InceptionV3 model. The next three approaches mirror these exper-
iments, with the distinction that the pre-trained Xception model is used instead. The
results reported by the Xception model on the ImageNet [20] database are slightly
better than the results obtained by InceptionV3. Therefore, it is of interest to ex-
periment with the Xception model and examine whether higher performance can be
obtained on the data set used in this thesis.
Figure 8.24: The training plot of the twelfth model.
The training process corresponding to the twelfth model is displayed in figure
8.24. Optimal descending trends can be observed for both training and validation loss
curves. The latter has a noisier evolution, however it also reaches an optimal value
==PAGE:88==
76
8 Results & Discussion
below 0.1, slightly higher than the training loss. The training process is stopped after
45 epochs, since the validation loss value has not improved past epoch 25.
Table 8.12: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the twelfth model.
Table 8.9 showcases the performance metrics obtained by model twelve.
It is
of interest to make a direct comparison with the InceptionV3 based model counter-
part, specifically model nine. A mean classification accuracy of 97.09% was obtained
by model twelve, which represents a regression of 0.26% compared to model nine.
However, model twelve shows a better stability with a standard deviation of 0.57%,
demonstrating a decrease of 0.58% compared to the ninth model. The mean APCER
and BPCER values obtained are also directly comparable between the two models.
Model twelve obtained slightly inferior results, with a mean APCER of 4.27% (in-
crease of 0.45%) and a mean BPCER of 1.55% (increase of 0.07%).
Figure 8.25: Confusion matrix for the twelfth model.
The confusion matrix resulted for fold 0 can be observed in figure 8.25. It can
be seen that the model demonstrates a perfect classification for bona fide samples,
with no misclassifications. However, 25 PA samples are classified incorrectly as bona
fide samples. This represents a misclassification increase of fourteen PA samples, in
comparison to model nine.
==PAGE:89==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
77
8.1.13
Fine-tuned Xception
Model thirteen mirrors the approach taken by model ten, with the difference that
the Xception pre-trained model is used. Two training processes are carried out as
part of the model fine-tuning, which are depicted in figures 8.26 and 8.27. The first
training plot shows that the best validation loss value obtained is in the first epoch,
the validation loss curve showing an ascending trend afterwards. As model ten, the
training process is stopped after ten epochs, with the only purpose being to prevent
the stage two of fine-tuning to start with randomly initialised weights in the newly
added classifier.
Figure 8.26: The training plot of the thirteenth model, stage one of fine-tuning.
The second training process corresponding to figure 8.27 demonstrates very little
learning by the model, with the best validation loss achieved at epoch four. Past
this point, the validation loss curve shows a slight ascending trend. The model is
overfitting significantly, with a training loss value close to 0.0 and a large difference
in comparison to the validation loss.
Table 8.13: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the thirteenth model.
Table 8.13 displays the performance metrics demonstrated by model thirteen. It
==PAGE:90==
78
8 Results & Discussion
Figure 8.27: The training plot of the thirteenth model, stage two of fine-tuning.
can be seen that a rather low mean classification accuracy is obtained, with a value
of 62.5%, this representing a regression of 1.89% compared to model ten. The mean
APCER and BPCER values obtained by model thirteen are also very similar to the
ones obtained by model ten. Overall, this inferior result was to be expected, due to
the suboptimal performance obtained by model ten.
Figure 8.28: Confusion matrix for the thirteenth model.
==PAGE:91==
8.1 Results obtained by each approach
79
The corresponding confusion matrix is depicted in figure 8.28. The model misclas-
sified 291 samples out of 764, with somewhat of a balance between the two classes,
the number of misclassified PA samples being slightly higher than the number of
misclassified bona fide samples.
8.1.14
LSTM with extracted features using fine-tuned Xception
The fourteenth model follows the same technique as model eleven, with the only
distinction that the pre-trained Xception model is used. As with model eleven, there
are three training processes that embody this approach. The training plots of the first
two stages are not considered of high relevance, since they do not directly influence
the final result. This is due to the fact that an intermediary layer of the fine-tuned
model (resulting after the first two training processes) is used to extract features.
Those features are then used as input data for the training of a LSTM based model,
the training process corresponding to this stage being shown in figure 8.29.
Figure 8.29: The training plot of the fourteenth model, third stage.
Both the training and validation loss curves demonstrate an expected descending
trend, with both values below 0.1. The training process is stopped after 60 epochs,
with the best value for the validation loss being obtained at epoch 53.
The performance metrics obtained by the model are illustrated in table 8.1.14 and
they can be directly compared to model eleven. A minor decrease of 0.14% in the
mean classification accuracy is demonstrated by model fourteen in comparison with
model eleven. However, the standard deviation obtained is slightly better, with a
decrease of 0.39%. The mean APCER and BPCER are also fairly similar between
==PAGE:92==
80
8 Results & Discussion
the two models, with model fourteen showing an insignificant increase of 0.01% in
the mean APCER and an increase of 0.25% in the mean BPCER.
Table 8.14: Classification accuracy, APCER & BPCER for the fourteenth model.
The confusion matrix resulted for fold 0 is displayed in figure 8.30. The percent-
ages depicted are fairly similar to the ones corresponding to model eleven. Model
fourteen shows the same tendency in misclassification, respectively more PA samples
being misclassified as bona fide than bone fide samples being misclassified as PA
samples. There is an increase of four misclassified PA samples, in comparison to the
twelve misclassified PA samples by model eleven.
Figure 8.30: Confusion matrix for the fourteenth model.
8.2
Summary of obtained results
The results of the fourteen models developed have been presented individually
in the previous section, together with an interpretation. Further on, a summary of
the results is given, with the intention to provide a performance overview. This is
depicted in table 8.15.
==PAGE:93==
8.2 Summary of obtained results
81
Table 8.15: Summary of the results in terms of classification accuracy, APCER &
BPCER. The top two best performing models are highlighted in bold,
as a comparison between them is conducted.
Models one to seven correspond to rather naive approaches, with modest archi-
tectures.
It can be observed that this translates to inferior values for the three
performance metrics evaluated. A separation can be carried out for the first seven
models, respectively between those that use CNN blocks and those that do not. The
mean classification accuracy obtained by the first four models that do not use CNN
blocks is at most 64.12%, while all of the naive approaches that use CNN blocks have
a mean classification accuracy above 70%. Therefore, it can be concluded that in the
case of naive approaches results are worse when CNN blocks are not embodied, due
to a lack of processing power for spatial information.
Further on, models nine to fourteen leverage the generalisation capability acquired
by the pre-trained InceptionV3 or Xception models. A poor performance is demon-
strated by models ten and thirteen with a mean classification accuracy of 60.61%
and 62.50% respectively.
It is important to note that the classifications were ob-
tained directly from the fine-tuned pre-trained models, without utilising a LSTM
block. The training plots corresponding to those two models both show aggressive
overfitting, therefore this approach does not prove to be optimal. On the other hand,
models nine, eleven, twelve and fourteen demonstrate high performance across the
three performance metrics monitored. They all utilise a similar approach where a
LSTM based model is trained on features extracted with a pre-trained model. This
technique proves to be highly effective, with a mean classification accuracy higher
than 97%.
The best performing model is the eighth model, which is highlighted in bold to-
gether with second best performing model, the eleventh model, in table 8.15. Model
==PAGE:94==
82
8 Results & Discussion
eight uses a convolutional base that is a smaller version of the proven VGG-16 ar-
chitecture. A simple LSTM block is added on top of the convolutional base and the
resulted network is trained from scratch on the available data set. It can be con-
cluded that training the model from scratch results in the best performance amongst
the evaluated models, possibly due to the network weights being updated together.
Therefore, the spatial information is processed more effective together with the tem-
poral information.
Additionally, the fourteen models are also compared by employing Detection Error
Tradeoff (DET) curves, with one DET plot being displayed for each of the three folds
evaluated.
A DET curve that is closer the bottom left corner indicates a higher
performance in terms of APCER and BPCER.
Figure 8.31: DET curves for fold 0.
Figure 8.31 illustrates the fourteen DET curves obtained for fold 0 of the data set.
It can be observed that model eight demonstrates the best performance on this fold,
in terms of APCER and BPCER. The second best performing model on fold 0 is the
ninth model, with a rather minor difference from model eighth.
Further on, figure 8.32 depicts the DET curves obtained for fold 1 from the three
folds used. Similar patterns as the DET curves in fold 0 can be observed in the plot,
with model eight also demonstrating the highest performance in this case, being the
closest to the bottom left corner. However, the second best performing model on fold
1 appears to be model eleven instead of model nine.
Finally, the DET curves resulted for fold 2 are displayed in figure 8.33. In this
case, it can be noticed that models nine and eleven demonstrate the highest perfor-
==PAGE:95==
8.2 Summary of obtained results
83
mances on this distribution of the data set. The difference between the two is rather
insignificant according to the plot.
Figure 8.32: DET curves for fold 1.
Figure 8.33: DET curves for fold 2.
==PAGE:96==
84
8 Results & Discussion
8.3
Analysis of top two best performing models
A deeper analysis is desired, specifically between the top two best performing
models, in order to hopefully gain an understanding of the possible courses in action
towards a higher performance. Model eight and model eleven are the best performing
models, with a minor difference in the performance demonstrated. The eighth model
uses a LRCN architecture, where a LSTM block is placed on top of a convolutional
base (smaller version of VGG-16), the weights of the resulted network being trained
from scratch.
The eleventh model uses a pre-trained and fine-tuned InceptionV3
model to extract features from the data set, before feeding them as input data to a
simple LSTM model.
Figure 8.34 illustrates the DET curves of both models, for each of the three eval-
uated folds. It can be noticed that all of the DET curves denote similar performance,
with model eight performing best on fold 0 and model eleven performing worst on
fold 1. The differences in performance showcased by the DET plot can be considered
rather insignificant.
Figure 8.34: DET curves for the top two best performing models, across all three
folds.
Further on, an analysis is carried out regarding the samples that have been mis-
classified by the two models. The idea is to identify what kind of samples prove to be
difficult to classify by the models. The breakdown of PAI types present in the data
set is illustrated in table 7.1, where 36 different types are shown.
The misclassified samples from each of the three folds are grouped together for
each model. Table 8.16 illustrates a comparison between the sum of all 3-fold mis-
==PAGE:97==
8.3 Analysis of top two best performing models
85
classification demonstrated by the eighth model and the ones demonstrated by the
eleventh model. The prediction threshold used for obtaining these values is the naive
threshold of 0.5. Overall, model eleven incorrectly classified 56 samples, representing
an increase of seven misclassifications compared to model eighth. Both models present
classification difficulty with roughly the same type of samples. However, model eighth
manifests higher difficulty in classifying bona fide samples, with 16 bona fide misclas-
sified samples more than the eleventh model. The PAI type of the misclassified PA
samples is predominantly overlay for both models, therefore this representing the
hardest challenge in classification for the models.
Table 8.16: Misclassified samples across all three folds per model, by using a naive
threshold of 0.5.
Additionally, the possibility of changing the prediction threshold from a naive
value to an optimal value is explored. A trained model is flexible to use any threshold
within the interval of its prediction layer, in this case [0, 1]. The process of finding
an optimal threshold starts with plotting a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
curve from the results obtained by a model across the three folds evaluated. The
two resulted ROC curves are available in appendix C. Second, the Youden Index [25]
is used to calculate the optimal cut off point on a ROC curve, such that the true
positive rate is high and the false positive rate is low. This cut off point represents
the optimal threshold for a model, which should reduce the number of misclassified
samples. A value of 0.6896 is obtained for the eighth model and a value of 0.0021 is
obtained for eleventh model. Next, the optimal threshold is used for the evaluation
of each test set per fold.
The result of this process is illustrated in table 8.17, where the optimal threshold
value was used for each model. The misclassified samples were grouped together for
the three folds evaluated per model. It can be observed that the number of misclas-
==PAGE:98==
86
8 Results & Discussion
Table 8.17: Misclassified samples across all three folds per model, by using an opti-
mal threshold.
sified samples has decreased with a difference of six samples for model eight, while
seven samples less have been misclassified by model eleven. Furthermore, it is worth
mentioning that the applied optimal threshold more than doubled the number of
misclassified bona fide samples for model eleven, with an increase of thirteen samples.
However, in the case of model eighth the number of misclassified bona fide samples
has decreased with six samples. The misclassified PA samples are unchanged when
applying the optimal threshold for model eighth. Overall, it can be seen that the over-
lay PAI type still poses the biggest challenge for the two models in the classification
task.
Finally, a Leave-One-Out cross-validation is performed on the top two best per-
forming models.
Five groups of PAI types are used to represent five folds to be
evaluated, this being discussed in sub-section 7.1.2. Both of the models are trained
and evaluated on these five folds, with the results being illustrated in table 8.18.
For each of the LOO folds, the model that obtained the highest performance
between the two is highlighted in bold in the table. The first observation is that the
highest performance for both models is with the transparent transparency fold, where
each of the models demonstrated a classification accuracy higher than 97%. On the
other hand, the worst performance is presented when the semi transparency fold is
used, with neither of the two models passing 81% in classification accuracy. Moreover,
the second worst performance seems to be on the overlay PAI type fold, with the
eleventh model achieving an accuracy of 84.54% and the eighth model achieving an
accuracy of 90.39%.
Furthermore, DET curves are used to evaluate the performance of a model across
the five different LOO folds. Figure 8.35 depicts the DET curves for model eight,
==PAGE:99==
8.3 Analysis of top two best performing models
87
Table 8.18: Results obtained on the five LOO folds, by using a naive threshold of
0.5.
where it can be seen that the best performance is obtained on the transparent trans-
parency and opaque transparency folds. On the other hand, the DET curve corre-
sponding to the semi transparency fold differences itself from the other curves, with
the worst classification performance.
Figure 8.35: DET curves for model eight on all five LOO folds.
==PAGE:100==
88
8 Results & Discussion
The DET curves that correspond to the eleventh model being evaluated on the five
LOO folds are illustrated in figure 8.36. It can be observed that the model performs
best on the same two LOO folds (transparent transparency and opaque transparency)
as it was the case for model eight. On the contrary, the worst performance is depicted
by the DET curve that represents the performance obtained by using fold overlay PAI
type. This was also the case with model eight.
Figure 8.36: DET curves for model eleven on all five LOO folds.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to perform an empirical exploration of deep neural
network models based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks, in a search
for a configuration that would demonstrate high performance on the available data
set, which embodies fingerprint LSCI data. For this binary classification task between
bona fide and PA samples, supervised learning techniques were applied.
Each of
the samples had a sequence of 100 frames associated with it, therefore a sequence
classification was performed, where the sequences were classified as one of the two
possible classes.
The conducted literature survey revealed that Convolution Neural Networks (CNN)
have a high adoption rate within Presentation Attack Detection (PAD) methods ap-
plied on fingerprint data. This is due to their capability of processing perceptual
data (such as images) in a highly effective manner, where useful data representations
are learned from the spatial information.
Based on the literature review, ten re-
search questions have been defined in chapter 4 with the intention to explore specific
ideas that show potential towards achieving a high performance. Seven out of the
ten research questions have been answered, with the remaining three being discussed
in chapter 10. The main direction was to evaluate whether LSTM based networks
demonstrate a high capability of processing the temporal information present in the
fingerprint LSCI sequences.
Fourteen models have been implemented and evaluated, this representing the ex-
perimental scope of the thesis. The models have been evaluated in a robust style
by employing two evaluation protocols: K-fold validation and Leave-One-Out valida-
tion. 52 experiments have been carried out in total, where an experiment corresponds
to training and evaluating a model. Each of the fourteen models has been trained
and evaluated on the three folds defined as part of the K-fold validation protocol, this
amounting to 42 experiments. Furthermore, the top two best performing models have
been trained and evaluated on the five folds defined as part of the Leave-One-Out val-
idation protocol, in an effort to observe how the model behaves when presented at
the testing stage with PAI types that have not been seen during the training stage.
Ten experiments have been carried out as part of this evaluation protocol.
The results obtained reveal that little generalisation capability can be acquired
when naive approaches with modest model architectures are used. Moreover, it is
important to note that the usage of a convolutional base in combination with a
LSTM block is critical in order to achieve high performance in the three metrics
==PAGE:102==
90
9 Conclusion
evaluated: classification accuracy, APCER and BPCER. Five of the evaluated models
demonstrated a mean classification accuracy higher than 97%, which is considered a
strong performance.
All the five models employ complex CNN architectures that
showed impressive results on image classification at large scale. The complex CNN
architectures evaluated were VGG-16 [76], InceptionV3 [85] and Xception [13].
Furthermore, an analysis of the misclassified samples by the top two best per-
forming models shows that the PAI of type overlay presents the biggest challenge
in classification. Additionally, the Leave-One-Out validation revealed that the PAI
group with the semi transparency property, which includes overlays, represents the
most effective unknown attack, if PA samples belonging to this group are not seen by
a model during its training.
Finally, it is concluded that the aim of this thesis has been achieved.
It was
empirically proven that the usage of LSTM based networks can represent a high
performing Presentation Attack Detection method for fingerprint LSCI sequence data.
However, it was also found that including a convolutional base in the neural network
is critical in order to achieve a high performance.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 10
Further work
This chapter aims to mention possible areas of improvement that appeared promis-
ing during the empirical exploration that was carried out.
As mentioned in chapter 9, three out of the ten research questions defined in
chapter 4 have not been answered during this thesis work. They are discussed next
in order to provide a possible exploration direction for each.
• Does additional pre-processing of the input data lead to better results in APCER
and/or BPCER? The results obtained show that the models evaluated have
difficulties in correctly classifying PA samples of type overlay.
One way to
tackle this issue would be to further pre-process the samples that comprise the
data set, in an attempt to emphasise the differentiating characteristics of the
problematic PA samples. This could help the deep neural network models to
improve on the classification accuracy.
• Would a patch-based neural network architecture lead to a better classification
accuracy? Would this be a viable data augmentation technique adopted due to
possibly insufficient large enough training data? A patch-based approach was
carried out with the training and evaluation of the fourth model developed, as
part of the re-implementation of a LSTM based model from a published pa-
per [56]. The results show that there was a minor difference in performance
between a patch-based approach and a non-patch-based approach, with model
four. However, the patch-based approach was not tried with the rest of the
developed models. As deep neural network models generally achieve a better
generalisation capability when training on a larger data set, a patch-based ap-
proach for the rest of the models represents a viable option to explore.
• How can the results from possibly multiple implemented fingerprint PAD methods
(LSTM and LRCN) and evaluated on the same LSCI data be combined in
fusion schemes [83] for a more robust PAD system? Amongst the experiments
that were carried out, five models demonstrated a classification accuracy higher
than 97% as it can be observed in table 8.15. One way to increase the overall
classification accuracy would be by using fusion schemes such as majority voting
where all five models would contribute to the final result. This would represent
an increase in robustness, due to multiple PAD methods being used in the
decision making process.
==PAGE:104==
92
10 Further work
Another direction worth exploring would be further hyperparameter optimisation
for each of the developed models. Hyperparameters such as the learning rate, number
of epochs to train or optimisation algorithm could be tweaked in an attempt to
improve the results. A starting point would be to experiment with model eight and
its hyperparameters. As explained in sub-section 8.1.8 the model is underfitted and
shows further potential of improvement past 60 epochs of training.
Additionally, alternative CNN models could be examined as convolutional bases,
models that have also demonstrated high performance on image classification at large
scale, as the utilised VGG-16, InceptionV3 and Xception models. The ResNet [34]
architecture could be a viable option, due to achieving the highest performance in
the 2015 edition of Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge [72].
Finally, it may be worth to explore the usage of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [32] for the purpose of generating additional training data, therefore augment-
ing the available data set. GANs are a type of neural networks that can generate new
data from a data set by adding random noise. The result would be samples that have
similar characteristics to the original data samples. This technique could increase the
generalisation capability of a deep neural network due to simply training on a larger
data set.
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A
Conda environment
1 # List of Conda packages present in the environment used for the experiments
2 # The environment can be re-created by running:
3 # $ conda create --name pad --file requirements.txt
4 # platform: linux -64
5 _libgcc_mutex=0.1=main
6 absl-py=0.7.1=py36_0
7 asn1crypto=1.2.0=py36_0
8 astor=0.7.1=py_0
9 astroid=2.2.5=py36_0
10 batl-utils-modules=0.1=pypi_0
11 blas=1.0=mkl
12 blosc=1.16.3=hd408876_0
13 bzip2=1.0.8=h7b6447c_0
14 c-ares=1.15.0=h516909a_1001
15 ca-certificates=2019.9.11=hecc5488_0
16 cairo=1.14.12=h8948797_3
17 certifi=2019.9.11=py36_0
18 cffi=1.13.1=py36h8022711_0
19 chardet=3.0.4=py36_1003
20 cloudpickle=1.2.2=py_0
21 cryptography=2.7=py36h72c5cf5_0
22 cycler=0.10.0=py36_0
23 cytoolz=0.10.0=py36h516909a_0
24 dask-core=2.5.2=py_0
25 dbus=1.13.6=h746ee38_0
26 decorator=4.4.0=py_0
27 expat=2.2.6=he6710b0_0
28 ffmpeg=4.0=hcdf2ecd_0
29 fontconfig=2.13.0=h9420a91_0
30 freeglut=3.0.0=hf484d3e_5
31 freetype=2.9.1=h8a8886c_1
32 fribidi=1.0.5=h516909a_1002
33 gast=0.2.2=py_0
34 glib=2.56.2=hd408876_0
35 graphite2=1.3.13=h23475e2_0
36 graphviz=2.40.1=h21bd128_2
37 grpcio=1.16.1=py36hf8bcb03_1
38 gst-plugins-base=1.14.0=hbbd80ab_1
39 gstreamer=1.14.0=hb453b48_1
40 h5py=2.8.0=py36h3010b51_1003
41 harfbuzz=1.8.8=hffaf4a1_0
42 hdafingerpad=0.1=pypi_0
43 hdf5=1.10.2=hba1933b_1
==PAGE:106==
94
A Conda environment
44 icu=58.2=h9c2bf20_1
45 idna=2.8=py36_1000
46 imageio=2.6.1=py36_0
47 intel-openmp=2019.4=243
48 isort=4.3.21=py36_0
49 jasper=2.0.14=h07fcdf6_1
50 joblib=0.13.2=py36_0
51 jpeg=9b=h024ee3a_2
52 keras=2.2.4=py36_1
53 keras-applications=1.0.7=py_1
54 keras-preprocessing=1.0.9=py_1
55 kiwisolver=1.1.0=py36he6710b0_0
56 lazy-object-proxy=1.4.1=py36h7b6447c_0
57 libedit=3.1.20181209=hc058e9b_0
58 libffi=3.2.1=hd88cf55_4
59 libgcc-ng=9.1.0=hdf63c60_0
60 libgfortran -ng=7.3.0=hdf63c60_0
61 libglu=9.0.0=hf484d3e_1
62 libgpuarray=0.7.6=h14c3975_1003
63 libopencv=3.4.2=hb342d67_1
64 libopus=1.3=h7b6447c_0
65 libpng=1.6.37=hbc83047_0
66 libprotobuf=3.9.0=h8b12597_0
67 libstdcxx-ng=9.1.0=hdf63c60_0
68 libtiff=4.0.10=h2733197_2
69 libuuid=1.0.3=h1bed415_2
70 libvpx=1.7.0=h439df22_0
71 libxcb=1.13=h1bed415_1
72 libxml2=2.9.9=hea5a465_1
73 lz4-c=1.8.1.2=h14c3975_0
74 lzo=2.10=h49e0be7_2
75 mako=1.0.10=py_0
76 markdown=3.1.1=py_0
77 markupsafe=1.1.1=py36h14c3975_0
78 matplotlib=3.1.0=py36h5429711_0
79 mccabe=0.6.1=py36_1
80 mkl=2019.4=243
81 mkl-service=2.1.0=py36h516909a_0
82 mkl_fft=1.0.12=py36ha843d7b_0
83 mkl_random=1.0.2=py36hd81dba3_0
84 mock=3.0.5=py36_0
85 natsort=6.0.0=py_0
86 ncurses=6.1=he6710b0_1
87 networkx=2.3=py_0
88 numexpr=2.6.9=py36h9e4a6bb_0
89 numpy=1.16.4=py36h7e9f1db_0
90 numpy-base=1.16.4=py36hde5b4d6_0
91 olefile=0.46=py_0
92 opencv=3.4.2=py36h6fd60c2_1
93 openssl=1.1.1d=h516909a_0
94 pandas=0.25.3=py36hb3f55d8_0
95 pango=1.42.4=h049681c_0
96 patsy=0.5.1=py_0
97 pcre=8.43=he6710b0_0
98 pillow=6.2.0=py36h34e0f95_0
==PAGE:107==
A Conda environment
95
99 pip=19.1.1=py36_0
100 pixman=0.38.0=h7b6447c_0
101 protobuf=3.9.0=py36he1b5a44_0
102 py-opencv=3.4.2=py36hb342d67_1
103 pycparser=2.19=py36_1
104 pydot=1.4.1=py36_1001
105 pygpu=0.7.6=py36h3010b51_1000
106 pylint=2.3.1=py36_0
107 pyopenssl=19.0.0=py36_0
108 pyparsing=2.4.0=py_0
109 pyqt=5.9.2=py36h05f1152_2
110 pysocks=1.7.1=py36_0
111 pytables=3.4.4=py36ha205bf6_0
112 python=3.6.8=h0371630_0
113 python-dateutil=2.8.0=py36_0
114 pytz=2019.1=py_0
115 pywavelets=1.0.3=py36hd352d35_1
116 pyyaml=5.1.1=py36h516909a_0
117 qt=5.9.7=h5867ecd_1
118 readline=7.0=h7b6447c_5
119 requests=2.22.0=py36_1
120 scikit-image=0.15.0=py36he6710b0_0
121 scikit-learn=0.21.3=py36hd81dba3_0
122 scipy=1.3.0=py36h7c811a0_0
123 seaborn=0.9.0=py_0
124 setuptools=41.0.1=py36_0
125 sip=4.19.8=py36hf484d3e_0
126 six=1.12.0=py36_0
127 slacker=0.12.0=py36_1000
128 snappy=1.1.7=hbae5bb6_3
129 sqlite=3.29.0=h7b6447c_0
130 statsmodels=0.10.1=py36hc1659b7_1
131 tensorboard=1.13.1=py36_0
132 tensorflow=1.13.1=py36_0
133 tensorflow -estimator=1.13.0=py_0
134 termcolor=1.1.0=py_2
135 theano=1.0.3=py36_0
136 tk=8.6.8=hbc83047_0
137 toolz=0.10.0=py_0
138 tornado=6.0.3=py36h7b6447c_0
139 tqdm=4.36.1=py_0
140 typed-ast=1.3.4=py36h7b6447c_0
141 urllib3=1.25.6=py36_0
142 werkzeug=0.15.5=py_0
143 wheel=0.33.4=py36_0
144 wrapt=1.11.2=py36h7b6447c_0
145 xz=5.2.4=h14c3975_4
146 yaml=0.1.7=h14c3975_1001
147 zlib=1.2.11=h7b6447c_3
148 zstd=1.3.7=h0b5b093_0
Listing A.1: Exported Conda environment.
==PAGE:108==
96
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B
Confusion matrices
Figure B.1: Confusion matrices for model 01, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:110==
98
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.2: Confusion matrices for model 02, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:111==
B Confusion matrices
99
Figure B.3: Confusion matrices for model 03, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:112==
100
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.4: Confusion matrices for model 04, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:113==
B Confusion matrices
101
Figure B.5: Confusion matrices for model 05, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:114==
102
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.6: Confusion matrices for model 06, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:115==
B Confusion matrices
103
Figure B.7: Confusion matrices for model 07, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:116==
104
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.8: Confusion matrices for model 08, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:117==
B Confusion matrices
105
Figure B.9: Confusion matrices for model 09, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:118==
106
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.10: Confusion matrices for model 10, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:119==
B Confusion matrices
107
Figure B.11: Confusion matrices for model 11, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:120==
108
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.12: Confusion matrices for model 12, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:121==
B Confusion matrices
109
Figure B.13: Confusion matrices for model 13, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:122==
110
B Confusion matrices
Figure B.14: Confusion matrices for model 14, fold 0 (left), fold 1 (right), fold 2
(bottom).
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX C
ROC curves
Figure C.1: ROC curve for the eighth model, across all three folds.
Figure C.2: ROC curve for the eleventh model, across all three folds.
==PAGE:124==
112
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
Y. Bengio, P. Simard, P. Frasconi, et al. “Learning long-term dependencies
with gradient descent is difficult”. In: IEEE transactions on neural networks 5.2
(1994), pages 157–166.
[2]
da/sec Biometrics and I.-S. R. Group. BATL: Biometric Authentication with a
Timeless Learner. 2017. url: https://dasec.h-da.de/projects/current-
projects/batl/ (visited on November 12, 2019).
[3]
C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer Science+
Business Media, 2006, page 235.
[4]
L. Bottou. “Large-Scale Machine Learning with Stochastic Gradient Descent”.
In: Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010. Springer, 2010, pages 177–186.
[5]
J. Brownlee. Understand the Impact of Learning Rate on Neural Network Per-
formance. 2019. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/understand-
the-dynamics-of-learning-rate-on-deep-learning-neural-networks/
(visited on November 20, 2019).
[6]
J. Brownlee. What is the Difference Between a Parameter and a Hyperpa-
rameter? 2019. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/difference-
between- a-parameter-and-a-hyperparameter/ (visited on November 20,
2019).
[7]
J. Brownlee. What is the Difference Between Test and Validation Datasets?
2017. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/difference-test-vali
dation-datasets/ (visited on November 19, 2019).
[8]
R. Caruana, S. Lawrence, and C. L. Giles. “Overfitting in Neural Nets: Back-
propagation, Conjugate Gradient, and Early Stopping”. In: NIPS. 2000.
[9]
A. Chatterjee, V. Bhatia, and S. Prakash. “Anti-spoof Touchless 3D Finger-
print Recognition System Using Single Shot Fringe Projection and Biospeckle
Analysis”. In: DOI: 10.1016/j.optlaseng.2017.03.007. 2017.
[10]
F. Chollet. Building Powerful Image Classification Models Using Very Little
Data. 2017. url: https://blog.keras.io/building-powerful-image-class
ification-models-using-very-little-data.html (visited on November 23,
2019).
==PAGE:126==
114
Bibliography
[11]
F. Chollet. Deep Learning with Python. 1st. Greenwich, CT, USA: Manning
Publications Co., 2017. isbn: 9781617294433.
[12]
F. Chollet et al. Keras. https://keras.io. 2015.
[13]
F. Chollet. “Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolutions”.
In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
(2016), pages 1800–1807.
[14]
J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. “Gated feedback recurrent
neural networks”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. 2015,
pages 2067–2075.
[15]
E. Commission. EU Passport Specification. 2018. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/e-library/documents/pol
icies/borders-and-visas/document-security/docs/comm_decision_c_
2018_7774_f1_annex_en.pdf (visited on November 12, 2019).
[16]
E. Commission. Feasibility Study of a Common Identity Repository (CIR). 2019.
url: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication- detail/- /publication/
f717e488 - 0c82 - 11e8 - 966a - 01aa75ed71a1 / language - en / format - PDF /
source-69739107 (visited on November 12, 2019).
[17]
E. Commission. Migration and Home Affairs. 2017. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/networks/european_migration_network/
glossary_search/entryexit-system-ees_en (visited on November 20, 2019).
[18]
I. Continuum Analytics. Conda - Package, Dependency and Environment Man-
agement. 2019. url: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/
index.html (visited on November 21, 2019).
[19]
N. Dalal and B. Triggs. “Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detec-
tion”. In: 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR’05). IEEE, 2005, pages 886–893.
[20]
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, et al. “Imagenet: A Large-Scale
Hierarchical Image Database”. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009, pages 248–255.
[21]
J. Donahue, L. A. Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach, S. Venugopalan, et
al. “Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks for Visual Recognition and
Description”. In: CVPR. 2015.
[22]
J. Duchi, E. Hazan, and Y. Singer. “Adaptive subgradient methods for online
learning and stochastic optimization”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research
12.Jul (2011), pages 2121–2159.
[23]
B. Efron. The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and other Resampling Plans. Volume 38.
Siam, 1982.
[24]
M. Espinoza, C. Champod, and P. Margot. “Vulnerabilities of Fingerprint
Reader to Fake Fingerprints Attacks.” In: Forensic science international 204
1-3 (2011), pages 41–9.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
115
[25]
R. Fluss, D. Faraggi, and B. Reiser. “Estimation of the Youden Index and
its Associated Cutoff Point”. In: Biometrical Journal: Journal of Mathematical
Methods in Biosciences 47.4 (2005), pages 458–472.
[26]
Y. Gal. “Uncertainty in Deep Learning”. PhD thesis. University of Cambridge,
2016.
[27]
Gemalto. Biometrics: Authentication and Identification (Definition, Trends, Use
Cases, Laws and Latest News) - 2019 Review. 2019. url: https://www.gemalto.
com/govt/inspired/biometrics (visited on November 12, 2019).
[28]
F. A. Gers and J. Schmidhuber. “Recurrent nets that time and count”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE-INNS-ENNS International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks. IJCNN 2000. Neural Computing: New Challenges and Perspectives
for the New Millennium. Volume 3. IEEE. 2000, pages 189–194.
[29]
L. Ghiani, D. Yambay, V. Mura, S. Tocco, G. L. Marcialis, et al. “LivDet
2013 Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition 2013”. In: 2013 International
Conference on Biometrics (ICB) (2013), pages 1–6.
[30]
M. Gomez-Barrero, J. Kolberg, and C. Busch. “Multi-Modal Fingerprint Pre-
sentation Attack Detection: Analysing the Surface and the Inside”. In: 2019
12th IAPR International Conference on Biometrics (ICB 2019). May 2019.
[31]
M. Gomez-Barrero, J. Kolberg, and C. Busch. “Towards Multi-Modal Finger
Presentation Attack Detection”. In: Proc. UBIO. 2018.
[32]
I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, et al. “Gen-
erative Adversarial Nets”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems.
2014, pages 2672–2680.
[33]
K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutnı́k, B. R. Steunebrink, and J. Schmidhuber.
“LSTM: A search space odyssey”. In: IEEE transactions on neural networks and
learning systems 28.10 (2016), pages 2222–2232.
[34]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. “Deep Residual Learning for Image
Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. 2016, pages 770–778.
[35]
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. “Long short-term memory”. In: Neural com-
putation 9.8 (1997), pages 1735–1780.
[36]
M. Hussein, L. Spinoulas, F. Xiong, and W. Abd-Almageed. “Fingerprint Pre-
sentation Attack Detection Using A Novel Multi-Spectral Capture Device and
Patch-Based Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: 2018 IEEE Int. Workshop on
Information Forensics and Security (WIFS). 2018.
[37]
I. A. R. P. A. (IARPA). Odin Research Program. 2016. url: https://www.
iarpa.gov/index.php/research- programs/odin/odin- baa (visited on
November 12, 2019).
[38]
U. I. A. of India. Aadhaar Enrolment Dashboard. 2019. url: https://uidai.
gov.in/aadhaar_dashboard/india.phpl (visited on November 12, 2019).
==PAGE:128==
116
Bibliography
[39]
U. I. A. of India. What is Aadhaar. 2019. url: https://uidai.gov.in/what-
is-aadhaar.html (visited on November 12, 2019).
[40]
G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. An Introduction to Statistical
Learning. Volume 112. Springer, 2013, page 145.
[41]
R. Józefowicz, W. Zaremba, and I. Sutskever. “An Empirical Exploration of
Recurrent Network Architectures”. In: ICML. 2015.
[42]
J. Kannala and E. Rahtu. “BSIF: Binarized Statistical Image Features”. In:
2012 21st Intl. Conf. on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). 2012, pages 1363–1366.
[43]
A. Karpathy. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Recurrent Neural Networks.
2015. url: http://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/
(visited on December 1, 2019).
[44]
P. Keilbach, J. Kolberg, M. Gomez-Barrero, C. Busch, and H. Langweg. “Fin-
gerprint Presentation Attack Detection Using Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging”.
In: 2018 International Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group
(BIOSIG). IEEE. 2018, pages 1–6.
[45]
R. Khandelwal. K fold and other Cross-validation Techniques. 2018. url: https:
//medium.com/datadriveninvestor/k-fold-and-other-cross-validation
-techniques-6c03a2563f1e (visited on November 19, 2019).
[46]
H. Kim, X. Cui, M.-G. Kim, and T. H. B. Nguyen. “Fingerprint Generation and
Presentation Attack Detection Using Deep Neural Networks”. In: 2019 IEEE
Conference on Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval (MIPR) (2019),
pages 375–378.
[47]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[48]
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. “ImageNet Classification with
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Commun. ACM 60 (2012), pages 84–
90.
[49]
M. Kuhn and K. Johnson. Applied Predictive Modeling. Volume 26. Springer,
2013, pages 64–65.
[50]
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. “Gradient-Based Learning
Applied to Document Recognition”. In: 1998.
[51]
E. Marasco, P. Wild, and B. Cukic. “Robust and Interoperable Fingerprint
Spoof Detection via Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: 2016 IEEE symposium
on technologies for homeland security (HST). IEEE. 2016, pages 1–6.
[52]
G. L. Marcialis, A. Lewicke, B. Tan, P. Coli, D. Grimberg, et al. “First Interna-
tional Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition - LivDet 2009”. In: ICIAP.
2009.
[53]
MarketsAndMarkets. Biometric System Market. 2019. url: https://www.m
arketsandmarkets.com/Market- Reports/next- generation- biometric-
technologies-market-697.html (visited on November 12, 2019).
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
117
[54]
A. Martin, G. Doddington, T. Kamm, M. Ordowski, and M. Przybocki. The
DET Curve in Assessment of Detection Task Performance. Technical report.
National Inst of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg MD, 1997.
[55]
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen,
et al. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems.
Software available from tensorflow.org. 2015. url: https://www.tensorflow.
org/.
[56]
H. Mirzaalian, M. Hussein, and W. Abd-Almageed. “On the Effectiveness of
Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging and Deep Neural Networks for Detecting Known
and Unknown Fingerprint Presentation Attacks”. In: ArXiv abs/1906.02595
(2019).
[57]
V. Mura, L. Ghiani, G. L. Marcialis, F. Roli, D. Yambay, et al. “LivDet 2015
Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition 2015”. In: 2015 IEEE 7th Inter-
national Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems (BTAS)
(2015), pages 1–6.
[58]
V. Mura, G. Orrù, R. Casula, A. Sibiriu, G. Loi, et al. “LivDet 2017 Fingerprint
Liveness Detection Competition 2017”. In: 2018 International Conference on
Biometrics (ICB). IEEE. 2018, pages 297–302.
[59]
Neurotechnology. DIGITALPERSONA U.ARE.U 5100 / 5160 MODULE AND
READER. 2019. url: https://www.neurotechnology.com/fingerprint-sc
anner-digitalpersona-u-are-u-5100-5160.html (visited on November 21,
2019).
[60]
Neurotechnology. GREEN BIT DACTYSCAN84C. 2019. url: https://www.
neurotechnology.com/fingerprint-scanner-green-bit-dactyscan-84c.
html (visited on November 21, 2019).
[61]
M. Nguyen. Illustrated Guide to LSTM’s and GRU’s: A step by step explanation.
2018. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/illustrated- guide- to-
lstms-and-gru-s-a-step-by-step-explanation-44e9eb85bf21 (visited on
December 1, 2019).
[62]
T. H. B. Nguyen, E. Park, X. Cui, V. H. Nguyen, and H. Kim. “fPADnet: Small
and Efficient Convolutional Neural Network for Presentation Attack Detection”.
In: Sensors. 2018.
[63]
C. Nwankpa, W. Ijomah, A. Gachagan, and S. Marshall. “Activation Functions:
Comparison of trends in Practice and Research for Deep Learning”. In: ArXiv
abs/1811.03378 (2018).
[64]
T. Ojala, M. Pietikäinen, and D. Harwood. “A Comparative Study of Tex-
ture Measures with Classification Based on Featured Distributions”. In: Pattern
Recognition 29.1 (1996), pages 51–59.
[65]
C. Olah. Understanding LSTM Networks. 2015. url: https://colah.github.
io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/ (visited on December 1, 2019).
==PAGE:130==
118
Bibliography
[66]
G. Orrù, R. Casula, P. Tuveri, C. Bazzoni, G. Dessalvi, et al. “LivDet in Action
- Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition 2019”. In: ArXiv abs/1905.00639
(2019).
[67]
E. Parliament. Interoperability Between EU Information Systems in the Field
of Borders and Visa. 2019. url: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/
document/TA-8-2019-0388_EN.html (visited on November 12, 2019).
[68]
R. Pascanu, T. Mikolov, and Y. Bengio. “On the difficulty of training recur-
rent neural networks”. In: International conference on machine learning. 2013,
pages 1310–1318.
[69]
Quartz. Homeland Security Will Soon Have Biometric Data on Nearly 260
Million People. 2019. url: https://qz.com/1744400/dhs-expected-to-hav
e-biometrics-on-260-million-people-by-2022/ (visited on November 12,
2019).
[70]
B. D. Ripley. Pattern Recognition via Neural Networks. 1st. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2008. isbn: 978-0521717700.
[71]
S. Ruder. “An Overview of Gradient Descent Optimization Algorithms”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04747 (2016).
[72]
O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, et al. “ImageNet Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge”. In: International Journal of Computer
Vision (IJCV) 115.3 (2015), pages 211–252. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-
y.
[73]
“Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation”. In: Encyclopedia of Machine Learning. Edited
by C. Sammut and G. I. Webb. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2010, pages 600–601.
isbn: 978-0-387-30164-8. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_469. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_469.
[74]
S. Sharma. Epoch vs Batch Size vs Iterations. 2017. url: https://towards
datascience.com/epoch-vs-iterations-vs-batch-size-4dfb9c7ce9c9
(visited on November 20, 2019).
[75]
Y. I. Shehu, A. Ruiz-Garcia, V. Palade, and A. James. “Sokoto Coventry Fin-
gerprint Dataset”. In: ArXiv abs/1807.10609 (2018).
[76]
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-
Scale Image Recognition. 2014. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[77]
X. I. Solutions. Xenics Bobcat 320 Series. 2019. url: https://www.xenics.
com/products/bobcat-320-series/ (visited on November 17, 2019).
[78]
N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov.
“Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting”. In: The
journal of machine learning research 15.1 (2014), pages 1929–1958.
[79]
I. O. for Standardization. ISO/IEC 2382-37:2017 - Information Technoology -
Vocabulary - Part 37: Biometrics. 2017. url: https://www.iso.org/standar
d/66693.html (visited on November 30, 2019).
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
119
[80]
I. O. for Standardization. ISO/IEC 24745:2011 Information Technology — Se-
curity Techniques — Biometric Information Protection. 2011. url: https://
www.iso.org/standard/52946.html (visited on November 29, 2019).
[81]
I. O. for Standardization. ISO/IEC 30107-1:2016 Information Technology —
Biometric Presentation Attack Detection — Part 1: Framework. 2016. url:
https:/ /www.iso . org/standard/53227.html (visited on November 26,
2019).
[82]
I. O. for Standardization. ISO/IEC 30107-3:2017 Information Technology —
Biometric Presentation Attack Detection — Part 3: Testing and Reporting. 2017.
url: https://www.iso.org/standard/67381.html (visited on November 21,
2019).
[83]
I. O. for Standardization. ISO/IEC TR 24722:2015 Information Technology –
Biometrics – Multimodal and other Multibiometric Fusion. 2015. url: https:
//www.iso.org/standard/64061.html (visited on November 27, 2019).
[84]
C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. E. Reed, et al. “Going Deeper with
Convolutions”. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) (2014), pages 1–9.
[85]
C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna. “Rethinking the
Inception Architecture for Computer Vision”. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2015), pages 2818–2826.
[86]
R. Tolosana, M. Gomez-Barrero, J. Kolberg, A. Morales, C. Busch, et al. “To-
wards Fingerprint Presentation Attack Detection Based on Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks and Short Wave Infrared Imaging”. In: 2018 International Con-
ference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG) (2018), pages 1–
5.
[87]
E. U. official website. EU in Figures. 2019. url: https://europa.eu/european-
union/about-eu/figures/living_en (visited on November 12, 2019).
[88]
K. Xu, J. Ba, R. Kiros, K. Cho, A. Courville, et al. “Show, attend and tell: Neu-
ral image caption generation with visual attention”. In: International conference
on machine learning. 2015, pages 2048–2057.
[89]
D. Yambay, L. Ghiani, P. Denti, G. L. Marcialis, F. Roli, et al. “LivDet 2011
— Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition 2011”. In: 2012 5th IAPR Inter-
national Conference on Biometrics (ICB) (2012), pages 208–215.
[90]
D. Yambay, L. Ghiani, G. L. Marcialis, F. Roli, and S. Schuckers. “Review
of Fingerprint Presentation Attack Detection Competitions”. In: Handbook of
Biometric Anti-Spoofing: Presentation Attack Detection. Edited by S. Marcel,
M. S. Nixon, J. Fierrez, and N. Evans. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2019, pages 109–131. isbn: 978-3-319-92627-8. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 -
92627-8_5. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92627-8_5.
[91]
K. Yao, T. Cohn, K. Vylomova, K. Duh, and C. Dyer. “Depth-gated LSTM”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03790 (2015).
==PAGE:132==
