==PAGE:1==
Imaging Technology Investigation
for Optical Guidance and Naviga-
tion
Author: Roberto Prestigiacomo - s132275
Supervisor: Mathias Benn
Kgs. Lyngby - December 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Space
National Space Institute
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, building 327+328 + 371 and
Ørsteds Plads, building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 9500
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A digital imaging system is the combination of electronics and optical elements aim-
ing at reproducing a scene in electronic digital form. Imaging systems can differ for their
electronic components and sensors (which can be considered part of the electronics).
There are two technologies for image sensors, namely CCD (Charge-Coupled Device)
and CMOS (Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor). CCD works thanks to the
charge transfer principle and has a single output node whereas CMOS sensors have an
x-y addressing mechanism for reading pixel signals. Other parts of the system such as
also have an influence on camera performance.
An imaging system can be characterized by a procedure known as photon transfer
method, applicable to both CCD- and CMOS-based cameras as long as they are linear.
This is generally the first step in an investigation.
Camera systems are used in artificial vision to assist in a multitude of applications
such as robotics, automotive, and in space applications. In optical navigation it is very
important for a camera system to be able to detect a target and to correctly follow its
motion over a sequence of images. In space, optical navigation serves in different forms:
star tracking, autonomous navigation without GPS, pose estimation for non cooperative
spacecrafts.
Today CCD is still the dominant technology in space applications but CMOS is
attractive for several reasons. In this project two cameras have been tested, the µASC,
a CCD-based star tracker camera developed at DTU and the Canon EOS 7D, a CMOS-
based commercial DSLR.
Characterization showed that µASC is linear whereas 7D is not. therefore the char-
acterization for the latter can only be considered an estimate of the order of values for
the camera. Under this assumption the µASC resulted to be much more sensitive with
a absolute sensitive threshold of roughly 15 photons and a quantum efficiency of about
62% against 35 photons and half the quantum efficiency of the 7D. 7D on the other
hand should have higher dynamic range. The temperature behaviour is complicated to
interpret but it made evident the non-linear in-camera processing happening in the 7D.
The two cameras have been tested by reproducing linear motions of a laser dot
pattern in vertical, horizontal, and diagonal directions relative to the camera. Results
indicate that both camera perform with deviation below 0.6 mm with 7D being only
slightly better at the horizontal and vertical motion reproduction but not at the diag-
onal one even though results show inconsistency and are likely to be more related to
experimental conditions.
i
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
Abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement and Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Imaging Technology
3
2.1
Image Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Sensor Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Colour Filter Arrays and Microlenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Noise and Non-uniformity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Sensor Related Image Defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
CCD vs CMOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.8
Lenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Characterization
33
3.1
Camera Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Photon Transfer Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Experiments
43
4.1
Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Linear Motion Reproduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Results
62
5.1
Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
Dark Current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
Linear Motion Reproduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Conclusions
91
6.1
General performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.2
Motion reproduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iii
6.3
Limitations and Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Bibliography
94
A Notes about Cameras
97
A.1 File Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.2 Stops of light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.3 7D CFA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.4 Intervalometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B Source Codes
102
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
B.3 Micro-ASC - Dark Current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
B.4 Canon EOS 7D - Dark Current
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
ADC
Analog-to-Digital Converter
APS
Active Pixel Sensor
APS-C
Advanced Photo System type-C
BP
Band-Pass
BSI
Back-Side Illuminated
CCD
Charge-Coupled Device
CDS
Correlated Double Sampling
CFA
Colour Filter Array
CHU
Camera Head Unit
CMOS
Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor
DCDS
Digital Correlated Double Sampling
DOE
Diffractive Optical Element
DPU
Data-Processing Unit
DR
Dynamic Range
DSLR
Digital Single Lens Reflex
DSNU
Dark Signal Non-Uniformity
DTU
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
EMVA
European Machine Vision Association
FD
Floating Diffusion
FFT-CCD
Full Frame Transfer CCD
FPN
Fixed Pattern Noise
FSI
Front-Side Illuminated
FT-CCD
Frame Transfer CCD
FWC
Full Well Capacity
HCCD
Horizontal CCD
IDE
Integrated Development Environment.
IT-CCD
Interline Transfer CCD
JPL
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
v
LTS
Linear Translation Stage
MOS-C
Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Capacitor
ND
Neutral Density
NIR
Near Infra-Red
PPD
Pinned Photo-Diode
PRNU
Photo Response Non-Uniformity
PT
Photon Transfer
PTC
Photon Transfer Curve
QE
Quantum Efficiency
RG
Reset Gate
ROI
Region Of Interest
S&H
Sample and Hold
SF
Source Follower
SNR
Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
SOC
System-On-a-Chip
UV
Ultraviolet
VCCD
Vertical CCD
VOD
Vertical Overflow Drain
µASC
Micro-Advanced Stellar Compass
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Vision is probably the most important sense for humans and the main mechanism by
which we interact with the surrounding reality. For this reason, there has always been
the interest in reproducing vision to create a memory of a moment (photography), to
communicate (photography, TV), and to transpose this sense into artificial systems in
industrial and scientific applications. Today vision-based systems are integrated in and
used by a wide variety of fields such as mobile devices, automotive, scientific research,
TV, astrophysics, medicine, and space technology.
For vision-based systems the wavelengths of interest fall into the visible spectrum,
which is covered by silicon.
Digital cameras are a combination of digital and analog electronics responsible for
capturing and storing an image in an electronic form. There are two main technologies
for the sensors: Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor
(CMOS) and Charged-Coupled Device (CCD). Each of them has its own advantages and
disadvantages over the other but today, in most applications, the trend is in favour of
the CMOS technology, due to its main advantages, namely, small size, low cost, a more
standardized fabrication process, and low power consumption.
In space programs there is an extensive use of imaging systems with different per-
formance requirements. Low to medium accuracy is enough for monitoring and visual
telemetry (an example is the IRIS-2 sensor [1]); medium to high accuracy is required
for robotic maneuvering, docking (e.g.
automatic rendezvous between the European
Automatic Transfer Vehicle and the International Space Station), spacecraft navigation
(e.g. attitude and orbit control, star trackers, sun sensors, relative position mainte-
nance between satellites), landers, and rover imaging [2]. Another application regards
Earth and planetary observation, and space science (e.g. Hubble, Envisat, XMM) [2].
In spite of the almost complete dominance of CMOS technology, in space CCD sensors
are still mostly used. The main reason for that is that it is a mature technology that
has been employed in space programs for a very long time. Nevertheless, it is foreseen
that CMOS sensors will replace CCDs in the future because of their advantages and an
inherent superior radiation hardness - which is an important requirement in space - but
the transition will be much slower compared to other fields mainly due to the peculiar
industrial organization in the space business [2]. Some examples where CCDs have been
replaced by CMOSs are STAR250 and STAR100, the first radiation resistant sensors
commercially available and space-qualified; High Accuracy Star (HAS) tracker; Digital
Sun Sensor on a Chip (DSSoC), also used for navigation by observing the relative posi-
tion with respect to the Sun; Sun Watcher using Active Pixel System (SWAP), as part
of PROBA2, concerned with solar events observation and space weather [2].
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Problem Statement and Methods
2
In the light of what has been said, it is of practical interest to investigate the differ-
ence in performances of camera systems employing CCD and CMOS sensors. This entails
the characterization of the technology through measurement of specific parameters de-
scribing the sensors and relating the impact of these measurements to the performance
in a practical application. Assessing the performance is essential for designers to find
areas of improvements and for users to make the most appropriate choice. For example,
from the point of view of the research this knowledge can justify the engagement in
a specific area of study. Characterization of image sensors and cameras is a problem
of interest that resulted in the definition of the EMVA 1288 standard released by the
European Machine Vision Association [3] - largely based on the theory in [CCD, 4]
and used in many companies (e.g. Adimec, Caeleste) to produce datasheets for their
products.
In optical navigation it is of great importance to be able to recognize patterns like
points and lines and reproduce the motion of such patterns in the image space to relate
to motion in the real space.
Literature concerning image technology is vast. In [2] both CCD and CMOS tech-
nologies are described (with a focus on CMOS) and several CMOS applications are
presented. Another book describing both technologies and characterization methodolo-
gies is [5].
Many other articles are available that describe CMOS sensors, noticeably the work of
Eric R. Fossum, who followed CMOS sensors development since their early days at Jet
Propulsion Laboratories (JPL). His publications span over a period of approximately 30
years and give a unique insight of how imaging technology evolved. As for CCD, today
it is more and more of a niche technology and literature is not as vast. An important
contribution is given by James R. Janesick, who published two books entirely dedicated
to CCD sensors and their characterization [6, 4].
1.1
Problem Statement and Methods
The problem tackled in this thesis is an investigation consisting of literature research
and replication of methods and it can be seen as consisting of three main parts.
First, relevant parameters of sensors as well as measurement procedures are identified
through literature work.
Secondly, measurements are performed to determine values of parameters of interest
by reproducing the methods specified in the literature on available camera systems.
Lastly, the imaging systems analyzed in the previous phases are tested in simplified
scenarios of moving targets.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Imaging Technology
Figure 2.1
Digital image acquisition.
A digital imaging system is composed
by the sensor, a solid state photosensitive
chip, a combination of analog and digital
electronics responsible for reading the sig-
nals from the sensor, for coordinating the
system, and to perform signal processing
such as analog-to-digital conversion de-
mosaicing, compression, noise reduction,
and so on. Finally, optical elements are
present to project a scene onto the pho-
tosensitive sensor and can be part of the
camera or interchangeable.
2.1
Image Sensors
Figure 2.2
Optical absorption coefficients for var-
ious materials [7]. Silicon has a relatively high ab-
sorption in the visible range..
A sensor consists of an array of solid-
state elements, the pixels, where upon
light incidence, an electrical charge depen-
dent on the light intensity is produced.
This charge is converted to an electrical
signal that can be read, digitized, and
recorded through the circuitry of the cam-
era. The electrical information from each
pixel is then used to reproduce the image
of a scene like in a mosaic (Figure 2.1).
Depending on the material chosen, a
sensor can detect from X-rays to infrared.
For visible imaging the range of interest
is: (400 – 700) nm. In this range silicon is
the most widely employed material having
a feasible penetration depth (Figure 2.2)
and being relatively easy to manufacture
and work with.
The spectral response of visible image sensors also extends to UV and NIR as can
3
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Image Sensors
4
be seen in many datasheets. For this reason camera systems generally include filters in
front of the sensor.
When light hits a silicon surface, the energy transported by photons is transferred
to the crystal through different processes. In the spectral range of interest the dominant
process is the photoelectric absorption [2]. In the visible spectrum photons can have
energy, Eph, from 1.75 eV (deep red) to 3.1 eV (violet) and in this range an indirect
transition of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band in silicon is possible
making it a good option for visible photo-sensing.
After an electron-hole pair is formed it must be separated to prevent an almost
immediate recombination. This is done through an electric field - built-in or externally
induced - that sweeps the newly formed free charge carriers in opposite directions. There
are different ways to do that such as MOS-C structures (Figure 2.3), and photodiodes
(reverse-biased p-n junctions, Figure 2.4). Pairs are photo-generated in the space charge
regions of reversed-biased junctions or of MOS-Cs, where the electric field is more intense.
Figure 2.3
Section of a MOS-C in inversion condition for a p-type semiconductor [7].
Figure 2.4
Pinned Photodiode (PPD) (left) and a normal photodiode (right) [7]. In the PPD the
depletion region can be extended in the intrinsic silicon part to optimize its capacity, noise immunity,
and quantum efficiency.
Today, the most used solution is the pinned photodiode (PPD), a peculiar structure
designed to tailor and increase the depth of the depletion zone in silicon. It provides
lower noise and better quantum efficiency – ratio between the charge generated at a
pixel and the incident photons [8]. It also reduces the strong absorption of blue light
typical in old MOS-C structures. The vast majority of digital image sensor use electrons
as signal charge carriers whereas holes are forced to ground terminals.
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Sensor Technologies
5
2.2
Sensor Technologies
There are two main technologies of solid state image sensors: Charge-Coupled Device
(CCD) and Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS).
2.2.1
CCD
Figure 2.5
CCD.
Background.
CCD technology was
introduced in 1969 as an analog mem-
ory device at Bell Laboratories and its
use in imaging was explored in 1970
[9].
At the time of its commercial in-
troduction, it had superior performance
compared to other imaging technology of
that time determining its universal adop-
tion.
Since then CCD has been in use
and has gone through many years of
improvements leading to very high lev-
els of performance and maturity.
To-
day the use of CCD sensors is limited
to highend and scientific imaging systems
[2].
How it works. Photo-charge is produced at each pixel in the array during inte-
gration, or exposure, and then it is shifted across the chip by exploiting the principle
of charge transfer. Line by line each row is shifted across the entire array down to a
horizontal shift register and then, from there, it is shifted horizontally pixel by pixel to
a single output node.
Charge is stored and transferred with the use of electrodes called phases (Figure 2.6).
With a p-type substrate, by applying a positive voltage to a phase, holes are repelled
from the surface and a depletion region is formed below the electrode. From the poten-
tial point of view, a potential sink is formed below the phase to collect electrons. By
applying positive voltage pulses with proper timing to adjacent phases charge is trans-
ferred from a sink to the next one (Figure 2.6). Potential steps (Figure 2.6) depend on
e.g. thickness of oxide, area of the electrodes, they determine the direction of transfer,
and prevents charge from leaking back. Modern CCDs achieved a very efficient transfer
where nearly all charge is transferred [5]. Scientific CCDs have transfer efficiency higher
than 0.9999 [2]. By driving phases appropriately some operations can be performed in
the analog domain (e.g. binning) but flexibility is limited in this regard.
Sensor structure. A CCD chip consists of the pixels array and the electronics
needed to drive the phases. Readout circuitry is fabricated on a separate chip and the
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Sensor Technologies
6
Figure 2.6
Cross section of a 2-phase CCD register structure. In this image the charge transfer is to
the right [5]. More phases are possible and allow to transfer more charge at a slower pace.
overall chip is integrated as a hybrid to combine otherwise incompatible technologies.
A CCD sensor array is a grid of vertical registers (VCCD) (columns of the array)
separated by channel stops to prevent charge to spread horizontally. At the bottom of
the array there is a horizontal register (HCCD) to transfer to the output. Depending
on how an image is transferred there are different types of CCD sensors:
Figure 2.7
FFT-CCD (left), FT-CCD (center), IT-CCD (right).
• Full-Frame transfer (FFT-CCD). The entire array is first exposed and then trans-
ferred. They can be made larger with bigger pixel areas but they are also the
slowest and require a mechanical shutter. Normally used in scientific application.
• Frame transfer (FT-CCD). Half the array is transparent and used for acquisition,
the other half is opaque and used for storage. Data is transferred at high speed in
the storage area. The storage area can be read out while a new image is acquired.
No mechanical shutter is required but only half of the chip is sensitive and the two
areas must be driven separately.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Sensor Technologies
7
• Interline transfer (IT-CCD). Each column has a photosensitive part and an opaque
part. No mechanical shutter is needed. High frame rate is possible in a more
compact sensor. Standard in commercial cameras but not in scientific applications.
To speed up transfer, a CCD can be split into sections and charge from these smaller
areas is transferred simultaneously to separate HCCDs and output nodes.
In CCDs no additional operation is performed at pixel level, therefore a large fraction
of the pixel area is available for light collection.
2.2.2
CMOS
Figure 2.8
CMOS.
Background. CMOS technology was
born in 1963 at Fairchild and it has been
very successful in microelectronics due to
some of its inherent characteristics such
as low power consumption and high scal-
ability. Microelectronics industry is very
active with a lot of investments and re-
search dedicated to CMOS optimization.
At the beginning of the ’90s efforts started
at JPL to exploit the efficient, standard-
ized CMOS processing technology to pro-
duce single-chip sensors at low cost, with
high yield, including additional electronics
to perform various operations e.g. timing and control, A/D conversion, digital interfac-
ing. At its introduction CMOS manufacturing process was not optimized for imaging
applications and sensors suffered from poor performance.
Therefore for a long time
CMOS has been limited to less demanding systems until when - in the early 2000s –
some manufacturers started to specialize their processes to enhance imaging performance
by incorporating some technologies established in CCDs (e.g. PPD, microlenses). Today,
CMOS sensors are very powerful and high-quality and they have become the dominant
technology in most imaging applications due to their low cost, low power consumption,
versatility, and manufacturing efficiency. As a side note, the interest in having CMOS
sensors was born from the space industry which is ironically one of the very few market
segments with the lowest demand. The interest remains though, especially considering
the substantial advancements in performances that CMOS have seen.
How it works.
In a CMOS sensor each pixel detects light similarly to a CCD
but photo-generated charge is accessed through x-y addressing - selection of rows and
columns – therefore no charge transfer is performed across the chip. The entire sensor
area or a region of interest (ROI) can be easily read out by raster scanning. Also skip
readout (reading only one every two, three, or more rows) is possible to increase the
frame rate at the cost of resolution. Generally the rows are selected and buffered one by
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Electronics
8
one and the column addressing circuit actually selects the cells of the buffer that stores
a row. Signal amplification and, possibly, digitization is done at a pixel level with the
inclusion of the necessary electronics within pixels or dedicated to a group of pixels (see
below).
Sensor structure. CMOS sensors are built as System-on-a-Chip (SOC) containing
in a single chip the pixel array, addressing electronics, analog front-end, ADCs, timing
and control, reference generators, and signal processing units.
The sensor can be organized to perform either serial or parallel processing. In the
first case lines are buffered one by one in the analog domain and only one amplifier
and one ADC are used for the entire line (Figure 2.9(a)). In parallel processing, for
each column there is an amplifier and an ADC and rows are buffered in digital form
(Figure 2.9(b)).
Since pixels are addressed and read through bus lines, as the sizes of the sensor array
increase parasitic capacitances become larger and introduce signal degradation.
Figure 2.9
Serial (a) and parallel (b) processing [5].
2.3
Electronics
The electronics in an imaging systems is present within pixels, as part of the sensor
chip, and as a separate unit in the system chain. At pixel level, it performs the readout
of the charge stored by each pixel.
At sensor level, it controls the functions of the
sensor, e.g timing control, readout control and it is normally defined at high level (e.g.
VHDL and programmable logic circuits). Finally, additional electronics can be present
to perform other operations such as correlated double sampling (CDS) to reduce the
noise. A thorough description of the latter type of electronics is very hard to do as
==PAGE:16==
2.3 Electronics
9
the variety is too wide and application dependent. Sensor control electronic is normally
defined at high level. Readout electronics is described below.
2.3.1
Pixels and Readout Electronics
Figure 2.10
IT-CCD pixel cross section [5].
Pixels store information as charge, this
information is then converted into a volt-
age by the readout electronics.
Sen-
sors are charge-integrating which means
that charge in each pixel must be ini-
tialized before each integration can be-
gin.
2.3.1.1
CCD
The idea of CCD pixels has already
been mentioned. In Figure 2.10 the section of a IT-CCD pixel is shown.
A potential minimum below the transfer gate acts as a barrier, created by a negative
voltage.
By switching this voltage the barrier lowered, allowing the charge transfer
Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11
Charge transfer from PPD to the pixel storage area [5].
As mentioned before, in a CCD charge is transferred across the sensor to a single
output node, at one end of the HCCD. At this node the charge-voltage conversion is
executed. This is done through the output gate electrode, and a floating diffusion (FD),
a n+ zone that creates a potential sink where charge can be transferred by the output
gate. In this region the electrostatic potential sink becomes proportional to the charge
transferred into it (V = Neq/CFD, with Ne being the number of electrons, q the electronic
charge and CFD the capacitance of the node). The voltage of this node can be sensed
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Electronics
10
through one or more MOSFET source follower (SF) amplification stages (Figure 2.12)
through capacitive coupling.
Figure 2.12
Readout of a 2-phase CCD with two source follower stages [5].
The reset gate (RG) contact is used to control the action. When the reset NMOS is
on, the output voltage is constant at approximately the reset voltage and charge in the
FD is removed through a reset drain; when the RG is off, the voltage from the FD can
be sensed.
2.3.1.2
CMOS
CMOS pixels today are almost exclusively “active” (Figure 2.13) and CMOS sensors
are often referred to as Active Pixel Sensors (APS).
Figure 2.13
Active and Passive pixels. Active pixels include amplifiers to improve noise immunity.
Active pixels have a more complicated structure to provide amplification at the
expense of fill factor – the ratio between the photo-sensitive area and the total pixel area
– and response uniformity. Amplifying within a pixel makes a signal less susceptible to
noise introduced in the bus that would be amplified by an amplifier at the bottom of
the bus (Figure 2.13).
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Electronics
11
Pixels in an APS can contain a different number of transistors depending on the type
of photodetector used and on the readout method. Pixels employing a PPD generally
use four transistors:
1. Transfer gate switch.
2. Reset switch.
3. Source follower amplifier.
4. Select switch.
These pixels are then called 4T Pixels. In Figure 2.14 a p-susbstrate 4T pixel is
shown. The readout of a single pixel is similar to the output node of a CCD with the
obvious exception that the readout circuit is present on every pixel (without shared
readout (see below)) and an additional transistor (MSEL in Figure 2.14) connects the
output to the column bus.
Figure 2.14
4T pixel structure on p-substrate.
Transistors are indicated with ’M’ and are: the
transfer gate switch, the reset switch, the source follower amplifier, and the select switch (the first two
are not drawn here). N-substrate is also possible and gives better isolation between pixels but it is more
complicated to integrate with the CMOS process and not commonly used [5].
It is desirable to reduce the number of transistors per pixel to shrink the sensor and
increase the fill factor. Since the SF amplifier is activated only during readout, it is
possible to connect the FD regions of multiple pixels to a single amplifier Figure 2.15.
There are different variations and depending on the extent to which transistors are
shared, the average number of transistors per pixel is reduced: 2.5T (two pixels), 1.75T
(four pixels), or 1.5T (six pixels) [8].
Shrinking pixels is a matter of interest, it makes the sensor smaller and easier to
integrate in other systems and for a fixed sensor size allows higher pixel density, in-
creasing resolution and giving the possibility to crop images with smaller loss or details.
On the other hand, performance are degraded in terms of noise, dynamic range, low
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Colour Filter Arrays and Microlenses
12
Figure 2.15
4 pixels with shared readout (1.75T) [2].
light sensitivity is worse, and pixel size can also go below the optical resolution of lenses
causing cross-talk.
4T pixel sensors are commonly read out in rolling shutter mode. In this mode for
each row the following sequence is repeated: reset, integration, transfer, and readout
(Figure 2.16). It is possible to perform a global shutter mode, in which the entire sensor
array is reset at the same time followed by a simultaneous integration of all pixels and a
row-by-row readout. This mode require more transistors per pixel (5T). In these sensors
CDS is not possible unless the overall structure is modified with additional pixels (6T,
7T) [10].
Figure 2.16
Timing of rows exposure in rolling shutter CMOS.
2.4
Colour Filter Arrays and Microlenses
2.4.1
Microlenses
With advancements in the technology, additional electronics has been added to the
pixel structure - especially for CMOS - and so additional layers of materials are stacked
in manufacturing. As a negative effect, this reduced the light sensitive area of the pixel.
Also, light has to travel through a thicker stack to reach the photo-sensitive part of the
device and some photons can be absorbed in the way. Both effects lead to a loss of
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Colour Filter Arrays and Microlenses
13
quantum efficiency. To increase the fill factor modern sensors employ microlenses on
top of the sensors to concentrate light onto the sensitive regions. Microlenses effectively
improve the fill factor by a factor of 2 or 3 [11] but also decrease the sensitivity to light
incident at wide angles (Figure 2.17). This problem can be addressed with an additional
layer of microlenses [5].
Figure 2.17
Angular dependence of microlenses [5].
To counter the absorption problem due to the thickness of the sensor, this can be
illuminated from the back (backside illumination, BSI). This results in higher signal-to-
noise ratio and wider dynamic range but requires the substrate to be thinned to make
the photosensitive region closer to the back surface and so additional fabrication steps
are required. Moreover, the response to red light is worse in thinner sensors (due to the
deeper penetration of red light). It is possible to make BSI sensors thicker by increasing
the resistivity of the chip. BSI sensors are more expensive but extensively used and
standard in commercial cameras.
Figure 2.18
Front-Side and Back-Side illumination sensors [12].
2.4.2
Colour Filter Arrays
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Colour Filter Arrays and Microlenses
14
Figure 2.19
Chroma noise.
Intrinsically,
every
camera
system
is
monochrome, i.e.
it can only produce gray-
scale images. In digital imaging systems color
filter arrays (CFAs), deposited on top of the
sensor, and demosaicing techniques are used
to create colored images (in signal processing).
The most used array is the Bayer pattern, but
other patterns exist [13].
Although they make colored images possi-
ble there are some disadvantages: each pixel
can absorb only one third of the incident light,
more nonuniformity in the pixel response is in-
troduced, quantum efficiency is reduced, inaccuracies in demosaicing algorithms intro-
duce fluctuation in colours known as chroma noise or chrominance in the final image.
Also, the Bayer CFA is more prone to colour aliasing, or colour moiré.
The Bayer pattern is a two by two pattern containing two green filters, one blue
filter, and one red filter. Green filters are more numerous to mimic the sensitivity of
the human eye. With the exception of special types of arrays, Bayer arrays have four
possible arrangements (Figure 2.20).
Figure 2.20
Bayer CFA phases.
An alternative to CFAs is adopted in the FoveonX3 sensor. In this case three different
pixel arrays are stacked to exploit the different absorption depth of light and register
the three channels, red, green, and blue, separately. This solution is only used in some
commercial cameras produced by Sigma.
==PAGE:22==
2.5 Noise and Non-uniformity
15
Figure 2.21
FoveonX3 and classic color sensor.
2.5
Noise and Non-uniformity
Like any electronic device, camera systems are plagued by noise caused both by the
manufacturing quality and from the circuitry in the camera. Evaluating the noise is im-
portant, it determines the noise floor of the system, it is determinant for characterization
methods which are based on the measurement of noise.
The first effect to discuss is that of dark current. Dark current represents electrons
thermally generated within pixels due to surface defects in Si/SiO2 interfaces, semi-
conductor imperfections, and thermal generation. It has a dependence on temperature,
material, and pixel size [4]
IDark = ADFMT 3/2e−Eg
2kT
(2.1)
Where A is the pixel area, DFM is the dark current figure of merit at 300 K (a value
that is usually reported by manufacturers), T is the temperature in kelvin, k is the
Boltzmann’s constant and Eg is the energy gap of the material. More on temperature
dependence of dark current can be found in [14, 15, 7]. The dark current determines
the dark signal which is a mean number of electrons detected above zero detected in
absence of light and is a linear function of Idark and texp that doubles every 6 – 8°C
increase of temperature [16].
Moving on, noise in imaging systems can be divided into spatial and temporal noise.
2.5.1
Spacial Noise
Strictly speaking, spatial noise is not noise but rather a non-uniformity in the pixels’
response due to a variety of causes (e.g. differences in threshold voltages in MOSFET
devices within pixels, differences in timing signals regulating pixels activity resulting in
different integration times for different pixels, presence of defects and impurity in pixel
areas during fabrication), and it appears both in darkness – Dark Signal Non-Uniformity,
DSNU – and under illumination – Photo-Response Non-Uniformity, PRNU.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Noise and Non-uniformity
16
PRNU is proportional to the illumination level and it can overcome the temporal
noise at high irradiation. As a side note, PRNU can be used as fingerprint of a digital
camera [17, 18].
DSNU is caused by differences in the dark current from pixel to pixel due to physical
differences in pixels resulting naturally from fabrication processes.
Although these effects are not noise, they have the same effect as noise, which is
undesired variations in pixel’s signals and unlike random noise, these variations remain
the same between images (i.e. they are synchronous) and thus in general they are known
as fixed pattern noise (FPN).
In general, FPN is temperature dependent [16]. It is modeled as an additive and a
multiplicative term with the additive term (a offset) being dominant and the multiplica-
tive part being significant only for small pixel areas [16]. CDS – primarily intended to
reduce reset noise – also removes a significant portion of FPN [16]. CDS is not viable
when high frame rate is required or in CMOS sensors though and other solutions are
more suitable [16].
Figure 2.22
FPN. Column FPN (left) and pixel FPN (right).
Other than CDS, techniques to reduce FPN (e.g. flat fielding correction [4]) are
performed in later image processing.
Figure 2.23
Effect of FPN removal [4].
2.5.2
Temporal Noise
Temporal noise describes all those noise sources that change with time and so in
general change between images (i.e. they are asynchronous). These sources follow a
statistical distribution that is stationary, i.e. it does not change from image to image,
==PAGE:24==
2.5 Noise and Non-uniformity
17
and can be reduced by simply averaging different images (provided that these images
are stationary, i.e. the scene does not change).
There are several components of temporal noise. They are briefly described below.
Johnson (white) noise. It comes from randomly, thermally excited car-
riers in conductors and resistive elements. It is mainly due to transistors in
readout nodes. It has a uniform spectral distribution and so its impact de-
pends directly on the bandwidth of the system. It is the dominant contribute
to temporal noise at normal frequencies [2].
Reset noise. It is related to the reset of photodiodes through MOSFET
transistors. Thermal variations of MOSFETs’ channel resistances lead to
differences in the voltage references for the reset from pixel to pixel. It is
also referred to as kTC noise because its standard deviation (in electrons) is
equal to [2]
σRST =
√
kTC
q
(2.2)
With C being the photodiode capacitance, T the temperature, k the Boltz-
mann’s constant, and q the electron charge. It is independent on the number
of photons in the pixels and dominates at low illumination. It is very difficult
to avoid and can be significant. It can be reduced by circuit operations like
CDS and digital CDS (DCDS).
Flicker Noise. It is an effect of conductivity fluctuations present at any
kind of junction between materials. A deeper knowledge about its nature
is limited. It has a spectral distribution proportional to approximately 1/f
and it is dominant at low frequency.
Random Telegraph Noise (RTN). Another form of noise whose knowl-
edge of is limited and affecting low frequency operations. It increases with
pixel shrinking [19].
Shot Noise. It is related to random generation of electrons from impinging
photons (photon shot noise) or to thermal generation of electrons at temper-
ature above absolute zero in the depletion regions that reach the conduction
band (dark shot noise). Photon shot noise power (the variance) follows a
Bose-Einstein distribution [4]
σ2
SHOT(µP) = µP
e
hc
λkT
e
hc
λkT −1
(2.3)
With h being the Planck’s constant, c the speed of light, λ the wavelength,
k the Boltzmann’s constant, T the temperature in kelvin, and µP the mean
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Noise and Non-uniformity
18
number of incident photons. In the visible spectrum and at 300 K, it reduces
to [4]
σ2
SHOT(µP) ≈µP
(2.4)
Which is a Poisson distribution. Photon shot noise is impossible to avoid
and the only way to reduce its effect is to increase the full well capacity of
the pixels, it dominates at medium to high illumination and represents the
main limitation to the dynamic range and to the signal-to-noise ratio.
Dark shot noise also follows a Poisson distribution [4]
σ2
SHOT,Dark(µP) = IDarktexp
(2.5)
With Idark being the average dark current and texp the exposure time.
Dark shot noise can be reduced by improving the fabrication quality and with
buried channels (thermal generation depends on the presence of generation-
recombination centres, especially present close to regions where Si has been
mechanically altered or etched and in regions rich in crystalline defects like
interfaces between Si and its oxide), by cooling the sensor or special sensor
modes (e.g. multi-pinned-phase mode in CCDs [6]).
As mentioned above, temporal noise can be reduced in principle by averaging multiple
stationary frames. This technique, known as multisampling, is generally done in the
digital domain but it is only effective provided that the FPN is removed first [4].
Figure 2.24
Effect of averaging of 100 images after FPN removal (Figure 2.23) [4].
2.5.3
Other Noise Sources
Another form of noise present in the final image is the quantization noise, caused
by ADCs. It has an approximately uniform, signal independent distribution with zero
mean and variance equal to 1/12DN 2 (DN means ’digital number’, a fictional dimension
to refer to the digital signal from pixels) [6]. The effect of quantization noise is generally
negligible for 8 bits or more [3] but can become more visible as the sensitivity of the
ADC increases (Figure 2.25), it is easily masked by other components of read noise and
shot noise though (Figure 2.26) [4].
==PAGE:26==
2.5 Noise and Non-uniformity
19
Figure 2.25
Quantization noise for different ADC sensitivities (represented by the parameter K
(Chapter 3)) when only the SF noise is present. [4].
Figure 2.26
Quantization noise for different ADC sensitivities when temporal noise is present [4].
Other effects include: electrons thermally or photo generated in neutral areas of the
chip in proximity - within a diffusion length - of space charge regions that mix with the
useful charge; quantum tunneling in highly doped junctions due to the narrow space-
charge regions [2], preamplifiers noise, luminescence, power supply noise, circuit cross-
talk, electromagnetic noise, and several others [6]. All these sources can be indicated in
a single term, the system noise.
All the noise sources described above, except the photon shot noise and the FPN,
together form the so called read noise, which is noise that does not depend on signal and
represents the noise floor of the camera system. For low illumination, digital cameras
are generally read noise limited, whereas at mid to high illumination they are shot noise
limited. At high illumination, FPN can dominate.
2.5.3.1
Noise in CCD-Based Cameras
FPN is mostly DSNU.
Reset noise is completely eliminated by CDS, which also reduces FPN and Flicker
noise leaving the sensor almost shot-noise limited. It is important to suppress this source
of noise because it precedes the SF amplifier.
Noise from the readout node remains the dominant component of temporal noise.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Noise and Non-uniformity
20
Figure 2.27
Photon transfer curve (Section 3.2). In this curve the different noise regimes are clearly
visible [4].
By sampling the same pixel signal multiple times and averaging, read noise can be
reduced as the square root of the number of samples but it also increases the read-out
time [20], provided that the FPN is removed first [3].
Dark shot noise becomes problematic at long exposure time and high temperature.
Dark current can be reduced by cooling down the sensor when integration lasts more
than a few seconds. In scientific CCDs exposure can be up to 15 minutes, requiring
temperatures of -70°C or lower.
CCDs used in astronomy can even require -110°C.
Another method to reduce the dark current is the inversion (or inverted) mode [21].
2.5.3.2
Noise in CMOS-Based Cameras
The FPN in CMOS sensors is more serious than in CCDs. Since each pixel has its own
readout node and several transistors (e.g. 4 transistors per pixel) there are several sources
of non-uniformity such as variations in amplifiers’ gain, threshold voltages in transistors,
FD capacitances (each pixel has a FD), in addition to differences in dark current and
in PPD sensitivities, as in CCDs. In parallel processing sensors noise appears along
columns as stripe noise due to non uniformity in column ADCs and column amplifiers
and it is more visible than random pixel noise [5].
Also, horizontal stripes noise is
present since rows are processed simultaneously. In the CMOS industry the push for
miniaturization is particularly strong leading to the use of the smallest possible transistor
geometries that come with more process imperfections [2], aggravating non-uniformity
between pixels.
As for the temporal noise, reset noise is not as easily eliminated as in CCDs as CDS
in the analog domain would actually increase the reset noise by √2 in common CMOS
sensor architectures (e.g. rolling shutter) [4]. For this reason in CMOS sensors DCDS is
employed instead. Considering the complex and small geometries found in CMOS sensors
as compared to CCDs, other sources of system noise are more problematic although
nowadays fabrication processes have been refined to the point that this comparison is
==PAGE:28==
2.6 Sensor Related Image Defects
21
no longer remarkable. Temporal noise sources can be also be directly injected in the bus
lines and contribute to the read noise [5].
2.6
Sensor Related Image Defects
Figure 2.28
Example of a image con-
taining cold pixels (black line) and hot
pixels (causing the thin white lines at
the center of the image) [image credit:
eso.org/public/images/badcol/]
There are other forms of disturbances that can
have an impact in the quality of the final images.
Some of these disturbances are typical for the spe-
cific sensor technology, other more general defects
are called cosmetics caused by lattice defects, dust
and heavy metal (e.g. Fe) ion deposition during
fabrication, mechanical damages, cosmic rays.
Cosmetics can be classified as follows:
White spots or Hot Pixels. Single
pixels generating a very high dark cur-
rent appearing as bright even in dark-
ness. Caused mainly by defects, ions,
and cosmic rays. They tend to become
more evident as temperature increases. The precise definition of how much
high the signal from a pixel must be to be considered a white pixel is rather
arbitrary and different manufacturers use different definitions, generally ex-
ceeding percentages of saturation values.
Black spots or Cold Pixels. Single pixels with very low response even at
high illumination appearing as black even in bright areas. Caused by dust
and particle deposition. Like hot pixels, definitions (generally expressed as
percentages below saturation) are arbitrary.
Cluster defects. Continuous groups of more than 2 point defects (in CCD-
based systems they almost always appear along vertical lines).
It is worth noticing that defective pixels have a different statistical behaviour than
healthy ones and when they are included in an averaging operation may lead to errors
[19]. Moreover, these pixels can be clustered into different classes, depending on how
much “hot” or “cold” they are, with different statistical behaviour [19]. Another de-
fect caused by the sensor is image lag, a residual image superimposed to another image
caused by incomplete reset of pixels.
2.6.1
CCD Related Defects
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Sensor Related Image Defects
22
Figure 2.29
smear (top) and blooming
(bottom) [5].
There are two types of defects that are typical
in CCD sensors: smear and blooming.
Smear. Charge generated in a VCCD due to
stray light of thermal generation which causes a
bright, vertical line (Figure 2.29). Reduce by op-
timizing the shielding areas during manufacturing
and with the vertical overflow drain (VOD) (Fig-
ure 2.30) [2, 5].
Blooming or Bleeding.
Under very bright
light, pixels that reach the full well capacity can
spill charge over adjacent pixels, normally verti-
cally but also around the bright light source in the
image, forming an extended bright area with a ver-
tical band over an image (Figure 2.29). VOD also
solves this problem [5].
Figure 2.30
Vertical overflow drain. It consists of fabricating the sensor in a p-type well on an n-type
substrate that is reverse-biased with respect to the p-well (usually grounded), creating a barrier that
prevent charge diffusion into the device [2, 5].
2.6.2
CMOS Related Defects
The rolling shutter mode mentioned in Section 2.3.1.2 causes distortion in fast mov-
ing objects with respect to the camera head.
This distortion can appear as a skew
(Figure 2.31), a shape distortion, or a break-up of an object into segments (Figure 2.32).
This problem is more severe in videos and can be solved by employing a global shutter
architecture.
Another negative effect of rolling shutter scan is the formation of bands at different
exposures (Figure 2.33).
==PAGE:30==
2.7 CCD vs CMOS
23
Figure 2.31
Rolling shutter effect due to a fast horizontal movement relative to the camera.
Figure 2.32
Rolling shutter distortions.
Figure 2.33
Differences in exposure caused by rolling shutter scan..
2.7
CCD vs CMOS
The comparison between CMOS and CCD technologies is a matter of interest since
the beginning of the ’90s. The interest in CMOS was dictated by portability, low power
consumption, and miniaturization but high dark current and read noise did not go in its
favour. Since then CMOS technology has advanced considerably and today the difference
in image quality between the two types of sensor is no longer remarkable while CMOS
sensor hold some other advantages as described below.
==PAGE:31==
2.7 CCD vs CMOS
24
Manufacturing
CCD
CMOS
• Very specialized fabrication process
without the same level of industrial
innovation and investments that
CMOS
• Hard to achieve cost-efficiency for
consumer applications but in other
areas CCD sensors may actually be
more economical [22], for example
in space programs and scientific ap-
plications.
Specifically, in space
programs industrial validation may
last years and production of parts
such as image sensors is often out-
sourced and CMOS industry can-
not guarantee the availability of a
certain state of technology whereas
CCD can [2].
That is why CCD
still dominates in most space appli-
cations.
• Based on highly standardized pro-
cesses and facilities that in principle
only require minor adaptation.
• High yield and easier mass produc-
tion allowing prices to be pushed
down.
Table 2.1
Noise
CCD
CMOS
• Significant better noise immunity
because of better substrate biasing
stability and less on-chip circuitry
which gives almost no FPN.
• Lower temporal noise since sam-
pling frequency is lower than in
CCD reducing the SF white noise
component [22].
• Worse FPN.
• Overall, noise performance is comparable and only slightly better
for CCD.
Table 2.2
==PAGE:32==
2.7 CCD vs CMOS
25
Performance
CCD
CMOS
• Slightly better at very low-light
(few tenths of lux); electron mul-
tiplying CCD has superior perfor-
mance in this condition.
• In CCDs it is rather complicated to
perform low resolution and/or ROIs
readout.
• Large sensors and small pixels are
also possible although not easy as
for CMOS.
• It
may
suffer
from
incomplete
charge transfer, it is not radiation
resistant.
• Inferior
response
to
wavelength
near UV because of overlying layers
of polysilicon.
• Electronic shuttering is easier to
perform in since no other function
is performed at pixel level).
• Limited sensitivity at very low-light
(few tenths of lux) [22].
• Noise reduction operations such as
CDS and binning are performed af-
ter readout, in signal processing. It
is more flexible but less effective.
• The
possibility
to
achieve
high
frame rate without strong compro-
mises in image quality.
• Generally more versatile.
• Intrinsically radiation resistant.
• Today, performances are comparable in general.
• Compared to the human eye both have limited dynamic range
(around 40 to 70 dB against roughly 140dB) [2].
Table 2.3
==PAGE:33==
2.7 CCD vs CMOS
26
Power consumption
CCD
CMOS
• In CCDs, the shifting operation and
other functions (e.g.
drain, reset,
transfer gate) require different volt-
ages with higher, non-standard val-
ues (for example, an ITCCD typi-
cally employs 15 V for resetting, 3
V to drive the HCCD, and –8 V to
drive VCCDs [5]).
• Need to be continuously supplied to
work.
• A single low voltage power supply
can be used with these sensors: 2.5
to 3.3 or 5 V.
• The x-y readout scheme of CMOS
only requires pixel activation dur-
ing readout so only circuitry in a se-
lected pixel consumes power at any
given time.
• Shrinkage of pixels lead to lower
power supply requirement.
• Shrinkage of pixels lead to lower
power supply requirement.
• No need for external analog front-
ends and high-speed analog inter-
faces with their own power supply,
which consume more power.
• Two to three orders less power than
CCDs [2].
The difference grows
with the size of the sensor and the
frame-rate grow [5].
• CMOS-based camera heads con-
sume 2 to 10 times less power than
a CCD-based one [5].
Table 2.4
==PAGE:34==
2.7 CCD vs CMOS
27
Design
CCD
CMOS
• Larger sensor require larger shift
registers with larger load capaci-
tance seen by clock drivers.
Also
require
larger
transfer
efficiency
and so larger pulse voltages which
means higher power consumption
[5].
• Sensor array is relatively simple.
• All signal processing is performed
outside of the pixel array, so re-
designing the overall system is sim-
pler.
• BSI-CCD
can
be
made
thicker
(above 20 microns [2]) and so have
better red response.
• A single low voltage power supply
can be used with these sensors: 2.5
to 3.3 or 5 V.
• It is easier to have larger sensor size
without dramatic effects on power
consumption.
• Chip complexity is higher and re-
designing involves the whole sensor,
including the pixel array.
• BSI-CMOS follows the consumer
market that requires much thinner
sensors (the lower voltage employed
makes it difficult to form deep de-
pletion regions).
Table 2.5
To conclude, CCD performance remains remarkable even today, but its higher cost
and its (around 100 times) higher power consumption strongly influenced its fall in the
market. Today CMOS sensors have a very high price-performance ratio and this makes
them attractive for machine vision. What really differentiates CMOS from CCD though
is the flexibility. CMOS employs a flexible x-y addressing scheme allowing a variety of
readout modes that are impossible or not easily achievable in CCDs, e.g. windowing,
skipping, digital zooming.
It is foreseen that the demand for CCD sensors will continue to decrease in the
future. This is because of the massive investment that CMOS benefits from and the
considerably higher number of facilities manufacturing CMOS. For example, since the
beginning of the 2000s Canon, which produces its own sensors, decided to focus only on
CMOS technology and outsource CCDs; Sony declared the end of their CCD production
in 2015.
Nonetheless, CCD is still important and the technology of choice in some applications
requiring larger pixels (e.g.
scientific and industrial imaging) as CMOS follows the
electronic industry trend to shrink devices. Also applications requiring large area sensors
(e.g. scientific) prefer the CCD technology since its simpler structure allows for higher
yield at large areas [2], regardless the limitations listed above. Also in UV and X-ray
applications BSI-CCD dominates.
==PAGE:35==
2.8 Lenses
28
2.8
Lenses
This section is very similar and for most based on a previous work from the author
[23].
Ideally, a point light source will form a point image on a focal plane, regardless of its
position in the plane. A deviation from this ideal situation is said to be an aberration. In
particular, some of these errors are termed as errors of focus (failure to produce a point
image of point objects in the same focal plane) and others are errors of magnification
(failure to produce the same image scale over the image area). Avoiding aberrations is
the primary challenge in the design of a lens and such errors strongly affect the quality
of an image.
In general, the effects of aberrations are more dramatic at the edges of an image.
Wide angle lenses, especially at higher apertures (smaller f-number), are most affected
as it will be stressed below.
It is assumed here, unless otherwise stated, that every optical element and the camera
focal plane share the same optical axis (perfect collimation).
There are different types of aberrations:
• Spherical.
• Comatic (or simply called Coma).
• Chromatic.
• Astigmatism.
In addition to aberrations, there are also distortions known as field curvature and
geometric distortions.
All these effects are briefly described below.
Spherical aberration. It is caused by rays of light entering at different distances
from the optical axis focused at different focal distances due to curved lens elements. It
is visually manifested as a uniform concentric spread of a point to a gradually blurred
roughly circular area Figure 2.34. The effect is uniform over the entire image frame.
Figure 2.34
Spherical aberration [24].
==PAGE:36==
2.8 Lenses
29
Figure 2.35
Comatic aberration [25].
Coma. A point is focused as a wedge-
shaped tail extended towards the radial di-
rection from the optical axis (Figure 2.35).
It can be external if the the tail extends
away from the optical axis and inter-
nal otherwise.
Coma is caused by non-
uniform magnification abaxial (not paral-
lel to the optical axis) light rays entering
the lens. The effect is more visible at the
edges of an image and higher apertures.
The
non-uniform
magnification
is
caused by the difference in the refractive
power at the sides of a lens due to differ-
ent incidence angles (Figure 2.36). If an
optical system is not perfectly collimated,
the effect can be present also at the optical axis.
Figure 2.36
Distortion of point light source due to coma.
Astigmatism. It is both a focus and a magnification error. It is a form of aberration
that is always present in abaxial light rays. When these rays enter the lens, they are
subjected to different refracting power, as it happens in the case of coma and this is the
magnification error component resulting in a distortion of a point image into a stretched,
thin ellipse. This effect occurs along two different directions relative to the optical axis:
sagittal and tangential. Moreover, there is a difference in the focal distances of light
entering the lens in the sagittal and in the tangential planes resulting in the focus error
component. Visually, the effect on an point-like source is shown in Figure 2.38.
==PAGE:37==
2.8 Lenses
30
Figure 2.37
Astigmatism.
Astigmatism is very complex in the sense that either component can be more dis-
torted than the other. The effect is always present for abaxial rays and is more evident
on the edges of the image and particularly at the corners. On the optical axis there is
no effect unless the optical system is not perfectly collimated. Astigmatism is the most
difficult error to correct and even the most expensive are affected by it.
Figure 2.38
Effect of astigmatism (the white triangle represents the direction towards the optical
axis) [24].
Often coma and astigmatism combine and cause more complex aberrations known
as sagittal coma (Figure 2.39).
==PAGE:38==
2.8 Lenses
31
Figure 2.39
Coma and astigmatism together [25].
Figure 2.40
Summary of aberrations seen so far [24].
Chromatic aberration. It is caused by light at different wavelength focused at
different focal distances causing colour aliasing in regions of an image with fine details.
It can be longitudinal when it affects rays of light parallel to the optical axis or lateral
for abaxial rays.
Figure 2.41
Longitudinal chromatic aberration (image credit: opto-e.com/basics/aberrations).
==PAGE:39==
2.8 Lenses
32
Figure 2.42
Lateral chromatic aberration (image credit: opto-e.com/basics/aberrations).
Finally and briefly, distortion is a projection of an image with a variable magnification
towards the edges: higher magnification results in straight lines at the edges to be curved
toward the center of the image (positive, or rectilinear, or pincushion distortion), lower
magnification on the contrary determines outward-curved surfaces (negative, or barrel
distortion). Also a combination of the two is possible (moustache distortion). The effect
in star tracker images is a change in the position of stars.
Figure 2.43
Distortions.
Field curvature consists of a focusing plane that is not flat. This causes changes in
focus across an image since camera sensors are flat instead. The effect can be present
either at the edge or at the central area of the image where the scene will be out of
focus.
A formal theoretical discussion of the various types of aberrations, models, and their
dependence on aperture and field of view is very complex and can be found in many
texts of which [26, 27, 28, 29] are some examples.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3
Characterization
An imaging system is characterized by several parameters determined by the circuitry
of the camera system and by the design of the pixels.
Here a description of these
parameters is presented briefly.
Responsivity. It represents the correspondence between the input of the
camera in mean number of electrons per pixel and the mean digital output
read from the pixels.
System gain constant. The system gain constant, K, is an important
parameter used to convert various measurements from units of digital number
to units of electrons.
Quantum efficiency (QE). QE, also denoted as η, is one of the most
important parameters for a camera system and measures the efficiency of
a sensor in detecting light. It is defined as the ratio between the average
number of electrons generated per pixel and the average number of incident
photons per pixel.
η = µe
µP
(3.1)
QE depends on the wavelength, on the material, and on the geometry of the
pixels (specifically of the pixel’s photodiode). Ideally, is should be equal to
one (or 100%) but in reality it is always less unity due to loss of photons
within the system. QE considered in characterization refers to the entire
pixel area and so takes into account the effects of fill factor, microlenses,
CFA and so forth. Due to the dependence from the wavelength, QE is used
to evaluate the spectral response of the sensor (this requires a precise control
over the wavelength though).
Full well capacity and saturation capacity. Full well, or full well capac-
ity (FWC), is the maximum amount of charge that can be stored in a pixel.
It depends on the pixel size and structure. In an assembled camera system,
the maximum reproducible signal does not actually correspond to the FWC
due to the presence of amplifiers, electronics, and ADC [2]. These limit the
maximum signal to a saturation level above which the actual signal from the
sensor is clipped. Therefore, often it is the saturation capacity, Qsat – the
33
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Camera Model
34
charge correspondent to the saturation level – that is stated and not the the
FWC.
Dark signal and dark noise. The dark signal is a non-zero signal read
in absence of light caused by the dark current Section 2.5 and therefore
it depends on temperature and on exposure time. For the entire array of
pixels, it is considered as the mean signal in darkness, µy,Dark. The standard
deviation, σy,Dark, is the dark noise. It is important to evaluate them as they
influence the measurements of all of the other parameters and need to be used
in data processing for corrections. Moreover, the dark signal determines the
minimum detectable signal, or the noise floor.
Read noise. Its meaning has already been defined in Section 2.5.
Signal-to-Noise Ratio, SNR. SNR has the classic meaning that it has in
any electronic system. For image sensors it is defined as the ratio of the mean
signal and the noise signal at a specific incident light. It will be showed later
that for an image sensor it depends on the QE and on the minimum dark
noise. High SNR is important for low-contrast scenes and it is an important
requirements in scientific applications.
Absolute Sensitivity Threshold. It represents the minimum number of
photons that the camera system is able to detect.
Dynamic Range (DR). It represents the ability of the sensor to distinguish
details with different levels of brightness.
The higher the DR, the more
brightness levels can be potentially resolved.
Therefore it represents the
range of light that can be reproduced by a camera.
Fixed Pattern Noise. FPN has already been described in Section 2.5.1.
The components of FPN, namely DSNU and PRNU, can be expressed in
different forms, graphically and numerically. In the second case, different
definitions exist and they only provide a qualitative indication of the effect
without any information about the affected areas of the sensor.
3.1
Camera Model
In Figure 3.1 the model of a camera system is illustrated.
In scientific applications and for characterization purposes the input is expressed
in units of photons. With a uniform illumination the input signal is expressed as the
mean number of photons per pixel and noise is expressed as the standard deviation of
the input. The output is expressed in relative units of DN. DN units do not hold any
physical meaning and anything represented in DN will need to be converted in units of
electrons.
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Photon Transfer Method
35
Figure 3.1
Model of a camera system. The vari-
ous sources of noise, non-uniformity, and nonlinear-
ity are also in the picture illustrating at which point
they appear.
At the input, noise is exclusively shot
noise – and we talk about shot noise lim-
ited systems (Section 2.5.3). At the out-
put this condition is almost never satis-
fied due to the presence of read noise –
accounting for every noise source that is
not dependent on the signal – and of the
FPN introduced by the system itself.
More rigorously, at the sensor there is
an additional parameter determining the
mean number of electrons generated per
interacting photon, namely the quantum
yield, but this is equal to 1 in the visible
spectrum (more precisely for wavelengths
longer than 4000Å [20]).
A couple of things should be noted
about Figure 3.1.
The FPN compo-
nent at the end of the voltage domain
is only present in CMOS sensors and
represents the non-uniformity caused by
different characteristics of column ampli-
fiers.
The processing electronics intro-
duces other noise components but those
are not indicated.
3.2
Photon
Transfer Method
The photon transfer (PT) method is
a powerful tool used in the develop-
ment, characterization, optimization, cal-
ibration, and specification of solid state
imaging systems [4]. It is a standard pro-
cedure used in research and by camera
manufacturers [30].
It is applicable to
both CCD and CMOS camera systems [4]
and it is formalized in the internationally
recognized standard EMVA 1288. It can
evaluate the parameters mentioned above, and it is normally the first test to verify the
overall health of a camera system.
The PT method can be applied if the system is shot noise limited and the sensor is
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Photon Transfer Method
36
linear or when the deviation from these conditions is small [3]. These conditions mean
that [31]:
• The sensor output should vary linearly with the input.
• The variance of K is small.
• Noise sources are uncorrelated.
These conditions are normally met by CCD camera systems but linearity and and
uncorrelated noise is often broken by CMOS sensors [31].
In [3] the method is extended to include the characterization of the FPN and of the
dark current. The PT method is widely described in literature and more details can be
found in [4, 6].
3.2.1
Photon Transfer Curve
Figure 3.2
Variance PTC [31]
The PT method simply consists of ex-
posing a camera or a sensor to a uni-
form light (a flat field) of known proper-
ties and measuring the mean digital out-
put and the standard deviation or the vari-
ance at the output over the entire sensor
area or a sub-region. From the measure-
ments of these quantities, several plots can
be drawn (known as PT curves family [4]).
The most common plots for character-
ization are noise-mean (Figure 2.27) plot
and variance-mean plot (Figure 3.2).
The second type of plots has been chosen in this work because it has some advantages
compared to the method based on standard deviation:
• Data processing is much simpler as it does not require to plot a family of curves.
• For high noise levels, finding K from standard deviation based curves is impossible
[4].
Additionally, the accuracy in determining K is the same for the two methods [4,
20].
Assuming that the FPN effect is removed from the measured data, that the incident
light has a wavelength greater than 4000Å, and that K has a negligible variance and the
input is shot noise limited (these two conditions are important because they are used in
the determination of the equation below) the relation between the mean signal and the
variance is [3, 20]
==PAGE:44==
3.3 Measurements
37
σ2
y = σ2
d
K2 + σ2
q + 1
K (µy −µy,dark)
(3.2)
Where σq is the quantization noise, and σd represents the net temporal noise, related
to sensor and electronics. The resulting noise power for a gray image, σ2
y term is due to
both read and shot noise.
The previous equation can be rewritten as
σ2
y −σ2
y,dark = 1
K (µy −µy,dark)
(3.3)
Where σy,dark contains both the read noise and the quantization noise.
When (3.3) is plotted on a linear scale, it is a straight line whose slope gives 1/K.
In a real case, the straight line is interrupted at the saturation and the curve starts to
decrease rapidly (Figure 3.2).
Ideally, K should be independent on the signal, but in reality non linearity due to
the SF and other amplifiers in the system chain – known as V/V non-linearity – can
create such a dependence. Another form of non linearity, which can be considerable in
CMOS sensors [4], known as V/e non-linearity is related to the non-linear capacitance
of the PPD and can also be present. A disadvantage of the variance PTC is that it is
not as easy to see and distinguish these two types of non-linearity whereas in a standard
deviation PTC they would be immediately noticeable and distinguishable. This feature
may be important since in case of non-linearity K will be incorrectly determined and so
the rest of the parameters that depend on it.
3.3
Measurements
For the measurements, the assumptions are those of an ideal camera reported in [3]:
• The amount of photons at each pixel depends on the product between the irradi-
ance in W/m2 and exposure time.
• The sensor is linear or exhibits little deviation from linearity.
• Only the quantum efficiency depends on the wavelength.
• Only the dark current is temperature dependent.
• Noise sources are uncorrelated and parameters describing the nose are time- and
space-invariant.
3.3.1
Light Source
For the measurements, a monochromatic light should be used to avoid effects of colour
temperature and quantum efficiency variations with wavelength [30]. For monochrome
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Measurements
38
cameras normally green light is used or, if possible, light with a wavelength correspondent
to the peak of QE. For cameras employing a CFA, each channel have to be characterized
separately. In the specific case of a Bayer pattern the channels are four (green channels
are treated separately).
Once the light source is selected, the intensity of this source must be varied to cover
the entire dynamic range of the camera system. This can be done by either changing
the exposure time in the camera with a constant light intensity, or by changing the light
intensity of the light source with fixed exposure time in the camera (there is a third
way using pulsed light but it will not be explored in this project). Although not very
practical, these two methods can be combined. Neutral density (ND) filters may be used
too.
Calibration of the light source should be carried out.
3.3.2
Data Acquisition
Before starting data acquisition the gain and offset of the ADC should be set. An
offset is set to prevent underflow (i.e. small signals coded as 0, with loss of information)
basing on the minimum expected signal to be handled. A gain is set to make small dif-
ference in signals visible. These values need to be chosen appropriately or they will cause
premature saturation of the digital output. If a camera system is already assembled,
users may not have control over these settings.
At each illumination intensity chosen, two images (at least) need to be acquired
in order to suppress the FPN in the processing (see below). If the exposure time in
the camera is changed, two images need to be captured in darkness as well. This is
necessary to compensate for the dark signal and dark noise during subsequent data
processing. Even if the exposure time is not changed, it is recommended to monitor
these quantities as they may change with temperature.
Acquisition should be carried out in a thermally controlled environment to prevent
excessive errors from dark current variations.
To study the dark current, cameras need to be operated in a thermal chamber and for
each selected temperature at least two images need to be acquired for the same reason
as above. The temperature range depends on the specifications of the camera systems.
In [3], minimum numbers of measuring points to produce are suggested (e.g. 80 for
the variance PTC, 100 to analyze the FPN), but such values are dependent on available
instrumentation, degree of control over settings such as exposure time, light source
output power, and so on. Measurements are normally performed on a sub-region of the
entire pixel array. It is advisable to use as many pixels as possible as the measurements
accuracy of K, which determines many of the parameters, is proportional to the square
root of the number of pixel under exam [4]
σK = K
√2
Npix
(3.4)
With Npix being the number of pixels. The error in K is
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Measurements
39
σK[%] = σK
K 100
(3.5)
and it is experimentally demonstrated that if Npix = 20,000, the error in K can be held
to 1% [4, 20].
3.3.3
Processing
3.3.3.1
Photo-response and PTC
For each couple of images, regardless the acquisition conditions, the mean pixel value
is determined as
µy =
1
2MN
N
∑
n=1
M
∑
m=1
(An,m + Bn,m)
(3.6)
Where A and B are two images, and N and M the image sizes.
To suppress the FPN and measure only the contribution of read and shot noise the
two images are subtracted pixel by pixel, back-to-back. This eliminates the FPN that
would represent an approximately synchronous offset in both images but it also increases
the noise by a factor of
√
2 since the variance of the difference is the sum of the variances
which should be approximately equal for two images taken in the same conditions [4].
Thus the variance to plot is
σ2
y =
1
2MN
N
∑
n=1
M
∑
m=1
(An,m −Bn,m)2
(3.7)
Note that if FPN is not removed, it dominates and cover the shot noise and the
measure of K will be underestimated [4].
To plot the photo-response curve also the mean number of photons per pixel is
calculated as [3]
µP = AEtexpλ
hc
α
(3.8)
Where A is the pixel area, E is the irradiance, texp is the exposure time, λ is the
wavelength, h is the Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light, and α is a factor repre-
senting attenuation from lenses, filters and so on. By expressing A in µm2, texp in ms, λ
in µm, and E in µW/cm2, which are convenient units in this context, (3.8) becomes [3]
µP = 50.34AEtexpλα
(3.9)
Finally, µy −µy,Dark is plotted versus µP.
To plot the variance PTC, µy −µy,Dark and σ2
y −σ2
y,Dark must be computed for each
measurement point.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Measurements
40
3.3.3.2
Dark Current
To plot the dark current, it is theoretically possible to work with either the dark
signal or with the variance values in darkness, but if a camera systems performs dark
current compensation, only the variance can be used [3]. Plotting one of these values as
a function of the exposure time should result in linear curves whose slopes are the dark
current [3, 4]. These plots are drawn at different temperatures and the dark current
values are then plotted as a function of the temperature.
3.3.4
Characterization
Now it follows a description of how to measure the parameters presented at the
beginning of this chapter. This is a summary of [3].
Responsivity. It is the slope of the photo-response curve.
System Gain constant. From (3.3), K it is read from the reciprocal of the
slope of the variance PTC in the linear region.
Quantum Efficiency. From the values of K and R, the quantum efficiency
is found by [3]
η = RK
(3.10)
Saturation Capacity. The saturation capacity is measured from the max-
imum of the variance PTC. The irradiation level for this point, µP,sat, is read
and from this value the saturation capacity is given by
Qsat = ηµP,sat
(3.11)
This is not equal to the full well capacity in general, the output of the ADC
is normally clipped before full well as already mentioned. If the curve is
smooth enough, one can simply read the maximum. Otherwise, the standard
EMVA1288 suggests to read this point as the first point on the curve, scanned
from right to left, whose the next two points are lower.
Minimum temporal noise. This value is extracted from the dark noise,
σy,Dark, at a minimum exposure time. This value includes the contribution of
the quantization noise as well. Under the assumption of uncorrelated noise
sources it is [4]
σ2
y,dark = σ2
d + σ2
q
(3.12)
From which, it is possible to remove the effect of the quantization noise
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Measurements
41
σd =
√
σ2
y,dark −σ2
q
(3.13)
By multiplying this value by K, it is possible to express it in units of electrons.
If σ2
y,Dark is less than 0.24, the quantization noise is not negligible and the
measurement is not reliable [3]. In this case, σy,dark is set to 0.49 and an
upper limit can be given for the read noise without quantization noise as [3]
σd < 0.4K
(3.14)
Signal to Noise Ratio. From the classic definition of SNR, it is
SNRmeasured = µy −µy,dark
σy
(3.15)
This is normally plotted in a log-log scale together with the theoretical SNR
curve
SNRtheoretical =
ηµp
√
σ2
d + σ2
qK2 + ηµp
(3.16)
Quantization noise is generally negligible so, from (3.16), the SNR only de-
pends on quantum efficiency and on dark signal noise. The relation (3.16)
in a log-log plot will vary from linear (at low irradiation) to square root (at
high irradiation). Also the ideal SNR (η = 1 and σd = 0 and negligible
quantization noise)
SNRideal = √µP
(3.17)
can be plotted in the same graph to show immediately the deviation from
an ideal system. SNR values can be expressed in dB
SNR[dB] = 20logSNR
(3.18)
or in bits
SNR[bits] = log2SNR
(3.19)
It is very important to remove the FPN to obtain the best possible SNR
[4]. Note that if multiple images are taken and averaged together, the SNR
increases as the square root of the number of frames averaged [4]. Of course
the measurement procedures become very cumbersome.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Measurements
42
Absolute Sensitivity Threshold. EMVA1288 defines it as the irradiation
level at which the SNR is equal to 1, resulting in
µp,min ≈1
η (σy,darkK + 0.5)
(3.20)
Dynamic range. It is expressed in dB as
DR = 20log
( µP,sat
µP,min
)
(3.21)
or in bits as
DR = log2
( µP,sat
µP,min
)
(3.22)
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments
In this chapter the experimental part of the project will be described. Measurement
setups, devices under test and other pieces of equipment will be listed and the specific
procedures adopted for data acquisition and processing will be presented.
4.1
Characterization
4.1.1
Cameras Under Test
Two cameras will be investigated in this project: the Micro Advanced Stellar Compass
(µASC) and the Canon EOS 7D (from now on referred to as 7D).
The µASC camera is a star tracker camera developed at DTU. It consists of a CCD-
based camera head unit (CHU) and a data-processing unit (DPU) Figure 4.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1
µASC. DPU (left) and CHU (right).
The sensor mounted is the ICX039DLA from Sony (Figure 4.2) which has the fol-
lowing characteristics
43
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Characterization
44
Number of effective pixels
752(H) x 582(V) (∼440K pixels)
Chip Size
7.95mm (H) x 6.45mm (V)
Pixel Size
8.6￿m (H) x 8.3￿m (V)
Material
Silicon
Architecture
IT-CCD
Carriers
Holes
Number of bits
8
Operating temperature
-10 to +60°C
Other
• Black-and-white
• High DR
• High SNR
• Low dark current
• Excellent antiblooming
• Electronic shutter
Table 4.1
µASC features.
Figure 4.2
Sony ICX039DLA.
For this experiment the CHU has been used with a F1.4 1/2.7 inch 5-50mm CS mount
3MP varifocal manual iris CCTV lens with IR Correction (ACTCSM0550IR3MP).
The ￿ASC is controlled through a software called EGSE, developed at DTU.
The exposure time can be selected from a minimum of 1 µs with the resolution of 1
µs.
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Characterization
45
EGSE allows for the download of uncompressed images (.unc) Appendix A.1, so the
original, digital output from the sensor is available.
Canon EOS 7D is a commercial, semi-professional DSLR whose features are listed
below:
Number of effective pixels
5196 x 3464 (∼18 MP)
Actual image resolution
5184 x 3456
Sensor size
22.3mm x 14.9mm
Pixel Size
18.4 µm2
Material
Silicon
Architecture
APS
Carriers
Electrons
Number of bits
14
Operating temperature
0 to +40°C
Other
• RGGB Bayer pattern
• Mechanical shutter
• High DR
Table 4.2
Canon EOS 7D features.
For this characterization phase, this camera has been used with the lens EF-S 55-
250mm f/4.5-5.6 IS STM, from Canon as well.
The 7D system can acquire raw files (minimally processed digital file) in the Canon’s
proprietary format .CR2. This format will allow to read data from the sensor before de-
mosaicing is applied. This should provide an approximation of what the sensor’s output
is (raw files are not completely unprocessed [32]). For more agility an intervalometer is
used with this camera (although 7D can be completely controlled remotely when teth-
ered to a computer by using Canon EOS Utility software, the communication is not very
reactive).
The 7D provides with 54 possible exposure times from 1/8000th of a second to 30
seconds (although from one second by combining the intervalometer and the BULB
mode in the camera any exposure time can be selected with a resolution of 1 second).
Between two consecutive standard exposure times there should be a difference in the
light of 1/3rd of a stop (the concept of stop is presented in Appendix A.2 and it is a
convenient way to express light transmission in the context of cameras).
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Characterization
46
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3
Canon EOS 7D body (left) and sensor (right).
4.1.2
Photo-Response and Photon Transfer Method
For all cameras tested the setup used for acquiring images for the PT method and
for the photoresponse is the same, with only a few minor changes for different cameras,
and it is illustrated in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4
Photo-response and photon transfer measurement setup.
A lamp placed on a tripod has been pointed at the reflector at an angle to provide
indirect illumination to the camera. Camera settings, image acquisition and download
are directly controlled by a computer. Images are downloaded directly on a computer.
==PAGE:54==
4.1 Characterization
47
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5
Photos of the setup described.
The setup has been mounted in a dark room in the basement of DTU Space.
For this setup the following equipment has been used:
• One reflector: A white bed sheet hung on a wooden beam. Subsequently a layer
of white paper sheets have been added to avoid wrinkles in the bed sheet which
would result in nonuniform output from the camera.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Characterization
48
• One lamp: Dedolight 400D.
• Two different cameras (see previous paragraph).
• One photometer: Thorlabs PM100D. Used to read the optical power at the location
of the camera.
• One UV-Si power sensor: Thorlabs S120VC. Used in conjunction with the pho-
tometer.
• Three band-pass (BP) filters (Figure 4.7):
1. Newport 10BPF25-450 (450 ± 50 nm).
2. Newport 10BPF25-550 (550 ± 50 nm).
3. Newport 10BPF25-650 (650 ± 50 nm).
• One ND filter: Newport FSQ-OD05.
• One intervalometer: Canon TC-80N3. Used to assist the control of the 7D.
• One laptop.
• Black cloths to cover reflective objects in the vicinity of the camera.
• Two tripods to hold the lamp and the cameras.
For the µASC, the distances between the lamp and the reflector and between the
camera and the reflector are 200cm and 130cm respectively. For 7D, the same distances
are 216cm and 166cm.
To acquire images in darkness, the setup is the same but of course the lamp has
been turned off and a lens cap has been mounted on the lenses instead of the BP filters
Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6
setup for dark images.
==PAGE:56==
4.1 Characterization
49
Before starting image acquisition, offset and gain of the ADC have to be set, in
general, to adapt the output of the sensor to the ADC (Section 3.3.2). For the µASC
these settings result in floor and ceiling values equal to 2100 and 4000 respectively. 7D
does not give control over the ADC settings. In this case the camera ISO has been set
to the minimum, 100, in accordance to the indication of the standard EMVA1288.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7
PB filters taped on holed supports.
To control the wavelength the BP filters have been applied to the front of the lenses.
For the µASC, the 10BPF25-550 (550 ± 50 nm) has been taped with a black adhesive
tape to the lens cap where a circular hole (Figure 4.7b), the same size of the filter, has
been punched in. For the 7D, all three BP filters reported above have been taped on
three holed plastic disks (Figure 4.7c), the disks themselves have been taped on the front
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Characterization
50
of the lens before the acquisition for each colour channel (Figure 4.5d). Filters have been
placed approximately at the centre of the lens front element. For the lenses the longest
focal length have been selected to reduce the shadowing effect introduced by the lenses
themselves and by the filters. In addition, the lenses have been defocused to distribute
light more uniformly over the sensor and avoid physical defects in the reflector giving
non-uniform output.
Before starting the measurements, after waiting for the lamp to achieve a stable
output, the photometer has been used to measure the optical power in front of the
lenses with the camera in position at the wavelength correspondent to the BP filters.
The exposure times have been selected from the minimum allowed by the cameras
to values that are high enough to saturate the sensors. These values and the number of
points acquired are tabulated below.
Camera
N. of
measurement
points
Exp. time range
ND filter used
µASC
95
1 µs to 20 ms
None
7D - Red
55
1/8000 to 16 s
0.05 OD @ 15 s
7D - Green # 1
46
1/8000 to 3.2 s
0.05 OD @ 2.5 s
7D - Green # 2
46
1/8000 to 3.2 s
0.05 OD @ 2.5 s
7D - Blue
47
1/8000 to 4 s
0.05 OD @ 3.2 and
4 s
Table 4.3
Measurement points.
For the 7D, at relatively long exposure time (indicated in the table above) mea-
surements point resulted to be rather sparse Section 5.1.2, therefore also an ND filter
has been used. Remembering that between consecutive exposure times the 7D gives a
difference in light transmission of 1/3rd of a stop, the FSQ-OD05 (the lowest optical
density available for this project, equal to 0.05 OD – corresponding to 80% transmission
of light) has been used because this filter provides a 1/6th of a stop reduction of the
light transmitted which produces the effect of an intermediate exposure time.
For each exposure time two images have been acquired under illumination and in
darkness. For the µASC files are named after the date and time read from the computer
where EGSE is run from, so they have been renamed manually after the exposure time
during acquisition otherwise there would not be any way to retrieve this information
later. 7D fortunately stores this information in the raw files. Files are read and processed
in Matlab. Details about how images are stored and treated are reported in Appendix A.
As aforementioned, 7D has an RGGB Bayer Pattern but as reported in Table 4.2
the image resolution does not correspond to the sensor resolution, hence tests have been
conducted (Appendix A.3) to see find the locations of the specific colour filters over
the an image and the results have been incorporated in the Matlab code that processes
images.
==PAGE:58==
4.1 Characterization
51
For each exposure time the mean and the variance of the digital output of the cam-
era under illumination and in darkness are computed after (3.6) and (3.7). The data
calculated in darkness is subtracted from data under illumination. The irradiation is
calculated from the list of exposure times after equation reference and by using the
following numbers
Camera
Optical power - Front
lens [mW]
TBPF
µASC (550 nm)
0.104
0.58
7D - 450 nm
0.275
0.55
7D - 550 nm
0.234
0.58
7D - 650 nm
0.211
0.56
Table 4.4
Optical powers and transmittance values from BP filters.
Even with the precaution of using the longest focal length, the BP filters still rep-
resents an additional aperture, introducing attenuation of the optical power. So before
starting measurements, for the CCTV lens tests have been conducted to assess the atten-
uation effect of the filters by measuring the digital output at an arbitrary illumination
that did not saturate the sensor with and without the filters on. The results may not be
accurate but it was the only option and resulted to be approximately 0.00139. For the
7D, the transmittance, TLENS, has been calculated from the TSTOP and from the FSTOP
values and from the following relation [33]
TSTOP = FSTOP
√TLENS
(4.1)
Resulting in a value of 0,8156. The FSTOP value selected for the experiment is F5.6
which corresponds to a TSTOP value of 6.2 according to dxomark.com Figure 4.8.
When the ND filter is used, the attenuation factor of (3.8) must also include the
transmittance of this filter, which is calculated as
TND = 10−OD
(4.2)
which for OD = 0.05 results in 0.8913.
Also for the 7D the effect of the aperture of the plastic disks have been measured
directly.
One last thing to notice about (3.8) is that the irradiance, E, is expressed in units of
µW/cm2 whereas the photometer measures optical power in mW. Therefore the optical
power is divided by the area of the sensor of the S120VC, namely 0.9409 cm2. Also, the
optical power read by the photometer should be divided by the S120VC’s transmittance.
Theoretically, also the CFA and the microlenses will have an effect, but this effect is
unknown.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Characterization
52
Figure 4.8
TST OP for Canon EF-S 55-250mm F4-5.6 IS STM. Credit: dxomark.com.
==PAGE:60==
4.1 Characterization
53
4.1.3
Dark Current
Figure 4.9
Setup for the measurement of the dark current.
To study the dark current, the cameras have been placed into a thermal chamber.
Dark images have been captured for this experiment, so the cameras have been left
with their lens caps on. A second computer has been used to control the cameras and
to capture and download images. Note that in this experiment the remote control of
the camera is more stringent since the thermal chamber should not be opened during
the experiments. Cables for remote control have been routed through a small slit in a
circular foam panel on the side of the thermal chamber.
The setup for this experiment is illustrated in Figure 4.9
The list of equipment used to study the dark current is as follows.
• Thermal chamber: Weiss WT 64.
• Two cameras.
• Two computers, one to control the thermal chamber and one to control the cameras.
• One intervalometer: Canon TC-80N3. Used to assist the control of the 7D.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Characterization
54
Figure 4.10
Setup for the measurement of the dark current (photo).
Figure 4.11
Inside the thermal chamber - 7D.
==PAGE:62==
4.1 Characterization
55
Figure 4.12
Inside the thermal chamber - CHU. Note that only a CHU has been placed into the
chamber.
The thermal chamber has been controlled with a virtual interface developed (not
by the author) in LabVIEW. This virtual interface allows to select the starting and
final temperatures, displays the current temperature (Actual temperature), and make
it possible to select how long a certain intermediate temperature has to be maintained
before increasing it. So it is possible to control the rate at which temperature is increased
or decreased.
Temperature has been varied from -15°C to 40°C for the 7D and from -15°C to 60°C
for the µASC. Below 0°C data has been acquired every 5°C. Above 0°C every 10°C.
This choice have been made to avoid too much thermal stress to the cameras at low
temperatures (and in the case of the 7D to ensure a long enough battery life) and to
avoid the experiment to last too long above 0°C. For the µASC the temperature have
been pushed to 60°C because the dark current effect resulted to be not noticeable (during
acquisition) below 50°C.
The internal temperature of the camera can be read from EGSE for the µASC. For
the 7D this information is contained in the raw file but it it not readily accessible so
a free software called EXIFLOG has been used to read it and monitor the internal
temperature although information about the accuracy of this data is unavailable.
Data acquisition and processing is completely analogous to what has been done with
dark images in the previous experiments. The difference is the choice of exposure times.
In order to not prolong the experiment too much, a few exposure times have been
chosen since it is not necessary to cover the entire dynamic range of the cameras. To
make variations in the dark noise power with exposure time visible, exposure time has to
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Linear Motion Reproduction
56
increase exponentially otherwise only fluctuations around a single value will be visible.
Therefore the following values have been chosen.
µASC (550 nm)
1 µs to 10 s
7D
1/30th of a second to 15 s
Table 4.5
After images have been processed, the dark noise power has been plotted against
exposure time. From each curve the dark current has been estimated as explained in
Section 3.3.3.2 and plotted against temperature.
4.2
Linear Motion Reproduction
For the final part of this project the ability of the two cameras to track the movement
of targets have been explored. A laser dots pattern have been projected on a vertical
surface relative to the camera to create such targets. Targets have been scanned through
the frame of the cameras to cover as much as possible their field of view. This test has
been repeated three times for scanning in the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal directions
relative to the camera.
Under the assumption that the centroids of the points projected on the surface follow
the relative movement between the targets and the cameras in the image plane, the
coordinates of these points are observed and compared to the movement in the real
plane. The consistency of the movement steps are also observed throughout the frame.
The setup used for these experiments has been mounted in a basement room at DTU
Space and it is illustrated in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13
Setup for linear motion study.
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Linear Motion Reproduction
57
Figure 4.14
Setup for linear motion study (photo). Acquisition has been carried out in much dimmer
light than in this picture.
The list of instrumentation used for this experiment is the following:
• Two cameras.
• One green laser: Military 5MW High-Powered Green Laser Pointer Pen Lazer
532nm Visible Beam Light.
• One linear translation stage (LTS) (300 mm long): Thorlabs LTS 300/M.
• One diffractive optical element (DOE): Holoeye DE-R 265 M – 1:19 dotted line.
• One tripod.
• An intervalometer.
• A laptop to control the camera and the LTS.
• ND filter: FSQ-OD60.
• Rigid boxes and other objects to hold the LTS at the correct height.
A green laser has been taped on the LTS and pointed directly at a wall. A DOE
pattern has been mounted on the tip of the laser to create a pattern of dots from the
main laser beam.
The LTS has been programmed to move 0.5 mm each step to move the pattern
projected on the wall approximately the same distances. Cameras have been mounted
on a tripod just above the laser to be as frontal as possible to the wall and to avoid
shadowing of the laser. Because of the conformation of the room there was limited space
to place a tripod for the camera and in the chosen location the LTS and the laser had
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Linear Motion Reproduction
58
to be placed on top of other objects in order to be placed right below the lens of the
camera (and make the pattern visible in the images).
Cameras have been controlled remotely through a computer as in the previous ex-
periments.
For this experiment, the µASC has been used with the same lens as in previous
experiments, whereas the 7D has been used with the Canon EF 70-200mm F4L USM.
The reason for this change is that this experiment is influenced by the geometrical
distortions in the lens and this lens results to be distortion-free at a focal length of
approximately 100mm (Figure 4.15).
Figure 4.15
Geometrical distortion of Canon EF 70-200mm F4L USM (credit: Dxomark).
The CCTV 5-50mm lens has a reported minimum barrel distortion of 1.2%. Un-
fortunately, this has to be accepted because there was no time to correct this effect in
processing.
The 7D has been placed at a distance of approximately 123 cm from the wall (the
minimum focusing distance of the lens used is 120 cm); the µASC has been placed at
roughly 132 cm. These distances have been chosen to have a satisfactory field of view
with the least distortion possible.
For the µASC it was necessary to mount the setup in the basement since this camera
is very sensitive and in normal lighting conditions it would saturate immediately unless
used with a lens at a very small aperture.
Using a small aperture did not provide
satisfactory results though as the light reduction was not enough and at such small
apertures every dust particle on the lens and on the sensor’s surface were very noticeable
as very wide black spots.
The positioning of the cameras has been controlled with bubble levels located on the
tripods. For 7D also an in camera electronic level could be used to assist the positioning.
For the translational motion, the LTS has never been moved (so the scanning of the
laser has been always horizontal), instead the camera head has been moved in three
different positions to achieve the desired effect. For the diagonal scan it has been tried
to tilt the camera at 45° but this situation could not be checked precisely.
==PAGE:66==
4.2 Linear Motion Reproduction
59
The µASC camera for this experiment has been used with an OD filter because of
its high sensitivity again. Even the projection of the laser on the wall was enough to
saturate the camera.
Finally, the following are the camera settings:
• µASC: texp = 1µs, focal length = 40 mm, aperture unknown.
• 7D: texp = 1/60s, foca length = 100mm, aperture = F5, ISO = 100.
4.2.1
Acquisition
The laser with the DOE has been scanned horizontally, vertically, and diagonally
with steps of 0.5 cm.
For the µASC this step has been used only in one case (the
vertical scan) because this camera is very slow at acquiring data and the procedure had
to be shortened. A step of 1 cm has been used instead.
At each step of the LTS an image has been captured.
4.2.2
Processing
The images acquired are imported and processed into Matlab. A sequence of morpho-
logical transformations is applied on the images and binary images are created through
thresholding. If the images were to go directly through thresholding the result would
be binary images where the white dots – corresponding to the laser projections – would
have a fuzzy haze around them Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16
Examples of dots without and with morphological transformation applied.
Morhpological transformation have been applied also to the resulting binary images
to eliminate protrusions in the dots. Considering that the amount of data to process is
not dramatically high, thresholds and the proper sequence of morphological transforma-
tion have been found manually. Ideally, automatic methods for thresholding would be
advisable, but they could not be explored.
The binary images have been summed to form a single binary image containing a
grid of dots resulting from the progressive scanning described above and so all the tracks
of the motions together. The result is therefore three 8-bit binary images (in reality,
due to issues with the setup, the horizontal scan have been conducted in two different
sessions for the left and for the right parts of the frame; coincidentally this happened for
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Linear Motion Reproduction
60
both cameras). Finally from these binary images the tracks have been manually isolated
into separate binary images Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17
Process to extract the single tracks.
The resulting binary images have been processed with an application developed in
C++ and OpenCV libraries, to find the coordinates of the centroids of each dot. These
coordinates have been exported in text files for further processing.
Figure 4.18
Attempt to reproduce a circular track.
With reference to the vertical scan, the result is a text file for each track in the image
containing the coordinates of the centroids. The following quantities have been checked:
• The variation of the horizontal coordinate.
Ideally it should be constant but
fluctuations have been observed and described by mean and standard deviation,
and also by the maximum and minimum deviations from the mean.
==PAGE:68==
4.2 Linear Motion Reproduction
61
• The accuracy of the motion reproduction. Knowing that constant steps of 0.5 or
1 cm have determined the motion in the real space, ideally the cameras should
produce a consistent shift, in pixels, in the image space. The steps are recorded
and described by mean, standard deviation, maximum and minimum shifts.
For the horizontal scan the processing is completely analogous.
For the diagonal scan instead what have been observed are the steps in the diagonal
tracks (this is completely analogous to the second point described for the vertical scan),
and the error in maintaining a uniform inclination along the track. Also, from each track
the inclination of the track is deduced from a linear fit of the centroid coordinates to
verify the angle of the track with respect to the horizontal direction.
It has been attempted to perform the same task with more complex tracks. Specifi-
cally, a circular track. The experiment had to be abandoned because it was very difficult
to find a stable way to project a precise circle with the laser pen. Only for illustration
purpose, the most successful attempt (performed with the 7D) is in Figure 4.18.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In this chapter the results of the experiments described in the previous chapter will
be presented.
5.1
Characterization
5.1.1
Micro-ASC
In Figure 5.1 the photo-response curve is illustrated.
From the curve it can be
observed that the response is fairly linear. Therefore the photon transfer method should
provide reliable results. It is worth mentioning that at low illumination the deviation
from linearity is more pronounced
From this curve it can be seen that the signal saturates at around 180 DN and
the responsivity, R, is found as described in Section 3.3.4 and it is equal to 0,0364
DN/photons Figure 5.2.
The PTC is illustrated in Figure 5.3. This curve confirms the saturation at around
181 DN. From this curve the system gain constant, K, is equal to 21 e-/DN. For these
calculations an area of 251,658 has been used.
The saturation point has been selected at a mean gray value of 181 DN, which
corresponds to approximately 6130 photons. The dark noise power at 1￿s is 0.3796 DN2.
In Table 5.1 with are reported the complete results from the curves.
System gain constant, K
21.0172 e-/DN
Responsivity, R
0.036421 DN/photons
Quantum efficiency, η
∼62.4 % (@ 550 ± 50nm)
Saturation capacity, QSAT
3.8247 · 103 e-
Minimum temporal noise, σd
11.4397 e- (0.5443 DN)
Absolute sensitivity threshold, µP,min
15.5973 photons
Dynamic range, DR
51.556 dB
Table 5.1
µASC measured parameters.
62
==PAGE:70==
5.1 Characterization
63
Figure 5.1
Photo-response curve for the uASC.
Figure 5.2
Linear fit of the linear region of the photo-response curve.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Characterization
64
Figure 5.3
Photon transfer curve fot uASC.
Figure 5.4
Linear fit of the linear region of the variance PTC.
==PAGE:72==
5.1 Characterization
65
In Figure 5.5 the measured, theoretical, and ideal SNR curves are plotted.
The
maximum achievable SNR is around 37.9 dB, but it is not reached. The uASC camera
actually exhibits a considerably lower SNR until approximately an irradiation of 4500
photons per pixel Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5
SNR curves for uASC.
Figure 5.6
Detail of the SNR curves of Figure 5.5.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Characterization
66
5.1.2
Canon EOS 7D
The procedure described in the previous paragraph is repeated for all four channels
in the Bayer pattern for the 7D. The photo-response and photon transfer curves have
been plotted (Figures 5.7 and 5.8).
The resultant parameter values are reported in Table 5.2.
450 nm
550 nm (1)
550 nm (2)
650 nm
K [e-/DN]
2.2827
2.3316
2.2406
2.2963
R [DN/ph]
0.029841
0.15513
0.15645
0.131
η [%]
6.81
36.17
35
30.4
QSAT [e-]
2.3135 x 104
2.1601 x 104
2.0902 x 104
2.335 x 104
µP,sat [ph]
339722.054
59720.6251
59720.6251
76808.9195
σd [e-]
12.69
(5.5592 DN)
12.962
(5.5592 DN)
12.456
(5.5592 DN)
12.766
(5.5592 DN)
µP,min [ph]
186.3434
35.8359
35.5884
41.9921
DR [dB]
65.2162
64.4361
64.4963
65.2449
Table 5.2
/D parameters.
To determine these values more than 2 million pixels have been used for each channel.
Figure 5.7
Photo-response curves for Canon EOS 7D – All channels included.
==PAGE:74==
5.1 Characterization
67
Figure 5.8
PTCs for Canon EOS 7D – All channels.
The red channel, appears to be quite insensitive. This result is consistent with the
typical quantum efficiency curves for image sensors and with the observation mad in
chapter 2 about the longer penetration depth of red light.
The results in Table 5.2 are comparable with typical values for DSLRs but they can
only be considered qualitative as 7D turned out to be non-linear (see below) and so the
photon transfer method cannot produce accurate results. In particular, the measured
SNR defies the theoretical limits expected by the linear models as shown in Figures 5.9
to 5.12. This non-linear behaviour could not be explored any further due to time con-
straints.
It still remains interesting to see what are the actual outputs provided by
the camera, such as the minimum dark noise and the actual behaviour with respect to
temperature.
==PAGE:75==
5.1 Characterization
68
Figure 5.9
SNR curve for Canon EOS 7D - Red channel.
Figure 5.10
SNR curve for Canon EOS 7D - Green #1 channel.
==PAGE:76==
5.1 Characterization
69
Figure 5.11
SNR curve for Canon EOS 7D - Green #2 channel.
Figure 5.12
SNR curve for Canon EOS 7D - Blue channel.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Dark Current
70
5.2
Dark Current
5.2.1
Micro-ASC
In Figure 5.13 the dark mean pixel value is plotted against the exposure time for
different temperature values.
Figure 5.13
Mean dark signal vs exposure time at different temperatures – µASC.
T [°C]
Mean dark signal [DN]
-15
41.0281
-10
42.5236
-5
44.2345
0
45.9255
10
50.3219
20
54.6238
30
60.3181
40
68.76
50
80.86
60
109.4194
Table 5.3
µASC measured mean dark signal for different temperatures.
Although it can be noticed an increase in the dark signal with temperature, the dark
current effect is not visible in the exposure time range observed. This increase only
start to become considerable above 30°C (Table 5.3). From Figure 5.13 it can also be
==PAGE:78==
5.2 Dark Current
71
seen that µASC does not perform dark current compensation, but the effect of the dark
current is extremely low.
Plotting the variance versus the exposure time (Figure 5.14) produces strange results.
At exposure times below 50 µs the variance actually decreases whereas above this value
it just fluctuates around fixed values. Also the behaviour of the variance with respect
to the temperature is strange below 30°C: the lowest noise power results from 0°C; the
variance at 10°C is comparable to that at subzero temperatures and it results to be even
lower that at -10°C. These observation indicate that this plot is not reliable.
Figure 5.14
Dark noise power for different values of temperatures – µASC.
In conclusion, the dark current could not be measured in the exposure time range
considered and extending this analysis would have been too time consuming.
5.2.1.1
Canon EOS 7D
In Figure 5.15 the same plot as above, for the 7D is showed.
The linear fit curves and the correspondent dark current values are reported in Ta-
ble 5.4 to convert the angular coefficient of the curves into the dark current, the mean
value of K for the four channels, equal to 2.2878, has been used. This again rises concerns
about the accuracy of the results which should be at least qualitatively significant.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Dark Current
72
Figure 5.15
Dark noise power for different values of temperatures – Canon EOS 7D.
T [°C]
Fit curve [DN2]
Dark Current
[e-/s/pixel]
-15
28.6587
∼0
-10
28.6632
∼0
0
0.014441 texp + 29.255
0.0756
10
0.023726 texp + 29.982
0.1242
20
0.052736 texp + 30.828
0.276
30
0.10756 texp + 31.284
0.563
40
0.29464 texp + 31.823
1.54
Table 5.4
µASC measured mean dark signal for different temperatures.
For –15°C and –10°C only fluctuations are visible throughout the entire range of
exposure times without any visible trend. This observation has not been extended to
exceptionally long exposure times (minutes) with the BULB mode.
In Figure 5.16 dark current values are plotted against temperature. Although not
perfectly smooth, it can be noticed an exponential increase. The method described in
EMVA1288 to plot the dark current as a function of the temperature seems to be rather
dependant on the reference temperature (Figure 5.17).
==PAGE:80==
5.2 Dark Current
73
Figure 5.16
Dark current vs Temperature – Canon EOS 7D.
Figure 5.17
Dark current vs temperature. Comparison with EMVA 1288 model – Canon EOS 7D.
With this camera it is not possible to observe the dark current from the plot of the
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
74
mean pixel value as a function of exposure time. 7D performs in-camera dark current
compensation, which is a non-linear operation that attempts to reduce the noise in
the image by subtracting an expected noise level dependent on the camera model and
manufacturer, temperature, and so on. The effect is shown in Figure 5.18 where it can
be seen that the mean dark signal fluctuates around only two fixed values, 2048 and 2049
DN, with the transition at around 1 s of exposure, and without any visible correlation
to either exposure time or temperature. This confirms the non-linear behaviour of this
camera and the inaccuracy of the measurements performed since the dark signal has
been used in the data processing.
Figure 5.18
Mean dark signal vs exposure time at different temperatures – Canon EOS 7D.
5.3
Linear Motion Reproduction
Due to the unavoidable differences in the setups and in the camera systems (different
lenses and sensor sizes in particular), there are some immediate differences:
• With 7D more lines and wider tracks have been acquired since a wider field of view
has been obtained.
• Acquiring data with the µASC is a very slow process and less point had to be
acquired to speed up the procedure.
==PAGE:82==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
75
µASC
7D
Vertical
6 lines –- 33 dots / line
11 lines – 33 dots/line
Horizontal
5 lines –- 13 dots / line
8 lines –- 50 dots / line
Diagonal
7 lines –- 5 to 21 dots /
line
14 lines –- 4 to 47 dots /
line
Table 5.5
Number of data points.
5.3.1
Vertical Motion
In the following, the deviation of the horizontal coordinate has been observed for
each line in terms of: mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum coordinates,
and minimum and maximum deviations from the mean and total maximum deviation
Figure 5.19.
xmean
σx
xmin
xMAX
δx,MAX
δx,min
∆x
106.87
0.70389
105.59
108.15
2.562
1.282
1.28
232.19
0.752
230.91
233.46
2.548
1.274
1.27
357.87
0.74
356.46
359.17
2.71
1.31
1.4
483.03
0.775
481.79
484.33
2.536
1.299
1.24
609.45
0.549
608.11
610.65
2.54
1.19
1.35
729.29
0.773
727.5
730.54
3.042
1.25
1.79
Table 5.6
Horizontal deviation of vertical tracks – µASC. All quantities are in pixels.
xmean
σx
xmin
xMAX
δx,MAX
δx,min
∆x
204.21
1.46
201.3
206.5
5.153
2.287
2.867
687.81
1.302
685.08
690.2
5.122
2.385
2.737
1169
1.268
1167
1172
4.55
2.502
2.05
1649
1.375
1647
1652
5.35
3.09
2.26
2122
1.32
2121
2125
4.76
3.16
1.602
2592
1.346
2590
2595
5
3.2
1.79
3064
1.349
3062
3067
5.42
3.242
2.18
3541
1.376
3539
3544
5.43
3.402
2.028
4016
1.513
4013
4019
5.75
3.43
2.32
4492
1.57
4489
4496
6.52
4.02
2.5
4976
1.9
4971
4980
9.42
4.14
5.27
Table 5.7
Horizontal deviation of vertical tracks – 7D. All quantities are in pixels.
Then, the errors in the vertical movement is reported as the mean, standard devia-
tion, minimum and maximum of the steps observed fr each vertical track.
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
76
∆ymean
σ∆y
∆ymin
∆yMAX
16.72
0.377
15.77
17.62
16.79
0.476
15.88
18.22
16.83
0.502
15.64
17.76
16.81
0.353
16.04
17.35
16.72
0.348
16.1
17.66
16.63
0.459
15.5
17.77
Table 5.8
Vertical movement – µASC. All quantities are in pixels.
∆ymean
σ∆y
∆ymin
∆yMAX
102.34
0.933
99.73
104.5
102.2
0.835
100.17
104
102.1
0.699
100.48
103.43
102.04
0.763
99.81
103.25
101.96
0.745
99.28
103.26
101.94
0.682
99.59
103.3
101.91
0.779
99.34
103.28
101.91
0.706
99.31
102.92
101.91
0.671
100.2
103.58
101.93
0.866
99.31
103.85
101.97
1.923
93.45
106.17
Table 5.9
Vertical movement – 7D. All quantities are in pixels.
Figure 5.19
Quantities reported in Table 5.6 and Table 5.7.
==PAGE:84==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
77
Figure 5.20
Vertical Tracks – µASC.
Figure 5.21
Vertical Tracks – 7D.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
78
Figure 5.22
Vertical Tracks detail – µASC. All vertical tracks are shifted around the origin to see
the deviations shown in Table 5.6.
Figure 5.23
Vertical Tracks – 7D. All vertical tracks are shifted around the origin to see the deviations
shown in Table 5.7.
Below are reported the distance conversion factors, sY , seen from each lines, for both
cameras, from the slopes of the plots of the vertical movement in the image space as a
function of the known vertical movement in the real space.
==PAGE:86==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
79
Line nr.
sY [pxl/cm]
1
33.473
2
33.68
3
33.677
4
33.678
5
33.506
6
33.29
Table 5.10
Vertical distance conversion – µASC.
Line nr.
sY [pxl/cm]
1
204.83
2
204.57
3
204.39
4
204.25
5
204.13
6
204.03
7
204
8
203.97
9
203.98
10
204.02
11
204.14
Table 5.11
Vertical distance conversion – 7D.
5.3.2
Horizontal Motion
For the horizontal motion data is reported below. The form of the results is similar
of course.
Note that for both cameras due to issues with data has been acquired separately and
some changes reflect in the results.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
80
ymean
σy
ymin
yMAX
δy,MAX
δy,min
∆y
Left
553.21
0.727
552
554
2.68
1.17
1.51
430
0.29
429.5
430.5
0.992
0.531
0.461
305.2
0.727
303.6
306
2.49
0.862
1.63
180
0.85
179.4
181.7
2.346
1.495
0.85
55.35
1.35
53.87
57.5
3.63
2.15
1.48
Right
529.6
0.811
527.7
530.4
2.66
0.775
1.89
408.3
1.012
406.3
410.12
3.776
1.85
1.93
282.91
0.802
281
284
2.91
1.072
1.84
157.17
0.483
156.5
157.8
1.346
0.676
0.67
31.1
0.657
30.15
32
1.85
0.872
0.981
Table 5.12
Vertical deviation of horizontal tracks – µASC. All quantities are in pixels.
ymean
σy
ymin
yMAX
δy,MAX
δy,min
∆y
Left
3177
1.392
3175
3180.32
5.66
2.869
2.79
2743
1.63
2739.85
2746
6.51
3.52
3
2315
1.63
2312
2319
6.35
3.46
2.89
1888
1.79
1884
1891
7.69
3.551
4.14
1465
2.086
1460
1468
7.92
3.7
4.22
1041
2.27
1037
1045
8.98
4.206
4.77
619.5
2.11
615.12
623
7.89
3.53
4.352
194.5
2.256
190
198
8.418
3.56
4.85
Right
3195
3.086
3190
3202
12.29
6.364
5.93
2760
2.723
2755
2764.91
10.37
5.403
4.97
2331
2.24
2326
2335
8.13
3.98
4.15
1902
2.14
1898
1905
7.65
3.59
4.06
1477
1.98
1472
1480
8.55
3.428
5.12
1052
2.033
1047
1056
8.84
3.5
5.34
629
2.17
623
632
8.9
2.97
5.93
203
2.54
197
206
9.35
3.044
6.31
Table 5.13
Vertical deviation of horizontal tracks – 7D. All quantities are in pixels.
The errors in the horizontal movements are as follow.
==PAGE:88==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
81
∆xmean
σ∆x
∆xmin
∆xMAX
Left
31.7
0.719
29.76
32.68
31.9
0.491
30.76
32.5
31.93
0.327
31.4
32.54
31.82
0.732
30.58
33.07
31.76
0.76
30
33.1
Right
31.9
0.419
31.228
32.82
31.8
0.717
30.776
32.95
31.93
0.527
30.96
32.74
31.5
1.17
28.6
32.66
31.4
1.28
27.9
32.48
Table 5.14
Horizontal movement – µASC. All quantities are in pixels.
∆xmean
σ∆x
∆xmin
∆xMAX
Left
99.8
4.37
90
108
99.7
4.23
90.3
108
99.66
3.89
90.9
107.14
99.6
3.71
90.8
107
99.5
3.343
91.3
106
99.4
3.1
92
105.135
99.3
2.74
93.04
104.9
99.2
2.5
93.02
104
Right
99.5
1.78
95.76
103
99.4
1.94
95.6
102.7
99.37
1.65
96.1
102.2
99.35
1.49
96.61
102.34
99.4
1.67
95.9
102.32
99.4
1.48
96.26
102.
99.38
1.56
96.3
102
99.4
1.21
96.9
101.7
Table 5.15
Horizontal movement – 7D. All quantities are in pixels.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
82
Figure 5.24
Horizontal tracks - Left side - µASC.
Figure 5.25
Horizontal tracks - Right side - µASC.
==PAGE:90==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
83
Figure 5.26
Horizontal tracks detail - left side - µASC.
Figure 5.27
Horizontal tracks detail - right side - µASC.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
84
Figure 5.28
Horizontal tracks - Left side - 7D.
Figure 5.29
Horizontal tracks - Right side - 7D.
==PAGE:92==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
85
Figure 5.30
Horizontal tracks detail - left side - 7D.
Figure 5.31
Horizontal tracks detail - right side - 7D.
Line nr.
sX (left) [pxl/cm]
sX (right) [pxl/cm]
1
31.804
31.921
2
31.959
31.876
3
31.945
31.947
4
31.865
31.657
5
31.802
31.534
Table 5.16
Horizontal distance conversion – µASC.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
86
Line nr.
sX (left) [pxl/cm]
sX (right) [pxl/cm]
1
199.54
198.9
2
199.39
198.8
3
199.16
198.71
4
199.03
198.65
5
199.87
198.67
6
199.73
198.71
7
198.66
198.71
8
198.52
198.75
Table 5.17
Horizontal distance conversion – 7D.
5.3.3
Diagonal Motion
For the diagonal movement, the slope of the lines is recorded.
The steps in the
movement are evaluated along the diagonal track and the error of the inclination of the
track with respect to the horizontal direction at each step is also observed.
∆Rmean
σ∆R
∆Rmin
∆RMAX
32.39
0.311
32.051
32.75
32.61
0.358
32.07
33.3
32.53
0.481
31.72
33.35
32.59
0.456
31.17
33.2
32.72
0.438
31.97
33.5
32.52
0.425
31.7
33.07
32.35
0.159
32.19
32.5
Table 5.18
Diagonal movement, track errors – µASC. All quantities are in pixels.
∆θmean
σ∆θ
∆θmin
∆θMAX
50.9
0.312
50.64
51.3
50.94
0.852
50.03
52.7
50.9
0.879
49.27
52.7
50.9
0.519
49.95
52
50.8
0.689
49.71
52
50.9
0.717
49.4
52.1
51
0.898
49.66
51.56
Table 5.19
Diagonal movement, inclination errors – µASC. All quantities are in degrees.
==PAGE:94==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
87
∆Rmean
σ∆R
∆Rmin
∆RMAX
93
7.76
84.12
98.3
98.6
3.10
93.6
106
98.7
2.91
92.7
105
98.9
2.48
93.1
103.7
98.7
2.43
93.1
104.8
99
2.51
94.23
107
98.7
1.79
94.2
103.4
99.3
2.98
91.76
109
99
2.05
93.75
105.6
99.2
1.93
95.7
104.4
98.92
1.32
96.13
102
99.1
2.076
95.82
104
97.86
2.99
89.6
102
99.4
0.312
98.93
99.6
Table 5.20
Diagonal movement, track errors – 7D. All quantities are in pixels.
∆θmean
σ∆θ
∆θmin
∆θMAX
47.35
1.35
45.8
48.3
48.4
1.64
45.73
53.2
48.1
2.68
42.64
54.5
47.9
1.93
42.75
53.1
47.9
2.53
40.46
56.1
47.8
1.87
43.11
51.8
47.8
1.44
42.2
51
48
1.35
44.2
52
47.9
1.83
43.43
56.5
47.73
1.27
44.16
50.2
47.8
1.55
44.36
52.7
47.48
1.81
43.87
50.7
48.2
1.92
44.12
51.7
46.9
1
45.7
48.1
Table 5.21
Diagonal movement, inclination errors – 7D. All quantities are in degrees.
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
88
Figure 5.32
Reference for the results reported above and below.
Figure 5.33
Diagonal tracks - µASC.
==PAGE:96==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
89
Figure 5.34
Diagonal tracks - 7D.
For each track in Figures 5.33 and 5.34 the slope with respect to the horizontal
direction and the distance conversion factors have been evaluated too.
Line nr.
slope [deg]
sd [pxl/cm]
1
51
64.79
2
50.95
65.21
3
50.85
65.29
4
50.81
65.46
5
50.8
65.45
6
50.91
65.15
7
50.9
64.84
Table 5.22
Diagonal tracks and diagonal conversion factors - µASC.
==PAGE:97==
5.3 Linear Motion Reproduction
90
Line nr.
slope [deg]
sd [pxl/cm]
1
47.53
195
2
48.5
196.9
3
48.24
197
4
48
197.7
5
47.9
197.1
6
48
198.1
7
47.8
197.4
8
48.1
198.6
9
47.9
197.9
10
48
198.5
11
47.8
197.87
12
47.96
198.23
13
48.3
195.9
14
46.9
199.1
Table 5.23
Diagonal tracks and diagonal conversion factors - 7D.
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
6.1
General performance
Two cameras have been studied in this project to investigate their performance in
the reproduction of linear motion of known, simple targets.
From the characterization of the 2 cameras it became evident that one them, namely
Canon EOS 7D, is non-linear. Hence the parameters deduced with the photon transfer
method can only be seen to have an idea of what the actual parameters could be. If
this statement is accepted, it can be concluded that although 7D is less sensitive (higher
absolute sensitivity threshold and lower quantum efficiency) and has slightly higher read
noise making it less efficient in low light conditions. On the other hand, it has more
dynamic range and thus it can achieve better contrast and can still be able to observe
targets in a wider range of lighting condition.
These results make sense since 7D is designed to be used in daylight whereas the
µASC camera is a star tracker camera that needs to be able to see faint stars in space.
The sensitivity of the µASC can be considered more useful in space, but this depends
on the specific application and design of the overall system. In this project, this camera
was easily saturated by a laser projected by a surface more than a meter away from the
front of the lens. This could not be convenient in an application such as docking as it
would be harder to track a known target as it get closer if this target emits directly or
indirectly reflects enough light.
The right solution depends on the design of the specific mission and lies in the middle
between the two cameras under test in this project.
In space applications radiation hardness is an important aspect, but for this project
it could not be studied.
The temperature behaviour is not easy to deduce. Canon EOS 7D performs non-
linear dark current compensation which makes it impossible to deduce the dark current
from the dark signal and poses some concerns bout the reliability of the results obtained
from the variance of the dark signal.
On the other hand, the µASC did not show
significant effects of the dark current with exposure time, which is theoretically strange.
6.2
Motion reproduction
The conversion factors show good consistency for both cameras with the vertical
one being slightly higher. By assuming typical values of sY of 33.6 pxl/cm and 204
91
==PAGE:99==
6.3 Limitations and Improvements
92
pxl/cm and typical values of sX equal to 32 pxl/cm and 200 pxl/cm for µASC and
7D respectively, it can be seen that all the standard deviation as well as the absolute
maximum deviations observed are below 0.6 mm and generally for 7D these deviations
are twice as small. Having said that, there is not much consistency between the different
tracks, especially for the horizontal tracks. This suggests that such fluctuations may be
more related to the setup inaccuracies rather than to the cameras. This observation
is supported by the fact that those quantities that are more imtimately related to the
camera systems, e.g. conversion factors, show much more consistency between different
tracks.
Both camera performed with similar errors and 7D performed only slightly better.
Also the inclination in the case of the diagonal scanning has been observed with more
consistency, showing typical values of 51° and 48° for µASC and 7D respectively, which
is in accordance with the experimental conditions, although as mentioned, this could not
be verified accurately. In this situation also the diagonal conversion factors have resulted
to be quite consistent, with typical values of 65 pxl/cm (µASC) and 198 pxl/cm (7D).
The deviations in track steps and inclination show random variation and in the worst
case observed (σ∆R equal to 0.481 pxl and 3.1 pxl for µASC and 7D respectively (there
are actually worse values, but they are obtained from tracks with just a few points and
are deemed to be not representative)) µASC performed better with an error of 0.074
mm against 0.152 mm (obtained by diving by the conversion factors sd.
It is believed that the experiments conducted in this projects are too simplified to
make more general statements and the investigation needs to be extended.
6.3
Limitations and Improvements
• The original idea of this project was to investigate the effect of different sensor
technologies on performances. The problem that immediately arose was the avail-
ability of camera systems with different sensors but comparable overall systems
(electronics, lenses, and so on). This was not a possibility for this project. To
complicate things even more the fact that cameras needed to be able to export
unprocessed files. The cameras chosen for this project are different, designed for
different applications, and presumably with quite different electronics.
Canon
EOS 7D even poses some doubts about the data produced as raw files can still
be the result of in-camera processing. The investigation should be repeated with
comparable systems, in comparable conditions.
• The photon transfer method requires specialized equipment that was not available.
For this method it is very important to provide a uniform illumination to the
sensor, for example with an integrating sphere. Not only a uniform illumination
is necessary - or at least highly recommended - it is also important to be able to
know how the sensor is illuminated (uniformity, exact optical power at the sensor).
In this project a great deal had to be assumed or estimated due to lack of proper
instrumentation.
==PAGE:100==
6.3 Limitations and Improvements
93
• The photon transfer method is applicable to linear cameras and one of the camera
under test resulted to be non linear. In [6] it is presented a procedure to deal with
non-linear cameras. That procedure could be included in the investigation.
• For all experiments in general the source of inaccuracies has been too high. Filters
were too small and did not have a mount and had to be taped. The DOE could
not be fixed and aligned correctly to the laser. Filters and lenses in particular were
very dirty. Tripods are not perfectly stable, the head can bend or move under the
weight of the camera (this was especially true for the Canon EOS 7D, whose weight
is considerable). Workings outside of DTU Space induced mechanical vibrations
even in the basement rooms.
• The experiments conducted in this projects, although not especially complex, are
very time consuming, A massive amount of data had to be taken and the situa-
tion was aggravated for the µASC camera which takes more than 20 seconds to
download a single uncompressed image (hundreds of images had to be acquired).
The thermal chamber took many minutes to change temperature and prolonged
the experiments for days. These caused a lot of additional delay and should be
kept in mind by whoever would like to try to repeat or expand this investigation.
• Delays mentioned above aggravated the problem of lack of expertise and resulted
in simple experiments.
• It is advisable to extend this investigation in the detection of more complex tracks
(e.g. curves) as well as distance camera-target and orientation of a target with
respect to the camera plane. Areas of interest in this regard would be structured
light, pose estimating, Moving target detection and tracking (although this greatly
extend the investigation to video analysis).
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Werner Ogiers. Integrated Radiation-Tolerant Imaging System. http://microelectronics.
esa.int/presentation/IRIS.pdf.
[2]
D. Durini, ed. High Performance Silicon Imaging: Fundamentals and Applications
of CMOS and CCD Sensors. Woodhead Publishing Ltd., 2014. isbn: 978-0-8579-
598-5 (print), 978-0-8579-752-1 (online).
[3]
Standard for Characterization of Image Sensors and Cameras - Release 3.1. Eu-
ropean Machine Vision Association. December 2016.
[4]
James R. Janesick. Photon Transfer DN –> λ. SPIE Press, 2007. isbn: 978-0-
8194-6722-5.
[5]
Junichi Nakamura, ed. Image Sensors and Signal Processing for Digital Still Cam-
eras. CRC Press Taylor Francis Group, 2006. isbn: 0-8493-3545-0.
[6]
James R. Janesick, ed. Scientific Charge-Coupled Devices. SPIE Press, January
2001. isbn: 0-8194-3698-4, 9780819436986.
[7]
S. M. Sze. Physics of Semiconductor Devices. John Wiley
Sons, 2007. isbn: 0-
471-14323-5 (10), 978-0-47 1-1 4323-9 (13).
[8]
Eric R. Fossum and Donald B. Hondongwa. “A Review of the Pinned Photodiode
for CCD and CMOS Image Sensors”. In: IEEE JOURNAL OF THE ELECTRON
DEVICES SOCIETY 2.3 (2014).
[9]
George E. Smith. “Nobel Lecture: The invention and early history of the CCD”.
In: REVIEWS OF MODERN PHYSICS 82 (2010).
[10]
Y. De Wit and T. Geurts. A low noise low power global shutter cmos pixel having
single readout capability and good shutter efficiency. Int. Image Sensor Workshop
(IISW). 2011.
[11]
E. R. Fossum. “CMOS Image Sensors - Electronic Camera-on-a-Chip”. In: IEEE
Transaction on Electron Devices 44.10 (October 1997).
[12]
Enrico Bravin. OVERVIEW OF IMAGING SENSORS AND SYSTEMS USED IN
BEAM INSTRUMENTATION. International Beam Instrumentation Conference
Oxford, 16-19 September 2013.
[13]
Chao Zhang Jue Wang and Pengwei Hao. New Color Filter Arrays of High Light
Sensitivity and High DemosaickingPerformance. 2011 18th IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing.
94
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
95
[14]
R. W. Widenhorn et al. “Temperature Dependence of Dark Current in CCD.” In:
Sensors and Camera Systems for Scientific, Industrial, and Digital Photography
Applications III 4669 (2002), pp. 193–201.
[15]
R. Widenhorn et al. “Meyer-Neldel Rule for Dark Current in Charge-Coupled
Devices”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 89.12 (2001), pp. 8179–8182.
[16]
R. I. Hornsey. Part III: Noise in Image Sensors. University of Waterloo. 1999.
[17]
C. Meij and Z. Geradts. “Source camera identification using Photo Response Non-
Uniformity on WhatsApp”. In: Digital Investigation 24 (March 2018), pp. 142–
154.
[18]
M. Chen et al. “Source Digital Camcoder Identification Using Sensor Photo Re-
sponse Non-Uniformity”. In: Security, Steganography, and Watermarking of Mul-
timedia Content IX 6505 (2007), p. 650511.
[19]
Mikhail Konnik and James Welsh. High-level numerical simulations of noise in
CCD and CMOS photosensors: review and tutorial. 2014. arXiv: 1412 . 4031
[astro-ph.IM].
[20]
J. Janesick and E. R. Fossum. Scientific CCD Technology at JPL.
[21]
F. Li and A. Nathan. CCD Image Sensors in Deep-Ultraviolet - Degradation Be-
havior and Damage Mechanism. Springer, 2005. isbn: 978-3-540-27412-4.
[22]
Pierre Fereyre and Gareth Powell. CMOS Image Sensors are Entering a New Age.
e2V. 2016.
[23]
R. Prestigiacomo and K. Simkus. Star Tracker Lens Quality Assessment. Final re-
port for the course ”30330 - Image Analysis with Microcomputer”. DTU, December
2018.
[24]
https://www.lonelyspeck.com/a-practical-guide-to-lens-aberrations-
and-the-lonely-speck-aberration-test/.
[25]
https://www.handprint.com/ASTRO/ae4.html.
[26]
M.J. Kidger. Fundamental Optical Design. SPIE, 2002. isbn: 0-8194-3195-0.
[27]
J. Sasian. Introduction to Aberrations in Optical Imaging Systems. Cambridge
University Press, 2013. isbn: 978-1-107-0063-13.
[28]
V. J. Mahajan. Optical Imaging and Aberrations Part 1 - Ray Geometrical Optics.
SPIE, 1998. isbn: 0-8194-5215-X.
[29]
V. J. Mahajan. Optical Imaging and Aberrations Part 2 - Wave Diffraction Optics.
SPIE, 2004. isbn: 0-8194-5215-X.
[30]
D. Gardner. Characterizing Digital Cameras with the Photon Transfer Curve. Sum-
mit Imaging. (Available Online).
[31]
S. E. Bohndiek et al. “Comparison of Methods for Estimating the Conversion Gain
of CMOS Active Pixel Sensors”. In: IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL 8.10 (October
2008).
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
96
[32]
Julian Achatzi et al. “Estimating an image sensor’s temperature for darksignal-
correction”. In: Image Sensors and Imaging Systems 2014. Ed. by Ralf Widenhorn
and Antoine Dupret. Vol. 9022. International Society for Optics and Photonics.
SPIE, 2014, pp. 102–112.
[33]
D. C. Hart. The Camera Assistant: A Complete Professional Handbook. Focal
Press, 1995. isbn: 0-240-80042-7.
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX A
Notes about Cameras
A.1
File Formats
uASC allows for the download of images in different formats. In this project the
uncompressed format, .unc, a binary file that has been used to retain the complete
information from the sensor. Below is showed the format of this type of file.
The first 34 bytes represent the header of the file. This header contains a series of
information such as the ADC’s gain and offset, the integration time, and so on. The
rest of the file contains the byte describing the pixel values. For this project the most
relevant information to extract from the header to read the image in the simplest way
are:
Field
Description
Dimension
Offset
H
Height of the
image
2 Bytes
28
W
Width of the
image
2 Bytes
30
IMOD
Interlacing mode
1 Bytes
32
Table A.1
Figure A.1
The interlacing mode is important because it determines the actual height of the file
as
H′ = H(IMOD + 1)
(A.1)
Other fields can be useful too for checking images after acquisition. They are de-
scribed in the uASC Interface Control Document (ref: ASC-DTU-ICD-3004 – Date:
August 21, 2012; Issue 3.2). When an image from the uASC camera is imported, for
97
==PAGE:105==
A.1 File Formats
98
example, into Matlab, first the field specified above are read and then the rest of the file
is read byte by byte in raster-scanning.like mode using H′ and W.
Canon EOS 7D uses the Canon’s proprietary raw format .CR2. This file contains a
lot information about the shooting settings of the camera (shutter speed, lens aperture,
focal length, ISO speed, white balance, and so on), on the camera itself (model, CFA
employed, image resolution, and so on), and even contains a JPG thumbnail of the
image. This type of file is difficult to handle as normally software to handle raw files
apply the camera settings when converting this file to another, more convenient format
such as .tiff or .png. Even more difficult is the fact that in this project the interest is to
read the sensor data before demosaicing, i.e. colour interpolation.
An open source tool useful to read raw files and extract in .tiff or .pgm formats the
data from the sensor, minimally processed and without any processing from the camera
applied is Dave Coffin’s dcraw (https://www.dechifro.org/dcraw/). It is available
online as an ANSI C source code that can be compiled directly on any machine (but it is a
tough task as it requires several additional components that most IDEs do not integrate)
and fortunately also as a pre-compiled executable (http://www.guillermoluijk.com/
tutorial/dcraw/index_en.htm) that can only be run from command prompt.
Although it does not have a graphic interface, it is quite straightforward if one knows
how a digital camera works and it also shows the list of functions that can be combined
together (Figure A.2) by typing:
> dcraw
To read a .CR2 file it is necessary to type the following command:
> dcraw -D -4 filename.cr2
This command will produce a .pgm file that can be directly read as a matrix. By
adding the -T option, a .tiff file with exactly the same content is produced.
It is also possible to read all the files of a specific type automatically by typing:
> dcraw -D -4 *.cr2
Another useful feature is the possibility to read the information about a camera (Fig-
ure A.3) (from an image file taken with that camera) by typing:
> dcraw -i -v filename.cr2
==PAGE:106==
A.2 Stops of light
99
Figure A.2
dcraw options.
Figure A.3
Camera information example.
A.2
Stops of light
Stop of light is a convenient way to refer to exposure light in photography and to
express increase or decrease in light intensity detected by a camera.
Each stop of increase corresponds to twice as much light detected. Each stop of
decrease instead correspond to half as much light.
Sometimes the effect of neutral density filters is expressed in stops of reduction. Some
==PAGE:107==
A.3 7D CFA
100
examples are in Table A.2.
There are different formats to specify the type of filter.
Some specify a number
correspondent to 2 raised by the stop of reduction (like in the table above), some others
specify the optical density (e.g. ND0.3, ND0.6, ND0.9).
The relation between OD and T is
T = 10−OD
(A.2)
The relation between Stops and T is
T = 2−stops
(A.3)
From the previous two equations also the relation between stops and Od can be
deduced.
ND Filter
Optical Density
(OD)
Stop Reduction
Transmittance
(T)
-
0.05
1/6
0.89
-
0.1
1/3
0.8
ND2
0.3
1
0.5
ND4
0.6
2
0.25
ND8
0.9
3
0.125
Table A.2
A.3
7D CFA
For Canon EOS 7D the image resolution does not correspond to the sensor resolution.
This is a problem if one wants to isolate the pixels covered by the red, green of blue
filters of the CFA.
The CFA phase is known to be RGGB, but there is no information about how this
pattern repeats over the image pixels. In the case where sensor and image resolutions
are the same the pattern would repeat starting from the upper-left corner of the image
after flipping it both vertically and horizontally (because the lens will project a flipped
image onto the sensor and the camera would rearrange the pixels) but in the present
case this is not so obvious as it is not known which part of the sensor is used to form
the actual image.
Three test images of a uniform red, green, and blue background have been read with
dcraw before color interpolation and the pixel levels have been read from the 4 pixels
in the upper left corner of a flipped image. From the pixel values the actual pattern to
repeat over the image to extract the “red”, “green”, and “blue” pixels have been deduced
and resulted to be GRGB (??):
==PAGE:108==
A.4 Intervalometer
101
Figure A.4
A.4
Intervalometer
An intervallometer is an advanced type of remote trigger. A remote trigger for a
camera allows to shoot the camera without touching the camera and avoiding camera
shake. An intervalometer can do this too but additionally it can:
• Take an arbitrary number of pictures or infinite pictures (until the battery runs
out).
• Take a picture with a timer set by the user.
• Take a defined number of photos, with a defined time delay between two consecu-
tive acquisitions.
• Take a photo at a specified exposure time. Normally the minimum is 1 second and
the maximum is (virtually) 100 hours. For this function the camera has to be set
in BULB mode.
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B
Source Codes
B.1
Micro-ASC - PTC
Couples of uncompressed images are downloaded and stored in folders. Each folder
contains 2 images taken at the same exposure time and the folder is renamed after this
exposure time in us (e.g. 1 after 1us). This is done for both normal and dark images.
Images are extracted from each folder, renamed after the folder (so the exposure
time) (e.g. 1A.unc, 1B.unc, 1ADark.unc, 1BDark.unc after 1 us) and saved in the same
folder with a text file containing the list of uncompressed images.
ExtractDark.m (script)
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This script extract uncompressed files from downloaded folders and
%
3 % renames files properly. Also creates a descriptive list with file
%
4 % names together with the exposure times.
%
5 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6
7
8 % Get list of folders ' names in specified directory
9 d = dir();
10 folders = {d.name};
11
12 % Get a logical vector that tells which is a directory.
13 f = [d.isdir] & ~strcmp(folders , '.') & ~strcmp(folders , '..');
14
15 % Extract only those that are directories.
16 folders = folders(f);
17
18 % Access each folder one by one and get the list of file names
19 N = numel(folders);
20 p = {d.folder};
21 p = p{1};
22
23 fout = fopen('DarkImages.txt','wt');
24
25 for i = 1:N
26
s = [p , '\' , folders{i}];
27
df = dir(s);
28
files = {df.name};
29
f = ~[df.isdir] & ~strcmp(files, '.') & ~strcmp(files, '..');
30
files = files(f);
102
==PAGE:110==
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC
103
31
32
% FORM NEW NAMES:
'folder name' + 'A/BDark' + '.unc'
33
if numel(files) == 1
34
fileA = [folders{i} , 'ADark.unc'];
35
36
oldPath = [s, '\' , files{1}];
37
movefile(oldPath , fileA);
38
fprintf(fout, '%s, %s\n', folders{i}, fileA);
39
40
else if numel(files) == 2
41
fileA = [folders{i} , 'ADark.unc'];
42
fileB = [folders{i} , 'BDark.unc'];
43
44
oldPath = [s, '\' , files{1}];
45
movefile(oldPath , fileA);
46
oldPath = [s, '\' , files{2}];
47
movefile(oldPath , fileB);
48
fprintf(fout, '%s\t%s\t%s\n', folders{i}, fileA, fileB);
49
end
50
end
51 end
52
53 fclose(fout);
ExtractIllum.m (script)
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 % This script extract uncompressed files from downloaded folders and
%
3 % renames files properly. Also creates a descriptive list with file
%
4 % names together with the exposure times.
%
5 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
6 clear
7
8 % Get list of folders ' names in specified directory
9 d = dir();
10 folders = {d.name};
11
12 % Get a logical vector that tells which is a directory
13 f = [d.isdir] & ~strcmp(folders , '.') & ~strcmp(folders , '..');
14
15 % Extract only those that are directories.
16 folders = folders(f);
17
18 % Access each folder one by one and get the list of file names
19 N = numel(folders);
20 p = {d.folder};
21 p = p{1};
22
23 fout = fopen('images.txt','wt');
24
25 for i = 1:N
26
s = [p , '\' , folders{i}];
==PAGE:111==
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC
104
27
df = dir(s);
28
files = {df.name};
29
f = ~[df.isdir] & ~strcmp(files, '.') & ~strcmp(files, '..');
30
files = files(f);
31
32
% FORM NEW NAMES:
'folder name' + 'A/B' + '.unc'
33
if numel(files) == 1
34
fileA = [folders{i} , 'A.unc'];
35
36
oldPath = [s, '\' , files{1}];
37
movefile(oldPath , fileA);
38
fprintf(fout, '%s, %s\n', folders{i}, fileA);
39
40
else if numel(files) == 2
41
fileA = [folders{i} , 'A.unc'];
42
fileB = [folders{i} , 'B.unc'];
43
44
oldPath = [s, '\' , files{1}];
45
movefile(oldPath , fileA);
46
oldPath = [s, '\' , files{2}];
47
movefile(oldPath , fileB);
48
fprintf(fout, '%s\t%s\t%s\n', folders{i}, fileA, fileB);
49
end
50
end
51 end
52
53 fclose(fout);
The lists of uncompressed images are read and and the images are read and processed.
ptcGenerator.m (function)
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 %
ptcGenerator
%
3 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
4 % This function takes the name of a text file containing the list
%
5 % of images with lines following the format:
%
6 %
%
7 %
<exposure time>
<exposure time>A.unc
<exposure time>B.unc
%
8 %
%
9 % This text files and the uncompressed files must be in the same
%
10 % folder. For each couple of images the mean pixel value and the
%
11 % variance are are calculated and a matrix containing all the
%
12 % results is generated.
%
13 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
14
15
16
17 function [Vptc] = ptcGenerator(images, varargin)
18
% Sizes of images have been read previously from the header of
19
% a single .unc file
==PAGE:112==
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC
105
20
H = 580;
21
W = 752;
22
23
% Open the text file received as input in reading mode.
24
fin = fopen(images, 'r');
25
26
% Read data into a cell array
27
% The numbers in each line of the text files are separated
28
% by tabs.
29
list = textscan(fin, '%s\t%s\t%s');
30
31
exposures = list{1};
% List of exposure times
32
A = list{2};
% list of images labeled 'A'
33
B = list{3};
% list of images labeled 'B'
34
35
% Get the number of images , N
36
[N, ~] = size(exposures);
37
38
% Preallocate a numerical array to store the results
39
% (3 columns to store exposure time, mean, and variance)
40
Vptc = zeros(N,3);
41
42
% Process the lists (A and B) line by line
43
for i = 1:N
44
% Read couples of uncompressed image files (A and B)
45
% Each file is opened in reading mode and the first 34
46
% bytes are skipped (refer to the microASC file format
47
% description)
48
finA = fopen(A{i},'r');
49
fseek(finA, 34,'bof');
50
51
finB = fopen(B{i},'r');
52
fseek(finB, 34,'bof');
53
54
% Preallocate matrices to store images
55
imA = zeros(W,H);
56
imB = zeros(W, H);
57
58
% Read the rest of the uncompressed files byte by byte.
59
% (uint8);
60
% Read in groups of W bytes (rows of images , saved as
61
% colummns for efficiency - fread saves as column)
62
for j = 1:H
63
imA(:, j) = fread(finA, W, 'uint8');
64
imB(:, j) = fread(finB, W, 'uint8');
65
end
66
67
% Transpose to have the correct image orientation
68
imA = imA';
69
imB = imB';
70
71
% Crop images to isolate the central part of the image
==PAGE:113==
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC
106
72
% to remove vignetting and illumination decay towards
73
% the borders of the image
74
imA = double(imA(70:521, 96:654));
75
imB = double(imB(70:521, 96:654));
76
[h,w] = size(imA);
77
78 % Save images as png, if interested.
79 % Note: If 2 arguments have been passed to this function , dark
80 % images are being treated
81 %
if nargin == 2
82 %
imwrite(mat2gray(imA), strcat(exposures{i}, 'ADark.png'), 'PNG');
83 %
imwrite(mat2gray(imB), strcat(exposures{i}, 'BDark.png'), 'PNG');
84 %
else
85 %
imwrite(mat2gray(imA), strcat(exposures{i}, 'A.png'), 'PNG');
86 %
imwrite(mat2gray(imB), strcat(exposures{i}, 'B.png'), 'PNG');
87 %
end
88
89
90
% Processing:
91
92
% Sum the 2 images back to back, sum all pixels together and
93
% divide by twice the number of pixel of a single image.
94
% This will provide the mean gray value calculated over 2
95
% images , assuming the illumination doesn't change.
96
97
mi_y = (sum(sum(imA + imB))) / (2*h*w);
98
99
% Variance is calculated from the subtraction of 2 images
100
% as in the standard EMVA1288. Subtraction is necessary to
101
% remove the FPN common to the 2 images , which will cover
102
% the noise if not removed and will affect the photon transfer
103
% curve.
104
105
var_y = (sum(sum((imA - imB).^2))) / (2*h*w);
106
107
% PTC data:
108
%
t_exp
|
mean
|
variance
109
110
Vptc(i, :) = [str2double(exposures{i}), mi_y, var_y];
111
112
fclose(finA);
113
fclose(finB);
114
end
115 fclose(fin);
116 end
A script calls the function above to put all data together and generate the final data
to plot the PTC.
PTC.m (script)
==PAGE:114==
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC
107
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 %
PTC
%
3 %
%%%%%%%%%
%
4 % This script complete all the processing necessary to plot the
%
5 % Photo Transfer Curve for the microASC camera.
%
6 % Data files from the camera needs to be named appropriately:
%
7 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
8
9
10 % Generate PTC data from lists of images: images.txt and
11 % DarkImages.txt
12 % Beware: the following function doesn't check the correctness of the
13 % second argument so it must be correct and equal to 'Dark'
14
15 Vptc = ptcGenerator('images.txt');
16 VptcDark = ptcGenerator('DarkImages.txt', 'Dark');
17
18
19 % Put together the PTC data for illumination and darkness to create a
20 % matrix , PTC_m (merged), with the following columns:
21 %
22 %
t_exp | mean | variance | mean dark | variance dark
23
24 PTC_m = [Vptc, VptcDark(:,[2,3])];
25
26
27 % Subtract the baseline (Illuminated - Dark).
28 % Result: PTC_d (difference)
29 %
30 %
t_exp | mean | variance | rest
31
32 PTC_d = [PTC_m(:,1), PTC_m(:,2) - PTC_m(:,4) ,...
33
PTC_m(:,3) - PTC_m(:,5), PTC_m(:,2:5)];
34
35
36 % Sort with respect to the mean gray value (second column)
37 % Result: PTC_s (sorted)
38
39 PTC_s = sortrows(PTC_d, 2);
40
41
42 % Remove outliers from from variance data (third column)
43 % In this specific case it needs 3 steps with different windows.
44 % Result: PTC_C (cleared)
45
46 % 1st step: removes as many as possible
47 i = isoutlier(PTC_s(:,3), 'movmedian', 11);
% i = Indices of outliers
48 PTC_C = PTC_s(~i, :);
49
50 % 2nd step: remove residual outliers
51 i = isoutlier(PTC_C(:,3), 'movmedian', 7);
52 PTC_C = PTC_C(~i, :);
==PAGE:115==
B.1 Micro-ASC - PTC
108
53
54 % 3rd step: remove the last outlier
55 PTC_C = PTC_C(~(PTC_C(:,1) == 1000), :);
56
57 writematrix(PTC_C, 'ptcFinaluASC');
58 % Plot results.
59
60 ptcPlotter(PTC_C);
The script above calls the following function to plot the PTC.
ptcPlotter.m (function)
1 function [] = ptcPlotter(PTC)
2
% Photo-Response plot
3
% Scaling the x axis to express it in photons
4
5
Apixel = 8.3*8.6;
% [micron^2]
6
As = 9.7^2 / 100;
% [cm^2]
7
8
% Tlens * Tbpf * effect of holed cap
9
atten = 0.8940322 * 0.58 * 0.0033;
10
% atten = 0.00139;
% The net attenuation of the optics and the
11
% pass band filter has been measured
12
% directly in the lab. It is only
13
% approximate due to limitations.
14
15
E = 0.104*1000;
% [uW] +/- 3% (in mW) (front of the lens)
16
wl = 0.55;
% [um] +/- 0.05
17
18
mi_p = 50.34 * Apixel * PTC(:,1)./1000 * wl * E/As * atten;
19
20
writematrix(mi_p, 'photons');
21
22
figure(1)
23
24
plot(mi_p, PTC(:,2), '.')
25
26
ylim([0,255])
27
title('Photo-Response Curve')
28
grid on
29
xlabel('\mu_p [Mean number of photons per pixel]')
30
ylabel('\mu_y - \mu_{y,dark} [DN]')
31
32
% Photon Transfer Curve Plot
33
figure(2)
34
plot(PTC(:,2), PTC(:,3), 'k.')
35
xlim([0,220])
36
title('Variance PTC')
37
grid on
38
xlabel('\mu_y - \mu_{y,dark} [DN]')
==PAGE:116==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
109
39
ylabel('\sigma^2_y - \sigma^2_{y,dark} [DN^2]')
40 end
Finally, the following function generates and plots the SNR (some of the parameters
need to be calculated before).
SNR.m (function)
1 function [] = SNR()
2
s_D = 0.5443;
3
QE = .6239;
4
K = 21.0172;
5
6
PR = readmatrix('photons');
7
PTC = readmatrix('ptcFinaluASC');
8
9
SNR_m = 20*log10(PTC(:,2) ./ sqrt(PTC(:,5)));
10
SNR_th = 20*log10((QE*PR) ./ (sqrt(0.5443^2 + (1/12)*K^2 + QE*PR)));
11
SNR_i = 20*log10(sqrt(PR));
12
13
M = [PR, SNR_m, SNR_th, SNR_i];
14
M = M(PR > 15, :);
15
M = M(PR < 6130, :);
16
17
loglog(M(:,1), M(:,2), 'b*-.');
18
hold on
19
loglog(M(:,1), M(:,3), 'r+--');
20
loglog(M(:,1), M(:,4), 'g-');
21
legend('SNR_{measured}', 'SNR_{theoretical}', 'SNR_{ideal}')
22
title('SNR')
23
grid on
24
xlabel('log(\mu_p) [Mean number of photons per pixel]')
25
ylabel('SNR [dB]')
26
xlim([15, 6131])
27 end
The text file ’photons.txt’ is generated from the results of ptcPlotter.m.
B.2
Canon EOS 7D – PTC
Five functions are used to generate PTCdata for dark images, blue, red, and the two
green channels. For dark images the entire frame is taken into the calculation (no image
crop).
Note that the images have not been renamed but they will be uploaded in the right
order.
DarkPTC.m (function)
==PAGE:117==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
110
1 function [darkVptc] = DartPTC()
2
% Get a list of the .pgm files
3
f = dir('*.pgm');
4
files = {f.name};
5
6
darkVptc = zeros(floor(numel(files) / 2),2);
7
8
% Upload couples of images (A and B) one by one
9
j = 1;
10
for i = 1:2:numel(files)
11
imA = files{i};
12
imB = files{i+1};
13
14
IA = double(imread(imA));
15
IB = double(imread(imB));
16
[N, M] = size(IA);
17
18
% Calculate the mean dark value
19
mi = sum(sum(IA + IB)) / (2*N*M);
20
21
% Calculate the dark noise variance
22
var = sum(sum((IA - IB).^2)) / (2*N*M);
23
24
darkVptc(j,:) = [mi, var];
25
j = j + 1;
26
end
27 end
The functions to produce ptc data are similar to that of the µASC, but additionally
they isolate the channels of the CFA. There are 4 functions in total but they are similar
so only one is reported and differences are in the code as comments.
ptc7DBlue.m / ptc7DRed.m / ptc7DGreenL.m / ptc7DGreenL.m (function)
1 function [Vptc] = ptc7DBlue(varargin)
2
% get list of pgm files
3
% Note: it will be ordered by name.
4
f = dir('*.pgm');
5
files = {f.name};
6
7
% Preallocation of the matrix to store results:
8
Vptc = zeros(floor(numel(files) / 2), 2);
9
10
% Upload couples of images (A and B) one by one
11
j = 1;
12
for i = 1:2:numel(files) - 1
13
imA = double(imread(files{i}));
14
imB = double(imread(files{i + 1}));
15
16
% ptcGenerator
==PAGE:118==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
111
17
% apply mask
18
imA = extractBlue(imA);
19
imB = extractBlue(imB);
20
% imA = extractRed(imA);
21
% imB = extractRed(imB);
22
% imA = extractGreenL(imA);
23
% imB = extractGreenR(imB);
24
25
[N, M] = size(imA);
26
27
% Calculate the mean dark value
28
mi = sum(sum(imA + imB)) / (2*N*M);
29
30
% Calculate the dark noise variance
31
var = sum(sum((imA - imB).^2)) / (2*N*M);
32
33
Vptc(j,:) = [mi, var];
34
35
j = j + 1;
36
end
37 end
The following functions are called by the ones above and extract the pixels belonging
to the relative channel. Also imge crop is performed here.
extractBlue.m / extractRed.m / extractGreenL.m / extractGreenR.m (function)
1 function [B] = extractBlue(I)
2
% Extract only one channel at a time
3
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4
% NOTE:
5
% Canon EOS 7D has the following pattern phase: R G G B
6
7
% R Gr | R Gr ...
8
% ---- | ----
9
% Gl B | Gr B ...
10
11
% Tests revealed that the bayer pattern is cut in a half
12
% vertically at the top left corner of the image (flipped both
13
% horizontallyand vertically):
14
15
% x | Gr | R Gr | R Gr...
16
% -
--
----
----
17
% x |
B | Gl B | Gl B...
18
19
% So, in essence , the pattern to repeat is actually: G R B G
20
21
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
22
23
% Images are flipped both horizontally and vertically because
24
% that's how it's projected onto the sensor by the optic.
==PAGE:119==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
112
25
% At this point I had assumed the CFA pattern to be placed on
26
% the sensor from the upper left corner , so I expected to have
27
% the pattern "overlying" a flipped image. This is not strictly
28
% necessary as it tuned out that the final image is a cut of the
29
% sensor and the pattern doesn't start from the upper left corner
30
% of the image anyway...
31
32
I = flip(I);
33
I = flip(I, 2);
34
35
% Extract Channels:
36
37
% 1) Preallocation of matrices which will contain masks
38
B = zeros(size(I));
39
% GL = zeros(size(I));
40
% GR = zeros(size(I));
41
% R = zeros(size(I));
42
43
% 2) Observe the note on top to know where the correct pixels are
44
B(2:2:end, 1:2:end) = I(2:2:end, 1:2:end);
45
% GL(2:2:end, 2:2:end) = I(2:2:end, 2:2:end);
46
% GR(1:2:end, 1:2:end) = I(1:2:end, 1:2:end)
47
% R(1:2:end, 2:2:end) = I(1:2:end, 2:2:end);
48
49
% 3) Restore original orientation of everything (this is not
50
% strictly necessary but easier to manage)
51
B = flip(B);
52
B = flip(B, 2);
53
% GL = flip(GL);
GL = flip(GL, 2);
54
% GR = flip(GR);
GR = flip(GR, 2);
55
% R = flip(R);
R = flip(R, 2);
56
57
% Crop
58
B = B(504:2856, 594:4428);
59
% GL = GL(570:3144, 1122:4434);
60
% GR = GR(570:3144, 1122:4434);
61
% R = R(708:2988, 834:4212);
62
63
% extraction
64
B = B(1:2:end, 1:2:end);
65
% GL = GL(1:2:end, 2:2:end);
66
% GR = GR(2:2:end, 1:2:end);
67
% R = R(2:2:end, 2:2:end);
68 end
Note that the green channels have been differentiated with the letters L and R after
’left’ and ’right’, reflecting their position in the CFA.
The results of the previous functions are saved in text files.
With reference to
the red channel these files are named ’R.txt’ (mean and variance under illumination),
’R_Dark.txt’ (mean and variance in darkness), ’R_ptc.txt’ (mean and variance minus
==PAGE:120==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
113
the values in darkness), and ’R_Final.txt’ (same as the previous plus the exposure
times).
Note that even though the dark data is the same for every channel, a different text
file is generated for each channel because the exposure times used are different.
The following script process and plot the photo-response curves and at the same time
produces data necessary for the SNR plots.
PhotoResponse.m (script)
1 % pixel area = 18.4 um2
2 % probe area = 9.7x9.7 mm2
3
4 % wl = 650 nm
5 % power = 211 uW (front lens)
6 % attenuation lens = 0.8158
7 % trasmittance filter = 0.56
8 % attenuation caused by holed disk = 0.4981
9
10 B = readmatrix('B');
11 Bd = readmatrix('B_Dark');
12 OD = zeros(47,1);
13 OD([46,44],1) = 0.05;
14
15 phB = 50.34 * 18.4 * 0.65 * (211*100/9.7^2) * 0.8158 * ...
16
0.56 * (Bd(:,1).*(10.^-OD)) * 0.4981;
17
18 plot(phB, B(:,1)-Bd(:,2), 'bo-')
19
20 hold on
21 grid on
22 title('Photo-Response Blue Channel - Canon EOS 7D')
23
24 writematrix([phB, B-Bd(:,2:3), Bd(:,2:3)], 'SNR_IN_B');
25
26 % wl = 450 nm
27 % power = 234 uW (front lens)
28 % attenuation lens = 0.8158
29 % trasmittance filter = 0.58
30
31
32 GL = readmatrix('GL');
33 Gd = readmatrix('G_Dark');
34 OD = zeros(46,1);
35 OD(44,1) = 0.05;
36
37 phGL = 50.34 * 18.4 * 0.55 * (234*100/9.7^2) * 0.8158 * ...
38
0.58 * (Gd(:,1).*(10.^-OD)) * 0.4981;
39
40 plot(phGL, GL(:,1)-Gd(:,2), 'gv-')
41
42 grid on
43
==PAGE:121==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
114
44 writematrix([phGL, GL-Gd(:,2:3), Gd(:,2:3)], 'SNR_IN_GL');
45
46 GR = readmatrix('GR');
47 OD = zeros(46,1);
48 OD(44,1) = 0.05;
49
50 phGR = 50.34 * 18.4 * 0.55 * (234*100/9.7^2) * 0.8158 * ...
51
0.58 * (Gd(:,1).*(10.^-OD)) * 0.4981;
52
53 plot(phGR, GR(:,1)-Gd(:,2), 'Color', [0 0.35 0], 'Marker',...
54
'd', 'Linestyle', '-')
55
56 grid on
57
58 writematrix([phGR, GR-Gd(:,2:3), Gd(:,2:3)], 'SNR_IN_GR');
59
60 % wl = 450 nm
61 % power = 275 uW (front lens)
62 % attenuation lens = 0.8158
63 % trasmittance filter = 0.55
64
65 R = readmatrix('R');
66 Rd = readmatrix('R_Dark');
67 R(51,:) = [];
68 Rd(51,:) = [];
69 OD = zeros(54,1);
70 OD([51:52],1)=0.05;
71
72 phR = 50.34 * 18.4 * 0.45 * (275*100/9.7^2) * 0.8158 * ...
73
0.55 * (Rd(:,1).*(10.^-OD)) * 0.4981;
74
75 plot(phR, R(:,1)-Rd(:,2), 'rs-')
76
77 grid on
78
79 writematrix([phR, R-Rd(:,2:3), Rd(:,2:3)], 'SNR_IN_R');
80
81 legend('650 nm', '550 nm (#1)', '550 nm (#2)', '450 nm',...
82
'Location', 'EastOutside')
83 title('Photo-Response All Channels - Canon EOS 7D')
84 ylabel('\mu_y - \mu_{y,dark} [DN]')
85 xlabel('\mu_p [Mean number of photons per pixel]')
The script plotting the PTCs.
PTCPlot.m (script)
1 B = readmatrix('B_ptc');
2 R = readmatrix('R_ptc');
3 GL = readmatrix('GL_ptc');
4 GR = readmatrix('GR_ptc');
==PAGE:122==
B.2 Canon EOS 7D – PTC
115
5
6 plot(B(:,1),B(:,2), 'bo-.')
7
8 hold on
9
10 plot(GL(:,1),GL(:,2), 'gv-.')
11
12 plot(GR(:,1),GR(:,2), 'Color', [0 .5 0], 'Marker', 'd',...
13
'Linestyle', '-.')
14
15 plot(R(:,1),R(:,2), 'rs-.')
16
17 grid on
18 title('Photon Transfer Curves - Canon EOS 7D')
19 xlim([0,12000])
20 ylim([0,4800])
21 xlabel('\mu_y - \mu_{y,dark} [DN]')
22 ylabel('\sigma^2_y - \sigma^2_{y,dark} [DN^2]')
23 legend('650 nm', '550 nm (#1)', '550 nm (#2)', '450 nm',...
24
'Location', 'EastOutside')
The following function takes as input the necessary camera parameters for the SNR
plots and the necessary data as a text file for a specific channel (so the same function is
used for all channels).
SNR.m (function)
1
function [] = SNR(s_d, QE, K, IN)
2
PTC = readmatrix(IN);
3
4
SNR_m = 20*log10(PTC(:,2) ./ sqrt(PTC(:,5)));
5
SNR_th = 20*log10((QE*PTC(:,1)) ./ (sqrt(s_d^2 + ...
6
(1/12)*K^2 + QE*PTC(:,1))));
7
SNR_i = 20*log10(sqrt(PTC(:,1)));
8
9
M = [PTC(:,1), SNR_m, SNR_th, SNR_i];
10
11
loglog(M(:,1), M(:,2), 'b*-.');
12
hold on
13
loglog(M(:,1), M(:,3), 'r+--');
14
loglog(M(:,1), M(:,4), 'g-');
15
16
legend('SNR_{measured}', 'SNR_{theoretical}', 'SNR_{ideal}')
17
title('SNR')
18
grid on
19
xlabel('log(\mu_p) [Mean number of photons per pixel]')
20
ylabel('SNR [dB]')
21 end
==PAGE:123==
B.3 Micro-ASC - Dark Current
116
B.3
Micro-ASC - Dark Current
The uncompressed images are collected in different folders, each for every temper-
ature. The same function is used in every folder. The only difference is that different
exposure times are used but the structure of the function is the same so only one is
reported here. This function produces a matrix containing exposure time, mean, and
variance. This matrix is saved in a text file.
Note that the exposure times are not ordered. This is because at some point Matlab
did not read the files in the same order as they were sorted.
DarkI.m (function)
1
function [N] = DarkI()
2
H = 580;
3
W = 752;
4
5
t = [ 10000 1000 100 1 20000 2000 25 3000 300 4000 5000, ...
6
500 50];
7
8
f = dir('*.unc');
9
files = {f.name};
10
11
N = ones(floor(numel(files)/2), 3);
12
13
j = 1;
14
for i = 1:2:numel(files)
15
finA = fopen(files{i},'r');
16
fseek(finA, 34,'bof');
17
18
finB = fopen(files{i+1},'r');
19
fseek(finB, 34,'bof');
20
21
imA = zeros(W,H);
22
imB = zeros(W, H);
23
24
for k = 1:H
25
imA(:, k) = fread(finA, W, 'uint8');
26
imB(:, k) = fread(finB, W, 'uint8');
27
end
28
29
imA = double(imA);
30
imB = double(imB);
31
[n,m] = size(imA);
32
33
mi = sum(sum(imA + imB)) / (2*n*m);
34
var = sum(sum((imA - imB).^2)) / (2*n*m);
35
N(j, 2:3) = [mi, var];
36
j = j + 1;
37
end
38
39
N(:,1) = t;
==PAGE:124==
B.3 Micro-ASC - Dark Current
117
40
N = sortrows(N,1);
41 end
All the text files for each temperature are put together in the same folder and a
script is used to plot all the curves in the same graph.
PlotsT.m (script)
1 Nm15 = readmatrix('Nm15');
2 Nm10 = readmatrix('Nm10');
3 Nm5 = readmatrix('Nm5');
4 N0 = readmatrix('N0');
5 N10 = readmatrix('N10');
6 N20 = readmatrix('N20');
7 N30 = readmatrix('N30');
8 N40 = readmatrix('N40');
9 N50 = readmatrix('N50');
10 N60 = readmatrix('N60')
11
12 figure(1)
13
14 semilogx(Nm15(:,1), Nm15(:,3), 'bx--')
15
16 hold on
17
18 semilogx(Nm10(:,1), Nm10(:,3), 'Color', [0 .9 0],...
19
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', '*')
20
21 semilogx(Nm5(:,1), Nm5(:,3), 'rs--')
22
23 semilogx(N0(:,1), N0(:,3), 'gs--')
24
25 semilogx(N10(:,1), N10(:,3), 'kv--')
26
27 semilogx(N20(:,1), N20(:,3), 'mp--')
28
29 semilogx(N30(:,1), N30(:,3), 'Color', [0 0.44 .74],...
30
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', '+')
31
32 semilogx(N40(:,1), N40(:,3), 'Color', [0.9 0.325 0.098],...
33
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', 'd')
34
35 N50 = sortrows(N50,1);
36
37 semilogx(N50(:,1), N50(:,3), 'k<--')
38
39 semilogx(N60(:,1), N60(:,3), 'b>--')
40
41 legend('-15°C','-10°C','-5°C','0°C','10°C','20°C','30°C','40°C',...
42
'50°C','60°C', 'Location', 'EastOutside')
43
==PAGE:125==
B.3 Micro-ASC - Dark Current
118
44 grid on
45 title('Dark Noise Power')
46 ylabel('Variance [DN^2]')
47 xlabel('Exposure time [s]')
48 ylim([.2, 1.3])
49
50 %%%%%%%%%
51
52 figure(2)
53
54 semilogx(Nm15(:,1), Nm15(:,2), 'bx-')
55
56 hold on
57
58 semilogx(Nm10(:,1), Nm10(:,2), 'Color', [0 .9 0],...
59
'Linestyle', '-', 'Marker', '*')
60
61 semilogx(Nm5(:,1), Nm5(:,2), 'rs-')
62
63 semilogx(N0(:,1), N0(:,2), 'gs-')
64
65 semilogx(N10(:,1), N10(:,2), 'kv-')
66
67 semilogx(N20(:,1), N20(:,2), 'mp-')
68
69 semilogx(N30(:,1), N30(:,2), 'Color', [0 0.44 .74],...
70
'Linestyle', '-', 'Marker', '+')
71
72 semilogx(N40(:,1), N40(:,2), 'Color', [0.9 0.325 0.098],...
73
'Linestyle', '-', 'Marker', 'd')
74
75 N50 = sortrows(N50,1);
76 semilogx(N50(:,1), N50(:,2), 'k<-')
77
78 semilogx(N60(:,1), N60(:,2), 'b>-')
79
80 legend('-15°C','-10°C','-5°C','0°C','10°C','20°C','30°C','40°C',...
81
'50°C','60°C', 'Location', 'EastOutside')
82
83 grid on
84 title('Dark Signal')
85 ylabel('Mean [DN]')
86 xlabel('Exposure time [\mus]')
87 ylim([35,120])
==PAGE:126==
B.4 Canon EOS 7D - Dark Current
119
B.4
Canon EOS 7D - Dark Current
The situation is totally analogous even the name of the function is the same. The
only differences are the exposure times and the fact that reading .pgm files is easier and
files are read in the correct order.
DarkI (function)
1 function [N] = DarkI()
2
t = [1/30; 1/25; 1/20;1/15; 1/13;1/10;1/8;1/6;1/5;...
3
1/4;.3;.4;.5;.6;.8;1;1.3;1.6;2;2.5;3.2;4;5;6;...
4
8;10;13;15];
5
6
f = dir('*.pgm');
7
files = {f.name};
8
9
N = ones(floor(numel(files)/2), 3);
10
11
j = 1;
12
for i = 1:2:numel(files)
13
imA = files{i};
14
imB = files{i+1};
15
IA = double(imread(imA));
16
IB = double(imread(imB));
17
[n, m] = size(IA);
18
% Calculate the mean dark value
19
mi = sum(sum(IA + IB)) / (2*n*m);
20
% Calculate the dark noise variance
21
var = sum(sum((IA - IB).^2)) / (2*n*m);
22
N(j, 2:3) = [mi, var];
23
j = j + 1;
24
end
25
26
N(:,1) = t;
27 end
The following plots the curves. Also the fit curves, the dark current vs temperature
and the comparison with the theoretical curves are plotted.
1 Nm10 = readmatrix('-10C');
2 Nm15 = readmatrix('-15C');
3 N0 = readmatrix('0C');
4 N10 = readmatrix('10C');
5 N20 = readmatrix('20C');
6 N30 = readmatrix('30C');
7 N40 = readmatrix('40C');
8
9 figure(1)
10 y1 = ones(28,1)*mean(Nm15(:,3));
==PAGE:127==
B.4 Canon EOS 7D - Dark Current
120
11 semilogx(Nm15(:,1), Nm15(:,3), 'bx--')
12 hold on
13 semilogx(Nm15(:,1), y1, 'b-')
14
15 y = ones(28,1)*mean(Nm10(:,3));
16 semilogx(Nm10(:,1), Nm10(:,3), 'Color', [0 .9 0],...
17
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', '*')
18 semilogx(Nm10(:,1), y, 'Color', [0 0.9 0],...
19
'Linestyle', '-')
20
21 semilogx(N0(:,1), N0(:,3), 'rs--')
22 semilogx(N0(:,1), 0.014441*N0(:,1)+29.255, 'r-')
23
24 semilogx(N10(:,1), N10(:,3), 'kv--')
25 semilogx(N10(:,1), 0.023726*N10(:,1)+29.969, 'k-')
26
27 semilogx(N20(:,1), N20(:,3), 'mp--')
28 semilogx(N20(:,1), 0.052736*N20(:,1)+30.828, 'm-')
29
30 N30([16, 18],:) = []; % These points are outliers
31
32 semilogx(N30(:,1), N30(:,3), 'Color', [0 0.44 .74],...
33
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', '+')
34 hold on
35 semilogx(N30(:,1), 0.10756*N30(:,1)+ 31.284, 'Color',...
36
[0 0.44 .74], 'Linestyle', '-')
37
38 semilogx(N40(:,1), N40(:,3), 'Color', [0.9 0.325 0.098],...
39
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', 'd')
40 semilogx(N40(:,1), 0.29464*N40(:,1)+31.823, 'Color', [0.9 0.325 0.098],...
41
'Linestyle', '-')
42
43 legend('-15°C', '-15°C Fit', '-10°C', '-10°C Fit', '0°C', '0°C Fit',...
44
'10°C', '10°C Fit', '20°C', '20°C Fit', '30°C', '30°C Fit', ...
45
'40°C', '40°C Fit', 'Location', 'EastOutside')
46 grid on
47 ylim([28,38])
48 xlim([1/30,15])
49 title('Dark Noise')
50 ylabel('Variance [DN^2]')
51 xlabel('Exposure time [s]')
52
53 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
54 hold off
55
56 figure(2)
57
58 semilogx(Nm15(:,1), Nm15(:,2), 'bx--')
59
60 hold on
61
62 semilogx(Nm10(:,1), Nm10(:,2), 'Color', [0 .9 0],...
==PAGE:128==
B.4 Canon EOS 7D - Dark Current
121
63
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', '*')
64
65 semilogx(N0(:,1), N0(:,2), 'rs--')
66
67 semilogx(N10(:,1), N10(:,2), 'kv--')
68
69 semilogx(N20(:,1), N20(:,2), 'mp--')
70
71 semilogx(N30(:,1), N30(:,2), 'Color', [0 0.44 .74],...
72
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', '+')
73
74 semilogx(N40(:,1), N40(:,2), 'Color', [0.9 0.325 0.098],...
75
'Linestyle', '--', 'Marker', 'd')
76
77 legend('-15°C', '-10°C', '0°C',...
78
'10°C', '20°C', '30°C', ...
79
'40°C', 'Location', 'EastOutside')
80
81 grid on
82 title('Dark Signal')
83 ylabel('Mean [DN]')
84 xlabel('Exposure time [s]')
85
86 hold off
87
88 K = 2.2878;
89 Id = [0 0 0.014441 0.023726 0.052736 0.10756 0.29464]*(K^2);
90 T = [-15 -10 0 10 20 30 40];
91 figure(3)
92 plot(T, Id, 'ob--')
93 grid on
94 title('Dark Current')
95 ylabel('I_{Dark} [e- / s / pixel]')
96 xlabel('Temperature [°C]')
97
98 figure(4)
99 plot(T, Id, 'ob--')
100 grid on
101 title('Dark Current')
102 ylabel('I_{Dark} [e- / s / pixel]')
103 xlabel('Temperature [°C]')
104
105 hold on
106 plot(T, 0.0756*2.^((T)/8.543), 'k-') % 0
107 plot(T, 0.1242*2.^((T-10)/8.543), 'm-') % 10
108 plot(T, 0.276*2.^((T-20)/8.543), 'r-') % 20
109 plot(T, 0.10756*(K^2)*2.^((T-30)/8.543), 'g-') % 30
110 plot(T, 1.5422*2.^((T-40)/8.543), 'c-') % 40
111
112
113 legend('Measured', 'T_{ref} = 0°C', 'T_{ref} = 10°C',...
114
'T_{ref} = 20°C', 'T_{ref} = 30°C',...
==PAGE:129==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
122
115
'T_{ref} = 40°C', 'Location', 'EastOutside')
B.5
Linear Motion Reproduction
Images for the horizontal scan has been acquired in 2 parts, moving from the cen-
ter to the left and from the center to the right. The same script can be used in both
horizontal and vertical scans. Only the scripts for the first case are reported here since
there are minimal differences. This script pre-processes and forms a binary image for
each image and sum them together to produce a single binary image.
left.m (script)
1 f = dir('*.tiff');
2 files = {f.name};
3
4 im = imread(files{1});
5 I = double(im);
6 TT = zeros(size(I));
7
8 for i = 1:numel(files)
9
im = imread(files{i});
10
SE = strel('disk', 2);
11
SE1 = strel('square', 2);
12
13
14
%
To see small dots
15
I = imdilate(I,SE1);
16
I = imerode(I,SE);
17
I = imerode(I,SE);
18
I = imerode(I,SE);
19
I = imerode(I,SE1);
20
I = imerode(I,SE);
21
th = 12000;
22
23
T = zeros(size(I));
24
T(I > th) = 255;
25
26
%
To see normal dots
27
% T = imerode(T,SE);
28
% T = imdilate(T,SE1);
29
% T = imdilate(T,SE1);
30
% th = 9000;
31
32
s = ['bin_right_', num2str(i), '.tiff'];
33
34
TT = TT + T;
35 end
==PAGE:130==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
123
36
37 % To reduce protrusions in the dots
38 SE = strel('disk', 10);
39 TT = imopen(TT, SE);
40 TT = imopen(TT, SE);
41
42 imwrite(uint8(TT), 'HORIZONTAL_L.tiff');
43 % imwrite(uint8(TT), 'HORIZONTAL_R.tiff ');
44 % imwrite(uint8(TT), 'VERTICAL.tiff ');
45 % imwrite(uint8(TT), 'DIAGONAL.tiff ');
46 % imwrite(uint8(TT), 'ANGULAR.tiff ');
For the µASC the preprocessing is very similar. Only the one for the vertical motion
case is reported here as differences are minimal.
vertical.m (function)
1 function [] = vertical()
2
H = 580;
3
W = 752;
4
5
f = dir('*.unc');
6
files = {f.name};
7
8
N = ones(floor(numel(files)/2), 3);
9
TT = zeros(size(W,H));
10
11
j=0;
12
13
for i = 1:numel(files)
14
fin = fopen(files{i},'r');
15
fseek(fin, 34,'bof');
16
17
% Preallocate matrices to store images
18
im = zeros(W,H);
19
20
% Read the rest of the uncompressed files byte by byte (uint8);
21
% Read in groups of W bytes (rows of images , saved as colummns for
22
% efficiency - fread saves as column automatically)
23
for k = 1:H
24
im(:, k) = fread(fin, W, 'uint8');
25
end
26
27
im = double(im');
28
29
SE = strel('disk', 1, 0);
30
im = imdilate(im, SE);
31
32
SE = strel('disk', 3, 0);
33
im = imopen(im, SE);
34
im = imopen(im, SE);
35 %
im = imopen(im, SE);
==PAGE:131==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
124
36
37
th = 120;
38
39
T = zeros(size(im));
40
41
T(im > th) = 255;
42
43
TT = TT + T;
44
45
end
46
47
SE = strel('disk', 3, 0);
48
49
TT = imopen(TT,SE);
50
TT = imopen(TT,SE);
51
TT = imopen(TT,SE);
52
TT = imopen(TT,SE);
53
54
SE = strel('disk', 1, 0);
55
TT = imerode(TT,SE);
56
57
imwrite(uint8(TT), 'VERTICAL.tiff');
58 end
The following is a C++ program which takes a binary image produced above and
find the centroids of each dot. OpenCV libraries are used. It can be used for both
cameras.
1 #include <iostream >
2 #include <fstream >
3 #include <stdio.h>
4 #include <stdlib.h>
5 #include <opencv2/opencv.hpp>
6 #include <string.h>
7
8
9 using namespace std;
10 using namespace cv;
11
12 void centroiding(const char *, const char *);
13 void pinpoint(const char *, vector<Point2f >, int K);
14
15
16 int main(int argc, char ** argv) {
17
const char * imgName = argv[1];
18
const char * outfile = argv[2];
19
centroiding(imgName , outfile);
20
return 0;
21 }
22
23 void centroiding(const char * imgName , const char * fout) {
==PAGE:132==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
125
24
Mat img;
25
img = imread(imgName , CV_LOAD_IMAGE_GRAYSCALE);
26
27
Mat bin = img.clone();
28
29
vector <vector<Point> > boundary;
30
vector <Vec4i> hierarchy;
31
32
findContours(bin, boundary , hierarchy , CV_RETR_TREE ,
33
CV_CHAIN_APPROX_NONE , Point(0, 0));
34
35
///
Compute moments for each contour and extract
36
///
only the normalized first moment.
37
int N = boundary.size();
38
39
// Count the contours with at least 5 points (the
40
// minimum to calculate the 1st order moment)
41
int k = 0;
42
for(int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
43
if (boundary[i].size() >= 5)
44
k++;
45
}
46
47
cout << endl << "Nr. of objects: " << N << endl;
48
cout << endl << "Discarded: " << N - k << endl;
49
50
//
Calculate all moments for contours selected before
51
52
vector <Moments > moms(k);
53
54
int j = 0;
55
for(int i = 0; i < N; i++)
56
if (contours[i].size() >= 5)
57
moms[j++] = moments(boundary[i], false);
58
59
// Normalized 1st moments
60
// NOTE: the class 'Moments' doesn't have normalized
61
// first moments...
62
vector <Point2f > n1stMoms(k);
63
64
for (int i = 0; i < k; i++)
65
n1stMoms[i] = Point2f((moms[i].m10 / moms[i].m00),
66
(moms[i].m01 / moms[i].m00));
67
68
69
// Save coordinates of centroids (normalized 1st
70
// moments).
71
72
ofstream coords;
73
coords.open(fout);
74
75
for (int i = 0; i < k; i++)
==PAGE:133==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
126
76
coords << n1stMoms[i].x << " " << n1stMoms[i].y << " \n";
77
78
pinpoint(imgName , n1stMoms , k);
79
80
coords.close();
81
bin.release();
82
img.release();
83 }
84
85 ////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
86 // This function creates a copy of the binary image and draws //
87 // a red cross at the centroid coordinates.
//
88 ////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
89 void pinpoint(const char * imgName , vector<Point2f > moments , int K) {
90
IplImage * imgcpy = cvLoadImage(imgName , CV_LOAD_IMAGE_GRAYSCALE);
91
IplImage * I = cvCreateImage(cvGetSize(imgcpy), IPL_DEPTH_8U , 3);
92
cvCvtColor(imgcpy, I, COLOR_GRAY2RGB);
93
94
unsigned short A = 10;
95
int x, y;
96
97
for (int i = 0; i < K; i++) {
98
x = moments[i].x;
99
y = moments[i].y;
100
cvLine(I, cvPoint((x - A),(y - A)), cvPoint((x + A),(y + A)),
cvScalar(0,0,255), 2, 4);
101
cvLine(I, cvPoint((x - A),(y + A)), cvPoint((x + A),(y - A)),
cvScalar(0,0,255), 2, 4);
102
}
103
104
string s(imgName);
105
s.resize(s.size() - 4);
106
s = s + "_centres.png";
107
108
cvSaveImage(s.c_str(), I);
109
110
cvReleaseImage(&imgcpy);
111
cvReleaseImage(&I);
112 }
The following complete the processing. They are the same for both cameras. The
only difference is that the number of tracks and dots to treat are written explicitly for
simplicity of the code with the exception of the diagonal case where the number of dots
per track is variable.
track.m (script)
1 % Vertical Tracks
2 % In this specific case (uASC) 6 lines were to be read
3 Tx = zeros(6, 7);
4 Ty = zeros(6, 4);
5
==PAGE:134==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
127
6 % Horizontal
7 Tx = zeros(5, 4);
8 Ty = zeros(5, 7)
9
10
11 % Diagonal
12 % R = zeros(7, 4);
13 % TH = zeros(7, 4);
14
15 for i = 1:6
16
% Vertical
17
s = ['v',num2str(i),'.txt'];
18
% Horizontal left
19
% s = ['L',num2str(i),'.txt'];
20
% Horizontal right
21
% s = ['R',num2str(i),'.txt'];
22
% Diagonal
23
% s = ['d',num2str(i),'.txt'];
24
25
v = readmatrix(s);
26
% Vertical
27
[Tx(i,:), Ty(i,:)] = calc(v, i);
28
% Horizontal
29
% [Ty(i,:), Tx(i,:)] = calc(v, i);
30
% Diagonal
31
% [R(i, :), TH(i,:)] = calc(v, i);
32 end
calc.m (functions)
1
2 % Vertical
3 function [X, Y] = calc(v, i)
4
% Centroiding produced a third column of NaN
5
v(:,3) = [];
6
7
v = sortrows(v, 2);
8
9
X = zeros(1,7);
10
Y = zeros(1,4);
11
12
X(1) = mean(v(:,1));
13
X(2) = std(v(:,1));
14
X(3) = min(v(:,1));
15
X(4) = max(v(:,1));
16
X(5) = max(v(:,1)) - min(v(:,1));
17
X(6) = max(v(:,1)) - mean(v(:,1));
18
X(7) = mean(v(:,1)) - min(v(:,1));
19
20
dy = v(:,2) - circshift(v(:,2),1);
21
dy = dy(2:end);
22
==PAGE:135==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
128
23
Y(1) = mean(dy);
24
Y(2) = std(dy);
25
Y(3) = min(dy);
26
Y(4) = max(dy);
27 end
28
29
30 % Horizontal
31 function [Y, X] = calc(v, i)
32
% Centroiding produced a third column of NaN
33
v(:,3) = [];
34
35
v = sortrows(v, 1);
36
37
Y = zeros(1,7);
38
X = zeros(1,4);
39
40
Y(1) = mean(v(:,2));
41
Y(2) = std(v(:,2));
42
Y(3) = min(v(:,2));
43
Y(4) = max(v(:,2));
44
Y(5) = max(v(:,2)) - min(v(:,2));
45
Y(6) = max(v(:,2)) - mean(v(:,2));
46
Y(7) = mean(v(:,2)) - min(v(:,2));
47
48
dx = v(:,1) - circshift(v(:,1),1);
49
dx = dx(2:end);
50
51
X(1) = mean(dx);
52
X(2) = std(dx);
53
X(3) = min(dx);
54
X(4) = max(dx);
55 end
56
57
58
59
60 % Diagonal
61 function [R, TH] = calc(v, i)
62
% Centroiding produced a third column of NaN
63
v(:,3) = [];
64
65
v = sortrows(v, 1);
66
67
dx = circshift(v(:,1),1) - v(:,1);
68
dx = dx(2:end);
69
70
dy = v(:,2) - circshift(v(:,2),1);
71
dy = dy(2:end);
72
73
N = length(dx);
74
==PAGE:136==
B.5 Linear Motion Reproduction
129
75
dr = sqrt(dy.^2 + dx.^2);
76
th = 180 / pi * atan(dy./dx); % [deg]
77
78
R = zeros(1,4);
79
R(1) = mean(dr);
80
R(2) = std(dr);
81
R(3) = min(dr);
82
R(4) = max(dr);
83
84
TH = zeros(1,4);
85
TH(1) = mean(th);
86
TH(2) = std(th);
87
TH(3) = min(th);
88
TH(4) = max(th);
89 end
==PAGE:137==
==PAGE:138==
