==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
SmartMed: An engaging way to report med-
ical adherence
Chen Wang (s133301)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis aims to introduce the Master project that includes design and implemen-
tation process of a pillbox, named as SmartMed. The goal of SmartMed is to find a
way to improve medical adherence of mental illness patients.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Master degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Chen Wang (s133301)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my professor Per Bækgaard, he gives me the opportunity to do
this interesting project and give me a lot of help.
I am also grateful to the Mr Raju Maharjan, PhD, a awesome assistant.He followed
the whole process of the project, sharing his knowledge,gives a lot of help as much as
he can.
I would like to thank my family and friends for their support throughout the
project and my daily life.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of the art
5
2.1
What are the reasons that patients do not take their medicine as pre-
scribed? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
What technologies are available?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Why pillbox? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Existing Pillboxes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
How is SmartMed different? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Method
9
3.1
User-centered design for SmartMed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Requirement gathering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Prototyping SmartMed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Building the SmartMed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Pilot test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Field study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results
33
4.1
Quantitative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
37
6
Conclusion
39
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A An Appendix
41
A.1 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 FlowCharts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.3 User story Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.4 Pair microbit with Phone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.5 Theory Example of prototype 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.6 Related figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Bibliography
47
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This thesis aims to introduce the project that includes design and implementation of
a medicine pillbox - SmartMed (see SmartMed outward in appendix A.6). SmartMed
is designed to encourage patients to take medicine on time, in order to improve the
adherence of medication.
1.1
Background
Mental health is closely related to our daily life, which affects people’s connection with
the outside world and their own behaviour. Research shows that there is an internal
correlation between human psychological activities and physiological functions.
If
people are in a good emotional state, they can make their physical function at its best.
On the contrary, the function would be reduced or destroyed, which not only affects
your work and life but also causes various diseases. Mental health disorders exist in
broad categories: anxiety disorders, mood disorders, psychotic disorders, personality
disorders and impulse control disorders.
Research shows that over 50% of patients do not take medications as prescribed [OB05]
resulting in additional health-care cost of $290 billion per year [DK10] in the U.S alone.
Of all medication-related hospital admissions in the United States, 33 to 69 percent
are due to poor medication adherence.
Patients with psychiatric illness typically have difficulty following a medication
regimen which accounts for substantial worsening of disease, death, and increased
health care costs [RR98; OB05]. Rates of non-adherence with medication for physical
illness are approximately 24% overall, compared with 35% for depression, 42% for
psychosis and 64% for bipolar disorder. Research indicate that half of patients with
major depression for whom antidepressants are prescribed will not take the drugs
three months after the initiation of therapy [V+02].
Hence, with the development of society, people pay much more attention to mental
health, the healthy status of mentality can make people have a higher quality of life.
Globally, mental and substance use disorders are very common: around 1-in-7 people
(15 percent) have one or more mental or substance use disorders. Until 2017, It’s
estimated that 970 million people worldwide had a mental or substance use disorder ,
the largest number of people had an anxiety disorder, estimated at around 4 percent
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
of the population.1
According to the statistics, in Denmark, people with severe mental illness (SMI)
comprise about 2 percents of the Danish population and they die 10-20 years earlier
than people without SMI2. For some patients already suffering from mental illness,
active and appropriate medical treatment is able to effectively inhibit the development
of the disease and prolong life.
1.1.1
Why people get mental illness?
In general, the factors of mental illness include, psychological trauma, adverse child-
hood environments, genetic predisposition and personality traits.3
1.1.2
The importance of adherence
In order to inhibit virus replication in patients, maintain immune function, prevent
the invasion of disease gradually, so that patients have the same quality of life as
ordinary people, it is important that follow the drug compliance. Another benefit is
that medication adherence helps in minimizing drug wastage and reducing healthcare
costs.
[AJM18] Failure to follow medication schedules may lead to major health
complications, including death.[AJM18]
1.2
Research question
The primary goal of the thesis will be established based on the following main research
question:
“How to improve medical adherence in patients with mental illness (and others)?”
Further more, sub-questions were came up with below:
• Does notification and tracking function of Smart tool can raise the adherence?
• Does the feedback function has any effect on the engagement and adherence?
The main purpose of this project is to improve the adherence of medicine for
mental illness patient, support them follow the medical plan on time and keep track
of their plan. In order to achieve this goal, I created the a pill box, which provides
a simple and clear way to prompt patients to take medicine at the right time, track
medication intake, and provide engaging feedback.
To build the whole project, I planned and conducted following processes:
1) Research of corresponding title and problem (literature and interview)
1https://ourworldindata.org/mental-health
2http://www.cachet.dk/
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causesofmentaldisorders
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Overview of thesis
3
2) Design the innovative function depends on the result from research
3) Develop SmartMed box by using Microbit with necessary accessories Build an app
which shows tracking status on calendar.
1.3
Overview of thesis
In the thesis, the following chapters are divided:
• Introduction
• State of Art
• Smart-Med Design
• Implementation
• Pilot study
• Field study
• Result And Discussion
• Conclusion
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
State of the art
Adherence refers to the patient’s compliance and consistency with relevant advice
and relevant guidance from doctor in order to get corresponding effective drug effect.
Adherence with drug therapy has always been a problem in the treatment of mental
illness patients, data from WHO shows that among depressed patients, adherence
with antidepressants is only about 40-70 percentage1.
2.1
What are the reasons that patients do not take
their medicine as prescribed?
An investigation shows that some patients do not follow the doctor’s instructions
because of trouble or worry about the side effects of drugs on other organs and
tissues in the body. Besides that, the more influential reason is that some patients
are so busy that they forget to take their medicine, furthermore they consider that
next time they take their medicine, they can just double the amount.2
2.2
What technologies are available?
Due to the severity of the lack of medicine adherence, technical intervention has
become an effective method to promote adherence. Currently, there are a number
of medicine adherence alerts system or tracking products available on the market
by using different technologies, this section will cover the representative types of
technologies.
2.2.1
Vision-Based System
The principle of vision-based technology is to use the camera to detect whether the
pill is still in the container, or whether to take the correct pill , the patients have to
stand in the available view area of camera when using this kind of product, the skin
color of patients will be collected in order to detect patients state of their action, the
1https://kknews.cc/health/45jamv.html
2http://www.xinhuanet.com/science/2018-06/10/c137245571.htm
==PAGE:16==
6
2 State of the art
action group of an iteration about taking medicine successfully includes: turn on the
box, pass pills into the mouth with the hand, swallowed pills, twist off caps. Based
on the above action detection, digital scale which is user for weighting pills is also
utilized in products. The camera can obtain the number on the scale, conduct image
processing on the computer, with analyze the decline of the total weight of the pills,
whether the pills are taken or could be confirmed.[AJM18]
2.2.2
Challenges of Vision-Based system
Ideally, this technology can be very precise and ensure the record situation that pa-
tients the taken correct pills as well, however, the study have shown that in skin color
detection process, the color of the clothing will affect the system, thereby reducing
accuracy of judgement, in order to solve this limitation, the developer will working
in conjunction with multiple cameras. Furthermore, if the digital scales is used, the
limitations become greater, because the container needs to placed on digital scales,
patients cannot take it out or move it, overall, the challenge of this technology is
high-cost and complex hardware setup which is not convenient.[AJM18]
2.2.3
Sensor-Based system
Sensor is becoming more common in modern products which is quoted to provide
convenient for people, generally, the size of the sensor is small , in order to reach the
function of medicine adherence, it can be set in the product which has the function
of tracking or notification to do real-time detection in patient’s daily life with corre-
sponding medicine-taken status, as for the form of application, it can be divided into
two main types, wearable product and fixed product.[AJM18]
In the market, wearables can be roughly divided into two categories according to
body position that the product is worn: neck-worn and wrist-worn. [AJM18] For
example, one of studies shows a specific necklace products for medicine adherence,
the core part is a piezoelectric sensor, its purpose is that detect the mechanical stress
from muscles and skin when the patient in the process of swallowing pills,afterward
a response to the voltage is produced, the voltage data will be sent as a signal to
the mobile phone via Bluetooth, on that stage, the data will be analyzed by a given
algorithm to determine whether the patient has taken the medicine. Besides above
technology￿there is another technique, which have the cooperation by utilizing sound
sensors and microphones to collect and detect the sound of a patient swallowing pills,
then, analyze the sound data to verify the status of medicine-taking process.
2.2.4
Challenge of Sensor-Based system
The core shortcomings of Wearable product is users’ acceptance, it will be uncomfort-
able for senior citizen because of long time attached status, this may cause psycho-
logical and physical stress to some extent.[AJM18]
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Why pillbox?
7
2.3
Why pillbox?
Pillbox is an indispensable and most direct element in the user’s medication process.
Most of the medicines must be taken out of from the pillbox. Furthermore, it is more
convenient to carry than vision-based system product. Technically, the size of the
pillbox is relatively larger than wearable product (eg.necklace), so that it is more
variety in the selection of component￿according to above reasons, pillbox is chosen as
the focused object of this project.
2.4
Existing Pillboxes
Nowadays, plenty of categories of the smart pillbox are produced to remind or track
patients’ medicine taking status, nevertheless, there are almost no drug boxes for
patients with psychological diseases. All existing pillboxes are divided into two cat-
egories: 1) APP-based product, which means there is cooperation between pill box
and mobile application 2) single med box. [AJM18]
2.4.1
Mobile Application: Patients’ Adherence to Medicine
In-take Schedules
This product is APP-based in order to improve medicine adherence of patients, the
core flow is: 1) Medicine-taken time is set by the patient’s corresponding caregiver
and sent to the server, when the scheduled time is reached, patient’s phone occurs a
notification to notify patient it’s time to take medicine.3) The patient turns off the
notification and finishes taking the medicine by open pillbox, take pills out, and close
the pillbox. 4) Whether pills have been taken is detected by measuring the weight
change of pillbox, this is the core and innovative function of the product.
When
weight decreases, it means the pill has been taken, and vice, the patient didn’t take
the medicine. 5) If the system detected that the patient did not take the medicine,
the APP in Caregiver will have an alert notification.[BW17]
On the whole, this product has excellent functionality, nonetheless it is not aimed
at people with mental illness, so that the patients cannot get a timely, positive feed-
back of taking medicine. Furthermore, this pillbox’s notification function relies on
mobile phone.
2.4.2
A Remotely Programmable Smart Pillbox for Enhancing
Medication Adherence
In literature, the purpose of this smart pillbox is to improve adherence of medicine-
taken, main function includes: 1) Notify user that it’s time to eat medicine by using
LED 2) detect whether pills were taken, 3) comment taking medicine on the calendar
==PAGE:18==
8
2 State of the art
in order take the record down and their corresponding remark.
From the above,
it is easy to be aware that this product is concentrated on tracking the status of
taking medicine. However,the notification will be sent from the APP as well, it is less
convenient that just finish all operation on the pillbox, furthermore, the size of this
product is too big to hold,although each column can be removed. [Abb+12]
2.4.3
PillSence
With the prevalence of using IoT technologies, it has been possible to develop a
wireless sensor-driven medication compliance monitoring system.
However, those
systems don’t naturally come with reliability, mobility or user’s comfort. One of the
cases who realized these limitations is called PillSense. It emphasized the size of the
device, energy consumption, cost of mobile computing and usability of communication.
PillSense consists of a 3D printed bottle, a magnetic switch, and sensors attached to
the bottle. The first is a magnetic sensor to monitor if the cap has been opened by a
user. Another one is the motion sensor to measure if the user picks up the bottle. The
third one is a weight sensor to measure the gross weight of the bottle and pills. And
the last sensor is the radio component to send and receive signals to the IoT platform.
PillSense monitors all events associated with the medication-taking process. First,
the user opens the cap, picks up the bottle. Then the user pours a pill or pills to the
other hand. In the end, the user places back the bottle and close the cap. During the
medication-taking process, the load sensor will weigh the pill bottle to verify whether
a pill is taken out of the bottle. The experiments show that the lifetime of PillSense is
about 22 days, which demonstrates that it consumes lower energy compared to other
examples on markets. However, one of the shortage is that PillSense is not able to
confirm whether or not a pill is absorbed by the user. Because it only monitors the
weight changes.[AMH18]
2.5
How is SmartMed different?
Innovation and special parts are listed below:
1. SmartMed has a reminder function provided by the pillbox itself, including two
parts, sound and pattern. The user can get reminders without using tools such
as APP or alarm clock, and can also directly see which cell should be taken
without hesitating.
2. Getting feedback after taking the medicine￿it’s to a certain extent can improve
enjoyment and encouragement for patient.
3. No complicated operation, no need for patient to set time manually.
4. The tracking function is just used and checked by caregiver or family member,
so that all things the user should do is focus on medication.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Method
3.1
User-centered design for SmartMed
User-centered design (UCD) is a type of design philosophy and model: When design-
ing products or system, how to plan and think from the perspective of users and
guide product design and development. One of the core feature of UCD is to design
a product that has a real need and clearly define the context in which it will be used.
In this architectural model, the flow is roughly defined as four main parts:
• Definition of the target group: Define who will use the product and service, the
goal they want to achieve, and what status are they to urge them to use.
• Specific requirement: Collect and confirm the corresponding requirement pa-
tients need and their expectation from the product.The scenarios can be defined
by actual observations of how the user uses them and the vision for the product
• Proposed scheme:
After having a clear purpose, the next step is to start
ideation￿the available idea should be came up with and the real product sys-
tem is established. This is the stage from the concept to the completion of the
product or service.
• Evaluation: Evaluate the product by having test, and modify if necessary to
make it better and meet patients’ requirement
3.2
Requirement gathering
Since the target customer of the project is mental illness patient, in order to get
pointed solution of patients’ facing problem, six participants with light or heavy
mental illness were interviewed, the age of all six participants are between 20-30
years old, and their siken duration are between 1-3 year.
Specific questions were divided into the following parts:
• What kind of mental illness do you have?
• The status of medicine-taken?
• Have you ever been used medicine box?
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Method
• If the customer has this experience?
– What’s the function of smart medicine box?
– Do you have any suggestion to improve?
• If the customer did not have this experience?
– Have you ever had some smart experience product related to taking medicine?
(Include App)
– What function do you wish? Pros and Cons
After collecting and settling results, the following list shows the challenge which
participants are facing and expect to optimize:
1. Patients feel dysphoric on account of the inconvenient function that they have
to turn off the notification by clicking button on APP every time when the APP
remind them to take medicine. Patients needs to check which kind of medicine
they should eat at current time
2. Patients always forget to record after they taking medicine. The notification
mode is boring. If patient is on a business trip, normal travel or other situation
that they cannot take medicine at home, pill box have no peace to contain
enough pill.
For SmartMed’s solution, the original function have been considered and proposed
based on result of interview and innovative thinking:
1. For the sake of patient’s convenience, the notification function can be finished
only rely on pillbox, it means the patient don’t need to click any button on
mobile APP.
2. After taking the corresponding pill, an instant and interesting feedback is given
to patient in order to improve humanization level of medicine box’s usability.
It’s worth mentioning that feedback function did not be included in other prod-
uct.
3. App is employed by caregiver and family member for managing and tracking
history and status of patient’s medicine taken in calendar way.
3.3
Prototyping SmartMed
Iterations describes the work of all prototypes that were came up with during whole
project, Since collected the suggestion and information, the prototypes’ creation pro-
cess is a creative step where focus on understand the context of the problem from
participants and fit their expectation as much as possible.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Prototyping SmartMed
11
3.3.1
Iteration 1
According to the daily medication-taken status and user experience of the related
products they used, the first idea is to design a pill-box for seven days, the feature of
first version of pillbox is open mode, the box is cylindrical, which includes three main
parts: Cell,Centered rotating stick and Cover, there are seven cells that represent
container of pills for a week correspondingly,(see figure 3.1).Centered rotating column
connecting all cells in series, every cells can be rotating in order to take out pills, as
for referenced and more straightforward illustration example(see figure in Appendix
A.5)
Furthermore, Micro-bit work plate is inlaid on the cover of pillbox. This prototype
is aimed at users who take the pills only once a day, and the user puts the pill that need
to be taken daily into each cell, and dosing interval is one week. As for operation, the
user completes the action group consisting of the three actions of opening the cover,
taking the medicine, and closing the cover, the signal of completion of the medicine
will be recorded once, in order to achieve the goal about tracking function.
Figure 3.1: The draft of prototype 1, it is designed for seven days,the operation to
the cover can be detected..
Test and feedback Prototype 1 has not been made into an entity model. Two
participants who are in mental illness status participated in the discussion. They were
shown the flat pattern-making and introduced the manual and principle. Feedback
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Method
and comment shows below:
1
I think the opening way is funny but a little bit complicated
2
Seems it’s too big to hold, but the operation step for detecting medication can be kept.
3.3.2
Iteration 2
The design of the second and the first prototype has certain similarities, but for the
second version, some function details has been added, this version of the prototype is
the horizontal rectangle, in the same way, the entire box includes seven independent
cells as well, each cell has a separate cover that opens downward. The Micro-bit is
placed on the right side of the box, there is an ‘A’ button on the interface of the
Micro-bit, each time the user removes and finish taking the pills, he needs to press ‘A’
button, ￿(see figure 3.2), after pressing, the LED will flash on the front panel, which
can give the pattern feedback as encourage to user, furthermore, the Micro-bit will
also read in and send the current time as the record time for taking pills by using
Bluetooth, in order to let the caregiver or family member look over whether the user
follow the Medication instructions or not.
Figure 3.2: The draft of prototype 2, 7 individual cells in total,each cell has a sepa-
rate cover that opens downward.Micro-bit is setted on the side of box,
the button will be used after taking the medicine for getting the feed-
back and data transfer..
Test and feedback The model was made with a carton, 3 participants attended
the short interview of prototype 3, two of them participated in the evaluation of the
first prototype.They were introduced the process of using, and simulated the usage
of a pill box on site, lists of feedback shows below:
3.3.3
Iteration 3
Due to the complexity of producing the pill box for seven-days, in limited time period,
the new version of prototype was came up with, which is the pill box for one day but
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Prototyping SmartMed
13
1
I don’t like the button pressing part, I think it will annoying me.
2
Bluetooth part is useful for recording, I like it.
3
Can you create a shorter box? This pox is too long to hold,also the first prototype,
and button press is not convenient.
with more function(see figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3: The draft of prototype 3, the Micro-bit is sett on the top surface,the
cover can be opened upward and closed downward,whole box is divided
into for cells..
The following part describes the details of the final version prototype. as a whole,
the box is cube with Clamshell style1, it is divided into four parts inside for the
corresponding period of medication time: Morning, Noon, afternoon and night. Micro-
bit is assembled on the cover with the LED side facing up, it’s convenient for patient
to receive time’s up notification, get visual and interesting feedback, and pill-taken
detection as well.
Specially, the notification way has more interesting and useful in this version, first
of all, the buzzer which on Micro-bit will play the tune to alert, in the meantime, LED
panel will show arrow which illustrate which cell the user should take after opening
the pill box, Since the maximum times of taking pills is four, so arrow’s direction
can be: North-West, North-East, South-West, and South-East. For example, a user
should take two times a day, 8am and 18 pm, he will receive two notifications per
1https://www.klug-conservation.com/Archival-Storage-Clamshell-boxes
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Method
day, as for arrow part, first time, he will get the North-West arrow, which means he
should take top left corner cell at 8am, at the second time of this day, he will be
shown North-East arrow, which means he should take top right corner cell at 18pm,
the rest can be done in the same manner.
Similar to the first prototype, the complete steps of taking medicine operation
also include open, take medicine and close the box, and the record will be noted and
sent for achieving tracking function as well.
Test and feedback 5 participants attended the test and interview of prototype
3, that including 3 participants who have done the first two prototypes.Feedback and
comment shows below:
1
This version is the best of 3 prototypes.
2
The arrow part seems good for me, I can see which cell should I take.
3
I think it has not enough space to contain pills for long time period’s medicine.
4
The method of detect eating process is cool!! But how can you confirm someone eating
the pills not just open the pillbox.
5
I would like to see what exact feedback will it show, in my opinion, it can
be a sentence to encourage.
Summary: According to the participants’ feedback, especially the participants
who have joined with multiple prototypes, the third prototype obviously has a better
response, so the implementation will be developed based on prototype 3.
3.4
Building the SmartMed
1. Micro-bit2
The Micro-Bit (also referred to as BBC Micro Bit, stylized as micro:bit) is an
open source hardware ARM-based embedded system designed by the BBC for
use in computer education.Its size is 43 mm × 52 mm, on the front size, there are
5*5 LED panel, two main programmable buttons, a series of necessary input and
output pins, on the reverse side, the core part of the is 16 MHz ARM Cortex-M0
micro-controller with 256KB flash, 16KB RAM, furthermore, it also embedded
the compass which is used for detect earth magnetic field, accelerator detector
which is used for detecting the motion such as free fall shaking or different
angles of tilt. Moreover, it has Low energy Bluetooth, it’s a antenna which can
provide micro-controller send and receive signals via Bluetooth, besides, on the
reverse side it has light sensor, temperature sensor, reset button as well.
In order to power on, there is a USB interface and a 3V battery socket on the
side of the micro-bit, so that there are two ways to power on it. The first way
is to use USB cable to connect the bit and the computer. USB is also the only
2https://Micro-bit.org/guide/features/
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Building the SmartMed
15
way that flash compiled files in the computer. the format of file that should
be executed is .hex file type, this file carries the code into the micro-bit and
runs it. The second method is to use a 3V battery to power on, the battery
package should be 2 AAA 1.5V battery, when finish using the USB to complete
the flash code process, the cable can be unplugged, then connecting the battery
pack, you can operate the micro-bit anytime and anywhere,however it’s worth
noting that in conversion progress, reset button cannot be pressed.
2. IO-bit extension board 1.0 and 2.03
Due to there is no buzzer on the micro-bit, in order to complete the sound-alert
in the notification function, IO-bit extension board is used in the project. This
board extends all the pins of the Micro-bit for necessary connection. There is a
slot on the top of the board. When start to using, Micro-bit should be inserted
into the IO-bit board’s slot, then power on the micro-bit.
3. MicroPython4
MicroPython is a lean and efficient implementation of the Python 3 program-
ming language that includes a subset of the Python standard library and is
optimised to run on micro-controllers. MicroPython is packed full of advanced
features such as an interactive prompt, arbitrary precision integers, closures,and
more. Yet it is compact enough to fit and run within just 256k of code space
and 16k of RAM.
4. MU compiler5
Mu is the specific python compiler which was used in project. After finishing
programming, ‘Flash’ should be clicked for running the code on connected Micro-
bit.
5. MakeCode 6
The MakeCode editor provided by Microsoft makes it easy to program your
micro:bit with blocks and JavaScript.7 It is a visual, intuitive programming
environment. and take full advantage of the device’s many features, such as
peer-to-peer radio and Bluetooth.
6. APP inventor8
APP inventor is an APP compiler, it is very intuitive and convenient to use.Firstly,
drag and drop to add element from the list in graphical editing page which is
called ’designer’ to compose the relevant setting , and then enter the block page
3https://www.kittenbot.cc/products/kittenbot-iobit-v2-0-for-Micro-bit
4https://docs.MicroPython.org
5https://codewith.mu/en/about
6https://Micro-bit.org/en/2017-03-07-javascript-block-resources/)
7https://Micro-bit.org/code/
8http://ai2.appinventor.mit.edu/5056732517236736
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Method
which is used for editing, elements will be displayed on the left side, clicking
different elements, corresponding available operations will be expanded, drag
the block to the blank area to compile the function.
7. Box with 4 cell Several simple four plastic boxes used in the project.
3.4.1
Coding the SmartMed
3.4.1.1
Iteration 1
The programming language of iteration 1 is MicroPython. According to the docu-
ment9 and the final version of the prototype, the main functions to be implemented
are shown following.
1. Start up:
When the user gets a brand new unused pillbox, all he needs to do is press ‘A’
button to start up the pillbox. When ‘A’ button is pressed, the LED will display
a rotating clock pattern, the corresponding function name is display.show().
Then the medicine box enters the standby state and waits for the first time to
be used. Use time.sleep() to set the waiting time.
1 if button_a.was_pressed():
2
display.show(Image.ALL_CLOCKS)
3
display.clear()
.
2. Notification:
When the waiting time is up, the buzzer will make a music tune, and the LED
will show the pointing arrow of the first cell, which means that the user needs
to take the corresponding medicine according to the arrow pointing.
1 display.show(Image.ARROW_NW) #The other directions are ARROW_NE,
ARROW_SW, and ARROW_SE.
.
The MicroPython library has a music function and comes with some preset
music tunes. It can be adopted directly by using syntax music.play().The tunes
can also be defined by the developer. The preset tune is used as example in this
project called ”NYAN”.
1 def play_melody():
2
music.play(music.NYAN)
.
9https://Micro-bit-MicroPython.readthedocs.io/en/v1.0.1/index.html
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Building the SmartMed
17
3. Process of medication:
During the usage process of the pill box, the cover will tilt because of opening
and closing. Therefore, the acceleration sensor on Micro-bit is used to detect
whether the cover is opened or closed. The theory of movement measurement
is explained by Figure 3.4 .The value of Y axis implement tilting forwards and
backwards10.
Figure 3.4: The micro:bit measures movement along three axes: X - tilting from
left to right. Y - tilting forwards and backwards.Z - moving up and
down..
In general, the state of the pillbox is divided into three type: ’0’, ’1’, ’2’. If the
pillbox is in the closed state and it is not being used, the value of y is close to
zero, at this time, the state of the pillbox is ’0’. When the waiting time ends, the
user receives the notification sound and the pattern pointing, the user opens the
pillbox. This action is regarded as a sign to start taking the medicine. When
the value of Y is less than a setting negative number, it can also be consider
that the pillbox is opened when the cover’s tilted larger than a certain angle,
the state of the pillbox changes from ’0’ to ’1’. The user takes out the pill that
should be taken, eat it, and then closes the pillbox. During this process, the
value of y gradually increases, which means that the pillbox changes from the
open state to the closed state, so the state of the pill box changed from ’1’ to ’2’,
the user’s medication action is completed. The difference of state ‘0’ and ‘2’, ‘0’
is closed status before each use, ‘2’ is closed status after using. As mentioned
above, the ’2’ state indicates the closed state after the pill box has been used.
At this time, the feedback step after taking the medicine is required, so when
10https://microbit-challenges.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/accelerometer.html
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Method
the state becomes ’2’, the flashing heart-shaped feedback will be displayed on
the LED Twice, when completing the feedback step, medication process has
completed from the user’s perspective.
1 y = accelerometer.get_y()
2 if box_state == 0:
#initial box state: set box is closed = 0
3
display.show("-") #Shows - for testing
4
if y <= -700:
#Box is being opened
5
box_state = 1 #now box state is set to 1
6 elif box_state == 1:
7
display.show("O") #shows 0 for testing
8
if y > -700:
#if close the box
9
time.sleep(3) #wait for 2 seconds
10
box_state = 2 #now box state is set to 2
11 elif box_state == 2:
#if the box was closed
12
for die in all_dice:
13
Micro-bit.display.show(die)
.
4. Pattern feedback to user:
In order to motivate the user and improve the enjoyment of the pillbox, pattern
feedback is designed11.The blinking heart dynamic pattern was set as feedback
in this project. MicroPython is enabled that set the light on or off of each pixel
to indicate the pattern, ”9” means lighted and ”0” means unlighted the code
examples and corresponding pattern result is as follows:
Non-filled heart (Figure 3.5)
1 heart3 = "09090:" \
2
"90909:" \
3
"90009:" \
4
"09090:" \
5
"00900"
.
Filled heart (Figure 3.6)
1 heart4 = "09090:" \
2
"99999:" \
3
"99999:" \
4
"09990:" \
5
"00900"
.
For the purpose of make them blinking, the string setting of hearts were con-
verted to fitted images and saved in a list variable called ’all heart’, furthermore,
for loop was adopted for circulation.
11https://Micro-bit-MicroPython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/display.html
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Building the SmartMed
19
Figure 3.5: Non-filled heart.
Figure 3.6: Filled heart.
1 heart1 = Micro-bit.Image(heart1) #example of conversion
2 all_heart = [heart2, heart1, heart4, heart3] #Save all image in a list
3 for d in all_heart:
4
Micro-bit.display.show(d)
5
time.sleep(1)
.
5. Bluetooth Transfer:
The Bluetooth transfer function is expected to be used as a way to transfer
medication time, nevertheless, it was found that MicroPython does not support
the Bluetooth function. There is no corresponding Bluetooth library. According
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Method
to correlative materials, found that this function is being developed and not
released yet.
Summary: The above part introduces process 1. Up to this point, two-thirds of
the requirements have been accomplish. On account of the limitation of the Bluetooth
function, in process 2, the programming language has become JavaScript.
3.4.1.2
Iteration 2
In the process of writing JavaScript, the function that in process 1 has achieved
remains unchanged, it is just converted into the corresponding JavaScript syntax￿the
corresponding code can refer to appendix. Next section, we introduce the new features
that were added.
1. APP for caregiver or family member￿
In order to enable the caregiver or family member to check whether the user took
medicines on time, the APP is implemented by using the APP inventor. Because
of the focus on core functions, the design of the APP is as simple as possible.
It only includes space which can list tracking info, necessary buttons related
to Bluetooth connectivity and connection status display area. Based on the
documentation of APP inventor lessons and suitable example from website, the
method and steps of material was referenced and made some modifications12.
The following figure(3.7) shows the main page of the app:
As shown from above , the main elements in the app were set, then block page for
compiling should be entered, the introduction of compiling detail are presented
following :
• ‘Micro-bit list’ button: Press the button to display a list of pairable Micro-
bits.(See figure 3.8) ’ConnectMicro-bit’ function was called for show avail-
able Micro-bit.
• ‘Connection status’ label: showing the connection status of micromit. Two
status,’Connected’ and ’Disconnected’ were set. ’global connected’ variable
that is set for connecting between Micro-bit and APP by using ’true’ or
’false’ value.(See figure 3.9)
• ‘Reset connection’ button: Allowing Micro-bit to be reconnected.(See fig-
ure 3.10)
• ‘Send key’ button: it is used for sending a signal to Micro-bit as a start
step of communication. BLE has ’sendStringKeyValue’ function with ’key’
and ’value’ content as signal which can be used directly. (See figure 3.11)
• ‘Receive’ label, Used for receiving return messages from the Micro-bit with
corresponding ’key’ and ’value’.(See figure 3.12)
12https://www.playfulcomputation.group/blockytalkyble.html
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Building the SmartMed
21
Figure 3.7: Main page of the APP.
• ‘BlockTalklyBLE1’ invisible extension package, this is the most important
element package of the APP it should be download 13 and extend manu-
ally.(see figure3.13)
2. Code for connection test between Micro-bit side and JavaScript
Considering that the success of the connection is the basis for information trans-
mission, before proceeding to the next step, connection test was performed to
avoid wasting time.
The test code shown is as follows:
13https://www.playfulcomputation.group/blockytalkyble.html
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Method
Figure 3.8: Block for getting connected Micro-bit function.
Figure 3.9: Block for connection function.
Figure 3.10: Block for Reset connection function.
1 bluetooth.onBluetoothConnected(function () {
2
basic.showString("C") #if connected,show C on LED
3
connected = 1
4 })
5 bluetooth.onBluetoothDisconnected(function () {
6
basic.showString("D") #if disconnected ,show D on LED
7
connected = 0
8 })
9 input.onButtonPressed(Button.A, function () {
10
if (connected == 1) {
11
bluetooth.uartWriteString("HELLO")
12
}
13 })
14 let connected = 0
15 basic.showIcon(IconNames.Heart)
.
Before connecting, pair steps are required, according to the instruction of pairing
steps(see Appendix A.4), although pair operation are successful, the stability
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Building the SmartMed
23
Figure 3.11: Block for sending key function.
Figure 3.12: Block for Receiving number info function.
Figure 3.13: The area which used for adding extension,Click ’Import extension’,and
enter the URL.
was poor, it was disconnected automatically every a few seconds which is not
expected, this situation has negative effect for achieving tracing function.Step
detail of paring Micro-bit with phone are listed in Appendix.
Summary: Process 2 ends here. Up to this point, it was found that the Bluetooth
function of Micro-bit is not continuous and smooth, so the implementation of tracking
function is rethought and planned.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Method
3.4.1.3
Iteration 3
Because of the severe instability of Bluetooth, the method of connecting and trans-
mitting information between APP and Micro-bit Bluetooth is not feasible. Due to
this limitation, we decided to store the tracked data locally in the micro-bit, which
allows 5mb of data storage. However, writing file locally on mb was not supported by
JavaScript. Therefore, in Process3, the programming language has been changed to
MicroPython renewedly, and the way of demonstration of tracking function has been
modified.
1. Tracking info record
Instead of using APP to receive and store medication Tracking information, the
MicroPython offer local file system, is the same as python’s file system. open,
write and other functions can be called to open the file to write and merge the
information. The information is entered in the form of a string with the format
”Medicine taken: Day X, Hour, Minutes” On account of there is no ’a’ which
implement append function in MicroPython, for the new information input after
each medication, superimposing and wrapping information is used.
1 e = 'Medicine taken: Day{d}, {h}, {m}'.format(d=day, h=hour, m=minute)
# e is the info detail of medication time
2 with open("box_data.txt", "w") as file_object:
3
text = text + e + "\n"
4
file_object.write(text)
.
2. Time calculation
There is no timer component on Micro-bit,(see extra component in Limitation1)
so that there are no parts that can get real-time time, hence, get the medication
time directly is not available, but Micro-bit has a function to get running time14,
that represent how long the Micro-bit has been working, so the project uses
running time to go through a series of calculations in order to get medication
time. The running time is counted in millisecond. Days, hours, and minutes
are calculated as following formulas:
day = (runningtime −(24 ∗60 ∗60 ∗1000)) + 1
Description: In day’s formula, 60 times 60 times1000 means how many mil-
liseconds for 1 hours, it is called as ’mph’ which means ms per hour in the
following description for the convenience. Use running time divided by ‘mph’
to find out how many days have been run so far. Since the count starts from
14https://techtutorialsx.com/2019/03/03/microbit-micropython-getting-the-device-running-
time/
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Building the SmartMed
25
0, generally speaking￿the number of day should start from 1,so added 1 at the
end of formula.
hour = (runningtime ÷ (60 × 60 × 1000)) −((day −1) × 24)
Description: For the cause of getting the calculation of the exact clock of a day,
the running time is divided by ‘mph’ represents how many hours the system
has been working so far, (day-1) * 24 means hour numbers of days that have
passed. Subtract two parts is the result of clock number of that day. (eg. 9am
of day 3 = 57 −(3 −1) × 24 , 57 is system’s working hour)
minute = (runningtime
mod (24 × 60 × 60 × 1000)) ÷ (60 × 1000)
Description: As for minute calculation, in order to get the minute number after
hour, first of all, get remainder of running times divided by ‘mph’, which means
minutes of one working day. Then use remainder divided by 60×1000,this step
is used for converting milliseconds to minute.
1 day = int(int(running_time() / (24 * 3600000)) + 1)
2 hour = int((running_time() / 3600000) - ((day - 1) * 24))
3 minute = int((running_time() % 3600000) / (60 * 1000))
.
3. Calculation of the number of medications
The number of medication times of different users take per day is uncertain, but
in this project it is set to a maximum of four times, therefore the usage of the
for loop brings convenience for sequential operation. This section adopts takes
the medicine twice a day as an example. Set a variable called ‘times’, loop range
is from 1 to 4, with respect to the condition of for loop, get the remainder after
division of times by 3. When times is 1, the remainder is 1, which represents the
first time of a day,afterwards run the necessary prompts, medication detection,
feedback and record time steps, then ‘times’ plus 1, routine goes to the next
step.
When the second medication is completed, ‘times’ is still added 1, at
this time the number of times reaches to 3, the remainder will be 3, it is Not
eligible for if statement, so the program jumps to the else statement. In the else
statement, ‘times’ will be reset from start, which means that the medication
for one day has been, in the next moment￿the system should wait for the next
day of medication timing arrival. Please refer to the code for more examples
in appendix. It is worth mentioning that this version is the final version after
modifying based on the wrong result from pilot study which is described in next
section.
1 for times in range(1,4):
#loop start
2
if (times % 3 == 1): #First time
3
do some work
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Method
4
times += 1
5
display.scroll("First time finished")
6
elif (times % 3 == 2):
7
times += 1
8
display.scroll("Second time finished")
9
else:
10
display.scroll("Well done for today")
11
times = 1
.
4. Method of getting tracking information file
Terminal command is used in this step, when the tracking information saved,
the file can be shown by using a utility of Micro-bit which is called microfs (’ufs’
is used in command line) there is a way to transfer and download it15.
1 ufs ls
2 #This shows the file in Micro-bit local file system
3 ufs get box_data.txt Downloads/data.txt
4 #This syntax can copy the file from Micro-bit to Downloads folder on
computer.
.
Summary:In iteration 3, all existing functions in Iteration 1 have been retained,
the way of tracking record function that has been implemented with updated ver-
sion. The implementation process was successful, so this is the last iteration in the
implementation step. After development stage, experimental stage is coming.
3.5
Pilot test
The Pilot test in this project can be identified as a preview test of core experimen-
tal tests, the purpose is to check the usability of the developed product, so that
make necessary technical adjustments and corrections based on the feedback of the
participants.
Because it was only a test of technical usability, and the schedules of expectant
patients who with mental illness were busy during the pilot test period, so the target
group of this test includes one healthy person and one person who need to take pills
on time to improve their health but not related to mental illness.
Before the pilot test, SmartMed‘s User instructions were clearly introduced in
order to let participants understand how to use it, the detail shows below:
Pre-step (for caregiver or family): Put the pills in cells according to the order,
each cell contains all pills for one time, can be different categories.
1. Press button A
15https://microbit-micropython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials/storage.html
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Pilot test
27
2. When the screen shows “Round clock”, it means the box start to be used.
3. Leave it somewhere you want.
4. When buzzer play the melody, the notification is working.
5. On the screen, you can see the arrow instruction which shows the corresponding
cell you should eat.
6.When the arrow disappear and music stop, open the box and take the pill.
7. Close the box, you can see the heart-blinking feedback.
In addition, several Think Aloud interview question were prepared to ask partici-
pants after testing which are shown below:
1.How was the process? What function did you realized?
2.Are there any step did not work well?
3.What do you think about SmartMed, any suggestion?
3.5.1
Pilot test I
The first pilot test lasted 2 hours. The participant is a 48-year-old middle-aged lady.
Because she is not necessary to take medicine, so she replaced the pills with candies.
She was told the instruction, furthermore, she explored the components individually
about the SmartMed around 3 minutes. Then she started to test. Overall, She used
it 4 times and each time interval was 0.5h. I helped her to place candies in cells.
I observed the participant’s usage throughout the process, including her response
to the notification sound, the behavior of opening the pill box, and her performance
after completing an eating cycle. The participant gave immediately feedback every
time when she was in the process of using SmartMed, which included asking some
related questions.
After finishing testing, she were asked to answer the interview question, here are
her corresponding answers:
1. ”At the beginning, I pressed the button, I saw a pattern. Then the pattern
disappeared, so I waited for a while, then I heard the sound of music. After
that I saw the arrow pointing to the upper left. When I finished the candy and
closed the cover, I saw a cute flashing heart.”
2. ”I wanted to open the cover immediately after hearing the music.I thought the
melody would stopped when I opened it, but it didn’t. I checked the LED and
the arrow was still displayed on it. Can’t I take medicine at that time? Or can
the melody be changed for a shorter one?”
3. ”I think you can modify the sound part, such as the melody can be interrupted
when the user opens the cover,so that the user does not have to wait. By the way,
I like the flashing heart very much, it’s feels like having an electronic pet, after
feeding him he will give me some feedback.”
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Method
After the end of the user operation part of the experiment, the tracking info was
downloaded and shown to her. She stated that the content was very concise and
understandable.
3.5.2
Pilot test II
The duration of the first pilot test was relatively short, so that the availability beyond
one day was not inconclusive. Therefore, the duration of the second test was set to a
longer time with 2 days The participant is a 25-year-old girl. The medicine she needs
to take is Vitamin B12, Rhinitis medicine, they were taken once a day per category,
so each type of pills was placed in a cell separately. Because the period of test were
more than one day, I could not follow the participant throughout the process, but she
gave feedback through the chat tool during the test.
During the test, she asked a few questions, such as ”if I take it to go out, will it
be damaged or included its work?” Her feedback are shown following:
1. ”The whole process was fine, the arrows and sounds remind me that I will take
medicine by then, and I also see number 0 after opening the pill box and flashing
heart after closing the cover.”
2. ”On day 2, when I received the notification, I picked up the box after the music
ended, but before I opened the box cover, I saw the number 0 that I would only
see after opening the box cover. I don’t know why. I still continued to take the
medicine and received feedback.”
3. ”I think it’s a great product. I don’t have to remember all the time that I need
to take medicine, and I don’t need to set an alarm on my phone. But the music is
too long. You can design a way to stop the music,such as users make an action
to stop the music? I see a button on the board, you can think about a way that
press the button to stop it.”
Finally, the tracking info file was shown to her, the value of minute part were inaccurate,it
should be double-digit (0 ≤minute ≤60)￿but in result,there were three-digit number.
the screenshot shows in figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: The result of 2nd pilot test, obviously the value of minute is unreason-
able.
==PAGE:39==
3.6 Field study
29
3.5.3
Summary and change
1. Summary: From 1st pilot test, I found that the melody alert should be inter-
rupted if the user starts to eat pills, it’s annoying if waiting for music end. From
2st pilot test, Apart from stopping melody, the open-cover operation had false
detection sometimes, after considering, I found that when the box is picked up
instead of putting it on the flat platform, the value of y axis will be changed
sometimes￿so that at that moment the system regards the using process has
been started. It was hard to modifying because of technical limitation, the so-
lution is let user know, it is better to pick it up horizontal and flat, or use it on
the table. Furthermore, the value of minute of tracking information should be
changed.
2. Change: Based on the feedback(main part were underlined to emphasize),
first of all, button pressing for stop the melody were considered, but the but-
ton pressed was complained in Prototype 2 design process, so I thought other
operation such as shaking the box should be better, but unfortunately, after
programming,the function doesn’t work well, it could also disappear the arrow
but there are no way to stop the melody in the process, so this function can be
regarded as the limitation of this project. Here is the example code:
1 if accelerometer.was_gesture("shake"):
2
display.clear()
.
Next step, the minute value is redefined to the correct version, here are the
comparison:
1 #Before
2 minute = int((running_time() - (hour * 3600000)) / 60000)
3
4 #After
5 minute = int((running_time() % 3600000) / (60 * 1000))
6 After modifying, 2 hours quick test has been taken without participant
in order to just check the veracity. The result was reasonable.
.
3.6
Field study
Field study is the most important test, research process in the project, it is used for
collecting the user experience by testing with target group member.
I took a three phase study design approach which consist of (i)Pre-study question-
naire; (ii) SmartMed use and ; (iii) post-study interview.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Method
3.6.1
Pre-study
Before starting the field study, find as many participants as possible in the target
group was the first step, because the schedules of expected participants were conflict-
ing with testing period, as a result the participants were finally determined with 3
patients with mental illness and 2 patients without mental illness but need taking
pills.
The table shows the collection of several information, the content of tables
includes personal information of participants,What kind of mental illness they are
suffering, What medicines they take,total number of days they would attend the test,
What time and How may times would they take the medicine per day.
ID
Age
Gender
Mental Illness
Medicine
Days
Time
Frequency
01
32
Male
Depression
Flupentixol and Melitracen Tablets
7
10am
1
02
27
Female
No mental illness
p-piller på abonnement
5
20pm
1
03
25
Female
No mental illness
Multi-Vitamin, Blue Berry tablets
6
9am, 21pm
2
04
21
Female
Depression & Anxiety
Doxepin Hydrochloride Tablets
7
11am,23pm
2
05
27
Male
Insomnia
Melatonin
5
21pm
1
After identifying the participants, they were asked to fill out a questionnaire which
about medical adherence by using Google Sheet.Some of the questions were referred
to Medication Adherence Questionnaire (MAQ) [Tol+07]). Pre-study Questionnaire
are listed below(includes yes/no question and comment question):
1.Do you ever forget to take your medicine(yes/no)￿
2.Are you careless at times about taking your medicine(yes/no)?
3. When you feel better, do you sometimes stop taking your medicine(yes/no)?
4.Sometimes if you feel worse when you take the medicine, do you stop taking
it(yes/no)?
5.Have you ever used Smart pillbox before with notification or other function(yes/no)?
6.Why do you forget to take the medicine normally(Comment question)￿
The result and analysis shows in ’Result’ section.4
3.6.2
Pill box use
All participants were explained also shown the instruction of SmartMed , then I gave
them few minutes to explore the parts by themselves, and simulated the process when
the Micro-bit was not powered on. I simulated caregiver to help them place the pills
they will eat during the test, powered on the Micro-bit, and then the trial started.
Because of the longer time period, I could not see their movements and immediate
feedback every time when they took the pills. The notable events that includes help
they asked and unexpected situation during the test process were listed:
1. Participant 02 , Day 5: She asked me what should she do because she went
out before 20 pm without taking pillbox with her, when she came back, it was
already around 20:10, that meant she missed the regulation time, she saw the
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Field study
31
LED is lighted, she was not sure about she should continue using it or not. I
told her eat the pills as usual.
2. Participant 03, Day 2: When she took the medicine in day 2’s evening, she said
that when she closed the box, the heart shape was already flashing. However,
last few times, the flashing heart only showed few seconds later after the cover
was closed.
3. Participant 04 , Day 6: Before the last medication time of her test period, she
gave back the SmartMed, because she needed to go for travel in that afternoon,
so that she did not have available time to return the pillbox as prescribed. This
can be regarded as she dropped out during the process which had 1 times left.
3.6.3
Post study
As for post study, after each test finished, first of all, interview and feedback has
been taken by using Google Sheet,the questionnaire has been little modified based on
Pre-test questionnaire in order to get comparison about participants’ thinking and
status.Besides that, oral conversation was taken with some of participants privately.
Post study Questionnaire are listed below(includes yes/no question and comment
question):
• Q1 Do you ever forget to take your medicine(yes/no)￿
• Q2 Are you careless at times about taking your medicine(yes/no)?
• Q3 When you feel better, do you sometimes stop taking your medicine(yes/no)?
• Q4 Sometimes if you feel worse when you take the medicine, do you stop taking
it(yes/no)?
• Q5 Do you want to continue to use SmartMed if is possible(yes/no)?
• Q6 Please talk about your feeling when you were using SmartMed (Comment
question).
Secondly,tracking info were downloaded are checked.
The result of questionnaire and screenshots of result file will be shown in ’Result’
section 4
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Quantitative
First part of quantitative result, is the screenshot of tracking info result file from
microbit which shows below: The format is ”Medicine taken: DayX, Hour, Minute”
Participant 01 (see figure 4.1)
Figure 4.1: Result of Participant 01, 1 times per day,10am,7 days in total.
Participant 02 (see figure 4.2)
Figure 4.2: Result of Participant 02, 1 times per day,20pm,5 days in total.
Participant 03 (see figure 4.3)
Participant 04 (see figure 4.4)
Participant 05 (see figure 4.5)
Moreover, on account of getting a comparison quantitative result, the remaining
amount of pills becomes a factor that reflects medical adherence.(see detail in table
4.1)
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Results
Figure 4.3: Result of Participant 03, 2 times per day,9am and 21pm, 6 days in total.
Figure 4.4: Result of Participant 04, 2 times per day,11am and 23pm,expect 7 days
in total,actually 6.5 days.
Figure 4.5: Result of Participant 05, 1 times per day,21pm,5 days in total..
4.1.0.1
Data analysis
It can be seen from the table that except for the 1 pill remaining from Participant
04, each participant took all medicine.
In terms of exact time of taking medicine, we can see the last time of Participant
02’s medication was delayed around 15 mins, the reason was expounded before. The
sixth time of participant 04 (23pm of day2) was postponed for 2 minutes. Considered
the reason, because the tracking information was immediately written after the com-
pletion of the medication,therefore, it is considered that participant 04 participated
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Quantitative
35
ID
Days
Before(pcs)
After(pcs)
01
7
7
0
02
5
5
0
03
6
12
0
04
6.5
14
1
05
5
5
0
Table 4.1: Table of remaining pills.
in the postponement for 2 minutes or medication process sustained for 2 minutes.
4.1.1
Qualitative
Feedback of post-study questionnaire are used in Qualitative result, which includes
participant’s status and direct feeling before and after using SmartMed.
The result are divided into 2 parts: Comparison pie charts from yes/no
question and comment question. Pie charts analysis shows in this chapter, and
comment question’s analysis shows in chapter 5.
Pie charts were shown below: (see table 4.2)
4.1.1.1
Data Analysis
1. Question’Do you ever forget to take your medicine’ has the most obvious
change￿before using SmartMed, all participant choose ’Yes’,but after testing,
they all choose ’no’ option.
2. Question ’Are you careless at times about taking your medicine?’, percentage of
’Yes’ option was increased, I considered that because participant did not have
to think about ’what time is it or should I eat pills now?’, all they should do
was waiting for alert notification.
3. Question ’When you feel better, do you sometimes stop taking your medicine?’
and Question ’Sometimes if you feel worse when you take the medicine, do
you stop taking it?’,both percentage of ’yes’ option reduced, these mean if the
status becomes better or worse of participants’ health, they preferred continue
medication.
4. Question’Do you want to continue to use SmartMed if is possible?’, all partici-
pant chose ’yes’￿this represents they all like SmartMed.
4.1.2
What does the data tell in terms of the medical adherence?
According to the existing results, we can see that almost everyone takes medicine
according to the prescribed time, and stated in the interview feedback that they did
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Results
Question
Pre-study
Post study
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Table 4.2: Comparison table.
not forget to take medicine after using SmartMed.This means it improve the medical
adherence to a certain extent.Positively,they are willing to continue using it.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The source of discussion part are according to the comment question from Pre study
questionnaire and Post study questionnaire.
• Pre-study: Why do you forget to take the medicine normally?(comment)
1. I don’t know why I always forgot to take medicine, I just didn’t take time
to remember it, when I remember it, it always pass a day, but I have set
a alarm clock to notify me, it works:)
2. The normal situation is sometimes I am busy at work or when I get up, I
need to be hurry to catch the train, then I will forget to take medicine.
3. if didn’t have water around me when I was taking medicine,I need to go
somewhere to get some water, at this time if other things got my attention,
I would forget to eat medicine. And another reason is I thought the pills
I am taking doesn’t make me better or worse, so I always ignore it.
4. When I am Very busy with my work
5. Sometime I’m late for the morning, I am in a hurry
• Post study:
Please talk about your feeling when you were using
SmartMed.(Comment)
1. I like it very much, It let me don’t have to remember to take the medicine
but will not miss it. The melody sounds positive and happy for me and
I am willing to use it. But one thing I would like to say is sometimes I
arrived in front of the box and want to eat medicine, but the sound still
alert, even when I opened the box, it sill alerting.
2. My favorite thing of pillbox is the arrow point, I can eat them directly
without thinking such as which medicine I should take or something like
that. I think the box is over sensitive because the pattern changed even I
didn’t open the cover. Other parts works really well. Good product!
3. It is a good way to inform about my medicine taking routine. But i think
the alarm is too loud and can’t turn it off manually.
4. The SmartMed helps me a lot to remember to take my medicine. When I
am using it, I feel very comfortable to have it to remind me the time when
I need to eat the pills. I am very happy for using it everyday. But I hope
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Discussion
that the design can be improved that the SmartMed should be easy taking
with me when I am on business traveling.
5. Good pillbox! It gave me ”freedom” about remember taking pills, arrow
point is so cool to use, I had awesome user experience, actually I don’t
care about history information, it’s more important to follow the medical
plan than checking if I took pills or not.
Most of the participants were satisfied with the product and were able to take the
medicine on time according to the notification.but some of the same shortcomings as
the pilot study were still raised. For example, the pill box could not give feedback
at the correct time,prompt sound could not be interrupted manually. In addition,
notification melody is too loud also mentioned in the feedback, and the physical
setting is not good enough for carrying outside with participants.
It’s worth to
mention that arrow point are mentioned as a good function.
The reason of shortcoming can be classified as technical limitation (see section 1)
and need more expectation comment of more patients from target group.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
6.1
Conclusion
This project aims to create a smart pillbox which can provide helpful function in
order to improve medical adherence of the patients who is suffering from mental
illness.In the process of the project, a prototype was designed and evaluated based on
the feedback from three iterations. In the implementation step, technical limitations
occurred several times. After repeated adjustments, most functions were realized,
although the expected goal was not completely achieved, which is discussed in section
6.3.
Based on a quantitative and qualitative result and analysis, it can be concluded
that notification can raise the possibility of medical adherence. As for feedback func-
tion, it’ not certain that this function can be the main function which can improve,
medical adherence.
6.2
Limitations
Limitations are listed after finishing the whole process of SmartMed,which includes
technical limitation and other limitation.
1. Technical Limitation
• Bluetooth part: Due to the instability of Bluetooth in iteration 2 with
JavaScript, the tracking info transfer function between microbit and APP
was cancelled.
• Timer parts: RTC (real time clock) parts that can get timers were missing,
so they can only be calculated to simulate RTC. The example component
can be DS32311
• APP development: The app part did not work, because of Bluetooth limi-
tation and lack of knowledge of creating the APP by using APP inventor
2. Other limitation
1https://hackaday.io/project/13132-microbit-clock-using-ds3231-rtc
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Conclusion
• Lack of mental illness participant: Because of time schedule and rare num-
ber of patients with mental illness, the field study had limited numbers of
result.
• Physical setting: The current version of physical setting is not perfect,
there is no space for the battery pack.
6.3
Future Work
A lot of exploration and experiments have been left for the future due to lack of time,
function should be optimized and more participant will be found. If have more time,
I would like have a try in following aspects:
1. Use necessary component to get the real time, so that the way of getting clock
time will become simpler and the detail of tracking info can be optimized.
2. Customize a very short melody to be used as a sound to interrupt the long
notification alert sound when the user opens the box, and then the user can
start taking medication without waiting for the alert sound to end.
3. Find more people with mental illness for testing aims to prove the feasibility of
SmartMed.
4. Before let participants use SmartMed for testing in field study progress, make
a 6 days pre-test of their medical adherence without using any helpful tool.
5. Add a feature that can further confirm that the pills has been taken by the user
instead of just opening the pillbox, such as checking whether the weight of the
pill box has been reduced, or checking whether the number of pills has been
reduced.
6. Optimize the code to make it easier to modify the medication time and waiting
time for different users.
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Code
Link to Github
A.2
FlowCharts
A.2.1
Patients
(see figure A.1)
Figure A.1: Flow chart for patients.
==PAGE:52==
42
A An Appendix
A.2.2
Caregiver/Family member
(see figure A.2)
Figure A.2: Flow chart for Caregiver or family member.
A.3
User story Map
A.3.1
Original version
(see figure A.3)
A.3.2
Final version
(see figure A.4)
A.4
Pair microbit with Phone
1. Get the APP on phone.
2. Click ’Choose Microbit’ option.
3. Holding buttons A+B, and then press reset button.
4. The enter pattern will be required in order to match.
5. Wait for pairing.
==PAGE:53==
A.5 Theory Example of prototype 1
43
Figure A.3: Original User story map.
A.5
Theory Example of prototype 1
(see figure A.5)
A.6
Related figures
A.6.1
SmartMed
(see figure A.6)
A.6.2
Field test pill setting example
(see figure A.7)
==PAGE:54==
44
A An Appendix
Figure A.4: Final version User story map.
Figure A.5: Rotating Cabinet in kitchen.
==PAGE:55==
A.6 Related figures
45
Figure A.6: SmartMed with Micro-bit, extension board and battery pack.
==PAGE:56==
46
A An Appendix
Figure A.7: Pills of Participant 01.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[Abb+12]
Brianna Abbey et al. “A remotely programmable smart pillbox for enhanc-
ing medication adherence”. In: 2012 25th IEEE International Symposium
on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS). IEEE. 2012, pages 1–4.
[AJM18]
Murtadha Aldeer, Mehdi Javanmard, and Richard P Martin. “A review
of medication adherence monitoring technologies”. In: Applied System In-
novation 1.2 (2018), page 14.
[AMH18]
Murtadha Aldeer, Richard P Martin, and Richard E Howard. “PillSense:
designing a medication adherence monitoring system using pill bottle-
mounted wireless sensors”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops). IEEE. 2018, pages 1–6.
[BW17]
Nichapat Boonnuddar and Pongpisit Wuttidittachotti. “Mobile Applica-
tion: Patients’ Adherence to Medicine In-take Schedules”. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Big Data and Internet of Thing. ACM.
2017, pages 237–241.
[DK10]
Richard Duffy and Brendan Kelly. “Adherence in psychiatry”. In: Irish
Journal of Psychological Medicine 27 (March 2010), pages i–vii. doi: 10.
1017/S0790966700001026.
[OB05]
Lars Osterberg and Terrence Blaschke. “Adherence to medication”. In:
New England journal of medicine 353.5 (2005), pages 487–497.
[RR98]
PT Rodgers and DM Ruffin. “Medication nonadherence: Part II–A pilot
study in patients with congestive heart failure.” In: Managed care interface
11.9 (1998), pages 67–9.
[Tol+07]
Benjamin A Toll et al. “Factor structure and validity of the Medication
Adherence Questionnaire (MAQ) with cigarette smokers trying to quit”.
In: Nicotine & tobacco research 9.5 (2007), pages 597–605.
[V+02]
AC Vergouwen, A Bakker, et al. “Methods to improve patient compliance
in the use of antidepressants”. In: Nederlands tijdschrift voor geneeskunde
146.5 (2002), pages 204–207.
==PAGE:58==
