==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Optimizing wind farm power output through wake steering 
 
 
Søren Majdal Kaarsholm 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0336 
January 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Søren Majdal Kaarsholm 
Title: Optimizing wind farm power output through wake steering 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03366 
January 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
August 2019 – January 2020 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Ju Feng 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
I would like to thank my supervisor Ju Feng for his dedication and continued support
throughout this thesis, the many fruitful discussions about the program code, results
and next obstacles at our biweekly meeting helped move this thesis in the right direction.
And thank you for your patience with me, during my transition from Matlab into Python.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to those people who lend me their computers so
that I could spread out the large computational times of my many simulation.
Søren Majdal Kaarsholm
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Climate change poses a bigger threat to our society for every day that passes, therefore the
need for renewable energy sources is increasing rapidly. Yaw steering is a newly proposed
control strategy for wind farms that has the potential to increase the power production
of a wind farm through a reduction in the wake eﬀects experienced by the turbines of the
farm. This is done, by intentionally yawing the turbine away from the incoming wind,
with the result of a deﬂected wake that will then not- or partially interact with any down
stream turbines, resulting in a collective increase in power.
This thesis will investigate the power increasing potential of the yaw steering technology,
and the many variables impacting the turbines and their wakes under yawed conditions.
To do this, this thesis will implement yaw steering as the control strategy in a series of
modeled wind farm scenarios in order to determine the potential power gains associated
with the technology. Each wind farm scenario will be run in a double loop over the wind
speeds 0 ≠25 m/s and the wind directions 0¶ ≠360¶ resulting in 9000 iterations, these
iterations will represent every possible power producing wind combination the farm can
experience. Each of these iterations are then passed through an optimization algorithm
developed for the occasion that will ensure collective yawing angles that yields the highest
collective power increase for the turbines of the modeled farm. A 21 year wind data set
collected from Sprogø in Denmark is then combined with the results of the model, to
calculate an average yearly yaw steering induced AEP and AEP increase.
This process is then systematically repeated with diﬀerent input variables for several
diﬀerent wind farm scenarios in a bid to investigate the many diﬀerent input variables’
eﬀect on yaw steering, during the many analyses a "best possible, while realistic" wind
farm scenario is being developed in an attempt to, not only optimize the yawing angles
of the wind farm, but also understand all the other factors aﬀecting the technology, such
as wind farm layout, atmospheric conditions and engineering models.
i
==PAGE:5==
With "best possible, while realistic" AEP increases ranging from 0.221 % to 1.802 % for
diﬀerent wind farm scenarios the results clearly show that it is possible to model, optimize
and apply yaw steering as a control strategy in modern wind farms, and through it gain
a substantial power/energy increase.
Furthermore it can be concluded that all variables investigated through this thesis are of
great signiﬁcance to the power increasing potential of yaw steering, and their contributions
must be considered when implementing yaw steering.
ii
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations and symbols
◊
Wind Direction
ﬂ
Air density
‡
Jimenéz wake expansion fator
⁄
Lagrainian multiplier
A
Rotor Area
CP
Coeﬃcient of Power
CT
Coeﬃcient of Thrust
D
Turbine Diameter
P
Power
T
Thrust
U
Mean wind speed of the combined ﬂow
ﬁeld
U0
Mean free wind velocity
V
Wind Velocity
VŒ
free wind speed
Vrated
rated wind speed
d
Optimization iteration search direction
f(xk)
Optimization objective function
fz
Lateral force
kw
Qian wake expansion factor
uÕ
Root-mean-square
turbulent
velocity
ﬂuctuations
x
Flow direction distance
xk
Optimization iteration
AEP
Annual energy production
iii
==PAGE:7==
AWC
Active wake control
BF
Brute Force
CF
Capacity Factor
COBYLA
Constrained Optimization BY Linear
Approximation
CVP
Counter-rotating Vortex Pair
DEL
Damage Equivalent Load
FLORIS
FLOw Redirection and Induction in
Steady state
GW
Giga Watt
IC
Induction Control
LCOE
Levelized cost of energy
LES
Large Eddy Simulation
LIDAR
LIght Detection And Ranging
LUT
Look Up Table
MW
Mega Watt
NREL
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NTM
Normal Turbulence Model
PDF
Probability Density Function
PIPS
Percentage Increase in Power Surface
PS
Power Surface
SLSQP
Sequential Least SQuares Programming
SOWFA
Simulations fOr Wind Farm Applica-
tions
TI
Turbulence intensity
W
Watt
WE
Wind energy
WF
Wind Farm
WR
Wake Redirection
WR
Wind Rose
WT
Wind Turbine
YS
Yaw Steering
iv
==PAGE:8==
Content
Abstract
i
Abbreviations and symbols
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Problem Formulation
5
2.1
Yaw steering environment: Wake models & Variables . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Yaw steering Control: Optimization problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Turbine type
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Wind Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Program Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Literature Review
10
3.1
Wake models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Model dependant layout optimization and model comparison . . . .
11
3.2
Wake deﬂection & Yaw steering models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Experimental yaw steering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Micro meteorology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Theory
14
4.1
Yawed turbines & wakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.1
Coeﬃcient of thrust & power for yawed turbines (CT & CP) . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Yaw angle (“) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Wake models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Wake skew (◊) & wake deﬂection
y
D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
v
==PAGE:9==
4.2.2
FLORIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Qian’s model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.1
Constrained Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.2
Yawing Surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.3
Power Surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Layout Dependency
29
5.1
Turbine spacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Number of turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Atmospheric Dependency
40
6.1
Wind Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Wind Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2.1
Yawing vs wind direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Turbulence Intensity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3.1
Diﬀerent "mean" turbulence intensities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3.2
Normal Turbulence Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3.3
Modiﬁed NTM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Model Dependency
53
7.0.1
Scenario setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.1
Gaussian wake model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.1.1
Gaussian wake deﬂection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.1.2
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.2
Multi zone wake model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2.1
Gaussian wake deﬂection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2.2
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.3
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.3
Qian’s wake model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
vi
==PAGE:10==
7.4
Field test result comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Discussion
67
8.1
Potential of yaw steering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.2
Variables in yaw steering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8.2.1
Ranking variable importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
8.3
Limitations & Exclusions and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.3.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9
Conclusion
76
Appendix A: Power Surfaces
79
Bibliography
93
Page 1 of 92
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Renewable energies are crucial in the ongoing ﬁght against climate change. As of 2016
renewable energy sources constituted 23.8% of the worlds electricity production [1]. Ac-
cording to reports from the IPCC this number has to more than triple, to 70% by the
year 2050, in order to keep global warming within a 1.5¶celsius increase over pre-industrial
levels [2]. For this to happen, the Levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for renewable energy
sources needs to become lower than that of traditional carbon based fuels (Coal,Oil,Gas),
making renewable energy sources, the go to choice when creating new power plants.
Wind energy (WE) is one of the more promising renewable energy sources due to its low
LCOE, high capacity and world wide application. Wind energy is currently accountable
for almost 6% (597 Gigawatt) of the worlds electricity production, with that number in-
creasing by 10% every year in recent years [3].
Over the last 40 years wind energy developers have started grouping their Wind Turbines
(WTs) together in large Wind Farms (WFs) in a bid to lower the LCOE by reducing
the cost of electrical- and logistical infrastructure, turbine installation, operations and
maintenance and the land/ocean that the farm occupies. But these cost reductions don’t
come for free, with the turbines being placed closer together the problem of turbine-wake
interaction arises, wake eﬀects in diﬀerent wind farms have proven to reduce the Annual
energy production (AEP) of wind farms by 10%-20% [4, 5, 6].
Although wind turbine wakes are inevitable, their eﬀects on the AEP can be reduced.
In modern wind farms, wake eﬀects experienced by other wind turbines in a farm, are
Page 2 of 92
==PAGE:12==
reduced through layout optimization with respect to the most frequent and severe wind
directions of the wind farm site. The turbines are placed further apart in these dominant
wind directions, and close together along the lesser frequent wind directions, while still
keeping water depths and sub-sea cable lengths in mind. This kind of optimization is
typically carried out based on the results of a wake model that models the wake velocity
deﬁcits throughout the farm.
Most modern wind farms are controlled so that each turbine in the farm optimizes its own
performance, this means each turbines rotor disc will stand perpendicular to the incoming
wind, in order to maximize its own power production, with no consideration to any wake
eﬀect it might cause other turbines.
To further mitigate the energy losses associated with turbine-wake interaction, the indus-
try and researchers have started looking at the concept of Active wake control (AWC).
AWC is a control strategy for the operation of wind farms, that under certain atmospheric
conditions, will down-regulate the energy production of an upwind turbine in order to
reduce the velocity deﬁcit of its wake, thereby increasing the energy production of any
turbines situated in its wake. AWC is therefore a collective wind farm control strategy.
AWC is primarily done in two diﬀerent ways. The ﬁrst being Induction Control (IC)
where the turbines blades are being pitched to a more aerodynamically ineﬃcient setting
to accommodate the down-regulation through a decrease of the turbines thrust exerted
on the wind.
Secondly there is Wake Redirection (WR), where the turbine is intentionally yawed or
tilted to an angle of the incoming wind, this will change the trajectory of the wake and
deﬂect it either horizontally or vertically respectively, meaning a smaller or no part of the
wake will interact with the downwind turbines [7].
Out the diﬀerent AWC strategies, the WR strategy, Yaw Steering (YS) where the wake is
deﬂected horizontally away from down stream turbines, looks the most promising [5], with
AEP increases ranging from 1% - 5% found in diﬀerent numerical simulations, wind tunnel
experiments and small ﬁeld measurements through out the literature [8, 4, 9, 6, 7, 10].
Yaw steering is yet to be implemented full time in any large scale wind farms, Therefore
the actual real potential of the technology remains to be seen, and it can currently only
be estimated through simulations, experiments and small ﬁeld tests.
Page 3 of 92
==PAGE:13==
This thesis aims to estimate the potential of yaw steering as a wind farm control strategy.
To do this, the diﬀerent variables aﬀecting the technology will be thoroughly investigated.
An optimization algorithm will be developed and applied at every iteration of every sce-
nario to ensure that the optimal yawing angles are used at each turbine in order to always
display the maximum potential of yaw steering. The diﬀerent engineering models used to
create the ﬂow ﬁeld in which yaw steering is tested, are also investigated.
Chapter 2 presents the problem statement of the project along with a formulation of the
optimization problem regarding yawing of turbines to maximize the power output of a
wind farm, the turbine type and wind data used throughout this thesis is also presented
here. In Chapter 3 the literature surrounding the topic will be presented, the previous
and current state of wake models, wind farm control etc. will be presented and shortly
discussed. In chapter 4 the theory behind yawed turbines and yaw steering will be pre-
sented, The utilized optimization algorithms are presented, and some wake models and
yaw setting will be programmed, simulated and tested to better explain the theory of it.
In chapter 5 the layout dependent variables, turbine spacing, turbine number and layout
shape will be tested to see how much impact the three variables have on the potential
power increase gained from yaw steering.
In chapter 6 the atmospheric variables are
analyzed, wind velocity, wind direction and turbulence intensity all greatly aﬀect yawed
turbines, their wakes and the yaw steering control strategy as a whole. The variables
will be tested and analyzed to display the technology’s dependency of these variables.
In chapter 7, the many diﬀerent wake models and wake deﬂection models that are avail-
able and used to model yaw steering are analyzed and compared, their signiﬁcance to
the potential of yaw steering is displayed. The ﬁndings of the previous chapters are then
discussed in chapter 8 and a conclusion to the initially presented problem statement, and
project ﬁndings is made in chapter 9.
Page 4 of 92
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Problem Formulation
Wind farm control by wake steering has become an emerging hot ﬁeld. Studies based on
numerical simulations, wind tunnel experiments and ﬁeld measurements have conﬁrmed
its feasibility to increase the power output of a wind farm.
Several engineering wake
models for yawed turbines have been proposed in the literature.
In this master thesis, several wake models for yawed turbines will be used to model dif-
ferent wind farms subjected to speciﬁc atmospheric conditions using yaw steering as their
control strategy, the results of the diﬀerent models, with regards to power production will
be compared, and the potential of wake steering will be accessed. To further describe the
problem formulation of this thesis, the problem has been broken down into the following
two sections: the yaw steering environment and the yaw steering control.
2.1
Yaw steering environment: Wake models & Variables
Through this part of the project the power increasing potential of yaw steering will be
investigated, this is done by modeling modern wind farms using yaw steering as the control
strategy in the diﬀerent engineering wake models.
First the variables that aﬀect the wake deﬂection mechanisms that are used in yaw steer-
ing, are tested and analyzed. In the thesis the variables are grouped as layout dependent
(turbine spacing, number of turbines,layout shape (X&Y coords) ) and atmospheric de-
pendent (Wind Velocity (V ), Wind Direction (◊), Turbulence intensity (TI) ), the results
are used to create the following scenarios in which yaw steering is tested. the diﬀerent
engineering models that are available from the literature, are used to model a series of
wind farm scenarios that are then paired with a 21 year long real wind data set. Together,
an average percentage AEP increase is generated for each engineering model, and for each
Page 5 of 92
==PAGE:15==
wind farm scenario.
From these results the ﬁeld of use for the technology can be mapped out, and it will
be determined under which circumstances the technology works and how much it will
increase the power if diﬀerent models are used.
2.2
Yaw steering Control: Optimization problem
In each of the above mentioned wind farm scenarios, The wind farm control problem will
be formulated as an optimization problem with the maximization of the total wind farm
power production as the objective function and the yawing angles of each turbine in the
wind farm (◊1, ◊2, ◊3...◊n) as the design variables. This is done to ensure that, the full
potential of the yaw steering technology is always displayed and utilized throughout this
thesis.
The diﬀerent algorithms that have been tested and used for the optimization problem are
presented and explained in chapter 4
2.3
Turbine type
The Vestas V80 2MW Oﬀshore wind turbine has been chosen as the default turbine for
all the simulations and models that are programmed and calculated for this thesis.
The turbines datasheet, Power curve and CT curve are as following:
Vestas V80 - Datasheet
Prated
2 MW
Cut-in wind speed
4.0 m/s
Rated wind speed
15.0 m/s
Cut-out wind speed
25.0 m/s
Survival wind speed
60.0 m/s
Rotor Diameter
80 m
Hub Height
70 m
Number of blades
3
Manufacture
Vestas
Turbine Classiﬁcation
Oﬀshore
Table 2.1: Datasheet for the Vestas V80 wind turbine
Figure 2.1: Power curve and CT curve for the Vestas
V80 wind turbine
Page 6 of 92
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Wind Data
In order to be able to calculate an AEP for a given wind farm, a wind data set is needed.
In this thesis a 21 year long wind data set from Sprogø in the Great Belt of Denmark is
used. The dataset contains 10 minute averaged values for wind velocity and wind direc-
tion.
The wind data set has been chosen for this thesis based on a series of factors.
Firstly, the measurement height of the meteorology mast situated at Sprogø is 70 meters,
which is also the hub height of the Vestas V80 wind turbines, modeled in the diﬀerent sim-
ulations. Using the same measurement height and hub height means that no extrapolation
of wind speeds are needed (Using log-law or power-law) [14].
Secondly the size of the data set enables the user to sort out any years with low data
availability while still being able to average the AEP over a series of years to remove the
bias of a single windy or low wind year.
To ensure correct results, the bad readings found in the data set have been removed, In
ﬁgure 2.2 the yearly data availability of the data set can be seen. furthermore the full 21
year timeline is plotted.
Figure 2.2: Wind data availability [15]
Through the assignment the 20 years with the best data availability will be used to cal-
culate a 20 year average AEP for the given model calculations. Using full years of data
removes seasonal bias in the wind velocity and direction. [14]
To better illustrate the wind speeds experienced by the turbines, over the 21 years, a Prob-
ability Density Function (PDF) is created for the wind data set by plotting a histogram
of the 21 year wind data. The PDF is presented in ﬁgure 2.3
Page 7 of 92
==PAGE:17==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
U, Wind velocity [m/s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
P(U)
104
Sprogo wind velocity histogram
Figure 2.3: Probability Density Function for the 21 year Sprogø wind data set [15]
Finally a Wind Rose (WR) is created for the 21 year data set, to better display which
directions the wind is typically coming from. And what the wind speed ranges are, for the
given wind directions. The wind rose will come in handy when a small layout optimization
will be carried out later in chapter 5 [15]
Figure 2.4: Wind rose from the Sprogø Met mast [15]
Page 8 of 92
==PAGE:18==
2.5
Program Setup
To get a better idea of how the diﬀerent programs, algorithms, inputs and output are
paired in this thesis, a program ﬂow chart is made and presented in ﬁgure 2.5
Figure 2.5: Program ﬂow diagram
Page 9 of 92
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Literature Review
This chapter will cover the fundamental literature from the past 40 years surrounding the
ﬁeld of wind turbine wakes and yaw steering, the most important articles with regards to
this project will be presented in this chapter. Many more articles have been used to gather
information and gain an understanding of the topic, they will all be cited throughout the
project when relevant or presented in the bibliography, but they will not be presented
explicitly in this chapter
3.1
Wake models
One of the earlier wake models was N.O. Jensen’s park model (1983) [16], it is a rather
simple model that calculates the velocity deﬁcits of the wake by assuming a steady inﬂow,
linear wake expansion and a uniform velocity through a given cross section of the wake.
Despite it’s simplicity it has been hugely popular and is used widely across the industry
today. Following Jensen’s park model, Gebraad et al (2014) [17] expanded Jensen’s model
and proposed a model that divided the wake into three zones, the near wake, the far
wake and the mixing zone. Each zone would have its own unique properties. Recently
Bastankhah et al (2016) [8] and Qian et al (2018) [18] proposed new wake models that
could calculate new features of a wake, like Counter-rotating Vortex Pairs (CVPs) in
the velocity deﬁcit, or the wake turbulence intensity. Currently the wake modeling tool
FLOw Redirection and Induction in Steady state (FLORIS) [19] which is developed by
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in Golden, Colorado, contains all the
above mentioned models except from the model presented by Qian et al, FLORIS will be
used throughout this thesis to access some of these wake models.
Page 10 of 92
==PAGE:20==
3.1.1
Model dependant layout optimization and model comparison
In a paper by Thomas et al (2015) [20] The wake models of Jensen and Gebraad are
compared with respect to the results of a layout optimization. The results are signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent. In 2018 Annoni et al [21] a similar but more extensive study is made, the paper
compares three wake models, Jensen’s park model [16], Gebraad’s multi zone model [4]
and Bastankhah & Porté Agel’s Gaussian model [8]. The three models are compared
with results from a ﬁeld test where a LIght Detection And Ranging (LIDAR) was used to
obtained the wind data for the given scenario. In the comparision the Gaussian model of
Bastankhah & Porté Agel comes closest to the results of the LIDAR with almost complete
resemblance.
3.2
Wake deﬂection & Yaw steering models
Since the turn of the century, articles and papers on yaw steering have started being
published. In two papers by Medici et al (2003-2004) [22, 23] the concept of yaw steering
as an active wake control strategy was presented, the papers present the results of wind
tunnel experiments of multiple yawed turbines, along with all the relevant physics of the
deﬂected wakes.
In a paper by Jimenéz et al (2010) [24], the power production of a series of yawed turbines
are coupled with their yaw angles and the coeﬃcient of thrust for the used turbines,
the results are again validated against experimental results. Furthermore a Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) is used to estimate the increase in turbulence intensity caused by the
wake along with the velocity deﬁcit of the wake.
This paper by Jimenéz et al also presents one of the ﬁrst wake deﬂection models for yawed
wind turbines. This model has proven to be very popular and has since been redeveloped
into some of the newer models whilst also being used in engineering models for yaw steer-
ing eg. FLORIS [19].
Building on Jimenez’s wake deﬂection model and further high ﬁdelity wind tunnel ex-
periments Bastankhah & Porté-Agel (2016) [8] developed a series of general governing
equations upon which a simple and computationally inexpensive analytical model was
built. The model estimates the wake deﬂection along with a Gaussian distributed ve-
locity deﬁcit in the far wake region. The paper also highlighted through the results of
Page 11 of 92
==PAGE:21==
experiments, how yawed wind turbines induce a counter-rotating vortex pair (CVP) in
their wake, leading to a kidney shaped wake in the far wake region. Bastankhah & Porté-
Agel’s so called Gaussian wake deﬂection model is also available in FLORIS [19]
Finally, in the recent paper by Qian & Ishihara (2018) [18] a new wake deﬂection model
claiming to be more accurate than both of it’s predecessors (Jimenéz & Bastankhah) is
presented, the paper directly compares the three wake deﬂection models with test data.
3.3
Experimental yaw steering
In the two previously presented papers by Medici et al (2003-2004) [22, 23] the ﬁrst
published experiment on yaw steering as a control strategy is presented.
The papers
present the results of wind tunnel experiments of six yawed model turbines, leading to
total collective energy increases of up to 10% for the six model wind turbines situated in
the wind tunnel.
In two connected articles from the NREL by Fleming et al (2016,2017) [25, 9] a ﬁeld test
experiment is carried out at the NREL facilities in Golden, Colorado. In the ﬁeld test a
turbine is chosen for yaw control, the turbine is equipped with a LIDAR scanner to track
the development of the wake and what eﬀect the yawing of the turbine has on it.
in a paper by Schottler et al (2017) [26] a two turbine wind tunnel experiment displays
how the wake deﬂects following a yawing of 30¶ of the ﬁrst turbine, and what eﬀect this
causes the next turbine in regards to power and partial wakes. The behavior of the wakes
recorded in this experiment show great resemblance with those presented and modeled in
the paper by Bastankhah and Porté Agel [8].
An extensive ﬁeld test is carried out on an oﬀshore wind farm in the paper by Fleming
and Jennifer Annoni et al (2017) [9]. The ﬁeld experiment is carried out on the Longyuan
Rudong Chaojiandai oﬀshore wind farm in Jiangsu, China, Where three turbines are
chosen for yawing, while one turbine is used as control, and one turbine is used as a
reference point. In the ﬁeld test a control Look Up Table (LUT) is created in FLORIS
and used as the control strategy for the three yawed turbines. The test yields positive
results in regards to an increased power production while using yaw steering. This is at
the same time also a somewhat validation of FLORIS and it’s ability to model yawed
Page 12 of 92
==PAGE:22==
turbines wakes.
In Howland et al (2019) [6] yaw steering is used on an operational wind farm in Albert,
Canada, consisting of six Vestas V80 wind turbines situated along a line. In the ﬁeld test
the front ﬁve turbines are all yawed to 20¶ when the wind direction is within a range of
20¶ along the line. The result of the test is an AEP increase of 0.3%.
3.4
Optimization
In the very extensive book "Numerical analysis with applications in mechanics and en-
gineering" by Hirsch, Smale and Devaney [27] the concept of numerical optimization is
explained thoroughly and its many diﬀerent applications in numerical problems are dis-
cussed, the book also presents a vast catalog of diﬀerent numerical methods for optimiza-
tion, among those are the basics for the gradient based, constrained optimization methods
that will be utilized through this project.
Since all the wake models have been programmed using the programming language Python
3.6.
It has been chosen to implement the optimization algorithms using the python
package Scipy.optimize.minimize, all the content of the package is available, displayed
and explained at the python package’s website [28].
3.5
Micro meteorology
In the very extensive course notes for the DTU course "Micrometeorology in wind energy"
by J Mann, J Bang, M Kelly et al (2017) [14] all the theory and best practices for handling
wind data, working with turbulence intensity, wind shear, stability etc. is explained.
Page 13 of 92
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Theory
This chapter covers the most important theoretical aspects of yaw steering. How does
it work? Which variables impact the turbines’ wakes and models? And under which
conditions can yaw steering be applied?
4.1
Yawed turbines & wakes
When a wind turbine is yawed, the face of the rotor is horizontally angled away from the
incoming wind so that it will no longer be in the optimal perpendicular position. This
given angel “ is called the yaw angle of the turbine. In normal wind turbine control, a
yaw angle or misalignment is unwanted, since it decreases the power production of the
turbine. This power loss happens because the yaw angle causes a decrease in the eﬀec-
tive velocity of the wind, that the turbine experiences. In the AWC control strategy yaw
steering, yaw misalignment is done on purpose, to steer the wake of the turbine away from
any downstream turbines to collectively increase the power output of the entire wind farm.
Figure 4.1: Force diagram of the rotor in a yawed wind turbine according to the actuator disk theory, presented
in [24]
Page 14 of 92
==PAGE:24==
In Figure 4.1, a force diagram of a yawed turbine is presented, an important feature of this
diagram is the altered velocity U0 · cos(“), which is the biggest contributor to the power
loss of the turbine since the velocity is cubed in the equation of power for an airﬂow,
meaning that the power available in the airﬂow for the yawed turbine to extract, is lesser
than under non-yawed conditions, see equations 4.1 & 4.2.
The eﬀective wind velocity at hub height of a yawed turbine and the power available in
the incoming airﬂow under yawed conditions are determined by
Ueff = U0 · cos(“)
(4.1)
Pyaw≠avail = 1
2 · ﬂ· A · (U0 · cos(“))3
(4.2)
Where U0 is the wind velocity at hub height, “ is the yaw angle, ﬂis the density of air, A
is the rotor area.
When the ﬂow of air passes through the yawed turbine, a lateral force is exerted upon the
ﬂow by the rotor, deﬂecting the wake horizontally, this lateral force is depicted in ﬁgure
4.1 as fz. Positive and negative yaw angles will deﬂect the wake to either side respectively.
In Figure 4.2 a force diagram of the deﬂected wake of a yawed turbine is shown (presented
in [24]).
Figure 4.2: Force diagram of the wake of a yawed wind turbine, presented in [24]
4.1.1
Coeﬃcient of thrust & power for yawed turbines (CT & CP)
The Coeﬃcient of Thrust (CT) is a dimensionless measure of a turbines aﬀect on the
wind, when the wind forces the turbine, Newtons third law of motion dictates that the
Page 15 of 92
==PAGE:25==
turbine must also force the wind. This relationship is what generates the wake, therefore
the diﬀerent properties of the wake eg. velocity, turbulence intensity & wake deﬂection
is highly dependent on the value of CT, the CT of a yawed turbine is deﬁned in equation
4.3.
The Coeﬃcient of Power (CP) is a dimensionless measure of a turbines ability to extract
energy from the wind. When a turbine is yawed, this coeﬃcient is lowered, resulting in
the turbine producing less energy. The coeﬃcient of power of a yawed turbine is deﬁned
in equation 4.4.
CT =
T
1
2 · ﬂ· A · (U0 · cos(“))2
(4.3)
CP =
P
1
2 · ﬂ· A · (U0 · cos(“))3
(4.4)
Where T is thrust exerted on the wind by the turbine, P is the power available in the
ﬂow of air passing through the turbine, ﬂis the density of air, A is the rotor swept area,
U0 · cos(“) is the eﬀective wind speed as experienced by the yawed turbine at hub height
as described in equation 4.1.
The CT(“) and P(“) curves for a yawed turbine are displayed in Gebraad et al (2016) [4],
in the paper, CT and P curves are calculated for a range of 100 degrees for the NREL
5MW reference wind turbine. The plot in ﬁgure 4.3 shows how the “ inﬂuences P and
CT of the turbine.
Figure 4.3: CT (“) and P(“) for a yawed windturbine, presented in [4]
It will be shown later in the chapter, how essential wake steering mechanisms such as the
wake deﬂection y(x)/D is inﬂuenced by the CT value.
Page 16 of 92
==PAGE:26==
4.1.2
Yaw angle (“)
When using yaw steering, there are of course limits as to how much yawing that can
be performed, before the power losses of the upwind turbine become prevalent, and the
control strategy yields a net power loss, instead of a gain.
Looking through the available literature it is found that a yaw angle of ±30¶ is the upper
limit of how much a turbine can be yawed while still achieving a positive result from yaw
steering [4, 6, 8, 24]. This is because yaw angles above 30¶ do not deﬂect the wake much
further, but their CP curves continue to decrease as the yaw angle increases. Although
the CP and CT curves are turbine speciﬁc, a similar trend and conclusion is drawn across
the investigated literature.
In papers by L.Voller et al (2016) [32] and C.Archer et al (2018) [33] it is discussed that
negative yaw angles result in a lower power gain from yaw steering than that produced
under positive yaw angles, this diﬀerence is argued in the reports as being caused by
an increased wake deﬂection for negatively yawed turbines under a clockwise rotational
direction of the rotor, and the wake being aﬀected by the Coriolis eﬀect. But this theory
is yet to be tested and none of the models covered in this project have included this feature.
4.2
Wake models
Before any yawed turbines or deﬂected wakes can be modeled, the wake itself needs to be
modeled. This is typically done using a wake model. The wake models used through this
thesis will shortly be presented here.
Gebraad et al (2014) [17] presented their multi zone model, which is a modiﬁcation of
Jensen’s park model where the wake is divided into three zones, the near wake, far wake
and mixing zone. Each zone has it’s own properties in regards to velocity deﬁcit, tur-
bulence etc. The multi zone model is also available in FLORIS. Figure 4.4 shows the
diﬀerent zones of the multi zone model.
Page 17 of 92
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.4: Multi zone wake model, presented in [17]
Due to high uncertainties and extreme turbulent air in the near wake zone, it is very hard
to make any accurate predictions of the wake properties in this zone. Therefore all the
predictions made about any wake velocity deﬁcits, yaw steering induced AEP increase
etc. will be done for the far wake zone only. [17, 14]
The Gaussian wake model which is presented by Bastankhah et al (2016) [8], also uses
the zones of the multi zone model, in the near wake zone the velocity deﬁcit is constant,
while in the far wake and mixing zones the velocity deﬁcit is described with a Gaussian
distribution. Due to its more realistic modeling using the gaussian distribution and good
results in comparative tests [21], this wake model is set as the default wake model when
using FLORIS.
Figure 4.5: Wake development using the Gaussian wake model, presented in [8]
Page 18 of 92
==PAGE:28==
4.2.1
Wake skew (◊) & wake deﬂection
y
D
One of the major diﬀerences between the wake models, are how they calculate the skew
and deﬂection of the wake. The wake skew is the angle between the wake center line and
the wind direction. The wake deﬂection is the measure of how far the wake has moved
laterally.
Out of the many diﬀerent wake deﬂection models Jimenéz model is proba-
bly the most optimistic, while Qian’s and Bastankhah’s models are more conservative.
Since Qian’s wake deﬂection model is developed oﬀBastankhah’s gaussian wake deﬂec-
tion model, they produce somewhat similar results, with Qian’s model yielding the most
conservative results of the two.
Following are the equations for wake skew from Jiménez model [24] and Qian’s model
[18] respectively, the Gaussian wake deﬂection model is expected to show almost identical
results to those of Qian’s relative to other models.
◊Jimenéz = sin(“) · CT
2(1 + ‡ x
D)2
(4.5)
◊Qian =
CT · cos(“)2 · sin(“)
44.4 · (‡/D)2 ≠1.88 · CT · cos(“)3
(4.6)
Where CT is the coeﬃcient of thrust, “ is the yaw angle, ‡ is the wake expansion factor,
D is the diameter of the rotor and x is the downwind distance.
For the wake deﬂection Jiménez’s model uses the following simple equation
y
D = cos(“)2 · sin(“) · CT
4kw
·
A
1 ≠
1
1 + 2kwx/D
B
(4.7)
Where kw is the wake expansion factor (kw = 0.4 ú Ia) and y is the lateral distance.
Qian’s wake deﬂection equation is a bit more complex since it considers a diﬀerent de-
ﬂection behavior in the near and far wake zones as proposed by Gebraad [17]. In the
near wake region the wake deﬂects linearly unaﬀected by its surroundings, in the far wake
region the ambient turbulence intensity of the free surrounding wind prompts a mixing
of free wind and the wake, resulting in a wake deﬂection in the shape of a power function
x0.5.
Page 19 of 92
==PAGE:29==
y(x)
D
=
Ò
CTcos(“)sin(“)
18.24kú
· ln
------
(‡0/D + 0.24
Ò
CTcos(“)3)(‡/D ≠0.24
Ò
CTcos(“)3)
(‡0/D ≠0.24
Ò
CTcos(“)3)(‡/D + 0.24
Ò
CTcos(“)3)
------ + yd0
D
(4.8)
‡0
D =
Û
CT cos(“)2(sin(“) + 1.88 cos(“)◊0)
44.4 ◊0
(4.9)
◊0 = 0.3 “
cos(“)
3
1 ≠
Ò
1 ≠CT cos(“)3
4
(4.10)
‡
D = kú x
D + ‘ú
(4.11)
kú = 0.11 C1.07
T
I0.20
a
,
‘ú = 0.23C≠0.25
T
I0.17
a
(4.12)
Following are a series of comparison of Jimenéz and Qian’s wake deﬂections, to see the
models performances under diﬀerent yawing, turbulence intensity and CT values.
Figure 4.6: Wake deﬂections using Jimenéz’s and Qian’s model, with diﬀerent settings.
From the plots in ﬁgure 4.6 it is clear that Jimenez’s model results in a larger deﬂection
than Qians, under all tested conditions.
Page 20 of 92
==PAGE:30==
The ﬁgure also shows that an increase in yawing, results in a larger deﬂection, a decrease in
CT results in reduced deﬂection while an increase in ambient turbulence intensity results
in a decrease in deﬂection.
Unless special atmospheric conditions are present, the turbulence intensity will typically
decrease as the wind velocity rises, while the turbine’s CT will decrease with an increase
in wind velocity. Meaning that it will rarely happen that upper extreme values for both
decreasing eﬀects are present.
4.2.2
FLORIS
The FLORIS tool is developed by the NREL in Boulder, Colorado, USA [19]. The tool
is a computationally inexpensive, modeling tool for steady-state wake characteristics in
a wind farms. The tool has several wake models (velocity deﬁcit) and wake deﬂection
models ( y
D) implemented to chose from upon use. The wake and deﬂection models are
the following
• Jensen (wake model)
• Jimenéz (wake deﬂection)
• Gaussian (wake model & wake deﬂection)
• Multi zone (wake model & wake deﬂection)
• Curl (wake model & wake deﬂection)
4.2.3
Qian’s model
The ﬂow model presented in the paper by Qian et al [18] is unique since it is the only
ﬂow model that also models the turbulence intensity of the wake. Qian’s model uses an
expanded version of the Gaussian wake model presented in Bastankhah et al [8] where
both the velocity deﬁcit and the turbulence intensity of the wake is modeled.
While
still implementing it’s own wake deﬂection model as mentioned previously in chapter
4. The model is computationally heavy compared to the model combinations available
in FLORIS. In the following ﬁgures 4.7a and 4.7b the modeled velocity deﬁcit and the
turbulence intensity of a yawed 1x6 wind farm is shown.
Page 21 of 92
==PAGE:31==
(a) Wake velocity deﬁcit
(b) Wake turbulence intensity
Figure 4.7: Velocity deﬁcit and turbulence intensity of yawed wakes
4.3
Optimization
When the ﬂow models calculate the power of a given scenario, with a speciﬁc wind farm
layout(Turbine spacing, number of turbines, layout shape), a given turbine type(D, H,
CT, CP), under speciﬁc atmospheric condition(V , TI, ◊) using one of the many wake
models (Multi zone, Gaussian, Qian) with one of the diﬀerent wake deﬂection models
(Jimenéz, Gaussian, Qian). Then it is necessary to implement an optimization algorithm
in order to ﬁgure out which constellation of turbine yaw angles(“1, “2, “3...“n) that yields
the highest power output under the given circumstances.
This can be done in diﬀerent ways, so it is important to chose an algorithm that suits
the data. Most importantly the results must be accurate, otherwise the algorithm will be
redundant. Secondly the computational time must be kept low to ensure usability.
4.3.1
Constrained Optimization
By adding constrains to the optimization algorithm the complexity of the problem can be
reduced, if the constrains are chosen correctly, they will result in an increased accuracy
of the optimization algorithm while also reducing it’s computational time. The yawing
angles of the optimization problem are constrained to “ = [≠30, 30] for all turbines. These
constrains are chosen based on the ﬁndings presented earlier in chapter 3.
Page 22 of 92
==PAGE:32==
SLSQP
Sequential Least SQuares Programming (SLSQP) is a method for constrained optimiza-
tion, that minimizes an objective function.
It can handle inﬁnite volumes while still
applying any combination of bounds, equality and inequality constrains. It is a very ver-
satile mathematical method that can be applied on most optimization problems. The
method uses the following equation:
min(d) = f(xk) + Òf(xk)Td + 1
2dTÒ2
xxf(xk) ≠⁄Tb(xk) ≠‡Tc(xk)d
(4.13)
where xk is an iteration, f(xk) is the objective function ⁄ and ‡ are lagrangian multiplies
and d is the search direction along the objective function [28]
COBYLA
Constrained Optimization BY Linear Approximation (COBYLA) is a method for con-
strained optimization, the method runs linear approximations on the objective function
and each constraint to ﬁnd the minimized objective function. Unlike other optimization
algorithms like gradient decent or SLSQP etc. COBYLA doesn’t need the gradient of the
objective function in order to work.
Brute Force
Brute Force (BF) optimization is the simplest yet most accurate optimization algorithm,
sadly it is also very very computationally heavy. BF optimization works by calculating
every single possible combination of the variables of a problem and from that, ﬁnding the
largest or smallest value. In the wind turbine optimization problem given in this thesis
the amount of iterations will be the range of the constrains to the power of the number
of variables. To avoid an inﬁnitely large volume of possible yawing angles, only integers
are used.
niterations = 61nturbines
(4.14)
The iteration process will run as following:
for i in range(n):
if iteration(i) > opt-power:
Page 23 of 92
==PAGE:33==
opt-power = iteration(i)
The BF optimization algorithm is rarely used for actual optimization problems due to
it’s slow performance. But it is often used as a check for other optimization algorithms
to see if they yield similar results as the BF optimization on simpliﬁed optimization
problems. Likewise, the brute force optimization algorithm has been integrated into every
optimization code used in this thesis, as an initial check to ensure the correct performance
of the chosen optimization algorithm whenever they are used.
4.3.2
Yawing Surface
Using the optimization algorithms on the modiﬁed ﬂow models a [ 25 X 360 X nturbines]
matrix is created for the given scenario, containing the yaw angle setting for each turbine
[“1, “2 “3 ...“n] that is required under the given wind- speed and direction, to yield the
collective maximized power for the wind farm, these maximized power values are then
coupled into the power surfaces, this will be covered later in the chapter. The matrix
containing the yaw angle settings can also be refereed to as a yaw steering look up table
(LUT). It is basically this look up table that each turbine in the farm would be con-
trolled after when applying yaw steering as the control strategy. To give an example
of this, the yaw steering surface (yawing matrix for one turbine) is plotted for the sec-
ond turbine of a 1x6 East-West layout. The surface is presented in the following ﬁgure 4.8
Figure 4.8: Yawing angle Surface, turbine 2 of 6
Page 24 of 92
==PAGE:34==
Due to the turbine yawing in both positive and negative angles, the 3D yawing surface
becomes diﬃcult to interpret, therefore a simpliﬁed 2D plot is made for each turbine,
containing only the yawing angles for all wind directions under four diﬀerent wind speeds.
Although these plots are simpliﬁed versions of the yawing surface plots that are used to
control the turbines, these 2D plots are better at displaying the trends in the data.
Figure 4.9: Yawing angles of each turbine in the 1x6 wind farm layout, for diﬀerent wind speeds and wind
directions
In ﬁgure 4.9, turbine 1 is the most western situated turbine and turbine 6 is the most east-
ern situation turbine. It is clear to see that the utilized optimization algorithm (SLSQP)
is working correctly in regards to the wind directions, with the two outer turbines only
being yawed when they are ﬁrst in line with the incoming wind. For turbine 1 that is
a western wind at 270¶, and for turbine 6 it is an eastern wind at 90¶. The individual
yawing angles will be further investigated in chapter 6.2.
4.3.3
Power Surface
Using the results from the yaw steering power optimized ﬂow models and the newly
produced yawing matrix, a Power Surface (PS) can be made. A power surface is essentially
Page 25 of 92
==PAGE:35==
a matrix containing the yaw steering optimized power output from the ﬂow model for all
of the possible combinations of the available wind data. That means the ﬂow model has
been run in a double loop over the wind speed VŒ from 0 [m/s] to the Vestas V80 cut-out
speed at 25 [m/s] (the lower bound could be moved to the cut-in speed at 4 [m/s] but
it was easier to program it running from 0, and the below cut-in wind speeds computed
very quickly), and the wind direction ◊ranging from 0¶ to 360¶.
This results in a [ 25 x 360 x 2 ] matrix containing the non-yawed reference power and the
yaw optimized power for the given wind farm scenario for all possible combinations of the
wind- speed and direction.
To better understand how power surfaces work, two example power surfaces are plotted
and shown. The non-yawed power surface and the yaw optimized power surface of a 1x10
wind farm with a spacing of 6D that has been modeled with a turbulence intensity of 0.08
using both the guassian wake model and the gaussian wake deﬂection model, is presented
in the ﬁgures 4.10 and 4.11 respectively.
Figure 4.10: No yaw steering, Power Surface
Figure 4.11: Yaw steering, Power Surface
The potential of the yaw steering technology’s ability to increase the power production
in wind farms, is essentially found in the diﬀerence between the previous two plots. The
diﬀerence between the non-yawed and the yawed wind farm. A keen eye will be able
to spot a minor diﬀerence in the two plots, but to better illustrate this diﬀerence the
percentage increase in power production for the wind farm is plotted along the same
ranges of wind- speed and direction. The result is presented in the following ﬁgure 4.11.
This type of plot will be refereed to as a Percentage Increase in Power Surface (PIPS)
onwards.
Page 26 of 92
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.12: Yaw Steering, Percentage power increase surface
These types of plots will be used throughout this project to analyze and display the
potential of yaw steering. In order to better compare the results of diﬀerent scenarios, the
yawed power surfaces will be paired with the Sprogø wind data presented in chapter 2.4
to create a 20 year averaged AEP for each scenario. The AEP values are chosen as the
measuring value of this thesis since they are easy to compare due to their single values.
Their ability to include the eﬀect of layouts with respect to wind directions and their
importance to the ﬁnal product of a wind farm.
To get a better idea of how the program that has been created to calculate the PS and
PIPS in this thesis works, revisit the ﬂow diagram presented in ﬁgure 2.5 of chapter 2
Page 27 of 92
==PAGE:37==
4.4
Summary
The theory, models and tools, used to describe the wakes of yawed turbines have been
presented in this chapter, ﬁrst oﬀ, the physics behind a yawed wind turbine and its wake
is presented, the cause of the wake deﬂection is explained. Following, the eﬀect on a
yawed turbine’s coeﬃcient of thrust and power is displayed.
In the second section of this chapter the diﬀerent wake models and wake deﬂection models
found throughout the literature that will be used later in this project are presented, the
wake deﬂection models are plotted and compared to show their diﬀerences, their respective
impact on the overall performance of a ﬂow model will be shown later in this report.
In the ﬁnal section, the diﬀerent techniques and algorithms used for the yaw angle opti-
mization problem, are presented and explained. The brute force method that is used to
validate the utilized optimization algorithms is also presented and explained. The product
of the optimization is presented in the shape of the yawing and power surfaces and the
percentage power increase surface, the power surface plots will be coupled with the wind
data presented in chapter 2.4 to calculate the AEP of all scenarios presented later in this
thesis.
Page 28 of 92
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Layout Dependency
To establish the full potential of yaw steering as a control strategy in wind farm control,
its ﬁeld of use must be found, therefore it is necessary to ﬁgure out which variable values
that must be present for the control strategy to yield a usable energy increase.
In this chapter the layout dependent variables turbine spacing, number of turbines and
layout shape will be investigated.
To reduce the amount of other variables aﬀecting the results of this chapter, all of the at-
mospheric dependent variables and wake model dependent variables will be kept constant
throughout this chapter, they will then be varied and analyzed further in the following
two chapters.
At the beginning of each section or subsection the setup for which variables are used, and
what the wind farm scenario looks like, will be presented.
All the models that have been programmed in this chapter uses the Gaussian wake model
with the Gaussian wake deﬂection model, with a turbulence intensity of 0.08. This setting
is the default setting of the FLORIS tool. As it was presented in chapter 3, the Gaussian
model by Bastankhah & Porté Agel [8] is one of the most accurate, while still being
computationally fast.
5.1
Turbine spacing
In normal layout optimization for wind farms, the spacing between turbines is one of the
most important factors. At lower spacings the turbine-wake interaction will be larger
and at longer spacings the turbine-wake interaction will be lower. Since yaw steering
Page 29 of 92
==PAGE:39==
works by reducing the turbine-wake interaction, it can be assumed that the potential of
yaw steering is highest at low turbine spacings, where the turbine-wake interaction is high.
In this section a wind farm test scenario with a 1x6 turbine layout is used, six Vestas V80
turbines are situated on a line running from east to west, with the wind direction ﬁxed
along the line coming from the west (270¶). The scenario can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: 1x6 East-West layout, 6D spacing, Wind farm scenario with turbine numbers
To test the yaw steering technology’s dependency on turbine spacing, an altered test
program is created where the wind farm scenario is run in a double loop over a range
of turbine spacings and wind velocities, in the initially presented program ﬂow diagram
shown in ﬁgure 2.5 the program loops over the wind direction instead of the turbine
spacing. For each iteration of the ﬂow model, the SLSQP algorithm presented in 4.3.1
is used to ensure that the yawing conﬁguration of the six turbines are optimized so that
the power production of the wind farm is at its maximum for each iteration. For each
iteration of the ﬂow model a non yawed reference scenario is also computed to allow for
the calculation of the percentage increase in yaw steering induced power.
In the following ﬁgure 5.2 the results of the altered double looped ﬂow model is presented.
Page 30 of 92
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.2: Percentage power increase surface, for turbine spacing and wind velocity:
Wake model = Gaussian, Wake deﬂection model = Gaussian. [Computational time = 31 seconds]
From ﬁgure 5.2 it can be seen that for the given scenario, the percentage increase in
power caused by yaw steering, decreases with an exponentially decaying function as the
turbine spacing increases for almost all wind speeds calculated. Therefore, as expected,
the potential of yaw steering is higher at low turbine spacings. It is important to remember
that the percentage increase in power that is shown in ﬁgure 5.2 only displays the diﬀerence
between the non yawed and yawed scenario for that given iteration. Meaning that placing
turbines closer to each other will still result in a decrease in energy production, but by
using yaw steering, that decrease can be reduced.
With this variable dependency investigated, the turbine spacing will be ﬁxed at 6 Turbine
Diameter (D) for all future test scenarios. This value has been chosen because it is often
used in commercial oﬀshore wind farms and is therefore realistic. Furthermore, based
on calculations carried out for the wake deﬂections in chapter 4.2.1, 6D is expected to
be placed in the far wake zone for the wind farm and atmospheric scenarios presented
through this thesis.
A lower turbine spacing could have been chosen to display a higher potential of the yaw
steering technology, but it would create less energy in the given farm and therefore making
the wind farm layout unlikely and less optimal.
Page 31 of 92
==PAGE:41==
5.2
Number of turbines
An interesting variable in yaw steering is the number of turbines aﬀected. Is it possible
to ﬁnd a convergence in the energy increase of a farm by changing the number of turbines
or will the potential decrease with more turbines?
To model the trend associated with the number of turbines, the wind farm scenario from
chapter 5.1 is used, with a ﬁxed spacing of 6D. The program is run according to the ﬂow
diagram presented in ﬁgure 2.5, with the exception that the entire program is put in an
additional loop over a range of turbines starting at 2 and ending at 16.
To make the results more relevant and more easily comparable, The AEP of each scenario
is calculated using the wind data from Sprogø, presented in 2.4. To do this, an optimized
PS and PIPS is produced for each ﬂow model iteration with changing turbine numbers,
the PS is used to calculate the AEP for each scenario and the PIPS is used to better
display the diﬀerence in the data, all the theory regarding PS and PIPS is presented in
chapter 4.3.3.
Following are the PIPS plots for the 1x2 turbine scenario and the 1x16 turbine scenario,
which are the extremes in the range of turbines.
Figure 5.3: 1x2 wind farm, procentage power increase
surface, Wake model = Gaussian, Wake deﬂection model
= Gaussian. [Computational time = 21 Min]
Figure 5.4: 1x16 wind farm, percentage power increase
surface, Wake model = Gaussian, Wake deﬂection model
= Gaussian. [Computational time = 6 hours]
To better clarify the trend associated with the number of turbines in a line, the percentage
increase in AEP is plotted for each number of turbine iterations used in this chapter. The
results are presented in the following ﬁgure 5.5.
Page 32 of 92
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.5: Convergence of AEP increase due to the number of turbines
from the above plot, a couple of observations can be made, ﬁrst an increase of the per-
centage increase in AEP is spotted from 2 turbines and up to 4 turbines. going from
an increase of 0.435% to 0.545% respectively. In the second region from 4 turbines and
all the way through to 10 turbines, the percentage AEP increase stalls from 0.545% to
0.541% respectively. In the ﬁnal and third region from 10 to 16 turbines a slight decrease
is spotted, running from 0.541 % to 0.509 % respectively.
From this very general scenario it can be concluded that the yaw steering technology will
yield a substantial and usable result as early as 2 turbines, meaning one yawed turbine,
and one non yawed. The technology’s potential peaks in the range from 4 to 10 turbines,
where after that it slowly decays. Usually, modern large scale wind farm layouts rarely
have lines of equidistantly spaced turbines longer than 16 turbines, therefore the plot is
stopped here.
5.3
Layout
As with any layout optimization in wind farms, the shape of the layout is also of great
importance, this is also the case in yaw steering. By trying out diﬀerent layout shapes,
yaw steering’s dependency on the layout shape of a wind farm will be clariﬁed.
First oﬀ, the 1x6 wind farm scenario from 5.1 is once more used, additionally a new layout
is added where the previous six turbines with the 6D spacing are rotated to an optimal
direction that will yield the lowest turbine-wake interaction, and therefore give the highest
Page 33 of 92
==PAGE:43==
energy production for the given wind data. in other words, the previous test scenario is
layout optimized with respect to the prevailing wind directions of the Sprogø data set. It
is expected that due to the decrease in turbine-wake interaction in the optimized layout
scenario, the percentage AEP increase will be lower for this scenario but the AEP will be
higher. The layout scenarios are presented in the following ﬁgure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Non-optimized- & Optimized wind farm layouts with the Sprogø data wind rose
The Percentage Increase in Power Surface (PIPS) for the two scenarios modeled are pre-
sented in the following ﬁgures 5.7 and 5.8 and the results of the simulations are presented
in the following table 5.1
Page 34 of 92
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.7: PIPS for the 1x6 East-West layout, Wake
model = Gaussian, Wake deﬂection model = Gaussian.
[Computational time ¥ 2 hours]
Figure 5.8: PIPS for the 1x6 Optimized layout, Wake
model = Gaussian, Wake deﬂection model = Gaussian.
[Computational time ¥ 2 hours]
Unit
1x6 East-West
1x6 Optimized
No yaw steering AEP
MWh
44166.17
44860.48
Yaw steering AEP
MWh
44407.63
44974.94
Yaw steering AEP increase
%
0.546
0.255
No yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.431
0.437
Yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.433
0.439
Table 5.1: Results of layout optimization, while using yaw steering
The results of the layout optimization are quite clear. When the turbine placement line
is changed from the prevailing wind direction (East-West), to the line which crosses the
wind direction with the lowest occurrence (350¶ to 170¶) the AEP of the wind farm is
increased. Furthermore a reduction in the potential of yaw steering is noticed since this
optimized layout will experience less turbine-wake interaction. Finally as expected, the
higest AEP is found in the layout optimized scenario that utilized yaw steering. All the
power surfaces and PIPS for the scenarios are presented in Appendix A.
To further expand on yaw steering’s potential’s dependency on turbine-wake interaction
and the layout shape. a 4x4 wind farm scenario is created using the previous scenario
settings, 6D spacing, 0.08 turbulence intensity etc. The wind farm scenario is presented
in the following ﬁgure 5.9
Page 35 of 92
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.9: 4x4 layout, 6D spacing, Wind farm scenario with turbine numbers
The PIPS of the scenario is presented in the following ﬁgure 5.10 while the full setup of
power surfaces can be seen in Appendix A.
Figure 5.10:
PIPS for a 4x4 layout modeled with the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 18.4 hours]
From the PIPS of the 4x4 scenario, it is clear to see the increase in turbine-wake interac-
tion. compared to the PIPS of the 1x6 scenario presented in ﬁgure 5.8 the 4x4 scenario
has much more wind directions where turbine-wake interaction happens, and therefore
the potential for yaw steering increases drastically. To show how much, the results of the
Page 36 of 92
==PAGE:46==
4x4 scenario are added into the previous results table, and presented anew in the following
table 5.2.
Unit
1x6 East-West
1x6 Optimized
4x4
No yaw steering AEP
MWh
44166.17
44860.48
110402.70
Yaw steering AEP
MWh
44407.63
44974.94
112392.35
Yaw steering AEP increase
%
0.546
0.255
1.802
No yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.431
0.437
0.403
Yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.433
0.439
0.411
Table 5.2: Results of diﬀerent layouts, while using yaw steering
Obviously the AEP can not be compared since there are 6 turbines in the ﬁrst two farms,
and 16 turbines in the last farm. But the percentage AEP increase and capacity factors
are good values to compare the performances of the scenarios by. The new 4x4 farm
shows a huge potential for yaw steering, with an AEP increase of 1.802 %.
This in-
crease is caused by the high turbine-wake interaction. This is also the reason why the
capacity factor of the 4x4 wind farm is the lowest of the 3 farm layouts and the 6 scenarios.
To ﬁnalize this layout dependency of yaw steering, the convergence of yaw steering’s AEP
increasing ability is mapped out over a series of expanding grid layouts, much like it was
done in the beginning of this chapter. A convergence plot like that of ﬁgure 5.5 presented
earlier, is created, only this time each loop in the program also adds another row to the
layout. the convergence plot is presented in the following ﬁgure 5.11
Figure 5.11: Convergence of AEP increase due to the number of rows and columns
Page 37 of 92
==PAGE:47==
From the plot it is clear that the AEP increasing potential of yaw steering rises fast from
the 2x2 to 4x4 layouts, much like it was the case in ﬁgure 5.5 between 2 and 4 turbines.
At the 4x4 and 5x5 layouts, the plot ﬂattens out in the area around 1.802% - 1.831 %.
Showing that, by increasing the size of a wind farm is only going to increase the AEP
increasing potential of yaw steering to a certain level, after a certain size (in this case
around 4x4 and 5x5), the percentage AEP increase will stall.
Ideally the plot would continue for 6x6, 7x7 layout etc. to ensure that the value did not
start falling again, But with a computational time for the 5x5 scenario of 2 days and 4
hours. It was considered out of scope of the time plan, for this thesis to model anything
bigger than a 5x5 layout.
Page 38 of 92
==PAGE:48==
5.4
Summary
Through this chapter, the yaw steering technology’s dependency on the diﬀerent layout
variables, turbine spacing, number of turbines and layout shape, have been investigated.
The results for the given scenarios where as following:
• The yaw steering technology’s power increasing potential decreases with an expo-
nentially decaying function as the turbine spacing increases.
• A signiﬁcant yaw steering power increase is present at as little as two turbines. with
the maximum potential achieved at 4 turbine, and a substantial increase still present
at 16 turbines.
• The layout of a given farm proved to have a huge impact on the yaw steering tech-
nology’s ability to improve the AEP of a wind farm. By rotating a 1x6 wind farm
80¶ the percentage AEP increase caused by yaw steering more than doubled from
0.255 % in the layout optimized case, to 0.546 % in the worst case scenario.
• A percentage AEP increase of 1.802 % was achieved using yaw steering on a 4x4
wind farm.
• The power increasing potential of yaw steering converges at bigger wind farm layouts
capping the potential of the technology.
It is important to remember that these results are unique to the given setup of variables,
models and wind data. They can be interpreted as general pointers towards the potential
of yaw steering, but they do not cover all possible uses of yaw steering.
Page 39 of 92
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Atmospheric Dependency
In this chapter the atmospheric dependent variables such as wind speed [VŒ], wind di-
rection [◊] and turbulence intensity [TI / Ia] will be investigated for their eﬀects on yaw
steering.
6.1
Wind Speed
Although the wind speed is not a variable that can be controlled, it is important to un-
derstand its eﬀect on yaw steering.
In chapter 4.2.1, diﬀerent wake deﬂection models where programmed and tested to show
how the wake deﬂection is dependent on the coeﬃcient of thrust. With high CT values
yielding a big deﬂection, and low CT values yielding a small deﬂection of the wake. Since
the coeﬃcient of thrust can be seen as a function of the wind speed that decreases in
value, as the wind speed increases. it can be assumed that the wake deﬂection of a yawed
turbine will decrease as the wind speed increases.
With a lower wake deﬂection, the yaw steering technology’s power increasing potential
diminishes. Therefore it is expected that, at higher wind speeds the potential of yaw steer-
ing will be lower. Obviously, when the wind speed experienced at the diﬀerent turbines
exceeds the rated wind speed (Vrated) of the given turbine, it is no longer the decreased
wake deﬂection that reduces the potential of yaw steering, but the fact that there is no
need for yaw steering since all turbines are running at max capacity.
The limits of yaw steering with respect to the wind speed will therefore be dependent
on the type of turbine, both the turbines CT curve and rated wind speed will determine
Page 40 of 92
==PAGE:50==
at which wind speeds yaw steering is useful and which it is not. In the case of the V80
turbine all of this information is available in the table 2.1 and ﬁgure 2.1 of chapter 2.3.
With the rated wind speed of the V80 turbine sitting at 15 m/s it can be expected that
the free wind speed (VŒ) needs to be higher than 15 m/s in order to achieve rated wind
speed conditions at multiple wind turbines that are experiencing turbine-wake interaction.
This means that in the case of the V80 turbine only free wind speeds well over 15 m/s
will be enough to make yaw steering obsolete.
Looking at the CT curve of the turbine, it is noticed that the CT value is stable at around
0.8 from the cut-in wind speed at 4 m/s to 10m/s where is then drops slowly until 13 m/s,
after 13 m/s it starts a rapid decline reaching a value of 0.4 at 14 m/s and further down
to 0.25 at 15 m/s.
This same rapidly decreasing trend can been in ﬁgure 5.2 in chapter 5 where a plot of
the percentage power increase for diﬀerent wind speeds and turbine spacings is shown. In
the plot, a rapid decrease in the percentage power increase is noticed for the wind speed
between 13 m/s and 15 m/s, conﬁrming the wind speeds aﬀect on yaw steerings ability to
steer the wake away from any downstream turbines, and from that it’s power increasing
abilities.
By looking at one of the percentage increase in power surface plots presented earlier (eg.
ﬁgures 5.4 or 5.10) the same trend is also very clear, the potential of yaw steering dies
out in the wind speeds following 13 m/s.
From this it can be concluded that at higher wind speeds, the low CT value will ﬁrst
reduce yaw steering’s power increasing ability, before Vrated ﬁnally kills it.
6.2
Wind Direction
Just like the wind speed, the wind direction can not be controlled, but the turbine can
be yawed to change the wind inﬂow angle relative to the turbine, this is the key element
in yaw steering itself. But with ﬁxed layouts some wind directions might still be more
favorable for yaw steering than others, allowing the turbine to better redirect the wake
away from any downstream turbines.
To investigate this, the previously used 1x6 East-West (90¶ ≠270¶) wind farm layout
Page 41 of 92
==PAGE:51==
scenario is used. The wind direction is in this case set to range around a western inﬂow,
with the range going from 260¶ to 280¶. The distance between the turbines is also of
interest in this scenario, since it must be ensured that the results are not misinterpreted
as the turbines being placed so close together that the wake can not be steered away from
the following turbine.
The following ﬁgure 6.1 contains the percentage increase in power surface of the modeled
scenario, due to its double curved shape, a 2D top view plot is also provided in ﬁgure 6.2
for better viewing of the data.
Figure 6.1: Percentage increase in power surface, vari-
able wind direction and turbine spacing [Computational
time = 43 seconds]
Figure 6.2:
Percentage increase in power top view,
variable wind direction and turbine spacing [Computa-
tional time = 43 seconds]
The two plots display an interesting trend in the data, it is clearly noticeable how the
highest percentage increase in power is achieved at inﬂow angles not aligned with the line
of turbines (270¶). The highest increases are found at 6¶ on either side of 270¶ but at
such low spacings (3 D) that they are deemed unrealistic, In the range of more realistic
turbine spacings (6D and up) it is at 2¶ on either side of 270¶ that the highest values are
found, and this trend follows through for all the spacings after 6D.
The lowest values on the other hand, are found at 270¶, this result might seam a little
counter intuitive, but it means that when the free wind VŒ is aligned with the line of
turbines, it is hard for the yaw steering technology to deﬂect the wake enough for the
downwind turbines not to experience the wake. This is also the case for the low spacings
of the otherwise favorable wind direction, 2¶ on either side of 270¶. Hence a dip in per-
formance is seen at these data points in the plot.
Page 42 of 92
==PAGE:52==
To get a clearer understanding of the wind direction’s eﬀect on yaw steering, two turbine
spacing samples of 5D and 9D are pulled from the data, their power production with
and without yaw steering are plotted for every wind direction in a range of 15¶ over and
under the wind direction aligned with the turbines (270¶). The plots are presented in the
following two ﬁgures 6.3 and 6.4.
Figure 6.3: 1x6 wind farm power production
Figure 6.4: 1x6 wind farm power production
From the two plots it is clear to see that yaw steering works best when the incoming wind
has a slight angle to the line of turbines using yaw steering. The space between the two
lines of the plots, (which eﬀectively is the potential of yaw steering) is biggest at angles
around ±2¶ on either side of 270¶.
Page 43 of 92
==PAGE:53==
6.2.1
Yawing vs wind direction
In ﬁgure 4.9 of chapter 4.3.2 the yaw settings for each turbine in a 1x6 East-West layout
wind farm is presented, the plots show how the turbines uses both a negative and a positive
yaw angle to maximize the power production of the farm when turbine-wake interaction
is present. The yawing angles are lowest when the incoming wind is far away from being
aligned with the row of turbines, since only part of the wake will interact with the next
turbine. The yawing angle is at its highest when they do align, since the full wake hits
the following turbine.
An interesting feature of the plot is the transition from the extreme negative yawing to
the extreme positive yawing that occurs over a very small wind direction range around
90¶ and 270¶, when the wind direction crosses the row of turbines. In practice this would
require the turbine to yaw 60¶ from ≠30¶ to 30¶ if the wind direction changed just a couple
of degrees over the alignment of the row of turbines. Seeing that the wind direction can
change 10¶ ≠20¶ in a matter of seconds under special atmospheric condition [14], it will
make it hard for the yaw actuator of the turbine to follow the desired yawing strategy of
the yawing matrix completely in this speciﬁc area.
6.3
Turbulence Intensity
Turbulence intensity is deﬁned as the Root-mean-square turbulent velocity ﬂuctuations
(uÕ) over the Mean wind speed of the combined ﬂow ﬁeld (U) (all three physical dimensions
x y z).
Ia = TI = uÕ
U
(6.1)
U =
Ò
Ux + Uy + Uz
(6.2)
This makes the turbulence intensity of a given ﬂow ﬁeld highly dependent on the wind
velocity components. And therefore, as it was the case before, turbulence intensity is like
wind speed, an atmospheric variable that can not be controlled.
Despite not being able to control the variable, it is still important to understand the
variable’s impact on yaw steering in order to better asses the potential of the technology.
Page 44 of 92
==PAGE:54==
The turbulence intensity’s impact on the diﬀerent wake deﬂection models’ ability to redi-
rect the wake has already been investigated in ﬁgure 4.6 of chapter 4.2.1. It was clearly
shown that higher values of turbulence intensity drastically reduces the diﬀerent models’
wake deﬂection ability, which ultimately would result in a lower energy increase through
the use of yaw steering. This will be further investigated in this chapter.
The Sprogø data set does not include the turbulence intensity, since the data has been
collected using cup anemometers to measure the wind speed and a wind vane to measure
the wind direction.
Therefore the data set only contains the stream wise velocity component Ux and not Uy
and Uz, and so the turbulence intensity can not be calculated using U as in equation 6.1.
In order to obtain these values a more advanced measurement campaign using LIDAR
equipment or similar is necessary. Therefore the turbulence intensity is set to a ﬁxed value
of 0.08 in most cases throughout this thesis (although being low, TI=0.08 is the default
value used in FLORIS [19] since it is the lowest mean value of TI that is still possible, so
it is the "best possible, while realistic" TI scenario).
In this chapter the turbulence intensity value will be varied to show it’s impact on yaw
steering AEP improving eﬀects, diﬀerent constant values will be tested along with the
Normal Turbulence Model (NTM) which models a stream wise velocity dependent tur-
bulence intensity TI(V ). For all variations of the variable, the AEP of the used wind
farm scenario will be calculated and used to assess turbulence intensity’s impact on yaw
steering.
6.3.1
Diﬀerent "mean" turbulence intensities
Since no turbulence intensity data is available in the Sprogø data set. Three diﬀerent
"mean" or constant turbulence intensities will be used for a 4x4 wind farm layout scenario
like the one presented in ﬁgure 5.9, in the following scenarios the turbine spacing is 6D
and the utilized wake model and wake deﬂection model is the Gaussian model.
In the following three ﬁgures 6.5 6.6 and 6.7 the PIPS for three iterations of the 4x4 wind
farm scenario using turbulence intensities of TI = [0.08, 0.10, 0.12] are presented, in the
following table 6.1 the AEP and AEP increases are presented for each case.
Page 45 of 92
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.5: PIPS for a 4x4 East-West layout using a
TI=0.08
Figure 6.6: PIPS for a 4x4 East-West layout using a
TI=0.10
Figure 6.7: PIPS for a 4x4 East-West layout using a TI=0.12
Unit
4x4, TI=0.08
4x4, TI=0.10
4x4, TI=0.12
No yaw steering AEP
MWh
110402.70
111296.43
112067.61
Yaw steering AEP
MWh
112392.35
112621.84
112957.64
Yaw steering AEP increase
%
1.802
1.191
0.794
No yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.403
0.407
0.409
Yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.411
0.412
0.413
Table 6.1: Results of diﬀerent turbulence intensities for the 4x4 layout scenario
From the results presented in the table 6.1 it is clear that the performance of the yaw
steering technology diminishes as the turbulence intensity of the ﬂow ﬁeld increases, the
yaw steering induced percentage AEP increase, goes from 1.802 % at a TI of 0.08 to a
Page 46 of 92
==PAGE:56==
0.794 % AEP increase at a TI of 0.12. To ensure that this change is not just caused
by the turbulence intensity’s impact on the regular production, the non yawed AEPs are
compared, and the biggest diﬀerence is here 0.08 % which is found between TI=0.08 and
TI=0.10, this diﬀerence is so low that the impact on the production can be ruled out as
the cause for the decrease in percentage AEP increase caused by yaw steering.
6.3.2
Normal Turbulence Model
The Normal Turbulence Model (NTM) is a way to estimate the turbulence intensity based
entirely on a single dimension wind velocity TI(Vx). The model is typically used when
estimating extreme structural loads associated with turbulence intensity.
In this case
the turbine structures are designed to withstand the highest turbulence intensity induced
loads. Therefore the NTM purposely yields a very high TI for the given wind velocity.
The Normal Turbulence Model is presented in the IEC standard 61400-1 [35] on design
requirements in wind turbines.
Using an Iref value of 0.14 which corresponds the Category B in turbine design, the model
estimates the turbulence intensity as following.
‡1 = Iref(0.75 · Vhub + 5.6)
(6.3)
TI = ‡1/Vhub
(6.4)
To get a better understanding of how the model calculates the turbulence intensities,
the function has been plotted in the following ﬁgure 6.8 using the reference turbulence
intensities for the three categories. a reference, constant turbulence intensity of 0.08 has
also been plotted to better compare the previously used values with those created with
the NTM.
Page 47 of 92
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.8: NTM for category A,B and C along with a reference TI of 0.08
In the ﬁgure it is clear that the NTM creates some very high turbulence intensity values,
in fact the model will produce turbulence intensities that are close to those of the 90th
percentile of regular wind data set. This is shown in papers by both Yamaguchi,Ishihara
et al (2012) [36] and Tzong-Shyng, Jui Ming et al (2014) [37].
Both papers presents
the NTM models similarity with the respective wind data’s 90th percentile turbulence
intensity data points.
In ﬁgure 6.9 which is originally presented in [37], the data collected from a wind power
site in Taiwan, is paired with the NTM model, to show the above mentioned similarity.
Figure 6.9: Wind data from the Chang-hua measuring site in Taiwan (Taken from [37])
Page 48 of 92
==PAGE:58==
From the two ﬁgures 6.9 and 6.8 an estimation can be made that the NTM model repre-
sents the upper boundary of the range of possible turbulence intensities for a given wind
speed, and a constant turbulence intensity of 0.08 roughly represents the lower boundary
of possible values.
With this assumption in mind, a possible range of the turbulence intensities for the Sprogø
wind data can be estimated running from 0.08 to the respective NTM value. therefore
all results related to percentage AEP increase with the turbulence intensity as the only
variable, will fall between the results of TI=0.08 and TI=NTM(category B). So although
no turbulence intensity data is available in the Sprogø data set, a qualiﬁed range can be
found.
In the following ﬁgure 6.10 and table 6.2 the results of the ﬂow model using the 4x4 wind
farm scenario with the NTM modeled turbulence intensity is presented and the results
using TI=0.08 is also included in the table for better comparison
Figure 6.10: PIPS for a 4x4 East-West layout using a TI=NTM
Unit
4x4, TI=0.08
4x4, TI=NTM
No yaw steering AEP
MWh
110402.70
114713.30
Yaw steering AEP
MWh
112392.35
114859.26
Yaw steering AEP increase
%
1.802
0.127
No yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.403
0.419
Yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.411
0.420
Table 6.2: Results of diﬀerent turbulence intensities for the 4x4 layout scenario
Page 49 of 92
==PAGE:59==
From the results presented in 6.2 it is clear that the potential of yaw steering as a control
strategy collapses completely if the NTM is used, this is not surprising since the NTM
models a very high turbulence intensity for the given wind speed, and as shown in chapter
4.2.1, this has a huge negative impact on the performance of yaw steering. Finally by
following the assumption of the turbulence intensity for Sprogø being placed in the range
between TI=0.08 and TI=NTM, it can be seen in table 6.2 that the percentage AEP
increase of a 4x4 wind farm can vary between 0.127 % and 1.802% depending on the
turbulence intensity.
6.3.3
Modiﬁed NTM
In an attempt to model a more realistic velocity dependent turbulence intensity, the NTM
model is modiﬁed to yield a mean value between the chosen NTM (the upper bound of
possible wind turbulence values) and the TI=0.08 (the lower bound of possible wind
turbulence intensities). The model is presented in the following equation and is shown in
the following ﬁgure 6.11 as the dashed blue line.
‡1 = Iref(0.75 · Vhub + 5.6)
(6.5)
TI(V ) = (‡1/Vhub) + 0.08
2
(6.6)
Figure 6.11: NTM for category A,B and C along with a reference TI of 0.08 and the modiﬁed NTM model
using a mean between NTM category A and TI=0.08
Page 50 of 92
==PAGE:60==
The model will represent a more statistically realistic occurring "meaned" turbulence
intensity. Obviously real turbulence intensity data is still preferred.
The 4x4 scenario is modeled using the new modiﬁed NTM model. The PIPS of the scenario
is presented in the following ﬁgure 6.12 with the results presented in the following table
6.3
Figure 6.12: PIPS for a 4x4 East-West layout using a TI=(NTM(0.12)+0.08)/2
Unit
4x4, TI=0.08
4x4, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2)
4x4, TI=NTM
No yaw steering AEP
MWh
110402.70
112095.36
114713.30
Yaw steering AEP
MWh
112392.35
112947.34
114859.26
Yaw steering AEP increase
%
1.802
0.760
0.127
No yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.403
0.409
0.419
Yaw steering Capacity Factor
-
0.411
0.413
0.420
Table 6.3: Results of diﬀerent turbulence intensities for the 4x4 layout scenario
The newly suggested velocity dependent turbulence intensity model yields a yaw steering
induced AEP increase of 0.760% which is lower than the 1.802% of the TI=0.08 scenario,
but despite that, an increase in AEP of 0.760% is still signiﬁcant. Obviously it must once
again be stressed that the ideal scenario does not need this kind of model since turbulence
intensity data is available.
Page 51 of 92
==PAGE:61==
6.4
Summary
In this chapter, the yaw steering technology’s dependency on the diﬀerent atmospheric
variables, wind speed, wind direction and turbulence intensity, have been investigated.
the results of the given scenarios where as following:
• Due to the deﬂection models’ dependency on the chosen turbine’s CT curve, which
is a function of the wind speed, it is seen that the yaw steering technology’s power
increasing potential is steady between 4≠10 m/s, after that it rapidly decreases and
dies out in the range between 10 ≠13m/s.
• If all the V80 turbines experienced wind speeds above Vrated (15 m/s), yaw steering
would be obsolete since the maximum production is achieved, but this scenario won’t
happen before yaw steering is made obsolete by the low CT values that follow 13m/s.
• A wind direction inﬂow angle of ±2¶ relative to a line of turbines yields the high-
est performances for yaw steering. An alignment between wind direction and wind
turbine rows causes a very low yield from yaw steering.
• Yaw steering is eﬀective for wind direction inﬂow angles relative to a line of turbines,
up to ±15¶ on either side of the line of turbines.
• In practice, it might prove diﬃcult in speciﬁc cases for the yaw actuator of a wind
turbine to follow the optimized yawing strategy proposed by yaw steering.
• Turbulence intensity has a clear impact on the turbines ability to deﬂect the wake,
and therefore also yaw steering’s ability to increase the power production.
• The normal turbulence model can be used to estimate an upper boundary for the
turbulence intensity. While a constant value of TI=0.08 is a good estimation for a
lower boundary. All results regarding yaw steering induced AEP increase related to
turbulence intensity can be expected to fall within the results of these two bounds.
• For a 4x4 wind farm scenario with a turbine spacing of 6D, a percentage AEP increase
of 0.760 % is found using the modiﬁed NTM model.
It is important to remember that these results are unique to the given setup of variables,
models and wind data. They can be interpreted as general pointers towards the potential
of yaw steering, but they do not cover all possible uses of yaw steering.
Page 52 of 92
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 7
Model Dependency
In this chapter, the diﬀerent wake models and wake deﬂection models that are used to
model the ﬂow ﬁeld in which the yaw steering strategy is optimized, are tested to show
their impact on yaw steering’s performance.
The wake models that are investigated are as following:
• Gebraad Multi zone model [17]
• Bastankhah’s Gaussian model [8]
• Qian’s model [18]
And the tested wake deﬂection models are as following:
• Jimenéz’s model [24]
• Bastankhah’s Gaussian model [8]
• Qian’s model [18]
Diﬀerent combinations of the wake models and deﬂection models will be tested, due to
Qian’s model not being a part of the FLORIS suite, it is programmed outside of this [38],
and so it can not be combined with other wake models or deﬂection models.
Furthermore the computational time of Qian’s model proved to be so long that only a
1x6 scenario could be modeled, this 1x6 scenario alone took 364 hours, which is 2 weeks 1
day and 4 hours. Therefore it was considered impossible to compute the Qian’s model for
a 4x4 wind farm within the time limit of this thesis, with the standard desktop computer
that was used.
Page 53 of 92
==PAGE:63==
7.0.1
Scenario setup
In this section of the thesis a 4x4 wind farm layout and a 1x6 Sprogø wind data optimized
wind farm layout is used. Both wind farms use a 6D turbine spacing and a TI=0.08 to
test yaw steering’s potential’s dependency on the models used to simulate the ﬂow ﬁeld.
The 4x4 and optimized 1x6 wind farm scenario are presented in the following ﬁgures 7.1
and 7.2
Figure 7.1: 4x4 layout, 6D spacing, wind farm scenario with tur-
bine numbers
Figure 7.2:
1x6 optimized layout, 6D
spacing, wind farm scenario with turbine
numbers
7.1
Gaussian wake model
The Gaussian wake model and wake deﬂection model are the default choices in FLORIS,
this is largely due to their good performance, both in regards to modeling accuracy with
respect to wind tunnel experiments, but also computational time [8]. In this section, the
Gaussian wake model is paired with the wake deﬂection models of Jimenéz and its own
Gaussian wake deﬂection model.
7.1.1
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
The pairing of the Gaussian- wake model and wake deﬂection model is the model combi-
nation that has been used in all scenarios throughout the report, up until now. Therefore
the results are a repeat, but they have been included again for better comparison of all
model combinations.
Page 54 of 92
==PAGE:64==
In the following ﬁgures 7.3 and 7.4 the PS and PIPS for the 4x4 wind farm scenario,
modeled with the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection model are presented.
Figure 7.3:
PS for a 4x4 layout modeled with the
Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 18.4 hours]
Figure 7.4:
PIPS for a 4x4 layout modeled with
the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 18.4 hours]
From the PIPS presented in ﬁgure 7.4 it is clear to see that the biggest power yields
from yaw steering happens at wind directions around those directions that align with the
lines of the grid of the 4x4 wind farm (0¶,90¶,180¶,270¶). The second biggest occur at the
diagonal turbine-wake interaction at (45¶,135¶,225¶,315¶). A third smaller series of power
yields are seen at the diagonal turbine-wake interactions between the turbines two rows
apart, and ﬁnally some very small contributions are seen for the diagonal turbine-wake
interactions that are three rows apart.
To sum all of this up the results of the modeled 4x4 wind farm scenario are presented in
the following table 7.1
Wake
Deﬂection
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Yaw steering
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Model
Model
steering AEP
AEP
AEP increase
steering CF
CF
[MWh]
[MWh]
[%]
-
-
Gaussian
Gaussian
110402.70
112392.35
1.802
0.403
0.411
Table 7.1: Results of using the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection model for the 4x4 layout
scenario
The results from table 7.1 are as seen previously, throughout the assignment.
Using
the the Gaussian wake model and wake deﬂection model with the given 4x4 wind farm
scenario with a TI=0.08, an AEP increase of 1.802 % is achieved. Remembering the
results and ﬁndings presented in chapter 6.3, the TI=0.08 was estimated to be the upper
boundary for the AEP increase results related to turbulence intensity. Hence this result
of 1.802% can be seen as the best performance possible for the given scenario, but with
Page 55 of 92
==PAGE:65==
actual turbulence intensity data available this results is expected to be lower.
7.1.2
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
The Jimenéz wake deﬂection model is more optimistic than its Gaussian counterpart, and
predicts a bigger wake deﬂection. This was all shown in chapter 4.2.1 where the two
models where compared.
Therefore it is expected that by using the Gaussian wake model with Jimenéz’s wake
deﬂection model, the 4x4 wind farm scenario will yield a higher yaw steering induced
AEP increase than that using the double Gaussian model setup.
The PS and PIPS of the Gaussian wake model paired with the Jimenéz wake deﬂection
model are presented in the following ﬁgures 7.5 and 7.6 and the results are presented in
table 7.2
Figure 7.5:
PS for a 4x4 layout modeled with the
Gaussian wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
[Computational time = 17.8 hours]
Figure 7.6: PIPS for a 4x4 layout modeled with the
Gaussian wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
[Computational time = 17.8 hours]
Wake
Deﬂection
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Yaw steering
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Model
Model
steering AEP
AEP
AEP increase
steering CF
CF
[MWh]
[MWh]
[%]
-
-
Gaussian
Jimenéz
112304.92
115302.76
2.669
0.411
0.421
Table 7.2: Results of using the Gaussian wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model for the 4x4 layout
scenario
Both from the PIPS of ﬁgure 7.6 and the ﬁnal results, it is clear to see that the Jimenéz
wake deﬂection model has a huge impact on the AEP increasing ability of yaw steering.
In the PIPS, power increases of over 50% are seen at 4m/s at wind directions close to
those that align with the grid of the wind farm (0¶,90¶,180¶,270¶).
The percentage AEP increase is up by almost 1%, from 1.802% in the double Gaussian
Page 56 of 92
==PAGE:66==
scenario, to 2.669 % in the this scenario using the Gaussian wake model with the Jimenéz
wake deﬂection model.
7.2
Multi zone wake model
Up until now, the Gebraad et al Multi Zone wake model has been largely unmentioned in
this thesis. This section of the thesis will run the 4x4 wind farm scenario using the Multi
zone wake model, and ﬁnally its results will be compared to those of the Gaussian model.
Since the Multi zone model predates the Gaussian model, there are elements in the Multi
zone model that the Gaussian model also uses or have further developed. Therefore it is
expected that the diﬀerence between the two models might not be very big.
7.2.1
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
In this section, the Multi zone wake model, is paired with the Gaussian wake deﬂection
model to see how the wake model impacts the optimized yaw steering algorithms’ ability
to increase the AEP of the given scenario.
The PS and PIPS of the modeled scenario are presented in the following ﬁgures 7.7 and
7.8 with the results of the scenario presented in table 7.8.
Figure 7.7: PIPS for a 4x4 modeled with the Multi
zone wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection model
[Computational time = 17.2 hours]
Figure 7.8: PIPS for a 4x4 layout modeled with the
Multi zone wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 17.2 hours]
Wake
Deﬂection
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Yaw steering
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Model
Model
steering AEP
AEP
AEP increase
steering CF
CF
[MWh]
[MWh]
[%]
-
-
Multi zone
Gaussian
111741.40
114054.77
2.070
0.409
0.417
Table 7.3: Results of using the Multi Zone wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection model for the 4x4 layout
scenario
Page 57 of 92
==PAGE:67==
From the results of table 7.3 it is clear that the Multi zone model adds a slight increase to
the AEP increasing potential of yaw steering relative to the Gaussian wake model. Using
the Multi zone model instead of the Gaussian, the AEP increase is taken from 1.802% to
2.070 %.
7.2.2
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Using the optimistic Jimenéz wake deﬂection model with the Multi zone wake model
should produce the highest percentage AEP increase for yaw steering seen in this thesis.
The PS and PIPS of the modeled scenario are presented in the following ﬁgures 7.9 and
7.10 with the results of the scenario presented in table 7.4.
Figure 7.9: PS for a 4x4 layout modeled with the Multi
zone wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
[Computational time = 16.6 hours]
Figure 7.10:
PIPS for a 4x4 layout modeled with
the Multi zone wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 16.6 hours]
Wake
Deﬂection
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Yaw steering
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Model
Model
steering AEP
AEP
AEP increase
steering CF
CF
[MWh]
[MWh]
[%]
-
-
Multi Zone
Jimenéz
111741.39
114931.46
2.854
0.408
0.420
Table 7.4: Results of using the Multi Zone wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model for the 4x4 layout
scenario
As predicted, the combination of the Multi zone wake model and the optimistic Jimenéz
wake deﬂection model yields the highest AEP increase for all of the model combinations
used so far, for the 4x4 wind farm scenario. The AEP increase of 2.854% is 63.14 % bigger
than that yielded using the standard scenario with the double Gaussian setup.
Page 58 of 92
==PAGE:68==
7.2.3
Model Comparison
To get a better overview of the diﬀerent wake- and wake deﬂection model combinations’
eﬀect on the AEP increasing ability of yaw steering. The results of the four combinations
are grouped in one table.
Wake
Deﬂection
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Yaw steering
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Model
Model
steering AEP
AEP
AEP increase
steering CF
CF
[MWh]
[MWh]
[%]
-
-
Gaussian
Gaussian
110402.70
112392.35
1.802
0.403
0.411
Gaussian
Jimenéz
112304.92
115302.76
2.669
0.411
0.421
Multi Zone
Gaussian
111741.40
114054.77
2.070
0.409
0.417
Multi Zone
Jimenéz
111741.39
114931.46
2.854
0.408
0.420
Table 7.5: Combined results from diﬀerent combinations of wake and wake deﬂection models for the 4x4 layout
scenario
From the combined results presented in ﬁgure 7.5. A few trends can be seen in relation
to the utilized models. First, and probably most noteworthy is the yaw steering induced
AEP increase caused by the diﬀerent models, with the Jimenéz wake deﬂection being the
biggest contributor when applied, followed by the Multi zone wake model. This leaves
the double Gaussian combination as the most conservative model combination.
Furthermore it is noticed that the highest yaw steering induced AEP result is not occur-
ing through the use of the Multi Zone wake model and Jimenéz wake defelction model,
although this combination yields the highest percentage AEP increase. The highest AEP
is recorded at 115302.76 MWh for the model combination of the Gaussian wake model
and the Jimenéz wake deﬂection model.
7.3
Qian’s wake model
Although it would have been ideal to have the results for Qian’s model presented together
with the other wake models for the same wind farm scenario. The programming and com-
putational time did not allow for this, therefore the results from Qians model will be based
on simulation carried out on the 1x6 optimized wind farm scenario presented in ﬁgure 7.2.
Qian’s model is a further development of the Gaussian model, in the article presenting
Qian’s model [18] the two models are compared with respect to their wake deﬂection etc.
It is shown in the paper how the two models diﬀer, but still show greater similarity to each
other relative to other deﬂection models like Jimenéz. Therefore it is expected that the
Page 59 of 92
==PAGE:69==
yaw steering induced AEP increase for the optimized 1x6 scenario modeled with Qian’s
wake- and wake deﬂection model, will be similar to that modeled with the Gaussian wake-
and wake deﬂection model.
The PS and PIPS of the modeled scenario are presented in the following ﬁgures 7.11 and
7.12 with the results of the scenario presented in table 7.6, to allow a comparison between
Qian’s model, the Gaussian model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model, the results of these
other models, run on the 1x6 optimized layout scenario have been added into table 7.6.
Figure 7.11: PS for a 1x6 optimized layout modeled
with the Qian’s wake model and Qian’s wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 364 hours]
Figure 7.12: PIPS for a 1x6 optimized layout modeled
with the Qian’s wake model and Qian’s wake deﬂection
model [Computational time = 364 hours]
Wake
Deﬂection
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Yaw steering
No yaw-
Yaw steering
Model
Model
steering AEP
AEP
AEP increase
steering CF
CF
[MWh]
[MWh]
[%]
-
-
Qian
Qian
45937.29
46036.18
0.215
0.448
0.449
Gaussian
Gaussian
45874.06
45991.04
0.255
0.447
0.448
Gaussian
Jimenéz
45874.06
46092.16
0.475
0.447
0.449
Table 7.6:
Combined results from diﬀerent combinations of wake and wake deﬂection models for the 1x6
optimized layout scenario
From the results presented in table 7.6 a series of observations can be made. First it is
clear from the AEP increasing results, that the combination of Qian’s wake model and
Qian’s wake deﬂection model yields the lowest AEP increase at 0.215% out of the three
combinations modeled. It is a little lower than the result of the combination using the
Gaussian wake- and wake deﬂection model, which sits at 0.255%. This double gaussian
combination was the lowest AEP increasing result in the previous comparison between the
4x4 layouts of tabel 7.5. So it is seen that the double Qian model combination yields the
lowest yaw steering induced AEP increase of all model combinations tried. Interestingly,
Page 60 of 92
==PAGE:70==
although the percentage AEP increase is smaller for the Qian combination, its non yawed
AEP and yaw steering induced AEP both sit higher than that of the double Gaussian
combination, this implies that Qian’s wake model is more optimistic in regards to it’s
predictions of the ﬂow ﬁelds velocity, and maybe only the Qian wake deﬂection model is
more conservative than the Guassian model.
It is seen how the Capacity Factor (CF) of the diﬀerent combinations vary around 0.448,
which is approximately 6% higher than the capacity factors of the 4x4 layout scenario
results presented in table 7.5. To avoid any wrong conclusions it has to be mentioned that
this increase is not caused by the models nor yaw steering, but is due to the optimized
1x6 wind farms reduced turbine-wake interaction compared to that of a 4x4 farm.
7.4
Field test result comparison
Finally the result of the modeled 1x6 optimized layout scenarios are compared to the
results of the ﬁeld test presented in the paper by Howland et al (2019) [6] which presents
an AEP increase of 0.30%. The wind farm scenario presented in the paper, is a little
diﬀerent from the scenarios used through this thesis, so a scenario similar to the one in
the paper is developed to bridge the gap between the modeled results and the ﬁeld test
results of the paper. The paper is one of the ﬁrst to make a ﬁeld test of yaw steering in
a real operational wind farm using all the wind farm’s turbines.
In the paper an operational wind farm situated in Alberta, Canada is used for a ﬁeld
test of yaw steering. The wind farm is very similar to the one used in this thesis, How-
land’s farm uses 6 Vestas V80 turbines that are placed in a line from 330¶ to 150¶. In
this thesis, the Sprogø wind data dictated that the optimal line would be 350¶ to 170¶,
the Howland wind farm uses a spacing of 4D instead of the 6D used in this thesis. The
eﬀective diﬀerence between the ﬁeld test and the scenarios modeled in this thesis are the
wind data, and a turbine spacing diﬀerence of 2D (the direction of the line of turbines is
only interesting relative to the wind data). This diﬀerence is so small that the ﬁeld test
results are deemed ﬁt to validate the results of the modeled scenarios of this thesis
To compare the performance of the modeling tools investigated in this chapter and the
results presented in Howland et al’s paper, a new 1x6 optimized layout scenario is mod-
Page 61 of 92
==PAGE:71==
eled with a turbine spacing of 4D, while using the more statistically realistic occurring
"meaned" turbulence intensity model presented in chapter 6.3.3, the wake model used is
the Gaussian, and the wake deﬂection model used is also the Gaussian. The power surface
and PIPS of this scenario is presented in the following ﬁgures 7.13 7.14 the turbine yawing
angles are also included in ﬁgure 7.15 to ensure that the turbines are yawing as expected.
The results of the scenario along with the previously presented AEP increasing results of
the 1x6 optimized layout, 6D spacing scenarios and the results of Howland et al’s paper
are presented in the following table 7.7
Figure 7.13:
Yawed power surface for a 1x6 opti-
mized layout modeled with the Gaussian wake model and
Gaussian wake deﬂection model, Turbine spacing = 4D,
TI=(NTM+0.08)/2 [Computational time = 2 hours]
Figure 7.14: PIPS for a 1x6 optimized layout modeled
with the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂec-
tion model, Turbine spacing = 4D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2
[Computational time = 2 hours]
Page 62 of 92
==PAGE:72==
Figure 7.15: yaw angles for each turbine in a 1x6 optimized layout modeled with the Gaussian wake model
and Gaussian wake deﬂection model, Turbine spacing = 4D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2 [Computational time = 2 hours]
Field
Wake
Deﬂection
Turbine
Turbulence
Yaw steering
Test
Model
Model
Spacing
Intensity
AEP increase
D
[-]
[%]
-
Qian
Qian
6D
TI=0.08
0.215
-
Gaussian
Gaussian
6D
TI=0.08
0.255
-
Gaussian
Jimenéz
6D
TI=0.08
0.475
-
Gaussian
Gaussian
4D
TI=(NTM+0.08)/2
0.326
Howland
-
-
4D
TI=Real Data
0.300
Table 7.7: Comparison of the modeled 1x6 optimized layout scenarios versus the results of Howland et al ﬁeld
test
The results presented in table 7.7 are quite interesting. It is seen that out of the many
diﬀerent scenarios, the scenario which AEP increasing result is closest to the 0.3% pre-
sented in Howland’s ﬁeld test is unsurprisingly the scenario modeled with a 4D turbine
spacing using the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection model and using
the modiﬁed NTM presented in 6.3.3 for the turbulence intensity, where a yaw induced
AEP increase of 0.326% is achieved. The diﬀerence between these two results is down to
7.9 %. Obviously an uncertainty between the two results will still be present, since the
AEPs calculated are based on two diﬀerent wind data sets. But if it is assumed that both
Page 63 of 92
==PAGE:73==
wind farms have capacity factors of around 0.4 or higher (which is usual for commercial
wind farm) and that they are both layout optimized with respect to the prevailing winds
of their respective win data, the percentage increase in AEP can still be used as a measure
of comparison.
And so the big similarity between the two results is still considered a good result, and
a veriﬁcation that both the Gaussian model and the modiﬁed NTM model presented in
this thesis are very accurate when modeling ﬂow ﬁelds with yawed turbines and deﬂected
wakes.
In a bid to double check this result, the turbine yawing angles at diﬀerent speeds presented
in ﬁgure 7.15 are checked, it can be conﬁrmed that the turbines are yawing as expected at
the right wind directions, this can be seen as a validation of the optimization algorithm
and through that the ﬁnal AEP result.
Considering the other results presented in table 7.7 it can further be seen how well the
Gaussian and Qian’s models perform when modeling the ﬂow ﬁeld for the scenario, and
likewise it can be seen how the Jimenéz wake deﬂection model does not perform well due
to the hugely overestimated AEP result.
Considering the lower spacing of 4D of the wind farm presented in Howland et al’s paper,
it is expected, as shown in chapter 5.1 of this thesis, that the AEP increasing results of
Howland et al will be higher than those using 6D presented earlier in this thesis and in
table 7.7. While still remembering the small variation in the results caused by the use of
two diﬀerent wind data sets.
By looking at the results of table 7.7 it is seen that the result of Howland et al sits at
0.3 % AEP increase, which is a little higher than those modeled with 6D spacing for the
similar 1x6 optimized layout scenario using both the double Qian setup (0.215%) or the
double Gaussian setup (0.255%). A large part of the diﬀerence between the AEP results
is expected to be due to the diﬀerence in spacing between the two wind farm scenarios. At
the same time it is seen that by using a 6D turbine spacing and the Jimenéz wake deﬂection
model an AEP increase of 0.475% is achieved, which is well over the result of Howland’s
ﬁeld test, so it is here seen how the Jimenéz wake deﬂection model grossly overestimates
the wake deﬂection which then causes the overestimation of the AEP increase.
Page 64 of 92
==PAGE:74==
So it can be concluded that by using the Gaussian wake model with the Gaussian wake
deﬂection model, or Qian’s wake model with Qian’s wake deﬂection model, it is possible to
model the power increasing eﬀects of yaw steering with an accuracy that is good enough
to answer the questions proposed in this masters thesis. Furthermore the results of this
master thesis where other layouts such as the 4x4 or the 1x6 East-West were modeled with
one of these two wake- and wake deﬂection models can also be considered to be accurate,
and the modiﬁed NTM turbulence intensity model presented in this thesis is also a good
tool in the absence of real turbulence intensity data.
Page 65 of 92
==PAGE:75==
7.5
Summary
Through this chapter, the yaw steering technology’s dependency on the diﬀerent ﬂow
ﬁeld wake- and wake deﬂection models have been investigated and the modeled results
have been validated through the results of a ﬁeld test. The major ﬁndings for the given
scenarios were as following:
• The combination of Qians wake model and wake deﬂection model proved to be the
combination that yielded the lowest yaw steering induced percentage AEP increase.
• The combination of the Multi zone wake model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
proved to be the combination that yielded the highest yaw steering induced percent-
age AEP increase.
• The FLORIS default model combination of the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian
wake deﬂection model yielded a 1.802% AEP increase for the 4x4 wind farm scenario
using a 6D spacing and TI of 0.08.
• The computational time of all the model combinations using the 4x4 wind farm
scenario, where in the range of 16-19 hours. The similar combinations for a 1x6 wind
farm scenario where around 2 hours.
• The computational time for a 1x6 wind farm scenario modeled with the Qian wake
model and Qian wake deﬂection model was 364 hours.
• The results of the 1x6 optimized layout wind farm scenarios, modeled with diﬀerent
turbine spacings for either the Gaussian or Qian’s wake model and the Gaussian or
Qian’s wake deﬂection model was validated to be accurate through the comparision
of the ﬁeld test results of Howland et al (2019) [6]
• The velocity dependent turbulence intensity model (NTM+0.08)/2, presented in this
thesis, is a good tool to estimate a realistic "mean" turbulence intensity in the absence
of real data.
It is important to remember that these results are unique to the given setup of variables,
models and wind data. They can be interpreted as general pointers towards the potential
of yaw steering, but they do not cover all possible uses of yaw steering.
Page 66 of 92
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 8
Discussion
Considering all the results, ﬁndings and observations gained through the many simulations
and models presented across the chapters of this masters thesis, a series of discussions on
the topic of yaw steering can be made.
Based on the ﬁndings of this thesis, and the comparison to the existing body of knowledge
about the subject. It will be discussed whether or not, yaw steering has the potential to
become a new control strategy in modern wind farms.
The variables that have been investigated through this thesis will be discussed for their
impact and importance to yaw steering, and how they will aﬀect the progress of the
technology.
The limitations and exclusions of this thesis will be discussed and their impact, had they
been included, will be estimated.
Finally the future work needed to fully implement yaw steering will be discussed, what is
yet to be investigated? What should be the approach?
8.1
Potential of yaw steering
Most importantly, is this thesis’s initial question of yaw steering’s ability to increase the
power output of a wind farm.
Through this thesis it was shown, that it is possible to signiﬁcantly increase the AEP of
a given wind farm through the use of optimized yaw steering as the control strategy.
The thesis systematically develops a "best possible, while realistic" yaw steering controlled
wind farm scenario, in which the scenario is updated whenever the analysis of one of the
many diﬀerent input variables yields a critical or favorable result. Example given, the
turbine spacing is set at 6D since it is the turbine spacing that yields the highest yaw
Page 67 of 92
==PAGE:77==
steering induced increase in AEP while still using realistic turbine spacings that would
yield a high AEP while also ensuring that the turbines are only situated in the far wake
region. As mentioned earlier it is important to distinguish between the AEP of the wind
farm which is the normal goal when working with wind farms, and the AEP increasing
ability of yaw steering for the given scenario, which is the goal of this thesis. In the case of
turbine spacing these two would work against each other, hence the name "best possible,
while realistic" is used.
The ﬁnal "best possible, while realistic" scenario developed out of the many optimized
scenarios modeled and tested, was the 6D spacing, 4x4 Vestas V80 wind farm scenario,
modeled with the Gaussian wake- and wake deﬂection model. When it was modeled with
the "best possible, while realistic" turbulence intensity conditions of 0.08, it yielded an
AEP increase of 1.802 % and if scaled down to a more statistically realistic "mean" tur-
bulence intensity of TI=(NTM+0.08)/2 which is the mean of the TI=0.08 and the NTM
modeled turbulence intensity, an increase in AEP of 0.76% was found.
What should be clear from this thesis, is the fact that you can not assign a single AEP
increasing number to the yaw steering technology as a whole, the AEP increasing ability of
yaw steering is highly dependent on the given wind data, turbine type, wind farm layout,
atmospheric values, utilized wake models and optimization algorithms. So it makes more
sense to talk about of range of possible percentage AEP increases.
This range is currently deﬁned by the diﬀerent contributions found throughout the lit-
erature, by looking through these papers a range of 0.3-5% AEP increases can be found
[4, 9, 6, 7, 39]. But given the methods used in some of these papers the upper bound is
probably a little over estimated.
Eg. In the otherwise excellent paper by Gebraad et al’s (2016) [4], a simulation similar
to the ones carried out in this thesis are presented, those simulations yield a 5 % AEP
increase for a wind farm consisting of 55 5MW wind turbines. But the ﬂow ﬁeld is modeled
in FLORIS with the Multi zone wake model and the Jimenéz wake deﬂection model, this
model constellation was state of the art at the time of writing for the paper, but as shown
in this thesis, the model combination was proven to be overestimating the AEP results by
quite a bit, due to the large wake deﬂections in the Jimenéz model. So it can be expected
Page 68 of 92
==PAGE:78==
that the 5% AEP increase presented in the paper is an overestimation. Furthermore the
paper does not clarify the turbulence intensity used, which is strange considering how
important is for a beneﬁcial implementation of yaw steering.
With this in mind the upper bound of the AEP increasing range of yaw steering found
through the literature should probably be lower than 5%.
In chapter 7.4 it was shown that the ﬁeld test results presented in Howland et al (2019)
[6] showed great resemblance to the results of a similar scenario modeled in this thesis,
proving the accuracy of the Gaussian and Qian model combinations.
With all of this in mind, the yaw steering induced AEP increasing results of this thesis,
whether it is the 1x6 or 4x4 simulations land well inside the expected range of AEP
increases found throughout the literature. The results achieved are considered to be of
a substantial size to make yaw steering a feasible new control strategy in modern wind
farms, whether it will be as a retroﬁt to an existing wind farm or the standard control
sequence in a new wind farm.
8.2
Variables in yaw steering
One of the things this thesis has done diﬀerently from other works on yaw steering, is the
systematic analysis of the many diﬀerent variables that aﬀect yaw steering.
The variables that were investigated through this thesis were: turbine spacing, number of
turbines, layout, wind speed, wind direction, turbulence intensity, wake models and wake
deﬂection models.
Through these many analyses, a series of interesting ﬁndings were made.
Firstly it was found that every single one of the variables investigated in this thesis proved
to be of great signiﬁcance to the yaw steering technology’s power increasing ability. In
non of the cases did the analyzed variable show none or little causality with the change
in the AEP increase.
Therefore it is important to take all of the variables into account when attempting to
accurately model optimized yaw steering in wind farms.
Page 69 of 92
==PAGE:79==
In the ﬁrst result chapter, the layout dependent variables turbine spacing, number of
turbines and layout shape were investigated. By running a series of iterations of sightly
altered layout scenarios through the ﬂow models and yaw angle optimizer, the trends of
the variable’s impact on yaw steering was displayed. In the case of turbine spacing, a
lower turbine spacing caused a higher yaw steering induced increase in AEP but a lower
AEP and visa versa.
For the number of turbines in a line (eg. 1x1, 1x2, 1x3) it was shown that the yaw steering
induced increase in AEP converges to an upper bound at approximately 4 or 5 turbines,
if a spacing of 6D is used. The same trend was spotted if it was turbines in both rows
and columns of a wind farm (eg. 1x1, 2x2...5x5).
Finally the shape of a farm was investigated, a 1x6 wind farm layout was layout optimized
with respect to the utilized Sprogø wind data, the diﬀerence between the non optimized
and optimized scenario was huge, both in yaw steering induced increase in AEP and AEP.
Considering these ﬁnding it is clear that more work can be done in this area, and that
installing an optimizer to optimize the yaw angles of the turbines (like it was done in this
thesis) is not enough to gain a good result for yaw steering. To successfully implement
yaw steering at its maximum potential, a wind farm developer must also ﬁnd the best
constellation of layout parameters for which yaw steering works best under.
This raises the question of whether it is possible to change the current approach of AEP
increasing wind farm layout optimization which considers wind directions, turbine place-
ment, cable lengths and sub sea conditions etc. to one that also considers the power
increasing potential of yaw steering.
In other words, introducing the yaw angles of the turbines into the optimization problem.
maximize
AEP([x, y], “i(V, ◊)|(V, ◊), [x, y])
(8.1)
This has been mentioned in a few papers across the literature [4, 9, 33], but none of the
papers actually attempt at adding the eﬀects of yaw steering to wind farm layout opti-
mization.
The second set of variables investigated are the atmospheric variables, wind speed, wind
direction and turbulence intensity.
The wind speed directly dictates how much power a turbine is producing, when yaw steer-
Page 70 of 92
==PAGE:80==
ing is applied the eﬀective wind- speed experienced by the turbine is changed. Therefore
the wind speed is an essential component in the optimization of yaw steering as well as
the proposed yaw steering included layout optimization. For the Vestas V80 turbines, the
yaw steering induced power increasing potential was a function of the inﬂow wind speed,
with a steady increase in power seen from the cut-in wind speed at 4m/s to 10m/s and
the potential stopping at 13 m/s.
The wind direction proved to be of huge importance to the turbines ability to redirect
its wake away from any down stream turbines. Wind inﬂow angles with an oﬀset of ±2¶
yielded the highest yaw steering induced increase in AEP for the modeled scenarios. This
eﬀect has not been mentioned in any of the papers found while doing the literature study
for this thesis.
Just like the other two atmospheric values, turbulence intensity is of huge signiﬁcance to
yaw steering’s energy increasing potential. But unlike the other two, turbulence intensity
is really hard to measure in large wind farms. It was shown through the thesis, how
turbulence intensity impacted the wake deﬂection of a yawed turbine, high values of TI
caused yaw steering to become very ineﬀective and visa versa.
Despite its clear importance to yaw steerings power increasing ability, it has received very
little attention across the literature with [40] being the only full bodied work linking the
atmospheric eﬀects with the power increasing eﬀects of yaw steering. Mentions or result
comparisons are seen in the following works [8, 33, 18]. And Many of the other papers
that model yaw steering scenarios or reports on ﬁeld tests such as [6, 4] and [10] chose
not to mention it at all.
In this thesis a modiﬁed Normal turbulence model was presented to better model a ve-
locity dependent average turbulence intensity in the absence of real TI data.
In the
comparison with the ﬁeld test results of Howland, the results modeled with this modiﬁed
NTM model proved very accurate. Turbulence intensity models such as this would prove
a great addition to ﬂow models such as FLORIS when working with yaw steering and no
turbulence intensity data is available.
The ﬁnal set of variable investigated were the wake models and wake deﬂection models.
In chapter 7 a 4x4 and 1x6 wind farm scenario was modeled using diﬀerent combinations
Page 71 of 92
==PAGE:81==
of wake models and wake deﬂection models, from the results of the modeled scenarios
it was clear that the models based on the Gaussian or Qian’s wake model and wake
deﬂection model [8, 18] yields the lowest yaw steering induced AEP increases. Based on
both papers [33, 8, 18] and result comparisons with ﬁeld tests [6] it is clear that these two
model combinations, although with low AEP increases, yields the most realistic results.
In the chapters 4.2.1 it is further shown how big a diﬀerence there is between the wake
deﬂection models.
A trend in the results is that the newer models (Gaussian, Qian) predicts lower AEP
increases, where the older models (Jensen, Gebraad, Jimenéz) tends to over predict the
yaw steering induced AEP increase.
This process of ﬁnding the correct modeling tools is very important to the future of this
technology, since accurate modeling of yaw steering is needed before it can be deemed
feasible by any wind farm developer seeking to implement it in their future wind farms.
8.2.1
Ranking variable importance
From the results and ﬁndings related to the variable importance in yaw steering, it is
clear that some variables holds greater signiﬁcance to the potential of yaw steering, than
others.
Following is a ranked list, detailing the importance of the diﬀerent variable groups pre-
sented throughout this thesis.
1. Atmospheric - The atmospheric variables are deemed to be the most important
when working with yaw steering, the impact that turbulence intensity and wind
direction had on the power increasing potential of yaw steering was the biggest of
all the variables investigated. At the same time, these variables can be some of the
hardest to correctly measure, due to their ﬂuctuating nature and ability to change
over short distances. The combination of these two yields a dangerous potential.
In case of a wrong wind direction or TI reading, the turbine might yaw when it
shouldn’t, and from that generate a net power loss, compared to the non-yawed
case. This is why the atmospheric variables are not only the most important for yaw
steering, but for any wind turbine control strategy, despite the fact that they can
not be controlled.
2. Model - The models chosen to create the ﬂow ﬁelds are also very important. In
Page 72 of 92
==PAGE:82==
the case of an inaccurate model eg. the Jimenéz deﬂection model, an over/under-
estimation of the wake properties for a given ﬁnd farm scenario is possible, this
over/under-estimation will mean that the turbines of the farm are following a sub-
par optimized yaw steering strategy which will then lead to a decreased yaw steering
induced AEP increase or in the worst case, a loss in AEP compared to the non-yawed
case.
3. Layout - The Layout dependent variables, turbine spacing, number of turbines and
layout shape are all important when trying to design a wind farm, in which yaw
steering will be a good control strategy.
But due to the easy tracking of these
variables it is not expected that misreadings can be made, and therefore no false-
positives can be associated with the variable group, and from that making it less
important than the others.
8.3
Limitations & Exclusions and Future Work
When mentioning the choices and exclusions of other papers, it is of course equally im-
portant to mention those made in this thesis, and estimate what their absence means for
the results of this thesis.
The biggest omission of this thesis is the structural loads of the turbines, when the turbines
are yawed under wake steering, both the yawed turbine and the turbines in the wake
experience new loading scenarios such as angled inﬂow, partial wake etc. In some cases
the new scenario might be more harmful than the non yawed case, this will lead to
an increase in the Damage Equivalent Load (DEL) which could ultimately shorten the
lifetime of a turbine. This would then increase the LCOE of the given wind farm, and by
that reduce the feasibility of the yaw steering technology. In the very extensive works by
Hulsman (2018) [42] and Esperanza (2018)[43] these very concepts are investigated and it
is concluded that yaw steering both increases and decreases the DEL of yawed turbines,
without declaring the control strategy too consequential for the fatigue of turbines. More
interestingly in the paper by Urban (2018) [44] yaw steering is actually used to avoid high
loads on the down stream turbines.
Although a good model for turbulence intensity is produced in this thesis, real data is
preferable.
Obviously given the length and age of the wind data (21 years) it would
Page 73 of 92
==PAGE:83==
have been near impossible to achieve such a measurement campaign. Due to the chaotic
nature of turbulence intensity, the use of real data could have brought the results in any
direction, so by using a qualiﬁed guess for the mean turbulence intensity would probably
prove to be very similar to the results gained from using real data.
Due to limited resources, time and access, and the large amount of simulation iterations
in this thesis, the FLORIS model parameters have not been tuned to the given wind
farm scenarios using the Simulations fOr Wind Farm Applications (SOWFA) software, so
default reference values were used. Had this been done the model would have been more
precise, to which extend it has now over/under estimated the results is unsure. But the
FLORIS modeled 1x6 results that were compared with the similar scenario modeled with
Qian’s model, which was coded outside of FLORIS, yielded very similar results, and it
showed very good accuracy when compared to the ﬁeld test presented in Howland et al
(2019) [6] and so it can be expected that the lack of tuning has not critically impacted
the utilized FLORIS model.
It remains to be seen if it actually possible for a wind turbine’s yaw actuators to follow
the optimized yawing strategy presented through the yawing surfaces modeled for each
of the wind farm scenarios presented in this thesis. It was shown in the analysis of ﬁgure
4.9 that when the optimized yawing angles of a turbines moves from being negative to
positive, the turbine is expected to yaw approximately 60¶ in a very small time frame,
this would prove diﬃcult for the turbine to do when required of it. This topic is discussed
thoroughly in the paper by Kanew (2019) [7].
Finally the computational time of the diﬀerent models and scenarios proved to be a very
limiting factor. With computational times exceeding the 48 hour mark for wind farms
of size 5x5 or larger, eg. this meant that the convergence plots of chapter 5 could not
be expanded to properly show the trend in the results. In the case of Qian’s model,
the computational time exceeded two weeks for a simple 1x6 scenario. Ideally the thesis
standard 4x4 scenario had also been modeled, but this was not possible. Had a faster
computer than the standard desktop computer that was used, been available. It might
have been possible to model bigger wind farms and from that gain some more interesting
results.
Page 74 of 92
==PAGE:84==
8.3.1
Future work
This discussion leads to the question of, what now?
Following are a series of topics that would be ideal for future work and would help the
yaw steering technology to be fully understood, better performing and eventually properly
implemented as the default wind farm control strategy in modern wind farms.
• Field Tests: Obviously more detailed and longer ﬁeld tests of yaw steering are
required to better verify and validate both the technology it self, and the tools used
to model it. Making the results, setup and data of these ﬁeld tests public would also
be a huge step in the right direction for yaw steering.
• Wake model development & validation: Although the Gaussian- and Qian’s
model have been proven to perform very well when modeling the deﬂected wakes
of yawed turbines, further development and validation of these models is need to
properly implement yaw steering as a new control strategy.
• Turbulence intensity models: It would be very interesting to develop a model
that could better describe a general turbulence intensity for a wind data set that did
not include the turbulence intensity. One could argue that a better solution is to
install LIDARs in the wind farm and have them measure the turbulence intensity.
But LIDARs are not cheap and with oﬀshore wind farms being placed further away
from the shore, the measurement campaign would also become diﬃcult. A turbulence
intensity model created for yaw steering, could prove to be a better solution.
• Yaw steering included layout optimization: The concept of adding the yawing
angles “i to the wind farm layout optimization algorithms that are used today would
be very interesting.
• Turbines designed for yaw steering: The Vestas V80 turbine type was brieﬂy
mentioned, and only in Chapter 4.2.1 was diﬀerent Ct values tested for their aﬀect on
the wake deﬂection models. And in Chapter 6 the Ct curve of the turbine was used
the describe the limits of yaw steering with respect the to wind velocity. It would be
interesting to see if diﬀerent turbine types are better suited for yaw steering based
on their properties (Ct,Cp,Prated,Hhub,D) and from that, investigate whether it is
possible to design a yaw steering operational optimized wind turbine.
Page 75 of 92
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
This thesis investigates the power producing potential of the wind turbine control strategy
yaw steering. To do this, a ﬂow model containing a wake model and a wake deﬂection
model is run for a given wind farm scenario for every combination of wind speeds between
0-25 m/s and wind directions from 0¶-360¶, for each iteration the yaw setting of each tur-
bine in the modeled wind farm scenario is passed to an optimization algorithm that ﬁnds
the collective wind farm yawing conﬁguration that yields the highest power production.
This process is then altered and repeated for a series of wind farm scenarios in order to
investigate all the variables aﬀecting the yaw steering control strategy, in order to better
understand the technology and it’s potential.
Following are the main conclusions of this Thesis, if more detailed conclusions for each
chapter is wanted, refer to the "Summary" sections of the chapter 4, 5, 6 and 7. It is
important to remember that these results are unique to the given setup of variables,
models and wind data. So they can only be interpreted as general pointers towards the
potential of yaw steering.
• The layout variables turbine spacing, number of turbines and layout shape, all
greatly aﬀect yaw steering’s ability to increase the power of a wind farm.
– Increases in the turbine spacing caused a reduced yaw steering induced AEP
increase, but a higher AEP.
– Yaw steering produced AEP increases at just 2 turbines in a row, with the
potential peaking/converging at 4-5 turbines in a row, the same trend is found
for grid layout of 2x2 3x3 etc.
Page 76 of 92
==PAGE:86==
– Yaw steerings potential is found in the turbine-wake interaction of a wind farm,
by changing the shape of a farm, the potential of yaw steering will increase or
decrease.
• The atmospheric variables wind speed, wind direction and turbulence intensity,
all greatly aﬀect yaw steering’s ability to increase the power of a wind farm.
– For the Vestas V80 turbine yaw steering stopped working after 13 m/s due to
the turbines Ct curve.
– A wind direction inﬂow angle of ±2¶ relative to a line of turbines yields the
highest performances for yaw steering. And yaw steering is eﬀective up to ±15¶
on either side of the line of turbines.
– Turbulence intensity has a clear impact on the turbines ability to deﬂect the
wake, and therefore also yaw steering’s ability to increase the power production.
– A modiﬁed NTM yielded a 0.760% AEP increase for the modeled 4x4 wind farm.
This is well below the 1.802% AEP increase gained from using a more optimistic
TI of 0.08 for the same scenario.
• The diﬀerent wake models Gaussian, Qian, Multi zone and Jimenéz, all yielded
diﬀerent results when modeling the ﬂow ﬁeld of a yaw steering controlled wind farm.
– Qian’s model and the Gaussian model, proved to be the most accurate while
yielding the lowest AEP increases. The combination of the Multi zone wake
model and Jimenéz wake deﬂection model yielded the highest AEP increase
which was deemed an overestimation.
– Using the Gaussian wake model and Gaussian wake deﬂection model yielded a
1.802% AEP increase for the 4x4 wind farm scenario with a TI=0.08.
– The results of the 1x6 optimized layout wind farm scenario, modeled with either
the Gaussian or Qian’s wake models were validated to be accurate through the
comparison of the ﬁeld test results of Howland et al (2019) [6]
Finally it can be concluded from the results shown in this thesis, that it is possible to
model, optimize and apply yaw steering as a control strategy in modern wind farms, and
through it gain a substantial power/energy increase.
Page 77 of 92
==PAGE:87==
Furthermore it can be concluded that all variables investigated through this thesis are of
great signiﬁcance to the power increasing potential of yaw steering, and their contributions
must be considered when implementing yaw steering.
The sensitivity of the technology in regards to the variables, is a reminder that more
research on the topic is needed before yaw steering is fully understood. Other aspects
such as loads, yaw actuators and reliability needs to be investigated for their impact on
the potential of the yaw steering technology, before the technology can be successfully
implemented as a new wind farm control strategy.
Page 78 of 92
==PAGE:88==
Appendix A: Power Surface
1x6 Layouts
Figure 9.1: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.2: Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.3: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase
surface: 1x6 optimal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaus-
sian wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.4: Yawing surface of Turbine No.2: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 79 of 92
==PAGE:89==
Figure 9.5:
No Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6
East-West layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake
model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.6: Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 East-
West layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.7: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase
surface:
1x6 East-West layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08,
Gaussian wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.8: Yawing surface of Turbine No.2: 1x6 East-
West layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 80 of 92
==PAGE:90==
Figure 9.9: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.10: Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.11: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase
surface: 1x6 optimal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaus-
sian wake model, Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.12: Yawing surface of Turbine No.2: 1x6 op-
timal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Page 81 of 92
==PAGE:91==
Figure 9.13: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 op-
timal layout, spacing 4D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.14: Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 4D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.15: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase
surface: 1x6 optimal layout, spacing 4D, TI=0.08, Gaus-
sian wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.16: Yawing surface of Turbine No.2: 1x6 op-
timal layout, spacing 4D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 82 of 92
==PAGE:92==
Figure 9.17: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 op-
timal layout, spacing 4D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.18:
Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 op-
timal layout, spacing 4D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure
9.19:
Yaw steering - Percentage Power
Increase surface:
1x6 optimal layout,
spacing 4D,
TI=(NTM+0.08)/2, Gaussian wake model, Gaussian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.20: Yawing surface of Turbine No.2: 1x6 op-
timal layout, spacing 4D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 83 of 92
==PAGE:93==
Figure 9.21:
No Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6
optimal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Qian wake model,
Qian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.22: Yaw steering - Power surface: 1x6 opti-
mal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Qian wake model, Qian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.23: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 1x6 optimal layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Qian
wake model, Qian wake deﬂection model
Page 84 of 92
==PAGE:94==
4x4 Layouts
Figure 9.24: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 lay-
out, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model, Gaus-
sian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.25: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model, Gaussian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.26: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 85 of 92
==PAGE:95==
Figure 9.27:
No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4
layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model, Ji-
menéz wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.28: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 lay-
out, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian wake model, Jimenéz
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.29: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Gaussian
wake model, Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Page 86 of 92
==PAGE:96==
Figure 9.30:
No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4
layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Multi zone wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.31: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Multi zone wake model, Gaussian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.32: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Multi zone
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 87 of 92
==PAGE:97==
Figure 9.33: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 lay-
out, spacing 6D, TI=0.10, Gaussian wake model, Gaus-
sian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.34: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Multi zone wake model, Jimenéz
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.35: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.08, Multi zone
wake model, Jimenéz wake deﬂection model
Page 88 of 92
==PAGE:98==
Figure 9.36: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 lay-
out, spacing 6D, TI=0.10, Gaussian wake model, Gaus-
sian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.37: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=0.10, Gaussian wake model, Gaussian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.38: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.10, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 89 of 92
==PAGE:99==
Figure 9.39: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 lay-
out, spacing 6D, TI=0.12, Gaussian wake model, Gaus-
sian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.40: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=0.12, Gaussian wake model, Gaussian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.41: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=0.12, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 90 of 92
==PAGE:100==
Figure 9.42: No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 lay-
out, spacing 6D, TI=NTM, Gaussian wake model, Gaus-
sian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.43: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=NTM, Gaussian wake model, Gaussian
wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.44: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=NTM, Gaussian
wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 91 of 92
==PAGE:101==
Figure 9.45:
No Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4
layout, spacing 6D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2, Gaussian wake
model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.46: Yaw steering - Power surface: 4x4 layout,
spacing 6D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2, Gaussian wake model,
Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Figure 9.47: Yaw steering - Percentage Power Increase surface: 4x4 layout, spacing 6D, TI=(NTM+0.08)/2,
Gaussian wake model, Gaussian wake deﬂection model
Page 92 of 92
==PAGE:102==
Bibliography
[1] IEA. Renewables Information : Overview. International Energy Agency and Organ-
isation for Economic Co-operation and Development Publishing, pages 1–12, 2018.
[2] IPCC. Special Report on 1.5 degrees: Summary for Policymakers. 2018.
[3] WWEA. Wind Power Capacity Worldwide. (June):1, 2019.
[4] Pieter Gebraad, Paul Fleming, Jared Thomas, and Katherine Dykes. Estimation of
loads on a horizontal axis wind turbine. Wind Energy, 18(11):1875–1891, 2016.
[5] Wim Munters and Johan Meyers. Dynamic strategies for yaw and induction control
of wind farms based on large-eddy simulation and optimization. Energies, 11(1),
2018.
[6] Michael F Howland, Sanjiva K Lele, and John O Dabiri. Wind farm power optimiza-
tion through wake steering. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, page
201903680, 2019.
[7] Stoyan Kanev. Dynamic wake steering and its impact on wind farm power production
and yaw actuator duty *. Renewable Energy, 146:9–15, 2019.
[8] Majid Bastankhah and Fernando Porté-Agel. Experimental and theoretical study of
wind turbine wakes in yawed conditions. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 806:506–541,
2016.
[9] Paul Fleming, Jennifer Annoni, Jigar J Shah, Linpeng Wang, Shreyas Ananthan,
Zhijun Zhang, Kyle Hutchings, Peng Wang, Weiguo Chen, and Lin Chen. Field test
of wake steering at an oﬀshore wind farm. pages 229–239, 2017.
[10] Tanvir Ahmad, Abdul Basit, Muneeb Ahsan, Olivier Coupiac, Nicolas Girard, Be-
hzad Kazemtabrizi, and Peter C. Matthews. Implementation and analyses of yaw
based coordinated control in wind farms. Energies, 12(7):1–15, 2019.
==PAGE:103==
[11] Philip McKay, Rupp Carriveau, and David Ting. Wake impacts on downstream wind
turbine performance and yaw alignment. Wind Energy, (March 2012):221–234, 2013.
[12] Jan Bartl, Franz Mühle, and Lars Sætran. Wind tunnel study on power output and
yaw moments for two yaw-controlled model wind turbines. Wind Energy Science,
3(2):489–502, 2018.
[13] Dongran Song, Jian Yang, Xinyu Fan, Yao Liu, Anfeng Liu, Guo Chen, and
Young Hoon Joo. Maximum power extraction for wind turbines through a novel
yaw control solution using predicted wind directions. Energy Conversion and Man-
agement, 157(September 2017):587–599, 2018.
[14] Jacob Berg, Jakob Mann, Mark Kelly, and Morten Nielsen. Micro meteorology for
Wind Energy. pages 1–151, 2017.
[15] Louis Bond Smith and Søren Majdal Kaarsholm. Micrometeorology for Wind Energy
46100 -Assignment 4 Wind resource and site assessment. (November), 2018.
[16] N O Jensen.
A note on wind generator interaction.
Risø-M-2411 Risø National
Laboratory Roskilde, pages 1–16, 1983.
[17] Pieter M.O. Gebraad and J. W. Van Wingerden. A control-oriented dynamic model
for wakes in wind plants. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 524(1), 2014.
[18] Guo Wei Qian and Takeshi Ishihara. A new analytical wake model for yawed wind
turbines. Energies, 11(3), 2018.
[19] NREL.
FLORIS.V1.0.0
[https://github.com/NREL/ﬂoris]
,
Date
visited
:
01/09/2019, 2019.
[20] Jared Thomas, Eric Tingey, and Andrew Ning. Comparison of two wake models
for use in gradient-based wind farm layout optimization. 2015 IEEE Conference on
Technologies for Sustainability, SusTech 2015, pages 203–208, 2015.
[21] Jennifer Annoni, Paul Fleming, Andrew Scholbrock, Jason Roadman, Scott Dana,
Christiane Adcock, Fernando Porte-Agel, Steﬀen Raach, Florian Haizmann, and
David Schlipf.
Analysis of control-oriented wake modeling tools using lidar ﬁeld
results. Wind Energy Science, 3(2):819–831, 2018.
==PAGE:104==
[22] Davide Medici and J. Å. Dahlberg. Potential improvement of wind turbine array
eﬃciency by active wake control (AWC). Confrence paper, pages p. 65–84, 2003.
[23] Davide Medici. Wind turbine wakes - Control and vortex shedding. KTH Mechanics
Technical Reports, (March):44, 2004.
[24] Jimenez Angel, Antonio Crespo, and Migoya Emilio. Application of a LES technique
to characterize the wake deﬂection of a wind turbine in yaw. Wind Energy, (13):559–
572, 2010.
[25] P. Fleming, M. Churchﬁeld, K. Johnson, A. Wright, P. Gebraad, J. Annoni, and
J. Berg. Detailed ﬁeld test of yaw-based wake steering. Journal of Physics: Confer-
ence Series, 753(5):0–12, 2016.
[26] M A Miller, J Kiefer, Muyiwa Samuel Adaramola, and Silvio Simani. Comparative
study on the wake deﬂection behind yawed wind turbine models Comparative study
on the wake deﬂection behind yawed wind turbine models. 2017.
[27] Morris W. Hirsch, Stephen Smale, and Robert L. Devaney. Numerical analysis with
applications in Mechanics and Engineering. 2013.
[28] Alecsandro Roberto Lemos Francisco. Scipy.Optimize.minimize, 2013.
[29] Pierre-elouan Réthoré. Wind Turbine Wake in Atmospheric Turbulence Introduction
The Wake “ Crisis ”. Number December. 2009.
[30] S. Macrì, O. Coupiac, N. Girard, A. Leroy, and S. Aubrun. Experimental analysis of
the wake dynamics of a modelled wind turbine during yaw manoeuvres. Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, 1037(7), 2018.
[31] Albert M. Urbán and Jaime Liew. The eﬀect of wake position and yaw misalignment
on power loss in wind turbines. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1222(1), 2019.
[32] Lukas Vollmer, Gerald Steinfeld, and Detlev Heinemann. Estimating the wake de-
ﬂection downstream of a wind turbine in diﬀerent atmospheric stabilities: An LES
study. Wind Energy Science Discussions, pages 1–23, 2016.
[33] Cristina L Archer and Ahmad Vasel-Be-Hagh. Wake steering via yaw control in multi-
turbine wind farms: Recommendations based on large-eddy simulation. Sustainable
Energy Technologies and Assessments, 33(February):34–43, 2019.
==PAGE:105==
[34] Marathe Neha, Andrew Swift, and John Schroeder. Characterizing power perfor-
mance and wake of a wind turbine under yaw and blade pitch Neha. Wind Energy,
(July 2015):963–978, 2016.
[35] D S En. Dansk standard Elproducerende vindmøller – Del 3 : Konstruktionskrav til
oﬀshorevindmøller. 2009.
[36] Atsushi Yamaguchi, Muhammad Waheed Sarwar, and Takeshi Ishihara. A Study of
The Normal Turbulence Model in IEC61400-1. Wind Engineering, 36(6):759–766,
2012.
[37] TZONG-SHYNG LEU, JUI-MING YO, YI-TING TSAI, JIU-JIH MIAU, TA-
CHUNG WANG, and CHIEN-CHOU TSENG. Assessment of Iec 61400-1 Normal
Turbulence Model for Wind Conditions in Taiwan West Coast Areas. International
Journal of Modern Physics: Conference Series, 34:1460382, 2014.
[38] Ju Feng. Python code for a ﬂow model for Qians wake and wake deﬂection model.,
2019.
[39] Tanvir Ahmad, Abdul Basit, Muneeb Ahsan, Olivier Coupiac, Nicolas Girard, Be-
hzad Kazemtabrizi, and Peter C. Matthews. Implementation and analyses of yaw
based coordinated control of wind farms. Energies, 12(7):1–15, 2019.
[40] P. M.O. Gebraad, M. J. Churchﬁeld, and P. A. Fleming. Incorporating Atmospheric
Stability Eﬀects into the FLORIS Engineering Model of Wakes in Wind Farms. Jour-
nal of Physics: Conference Series, 753(5), 2016.
[41] Daniel S. Zalkind and Lucy Y. Pao. The fatigue loading eﬀects of yaw control for
wind plants. Proceedings of the American Control Conference, 2016-July:537–542,
2016.
[42] Paul Hulsman. Power production and turbine response during yaw-based wind farm
control, 2018.
[43] Andrea Esperanza.
Load Analysis in Waked Turbine during Active Wake Wind
Energy Master Report. (June), 2019.
[44] Albert M. Urbán, Torben J. Larsen, Gunner Chr Larsen, and David Verelst. Optimal
yaw strategy for optimized power and load in various wake situations. Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, 1102(1), 2018.
