==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Using Convolutional Neural Networks and
Data Science to Explore Patterns of Reli-
giosity over Centuries
Thorsteinn Gunnar Jonsson (s171945)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
ACT
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3949
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Religion is an important part of human life all over the globe. The importance of
religiosity however, is different. In some areas, religion is the main social value to
follow, while in other areas religion, albeit being a part of daily life there, isn’t the
only social value of importance to human beings. By training a Mask R-CNN to
distinguish a set of religious symbols, imagery data of gravestones available on the
internet can be used to classify memorials as being of a religious type or not. A
network was trained to identify 6 commonly occuring religious symbols on American
gravestones. Those religious symbols are; a cross, the Bible, praying hands, doves,
angels and the star of David.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master’s degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, January 1, 2020
Thorsteinn Gunnar Jonsson (s171945)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I want to thank my supervisor Sune Lehmann Jørgensen for his advice over the
course of the thesis. For help with segmentation of images my greatest gratitudes to
the work done by Jochen Gebauer, Tobias Ebert and their team of student assistants.
For support and help with technical material over the course of the project I want to
thank my friends Hallgrimur Hrafn Einarsson, Ingvar Bjarki Einarsson and Enrique
Yegros Miller.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Religiosity as a Social Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Forward pass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Activation functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.5
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Weight initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Convolutional Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Nonlinear layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.3
Pooling layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.4
Fully Connected Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
R-CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Fast R-CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.3
Faster R-CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.4
Residual Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.5
Feature Pyramid Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.6
Fully Convolutional Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.7
Mask R-CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methods
21
3.1
Data gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.2
Data handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Image segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.1
Backbone network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results
31
4.1
Network performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Statistics from sampled data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.1
United States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.2
Rest of the World
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
45
6
Future Work
47
A Appendix
49
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ANN
Artifical neural network
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CPU
Central processing unit
FPN
Feature pyramid network
GPU
Graphics processing unit
HOG
Histogram of oriented gradients
IoU
Intersection over Union
mAP
mean average precision
R-CNN Regions with Convolutional Neural Network features
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit function
ResNet Residual network
RoI
Region of interest
RPN
Region proposal network
SIFT
Scale invariant feature transformation
List of symbols
α
Momentum
δ
Errors
η
Learning rate
λ
Weight decay
µ
Mean
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
ρ
Correlation
σ
Standard deviation
σx
Standard error of the mean
b
Batch size
t
Targets
wn
Weights
a
Activation or feature map
d
Depth
f
Function
h
Activation function
hk
Kernel height
I
Input image
k
Kernel filter
L
Cost function
N
Number of samples
P
Padding
S
Stride
u
LATER
v
LATER
wk
Kernel width
X
Data set
xi
Pixel value
y
Output set
yi
Pixel value
z
Transformed activation
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Whether personal religiosity has any psychological benefits has been studied exten-
sively[1]. Religion has been found to have a positive effect on health[2]. But those
effects are not the same everywhere. The effects of religiosity as a social has been
hypothesized in [1] to explain cross-cultural differences in benefits it offers. Religious
countries are said to have religiosity as the defining social value, while in non-religious
countries religiosity, albeit being a social value, is not as important.
[1] uses results from three studies to examine the relationship between religiosity
and self-esteem. They use covariates such as GDP per capita to exclude alternative
explanations, and their results found relations between religiosity and self-esteem to
be higher in religious countries than secular countries.
Other methods have been proposed to examine the positive psychological benefits
of religiosity, and the differences of benefits between religious and secular areas. [3]
proposes using imagery data of memorials to investigate this connection. Data on
6400 memorials from https://www.findagrave.com/ is used in that investigation.
[3], [4] and [4] suggest using symbols engraved on gravestones to classify them as
either religious or non-religious. Symbols on gravestones and their connections with
religion are described in [4]. [3] uses the the lifespan of each memorial, the symbol
types and the religious adherency rate of each memorials corresponding county[5] and
finds correlation between the symbolism and reached age, depending on county.
Manually classifying the symbolism engraved on gravestones is very time consum-
ing. Is it possible to automate that process?
This project trains a powerful CNN to locally segment symbols on gravestones
from https://www.findagrave.com/ automatically. Convolutional Neural Networks
have proved very capable at image classification[6]. In image classification competi-
tions, CNNs have reportedly beaten the error rate of humans[7], [8]. For instance
segmentation and local object detection, CNNs have had increased popularity since
[9] was published. [10] reports promising success in these areas and has since being
published been used to segment nuclei in microscopic images[11] and reconstruct 3
dimensional building from aerial footage[12].
This project aims to utilize [10] to segment religious symbols on gravestones from
https://www.findagrave.com/ to classify them as religious or non-religious, like
done in [3]. The religious symbols considered will be crosses, Bibles, angels, doves,
praying hands and the Star of David.
A theoretical discussion on how neural networks and convolutional neural networks
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
are built will be presented in chapter 2. Chapter two will also further articulate the
progress which has been made on CNN models, specifically those which do local object
detection.
Chapter 3 will go over technical details of the project. The programming work
done in this project will be explained. How the data in this project was gathered
from the internet will be explained, as well as how data was used and modified. The
characteristics and hyperparameters of the specific neural network used in this project
will be outlisted as well.
The performance of the neural network will be reviewed in the fourth chapter.
The network will then be used to segment a large amount of data scraped from
https://www.findagrave.com/. Results from that coupled with data from memorial
pages will be used to explore the relationship between symbol engravings, geographical
religiosity score and length of life. That will be done both for data from the United
States and for other countries, but will be done in seperate sections.
A conclusion and discussion will follow in chapter 5, looking back on the results
and performance of the network.
Possible future work will be discussed in chapter 6.
All work done in this project can be found on https://github.com/IceTharu/
masters_thesis/.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter will briefly introduce the concept of religiosity as a social subject and
previous studies made on the relationship between religiosity and wellbeing. Following
that, the basic operations of neural networks and the different layers in convolutional
neural networks will be introduced, as well as a more focused explanation about the
usage and advancements made in using convolutional neural networks in the field of
object detection and semantic segmentation.
2.1
Religiosity as a Social Value
The effects of personal religiosity and self-esteem had previously been examined in
[1].
In it, the hypothesis of religiosity as a social value is introduced, describing
that religiosity is the defining social value in religious cultures and fulfilling religious
requirements is beneficial for individuals living there. It also states that in secular
cultures, where other social values are more important than religiosity, the connec-
tion between religiosity and wellbeing is less apparent. [1] uses online data gathered
through a survey between 2001 and 2009 in 65 countries. The paper reports a corre-
lation between religiosity and self-esteem.
Other types of data to examine the relationship between religiosity and wellbeing
has been used in [3], where imagery data of gravestones is used. The images are
classified as a religious sort if symbols of religious nature appear on them, or as a
non-religious sort in case religious symbols are absent. Manually classifying symbols
such as crosses, Bibles, angels, lambs and doves on 6400 images of gravestones found
on https://www.findagrave.com/ from 64 counties in the United States shows a
correlation between the longevity of life and whether a religious symbol appears on
the gravestones. The counties are classified by their religious adherence rate from the
U.S. religion census[5].
2.2
Neural networks
This section will introduce artificial neural network, starting with a overview of how
they are built up. Following that, a few of the processes of ANNs will be explained.
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Theory
Forward pass, activation functions, optimization, backpropagation and regularization
of neural networks will be given a look.
Neural networks were introduced as the Perceptron by Rosenblatt[13] back in the
1960’s, but they didn’t reach the widespread popularity they have nowadays until in
recent times.
Neural networks are loosely inspired by the way information is processed in bio-
logical brains[14]. Neural networks have been successfully used in a lot of different
tasks. Simple artificial neural networks can be used to classify images of handwritten
digits, and more complex neural networks can be trained to recognize a variety of
objects, such as segmenting nuclei in microscopic images[11] and reconstructing 3D
buildings from aerial images[12].
Figure 2.1: A simple diagram of a two layer neural network.[14] (p. 228)
Neural networks are built up of nodes and layers. The number of layers within a
neural network denote its depth, and the number of nodes within a layer denotes its
width. Artificial neural network require three different types of layers; an input layer,
hidden layers and an output layer. An artifical neural network only has one single
input and output layer, but of hidden layer can be several. Nodes within each layer
are connected to nodes in the adjacent layers and the connection between them are
called weights w. An extra bias node is included in the input and hidden layers, and
allows better flexibility of a neural network. A general architecture of an artificial
neural network composed of three layers can be seen in figure 2.3
The nodes in the hidden layer need to be more than the nodes of either the input
or output layer. In the hidden layers, nonlinearities are introduced to make neural
networks capable of representing nonlinear functions. These nonlinear functions in-
troduced at the hidden layer are generally required to be nonlinear and differentiable,
but some of the most commonly used nonlinear functions such as the rectified linear
functions are not differentiable at every point. That is permitted due to the extremely
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Neural networks
5
slim chances that gradients will reach a point of local minimum during training.[14],
[15]
The number of nodes in the last layer depends on the type of the application
intended for the artificial neural network. Neural networks can both be applied to re-
gression and classification problems. For regression, the output layer will be composed
of a single node, but for classification, the number of nodes will usually represent the
numbers of different classes required.
Neural networks are function approximators which in theory can map any function
f(X). They take as an input a vector X, and using a nonlinear function f, map those
inputs as an output vector y.
y = f(X)
(2.1)
2.2.1
Forward pass
Forward pass, also called forward propagation, is an integral part of neural networks
and has been the building block of the networks since they were first introduced in
1958.[13] During forward propagation, dot products of the nodes within that layer
with the weights connecting them to the next layer are computed, resulting in the
activations of nodes in the next layer.
Those activations are transformed with a
nonlinear activation function to ensure that the solution will be nonconvex. At the
output layer, depending on the number of nodes in it, an output activation function
such as the sigmoid or softmax funtions are used.
For the first layer of 2.3 with D dimensions, the activations a of nodes in the next
layer with M dimensions are computed as a dot product of the weights w and input
values x, as shown in equation 2.2. Those activations are then transformed using
a nonlinear activation function h. After transforming the activations in the hidden
layer, the activations of the output layer with dimensions K is computed as shown
in equation 2.4 These computations can be repeated if more than one hidden layer is
included within an artificial neural network.
aj =
D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(2.2)
zj = h(aj)
(2.3)
ak =
M
∑
i=1
w(2)
kj zj + w(2)
k0
(2.4)
Equations 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 show how the activations are computed.
yk =
1
1 + e−ak
(2.5)
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theory
For artificial neural networks used for regression, the activation of the output node
can be output directly as y, since there will only be one. For binary classification
problems the sigmoid function can be used to transform the activation of the output
node to a probabilistic value.
For multiclass problems, the softmax function in equation 2.6 is used to convert
the output activations to probabilistic values. The softmax function is advantageous
for neural networks classifying multiple classes due to the fact that all elements y will
sum together to 1 and represents a probability distribution.[15]
yk =
eak
∑n
i=0 eai
(2.6)
2.2.2
Activation functions
Several nonlinear functions can be used in neural networks. As mentioned previously,
they are generally required to be nonlinear and differentiable.
Amongst commonly used nonlinear functions are the sigmoid function (shown in
eq. 2.5), hyperbolic tangent and the rectifier function. Both the sigmoid function
and hyperbolic tangent suffer from the problem that their gradients are zero for both
very large and very large activations. When backpropagating with these nonlinear
functions there is a risk that the gradient of the weights will vanish and thus no
updates will be done in reality.
The rectifier function is preferred for deep neural networks[15].
Figure 2.2: ReLU function
It is the most widely used activation function in deep convolutional neural net-
works, often abbreviated as ReLU, standing for rectified linear unit. The reason why
the ReLU function is preferred over other activation functions such as the sigmoid
and hyperbolic tangent function is that for very high activations we do still have a
value for the gradient so updates will be made to the weights. For activations of lower
than zero, the ReLU function will increase sparsity in the computation.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Neural networks
7
f(x) = max(0, x)
(2.7)
The mathematical representation of the ReLU function is shown in equation 2.7
and visualized in figure 2.2. It is a differentiable function at every point except at
x = 0, where f ′(x−) = 0 and f ′(x+) = 1. The derivative of the function at that
points is generally either configured to 0 or 1.[15].
2.2.3
Optimization
A lot of different functions can be used to compute the loss of a neural networks,
such as a multiclass SVM loss, log loss and cross-entropy loss. The cost function for
neural networks will be nonconvex due to the nonlinearities introduced in the hidden
layers[15].
Figure 2.3: A 3-dimensional representation of an error function.[14] (p. 236)
The cross-entropy function can be used to compute the error of a classification
neural network for many classes, and is defined in equation 2.8
L(w) = −
N
∑
n=1
{tn ln yn + (1 −tn) ln(1 −yn)}
(2.8)
where y is the value computed by the neural network and t is the true value. The
loss computed will be zero when yn = tn. In other cases, it will take a value higher
than zero.
To minimize the loss function and move closer the predicted values y closer to
true values t, steps can be taken in the negative direction of the gradient of the loss
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theory
function, or ∇L(w) →0. The gradient calculates the slope of the loss function, and
taking it in the negative direction causes us to move in the direction of a local minima.
The loss is minimized by using stochastic gradient descent, which computes for
one point at a time the weight gradient given a learning rate η. The momentum of
the gradient can be used to speed up converence. It uses the updates ∆w at each
timestep t, accompanied with a momentum constant α to accelerate the learning[15].
wt+1 = wt −η∇Ln(wt) + α(wt + ∆wt)[15]
(2.9)
2.2.4
Backpropagation
The learning algorithm vital to neural networks today, backpropagation, was intro-
duced back in 1986 by utilizing the Chain Rule of Calculus to calculate the gradients
of the loss through neural networks[16]. That addition allows evaluating the gradient
between the weights in a computationally easy manner and, most importantly, allows
neural networks to learn.
The gradients of the error function (f.x. equation 2.8) used in a neural network are
fed backwards, or backpropagated, through the network after an iteration of forward
pass, updating the weights between nodes and the activations of nodes in the process.
Backpropagation can be broken up into two separate parts.
In one part the
derivatives of the loss with respect to the weights is derived. In the other part do we
use those derivatives to adjust the weights.
The derivative of the loss with respect to the weights can be split into two parts,
the derivative of the loss L with respect to the activations a and the derivative of the
activation with respect to weights.
∂L
∂w(l)
ij
= ∂L
∂a(l)
i
∂a(l)
i
∂w(l)
ij
.
(2.10)
The second derivative equals the transformed activation z from the nodes in the
layer before that, or the inputs in the first layer x as can be derived from equations
2.2 and 2.4.
The derivative of the loss L with respect to the activations a at the output layer,
will be different depending on which error function is used, but for the cross entropy
functions will be found to be simply the difference of the predicted value and true
value δi = yi −ti for the output layer, where δ is called the error[14]. The derivative
of the activations with respect to weights can be found be differentiation function 2.4.
To compute the derivative of the loss with respect to activations in internal layers,
we need to use the chain rule to break the derivative into sums, where M is the number
of nodes.
∂L
∂a(l)
i
=
∑
M
∂L
∂a(l+1)
M
∂a(l+1)
M
∂a(l)
i
.
(2.11)
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Weight initialization
9
Here M are the number of activations in a layer. The errors in the hidden layer
will then be found to be δi = h′(ai) ∑
M wkjδk by differentiating equation 2.4.
So equation 2.10 can be written on the form
∂L
∂w(l)
ij
= δjzi[15].
Using these derivatives, the updates of weights between layers in the neural net-
work can then be performed.
When a neural network is trained, these processes of forward pass and backward
pass will be done in alternation. One performance of forward pass and backward pass
through a whole network is called an epoch.
2.2.5
Regularization
Regularization is used in deep learning to make models better at recognizing new
inputs. Most regularization error sacrifice training error to try to lower the validation
error [15].
If a neural network is able to model perfectly the relationship between the input
variables and outputs within a training sampla, there is a chance of it simply being
overfitting to the training data and that isn’t certain to generalize as well to data
which the neural network hasn’t seen before.
Regularization methods attempt to sacrifice training error for improved general-
ization throuh a variety of different methods.
Ridge regression is one of those methods. In ridge regression a weight decay is
added to the error function with a hyperparameter λ
ˆL(w) = L(w) + λ
2 ||w||2
2
(2.12)
The purpose of this is to force the predictions not to have to high of a variance
and become simpler.
The hyperparameter gives control over how much we want to force the predicted
model to be simple.
Another possible regularization method, especially applicable to image classifica-
tion[15], is dataset augmentation. Increasing the amount of training data will improve
the generalizability of a neural network, and augmentation is a simple way of creating
fake data for training.
Dataset augmentation on images simply alters images in the training dataset in
selected ways.
2.3
Weight initialization
In [15], weights are recommended to be initialized as small random values. Weights
can be initialized from pretrained weights from another neural network[17]. Initializ-
ing weights in that manner is called transfer learning, and if done correctly can reduce
convergence times of deep neural networks. Transfer learning can be described as a
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theory
way of taking an educated guess on what values we expect the weights to have, in-
stead of randomly initializing them. Convolutional neural networks who are trained
to detect similar images can benefit well from that. Pretrained neural networks for
image classification over a whole range of different classes such as the one in the
COCO challenge[18], and transferring weights from those to different tasks but of a
similar nature is likely to help. Transferring weights from inappropriate CNNs on the
other hand would be counterproductive[17].
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks
This section will start with a brief historical introduction on convolutional neural
networks.
A more detailed explanation about layers which can be included in a
convolutional neural network architecture will follow.
Convolutional neural networks are a specific type of neural networks, generally
used for data which can be represented as a grid. They can be used for 1 dimensional
data such as time-series data. In this project they are used for images which form a
2 dimensional grid of pixels[15].
Nowadays, convolutional neural networks can be used effectively on image classi-
fication[6]. They can also learn to detect and classify local objects within images[19],
as well as segmentation of local objects within images [10]. They are, for example,
being used in the training of self-driving cars by Tesla[20].
One of the first attempt to try to map the activities of neurons in the visual
part of the brain was done by David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel in a series of studies,
beginning in 1959. The studies were made on the visual stimuli of cats by showing
them different types of edges, shapes and forms, while measuring the response of the
neurons in their brain. In following studies they made similar studies on the visual
stimuli on other mammals. They discovered, amongst other things, that neurons in
the visual cortex operate in a hierarchical order. There are neural cells in the brain
which respond to light, other neural cells which respond to the orientation of light,
and even other ones which respond to movement of light. For their research they
were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1981[21].
Inspired by the discoveries made by Hubel and Wiesel, the Neocognitron was
introduced by Kunihiko Fukushima in 1979, being the first model which included
alternating layers of simple cells with modifiable parameters and complex pooling
cells. However, it did not include a supervised learning algorithm[22].
Backpropagation and learning based on gradients were introduced to convolutional
neural networks in 1998, when a convolutional neural network was trained to recognize
digits of zip codes successfully[23].
It was only as recently as 2012 that the first monumental results for image recog-
nition using convolutional neural networks were achieved by Krizhevsky’s AlexNet,
which performed better than other methods used in computer vision on the ImageNet
classification challenge[6]. The AlexNet was designed by Alex Krizhevsky, then only
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
11
a student at the University of Toronto. It was able to utilize both the abundance of
data available on a digital format in the current era, as well as the computational
capabilities offered by GPU’s, which was only invented in 1999.
For a network to be considered a convolutional neural network, it is required
to include at least a single convolutional layer[15]. Other layers frequently a part
of convolutional neural networks are, a fully connected layer, nonlinear layer and
a pooling layer.
Generally, convolutional layers and nonlinear layers are used in
alternation, with a pooling layer shrinking the image at a few intervals. To compute
the output, a fully connected layer which maps all the weights into a long vector is
used. An exemplary image of the effects these layers have on an image is shown in
figure 2.8.
2.4.1
Convolutional Layer
Convolution, typically represented as shown in equation 2.13 is a mathematical func-
tion which outputs a function a representing how function I is changed by function
k.
a(t) = (I ∗k)(t).
(2.13)
In the terms of convolutional neural networks, the functions will be an image I
and a kernel filter k, which when convolved will create a feature map a[15].
Strictly speaking, convolutional neural networks use a function called cross-correlation,
not convolution. Cross-correlation uses a flipped kernel filter relative to convolution.
For an image I and kernel filter k of two dimensions the convolutional equation
will be of form
a[xI, yI] = (I ∗k)[xI, yI] =
∑
wk
∑
hk
I(xI + wk, yI + hk)k(wk, hk).
(2.14)
where a is the output feature map, I is the image, k is the kernel filter, xI and yI
are pixel locations within the image, and wk and hk represent the width and height
of the kernel.
The convolutional layer is the first layer of a CNN, and shares it’s name with this
type of network. In it, filters are convoluted, or slid, over an image spatially, while
dot products are computed at each spatial location. An input image I has a shape of
(wI, hI, dI), where wI, hI and dI represent the height width and depth of an image
respectively. The kernel filter k has shape (wk, hk, dk), where wk is the width of the
filter, hk is it’s height and the depth of dk it is the same as the depth of the input
image. The width and height of the kernel filter will be a lot smaller than the width
and height of the image.
Each convolution with a filter over an image will produce a two dimensional feature
map of shape (wI −wk + 1, hI −hk + 1, 1). N different filters can be convoluted over
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theory
the image, producing a feature map of shape (wI −wk + 1, hI −hk + 1, N). For
computational reasons, generally a number of filters which is a power of 2 is used.
The receptive field of each pixel location with a feature map will be the pixels in
the respective location of the previous feature map of where the dot product has been
taken.
Figure 2.4: Visualization of filters and their effects during the first two layers of a
convolutional neural network.[24]
A deep CNN will consist of sequences of these convolutional layers, with nonlinear
layers and pooling layers in between. The deeper in a neural network architecture we
reach, the receptive field of the activation map will cover a larger part of the original
input image and more complex features of images will be detectable as shown in figure
2.4. At the first layer only simple features such as edges will be detected, but the at
greater depths features will start to look more like complicated forms. That resonates
well with the discoveries Hubel and Wiesel had made previously on the visual stimuli
of cats[21].
Two hyperparameters are introduced in the convolutional layer. Firstly we can
adjust the stride, S, of steps which the kernel filter takes between locations. If the
stride is set as S = 1, a convolutional operation will be done at every single possible
pixel. If the stride is assigned of a higher value, for example S = 2, we will skip
every other possible pixel. Selecting a stride larger than 1 will cause the image to
shrink and make the height and width of the feature map smaller. The mathematical
relation between the output image and stride is as follows:
wI −wk
S
+ 1 = wout,
(2.15)
where wI is the width of the input image, wk the width of the kernel filter, S is
the stride and wout is the width of the stride. The relationship is identical for the
height of the output feature map. The dimensions of the output image must be an
integer, so not all values of stride are acceptable.
The second hyperparameter introduced in the convolutional layer is padding P.
Padding is used to avoid the shrinking of the feature map in the convolutional layer.
A filter kernel is only convoluted over areas of the image where it fits, so if no padding
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
13
is introduced the image will shrink even if a stride of 1 is used. And if shrinking is
too rapid, it limits the number of convolutional layers the original image can be run
through. By padding an input image, the dot product of the kernel filter and input
image can be computed with a centre over all pixel locations of the image, excluding
obviously the padded areas. Several versions of padding pixels can be used, such as
zero-padding[15], reflection padding and replication padding, but zero-padding is the
most commonly used[25].
wI + 2 ∗P −wk
S
+ 1 = wout.
(2.16)
Equation 2.16 shows the relationship between input and output width when
padding is involved, where P is the number of pixels the image is padded one di-
rection. The relationship is identical for the height of the output feature map.
Figure 2.5: An example of the convolution operation, with pixel values from image
?? and a filter, done with a stride of 1.
2.4.2
Nonlinear layer
The nonlinear layer in CNNs has the same functionality as the hidden layers do in
ANNs, introducing nonlinearities to ensure that the neural network won’t simply be
a linear classifier.
The ReLU function is most applicable for deep neural networks[15].
Figure 2.6: Example of what effects the ReLU function has on the convolved output
from figure 2.5.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory
2.4.3
Pooling layer
A pooling layer takes as input an feature map of size (wa, ha, da), where wa, ha and da
are the width, height and depth of the feature map respectively. Two hyperparameters
are needed in this layer, the size of the filter k and the stride S. Usually, overlap will
be avoided by configuring the values of filter and stride in that manner. They will
be connected in a way such that the whole picture is pooled without overlap. The
output dimensions from this will be a feature map of size (wout, hout, dout), where
wout = wa−wk
S
+ 1, hout = ha−hk
S
+ 1 and dout = da.
Max-pooling is a frequently used version of pooling, where simply the maximum
value of the are which the filter covers at each step will represent that area of the
feature map. Other versions such as average pooling are also usable, but max-pooling
better represent the extreme signals within a feature map[15].
Figure 2.7: An example of what effects the max-pooling the feature map from figure
2.6 has, with a kernel filter of size 2 and stride of 2.
Reverse pooling layers also do exist, and are used, for example, in a Fully Con-
nected Network, which Mask R-CNN utilizes to generate masks. The output dimen-
sions from this will be a feature map of size (wout, hout, dout), where wout = wa ∗wk,
hout = ha ∗hk and dout = da. Reverse pooling can be done in several different ways.
Nearest neighbor reverse pooling will fill areas of size wa ∗wk and ha ∗hk in the
output feature map with the respective value in the original feature map. Bed of
Nails reverse pooling will only keep the values of the original feature map, but fill
around them with zeros[24][26].
2.4.4
Fully Connected Layer
The fully connected layer in a CNN typically comes after all other layers.
In a
fully connected layer, the grid-like shape of the feature map will not be kept. The
preceding layers will have gathered knowledge about features within an image, and
the fully connected layer stretches the feature map of the connectin layer to a vector
of shape shape (wa ∗ha ∗da). This vector functions like an ANN, where all pixels
in the grid form are now nodes, connected to output nodes via weights. The dot
product of those weights with the vector will compute output values, which can be
transformed to probabilistic values using equation 2.6.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks
15
(a) Single channel image of a Bible with zero
padding of 2 pixels in each direction.
(b) Same Bible convoluted with a filter of
size three and stride 1.
(c) Same Bible after going through the non-
linear layer using the ReLU function.
(d) The Bible shown after max-pooling with
filter size of 8.
Figure 2.8: Example of how an image of a Bible is altered while processing through the
layers of a CNN. The filter which the image is convoluted with is shown in 2.5.
2.5
Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks
This section will go through the advancements made in convolutional neural networks
with regards to object detection and semantic segmentation, touching briefly on rel-
evant network models and architectures which have led to the development of the
model used in this project, Mask R-CNN.
2.5.1
R-CNN
Before R-CNN was introduced, convolutional neural networks had already shown
considerable capabilities in the field of image classification as demonstrated by the
AlexNet[6].
An R-CNN, short for regions with convolutional neural network features, was
introduced in 2014 as a CNN capable of semantic segmentation and object detection,
a different challenge than image classification. It requires accurate localization of
objects within an image to be able to classify them.
It successfully managed to
outperform more conventional computer vision methods which had previously been
successful within the competition, such as various different implementations of SIFT
and HOG. On the PASCAL VOC dataset from 2012, it achieved a mAP (mean
average precision) of 53.3%, an increase of about 15% compared to what had been
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory
achieved before[9].
Figure 2.9: Model of R-CNN[9].
The proposed object detection system in R-CNN is composed of three separate
parts. The first part of those generates region proposals within the image, such as the
man and the horse seen in figure 2.9, which define a set of possible objects detectable.
In [9], it is done by using a method called selective search, which returns 2000 regions
of interest within the image. Due to possible regions of interest potentially being of
vastly different shapes and sizes, all object proposals found are warped to a rectangle
with a height and width of 227 pixels[9]. The second part is a convolutional neural
network run over all of those object proposals and outputs a feature vector of 4096
dimensions.
The third and last part of R-CNN utilized support vector machines
trained for each class to calculate a score for each feature vector. To avoid classifying
the same object many times, non-maximum suppression is used to accept or reject
regions, based on their IoU overlap score. The IoU score simply calculates how much
of the object is within the bounding box.
Although being a groundbreaking combination of deep learning and computer
vision methods, this neural network is still very computationally expensive due to
needing to run forward propagate for each object proposal[27].
2.5.2
Fast R-CNN
Figure 2.10: Model of Fast R-CNN[27].
Fast R-CNN was built on the original R-CNN and published in 2015 by Ross
Girshick, who had also been a part of the group which published the the prior. The
training model is changed so that the CNN forward pass is done on the whole input
image in one step, instead of small parts of it.
The model takes an input image as well as object proposals, and outputs a feature
map. Areas of the feature map which have object proposals are run through a RoI
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks
17
max-pooling layer, generated object proposal feature maps of fixed sizes. A RoI max-
pooling layer works identically as a max-pooling layer described in chapter 2.4.3, but
only over the area where the object proposal, or the RoI, is located.
Those RoI-pooled feature maps are then mapped to a feature vector, from where
classification scores are computed using the softmax function (eq. 2.6) and bounding
box regression scores are computed using a L1 loss[27].
Slight improvements in the mAP is noted compared to the R-CNN. A nine fold
speedup of the training time was experienced compared to the forementioned R-
CNN[27]. However, the training speed can still be sped up, since the bottleneck is
now the region proposal[19].
2.5.3
Faster R-CNN
The paper describing Faster R-CNN was published in January 2016, by a team in-
cluding Ross Girshick and Kaiming He.
Faster R-CNN, as the name implies, is a faster version of the previously mentioned
Fast R-CNN. The bottleneck of the Fast R-CNN model was the time spent on object
proposal, which Faster R-CNN improved on.
It does so by replacing the object proposal step with a Region Proposal Network
(RPN). That RPN is merged with the Fast R-CNN model to create Faster R-CNN,
and eliminating the bottleneck that region proposals had been [19].
Figure 2.11: Model of Faster R-CNN[9].
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory
Region Proposal Network
The RPN takes an input image, and predicts rectangular objects with an objectness
score.
To the Region Proposal Network an image is input, and the network outputs
rectangular object proposals as well as an objectness score. It shares convolutional
layers with a Fast R-CNN network.
On the feature map output from the last shared convolutional layer,a small sliding
window is run. The feature map from every window is mapped to a feature vector,
which is then run throuh two branched fully convolutional layers, one for the bounding
box regression and another for the classification[19].
Within each sliding window, a lot of different regions are proposed. They are
all rectangular regions with different scales and shapes. At most, N regions can be
proposed. That means, that for each region we can get at most 4N bounding box
outputs, for the 4 corners of each bounding box. The classification fully connected
layer outputs at most 2N different proposals, with the probabilities of a proposal
being an object, and another probability of it not being an object.
To train the Region Proposal Network, each of the k anchor boxes gets a binary
class label of being an object or not being an object. Positive labels are given to
anchors with either the highest IoU overlap with a ground-truth box, or if an anchor
has an IoU overlap with a ground-truth box of more than 0.7. A negative label is
given to an anchor if it has an IoU overlap with all ground-truth boxes of less than
0.3[19].
Training of Faster R-CNN alternates between region proposal and object detec-
tion[19].
The speedup achieved by this architecture is almost 10-fold compared to the pre-
vious Fast R-CNN[19].
2.5.4
Residual Network
Residual blocks were introduced in 2015 by a team includin Kaming He, to address
a degradation problem on training accuracy that deep convolutional neural networks
have. This problem is not caused by overfitting[7].
The residual blocks include a shortcut connection, a previous feature map is simply
added via a shortcut to an output feature map computed by a series of layers.
The layers thus instead learn residuals functions with reference to layer inputs,
H(x) = F(x) + x, instead of only F(x). These modifications resulted in a decrease in
both training and validation error when CNNs are made deeper, instead of an error
increase, which had been apparent in previous structures[7].
2.5.5
Feature Pyramid Network
Feature pyramids networks were published in [28] in 2017 by a team including Piotr
Dollár, Ross Girshick and Kaiming He.
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks
19
Figure 2.12: A residual block as introduced in [7].
Feature pyramid networks are used in deep neural networks, where outputs from
every stage of the network are fed into the FPN. The outputs are taken from the
last output of the last convolutional layer in a convolutional architecture before the
feature map is downsampled.
At the deepest stages, features with high resolution will be detected, while at the
shallowest stages, better information about localization of features will be available.
The feature maps are upsampled to the same dimensions of the shallowest feature
map by using nearest neighbour unpooling previously described in 2.4.3.
These feature maps are then connected by skip connection with features in shal-
lower layers. In [28] FPN is used with a Residual Network architecture. upsampled
2.5.6
Fully Convolutional Network
Figure 2.13: Model of a fully convolutional network.[26].
A fully convolutional network is a CNN which performs semantic segmentation
mask generation. An input image is run through a series of convolutional, nonlinear
and pooling layers to generate a fully convolutional layer, which, instead of being used
for classification, which is upsampled again to form the shape of the original image.
Upsampling is not done by unpooling in this network, but by deconvolution. Up-
sampling by deconvolution is simply doing convolution backwards[26].
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Theory
2.5.7
Mask R-CNN
Figure 2.14: Architecture of Mask R-CNN[10].
Mask R-CNN was introduced in [10], published by Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari,
Piotr Dollár and Ross Girshick in January 2018.
It builds on Faster R-CNN by adding a layers capable of instance segmentation.
Instance segmentation combines both the task of object detection and semantic seg-
mentation.
Object detection classifies objects to different classes, while semantic
segmentation classifies all pixels in an image to a belonging class.
In [19] the final branch fully convolutional layers predicted classes and bounding
boxes on the proposed RoI, but now [10] adds a third segmentation branch. The
segmentation mask output is a binary mask for proposed RoI.
To predict the segmentation mask, a Fully Convolutional Network is used n every
RoI predicted by the RPN.
RoI-pooling, as used in [27] is replaced with a RoIAlign layer, which preserves
object locations accurately. Quantization involved in RoI-pooling causes a misalign-
ment between the RoI used and features extracted. RoIAlign avoids quantization and
greatly improves mask accuracy[10].
The Mask R-CNN is built up of two parts, a backbone and a head. The backbone
takes care of the convolutional computations, while the heads perform classification,
bounding-box regression and mask prediction[10].
In [10], a backbone architecture using both 50, and 101 layered ResNets is used,
as well as an architecture combining a FPN and ResNet, with the FPN using feature
maps from several different stages of the architecture.
The head architecture takes seperate input feature maps from the last layer of the
convolutional network. One input feature map gets stretched to fully convolutional
layers and used for classification and bounding box regression. The other input feature
map has its grid like features kept, and is run throuh a series of convolutional and
deconvolutional layers to predict a segmentation mask.
During training, the loss of the network is composed of a combination of the
classification loss, bounding box loss and segmentation mask loss,
L = Lcls + Lbox + Lmask[10],
(2.17)
where L is the loss.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter will introduce the configurations of the neural network used in this
project. Computational and technical information will first be discussed. Following
that, the process of scraping for the data used in the project will be detailed. Reg-
ularization methods used in the project will follow, and lastly the backbone of the
network used will be explained.
Mask R-CNN is available implemented on Python 3, using Keras and Tensorflow
on GitHub [29]. The model used in this project is unchanged from the version pre-
sented there, with a few adjustments made in the configurations. It was chosen as
the optimal neural network for this project due to its recorded success at outperforms
other existing models on all COCO challenges[10].
All work done in this project was done by using Python. When jobs were run
on DTU’s high performance computers, Python 3.6.2 was used. Python is currently
ranked as the 4th most commonly used programming language according to Stack
Overflow’s user survey [30]. It’s an open source programmed language, supported by
various different modules which can be created by anyone.
Some highly used modules in this project are, Tensorflow and Keras through Mask
R-CNN, BeautifulSoup was used for scraping webpages, Pandas was used for data
manipulation and visualization. Imgaug was utilized for augmentations. Matplotlib
and Seaborn were also used for visualization.
• Tensorflow is an open-source library written in Python, C++ and CUDA
usable for various machine learning applications. It was developed by an internal
team at Google and originally released in 2015[31]. Initially, tensorflow-1.5 was
used, but great speedup was seen when switching to tensorflow-gpu-1.5, which
helped training the neural network in a much shorter amount of time.
• Keras is an open-source library written in Python, used mostly on neural
networks. It is run on top of Tensorflow, and is also capable of running on
top of other well known data science libraries. Version 2.0.7 of Keras was used
for this project[32].
• Pandas is a software library written in Python, Cython and C which allows
user friendly data manipulation[33].
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Methods
• BeautifulSoup is a module written in Python, which allows parsing html and
xml documents[34]. That makes extracting HTML data, which has been done
extensively throughout this project, manageable.
• imgaug is an image augmentation library which also augments segmented
masks accordingly[35].
The Bash[36] shell in Linux was used to run programs straight to the terminal on
remote high performance computers using Bash cripts. The Mask R-CNN to detect
religious symbols was trained in DTU’s high performance computational cluster. It
was done on a GPU called Tesla V100 32 GB, callable with queuename gpuv100
through a bash script. For scraping, 4 scripts were run simultaneously on a CPU for
72 hours at a time, callable with queuename hpc through a bash file, which allowed
gathering of data from approximately 130 thousand memorials in 24 hours. Addresses
for images were stored and downloaded seperately.
3.1
Data gathering
This section will go through the processes involved in webscraping and data gathering
of the project.
Figure 3.1: The opening header on https://www.findagrave.com/.
All data gathered and used in this project can be found on https://www.findagrave.
com/. It is an online gravestone collection, with claims of being the biggest online
gravestone memorial site online.
The website includes memorials in remote loca-
tions such as North Korea and Samoa. Alternative memorial websites do exist, such
as http://findengrav.dk/ in Danish and https://www.gardur.is/kirkjugardar.
php in Icelandic, but were not considered for this project.
The website claims to have over 180 memorials stored. The quality of memorial
pages vary greatly, some memorials have been removed, some memorials do not have
an image, and some lack information on age.
Around 40% of memorials scraped
were found to be missing images, and were excluded. Figure 3.2 shows two image
examples from the website. Memorials on the webstite can be accessed through the
address https://www.findagrave.com/memorial/ID, where ID simply needs to be
configured to be an integer between 1 and approximately 200 million.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Data gathering
23
Memorial pages have a variety of interesting information. The header includes
information about the location of the memorial, information about the date of birth
and death, as well as geographical locations of birth and death. Memorials are as-
signed an identification number (ID), which is also included within the header. Below
the header, further information is often included. Information about family relations
and commemorative text can sometimes be seen, as well as more images. The images
shown below the were not scrapeable by using only BeautifulSoup, because they are
not included in the raw HTML code, but included in the page using AJAX, a JavaScript
technique. Due to the complications proposed by that, it was decided to only scrape
header images.
Even though the website has memorials from all over the world, randomly scraping
returned by far the most data from the English speaking world. It does have memo-
rials from all across the globe, but random scraping found that memorials outside of
the English speaking world were very sparse.
(a)
Memorial
plaque,
covered
in
parts by dirt.
(b) Memorial headstone showing an
image of a person and a bald eagle.
Figure 3.2: Exemplary images from https://www.findagrave.com/.
Webscraping was done in two different parts, with each part having two steps.
First, a set of 6025 images, which had previously been manually labelled, was scraped,
returning all necessary statistics from the website in a spreadsheet. Then, the links
to images, included in the spreadsheet, were all downloaded. These images amount
to 6.7GB’s of data. Images from that subset were used for network training.
The next part was a random webscraping of a large amount of data. A total of
693953 images were scraped over a course of several days, amounting to 716.0GB’s
of data. Webscraping proved to be a bottleneck during the project, and the highest
speed which scraping was able to be done at was scraping information from 400
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methods
thousand memorials in 72 hours.
Information was gained from 2918 of the 3142
counties within the United States, as well as information from 129 other countries or
territories. 93% of data scraped is from the United States. Images in this subset were
used for inference.
The spreadsheets storing the data had columns for: Memorial ID, image link,
birthdate, deathdate, birthplace, deathplace, cemetery and the city, county, state
and country of the cemetery.
3.2
Data handling
This section will go briefly over what modifications were made on the data.
A lot of randomly scraped data was found to be lacking exact information about
birth and death. Some memorials had either the birthyear or the deathyear missing,
and those were removed. Other memorials had the birthyear and deathyear scraped,
but did not have more exact information on the birthdate. If birth- or deathmonths
were found missing, a month of January was assigned. If birth- or deathdays were
found missing, a day of 1 was assigned.
The lifespan of each memorial had to be computed.
That was done by using
theinformation on birthdate and deathdate. Not all information on the website was
accurate, and to handle some inaccuracies, memorials with a recorded lifespan of
more than 123 years were excluded1.
Memorials from the United States were assigned a FIPS2 county code according
to the cemetery county they were located in. The religious adherency index used
for the project listed counties by their FIPS code[5], and it aided with geographical
representation of the data as well.
Memorials scraped from the countries of England, Scotland, Northern Ireland and
Wales were assigned a unified country of the United Kingdom.
3.3
Image segmentation
This section will detail how images were segmentated.
To train a neural network such as this, a lot of training data is required. It was
decided to train the neural network to be able to detect 6 different classes of religious
symbols, as well as an extra class for the cases where an image of a person has been
scraped as well as the background class. Those classes were; angels, bibles, crosses,
praying hands, doves, David’s star and a person. Examples of those can be seen in
figure A.1 in the Appendix.
CNNs used for localized segmentation need when training knowledge about the
true objects located within an image. The symbols in the images were segmented
1The oldest person ever according to Wikipedia reached an age of 122 years and 164 days.
2Federal Information Processing Standards
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Configurations
25
using VGG Image Annotator[37], an online image annotator which supports man-
ual segmentation. The image annotator outputs a JSON file with locations of the
segmentations as well as the name of the class they belong to.
Figure 3.3: Example of an annotated image, with two annotated Bibles and two
annotated praying hands.
Figure 3.3 shows an image with segmented and annotated symbols. Engravings
which the neural network is not being trained to recognize, such as the rings in figure
3.3, are not segmented. In addition to that, symbols on gravestones in the background
are not segmented.
In total, 1240 images were segmented for training purposes, of which 972 were
assigned to a training set and 268 to a validation set. Initially, a much lower number
of images had been segmented.
3.4
Configurations
Here follows a description on the configurations of the network during training and
inference. Following that the backbone network and heads of the Mask R-CNN will
be articulated. Regularization methods used will be shown.
The training steps and validation steps in one epoch were set to be equal to
the number of images within the training data or validation data, multiplied by the
number of augmentations made. Training was done on a GPU with a memory of
32GB. When training all layers of the network, it was possible to assign 4 images at
each training step, thus resulting in 1458 training steps per epoch. Images are not
augmentated during validation. Validation steps were 68.
All images presented to the network were scaled and zero-padded to a square image
with height and width between 800 and 1024 pixels. Only images with 3 channels
were able to be used, so a very few number of images were thrown out due to having
an invalid depth. All images are adjusted in a way that the mean pixel value of each
channel is 123.7 for the first channel, 116.8 for the second channel and 103.9 for the
third channel.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methods
The anchors scales used within the RPN were all powers of two between 32 and 512.
There were three anchor ratios used, 0.5, 1 and 2. All anchors were rectangular. To
avoid multiple detections of the same object, a non-maximum suppression threshold
of 0.7 IoU was used. Each image had 256 anchors trained within it.
Stochastic gradient descent with momentum is used to optimize the weights, with
a learning rate η 0.001 and momentum α of 0.9, as is done in [29].
Weights were initialized with weights from a Mask R-CNN pre-trained to detect
between the 82 different classes of the COCO dataset[18]. Initializing weights in that
manner utilizes a method called transfer learning, where weights pre-trained for a
task in a similar manner to our own already performs at an adequate level[38].
Initial attempts were made to only train the heads of the networks, but results from
that were not promising. For example, detecting the difference between a Bible and a
rectangle seemed to be almost impossible when only training the heads. That is due to
how similar the symbols look after going through max-pooling layers. When training
all the layers of the network, those problems evaporated. A minimum confidence
for a detection was set to be 0.8 during training and validation. The final training
system was to, start training only the heads of the network for 20 epochs, follwing
that the whole network was trained for 40 epochs, and then an additional 20 epochs
were trained on the heads again.
3.4.1
Backbone network
As mentioned in 2.5.7, the Mask R-CNN is split into two parts, a backbone and heads.
(a) Identity block used in Mask R-
CNN.
(b) Convolutional block used in Mask
R-CNN.
Figure 3.4: Flowcharst showing the layers included within the two residual blocks used in
Mask R-CNN.
The backbone of the network is a 101 ResNet of 101 layers, composed of five stages.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Configurations
27
Two types of residual blocks are used to compose it. One is an identity block, where
the skip connection doesn’t have any layers on it, and the initial input feature map is
simply added to the output feature map after going through a series of convolutional
and nonlinear layers. The other is a convolutional block. Its difference compared to
the identity block is that the skip connection includes a convolutional layer. These
two blocks are shown in figure 3.4. All batch normalization layers are frozen and
simply function as linear layers.
The first stage takes an image as an input, zero-pads it 3 pixel in each direction,
and is then run through a convolutional layer with 64 different filters of shape (7 × 7)
and with a stride of 2. After the convolutional layer it goes through a nonlinear layer
using the ReLU activation function introduced in chapter 2. That concludes the first
stage and the output feature map is assigned as C1. The next stage continues on
feature map C1, and runs it through one convolutional block, with stride of 1, not 2
like shown in figure 3.4b. That feature map is then run through two identity blocks.
That concludes the second stage and returns an output feature map as C2.
The third stage continues on feature map C2, and runs it again through one
convolutional block, now exactly like shown in figure 3.4b. Then it is run through
three identity blocks, and returning an output feature map of C3.
The fourth stage continues on feature map C3, and runs it again through a single
convolutional block like in stage three. After that, it is run through 22 identity blocks,
returning an output map of C4.
The fifth and final stage continues on feature map C4. It is identical to stage two,
except the convolutional block is like shown in figure 3.4b. Then we return an output
map of C5, now with a dimensionality of 2048.
At each stage, the output feature maps are fed into a FPN.
The heads are where region proposals take place and classifications, bounding box
regression and mask prediction happens. The region proposal network is input with
a feature map, as well as anchor scales, ratios and strides. There are 5 anchor scales
used, 3 anchor ratios and 1 anchor stride, creating a total of 15 different anchors at
each location. It outputs anchor class logits, class probabilities and bounding boxes.
A total of 256 anchors are trained for each image.
The feature pyramid network takes as an input the outputs of stages 2, 3, 4 and
5, C2, C3, C4 and C5 are then used as feature maps in the feature pyramid network,
labelled as P2, P3, P4 and P5. On those feature maps,
The feature pyramid network takes as input pooled regions of interests, as well as
the feature maps output of the ResNet at stages 2, 3, 4 and 5, C2, C3, C4 and C5,
which will now be labelled as labelled as P2, P3, P4 and P5. It also takes inputs of a
pooling size and class numbers, returning class logits, probabilities, bounding boxes
and masks. The functions for the feature pyramid network are split into two parts, a
classifier and a mask builder.
So in full, during training of the layers, we generate feature maps by using a
residual network, those feature maps are used in reverse in a feature pyramid networks.
Anchors are generated and used along with the region proposal network to generate
regions of interests.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Methods
During training, bounding boxes and classifier logits and probabilities are gener-
ated by using the regions of interests in the feature pyramid networks.
Then the feature pyramid network generates masks for those bounding boxes and
classifiers, and the loss is compared to the predefined segmentations.
During inference no loss is computed, and the resulting trained network is simply
used.
3.4.2
Regularization
Two regularization methods are used in this project. L2 regularization is used with
a weight decay of λ = 0.0001 as initialized in [29], and augmentations are used to
increase the dataset available.
Augmenting images for training neural network is a commonly used regularization
method to improve the generalization[15]. Although the training set is composed of
almost 1000 images, getting more data for training is extremely time consuming, due
to the hours needed to segment the data. Some classes of the religious symbols were
also very hard to find, and even from a subsample of 15000 images less than 200
gravestones with a dove were successfully found.
While training, several different augmentations were made available for each im-
age. Adding to the original representation of the image, 5 additional images were
generated by augmenting in one manner each time, with seven different methods
available. Augmentations were dune using the imgaug library[35].
The augmentational methods available during training were:
Method:
Parameters
Horizontal flip
Vertical flip
Piecewise affine transformation
s ∈(0.01, 0.05)
Gaussian blur
σ ∈(0, 0.5)
Dropout
p ∈(0.05, 0.1)
Grayscale
α = 0.5
Canny
α ∈(0.1, 0.3)
Table 3.1
Horizontal and vertical flipping is done to replicate images on the website shown
incorrectly. Piecewise affine transformation !!!
Gaussian blur is used to replicate images with lower pixel quality. Dropout drops
a percentage of pixels out randomly. Canny edge detector slightly highlights edgs
in the image, potentially showing forms which the neural network can detect earlier.
The image is also made grayer to replicate grayscale images which there might be
some of on the website. All augmentation types are shown in figure 3.5
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Configurations
29
(a) Original image.
(b) Horizontal flipped.
(c) Vertical flipped.
(d) Piecewise affine trans-
formation.
(e) Grayed out image.
(f) Slightly blurred image.
(g) Pixels dropped out.
(h) Canny edge detection.
Figure 3.5: All augmentations available during training of the network.
Figure 3.5a is
the original image. Figures 3.5b and 3.5c are horizontal and vertical flipped versions of it.
Figure 3.5d shows the image piecewise affine transformed. Figure 3.5e shows the image with
grayer colours. Figure 3.5f shows the image with a slight Gaussian blur. Figure 3.5g shows
the image with pixels dropped out. Figure 3.5h shows the image with Canny edge detection
effects.
==PAGE:42==
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Results
Results of the project will be presented in three sections. First, a general overview of
the performance of the network will be shown. Following that, results from inference
over randomly sampled data will be presented in two sections. The prior will solely
focus on data sampled from the United States. The latter will focus on data sampled
from the rest of the World.
4.1
Network performance
This section will present losses of the network, while in training. Performance on the
validation set will be shown, and a comparison with manually labelled data will be
shown.
The network was trained several times in different ways over the course of the
project, always initialized with the same weights. The lowest loss on the validation
set was achieved by using the augmentations described before, and was trained in
December 2019, after a set of segmented images was received. The validation loss at
the lowest point was 0.7077.
The training and validation sets did not include equal amounts of segmented
symbols from each class. The network, which was trained to detect 8 different symbols,
had the most amount of crosses and Bibles segmented. An attempt was made to have
the distribution of segmented classes equal, but that was done by selecting equal
numbers of pictures which had each symbol engraved. Multiple engravings of crosses
and Bibles on gravestones were frequent, and that led to them having a greater
representation in the training and validation sets.
The training set included 147 instances of angels, 340 instances of Bibles, 394
instances of crosses, 112 instances of David’s star, 171 instances of doves, 42 instances
of people and 199 instances of praying hands.
The validation set included 29 instances of angels, 81 instances of Bibles, 100
instances of crosses, 20 instances of David’s star, 22 instances of doves, 15 instances
of persons and 61 instances of praying hands.
The worst performance on object detection on images in the validation set was
for the class of doves, where almost a third of detections were false positives. The
only perfectly performing class is the one with persons.
That is due to how the
weights are initialized, with weights from a well trained Mask R-CNN which detects
classes of the COCO dataset[18]. In the COCO classification dataset, there are a
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: Figures 4.1a and 4.1b show the training and validation losses of 4 runs. Orange
represents losses for a run only done when training heads.
Dark blue represents losses
when done with a third of the total training data. Maroon represents the losses when no
augmentation is used.
Light blue represent the losses with augmentations and using all
training and validation data. Weights after 32 epochs from the ligth blue training were used
for inference.
total of 82 classes, of which one is a class for persons. So, even when training the
network on a different dataset, it still generalizes really well over a class it is already
trained for. The difficulties in detecting doves stems from two reasons. Firstly, the
variety of different birds appearing on gravestones, such as colibri birds, finches and
the bald eagle, is a challenge. An example of this can be seen in figure 4.2. Floral
depictions engraved on the gravestones also pose a challenge, especially for the angel
and dove classes due to the variety of appearances those symbols can take. The floral
engravings are thus often misclassified as a dove or an angel
The mean average precision, or the average of correctly classified symbols in im-
ages, over the whole validation dataset was found to be be 0.825. Further numbers
of performance of the model on the validation set can be seen in table 4.1.
To further evaluate how the model was performing, a comparison was made with
5092 manually labelled images. Those images are also collected from the same website.
A slight caveat is that the classifications do not always have a chance of accurately
matching due to the inability of webscraping all images on each memorial on https:
//www.findagrave.com/. The manual classification is made on the most appropriate
image on each memorial site, while webscraping was only able to gather the header
image.
That image is, in most cases, an image usable for the project.
However,
some of the memorials have an image of a person and those memorials were excluded
from classification. Some images also had an image with religious symbols within the
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Network performance
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Figures 4.2a and 4.2b show the challenges posed to the network. A bird, possibly
a finch, has been classified as a dove with a 99% certainty. So has a sitting person around
bushes been classified, albeit with a lower certainty.
True detection:
False detection:
Undetected:
Angels
27
4
2
Bibles
78
4
3
Crosses
95
7
5
David’s star
17
1
3
Doves
21
10
1
Persons
15
0
0
Praying hands
59
6
2
Table 4.1: Detection stats for the 7 symbol classes. The highest percentage of false
detections is for doves, with 32% of detections of doves being false.
Persons are
detected perfectly. Bibles have the highest percentage of accurate symbols out of the
religious symbol classes, with 95% of detections for Bibles being true.
unscrapeable part of the site, while the header either showed no such symbol or a
different one.
Comparisons of the performance of the network versus the performance of manual
classification was also made for the all religious symbols the neural network was taught
to recognize, excluding the Star of David, which did not have a comparable manual
classification. Confusion matrices can be seen in figure 4.3.
The accuracy for all classes as well as the absolute class of a religious symbol
being present is higher than 84%. The accuracies of predicting each separate symbol
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Results
is above 90% for each class.
However, when detecting angels and doves, a fairly
high number of false positives are obtained, dragging the precision down to around
17% and 20% for those classes respectively. However, those symbols appear lot less
frequently than other classes.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Network performance
35
(a) Confusion matrix of angel detec-
tions.
(b) Confusion matrix of Bible detec-
tions.
(c) Confusion matrix of cross detec-
tions.
(d) Confusion matrix of dove detec-
tions.
(e)
Confusion
matrix
of
praying
hands detections.
(f) Confusion matrix of religious de-
tections.
Figure 4.3: Confusion matrices for comparisons of manually classified symbols and symbols
classified by a neural network. The accuracy for all classes as well as the absolute class
of a religious symbol being present is higher than 84%. The accuracies of predicting each
separate symbol is above 90% for each class. However, when detecting angels and doves, a
fairly high number of false positives are obtained, dragging the precision down to around
17% and 20% for those classes respectively.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Results
4.2
Statistics from sampled data
In this chapter, results from inference over randomly sampled test images using the
weights with the lowest validation loss will be presented. First, a small overview over
how the data is grouped together according to the religious adherency index[5] will
be explained, as well as a visualization of where the sampled data is from.
Distributions of ages recorded for religiously and non-religiously sampled memori-
als for each religious adherency percentage group will be visualized in a boxplot. The
whole distribution of samples from two of the religious adherency groups will be shown.
The difference between the mean lifespan of the religiously classified memorials and
the non-religiously classified memorials will also be visualized.
Lastly, a table with the amount of classified religious symbols within each religious
adherency group will be shown.
4.2.1
United States
The network was run over memorials from the United States separately from other
memorials and results from that will be shown here.
The network was run over randomly sampled data from https://www.findagrave.
com/. Scraping the website by random sampling for a few days returned in the end a
total of just over 587 thousand usable samples from the United States. Random sam-
pling from the United States mostly returned samples in correlation with population,
with 6223 samples coming from Los Angeles County in California, 5176 samples from
Cook County, where Chicago is, and 4321 samples coming from Allegheny County
in Pennsylvania, where the city of Pittsburgh is located. Los Angeles County and
Cook County are the two most populous counties in the United States. Four counties
only have 1 samples, Southeast Fairbanks Census Area in Alaska, Harding County
in New Mexico, Reagan County in Texas and Ziebach County in South Dakota. All
those counties have a current population of less than 10 thousand people. The dis-
tribution of counties with religious adherency now goes up to 146%, with the City
of Fredericksburg in Virginia being the most religious county and Sanpete County in
Utah with a religious adherency rate of less than 1%.
The religious adherency rate numbers are gathered from [5]. It might seem odd
that religious adherency rate can go over 100%, but the reason for that is simply that
people might go to church in a county which they do not reside in. The counties in
the United States were grouped together by their religious adherency rate. Counties
with an adherency rate between 0 and 10 percent were assigned to group 0, counties
with an adherency rate between 10 and 20 were assigned to group 10, and so on.
The number of religiously classified memorials in the United States were 193624,
while memorials classified as not religious were 393386.
The median age of all memorials which the neural network has attempted to
detect religious symbols on is 70.0. For memorials which have had a religious symbol
detected, the median age is 71.55 and for memorials which have not had a religious
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Statistics from sampled data
37
Figure 4.4: Religious adherency grouping of counties in the United States which had
samples retrieve during scraping.
Figure 4.5: Number of samples scrapes within each geographical area in the United
States, visualized logarithmically.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Results
symbol detected, the median age is 69.44. The year of death for memorials in this
dataset take a value between 1637 and 2019, with a median of 1967.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Figure 4.6a shows the age distribution for all religious adherency deciles which
have sampled data classified as religious. A slight increase in the median age can be seen
for counties within the 90 decile and 100 decile. Figure 4.6b shows the age distribution for
all religious adherency deciles which have sampled data as not religious. A slight increase
in the median age can be seen within the 100th and 110th decile, but otherwise the age
distribution seems pretty uniform.
Figure 4.6 shows the distribution of religiously classified memorials (fig. 4.6a) and
memorials not religiously classified (fig. 4.6b). The boxes in the plot cover between
the lower quartile of Q1 = 25% and Q3 = 75% and the green line represents the
median of the distributions. Outliers, shown with a black point, are points outside of
the inquartile range defined as IQR = 1.5 ∗(Q3 −Q1)[33].
Figure 4.7 shows the full distributions of lifespans of memorials classified as re-
ligious (fig. 4.7a) and not religious (fig. 4.7b) of memorials sampled from counties
within the 10 group and 100 groups. The distributions are bimodal. That might be
due to no considerations being taken for the year of death of the memorials. Infant
mortality has reduced by 93% since 1919[39].
µ(agediff) = µ(ager) −µ(agenr)
(4.1)
Figure 4.8 shows the difference of the mean lifespan of memorials of religious
gravestones and non religious gravestones, computed using equation 4.1. The red
whiskers shown represent the standard error of the mean of the whole distribution,
defined as:
σx =
σ
√
N
,
(4.2)
where σ is the standard deviation of the sample and N are the number of samples.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Statistics from sampled data
39
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Figure 4.7a shows the distribution of samples within the 100th and 10th deciles
of religiously classified samples. A difference is distinguishable for the distributions. Figure
4.7bshows the distribution of samples within the 100th and 10th deciles of non-religiously
classified samples. A difference is hard to distinguish for the distributions.
Figure 4.8: Difference of the mean age reached of memorials within each religious
adherency group.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results
Correlation between lifespan and religious adherency group of memorials were
calculated using Pearson’s correlation coefficient, defined as
ρX,Y = cov(X, Y )
σXσY
,
(4.3)
where ρ is the correlation of variables X and Y and cov is the covariance and σ
is the standard deviation. The correlation was calculated separately for religiously
classified memorials and not religiously classified memorials.
The correlation of the mean lifespan of religiously classified memorials with the re-
ligious adherency group is 0.77. The correlation of the mean lifespan of non-religiously
classified memorials with the religious adherency group is 0.36.
Decile
Cross
Bible
David
Praying
Angels
Doves
Religious (%)
N
0
11.82
16.22
0.99
5.04
3.75
3.93
29.22
11135
10
12.62
10.40
1.22
1.86
5.15
3.48
26.61
5636
20
19.98
9.19
1.52
2.68
3.08
2.78
30.17
38735
30
22.97
9.08
1.82
3.43
3.20
2.77
32.80
127911
40
23.37
9.91
1.73
3.65
2.94
2.74
32.87
174632
50
23.24
11.41
1.59
3.62
2.83
2.71
33.11
133878
60
26.20
12.23
1.66
3.99
3.05
3.09
35.62
61782
70
26.68
13.20
1.01
3.86
2.71
3.03
34.82
22875
80
26.06
13.00
0.80
3.25
2.75
2.36
34.20
6992
90
26.00
14.08
1.25
3.22
2.66
2.62
34.21
2485
100
19.08
15.46
1.15
5.10
2.14
2.47
31.74
608
110
14.49
8.70
1.45
1.45
2.90
0.00
27.54
69
120
18.63
6.37
0.49
2.94
1.47
2.45
24.02
204
140
14.71
16.18
0.00
2.94
0.00
0.00
22.06
68
Table 4.2: Number of appearances of each symbol per 100 gravestones in each religious
adherency group. The distribution of symbols within each area are not uniform, with
a difference of 25 between the religious adherency group with the fewest crosses and
most crosses.
The number of appearances of each symbol is not uniform. The least religious
counties in the US have had a lot of Bibles and praying hands detected, while crosses
have been detected most in the mid to high range of religious counties. The highest
percentage of religiously classified are from the US counties in the 60th decile of
religious adherency. The full distribution can be seen in table 4.2.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Statistics from sampled data
41
4.2.2
Rest of the World
Data gathered from other countries than the United States will be presented here.
Randomly scraping https://www.findagrave.com/ returned 47359 samples from
countries other than the United States. A total of 129 different geographical entities
had samples returned, but a lot of them had extremely few memorials. Countries
which had fewer than 500 memorials were excluded from calculations.
Only 7 countries had more than 500 memorials webscraped. A total of 42.472
memorials were sampled from these countries. Table 4.3 shows the total number of
samples from every country with more than 500 memorials as well as their religiosity
level.
Country-level religiosity used in [1] was used as a metric on the religiosity of the
respective countries. Philippines have by far the highest religiosity, with a value of
3.27, while other countries have a much lower religiosity value.
The study which these values are based on were done by collecting data online in
a study between 2001 and 2009. The study involved scales ranging from 1 to 5, with
1 labelled as strongly disagree and 5 as strongly agree. The country-level religiosity
is then calculated as the average personal religiosity within each country[1].
The number of religiously classified memorials in these seven countries were 10397,
while memorials classified as not religious 32075
Country
N
Religiosity
Australia
6012
2.12
Canada
23346
2.19
France
792
1.94
Germany
2389
2.02
New Zealand
1246
2.13
Philippines
892
3.27
United Kingdom
7795
1.91
Table 4.3: Countries with more than 500 samples returned, showing the number of
samples N as well as their country-level religiosity.
The median age of all memorials which the neural network has attempted to
detect religious symbols on is 70.58. For memorials which have had a religious symbol
detected, the median age is 72.57 and for memorials which have not had a religious
symbol detected, the median age is 70.24. The year of death for memorials in this
dataset take a value between 1135 and 2019, with a median of 1900.
The whole age distributions shown in figure 4.9 do seem to be really hard to
decipher. Data from France had a lot of memorials with deaths from the first and
second worlds war, located in specific war cemeteries. Memorials from such locations
are expected to have a low lifespan.
Figure 4.10 shows the difference of the mean ages of religious and non religious
data, computed using equation 4.1.
It does seem to show a higher difference for
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Figure 4.9a shows the age distribution for religiously classified memorials per
country. Figure 4.9b shows the age distribution for non-religiously classified memorials per
country. The age distribution from France really stands out, with a median age of 32.8 for
all samples.
countries with a higher country-level religiosity value, barring Germany.
The red
whiskers are the standard error of the means, computed using equation 4.2.
Figure 4.10: Difference of the mean age reached of memorials within each religious
adherency group.
The correlation, computed using equation 4.3, of the mean lifespan of religiously
classified memorials with the country-level religiosity is 0.13. The correlation of the
mean lifespan of non-religiously classified memorials with the country-level religiosity
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Statistics from sampled data
43
is −0.00.
Even though the correlation computed here is lower than reported from data from
the United States, there is a higher correlation for religiously classified memorials than
non-religiously classified memorials.
Country
Cross
Bible
David
Praying
Angels
Doves
Religious (%)
N
United Kingdom
9.51
0.64
4.27
0.26
0.74
1.68
14.61
7674
France
23.80
0.25
2.03
0.13
0.38
3.16
16.96
790
Germany
41.90
0.47
3.47
0.85
1.23
1.35
39.07
2365
Australia
19.62
1.99
1.74
0.34
2.01
1.74
22.17
5927
New Zealand
9.50
3.00
1.46
0.08
0.89
1.46
15.02
1232
Canada
20.81
6.69
1.68
2.54
3.95
4.43
28.06
22869
Philippines
29.52
2.24
1.01
2.47
1.80
6.96
33.89
891
Table 4.4: Number of appearances of each symbol per 100 gravestones in each country.
A big difference in commonly appearing symbols can be noted.
Table 4.4 shows how many times each symbol appears per 100 gravestones in each
countries. The difference of commonly appearing symbols are stark. Gravestones in
the dataset from Germany have almost 42 crosses per 100 gravestones, while for the
United Kingdom that rate is less than 10. The Bible and praying hands do not seem
particularly popular in Europe.
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
Morbi pharetra ligula integer mollis mi nec neque ultrices vitae volutpat leo ullamcor-
per. In at tellus magna. Curabitur quis posuere purus. Cum sociis natoque penatibus
et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Suspendisse tristique plac-
erat feugiat. Aliquam vitae est at enim auctor ultrices eleifend a urna. Donec non
tincidunt felis. Maecenas at suscipit orci.
Talk about maybe other factors. Even thouh correlation.
==PAGE:58==
46
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Future Work
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor
incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud
exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure
dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.
Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt
mollit anim id est laborum.
==PAGE:62==
50
A Appendix
(a) Example of the symbols of praying hands
and an angel.
(b) Example of the symbols of bibles and a
cross.
(c) Example of the symbols of a dove.
(d) Example of the symbol of a David’s star.
Figure A.1: Examples of the religious symbols the neural network is taught to recognize.
==PAGE:63==
A Appendix
51
Figure A.2: Distributions of ages of memorials classified as religious within all reli-
giosity deciles in the United States from a random sample of 587010 samples.
==PAGE:64==
52
A Appendix
Figure A.3: Distributions of ages of memorials not classified as religious within all
religiosity deciles in the United States from a random sample of 587010 samples.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Gebauer, F. Schönbrodt, P. Rentfrow, C. Sedikides, W. Bleidorn, and J. Pot-
ter, “The religiosity as a social value hypothesis: A multi-method replication
and extension across 65 countries and three levels of spatial aggregation,” Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, volume 113, number 3, pages 18–39,
2017, issn: 0022-3514. doi: 10.1037/pspp0000104. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000104.
[2]
Y. Chida, A. Steptoe, and L. Powell, “Religiosity/spirituality and mortality a
systematic quantitative review,” Psychotherapy and psychosomatics, volume 78,
pages 81–90, March 2009. doi: 10.1159/000190791.
[3]
T. Ebert, J. Gebauer, J. Talman, and J. Rentfrow, “What the dead may tell us
about the living: Religiosity and longevity based on gravestone inscriptions,”
[4]
W. Zelinsky, “The gravestone index: Tracking personal religiosity across nations,
regions, and periods,” Geographical Review, volume 97, number 4, pages 441–
466, 2007. doi: 10.1111/j.1931- 0846.2007.tb00406.x. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1931- 0846.2007.tb00406.x. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1931-0846.2007.tb00406.x.
[5]
U.s. religion census | religious statistics demographics, http://www.usreligioncensus.
org/index.php, Accessed: 2019-12-28.
[6]
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification with
deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 25, F. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Wein-
berger, Eds., Curran Associates, Inc., 2012, pages 1097–1105. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824- imagenet- classification-
with-deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf.
[7]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition,” 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 770–778, 2015.
[8]
A. Karpathy, What i learned from competing against a convnet on imagenet),
https : / / karpathy . github . io / 2014 / 09 / 02 / what - i - learned - from -
competing-against-a-convnet-on-imagenet/, January 2020.
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
[9]
R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich feature hierarchies
for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of
the 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, se-
ries CVPR ’14, Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2014, pages 580–
587, isbn: 978-1-4799-5118-5. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.81. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2014.81.
[10]
K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. B. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” CoRR,
volume abs/1703.06870, 2017. arXiv: 1703.06870. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870.
[11]
J. W. Johnson, “Adapting mask-rcnn for automatic nucleus segmentation,”
CoRR, volume abs/1805.00500, 2018. arXiv: 1805.00500. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.00500.
[12]
D. Kudinov and D. Hedges. (2018). Reconstructing 3d buildings from aerial
lidar with ai: Details, [Online]. Available: https : / / medium . com / geoai /
reconstructing-3d-buildings-from-aerial-lidar-with-ai-details-
6a81cb3079c0 (visited on November 13, 2019).
[13]
F. Rosenblatt, “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage
and organization in the brain,” Psychological Review, pages 65–386, 1958.
[14]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science
and Statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, isbn: 0387310738.
[15]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016,
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[16]
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Parallel distributed pro-
cessing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1,” in, D. E. Rumel-
hart, J. L. McClelland, and C. PDP Research Group, Eds., Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press, 1986, ch. Learning Internal Representations by Error Prop-
agation, pages 318–362, isbn: 0-262-68053-X. [Online]. Available: http://dl.
acm.org/citation.cfm?id=104279.104293.
[17]
C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong, W. Zhang, C. Yang, and C. Liu, “A survey on deep
transfer learning,” CoRR, volume abs/1808.01974, 2018. arXiv: 1808.01974.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.01974.
[18]
T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, L. Bourdev, R. Girshick, J. Hays, P. Perona,
D. Ramanan, C. L. Zitnick, and P. Dollár, Microsoft coco: Common objects in
context, cite arxiv:1405.0312Comment: 1) updated annotation pipeline descrip-
tion and figures; 2) added new section describing datasets splits; 3) updated
author list, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
55
[19]
S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
detection with region proposal networks,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 28, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and
R. Garnett, Eds., Curran Associates, Inc., 2015, pages 91–99. [Online]. Available:
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5638-faster-r-cnn-towards-real-time-
object-detection-with-region-proposal-networks.pdf.
[20]
A. Karpathy, Predicting cut-ins (Andrej Karpathy), https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=A44hbogdKwI, November 2019.
[21]
D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, “Receptive fields of single neurons in the cat’s
striate cortex,” Journal of Physiology, volume 148, pages 574–591, 1959.
[22]
K. Fukushima, “Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a
mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in position,” Biological
Cybernetics, volume 36, pages 193–202, 1980.
[23]
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning ap-
plied to document recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE, volume 86, 1998,
pages 2278–2324. [Online]. Available: http : / / citeseerx . ist . psu . edu /
viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.42.7665.
[24]
M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional net-
works.,” CoRR, volume abs/1311.2901, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://dblp.
uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/corr1311.html#ZeilerF13.
[25]
G. Liu, K. J. Shih, T. Wang, F. A. Reda, K. Sapra, Z. Yu, A. Tao, and B. Catan-
zaro, “Partial convolution based padding,” CoRR, volume abs/1811.11718, 2018.
arXiv: 1811.11718. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.11718.
[26]
E. Shelhamer, J. Long, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for se-
mantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., volume 39,
number 4, pages 640–651, April 2017, issn: 0162-8828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
2016.2572683. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2016.
2572683.
[27]
R. Girshick, “Fast r-cnn,” in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), series ICCV ’15, Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, 2015, pages 1440–1448, isbn: 978-1-4673-8391-2. doi:
10.1109/ICCV.2015.169. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICCV.2015.169.
[28]
T. Lin, P. Dollár, R. B. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. J. Belongie, “Fea-
ture pyramid networks for object detection,” CoRR, volume abs/1612.03144,
2016. arXiv: 1612.03144. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.
03144.
[29]
W. Abdulla, Mask r-cnn for object detection and instance segmentation on keras
and tensorflow, https://github.com/matterport/Mask_RCNN, 2017.
==PAGE:68==
56
Bibliography
[30]
Stackoverflow. (2019). Stack Overflow developer survey results 2019, [Online].
Available: https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2019 (visited on
December 14, 2019).
[31]
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen,
Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, San-
jay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard,
Y. Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg,
Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike
Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul
Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals,
Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang
Zheng, TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,
Software available from tensorflow.org, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.
tensorflow.org/.
[32]
F. Chollet et al., Keras, https://keras.io, 2015.
[33]
W. McKinney, “Data structures for statistical computing in python,” in Proceed-
ings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, S. van der Walt and J. Millman,
Eds., 2010, pages 51–56.
[34]
L. Richardson, “Beautiful soup documentation,” April, 2007.
[35]
A. B. Jung, K. Wada, J. Crall, S. Tanaka, J. Graving, S. Yadav, J. Banerjee,
G. Vecsei, A. Kraft, J. Borovec, C. Vallentin, S. Zhydenko, K. Pfeiffer, B. Cook,
I. Fernández, W. Chi-Hung, A. Ayala-Acevedo, R. Meudec, M. Laporte, et al.,
imgaug, https://github.com/aleju/imgaug, Online; accessed 25-Sept-2019,
2019.
[36]
P. GNU, Free software foundation. bash (3.2. 48)[unix shell program], 2007.
[37]
A. Dutta and A. Zisserman, “The VIA annotation software for images, audio
and video,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Multi-
media, series MM ’19, Nice, France: ACM, 2019, isbn: 978-1-4503-6889-6/19/10.
doi: 10.1145/3343031.3350535. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3343031.3350535.
[38]
S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. on Knowl.
and Data Eng., volume 22, number 10, pages 1345–1359, October 2010, issn:
1041-4347. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2009.191. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
org/10.1109/TKDE.2009.191.
[39]
Achievements in public health, 1900-1999: Healthier mothers and babies, https:
//www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4838a2.htm, Accessed: 2019-12-
30.
