==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Monitoring transactional flows in large fin-
tech company: A datadriven approach
A case study at VP Securities A/S
Martin Jensen
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this Thesis is develop a data driven approach to the problem of transac-
tional data stream monitoring in the danish company VP Securities, with the purpose
of anomaly detection. This is done as a first step on the way to establish a more proac-
tive approach, and aid the existing domain experts. Furthermore, the Thesis deals
with the general challenges of large amount of unsupervised data.
The proposed model for the task is a Variational Autoencoder, using a Recurrent
Neural Networks as Encoder and Decoder. The reconstruction of the input and latent
space is then used in a Statistical Process Control inspired framework, to flag the out-
of-normal periods. The evaluation of this the model is done by comparing the model
output to the operational back-log at VP, and by simulating data similar to the VP
data. This shows the models capability of detecting contextual and collective outliers
both in the VP and simulated data, encouraging a real life implementation, as well
as further studies within the domain.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering from DTU, and represents a workload of 30 ECTS
points carried out in the fall of 2019.
The thesis is prepared in cooperation with and by request of VP Securities, in
their initial pursuit of investigating data driven methods. The definition of problem
statement was carried out in open dialog with the stakeholders at VP Securities,
and this thesis is the first attempt to apply machine learning methods within VP
Securities. The project is supervised by Associate Professor at DTU Compute, Line
Katrine Harder Clemmensen.
Kongens Lyngby, December 31, 2019
Martin Jensen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my principal supervisor Line Katrine
Harder Clemmensen. Both for agreeing on being my supervisor and making this
project happen, but mostly for providing exactly the necessary supervision to guide
the project, while still requiring independent thinking and problem solving. Further-
more for establishing a group environment with fellow students, encouraging profes-
sional sparring and flexible supervision.
Secondly, I would like to acknowledge the VP representatives, Christian Elmose
and Nino Ziino, for their continuous interest and curiosity, driving this Thesis for-
ward from day one. The cooperation has been a perfect combination of professional
expectations and freedom to make suggestions and take ownership of the problem to
solve. Furthermore, the engagement and seriousness have been proven many times
over, both by providing all necessary facilities, but especially by arranging intermedi-
ate update presentations with decision makers from the company. As a student, this
is all I could ask for doing a practical study.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Thesis outline
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
VP Securities A/S
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods and theory
7
2.1
Machine learning paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Types of anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Training, validation and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.6
Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Data
31
3.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
37
4.1
Proposed model: LSTM-VAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Outlier detection: VP data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Estimating model performance: Simulated data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion
61
5.1
Lessons learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
Summary of contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A Control Chart Factors
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
Thesis outline
This Thesis contains five chapters. The first chapter gives an introduction to the
study, including a motivation, background knowledge and a review of related work.
In chapter 2 the methods used in the study is explained. It is the idea, that this
chapter acts as a stand alone lookup chapter, to be consulted to the theoretical
background material. If this is of less interest to the reader, the chapter can safely be
skipped. In the following and third chapter, the data and data processing is described.
This is meant to give a brief overview of the data structure, and necessary steps to
recreate the data format used for the following modelling. Chapter 4 presents the
proposed model, along with all details required to possibly implement the model. The
chapter relies on the theory described in chapter 2, but can be read as a stand alone
overview of the model used, and results obtained. Lastly, chapter 5 summarizes the
most important conclusions, addressing the lessons learned, the contributions made,
and the natural steps to take in future work.
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter gives an introduction to the Thesis, and outlines the purpose of the
study: Anomaly detection in VP Security. This includes a motivation of the problem,
a background section about the problem domain, and a review of similar studies.
1.1
Motivation
Internet of Things.
Big Data.
Artificial Intelligence.
Deep Learning.
All words
from an endless list of new concepts driving a paradigm shift in the industry of the
21st Century, all with one thing in common; data. The almost unlimited source
of information, just waiting to be exploited and put in to use by the algorithms
which are, actually, not new at all.
Even though they are without a doubt only
in the beginning of their time, data driven concepts such as Artificial Intelligence
(AI) and Deep Learning actually predates the modern industry. Their fundamental
methods such as Bayes Theorem, least-square error, Markov-chain etc. even predates
the machines needed to carry out the learning.[Fog15] However, as machine learning
very much relies on the power of computers to learn, a clear coherence between the
evolution of computers and application of machine learning exists, and especially the
evolution of GPU’s have been an important factor in the increased performance and
applicability of e.g. neural network.
One very suited sector to utilize the potential of these data-driven methods is the
cross-field between finance and technology, commonly known as the FinTech business.
Insurance, loans, payments and trading are all areas heavily relying on data, and
innovation within the sector is key to stay ahead of the competitors. This Thesis
focuses on this business exactly, studying the application of data driven methods
in a large Danish FinTech company. With millions of data point generated by the
hour the company contains unexplored potential, and this study serves as the first
step to introduce more automated systems, developing an unsupervised approach
to the task of doing process monitoring. If successful, this can aid the daily work
of the operational team, and provide an automated and scalable approach to not
only the examined problem, but a wide range of other data heavy areas within the
company. The proposed model is a Variational Autoencoder, capturing the time-series
data structure by utilizing the strengths of a Long-Short Term Memory Recurrent
Neural Network.
The output of the model is combined with a statistical process
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
control inspired framework, with the purpose of detecting out-of-normal behavior in
the sequential data flows.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 VP Securities A/S
3
1.2
VP Securities A/S
VP Securities A/S (VP) was founded by law in 1980 as a private company, before
it registered on the danish stock-market in 2000. VP Securities is primarily owned
by the danish banks and the National Bank of Denmark, and has status of a critical
financial infrastructure. Thanks to the transformation of VP in the 1980’s, Denmark
became the first country in the world to do paper-less bond and equity registration.
Today, VP Securities is a modern FinTech company operating various business areas
such as clearing and settlement, issuance service, investor service, and safe-keeping.
As the focus of this study is greatly on the core business function of VP, clearing and
settlement, we’ll concentrate on that.
From a high level perspective VP’s responsibilities is actually not that hard to
understand. Simply defined, it is the authoritative institution of handling and regis-
tering equity and bond trading in Denmark. This means, that whenever a customer,
e.g. Danske Bank, wishes to sell e.g. 50 shares of Apple Inc. on the stock-market, it
puts in an instruction request to VP, who then:
• Matches the deal if possible. This means looking for other customers trying
to sell 50 or more shares of Apple Inc.
• Clears the deal by ensuring the buyer has enough liquidity, and checking that
the seller actually owns 50 shares of Apple Inc. The ownership of shares is regis-
tered in VP’s depot database, which is therefore easy to check. The liquidity is
checked by requesting a liquidity overview from the National Bank of Denmark.
• If cleared, the deal is then settled by making the correct alterations to the
depot database and liquidity overview, which is then sent back to the National
Bank.
It is important to notice, that VP never handles any liquidity it self, and only alters
an overview of liquidity. This means that VP’s role is based only on data handling and
registering. It is however the official authority of doing so, and whatever is registered
in VP’s database is therefore legally correct.
The above process basically describes the core business area of clearing and settle-
ment. However, in 2018 VP Securities successfully aligned their processes to match
the ones of their European twin, T2S, and a direct link to the European Central
Bank institution now exist. Serving as the European counterpart to VP, T2S serves
the European market in the same way as VP serves the danish, doing clearing and
settlement for the whole EU. This means, that almost all non-retail trade instructions
is forwarded from VP to T2S, to be matched, cleared and settled on the European
market, which obviously opens up a wider market available to the customers of VP.
In a day-to-day practical setting, the matching and clearing in VP is of historical
reasons done in batches 11 times a day, which are all run on exact scheduled times
throughout the day. One limitation to this is reduced reaction time, as potential errors
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: This figure shows VP Securities, and all of their core connections doing
trade matching, clearing and settlement. Each arrow going in or out of VP yields
some kind of data transaction.
Especially the link between VP securities and the
European counterpart T2S yields a lot of data, as many trades are sent back and forth
from VP to the European Markets
could happen in between batches, and not be discovered before running a batch. The
data is however gathered in real time, and an automated system could make use of
this to predict errors before they would else have detected at batch run-time. An
overview of the batches is given in table 1.1
Table 1.1: Batch execution table
Activity
Planned
Latest start
Latest end
Redemption
18:00
18:25
18:55
Batch 10
18:25
19:00
19:30
Batch 30
07:05
07:15
07:45
Batch 35
09:15
09:25
09:45
Batch 40
18:00
10:25
10:45
Batch 55
18:00
10:40
11:00
Batch 70
18:00
11:10
11:40
Batch 60
18:00
12:10
12:40
Batch 45
18:00
12:15
12:35
Batch 50
18:00
14:25
14:55
Batch 80
18:00
15:10
15:40
==PAGE:17==
1.2 VP Securities A/S
5
1.2.1
Cost reduction and value creation potential
To claim that VP Securities sits on a lot of data would simply be an understatement.
All aspects of VP’s business areas generates, manipulates and/or utilizes some kind of
data. Again, all of the business areas have different purposes and needs, and therefore
we focus only on the clearing and settlement core business.
The whole purpose of machine learning and data driven models in an industrial
context is to harness knowledge and generate value from available data sources. Po-
tential value creation from includes, but are not limited to:
• Increased reliability of existing systems, by predicting upcoming errors or in-
creased workloads of the system. This allows operation to carry out proactive
maintenance, or increase their capacity upfront.
• Free up human resources by solving simple but large-scale problems, such as
process monitoring
• Serve as a whole new portfolio of AI/data-driven products, to be sold as addi-
tional services or offered to existing customer groups
• Capture knowledge which only few human experts possess, in order to be in-
crease robustness from loss of these experts.
• Be a first-mover within the relatively new area of business applicable AI, to
gain attractiveness from potential new customers
Beside the above points, innovative products within data driven solutions actually
fits very well with the vision of VP, as pictured below.
Figure 1.2: VP visions. A potential data-driven AI product clearly reconciles with
the visions of the company 1
Data driven solutions offers both more reliable systems, because they are fully
automated and computer based. Also, because of their large-scale nature, they have
the potential of increasing the efficiency of numerous processes, such as fault detection,
work-load prediction etc.
1https://www.vp.dk/Who-We-Are/Our-Vision
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.3
Related work
Even though several studies has examined the financial sector, the specific area of
aggregated transactional flow is not a widely studied topic. Instead, fraud detection,
credit card fraud and insurance claims are more common, as they contains a legal
aspect. [Moh16] summarizes this, and gives an exhaustive summery of the most com-
mon areas of study within the financial domain, along with a description of the most
common used methods used.
In the area of streaming data, in this sense unspecified sensor time-series data,
[Sub17] proposes a Hierarchical Temporal Memory model for doing anomaly detec-
tion in an online setting. The study emphasises model development however, and
focuses on the challenges of handling different types of sensor data.
In a more general context, the area of time-series anomaly detection is widely
studied. [Nan18] Examines the task of anomaly detection in multivariate time-series.
The paper combines a Hierarchical Temporal Memory (HTM) model with a Bayesian
Network (BN), to obtain a better detection performance compared to the one of a
HTM model alone. [Pan15] uses Long-short Term Memory (LSTM) networks to do
anomaly detection. Here, they apply the LSTM to different time-series data, and find
it superior to regular Recurrent Neural Networks in the examined examples.
A more and more popular choice for doing unsupervised anomaly detection is Au-
toencoders. [SY14] shows the ability of Autoencoders to do dimensionality reduction,
and compares them to PCA. Furthermore, it shows how the Autoencoder is able to
detect subtle anomalies, which the PCA methods cannot do. [Per18] and [Mir+18]
both takes it a step further, and presents Variational Autoencoders for doing unsuper-
vised anomaly detection. Here, [Per18] also uses an LSTM structure as encoder and
decoder, but applies it to much more smooth and well-behaving data than presented
in this study. [Mir+18] combines the output of multiple Variational Autoencoders in
an ensemble model, to obtain increased performance than of the individual parts.
Even though the link between machine learning methods and statistical process
control seems rather natural, few studies combining the two actually exists.
One
attempt to utilize the combined strength of the two however, is found in [KP00].
Here, three methods for combining machine learning and SPC is suggested. One of
these uses neural network to do feature selection and dimensionality reduction, which
is then evaluated within the statistical process control framework.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Methods and theory
This chapter gives a general introduction to the most important methods and theories
used in this study. As deep learning is sometimes referred to as ”black box models”,
the hope is to unfold some of the mysteries, and give the reader a good starting
point for the rest of this paper, rather than acting as an in depth lecture in machine
learning, while still being comprehensive enough to recreate and implement the final
model presented later.
2.1
Machine learning paradigms
To help the reader understand the framework of this study, a brief description of ex-
isting machine learning approaches is given. For an elaborate description, see [Bis06]
The definition of learning is typically split into three different categories:
• Supervised learning describes the task of learning the relationship between
an input vectors x and their corresponding target t. This can be further divided
into two cases. If the target vector is a numerical variable such as a temperature
or price, the task is called regression. If the target vector is some kind of class
label such as ’dog’ or ’cat’, the task is referred to as a classification problem. In
both cases, learning the mapping from x to t is aided by knowing the correct
labels, which is often compared to the prediction of a trained model.
• Unsupervised learning on the other hand, describes the task of learning/ex-
tracting useful information from only the input vector x. In this case no label is
given, and therefore no information about the state of x is known. The goal of
this is to extract information about the data, such as underlying data-structure
(feature decomposition, e.g. PCA), underlying distributions (distribution esti-
mation), and similarity of different data groups (clustering).
• Reinforcement learning differs a bit from the other areas, as the input con-
sists of a set of states and actions, in which the learning algorithm (agent) can
maneuver. Given a reward function, the agent must then learn how to act in
different states, to maximize the reward of actions.
The learning is often a
simple case of trial and error, but the environment can be extremely flexible,
and learn complex tasks such as board and computer games.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Methods and theory
A forth method relevant to include here, is the hybrid between supervised and
unsupervised learning, namely semi-supervised learning. It is a class of problems
where e.g. labels are only given for a small subset of data, the input data is somehow
used to generate labels in an automated way, or some similar case. In a time where
data quantities is constantly increasing, more and more problems are semi- or com-
pletely unsupervised, as labeling data is often a time consuming and resource heavy
task.
2.2
Types of anomalies
There are several ways for data to be an anomaly, and the methods to be used for the
different types are very different. In general, anomalies are typically split into three
categories:[Chi17]
• Point Anomaly: One or more anomalous points in a collection of data points
• Contextual anomaly: A point that may be anomalous with respect to its neigh-
bours, or to other data points that share a context or some feature
• Collective anomaly: A collection of (similar) data points that behave differently
from other collections in the entire data-set.
While many simple methods exist for point anomaly detection, this is not as
such relevant in this project. Instead, the contextual and collective anomalies are
interesting, as we wish to detect irregular behaviour of continuous sequences of data.
(a) Example of contextual anomaly
(b) Example of collective anomaly
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the types of anomalies interesting in this study [al09]
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Deep learning
9
2.3
Deep learning
This section introduces the guiding concepts of how to actually train a neural net-
work. First, we’ll visit the definition of a loss function. Then, we’ll discuss how
this function can be used to optimize the networks, by introducing the optimiza-
tion technique gradient-descent. This then takes us to the explanation of how the
back-propagation algorithm works, and lastly we’ll touch upon the task of evaluat-
ing and assessing the performance of the optimized models. If preferred, the reader
can first skip to the section on the model architecture for a basic understanding of
neural network structure, and then revisit this section.
2.3.1
Loss function
The most important job of a loss function is to quantify the error between the model
estimate f(x) and the target t. Furthermore, we wish to define the loss function C
as a function of our model weights w, such that we can alter these to arrive at better
(or worse) solutions. A common loss function to use with continuous variables, is the
mean squared error MSE, defined as:
C(w) =
1
2N
N
∑
n=1
||tn −f(xn, w)||2
(2.1)
where f(x, w) is the network output with regards to the input x and weights w.
To ease the notation, we’ll use f(x, w) and interchangeably f. The MSE is of course
only one example of a loss function, and later we’ll introduce additional functions to
be used in this thesis. As seen from 2.1, C goes towards 0 as our model estimate f
approaches t. Therefore, our goal is to minimize our loss function, with regards to
to model weights w. This is a challenge in it self however, as analytical solutions
exists only for simple models. Instead, one must rely on numerical optimization and
gradient-based methods.
2.3.2
Gradient-based optimization
To understand how gradient-based optimization is done, we’ll focus on the most
simple case, namely the gradient descent algorithm.
Furthermore, we imagine a
neural network with only two weights w = {w1, w2}
From calculus we know, that the change in our loss function C depends on the
change of w:
∆C ≈δC
δw1
∆w1 + δC
δw2
∆w2
(2.2)
Introducing the gradient of C as
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Methods and theory
∇C ≡
( δC
δw1
, δC
δw2
)T
(2.3)
and the vector of changes in v as
∆v ≡(∆w1, ∆w2)T
(2.4)
we can rewrite equation 2.2 to:
∆C ≈∇C · ∆w
(2.5)
From here the derivation becomes a bit more complex. Lets remember, that what
we would like to do is to choose ∆v such that ∆C becomes negative. If we then
choose
∆w = −η∇C
(2.6)
where η is a small, positive parameter, often referred to as the learning rate, we
get from equation 2.5 that
∆C ≈∇C · −η∇C = −η∇||C||2
(2.7)
Because ||∇C||2 ≥0, we’re sure that ∆C ≤0, meaning that it will never increase
if we choose w according to equation 2.6. Utilizing this, we can use 2.6 to compute
a value for ∆w, and then change the weights accordingly:
w →w′ = w −η∇C
(2.8)
This rule is then used again and again, to iteratively decrease C, and hopefully
arrive at an optimum. For a full derivation and more in depth explanation, we refer
to [Nie15].
As mentioned earlier, the above update scheme is called the gradient descent
method, and is one of the simplest algorithms to explain.
Many variations exist
however, each with different pros and cons and different features. One example is
the Stochastic Gradient Descent, which approximates the gradient by an estimate
calculated on a subset of the data, and another example, Adaptive Moment Estimation
(ADAM), maintains and updates different learning rates for each network parameter,
especially useful in applications with large datasets and/or large networks. [Die17]
Working with big data set, it becomes computationally too expensive to compute
the gradient based on the full dataset. Therefore, the gradient estimate ∆¯C, will in
practice almost always be based on a smaller subset of data, referred to as a batch. The
size of these batches is something to optimize from project to project, and is a trade-
of between noisy but computationally efficient small batches and computationally
in-efficient but more general larger batches.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Deep learning
11
2.3.3
Back-propagation
Even though we now have a loss function and optimization algorithm in place, we still
need a way to actually compute the gradients of our loss function C. We could rely
on our calculus, and try to derive them analytically, but the reality is that this would
be very tedious for even simple loss function. We could also try to use an estimate,
computing:
δC
δwj
= C(w + ϵej) −C(w)
ϵ
Where ϵ is a small positive constant. This seems simple enough to be doable, but
it scales poorly. In fact, each weight in the network would require a forward pass
in our neural network, and with potentially millions of weights, this is not a feasible
solution.
Instead we will rely on the back-bone of neural network optimization, namely the
back-propagation algorithm. This algorithm was in fact what made neural networks
truly useful. It is however a bit complicated, and this section only gives a very light
introduction to the calculations involved. Instead, it includes an intuition behind the
algorithm, to hopefully give an overall understanding. The section builds heavily on
[GBC16], which gives a very good explanation on the back-propagation algorithm.
2.3.3.1
Back propagation intuition
To start of with, we’ll have to introduce some notation. First of all, we’ll add some
indicies to our weights, such that wl
jk denotes the weight from the k’th neuron in
layer l-1, to the j’th neuron in layer l. bl
j denotes the bias for neuron j in layer l, and
al
j is the activation for neuron j in layer l.
This means, that we can write our activation as:
al
j = σ
(∑
k
wl
jkal−1
k
+ bl
j
)
(2.9)
where we sum over all k neurons in layer l-1, and σ() is the activation function.1
From here on, we’ll omit the neuron indices and treat wl as the J×K weight matrix of
layer l, al as the activation vector for layer l, containing j components, and of course,
bl the l’th layer bias vector also containing j components.
That way we can express the activation as:
al = σ
(
wlal−1 + bl)
(2.10)
1This will be further explaned in section 2.4
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Methods and theory
Figure 2.2: Simple neural network with weight, bias and activation shown
The last thing we’ll define is
zl ≡wlal−1 + bl
(2.11)
which will shorten the notation significantly.
Now, before going into details on the mathematics, we’ll look at the intuition
behind what we’re actually trying to achieve. Let’s start by making a small change
to only one of our weights in our small example:
Figure 2.3: Neural network with a change in one of the weights
This small change in the weight cause a change in the linked activation function,
in the order of:
∆al
j ≈δal
j
δwl
jk
∆wl
jk
(2.12)
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Deep learning
13
Figure 2.4: The change in weight affects the activation of the connected neuron
The change in activation naturally cause a change in the following activations
through the network, all the way to the output cost C. Following just one possible
route forward through the network, we see that:
∆al+1
q
≈δal+1
q
δal
j
∆al
j
(2.13)
Figure 2.5: The change propagates through all possible routes. Here, one example is
shown
Substituting ∆al
j from 2.12 into 2.15 we get that
∆al+1
q
≈δal+1
q
δal
j
δal
j
δwl
jk
∆wl
jk
(2.14)
In fact, we can imagine doing this all the way up to the final layer, to get:
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Methods and theory
∆C ≈δC
δaL
δaL
m
δaL−1
j
..δal+1
q
δal
j
δal
j
δwl
jk
∆wl
jk
(2.15)
We would then only have to sum up all the possible routes in which δwl
jk could
propagate a change, to get the total change in C. The important thing about this
is, that it shows us there is a straight way to actually compute the change caused
by any change in any weight. Turning the the order around, we’ll soon see how this
can be exploited to back-propagate a change to our weights back-wards through the
network.
2.3.3.2
Back-propagation algorithm
Now, before writing out the actual algorithm, we’ll introduce one last component,
namely the error:
δl
j ≡δC
δzl
j
(2.16)
where we remind us self that zl
j is simply the linear combination part of the neuron
activation al
j. The algorithm then works by the following steps:
Input Set activations a1 at the input layer.
Feedforward: For all layers = 1, 2, .., L compute zl = wlal−1 +bl and al = σ(zl)
Output error: Compute the error at the last layer δL = ∆aC ⊙σ′(zl), where ⊙
is the Hadamard Product (elementwise product)
Backproagate error: For each l = L-1, L-2, .. , 2 compute δl = ((wl+1)T δl+1)⊙
σ′(zl)
Output: The gradient of C is then given by
δC
δwl
jk = al−1
k
δl
j and δC
δbl
j = δl
j.
Even though the above formulas seems a bit complicated, we can relate them
directly to the intuition we built up earlier. We start by computing the activation for
all neurons, by doing a forward pass of data. This enables us to evaluate the error at
the final layer, which we can then use to back propagate the error at each neuron in
the previous layer l-1, by multiplying the error δl with the transposed weight matrix
wl linking the two layers. Lastly, the errors can then be used to calculate the cost
function derivatives, by multiplying the activation going into the weight input, with
the error of the neuron output going out from the weight.
A full and more in detail derivation of the back-propagation algorithm can as men-
tioned be found at [GBC16], but hopefully this section gives a general understanding
of how to calculate the cost derivatives in an iterative and computational fast way.
With the basic fundamentals on learning in place, we now move on to the actual
model architectures, known as Neural Networks.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
15
2.4
Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
This section introduces the deep learning architectures used in this study. One of the
advantages of neural network structures is that they are very flexible, and can be com-
bined in many various combinations. This is also the case with the model presented
later in this paper, and therefore we describe both the concepts of a Recurrent
Neural Network, and an Auto-Encoder. However, we’ll start out introducing the
perhaps most common network structure, namely the Feed-forward neural net-
work. This is done to introduce the basic elements contained in all neural networks,
and the ideas are then later expanded into the more complex setups.
2.4.1
Feed-forward neural network
The most simple Neural Network is called a Feed-forward neural network (FFNN).
It is called so, because information flows only forward in the model, from the model
input x to the model output f(x, w).
The easiest way to introduce the structure of a FFNN, is to present a graphical
representation of a simple network:
Figure 2.6: A simple 2 layer feed-forward neural network2
The nodes in our orientated graph represents what we call neurons, named from
the inspiration the models have from the human brain.
The edges in our graph
represent the network weights between our neurons, and the graph is organized in
layers of neurons, with weights connecting each layer to the following.
As information only flows forward, it’s natural to start from the input layer. The
role of this layer is simply to map the input x, and pass it forward in the network,
adding the weights in a linear manner:
2The naming of these networks differs a bit in the literature. Here we number the number of
layers as all layers except the input- and output-layer
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Methods and theory
z1
j =
D
∑
i=1
w1
jixi + b1
j
(2.17)
Where D is the input dimension, wl
ji is the weight from the i’th neuron (in this
case input) in layer l-1, to the j’th neuron in layer l, and bl
j is the bias of neuron j
in layer l. For the ease of notation however, we absorb the bias parameter into the
weight-matrix, which can be obtained by adding an additional variable x0 = 1 to the
input:
z1
j =
D
∑
i=0
w1
jixi
(2.18)
Notice how the index does not follow the naming in the illustration, as we index
the input-layer as index 0, layer 2 as index 1 etc.
The linear combinations zl
j is
transformed using a non-linear activation function σ(·), to give the activation of a
neuron.
a1
j = σ(z1
j )
(2.19)
The activation of a given neuron can be thought of as the magnitude of which the
neuron is ’firing’. This is then forwarded to the next layer in the same fashion:
z2
k =
M
∑
j=1
(
w2
kjσ
( D
∑
i=0
w1
jixi
))
=
M
∑
j=1
(
w2
kja1
j
)
(2.20)
Where M is the number of neurons in layer 2, and k is the k’th neuron in layer 3.
Continuing forward, we can pass the information through the final layer 3, an
compute the output as:
f(x, w) =
P
∑
q=1
w3
qk

σ


M
∑
j=1
(
w2
kjσ
( D
∑
i=0
w1
jixi
))


=
P
∑
q=1
(
w2
qka2
k
)
(2.21)
where P is the number of neuron in layer 3. As seen, the models ends up actually
being a linear combination of non-linear activations in the network. This is in fact
not far from simple linear regression with a basis function transformation. In fact,
the idea of a feed forward neural network can be seen as an attempt to learn the basis
transformation to x, by parameterizing the activations with weights w.
One last concept to establish, is the naming of layers between the input and output
layer. These are referred to as hidden layers, as we do not as such have any control
of whats going on in those layers. In fact, neural networks get their strength from
their potential size, as they can be extremely deep (have many hidden layers), and
extremely wide (have many hidden neurons in each layer). This results in millions of
weights, making interpretation of the individual weights almost impossible.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
17
2.4.2
Recurrent Neural Network
The next network structure presented here, is a lot more complicated than the one
above. The main difference is that we’re now going to feed information backward
in network as well as forward.
The group of models with this attribute is called
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). More specifically, we’re going to use a Long-
Short Term Memory (LSTM).
In this section, we compress our previous graph representation to a ’box’.
As
mentioned, we now also feed information backward through the network. This means,
that the network receives previous outputs from it self:
Figure 2.7: A simple recurrent neural network
Now, a simple RNN takes the raw output of the previous pass as an input. The
RNN-LSTM instead, has a much more complex way to process the information from
previous pass. Heavily inspired by [Ola15b], this process is explained and illustrated
below.
Figure 2.8: The cell state of the network act as the memory of the network. Infor-
mation is stored and passed on in each iteration. Training an LSTM network can be
thought of training the cell-state to memorize certain structures
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Methods and theory
The governing idea of the LSTM, is to establish a cell-state C.
This is what
defines the ’memory’ of the network, and as seen above, this memory is passed on
between the RNN modules. The role of the cell-state is to learn certain patterns of
the inputs, to utilize previous similar examples. The neural network can change the
cell-state through various gates in the module. Each gate is small neural networks,
with a sigmoid function added to the output. The first of these gates are the forget
gate.
Figure 2.9: The forget gate decides how much information to keep from previous
output and input xt
This gate takes the input xt and previous output ht−1 as input, and by applying
a sigmoid transformation it outputs a matrix with element between 0 and 1, which is
multiplied with the cell state Ct, to decide how much to forget. (Multiplying a cell-
state element with 0 forgets everything, and multiplying an element with 1 remembers
everything from previous state).
Mathematically this is computed as:
ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, xt], bf)
(2.22)
The role of the next gates is to decide which information we would like to add
to the cell-state. This is done in two parallel gates. The first one, the ’input gate’,
decides which values we would like to update in the same manner the forget gate
decides what to forget:
it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
(2.23)
The other gate, ”the candidate gate”, creates a candidate for a new cell-state ˜C:
˜Ct = tanh(WC · [ht−1, xt] + bC)
(2.24)
The outputs of the two gates are then multiplied together, and added to the
cell-state Ct, to update it with the new input.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
19
Figure 2.10: The input- and candidate gates works together to decide what to add to
the existing cell state
With the three gates combined, we now have a cell-state updated by:
Ct = ft · Ct−1 + it · ˜Ct
(2.25)
The last things to do, is to decide what to output. First, we compute an output
based on the input xt and previous output ht−1, in similar fashion to previous gates:
ot = Wo · [ht−1, xt] + bo
(2.26)
This is then multiplied with a filtered version of the updates cell-state:
ht = ot · tanh(Ct)
(2.27)
Figure 2.11: The updated cell-state, previous output ht−1 and input xt is used to
compute the output ht
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Methods and theory
One of the best application of these networks, and the reason for including them
in this paper, is to sequential data, such as time-series. Their cell-state gives them
the ability to learn sequential patterns repeating over time, and the frequency and
structure of these patterns. The disadvantage on the other hand is, that they have
a lot of internal weights to fit, and the complexity makes them harder to work with
than regular feed forward networks.
2.4.3
Auto-encoders
The next part addresses the concept of Autoencoders. They are not a network archi-
tecture in the same way as the FFNN and LSTM models, but rather an overall idea
on how to arrange an unsupervised model.
The guiding principle in an auto-encoder is to pretend as if the unsupervised
problem at hand was instead a supervised problem, by letting our target t = x. That
is, the goal of the model is to predict the input given to the model. At first this
seems trivial, as we would simply chose f(x) = x for a perfect model. The trick is
of course to prevent this from happening, by regularizing the network in one of more
different ways. Before going into details on how to do that, we split out model into
two different models. The first section is called en encoder, which maps from input
space x to a latent space z. The second part, called the decoder, then maps this
latent space into output space ˆx. The output is also sometimes referred to as the
reconstruction of x. In relation to deep learning, the trick is of course to let f(x) and
g(z) be some kind of neural network
Figure 2.12: The basic concept of an autoencoder maps from input space x to latent
space z via the encoder f(x), and then reconstructs the input ˆx via the decoder g(z)
2.4.3.1
Undercomplete Autoencoders
One way to force the autoencoder to learn useful insight, is to limit the dimension of
the latent space to be lower than the input space, M < D. In this way, the latent space
cannot simply mirror the input, but has to learn a lower dimensional representation.
In this way, an undercomplete autoencoder can serve as a way to do dimensionality
reduction. The overall structure of an undercomplete autoencoder can be imagined
as an hour-class, as it is more narrow in the middle layers.[GBC16]
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
21
Figure 2.13: The undercomplete autoencoder is called so, because the dimension of
the latent space is less than the dimension of the input x. This forces the network to
learn lower dimensional representations of x
2.4.3.2
Variational Autoencoder
Another way to set up an autoencoder, is by using a variational approach. Here,
instead of encoding a single point, we try to encode a distribution over the latent
space, and decode the reconstruction from this distribution.
This approach means, that we can think of the data generation process in the
following way[Roc19]:
• Sample a latent representation from the prior distribution p(z)
• Sample data x from the conditional likelihood distribution p(x|z)
Figure 2.14: Graphical model of the generation process at the heart of a variational
encoder[Roc19]
With this definition in place, we can now consider the encoder and decoder as
probabilistic objects, where the decoder describes the conditional probability of x,
p(x|z).
The encoder in reverse, defines the conditional probability of z given the
decoded variable x, p(z|x). In practice however, we’ll use the encoder to generate the
latent space representation, and then feed it to the decoder, in a similar fashion to
the ’regular’ autoencoder.
As it is often the case in Bayesian inference models, we see that the Variational
Autoencoder is naturally regularised from the fact that we defined a prior to the latent
space, p(z). To simplify things, we’ll assume that this prior is a standard Gaussian
distribution:
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Methods and theory
p(z) ≡N(0, I)
(2.28)
Where I is the identity matrix. Furthermore, we’ll assume that p(x|z) is a Gaussian
distribution with mean given by a deterministic function f(z), and a constant diagonal
covariance matrix cI, where c i some constant. We will see later why this is a good
idea.
p(x|z) ≡N(f(x), cI)
(2.29)
In theory, knowing p(z) and p(x|z), we could compute p(z|x) using Bayes Theorem:
p(z|x) = p(x|z)p(z)
p(x)
(2.30)
This is however often intractable, and instead we have to rely on variational
inference techniques. Here, the basic idea is to minimize the difference between the
distribution of interest and an approximation of this, by minimizing the Kullback-
Leibler3 (KL) divergence between the two. In this case, we wish to approximate p(z|x)
by a Gaussian distribution qx(z), with mean and covariance defined by functions g(x)
and h(x).
qx(z) ≡N(g(x), h(x))
(2.31)
This means that our goal is to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence with
respect to our two functions g(x) and h(x), to approximate p(z|x):
(g∗, h∗) = arg min
(g,h)
KL(qx(z), p(z|x))
(2.32)
Expanding the equation, we end up with a very interesting property:
= arg min
(g,h)
KL(qx(z), p(z|x))
(2.33)
= arg min
(g,h)
(
Ez∼qx(logqx(z)) −Ez∼qx
(
logp(x|z)p(z)
p(x)
))
(2.34)
= arg min
(g,h)
(Ez∼qx(logqx(z)) −Ez∼qx (log(p(z)) −Ez∼qx(logp(x|z)) + Ez∼qx(logp(x)))
(2.35)
= arg max
(g,h)
(Ez∼qx(logp(x|z)) −KL(qx(z), p(z)))
(2.36)
(2.37)
3The Kullback-Leibler divergence measures the divergence between one distribution and another
base distribution.[Bay17]
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
23
As seen in the last equation, the approximation of p(z|x) is really a trade-of
between maximising the likelihood of the data x, and staying close to the prior distri-
bution p(z), i.e. minimising the KL divergence between qx(z) and p(z). Furthermore,
equation 2.36 is actually what is called the evidence lower bound (ELBO) loss
function, which we can use to train our variational autoencoder. [Roc19]. It is also
now that our assumption of our likelihood p(x|z) from equation 2.29 comes into play
again. Defining our likelihood to be a Gaussian with constant diagonal covariance
matrix, the first term simplifies into:
logp(x|z) =
(
−||x −f(z)||2
2c
)
Here, we are of course still looking for the optimal decoder f*, such that
f ∗= arg max
f
Ez∼q∗x
(
−||x −f(z)||2
2c
)
(2.38)
Where the optimal approximation q∗
x depends on f, and is found as described
above.
Furthermore, as all our distributions are Gaussian, the second term in the ELBO
function also has a closed form analytical solution:
−KL(qx(z), p(z)) = 1
2
J
∑
j=1
(1 + log((σj)2 −(µj)2 −(σj)2
(2.39)
where µj and σj is the mean and variance parameters of the j’th latent variable,
encoded from the approximation qx(z).[KW13]
Putting it all together, and bringing the neural network framework back into play,
lets have a look at the pieces we need. First of all, as mentioned above, we need the
encoder functions g(x) and h(x) to give us µqx and σqx respectively. Here, we will
assume that the covariance matrix defined by h(x) is a diagonal covariance matrix,
such that h(x) output a single diagonal vector, of the same dimension as g(x). In
that way we get our encoder:
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Methods and theory
Figure 2.15: Encoder part of our VAE
The latent space variable is then sampled from the mean and variation parameters
µz and σz, and passed on to the decoder part of the model:
Figure 2.16: Decoder part of our VAE
Here, a third contribution to the latent space variable should be noticed. This
represents what is called the reparametrisation trick, and is needed to be able to
sample from the latent distribution. The challenge here is, that we cannot perform
back propagation, if we sampled z directly from N(µz, σz). Instead, we draw ξ from
a standard normal distribution, and parameterize z as:
z = µz + σz ⊙ξ
(2.40)
Our objective is then to minimize our negative ELBO loss function, defined earlier:
LELBO(θ, x) = −

Ez∼q∗x
(
−||x −f(z)||2
2c
)
+ 1
2
J
∑
j=1
(1 + log((σj)2) −(µj)2 −(σj)2))


(2.41)
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Deep Learning Architecture - Neural Networks
25
Where θ represents the parameters in our neural networks, h(x), g(x) and f(z).
Notice here, how our fixed parameter c controls the variation of the reconstruction,
and provides a trade-of parameter for the two terms. The higher c gets, the more
variation of f(z) we assume, and the more we favour the regularisation term.
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Methods and theory
2.5
Training, validation and testing
As the reader might now have noticed, neural networks contains a lot of internal
weights and parameters. Therefore, as it is in general the case with machine learning,
it is important to be careful when training these models. The problem is, that with
finite data, a model with enough parameters is able to simply ”memorize” the input
data, instead of learning the general structures in the data. This is known as overfit-
ting, and it is one of the most important factors to keep in mind working with neural
networks. The opposite is of course also true, and underfitting can sometimes occur,
if the model is not flexible enough to capture the underlying structures.
To accommodate for these challenges, the common practice is to split the data into
separate training, validation and test sets. The training data is used for all training
of internal parameters, and usually makes up 50-80% of the total data available,
depending on the structure of the data [Ng18]. The validation set is used to validate
the model with different setting of the hyper-parameters, such as model-type, batch-
size, learning-rate etc. The idea is, that since the validation and training set contains
different data, a good model should yield good performance on both, as a proof of the
model being able to generalize to new data. If this is not the case, the performance
on the validation set would be significantly worse than on the training set, as the
model has ’memorized’ only the training data.
The test set is kept completely separate from this process, and only used in the
end to access the final model performance. The validation and test set is usually
made up of 25-10% of the data each.
A limitation to the above approach is, that it requires enough data for all three
set to represent the underlying distributions. If the problem at hand has limited data,
other techniques such as cross-validation can be utilized.
==PAGE:39==
2.6 Model evaluation
27
2.6
Model evaluation
With the general deep learning framework in place, this section describes the methods
we will be using for model output evaluation. That is, how to interpret the model
output, and evaluate which data-points is actually outliers. The first part introduces
an approach based on Statistical Process Control, with the purpose of classifying
data-points or sequences as normal or out-of-normal. The second part introduces
some general methods for evaluating models based on the classification performance,
to be used in the later simulation study.
2.6.1
Statistical Process Control
Statistical Process Control (SPC) is a collection of tools, used to monitor and improve
the quality of a give process. The goal of SPC is to reduce or eliminate the variation
of the process, by identifying the cause of out-of-control variation. For our purpose
however, we shall simply use some of these tools to monitor a given process, and flag
whenever something seems to be out-of-the-normal.
The basic idea is to set up a control chart, with an upper control limit (UCL),
and a lower control limit (LCL). For a given process, assumed to be normally dis-
tributed, we will define the sample mean as:
¯x = x1 + x2 + x3 + .. + xn
n
(2.42)
Where x1 + x2 + x3 + .. + xn is a sample of size n. Given m of these samples, we
define the grand average as a mean estimate:
¯¯x = ¯x1 + ¯x2 + ¯x3 + .. + ¯xm
m
(2.43)
Furthermore, we will compute the range of our sample x1 + x2 + x3 + .. + xn as:
R = xmax −xmin
(2.44)
And use the average range as a variance estimate:
¯R = R1 + R2 + R3 + .. + Rm
m
(2.45)
The control limits for ¯x is then given as:
UCL =
¯¯x + A2 ¯R
(2.46)
Center line =
¯¯x
(2.47)
LCL =
¯¯x −A2 ¯R
(2.48)
Where A2 is a factor depending on the sample size n. See Appendix A
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Methods and theory
Furthermore, the control limits for the R chart is given as:
UCL =
D4 ¯R
(2.49)
Center line =
¯R
(2.50)
LCL =
D3 ¯R
(2.51)
Where again, D4 and D3 is given in Appendix A. The derivation of these factors is
not further explained here, but can be found in [Mon09, p. 230]. Using these factors
however, we implicitly allow a variation of 3 standard deviation. This can of course
be varied per need.
Examples of such control charts, for a process operating in control with sample
size n = 5, true mean µ = 1.5, and true variance σ = 0.5 is shown below:
(a) Control chart for ¯x
(b) Control chart for R
Figure 2.17: Example of control chart, and how to control the mean and variance of
a given process
Even though the above charts sets the basic theory of control charts, these are
only one of many tools within SPC. One of the advantages of SPC is, that it provides
overall rules of thumb, while still being flexible enough to be altered to fit the specific
problem. Therefore, a good process control is one that fits the problem domain, and
captures the relevant out-of-normal features.
2.6.2
Time series decomposition
One classic way to treat time-series data, is to decompose them into three components:
season, trend and residual.
The seasonal component describes the cyclic part of
the sequence repeating it self at some order. The trend component describes the
increasing or decreasing development over time, and the residual describes the rest.
Any given time-series can be decomposed either additive or multiplicative. In this
study, we will only use a multiplicative decomposition, describing a sequence with
the relation:
X = Seasonality × Trend × Residual
(2.52)
==PAGE:41==
2.6 Model evaluation
29
Figure 2.18: Example of multiplicative time series decomposition, explained in [Bro15]
2.6.3
Performance evaluation
If the true labels of a given data sequence exists, the performance of a classification
model trying to predict those labels can be evaluated by examining the amount of
four different outcomes:
• True positives (TP): Correctly predicted positive examples
• True negatives (TN): Correctly predicted negative examples
• False negatives (FN): Positive samples falsely predicted as being negative
• False positives (FP): Negative samples falsely predicted as being positive
It is of course desired to have many TP and TN, while having few FN (missed
errors) and FP (false alarms), but it often comes down to a trade of between the dif-
ferent metric. To say something a bit more general, we define the following relations:
Table 2.1: Definition of relevant performance metrics, used to evaluate classification
models
Metric
Definition
Description
Precision
TP/(TP+FP)
How many of the samples predicted as ”positive” is actually positives
Recall
TP/(TP+FN)
How many of the actual positives were predicted as ”positives”
F1
2 · precision·recall
precision+recall
Harmonic mean of the precision and recall
It should be noted, that the performance metrics defined here primarily focuses
on evaluating the model performance on positive samples. This is due to the fact,
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Methods and theory
that we will be classifying anomalies in a binary classification problem (normal or out-
of-normal), where the majority of samples are from the normal class. It is in other
words not as interesting knowing how well the model is predicting normal samples,
as the imbalanced number of samples in the normal and out-of-normal classes will
always yield a good performance in the normal class.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Data
This section gives an introduction to the data used in this study, provided by VP
Securities. First, a simple description of the data is provided, summarizing the overall
data format. Then, the data pre-processing steps is explained to allow the reader to
recreate the data used for the models. Lastly, the challenges of handling big data is
addressed, and the solutions used to accommodate for this presented.
3.1
Data description
The data considered in this project, consists of all transactions created in VP from
the 27th of October 2018 to the 21st of August, where the data was extracted from
the VP database.
A transaction is in this case defined as one specific action in the VP system, and
several hundred unique actions exists. Again considering the example from chapter
1.2, a transaction entry could be an instruction from Danske Bank to sell Apple Inc.
shares, VP’s instruction to T2S to make the transaction, or VP’s confirmation that
the deal has been completed. Each of these transactions is defined with a specific
transaction-type, and these all have an eight-character ID. Every time such a transac-
tion happens in the VP system, a data entry is created with the relevant transaction
type and a timestamp.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Data
Table 3.1: Example of raw data entries. As seen, new data is generated by the second,
and multiple occurrences of the same transaction type can happen at the same time
TIMESTAMP
TRANSACTION_TYPE
2018-10-27-13.18.33.491444
DP09T006
2018-10-27-13.18.33.938556
DP09T006
2018-10-27-13.18.33.972715
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.33.990129
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.005243
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.016026
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.047239
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.055700
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.061117
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.069284
TC200026
2018-10-27-13.18.34.076293
TC208091
2018-10-27-13.18.34.093874
TC208091
A complete description of what each of these transaction types mean are supplied
by VP, but is not as such relevant for this study.
A summary of the 9 month of raw data is provided below:
Table 3.2: Dataset summary. The eight datasets are comprised of millions of data
entries, accumulating a total of 77,404,439 rows. It should be noticed how the number
of unique type of transactions are different in the different months, as some transaction
types are rarely active. This means that there will be some types that are found in
all the monthly data-sets, while others will only appear in some
Year-Month
Rows
Unique transaction types
18-10
1,989,361
391
18-11
8,519,729
519
18-12
7,678,791
476
19-01
7,868,880
495
19-02
7,817,104
483
19-03
8,436,921
512
19-04
7,817,407
471
19-05
7,489,629
471
19-06
7,508,614
474
19-07
7,269,881
466
19-08
5,011,032
419
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Data processing
33
3.2
Data processing
As the purpose of this project is to detect abnormal behaviour of the transaction
patterns, the first thing to be done is to reformulate the data in such a way, that
these patterns become apparent. Therefore, the first thing done in processing the
data, is to bin it in hourly intervals. By doing this, the data is transformed from
millions of rows into a data-set consisting of one row per hour, and one column per
unique transaction type.
Figure 3.1: Binning data into hourly intervals reduces the amount of data
This transformation is done in order to track the patterns of the individual trans-
action type over time. It also heavily reduces the amount of data, such that it can
actually be used for training by the machine learning algorithms used in this study.
What should be noticed here is that every transaction type is given its own column,
and the problem is therefore in fact a multivariate time series problem, each transac-
tion type making up a sequence.
After dividing the data into bins, all weekend-days are removed from the the data.
This is done as a consequence of all weekend transactions being maintenance work,
and therefore out of interest as only daily operation is to be considered. This resulted
in a dataset consisting of ∼5000 rows, and ∼656 columns of unique transaction types.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Data
Figure 3.2: Example of 4 different transaction types and their daily flow
As seen in the plot above, the different transaction time-series have a very different
scale. This is especially not appropriate working with neural networks, as the gradient-
based optimization methods will have a very hard time finding good solutions for the
weights. To cope with this, each time series is normalized to have the same scale,
between 0 and 1. By doing this, we furthermore ensure that we are modelling the
transaction patterns equally, rather than emphasizing transactions types with a high
frequency. Also, datapoints exceeding 6 times the mean of the sequence it belongs
to is replaced with 6·mean of the series. The idea here is to avoid peaks being to
dominant, after the normalization, as the rest of the series would be on a very low
scale because of these peaks. Furthermore, as we are again interested in the patterns
rather than the numeric value of these peaks, it assumed that 6·mean still represents
a noticeable peaks, and therefore the information should be preserved. The same four
transactions as above is plotted below, now normalized according to:
˜xi = xi −xmin
xmax
(3.1)
Where ˜xi is the normalized value of xi, and xmin and xmax is the minimum and
maximum value of the series accordingly.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Data processing
35
Figure 3.3: Example of 4 different transaction types and their daily flow, normalized
to the number of transactions
Lastly, the data is split into three different datasets, to be used for modelling:
• Training data. From 5th of November 2018 to 29th of April 2019 (3000 rows)
• Validation data. From 6th of May 2019 to 1st of July 2019 (960 rows)
• Test data. From 8th of July 2019 to 21st of August 2019 (770 rows)
Notice that because we are working with temporal data, the split is not scrambled
at random, as this would break the time-series structures. Instead, gaps between the
data sets are introduced, and the training data is picked to be the first available data,
to avoid look-ahead bias.
3.2.1
Handling big data
A huge challenge in this study, concerns the size of data. Even though only eight
months of data is available for training, these months consist of millions of rows,
which have to be loaded into memory and be processed. To cope with this, various
tools and methods are utilized.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Data
First of all the online cloud solution ’Kaggle Notebook’ is used for the majority
of data processing and modelling. This service is free to use, and provides a CPU
solution with 4 CPU cores and 16 GB of RAM, or a GPU solution with 2 CPU cores,
13 GB of RAM, and a NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPU. The CPU solution is used to load
in and process the big data-sets, and the GPU solution is enabled when training the
models. For further details see [Kag19]
Secondly, the python library Dask is used as data container. Without going into
too much details, the framework Dask DataFrame allows parallel computing of Pan-
das operations, such as groupby, join, and time series computations. By using dask
instead of Pandas, the data does not have to fit into memory all at once, and the
multiple cores of Kaggle Notebook can be utilized. For further details see [Das19]
Lastly, to reduce the amount of data processed, testing and training is carried out
on sub-sets of data, mentioned later. These sub-sets represents the time-series with
most number of unique observations. That means, that a sub-set of e.g. 30 features
contains the 30 transaction types, with the most amount of unique datapoints. This
is done, as it is assumed that these will be harder to model than sequences with few
observations repeating it self every day.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Unsupervised fault
detection and process
monitoring
This chapter presents the final proposed model for anomaly detection in VP Security.
Further more, a way to monitor and evaluate the model output is given, inspired by
the Statistical Process Monitoring domain. As the VP data is completely unsuper-
vised with no data labels given, the model evaluation is done in two steps:
• First, the model output from the VP dataset is compared to the VP daily
operation backlog, to see if events described in that was captured by the model
• Then, new data with the same structure as the VP dataset is simulated. Rel-
evant outlier types is added to the simulated data, which is then evaluated by
the model to estimate the model performance.
4.1
Proposed model: LSTM-VAE
The core of this Thesis is the proposed model for anomaly detection: a Variational Au-
toencoder (VAE) with Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) Recurrent Neural networks
as Encoder and Decoder. This section breaks down the model in its components, and
describes its details.
4.1.1
Encoder
The Encoder of the model consist of a single LSTM layer, followed by a single fully
connected layer. It takes a one-dimensional vector xt = (x1, x2, x3, .., xD) as input,
where D is the dimension of the feature space, evaluated at a given time t. The encoder
runs this through the LSTM and the fully connected layer, and outputs the variational
parameters µz = (µ1, µ2, .., µZ) and σz = (σ1, σ2, .., σZ), where Z is the number of
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
latent features. Notice here, that the input is a single point in time for each feature,
although the LSTM layer would be capable of handling sequences for each feature.
It was however found, that the internal memory blocks was enough to decompose
the time-series structure of the input, and therefore the simpler structure was used.
Furthermore, the additional parameters needed to encode sequences complicated the
training process, as the model would overfit much faster. The encoder component is
controlled by the following hyper-parameters:
Table 4.1: Hyper-parameters controlling the encoding scheme
Parameter
Description
hencoder
Hidden units in the encoder cell-state
aencoder
Activation function on the linear layer in the encoder
Z_dim
Number of latent variables
4.1.2
Variational Layer
The encoding scheme above describes the approximate posterior qx(z), and the varia-
tional parameters, µz and σz is then passed to the variational layer. Here, a Softplus
function is applied to the σz parameters, to ensure all the variations is positive. Then,
applying the reparameterization trick, the latent variables is obtained by:
z = µz + σz ⊙ξ
Each latent variable z is sampled ω times.
As described in section 2.4.3.2, a prior distribution of the latent space parameters
acts as a regularization of the latent space, and here a simple Standard Normal
distribution p(z) ∼N(0, I) is used. The variational layer is affected by the following
hyper-parameter to optimize:
Table 4.2: Hyper-parameter affecting the variational layer
Parameter
Description
ω
Number of samples drawn for each variable z.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Proposed model: LSTM-VAE
39
Figure 4.1: Encoding and variational part of proposed LSTM-VAE model
4.1.3
Decoder
The other part of the model, the decoder, takes the latent variables as input, and
decodes a reconstruction of the original input x, as an average over the ω samples
drawn for each variable z.
As the decoder represents the variational component
p(x|z), the decoder actually outputs the mean of the decoded distribution over input
variables, with variance controlled by the hyper-parameter c:
p(x|z) = p(f(z), cI)
where f(z) = µx = ˆx is our decoded output and reconstruction.
The decoder in the proposed model has the same structure as the encoder, with a
single LSTM layer followed by a fully connected output layer. The decoder component
is controlled by the following hyper-parameters:
Table 4.3: Hyper-parameters controlling the decoding scheme
Parameter
Description
Z_dim
Number of latent variables
hdecoder
Hidden units in the decoder cell-state
adecoder
Activation function on the linear output layer in the decoder
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
Figure 4.2: Decoding part of proposed LSTM-VAE model
4.1.4
Training the model
The model is trained with the simplified ELBO loss function, defined in equation
2.41:
LELBO(θ, x) = −

Ez∼q∗x
(
−||x −f(z)||2
2c
)
+ 1
2
J
∑
j=1
(1 + log((σj)2) −(µj)2 −(σj)2))


The loss function is optimized using the Adam-optimizer. [Die17]
The table below shows all the hyper-parameters to optimize, including training-
specific parameters such as batch size.
Table 4.4: All hyper-parameters to set for the final model
Parameter
Description
hencoder
Hidden units in the encoder cell-state
aencoder
Activation function on the linear layer in the encoder
Z_dim
Number of latent variables
ω
Number of samples drawn for each variable z.
hdecoder
Hidden units in the decoder cell-state
adecoder
Activation function on the linear output layer in the decoder
c
Reconstruction variance/trade of parameter
Batch size
Number of samples in each mini-batch
Epochs
Number of times to iterate over all batches
η
Learning rate of the Adam optimizer
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Proposed model: LSTM-VAE
41
Figure 4.3: Full proposed LSTM-VAE model
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
4.2
Outlier detection: VP data
As previous described, one means of handling the amount of data in the VP dataset
is to reduce the number of features. In this section, we will denote the subset of data
containing the 30 most active features X 30, and use it for the remainder of the study.
4.2.1
Optimization and training
As mentioned, the model has several hyper-parameters to optimize outside the actual
training. This is a bit more complicated in an unsupervised setting, as a quantifiable
performance metric does not naturally exists. Instead, the parameters was optimized
by the following guidelines:
• The model should yield a good reconstruction quality
• The training and validation loss scores should be fairly similar, indicating that
the model is able to generalize
• The latent space should be arranged in a reasonable manner, indicating the
model has learning some underlying distributions
The parameters is optimized in a ’one-at-the-time’ manner, testing and optimizing
one parameter at the time, holding all others constant. This is a simplified way of
working, with the obvious advantage of having less iterations.
The disadvantage
is that several hyper-parameters are interdependent, and changing one might affect
the optimal setting of another. In reality it was however found, that this way of
optimization was sufficient for obtaining good results, as the model was rather robust
to small changes. The final model is optimized with the following values:
Table 4.5: Hyper-parameters for the final model, optimized to the VP dataset
Parameter
hencoder
aencoder
Z_dim
ω
hdecoder
adecoder
c
Batch size
Epochs
η
Setting
128
Constant
3
20
128
ReLu
50
32
200
0.001
Which yielded final loss metrics of:
Table 4.6: Final loss metrics are close to each other, indicating that the model is able
to generalize to the validation data as well as the training data
Training loss
Validation loss
0.00000152
0.00000041
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Outlier detection: VP data
43
4.2.2
Reconstruction
To illustrate the quality of the reconstruction, 200 hours of consecutive transactions
is shown in figure 4.4, along with the reconstruction output from the model. As seen,
the model does a good job of reconstructing the input space from the latent space,
and even the period with lower amplitude is reconstructed.
Figure 4.4: Figure showing 6 different transaction processes, and the model recon-
struction. The period after 125 hours is considered out of normal, and it is seen that
the model is able to do a good reconstruction of this period as well
The above reconstructions might appear discouraging, as the model is in a sense
too good, and able to reconstruct even what we consider abnormal behavior. This
might have been constrained by regularizing the model even more, but this would
also decrease the overall reconstruction quality, especially around the peaks of each
cycle. Therefore, we shall allow the model to be flexible enough to recreate also the
irregular periods, and instead turn our attention to the latent space variables.
4.2.3
Latent space
Choosing the latent space dimension to three, effectively means that we are trying
to encapture as much information about the 30 input features as we can, in the
three latent variables. Figure 4.17 shows the latent space computed by the model,
evaluating the same series as above. Here, several things are worth noticing. First of
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
all, the latent space distributions seems to have meaningful features, having captured
the cyclic structure of the input data. Secondly, even though the final reconstruction
of the irregular period was of high quality, it is clear that the latent space represent
some dispersion from the normal in this exact period.
Figure 4.5: Figure showing the three latent variables, computed by the model evalu-
ating 200 hours of input sequence
One important point to keep in mind is, that the illustrated example above repre-
sents a situation where all features show irregular behaviour and a drop in amplitude.
In a scenario where the irregularity happens only in one feature, it might not show
up in the latent space, as this depend on the cross-correlation of all features. In that
case however, it is assumed to lead to a poor result in the reconstruction space, and
it is therefore important to monitor both the reconstruction residual and the latent
space dimension.
4.2.4
Process monitoring and outlier detection
To actually utilize the model, we will need a way to automatically distinguish between
what we consider ’in-control’ behaviour and irregularities. The approach used here is
inspired by classic statistical process control. However, as the latent variables show
time-series structure, the latent variable sequences is first decomposed using a simple
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Outlier detection: VP data
45
multiplicative decomposition. This gives three components: seasonality, trend and
residual between the seasonality component and the original series.
Figure 4.6: Figure showing the three latent variables, decomposed into trend, season-
ality and residual. The figure shows all 960 data points in the validation set
The decomposition is done to separate the seasonality component, such that simple
statistic process control charts can then be setup for the trend and residual compo-
nent.
To simulate a real life setting with data arriving in an on-line manner, we’ll use the
first 100 samples of each sequence as baseline, to compute our upper and lower control
limits. Instead of using estimates, we will simply compute the following attributes:
Table 4.7: Control chart attributes used to monitor the decomposed latent variables
Upper Alarm Limit (UAL)
µsequence + 3σsequence
Upper Control Limit (UCL)
µsequence + 2σsequence
Mean
µsequence
Lower Control Limit (LCL)
µsequence - 2σsequence
Lower Alarm Limit (LAL)
µsequence - 3σsequence
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
Where the subscript sequence refer to either a sequence of the trend component
or a sequence of the residual component of the decomposed latent variable.
(a) Latent variable 1: residual component
(b) Latent variable 1: trend component
Figure 4.7: Control charts for latent variable 1
(a) Latent variable 2: residual component
(b) Latent variable 2: trend component
Figure 4.8: Control charts for latent variable 2
(a) Latent variable 3: residual component
(b) Latent variable 3: trend component
Figure 4.9: Control charts for latent variable 3
As seen in the charts above, the trend is sensitive to previous data-points, taking a
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Outlier detection: VP data
47
long time to settle back to normal. Therefore residual component seems like a better
option to use for fault identification.
To automate the process monitoring, we will use the rules known as the Western
Electric rules [Mon09, p. 197]. That is, we’ll flag the data-point as an irregularity if:
1. One or more points outside of the three-sigma limits
2. Two of three consecutive points outside the two-sigma warning limits but still
inside the control limits
3. Four of five consecutive points beyond the one-sigma limits
4. A run of eight consecutive points on one side of the center line
An example of such a flagging is shown in figure 4.10, where error type 1 is marked
red, error type 2 is marked yellow, error type 3 is marked blue, and error type 4 is
marked green:
Figure 4.10: Control chart with the Western Electric rules applied to one of the latent
variable components
As mentioned, we will also observe the reconstruction quality. This is done, by
computing the average residual for all features, and applying the same rules as above:
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
Figure 4.11: Control chart with the Western Electric rules applied to the average
reconstruction residuals
A known fact with the rules applied is, that they will in real life application often
raise a proportion of false alarms. To accommodate for this, the three latent variable
and average residual chart can be used as a simple ensemble, and raise a flag if the
given data-point is outside the limits in one, two, three or all four sequences. As the
task is fully unsupervised, this is a parameter to set based on operational experience.
Figure 4.12 shows the flags raised, varying the number of deciding models, illustrated
at one arbitrary feature from the full validation set. We will denote the ensemble
limit κ, where e.g. κ = 2 refers to the case where an alarm is raised when the data
point is outside the limits at at least two charts.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Outlier detection: VP data
49
Figure 4.12: Flags raised at different values of κ. From a purely visual inspection, it
seems like κ = 2 and κ = 3 yields the best result
As seen in figure 4.12 upper left graph, the number of flags raised at κ = 1 seems to
be rather high, where as κ = 2 and κ = 3 seems to reduce the amount of false alarms.
Furthermore, from a purely visual inspection of the graphs, the flags raises seems to
be equivalent to the periods we would consider irregular, from visually inspecting the
feature. To evaluate the flags raised further, we will have to look in the qualitative
data contained in the operational backlog.
4.2.5
Operational backlog comparison
The operational backlog contains qualitative comments from the operational staff at
VP security. It is mostly comprised by domain specific codes, and reading it requires
training within the specific systems. Therefore, table 4.8 only shows the timestamp
of the back-log events created, without relating to the type or severity of the event.
It does however provide some ground for comparison between the back-log and flags
raised by the model. For both, we only include the timestamp of the first occurrence
at a given day, although the model in most cases raises several flags for the same day.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
Table 4.8: Dates of events created in the back-log, and dates of the flags raised by
the model at different values of κ, at the first time of occurrence at the given day
Back-log
κ = 1
κ = 2
κ = 3
κ = 4
-
05-07 05:00
-
-
-
-
05-08 07:00
-
-
-
-
05-09 10:00
-
-
-
-
05-10 06:00
-
-
-
-
05-13 07:00
-
-
-
05-14 18:35
05-14 09:00
-
-
-
05-15 09:30
05-15 09:00
-
-
-
-
05-16 13:00
-
-
-
05-17 09:20
05-17 03:00
05-17 05:00
05-17 12:00
-
05-20 09:00
05-20 04:00
-
-
-
05-21 09:00
05-21 09:00
-
-
-
-
05-22 04:00
-
-
-
-
05-24 15:00
-
-
-
05-26 19:25
-
-
-
-
05-27 08:15
05-27 08:00
05-27 09:00
-
-
05-28 16:30
05-28 03:00
-
-
-
-
05-29 07:00
05-29 08:00
05-29 08:00
-
05-30 00:00
05-30 00:00
05-30 00:00
05-30 02:00
05-30 05:00
05-31 00:00
05-31 00:00
05-31 00:00
05-31 02:00
-
06-03 08:00
06-03 05:00
06-03 20:00
06-03 20:00
-
06-04 10:05
06-04 08:00
06-04 08:00
-
-
06-05 16:00
06-05 05:00
06-05 05:00
06-05 11:00
-
06-06 14:50
06-06 09:00
-
-
-
06-07 18:40
06-07 15:00
06-07 17:00
-
-
06-08 08:05
-
-
-
-
-
06-10 00:00
06-10 00:00
06-10 05:00
06-10 10:00
06-11 11:00
06-11 08:00
06-11 14:00
-
-
-
06-12 14:00
-
-
-
06-13 12:10
06-13 07:00
06-13 07:00
06-13 08:00
06-13 09:00
06-14 08:00
06-14 00:00
06-14 01:00
-
-
06-17 08:00
06-17 11:00
06-17 15:00
-
-
-
06-18 06:00
-
-
-
-
06-19 10:00
-
-
-
-
06-20 11:00
-
-
-
-
06-21 08:00
-
-
-
-
06-24 09:00
-
-
-
-
06-26 15:00
-
-
-
-
06-27 16:00
-
-
-
-
06-28 08:00
06-28 08:00
06-28 08:00
-
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Estimating model performance: Simulated data
51
4.3
Estimating model performance: Simulated data
To further investigate the performance of the model, we’ll now simulate data similar
to the VP data.
This gives the opportunity to add ”failures”, and keep track of
these, to ultimately evaluate whether the model is able to capture these. In total the
’simulation’ is carried out five times and averaged. The simulated data will be based
on the real data, by:
• First extracting the mean µX 30 and variance σX 30 from upper 30% quantile of
the X 30 dataset.
• Then, the upper half of a sine curve with period of 48 is used, to simulate the
daily cyclic structure of the transaction data, and
• Finally, noise with mean µX 30 and variance σX 30 is added to the upper 30%
quantile of the sine-curve, and the bottom is smoothed to the flat periods in
between the days
Figure 4.13: The simulated data is composed by the upper half of a sine curve, and
noise similar to that of the real data
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
With the normal sequences of simulated data in place, we create three different
types of irregularities.
1. Missing data completely (i.e. number of transactions = 0)
2. A decrease in the number of data. The number of transactions is decrease by a
factor 2, 3 or 4, drawn randomly
3. An increase in the number of data. The number of transactions is doubled by
a factor 2
The failures is assigned to the sequence in the following way:
For each data-point, failure 1, 2 or 3 is chosen with a possibility of 0.5%, 0.025%
or 0.025% chance respectively. If a failure is chosen, a sequence length is drawn from
a uniform distribution with range 5 to 24, i.e. the failure will last for 5-24 hours. The
failure is then added from the given data-point and forward.
Figure 4.14: Figure illustrating the different types of failures, added to the simulated
data
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Estimating model performance: Simulated data
53
In total, 13.27% of the training data is corrupted, and 11.19% of the validation
data is corrupted. 1
4.3.1
Optimization and training
The optimization and training is carried out exactly in the same way as with the VP
data, with almost the same setting for the hyper-parameters, to make it as fair a com-
parison as possible. The only parameter that varies, is the regularization parameter
c, which is increased a bit to constrain the model from trying to fit the noise added
previously.
Table 4.9: Hyper-parameters for the final model, optimized to the simulated dataset
Parameter
hencoder
aencoder
Z_dim
ω
hdecoder
adecoder
c
Batch size
Epochs
η
Setting
128
Constant
3
20
128
ReLu
150
32
200
0.001
The final loss metric of the training was:
Table 4.10: Final loss metrics are close to each other, indicating that the model is
able to generalize to the validation data as well as the training data
Training loss
Validation loss
0.00000097
0.00000088
As the trade-of parameter c is changed from previous training, these should not
be compared to previous loss-metrics. Again we conclude however, that the metrics
is close to each other, indicating that the model is able to generalize to the validation
data.
1For one arbitrary iteration used for illustration in the section
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
4.3.2
Reconstruction
Compared to the VP-data, the reconstruction quality is a bit lower with the simulated
data. This is however expected, as we increased the regularization, and because of
the fact that the simulated data is in its nature composed by noise.
Figure 4.15: Figure showing 6 different simulated processes, and the model recon-
struction. Compared to previous, we see that the reconstruction is not as accurate.
Instead however, the out of normal periods stick out
What is interesting about the reconstruction of the simulated data is, that it does
not seem to be able to do as good a reconstruction as previous in the irregular areas.
Especially the periods completely without data is not captured in the reconstruction,
where the cyclic patterns is still apparent.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Estimating model performance: Simulated data
55
4.3.3
Latent space
The latent space of the model trained on the simulated data is very similar to the
one previously found, with a cyclic pattern repeating it self, although it is not as well
defined as with the VP data. Furthermore, we see very distinct deviations from this,
in the periods where we have added irregularities.
Figure 4.16: Figure showing the three latent variables for the simulated data, com-
puted by the model evaluating 200 hours of input sequence
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
Again, we will use a decomposition of the latent space variables in our outlier mon-
itoring, and use both the average reconstruction residual and latent decomposition
residual as input for our control chart
Figure 4.17: Figure showing the three latent variables of the simulated data, decom-
posed into trend, seasonality and residual.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Estimating model performance: Simulated data
57
The flagged raised at different values of κ is illustrated below:
Figure 4.18: Flags raised for the simulated data at different values of κ
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
As we have added the failures our self, the flags raises by the model can be
compared to the actual labels of the data. This is illustrated in figure 4.19, where
the orange sketching marks the periods at which an error was added, and red marks
the flags raised by our model at κ = 2. It is encouraging that a flag is raised in the
same periods as every true error occurs. In some of the cases the flag is raised prior
to the failure, although the most common case is that the model detects the failure
one or two time-steps after the failure is starting. This might be due to the fact that
any error added to the simulated data occurs instantly, compared to the real data
where an error is assumed to often have some kind of built-up period. Beside this, we
also notice a few false flags. This is expected, first of all because our thresholds are
based on statistics and standard deviations, which means that we are at 3 standard
deviations allowing ∼.3 % false errors.2 Secondly, the data is composed by random
samples from a normal distribution, which will also naturally have some ’outliers’.
Figure 4.19: Flags raised for the simulated data at κ = 2 (red), and the true added
irregular periods (orange)
The study on simulated data is carried out five times, with different simulated
sequences and added failures. To quantify the performance of the proposed model,
the average of different performance metrics of the five simulation iterations is shown
below.
As we know the proportion of added failures, the weighted F1 score is
computed, to make up for the class imbalance.
2For a standard normal distribution, the amount of data within three standard deviations on
each side of the mean make up 99.7%
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Estimating model performance: Simulated data
59
(a) Confusion matrix of average model perfor-
mance on simulated data
Metric
Score
Accuracy
0.932
Precision
0.672
Recall
0.765
Weighted F1
0.934
(b) Average simulation performance
Figure 4.20: Average model performance on the simulated data set.
As seen, the model obtains an average recall score of 0.77 and an average precision
of 0.67. This however, needs to be compared with the observations done in figure 4.19,
where it was shown that the model actually detects all periods with added errors,
although with a small delay.
This means, that even though the model is ”only”
right in 67% of its failure predictions, all false-negatives is followed by a true-positive
prediction, eventually capturing all periods of failure. The weighted F1 score of 0.934
furthermore shows a good performance, taking the proportion of failures into account.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Unsupervised fault detection and process monitoring
4.4
Discussion
The performance metrics found in the simulation study clearly indicates, that the
model is able to detect periods of irregular behaviour. It is especially encouraging,
that all periods with added irregularities is captured, although with a small delay.
This however, highlights a problem about simulating real life data, as we would
assume errors to gradually build up over time, rather than happening all of the sudden.
Furthermore, the simulated sequences is created by adding noise extracted from the
real series in an uncorrelated manner. In the real VP data, we would assume the noise
of the cycles to be somewhat correlated. This was reflected in the reconstructions
of the real and simulated data, where we found the model struggling to recreate the
simulated sequences, while it did a good job on the real VP data.
In both cases however, the latent space encoded by the model appear meaningful
and interpretable. In both cases the model captured the cyclic nature of the data, and
periods of irregular behaviour was visually detectable in both cases. This enabled a
simple decomposition of the latent space to be used in a simple control chart, flagging
points ’out-of-control’ with some simple rules.
Comparing the flagged periods to the back-log obtained from VP showed a good
correlation between the model output, and what is the best estimate of true nature
of the given periods. In several cases the model is able to detect an error before it is
logged in the back-log, and the model rarely misses events. It is however a difficult
comparison, as the back-log contains several cases that would not be detectable by
the model, such as network errors or single transaction errors. Therefore, the compari-
son to the back-log should only be used as an overall indication of model performance.
From VP’s perspective, one huge advantage of the model is that it is completely
unsupervised. This means, that the methods presented in this paper can be de-
ployed with a minimum of resources needed for data preparation, labeling and vali-
dation. The data used in this study for example, was simply extracted from an SQL
database with minimum effort. Furthermore, the majority of problems in VP and
similar companies requires unsupervised methods, simply due to the amount of data
and problem complexity.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Lessons learned
The biggest challenge working in the VP problem domain, is the amount of data. With
a total 77 million rows, loading and processing the data requires specialized software,
making the whole data process period very time consuming. This is something to
keep in mind for future work as well, as computational efficient procedures is required
to implement the model in practice. In this specific Thesis, the online cloud solution
Kaggle has been used for all heavy computations. This is acceptable in a research
scenario, but for practical application other services would have to be used. In the
specific case of VP this shouldn’t be a problem, as the necessary hardware already
exist within the company.
From a theoretical point of view, the biggest challenge relates to the problem
being unsupervised. This first and foremost complicates model validation, as there
are as such no way to definitively determine the state of a given period. Secondly,
it is often hard to even describe what normal looks like, and even though a domain
specialist might be able to extract certain rules of thumb or visual characteristics, it
is very different from a general, purely data drive approach. Here, normal depends
on statistical features such a most frequent, mean, standard deviation etc. Therefore,
working with completely unsupervised data, one must often rely on other metrics
doing the modelling, such as training and validation loss for determining the models
ability to generalize, visual inspections for model performance etc.
Compared to
supervised learning, this makes fitting and optimization much more time consuming,
and theoretical more challenging.
The last thing worth mentioning, is the limitations of the proposed model. As it
is in general the case with machine learning models, the model proposed here models
only one part of the VP domain, namely the flow of transactional data. This is great
for monitoring and detection abnormalities in the big picture, e.g. changed behavior
from T2S or an internal system not working as expected. Looking in the error back-
log however, it becomes apparent that errors sometimes happens, due to a single
transaction not having the correct format, being delayed or similar. These single-
point abnormalities is out of scope for the proposed model, and could be investigated
further in a future related study.
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Conclusion
5.2
Summary of contributions
With the proposed model, this Thesis recommend one way to solve the problem of
anomaly detection in VP. The model is developed and optimized to the specific prob-
lem domain, with the purpose of being a scalable, data driven tool, to aid the transac-
tional process monitoring. Even though it could benefit from domain expert inputs,
it is an accomplishment that the model is developed in a completely unsupervised
manner, being independent of human resources.
Furthermore, being the first attempt to do data driven analysis within VP, this
study serves as a proof of concept, and shows the potential for introducing machine
learning models to the daily work at VP.
Lastly, this Thesis contains a description of all the methods used for the proposed
model, and it should therefore be possible for VP to directly replicate and implement
the model themselves, with the purpose of eventually integrating it to the existing
monitoring tools.
5.3
Future work
As this Thesis primarily focuses on the development of the proposed Variational
Autoencoder, the Statistical Process Control used to setup control charts could be
improved upon. The methods used in the paper are very generic, and with little
effort domain optimized protocols could be setup, to further improve the detection
performance. This includes time-series specific control charts, specifically designed for
sequential processes. Alternatively, classic time-series components as autoregressive
variables and moving averages could improve the detection scheme.
As already mentioned, another interesting problem contained in the data is the
single-point classification, modelling the individual transactions in the data. It is
complicated by including GDPR1 data, but could reveal interesting relations and
potentially be used for detection of other failure types.
Even though the proposed model is completely unsupervised, one simple way to
improve detection performance could be to move towards the semi-supervised do-
main, including domain specialist inputs to the modelling iterations, or even have
him/her label a subset of data. This is a resource heavy step, but could increase the
performance significantly.
Lastly, a natural step would be to look into expansions to the model. Additional
techniques such as attention mapping and augmented recurrent models could further
increase the model performance. [Ola15a]
1General Data Protection Regulation
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Control Chart Factors
==PAGE:76==
64
A Control Chart Factors
Figure A.1: Figure showing the factors to use in SPC control charts, originally given
in [Mon09]
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[al09]
VARUN CHANDOLA et. al. “Anomaly Detection : A Survey”. In: (2009).
[Bay17]
Count Bayesie. Kullback-Leibler Divergence Explained. Blogpost at Count
Bayesie. 2017. url: https://www.countbayesie.com/blog/2017/5/
9/kullback-leibler-divergence-explained (visited on December 9,
2019).
[Bis06]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. Infor-
mation Science and Statistics. Spring, 2006. isbn: 0387310738.
[Bro15]
Jason Brownlee. How to Decompose Time Series Data into Trend and
Seasonality. Online blog. 2015. url: https://machinelearningmastery.
com/decompose-time-series-data-trend-seasonality/ (visited on
January 30, 2017).
[Chi17]
Kishan G. Mehrota Chilukuri K Mohan. “Anomaly detection in banking
operations”. In: DRB (2017).
[Das19]
Dask. Dask Documentation. Anaconda, Inc., 2019. url: https://docs.
dask.org/en/latest/dataframe.html (visited on September 23, 2019).
[Die17]
Jimmy Ba Diederik P. Kingma. ADAM: A METHOD FOR STOCHAS-
TIC OPTIMIZATION. Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015.
2017. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 (visited on October 23,
2019).
[Fog15]
Andrew Fogg. A History of Machine Learning and Deep Learning. im-
port.io. 2015. url: https://www.import.io/post/history-of-deep-
learning/ (visited on December 20, 2019).
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[Kag19]
Kaggle. Kaggle Notebook Documentation. Kaggle, 2019. url: https://
www.kaggle.com/docs/kernels#the-kernels-environment (visited on
September 23, 2019).
[KP00]
Boo-Sik Kang and Sang-Chan Park. “Integrated machine learning ap-
proaches for complementing statistical process control procedures”. In: De-
cision Support Systems 29 (2000), pages 59–72. doi: 10.1016/s0167-
9236(00)00063-4.
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
[KW13]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes.
2013. arXiv: 1312.6114 [stat.ML].
[Mir+18]
Yisroel Mirsky et al. “Kitsune: An Ensemble of Autoencoders for Online
Network Intrusion Detection”. In: January 2018. doi: 10.14722/ndss.
2018.23211.
[Moh16]
et. al. Mohiuddin Ahmed. “A survey of anomaly detection techniques in
financial domain”. In: Future Generation Computer Systems 55 (2016),
pages 278–288. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2015.01.
001.
[Mon09]
Douglas C. Mongomery. Introduction to Statistical Quality Control. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009.
[Nan18]
et. al. Nan Ding. “Multivariate-Time-Series-Driven Real-time Anomaly
Detection Based on Bayesian Network”. In: Sensors (Basel) (2018). doi:
10.3390/s18103367.
[Ng18]
Andrew Ng. Machine Learning Yearning. deeplearning.ai, 2018.
[Nie15]
Michael Nielsen. Neural Network and Deep Learning. http://neuralnetworksanddeeplear
com/. Determiation Press, 2015.
[Ola15a]
Christopher Olah. Attention and Augmented Recurrent Neural Networks.
Online blog. 2015. url: https://distill.pub/2016/augmented-rnns/
(visited on December 8, 2019).
[Ola15b]
Christopher Olah. Understanding LSTM Networks. Online blog. 2015. url:
https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/
(visited on November 2, 2019).
[Pan15]
et. al. Pankaj Malhotra. “Long Short Term Memory Networks for Anomaly
Detection in Time Series”. In: 23rd European Symposium on Artificial
Neural Networks (2015).
[Per18]
João Pereira. “Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Time Series Data using
Deep Learning”. In: (2018). url: https : / / www . researchgate . net /
publication/330523197_Unsupervised_Anomaly_Detection_in_Time_
Series_Data_using_Deep_Learning.
[Roc19]
Joseph Rocca. Understanding Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). Article
in Towards Data Science. 2019. url: https : / / towardsdatascience .
com/understanding-variational-autoencoders-vaes-f70510919f73
(visited on November 5, 2019).
[Sub17]
et. al. Subutai Ahmad. “Unsupervised real-time anomaly detection for
streaming data”. In: Neurocomputing 262 (2017), pages 134–147. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2017.04.070.
[SY14]
Mayu Sakurada and Takehisa Yairi. “Anomaly detection using autoen-
coders with nonlinear dimensionality reduction”. In: Association for Com-
puting Machinery (2014), pages 4–11. doi: 10.1145/2689746.2689747.
