==PAGE:1==
Resource Scarcity in Early
Startup Development
Imre Nagy
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Entrepreneurship
DTU Entrepreneurship, building 426,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This study aims to follow up on the recent call for more research papers exam-
ining how entrepreneurs interact with resources by focusing on the process of
search. The research aims to explore how entrepreneurs search for new resources
from a behavioural perspective, what resources they search for, and whether
problemistic search, the existing behavioural model for ﬁrms, is applicable to
the domain of entrepreneurship or not. It achieves this through exploratory
qualitative research, based on a series of semi-structured interviews focusing on
entrepreneurs in their early venture. The results indicate that entrepreneurs do
not behave according to the problemistic search model. Instead, a new model
is proposed, based on the observed behaviours related to common search tar-
gets; such as the opportunity, co-founders, coworkers, money, etc. This model
diﬀerentiates between exploitational, experimental and passive search.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the DTU Entrepreneurship in fulﬁlment of the
requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Digital Media Engineering. The research
started in August of 2019, and concluded at the end of December, 2019. The
project was guided by Argyro Nikiforou who supervised my work throughout
the semester, and helped in formulating the research question.
The subject of the study was chosen out of my personal interest. The research
was challenging, but after a thorough review of the literature, and with the
helpful support of Argyro, the research questions have been answered.
The thesis consists of an introduction, where the aim of the study is elaborated,
followed by a review of the relevant literature. After detailing the methods of
the research, the results are introduced. Finally, the paper concludes with some
remarks, future works, and implications.
Lyngby, 01-January-2019
Imre Nagy
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Argyro Nikiforou, for the patience, encour-
agement, and advice that she has provided throughout my time as her student.
I have been extremely lucky to have a supervisor who cared so much about my
work, and who responded to my questions and queries so promptly. I truly felt
supported throughout the semester, and I am really thankful for the guidance.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Search processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Search methodologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Organisational search models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Human capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Social capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Financial capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.4
Other types of capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.5
Milestones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Methodology
25
3.1
Data gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results
31
4.1
The failure of the milestone approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
How do entrepreneurs search? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
A never ending search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
It is all about eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.3
The good: exploiting known resources . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.4
The bad: experimenting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.5
The ugly? Ignorance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.6
Sharing is caring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
What do entrepreneurs search for? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Searching for an idea, or being found by it . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.2
Dating: ﬁnding a co-founder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.3
Money does not grow on trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.4
Finding the right person to employ . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.5
Psychological capital - the found one . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4
What entrepreneurs do not search for? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.1
Networking - the used but not needed . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.2
Other types of capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
47
5.1
How do entrepreneurs search and for what? . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
A problem with problemistic search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
The quality of the resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Closure and brokerage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
An unmentioned resource: time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.6
The cost of ignorance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.7
The reward of low-aspirations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Conclusions
57
6.1
Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A Appendix
63
A.1 Interview guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The vast majority of deﬁnitions for entrepreneurship revolve around the same
few core phenomena. First, the entrepreneur operates with scarce resources,
under high uncertainty, pursues an innovative goal and creates value in the
process [Perren, 2003], [Montanye, 2006], [Yetisen et al., 2015].
Taking the resource perspective on examining entrepreneurship, a common view
in recent academic literature is to treat ventures as black boxes and focus solely
on examining connections between diﬀerent input resource conﬁgurations and
their eﬀects on the ﬁrm [Clough et al., 2019], [Linder et al., 2019]. This approach
does not touch upon the underlying processes yielding the examined eﬀects.
This resulted in a call for research to understand how exactly do entrepreneurs
interact with resources from a behavioural perspective [Trenton, 2019]. One
neglected aspect of this interaction is the search for new resources.
Clough
(2019) suggested that problemistic search, the successful behavioural search
model for ﬁrms [R. M. Cyert; J. G. March, 1963], should be examined in the
context of entrepreneurship.
Problemistic search was born due to a need for a model that explains how
decisions within a ﬁrm are being made. The growing criticism towards some of
the core assumptions of the previously existing ﬁrm models resulted in a need
for behavioural models. To address this problem, Cyert and March set a goal
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
to:
1. Focus only on a small set of key decisions. This way focusing on
what’s most essential, while eliminating noise from the research.
2. Develop process-oriented models. These models build on the under-
standing of the internal workings of the observed behaviour.
3. Link models as closely as possible to the empirical observations.
Instead of deriving a new model from the existing one, this ensures that
these models describe reality as much as possible.
4. Develop a theory with generality in mind, to be applicable for
everyone, not just the studied subject. This makes sure that the
model is not going to be too case speciﬁc.
This study aims to do the same in the context of entrepreneurship. The current
call to focus on resourcefulness [Trenton, 2019] is an indication that research
recognised, that in order to get models explaining more about the internal in-
teraction of entrepreneurs and resources, they have to be based on behavioural
observations. Just like in the case of "A Behavioural Theory of the Firm".
One of these interactions subjected for further research is the search for re-
sources.
Studying how entrepreneurs engage in search allows to understand
why some entrepreneurs are more eﬃcient, therefore have a head-start amongst
others. An insigniﬁcant amount of groundwork has been done in understanding
this phenomenon from a behavioural perspective. Three reasons are proposed
as to why investigating the search process has been neglected so far [Clough
et al., 2019]:
1. Resource search is assumed to be unimportant due to the assumption
about entrepreneurs not having the luxury of assembling a choice set of
potential resource holders. Instead, they are assumed to engage on any re-
source holder showing interest. This goes against the usual archeotypical
image of an entrepreneur who pursues their goals, without acknowledging
the resource scarcity, and ﬁnding both creative and innovative ways of
acquiring the needed resources [Perren, 2003], [Montanye, 2006], [Yetisen
et al., 2015]. This controversy gives more legitimacy as to why this phe-
nomenon needs to be researched.
2. There are no good theoretical ways of modelling the search from the stand-
point of a low-powered entrepreneurial actor. Most search models are de-
veloped for organisations. It is tempting to use these in the context of
==PAGE:13==
3
entrepreneurship based on the similarities between organisations, and en-
trepreneurs regarding their roles on the markets. But, search is tightly
coupled with resources, and in this regard, the diﬀerence in controlled re-
sources between organisations and entrepreneurs is major. This makes a
compelling argument that these models might not be portable from one
domain to the other.
3. The diﬃculty of observing search behaviours might have contributed to
the disproportionately small amount of attention given to it.
To ﬁll in this gap in literature and to address Clough’s request of testing whether
or not problemistic search is a suitable model for entrepreneurs, this research sets
a goal to answer how entrepreneurs search for resources. To narrow down the
scope of the project, the study focuses on entrepreneurs in their early ventures.
Even with this restriction the study should still provide valuable insights, since
resource acquisition is especially critical at the beginning of a venture.
The problemistic search model is being put to the test and evaluated whether it
is appropriate in the context of entrepreneurship. In case deemed inappropriate,
an alternative model is proposed based on the observed behaviours.
To get a comprehensive overview of the search processes, they will be exam-
ined in regards to their subject. Therefore, emphasis will also be towards what
entrepreneurs search for. This implies an in-depth understanding on what en-
trepreneurs require. Therefore, apart from the existing behavioural models for
the search and the existing search models for ﬁrms, the literature review also
explores the resource-based view of the ﬁrm.
To align with recent criticism towards process oriented research being too fo-
cused, and through that not taking the eﬀects of event sequencing into mind, this
paper aims to explore the search related behaviours of entrepreneurs through
diﬀerent milestones in their early ventures [Mcmullen and Dimov, 2013]. This al-
lows examining whether these behaviours change as the venture matures within
the observed period.
The study is carried out in the form of a qualitative exploratory research, con-
sisting of a series of semi-structured interviews.
The structure of the paper
follows the one recommended by McCracken (1988) [McCracken, 1988]. There-
fore it starts by uncovering relevant literature, followed by a detailed description
of the methodology. Then, after elaborating on the results found, they are in-
terpreted and discussed, before a conclusion is drawn.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Literature review
The ever growing criticism of the base assumptions of the previous ﬁrm models
gave rise to a new model: the behavioural theory of the ﬁrm [R. M. Cyert; J.
G. March, 1963]. A new trend in research started to question the validity of the
idealistic pillars of the old models, such as the existence of perfect markets with
perfect information, or whether the purpose of ﬁrms is to maximise revenue.
This new wave of critical thinking created a need for models based more on how
ﬁrms behave. And with that, the former black-box view of ﬁrms was opened
up to give way to a new stream of studies that have an impact even today
[Argote and Greve, 2007]. These studies aim was not to replace the classical
models. They acknowledge their analytical uses and predictive power for certain
domains, but, they pioneered at explaining general methodologies through the
result of internal processes. Therefore they enforced drawing structural conclu-
sions by backing them with process oriented studies.
To get a comprehensive understanding on how entrepreneurs search for re-
sources, it is crucial to understand the subject and the facilitators of their search.
To aid this need, the literature review ﬁrst focuses on already existing models,
then it introduces resource theory.
==PAGE:16==
6
Literature review
2.1
Search processes
Research has found that some aspects of organisational search to be similar to
individual search [Billinger et al., 2014]. To adequately cover both grounds,
the literature review of the search processes has been divided into two parts.
The ﬁrst considers the general aspects of search behaviours, and the second one
introduces behavioural models used for organisational search.
2.1.1
Search methodologies
2.1.1.1
Forward and backward looking search
These two methodologies diﬀer in the evaluation of alternatives, the amount
of alternatives considered, and the location of these alternatives compared to
the current behaviour. The key diﬀerence, however, is how the alternatives are
evaluated [Gavetti and Levinthal, 2000].
Forward looking search, also called the cognition-based or oﬄine search, is based
on the actors beliefs of the linkage between the actions and their consequences.
It originates from the actors mental model, the perception. The alternatives
are not tried out, therefore, the decision is purely made based on the actors
understanding of the world. Its advantage is that it can usually consider more
alternatives. The drawback is that it is subjective to cognitive biases.
Backward looking search, also called experimental or feedback-based or online
search, requires the alternatives to be at least partially implemented in order
to evaluate their eﬃciency. Actions are tried out, therefore, their outcomes are
experienced which provides the base for comparison. Its advantage is that the
results are proven by experiments, but in return usually this search methodology
requires more resources.
In an organisational perspective, ﬁrms often tend to use forward looking search
when having excess resources. Backward looking search is employed due to its
convenience with business performance monitoring, and adjustment of actions
[Arrfelt et al., 2013]. It also enables examining alternatives close to each other
with relatively low investment.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Search processes
7
2.1.1.2
Search scope
The scope of the search describes how far the search reaches out of the already
existing knowledge base [Katila and Ahuja, 2002]. A search with a larger scope
results in acquiring more knowledge, and more possibilities to recombine the
new and existing knowledge into new solutions. Smaller scoped search facilitates
further exploiting the already acquired knowledge.
In terms of scope size, literature tends to diﬀerentiate between local search,
also referred to as exploitative search, and distant search also referred to as
exploratory search.
A process with a too large scope can have unexpected
negative consequences, since it results in high integration costs, and less trust
in the new knowledge making the results not worth the investment. However, it
also carries the possibility of acquiring a considerable amount of new knowledge.
Individuals and organisations tend to express the same behaviour in terms of
adapting their search scope [Billinger et al., 2014]. Success tends to embrace
exploitative search, while failure results in more exploratory search.
2.1.1.3
Search depth
Search depth is the measure of how much an actor reuses its already existing
knowledge base [Katila and Ahuja, 2002]. It results in less proneness for errors,
it gives way for a deeper understanding, and to accumulate more experience in
the area. On the contrary, it can also limit improvements, as the examined area
of expertise gets completely explored, and it has the potential to lure actors
into not reaching out to acquire new knowledge, making them stuck with old
routines.
2.1.2
Organisational search models
The problem of researching how entrepreneurs search is the lack of existing
models that could be applied to such low-powered actor [Clough et al., 2019].
There is, however, substantial research on the behavioural theory of ﬁrms en-
gaged in search. While understanding the diﬀerences between the power levels
of these actors it is still considered worth exploring the methodologies for ﬁrms,
since they are also participating on the same market, and are economic enti-
ties. Therefore, the search methodologies might be adaptable to some extent to
entrepreneurs.
==PAGE:18==
8
Literature review
2.1.2.1
Problemistic search
The believers of the classical theory of the ﬁrm argued that behavioural methods
make analytical models impossible. From a mathematical standpoint for mod-
elling purposes it is very comfortable to assume that all ﬁrms aim to maximise
revenue. By questioning this assumption the models built on top of it are also
in danger.
An approach to resolve this conﬂict is to redeﬁne what a pursuable goal can be
in a way that includes the classical model but also introduces some ﬂexibility.
This is achieved by stating that ﬁrms, instead of maximisation, strive to achieve
satisfactory results [R. M. Cyert; J. G. March, 1963].
This way of thinking
introduces avenues to facilitate the development of a general theory. Instead of
trying to ﬁnd what the ﬁrm pursues as a goal, which can be hard to generalise,
and therefore analytically model, it assumes that the goals map to a ﬁeld of
acceptable and non-acceptable results. This enables modelling independently of
the case speciﬁc goals.
It also declares that knowledge is a resource one acquires with investment
through other resources.
Therefore arguing that perfect knowledge is unre-
alistic.
Building on top of these assumptions the model of problemistic search was
born. It is deﬁned as a motivated, simple-minded and biased search. Motivated,
because problemistic search requires a problem, or a realisation of a problem,
that lowers performance below the aspiration levels. Simple-minded, because
the search starts in the vicinity of the problem, and increases search radius
incrementally, as long as the performance is below aspirations.
And biased,
because the search has elements resembling the participants of the organisation.
Problemistic search has been intensively studied, and with it, criticised since its
proposal [Posen et al., 2018]. It has been concluded that its initial deﬁnitions
need to be modernised and further studied through process oriented research.
An addition waiting to be tested, is the notion that solution search is antecedent
by a solution-deﬁnition search, where the organisation identiﬁes exactly what the
problem is. Furthermore, it is argued that problemistic search is a generalised
behaviour which can be applied to diﬀerent domains. An example of which is
entrepreneurial resource search in relation to this paper. Aﬀerming this logic
means that organisational problemistic search is just one case of problemistic
search, when the triggering problem happens to be a performance shortage at a
ﬁrm.
The model is ambiguous on how performance is measured and how aspiration
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Search processes
9
levels are set. Performance can be measured based on ﬁnancial indicators, but
it can also be of diﬀerent measures.
Aspirations can be historically based ,
comparing with past performance, or it can be socially based, comparing with
relevant reference groups performance. In the latter case the bases of forming
the reference groups are still unexplored. Some studies are using an aggregate
of social and historical bases. In these cases the weights of the diﬀerent factors
are also unexplored.
Another line of criticism is towards the stopping mechanisms of problemistic
search. In the initial paper, the only proposed way search stops is by restoring
the performance above aspiration levels. It is argued that shift in managerial
attention, such as shifting performance reference, or shifting aspiration measures
(or even lowering aspiration measures) or a shift in organisation goals can act
as a stopping mechanism.
The studies trying to prove, whether, performance below aspiration levels cause
engagement in search, have mixed results. Some studies oﬀer explanations for
this observed behaviour. One proposed explanation states that when an organ-
isation’s problem threatens its existence, they prefer to cut back on search, and
focus on core functionalities. This way they suggest an inverted U shape on the
relation between performance shortfalls and triggered search.
Mimetic isomorphism is mentioned as an inexpensive form of problemistic search
as a response to uncertainty [Argote and Greve, 2007]. This means, that in
high uncertainty, instead of searching for a solution of the problem, ﬁrms may
choose to imitate processes done by other organisations based on their successes,
relevance or sheer amount [Haunschild and Miner, 1997].
The general steps of problemistic search are:
1. A problem occurs. This problem disrupts the initial equilibrium be-
tween the performance and aspiration levels by lowering the performance.
2. The performance shortfall is noticed. This serves as a motivation to
ﬁnd the solution which could restore the previous balance.
3. The search begins for solution alternatives.
Initially, the search
begins by exploring areas in the company’s comfort zone, resulting in
a small search scope.
If the solution is not found, the search scope is
increasing its radius further and further.
4. A working alternative is found. The solution should be able to restore
the performance above the aspiration levels.
This level is the same as
where it was when the whole process started. The system now returned
to its initial state, therefore, the problemistic search process concludes.
==PAGE:20==
10
Literature review
According to the model these steps happen organically.
2.1.2.2
Slack search
Relying solely on problemistic search for ﬁrms imposes another problem. In
its original form, this process only "kicks in" when some problem has occurred
at the ﬁrm [R. M. Cyert; J. G. March, 1963].
Therefore, it is not capable
of explaining search conducted without a destabilising problem during regular
functioning times.
A few examples for search activities that can take place
during calm periods are innovation, product development and developing new
technologies [Argote and Greve, 2007].
To explain these behaviours Cyert and March introduced "organisational slack".
They explained that organisations can have excess resources, contrary to the
classical theory of the ﬁrm. They argued that payments and demands come to
the ﬁrm in many form, therefore, it is not easy to calculate their equilibrium
point, in which the ﬁrm should operate according to the classical theory. Fur-
thermore, they argued that information about the market is hard to obtain, and
adaptation in demands are slow. Due to all of these frictions, there is a disparity
between the resources needed, and the ones available to the ﬁrm. The surplus
of resources the ﬁrm possesses over the amount needed, are referred to as slack.
Slack search, also referred to as "irresponsible search" [Levinthal and March,
1981], happens when an organisation engages in search using the accumulated
slack. This usually happens unoﬃcially, by projects, done by employees with
excess resources that otherwise would not be approved by management. This
search type is more exploratory in nature, and it is usually not problem-oriented,
rather it is aimed to contribute to sub-unit or individuals goals. It is usually
tolerated because the organisation’s current success achieves targets [Levinthal
and March, 1981].
Slack acts as a dampening medium between the environmental changes and the
organisation. It delays aspiration changes downwards, since the organisation
does not notice the problem until the slack is lived up, but it also slows down
the increasing of aspiration levels, since the excess resources can go to slack until
noticed.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Search processes
11
2.1.2.3
Adaptive search
Slack search, and problemistic search [R. M. Cyert; J. G. March, 1963] work
due to the dynamics of the performance and aspiration levels. They do not oﬀer
any way of explaining how aspiration levels might change over time. Adaptive
search was proposed to overcome this limitation [Levinthal and March, 1981].
Adaptive search is a model that connects organisational learning with search
processes. According to it, organisations react to their environmental changes
in two waves called ﬁrst and second order. First order responses are quick and
natural to the organisation. Depending on, whether, the ﬁrm is over or under
performing the current aspiration levels, ﬁrst order responses can be slack or
problemistic search respectively.
Second order responses on the other hand are much slower. They involve changes
in search behaviours based on experience and learning.
For example as the
company learns how to be more eﬃcient, they improve their search processes,
or by learning what the organisation can hope for in the current environment,
the aspiration levels are set.
Adaptive search is on the boundary between being a process of organisational
learning, and organisational search.
Figure 2.1: The adaptive search model allows a slow shift of the aspiration
levels, while keeping problemistic and slack search as ﬁrst-order
quick responses to the interplay between aspiration levels and per-
formance.
==PAGE:22==
12
Literature review
2.1.2.4
Institutionalised search
Apart from reactive engagement in searching behaviours based on performance
and aspiration ﬂuctuations, organisations can routinise search. An example for
this is R&D activity, which is solely engaged in acquiring new knowledge. This
process requires to allocate a ﬁx amount of resources, regardless of performance,
to risky projects and innovation [Chen and Miller, 2007]. A great, and well
detailed, example of institutionalised search is corporate entrepreneurial search.
Corporate entrepreneurial search is a model describing a way large ﬁrms ﬁnd
opportunities for long term growth [Bhardwaj et al., 2006]. Long-lasting organi-
sations has to adapt their portfolio many times throughout their existence. Iden-
tifying new directions takes substantial eﬀort done by corporate entrepreneurs.
This is achieved through "moving, anchored search".
Moving, anchored search starts by picking a domain. This is something that
is done fairly infrequently due to its large resource requirements, usually as a
response to expectations for lasting deviations in future performance. These can
be signals for limits in the current domain, or expected high growth in other
domains. More precisely, these events can be narrowed down to new discoveries,
anticipated shortages, external shocks or anticipated surpluses.
After the domain has been established, a sub-area within the domain gets picked.
This is the process of selecting a search anchor. Exploration starts in the sur-
rounding areas, this process is referred to as tethered search. Some anchors
prove ineﬃcient or unfeasible, and these are abandoned quickly. The promising
ones are further researched while their tether area increases over time. Once the
area around the anchor has been substantially discovered, a new one is picked
and another tethered search is conducted. This process is then repeated.
Usually the number of anchors pursued over time resembles an inverted U shape.
In the beginning the ﬁrm possesses only a few anchors due insuﬃcient knowledge
in the domain. As the ﬁrm accumulates more knowledge, more anchor points
are born. Then as the domain is being explored, the acquired knowledge will
be used to identify which anchors are worth pursuing. Therefore the amount of
anchors decrease leaving only the important ones.
When the domain is substantially explored, or if it is not considered worth
exploring further, a new domain is picked, and with that the process starts
again. Eventually many domains can be explored this way. See on image 2.2.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Resources
13
Figure 2.2: The steps of moving anchored search. The image is taken from
[Bhardwaj et al., 2006].
The big diﬀerence between problemistic search and institutionalised search is
that the motivation for the latter does not seize to exist during satisfactory times
of the ﬁrm. Problemistic search is a reactive behaviour, whereas institutionalised
search is preventive or proactive.
2.2
Resources
Resource theory suggests that examining a ﬁrm from the perspective of the
resources it has control over, is analogous to examining it from the product
perspective [Wernerfelt, 1984]. It puts sustained competitive advantage on the
basis of the resources that the ﬁrm operates with and not on the environment
it operates in [Jay Barney, 1991].
According to the theory to obtain sustained competitive advantage, a ﬁrm’s
resources have to be; valuable, meaning that they contribute to the eﬃciency and
eﬀectiveness; rare, meaning that not a lot of competitors have them; imperfectly
imitable, meaning that other ﬁrms do not possess it and can not easily obtain
them; and not substitutable meaning that there are no alternatives to it.
==PAGE:24==
14
Literature review
Resources are deﬁned as those tangible and intangible assets which are tied
semi-permanently to the ﬁrm [Wernerfelt, 1984].
This formal description is
general enough to be applied to every case, but for more detailed research a
more speciﬁc approach is required.
For ﬁrms in diﬀerent businesses diﬀerent things are perceived as valuable. There-
fore, deﬁning exactly what is a resource is impractical for modelling purposes.
To overcome this limitation literature developed categories in which similar re-
sources can be organised. However, there is an ambiguity around these cate-
gories. Many existing papers deﬁne various categories with contrasting names
and meanings, consequently, there is no overall accepted consensus.
For example a set of categories frequently used by Jay Barney is [Jay Barney,
1991]:
• Physical capital: raw materials, assets, equipment.
• Human capital: training, experience, knowledge, relationships of work-
ers and managers.
• Organisational capital: internal managerial routines of the ﬁrm.
In later work he added ﬁnancial capital to the list as a fourth category [Jay B.
Barney and Delwyn N. Clark, 2007].
With the realisation of the increasing value of social networks, in several papers
listed social capital as a new category [Huang, 2016]. For the purpose of this
paper the used grouping is the following:
• Human capital: including the knowledge, experience and workforce of
individuals.
• Social capital: including the resources and information accessible through
the network of people known.
• Financial capital: including money and physical assets.
This division is getting increasing traction, and with it, criticism [Kontos, 2003].
To leave room for resources that can not be adequately ﬁtted into any of these
categories, an additional "other" category is added. This matches the view of
[Clough et al., 2019].
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Resources
15
2.2.1
Human capital
The concept of human capital originates from human capital theory. It was
developed to explain diﬀerences in individual earnings based on investment in
acquiring human capital [Martin et al., 2013], [Unger et al., 2011]. The term
itself used to refer to knowledge and skills, and other competencies possessed
by individuals or groups.
Human capital has since been vastly researched with regards to entrepreneur-
ship. Since it is much easier to assess and measure the human capital of an
individual, rather than it is for a group (representing an organisation), en-
trepreneurship turned out to be a convenient area where results can easily be
obtained. Its usual measures are the amount of formal education, training, em-
ployment experience, start-up experience and owner experience. Studies have
shown that human capital plays diﬀerent roles throughout diﬀerent segments of
the venture, in other words human capital is dynamic [Davidsson and Honig,
2003], [Marvel et al., 2016].
For example human capital plays a crucial role in:
• Opportunity recognition: Human capital impacts identifying the op-
portunity [Marvel and Lumpkin, 2007]. Individuals with a certain set of
knowledge have an overview of a limited set of opportunities, excluding
others. As an example, innovation radicalness has been shown to be tied to
former education, and technological knowledge. Due to knowledge being
generated through unique life experiences, each individuals accumulated
human capital is diﬀerent.
• Engaging in the venture: A case study in the United States showed that
engaging in a venture depends only on the level of human capital possessed
[Kim et al., 2006]. According to this study neither social nor ﬁnancial
capital has showed any correlation.
An inverted U shaped relation is
proposed between the amount of education, and the likelihood of engaging
into a venture, meaning that too little or too much education decreases
the chances of becoming an entrepreneur.
• Exiting the venture: Exiting the venture is also highly dependent on
the amount of human capital possessed. Individuals with more human
capital could earn more if they would not be engaged in their venture.
They have higher alternative earning possibilities, therefore, it is expected
that they will leave their ventures at higher performance levels [Gimeno
et al., 1997].
==PAGE:26==
16
Literature review
• Success of the venture: It is a highly researched topic, whether the
success of the venture is aﬀected by human capital or not. Depending
on diﬀerent deﬁnitions of success, and sub-dimensions of human capital,
results can be found both pro and contra. Recent meta-analysis and review
of literature [Unger et al., 2011], [Martin et al., 2013], [Marvel et al., 2016]
concluded that it is indeed correlated to ﬁrm success.
The traditional ways of measuring human capital have received a signiﬁcant
amount of criticism [Unger et al., 2011]. It is proposed that most studies measure
it in an indirect way, by counting years of education or managerial experience,
which corresponds to investments in getting human capital, but not the amount
actually acquired by the individual.
Furthering this logic, even acquired knowledge is not being used up to its full
potential, because it has to be applied in a diﬀerent context than it has been
learned. This adds another layer of ﬁltering out what exactly ends up being
utilised. This process is called transferring the knowledge. It is argued that
knowledge learned in similar contexts as they are used, are transferred more
eﬃciently. Of course measuring the actual used knowledge is much more diﬃcult
than measuring the number of years in education or as a manager [Martin et al.,
2013].
Another frequent criticism is using the number of years in education as a measure
for human capital. It is argued that due to its generality it captures education
that might be completely unrelated to the venture the entrepreneur engages in.
To combat this eﬀect studies started to divide knowledge as general and task-
speciﬁc [Davidsson and Honig, 2003], [Unger et al., 2011], [Martin et al., 2013],
[Lukeš and Zouhar, 2016].
The impact of human capital is also argued to be context dependent. Its eﬀects
are shown to be diﬀerent in developing and developed countries. Intuitively,
possessing more knowledge in a developing country, where education might not
be as widespread as in a developed country, is more valuable [Unger et al., 2011].
2.2.1.1
Accumulating human capital
Since human capital by its nature is tied to the individual, it can only be acquired
by either learning or accumulating experiences. This means schooling, on-the-
job training and job experiences [Unger et al., 2011].
Another method is through on-boarding individuals who are in possession of the
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Resources
17
required knowledge, skills and capabilities that are needed.
2.2.2
Social capital
Towards the end of the 20th century, researchers started to recognise the value
embedded in social networks. Through this process, social capital theory was
born, engaged in understanding how social contacts aﬀect the productivity of
individuals. The two most frequent theories [Siisiäinen, 2000] are from Pierre
Bourdieu and Robert Putnam.
Putnam deﬁnes social capital as the connection between individuals, based on
trust and on the norms of participating in the network [Xiaoying Qi, 2018].
According to this theory social capital is both connected to individuals and acts
as a collective resource of the community. Originally, this division is referred to
as the public and private face of social capital. The nature of being a collective
resource means that one can still beneﬁt the advantages created by a group,
even while not being its member [Putnam, 2001].
His theory diﬀerentiates between bridging, also referred to as inclusive connec-
tions, and bonding, also referred to as exclusive connections. Bridging connec-
tions are outward facing. They allow the individuals to connect to diﬀerent
groups, and access a wide variety of new resources. An example of this type of
connection would be a business partner in another industry. On the opposite
spectrum, bonding connections face inwards. They reinforce identities and cre-
ate homogeneous groups, for example participation in an ethnic group or in a
book club.
Bonding social capital constitutes a kind of sociological superglue,
whereas bridging social capital provides a sociological WD-40.
(Robert D. Putnam, 2001)
Contrary to Putnam’s view, Bourdieu assumed that social capital belongs to the
individual and does not act as a public good [Xiaoying Qi, 2018]. He deﬁned
it as the sum of actual and potential resources embedded in the possession of
a network [Bourdieu, Pierre. Woolsey Biggart, 1986]. Social capital, therefore,
is not given, but it is something that has to be pursued and acquired through
conscious or unconscious processes.
It acts as a "virtual resource" in a sense that it only turns into real capital once
the owner ﬁnds a use, or need for it [Siisiäinen, 2000]. Investing in it translates
==PAGE:28==
18
Literature review
into voluntarily engaging in new associations to get access to more resources.
Unlike in Putman’s view, this process is driven by self-interest and short-term
economic maximisation, and not by the belief of future returns in the long-run
[McKeever et al., 2014].
Regardless of which theoretical model is being used from an individuals perspec-
tive a network’s value relies in its ability to provide resources to its owner. Stud-
ies focused on investigating the diﬀerences between the social capital amongst
diﬀerent actors found structural advantages to certain positions in a network.
This line of thought spawned a wave of studies engaged in understanding how
the structure of a network eﬀects its usefulness.
These studies found that clustered networks provide less value to their partic-
ipants, due to their redundant information content [Lazega and Burt, 1995].
There is a higher chance that two people know each other if they both have a
strong connection to a mutual friend. This phenomena results in the clustering
amongst people who have strong contacts between each other. These two forces
combined result in a higher valuation for weak ties which are more likely to
bridge clusters together [Mark S. Granovetter, 1973]. See ﬁgure 2.3.
(a) Brokerage - structural advantage
(b) Closure - structural disadvantage
Figure 2.3: Two networks demonstrating that the size of the network an indi-
vidual has, is not directly responsible for the value that the net-
work provides. A position bridging two clusters together is more
favourable than being a part of a closed cluster.
The same phenomena is also explained using the theory of structural holes,
which builds upon the notion that non-redundant contacts (contacts of an in-
dividual, who do not know each other) provides non-overlapping information.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Resources
19
In a case like this, the missing link between the contacts is a structural hole.
Structural holes beneﬁt their owners by providing diversity in content [Lazega
and Burt, 1995].
The diﬀerence between the weak-tie argument and the structural hole theory
is their direction in causality. Whereas Granovetter argues that clustering and
structural advantage arises from the interplay between the strength of the con-
tacts in the network, Burt emphasises that advantage arises from the structure
which in response might cause weak ties.
From a behavioural point of view, a person can be a specialist in maintaining
strong ties in a cluster. This type of arrangement is referred to as a closure.
On the other end of the spectrum, if a person specialises in maintaining links
between clusters, it is referred to as brokerage.
Being in a closed network is advantageous at the start of a venture due to its sta-
bility and low maintenance cost, however, compelling evidence also shows that
being engaged in network brokerage, and through that purposefully building
connections amongst clusters, results in a higher chance for a successful venture
[Burt, 2019].
2.2.2.1
Accumulating social capital - networking
Networking consists of purposefully creating and maintaining personal and pro-
fessional relationships to build a system of contacts that provide information
and support crucial for personal and career success. It is therefore a proactive
behaviour [Torres-Coronas et al., 2015].
It is not an activity that is tied to individuals only.
Entrepreneurial ﬁrms
can also engage in networking behaviours to get access to core competencies of
collaborating partner ﬁrms, this way creating a shared pool of resources within
the alliance [Dimitratos et al., 2014].
Multiple studies have examined the consequences of networking. They found
that high growth businesses engage in considerably more networking behaviour
than others [Chell and Baines, 2000]. They also highlight that knowledge busi-
nesses, such as consultancies, are much more likely to be active networkers.
Networking has found to have a strong connection with innovativeness [Maritz,
2010], and it plays a positive role for an international ﬁrm in becoming a micro-
multinational enterprise [Dimitratos et al., 2014].
==PAGE:30==
20
Literature review
2.2.3
Financial capital
Financial capital refers to the available cash of the ﬁrm or entrepreneur. Since
cash is the medium of exchange, it is the easiest form of capital that can be
used to acquire other capital. There are direct ways of using ﬁnancial capital
to acquire more human capital. For example through hiring someone with the
needed knowledge. The passage on the other direction is not so straight-forward.
Counter-intuitively, it has been shown that relying too much on ﬁnancial capital
for entrepreneurial purposes is one of the worst conﬁgurations one can start the
venture with [Linder et al., 2019]. Reinforcing this ﬁnding, it has also been
shown that having too little ﬁnancial capital does not aﬀect engagement in a
venture either [Kim et al., 2006].
2.2.3.1
Accumulating ﬁnancial capital
There are multiple ways to acquire ﬁnancial capital for a business venture. One
can use their own saved up money, or reach out to friends and family to acquire
some ﬁnancial aid. More formally, banks, venture capitalists and angel investors
oﬀer traditional ways to access ﬁnancial capital.
But not every country has a well-developed ﬁnancial ecosystem that oﬀers all
these institutions. To cope with ﬁnancing in developing countries, and also in
developed countries as an alternative, new ways of acquiring money emerged.
• Crowdfunding relies on collective decision making upon social media
campaigns. Its emergence took route from the global crisis initially oﬀering
an alternative way to ﬁnance arts and entertainment ventures. Later on
the models evolved to support entrepreneurs through structured loans and
equity investments.
• Peer-to-peer or peer-to-business platforms let individuals lend money
to other individuals or businesses. The diﬀerence between crowdfunding
is that through these platforms, the money usually goes straight to the
renter, instead of being consolidated through the crowdsourcing platform.
• Equity crowdfunding is also a line of crowdfunding, but it struggles
to acquire large audiences due to governmental restrictions to protect the
investors.
• Microﬁnancing institutions oﬀer small loans to entrepreneurs. Usually
these organisations raise capital from foundations, governments or banks,
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Resources
21
and further lend it in smaller portions to the entrepreneurs at a higher
interest rate.
Diﬀerent ﬁnancial forms are appropriate for diﬀerent types of entrepreneurial
ventures. A high-capital intensive biotechnology startups requirements are much
diﬀerent than a small ﬁrm that can be started through bootstrapping [Bru,
2015].
2.2.4
Other types of capital
Each research paper used the resource categories most ﬁtting for their own
purpose. In the following, some additional resource categories are elaborated.
It could be argued that some of these resources could be categorised as sub-types
of the already mentioned ones.
2.2.4.1
Cultural capital
Cultural capital has been used by diﬀerent authors, in diﬀerent meanings. Kon-
tos referred to it as prestige, recognition and access to inﬂuential networks that
has been acquired through socialisation in the family and in the school [Kontos,
2003].
On the other hand Kim used a much more exact and measurable deﬁnition. He
used it to describe whether anyone in the relatives of the entrepreneur used to
be an entrepreneur themselves or not [Kim et al., 2006].
2.2.4.2
Ethnic capital
Ethnic capital is a resource that is owned by the ethnic collectivity. It is not tied
to the individual, it is build around ethnic solidarity and it consists of kinship,
trust, marriage systems, religion, native language ﬂuency, etc [Kontos, 2003].
It is solely tied to ethnic groups and oﬀers some kind of compensation towards
deprived class resources, that non-ethnic members of society have.
==PAGE:32==
22
Literature review
2.2.4.3
Psychological capital
Psychological capital is the entrepreneurs conviction that they can carry out
the venture and recognise and exploit business opportunities. It encompasses
conﬁdence, optimism, hope, resilience, and trust.
Conﬁdence refers to ones belief that they possess the abilities to carry out the
task at hand or achieve a given goal. Optimism is a tendency to expect positive
outcomes even in situations where rationality does not justify these expectations.
Hope is a perceived ability to develop routes toward the set goal, and the ability
to self-motivate to utilise these routes to achieve the goal.
Resilience is the
ability to cope and adapt to risks, threats and setbacks. It enables the individual
to keep moving forwards, even in the sudden event of uncertainty or negative
impact. Lastly, trust roots in the perception that the probabilities will play out
exactly as expected [Baluku et al., 2016].
A study has found that all of the components of psychological capital are pos-
itively correlated to venture success, and that overall psychological capital is a
better indicator of success than ﬁnancial startup capital [Baluku et al., 2016].
2.2.4.4
Motivation
Motivation can arise from an individuals need for achievement. People with a
higher need for achievement tend to engage in tasks with higher individual re-
sponsibility, which require more skills, and have higher degrees of risk associated
with them. Risk can also be a provider of motivation. Activities of intermediate
risk provide a challenge, yet appear to be attainable, hence oﬀering a higher
sensation of achievement.
Another source of motivation can be an internal focus of control which refers
to believing that things are aﬀected by ones own actions.
It is proven that
entrepreneurs tend to seek out situations where they can have direct control
over them [Shane et al., 2003].
2.2.4.5
Credibility
Being credible is essential for a start-up company [Rehme and Svensson, 2011].
Funding from investors or orders from customers all require the company and
entrepreneur to prove its credibility. On the other hand, large companies have
already established a track record, therefore, are considered to be credible. To
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Resources
23
combat this they recommend credibility to be considered in every step of build-
ing the venture.
2.2.5
Milestones
Process oriented research can take two forms [Mcmullen and Dimov, 2013]. One
dealing solely with one particular concept, examining the attributes eﬀecting
it and relating it to an output variable. An example would be to study the
concept of entrepreneurial decision making in isolation and its eﬀects on venture
performance.
The other notion considers processes as sequences of events.
These studies
focus on the interactions between these events, addressing the consequences of
sequencing between them.
McMullen calls for more studies focusing on the
latter category.
One way of dividing the entrepreneurial journey into events is by considering
important milestones. This methodology has already been used by researchers
[Marvel et al., 2016]. The problem it introduces is how to ﬁnd the best ﬁtting
milestones. This process is most eﬃcient when tailored to each particular ﬁrm
[Spinelli and Timmons, 2004], [Block and MacMilan, 1985], but there some
common events that are often times a part of an entrepreneurial journey. In
this study, the following events are considered based on the ones used by Spinelli
and Block:
• Discovery of opportunity. This milestone includes everything leading
up to the idea that is pursued at the beginning of the venture.
• Establishing core team. Once the idea has been found, the entrepreneur
has to assemble the team of co-founders. This process might happen com-
pletely naturally, for example deciding to pursue a venture together with
friends, or it can be a conscious process of selecting individuals. Another
possible scenario might be if the entrepreneur decides to work completely
alone.
• Establishing legal entity. Somewhere along the venture the company
is registered and it becomes oﬃcial.
• Testing the ﬁrst prototype. This milestone applies that in some form
an initial version of the product is ready, and potential customers have
been found.
==PAGE:34==
24
Literature review
• Securing ﬁnancing. Acquiring money is a major step that has the po-
tential to completely disrupt the previous pace of the venture. Depending
on the previously controlled ﬁnancial resources and the invested amount,
securing ﬁnancials has the power to impose a huge shift on how the com-
pany is being developed.
• Product release. Releasing the product can have a high impact, since
it is the ﬁrst time the product hits the real market.
• Acquiring ﬁrst customer. Depending on the product, the eﬀect of this
milestone may vary. If the product is meant to be sold in high quantity, the
ﬁrst customer might not carry much meaning apart from its motivating
power.
But in limited and niche markets selling a high-value product
might impose large eﬀects on the ﬁrm.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Data gathering
The aim of this paper is to explore how entrepreneurs engage in search from a
behavioural point of view. For this purpose, an inductive qualitative research
methodology has been chosen as a ﬁtting method [Burnard et al., 2008], due to
its adequacy for exploratory research.
To increase the chances of ﬁnding interesting insights on how entrepreneurs
engage in search, and to comply with the call from McMullen to do more macro
view process oriented research [Mcmullen and Dimov, 2013], the study has been
designed to explore multiple important milestones during the development of
the ventures. To facilitate this need, the method of choice for data collection
was to do semi-structured interviews. This way introducing some control over
the data-collection, enabling to investigate behaviours around diﬀerent events,
while still leaving enough freedom for the participants to explore the behavioural
aspects of engaging in search [Maxwell, 2013].
After an initial thorough review of the existing literature, a ﬁrst draft of the
interview guide has been tested on a trial interview. Based on the experiences,
the guide has been updated to its ﬁnal form (see: A.1), which was then used in
the remaining 10 interviews.
==PAGE:36==
26
Methodology
The participants were chosen from the online catalogue of several accelerators
located in Denmark, from a job-portal speciﬁed for startups, and through a
public listing for female founders in Denmark. Initial emphasis was towards
focusing on tech and software startups in their early ventures to facilitate a
better base for the comparison of results. This scope later on has been widened
due to time limitations.
The interviews have been carried out in Copenhagen. They were recorded and
transcribed automatically with the Google Recorder application. These tran-
scriptions later on have been revisited and corrected. The results of this process
then became the base for the analysis.
Apart from the trial interview, a total of 10 interviews have been performed.
Each of which lasted anywhere between 25 to 52 minutes. Due to scheduling
diﬃculties, two interviews were carried out on the phone. These later on have
been found not to be suitable for the purposes of this analysis. In both cases the
interviewees were distracted, which resulted in data with an inadequate quality
to comply with this research.
One more interview was disqualiﬁed, due to the interviewee not being actively
engaged in any venture, leaving a total of 7 interviews in the pool. A summary
of the interviews can be seen on table 3.1.
To adhere with the participants
requirements for anonymity, the names and certain details have been distorted
to avoid traceability.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Data gathering
27
Name
Company proﬁle
Role of
intervie-
wee(s)
Age of
venture
A
A platform for augmented
reality games for mobile
environment along with a few
games.
CEO
2 years
CTO
B
A platform connecting ﬁsher-
man with customers, cutting
out the middleman.
Co-founder
2 years
C
An online dinner-hosting and
sharing platform.
CEO
3 years
D
An online tool detecting and
marking fake content or content
forgery.
CEO
1 year
E
A family organisation tool.
Co-founder
2 year
Plant-based alternative to milk.
1 year
F
Long-term bike rental company.
Co-founder
3 years
G
Online platform helping sport
fans ﬁnd the best places to view
sport events.
CEO
2 years
Table 3.1: Summary of the participants in the interviews.
To further widen the bases of comparison for the interviews, therefore increase
the chances of ﬁnding interesting insights, the ventures have been categorised
based on the aspirations, background and roles of the founders, as well as some
important characteristics of the ﬁrms themselves. These categories are sum-
marised in table 3.2.
==PAGE:38==
28
Methodology
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Is this the ﬁrst venture?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Did the founder bring tech
knowledge?
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Did the founder bring en-
trepreneurial knowledge?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Did the founder search for
funding?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Did the founder search for
a core team member?
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Did
the
founder
study
something relevant?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Did the founder work in
some related area?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Does the founder aspire to
go international?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Is it a tech company?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Table 3.2: Bases for comparison.
3.2
Data processing
The data processing began by ﬁxing the output of the transcriber application.
The raw transcription lacked the diﬀerentiation of who was speaking. Therefore,
the interviewer and the interviewee had to be separated. As this process included
going through all of the gathered material thoroughly, in parallel with it some
mistakes in the transcription were corrected. An example of the required changes
can be seen on table 3.3.
After cleaning the data it has been subjected to a thematic analysis following
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Data processing
29
we are continuously looking for
investment always looking for
more money yeah but the ﬁrst
pool of money we applied for was
over the ﬁrst pool where we got
the money was the inner books
[U] We are continuously looking
for investment.
Always looking
for more money.
[J] Yeah.
[U] But the ﬁrst pool of money
we applied for was over. . . The
ﬁrst
pool
where
we
got
the
money was the innobooster.
Table 3.3: Example of cleaning the transcription. In this case, both the CTO
(coded as [U]) and the CEO (coded as [J]) of the company partic-
ipated in the meeting.
the guide laid out by Bricki and Green. This process began by reading all of the
transcripts once again and afterwards doing one round of initial coding. These
codes did not consider the emerging global schemes yet. They were done by
analysing the text in their own context [Bricki and Green, 2002]. An example
of this process can be seen on table 3.4.
Once all the transcripts have been initially coded, the coded texts have been
extracted from the original material, with their respected codes. The parts of
the original text that have not been coded were deemed as not useful, and were
not subjected to further analysis. The parts that have been coded were analysed
in the global context.
Following up with the process, all of the initial codes were extracted and aggre-
gated under some new codes. This process has been carried out in two levels.
The method was executed in an iterative manner, leaving room for repetition
and reﬁnement until the ﬁnal, high-level themes emerged.
To conclude the analysis, all of the snippets from the transcripts that belonged
to the same theme were gathered together, and were studied to give insights
about the emergence of that particular theme. This part of the study was done
while constantly referring to table 3.2 to discover connections between certain
groups of the participants and unique behaviours related to that theme.
==PAGE:40==
30
Methodology
Quote
Code
". . . I didn’t have to do like a
bank loan, but I invested a lot
of money that I gained from my
family. And I put some myself
in and then my partner also put
some in. . . "
ﬁnance acquisition
". . . I was like yeah at the end of
the night I’m deﬁnitely ﬁnding
my co-founder. And guess
what? No one came . . . "
core-team search
". . . it always starts with
identifying a problem. Digging
in and saying: Hey, I’ll be alone
in this! . . . "
problem deﬁnition search
Table 3.4: Examples of initial codes.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
The failure of the milestone approach
The interviewees did not change their behaviour after the previously listed mile-
stones have been achieved in the development of the venture. The product re-
lease or the acquisition of the ﬁrst customer did not impose any sudden changes
in the behaviour. Even the most impactful breakthroughs, such as the acqui-
sition of ﬁnancial capital did not alter the methodologies of the participants in
regards of how they searched.
Instead, it changed what they searched for. The real milestones in regards of
search are the acquisitions of crucial resources.
Once a decisive resource is
secured, the entrepreneur can move on to search for the next pressing means
they have a shortage of. This eﬀect clearly emerged from the data.
Most participants started with scouting for the opportunity. Once the idea was
found a common next step was to search for co-founders to assemble the core
team. Depending on what initial resources the co-founders had, the next big
search impacting almost everyone was to search for ﬁnancial capital. After some
ﬁnancial stability was assured, the purpose of search shifted to ﬁnd ﬁtting uses
for the money, such as on-boarding employees.
==PAGE:42==
32
Results
These search processes have not necessarily happened in a sequential order. In
some cases, the entrepreneurs searched for multiple resources at the same time,
such as seeking money and employees.
Depending on the initial resources under control, sometimes certain processes
were not needed. In B’s case, the co-founders were good friends, and decided to
enter the venture together. Therefore, they did not have to engage in searching
for a co-founder. In E’s case, the opportunity for a venture popped up natu-
rally, as the founder lived their normal life. In their case, the idea came ﬁrst,
eliminating the need to search for it. Regardless of these cases, the pattern
showed that behaviours regarding search are tightly coupled with the controlled
resources and their shortages.
4.2
How do entrepreneurs search?
4.2.1
A never ending search
Before every interview, I explained to each participant, that the goal of the
research is to understand how entrepreneurs search for resources throughout
their early ventures. As a response, the CEO of G bursted out saying that it is
a constant search.
Their opinion was shared by many of the others. Every interviewee expressed
in some way that they feel as if they are always undergoing in some form of
search. Either searching for a resource or for a solution to a problem. This
distinction might be misleading since most of the time the search for a resource
arises due to a problem and vica-versa: the solution to a problem is often times
the acquisition of some kind of resource. Nevertheless, the CEO of E referred
to the latter as "rabbit holes". They explained that searching for solutions to
problems is like going down a rabbit hole. Once the solution is found another
problem occurs, which is another rabbit hole and so on.
These experiences originate from the nature of the beginning of the venture. At
this time, entrepreneurs do not control all the necessary resources and face an
overwhelming amount of problems. Contrary to this, when asked about their
goals for their company, most of them described a position far away from their
current state (See table 4.1). These opposing forces, the sense of "dreaming
big" or "aiming high", and the low amount of resources under control, translate
together into the feeling of search.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 How do entrepreneurs search?
33
Name
Goals
Current performance
A
To become a proﬁtable busi-
ness.
No income yet.
B
To
become
the
dominant
platform, used by all ﬁsher-
men around the world.
Available in one city.
C
Be present in all the large
cities around the world.
Available in a few cities.
D
Go abroad to the US and
possibly get acquired.
Product
is
not
yet
com-
pletely ready.
E
Establish product awareness
and have a successful launch.
Steady business.
F
Expanding in Denmark and
having more shops.
One successful shop.
G
To build something people
love and possibly get ac-
quired.
Available in one city.
Table 4.1: Summary of the participants goals for their ﬁrms.
==PAGE:44==
34
Results
It’s basically a constant search. So I started looking for co-founder.
Found a co-founder. Or even before that. Looking for events to go
networking. I decided to do my own events so I started searching
for venues...
(The CEO of G)
4.2.2
It is all about eﬃciency
Due to the low amount of resources, entrepreneurs have to do as much as they
can with as little as possible. Eﬃciency is the name of the game. One over-
looked and rarely mentioned resource that was referenced frequently by many
participants was time. Time spent on searching for something is time taken
away from doing something else. But its eﬀects are more impactful than that.
The CEO of C explained that in their case, it is getting increasingly more and
more diﬃcult to ﬁnd an investor, due to the age of their company and the fact
that it is not yet proﬁtable.
A great way to understand and appreciate the signiﬁcance of search, is to take
a look at how much time it consumes.
Half of my time is going with following up with contracts from in-
vestors, writing out project proposals together with [J], writing re-
sponses to potential partners and potential investors... At least 40-
50% of my time is spent assisting [J] with searching for more money,
searching for partners, talking to external people, talking to our
freelancers...
(The CTO of A)
The quote above is from the CTO of the company A. Their role is crucial in
the venture, since their product is an unconventional, innovative software, the
development of which requires very speciﬁc knowledge. Still, half of their time
is spent on assisting with the search for resources.
4.2.3
The good: exploiting known resources
Eﬃciency, therefore, is a crucial aspect of managing resources [Trenton, 2019].
When the company B faced the need for a new employee, someone to manage
==PAGE:45==
4.2 How do entrepreneurs search?
35
their relationships with their partner restaurants, they experienced a shortage
in human capital. Their CEO knew a person who might be suitable for this job.
The company approached this person, knowing their capabilities, and ended up
nailing a work contract with them. This way the problem was solved with as
little eﬀort and investment as possible.
Something very similar happened to the company A. In their case, one of the
founders used to be a former teacher. When they faced the problem of requiring
someone with speciﬁc knowledge, they immediately tried to on-board a former
student of theirs. This attempt ended up being a success, and their company
acquired someone they knew would ﬁt in, and be a useful workforce with great
eﬃciency.
Let’s talk to the people we sort of know the quality of already before
just start applying broadly...
(The CEO of A)
I refer to this phenomena as exploitational search, because solving a problem
in this manner relies on exploiting the resources under control. It is by far the
most eﬀective, and, therefore, the most favoured scenario that can occur. In
both of the cases mentioned above, the exploited resource was the social capital
of the owners, where they found the quick solution through their network. But,
it is just as easy to exploit previously existing ﬁnancial or human capital.
As an example, the scarcity of ﬁnancial capital, the chasing of which takes away
half of the time of the CTO of the company A, caused almost no inconvenience
to the company F, who were able to ﬁnance themselves from the spared money
of the founders and their families. In their case, they were able to exploit their
existing ﬁnancial capital.
Utilising human capital happens when someone already possesses the ability to
satisfy a certain need. In D’s case the interviewee explained that since this is
not their ﬁrst venture, they already knew the process of how to register their
ﬁrm, how to apply for founding and basic knowledge on how to market it. In
this case, they leveraged upon their previous experience.
4.2.4
The bad: experimenting
Whereas exploitational search starts with "we had", experimental search starts
with "we tried". Whenever a need arises for something, and the solution can
==PAGE:46==
36
Results
not be solved utilising the already controlled resources, the entrepreneur must
resolve to experimenting. This process is tedious and ineﬃcient, therefore, it is
usually avoidable. Only usually, because testing and experimenting, to a certain
degree, is part of the entrepreneurial practice [Ries, 2011].
In my research two interviewed companies went through a very resource con-
suming round of experimental search. In C’s case, the company required an
application to be developed. They had resource constraints, so building it in-
house was unfeasible. To solve this issue, the CEO started looking for a suitable
candidate to outsource the development work.
Their ﬁrst attempt was to ﬁnd a local development ﬁrm. They asked around
in their network for recommendations, and got in touch with several possible
companies. But due to the very high price oﬀerings, these attempts were quickly
shut down. They then decided to ﬁnd a company abroad based on valuations
in review sites. This way, they got in touch with an Indian developer company.
After several rounds of interviews they hired the company for the job, with a
delivery date set to three months.
After several months of delay, it became apparent that the company can not keep
up with its promise, therefore, the agreement had to be cancelled. At this point
C has already invested a large amount of money and time, but the solution was
still not feasible. They then reached out to their network again, and got in touch
with a freelancer, who they hired but ﬁred after two months due to the lack of
progress. After trying out so many options, investing eight months of time, and
a non-negligible amount of money, C ﬁnally found a local company, working
with outsourcing development work, and with a money back guarantee in case
of not reaching the set milestones. This ﬁrm ended up successfully delivering
the application.
In this example the company C lacked human capital. Since they weren’t able
to resolve this issue using only their resources, they had to expand their search
radius and try to hire someone. In their ﬁrst try, they chose a local development
company based on their familiarity with the local work-ethics.
This failure,
however, was a success because it was quick and did not cost much eﬀort. After
this, they either relied on the recommendations of their network, or on the
review sites. Neither of these tries were successful, nor cheap.
The company G went through a very similar process. In their case, the founder
of the company was looking for a co-founder who would compliment their sales
and business skills, with the required technical knowledge. Their incentive was
very similar to the case of C. They also needed an application to be developed,
but instead of outsourcing it, the CEO decided to on-board it. In order to do
this, they engaged in a very tedious and long process to ﬁnd their co-founder.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 How do entrepreneurs search?
37
Similarly to C, the CEO of G ﬁrst reached out to their network for a suitable
person. Nobody seemed interested, so they tried going to networking events
and meetups. During these events, they reached out to as many people as they
could, but did not manage to secure a partner.
Their next strategy was to
organise match-making events for individuals looking for a co-founder, which
they invested a lot of eﬀort into organising. They invited speakers to make the
events appealing to guests, and made a speech introducing their own need for
a CTO. Still, even after investing months of their time, not even the second
matchmaking event, with more than 150 attendants ended up being successful.
Throughout this time, the CEO was documenting this whole process on a blog,
where eventually a person reached out to them, and they became partners.
We are constantly trying to ﬁnd the right approach and ﬁnd out who
are the right people to talk with. And I think that’s the hardest part.
Finding out who is actually relevant to talk to...
(The CEO of A)
Even though experimentation usually burns up a lot of resources, there is one
unique positive consequence to it. The result of the process translates to human
capital.
The experience of the search will be beneﬁcial next time a similar
problem occurs. In this regard, experimentation is closely related to learning.
I don’t have really a business background so everything I learned
through doing. And I can see when I look back three years ago I was
very young. I didn’t know a thing so it all took a lot of time just to
get here...
(The CEO of F)
Contrary to my expectations, mimicking ended up being a surprisingly under-
utilised way of cheapening experimental search. In all of the interviews, only one
person described copying already acknowledged, well-known solutions in order
to cheaply ﬁnd resolution outside of their exploitable resources. In that case the
founder of the company created the design of the product without any relevant
knowledge or background, simply by copying other successful applications.
4.2.5
The ugly? Ignorance
One of the emerging themes from the analysis was passive search, which tightly
coupled with the very frequent code being found. After taking a much closer
==PAGE:48==
38
Results
look at the gathered data that yielded these terms, an interesting behaviour
shaped up. A strategy that has been commonly utilised amongst entrepreneurs
was to acknowledge the need for something, but to not engage in any kind of
activity to resolve it.
This behaviour resulted in a sense of being alert about that particular necessity.
They did not invest any resources to ﬁnd a solution to their needs, but continued
to work on other aspects of their ventures. In the meantime, often times an
opportunity presented itself out of the consequences of actions not controlled
by the entrepreneur. This opportunity then was taken, and the solution of the
problem was found.
Yes, well if it comes... We’re not actually searching for it, but we
are open for it...
(The CEO of A)
A great example of this was when the company B got to know through one
of their contacts, that a major customer segment they were targeting is legally
restricted to purchase from them. This was a serious setback for their plans, but
instead of searching for a solution to get around the legal requirements, they
decided to abandon the subject. The CEO said that they did not really care
about this new piece of information, and just started focusing on other pressing
issues. Eventually, they heard from someone that the information they received
about the legal restrictions were false in the ﬁrst place. So they returned their
focus to the previously abandoned customers.
In C’s case, the company needed an oﬃce space, but it was not a pressing
issue, since they had their current place secured for a while. Therefore, they did
not engage in any type of search yet. This behaviour continued, until the CEO
received a phone call from an old colleague. During their conversation, the CEO
happened to mention about their venture and the problem of soon needing a
new oﬃce space. The colleague on the other side happened to have some place
to oﬀer for free, and this way, without consciously engaging in the search of an
oﬃce space they acquired a great deal.
It is becoming a bigger and bigger priority.
We will have to do
something about it, but for now we just kind of been waiting for it
to come to us.
(The CEO of B)
==PAGE:49==
4.2 How do entrepreneurs search?
39
Problems that are not urgent or that are not blocking anything else are dealt
with this strategy, because it is a very eﬃcient way of solving them. This type
of search was dominant when entrepreneurs expressed themselves, saying that
they are "always searching".
It implied they knew they had shortages, but
either they decided not to deal with it, or they have no capacity to deal with it.
One could become more eﬀective at passive search, if they recognise the need
for something earlier than others. This grants them more time for the solu-
tion to naturally occur, this way solving the initial problem. This observation
suggests, that entrepreneurs who plan ahead, and recognise upcoming future
resource scarcity earlier than others have a higher chance of resolving it without
engagement. Therefore, they have a competitive advantage over others.
A great facilitator to be found with the solution was to utilise the internet
with special emphasis on social networks. Multiple participants were found by
potential partners or even investors through their presence on LinkedIn. D,
who received the most opportunities through passive search, encountered four
oﬀerings from investors through the platform. A was approached by Google
due to their online presence. These two cases might be uniquely attractive for
outsiders to reach out, due to the ventures being in the niche high-tech space,
nevertheless the other companies also encountered similar experiences through
social media.
Advertisement, granting exposure, naturally enhances the chances of being
found, but it is not considered to be an active part of the passive search process,
because it aims at ﬁnding customers and building a brand. It is a fortunate
side-eﬀect, that also facilitates people reaching out with solutions.
The CEO of D explained that the problem they oﬀer a solution for, the existence
of deep fakes, is easy to understand by others and to communicate to other
people.
They argued that this is the reason they are found by partners so
often. This suggests that clear storytelling also emphasises the success of passive
search.
4.2.6
Sharing is caring
The entrepreneur whose resources allow to engage more in exploitational search,
and less in experimental or passive search has a competitive advantage over the
others. One way to simply "enhance" one’s resources and, therefore, facilitate
the chances of resolving issues by exploitation, is to get access to someone else’s
resources. This is the case when someone has a mentor.
==PAGE:50==
40
Results
In the analysis ﬁve out of the interviewed seven participants referred to men-
torship, and its role of helping them quickly ﬁnd answers. This is especially
true for the younger interviewees. Everyone except for one person under 30 had
access to mentorship.
She knows: Okay marketing-wise you need to talk to this guy, ﬁnance-
wise talk to this guy or whatever. She’s very well connected.
(The CEO of C)
In C’s case, the company acquired a round of funding from a private investor.
Later on the investor took on the role of mentoring the CEO. In this case, the
company acquired ﬁnancial capital, but also access to the investor’s human and
social capital in one round. Another interviewee referred to this scenario as
acquiring smart money. This is a stable relationship, since it is in both of their
interest for the company to overcome problems quickly.
Getting access to someone else’s network and knowledge, is such a huge incen-
tive, that the company G turned down an investor partially due to the investor’s
unrelated network and ﬁeld of knowledge for their venture.
Across all of the interviews the CEO of E was by far the most reliant on their
network. They also had the largest network amongst the participants, and they
were the only ones asked to become a mentor. In fact, one of their companies
was started by someone asking them to take on a mentoring role. Later on their
relationship developed into becoming co-founders.
4.3
What do entrepreneurs search for?
4.3.1
Searching for an idea, or being found by it
Each venture starts with an idea. When asked about how the interviewees found
theirs, two common paths shaped up. They either stumbled upon one during
their everyday life and decided to pursue it, or they consciously searched and
evaluated several, until one was deemed worth pursuing.
The ﬁrst situation occurred for the CEO’s of B, G and E. In their cases, they
bumped into a problem and decided to oﬀer a solution to it. First, they further
explored the idea, then they moved on to do other tasks, to start their venture
==PAGE:51==
4.3 What do entrepreneurs search for?
41
such as validating the idea or ﬁnding a co-founder. This situation is very similar
to passive search, in the notion that in this case the participants were open to
start a venture, but did not engage actively in searching for ideas, until one
popped up naturally.
The other scenario starts with an incentive of wanting to start a business. Driven
by this, entrepreneurs engage in a conscious search for ideas. The ideas are
explored based on what they would like to do or are interested in.
The ideas then got researched and pitched to friends and families for evaluation.
Eventually one emerges, which then becomes the one pursued. In F’s case the
choice for the ﬁnal concept was based on an opportunity that put one of their
ideas in a more favourable position.
And I took it [the idea] to my friends, explained what I wanted to do
and... They had a better technological inside on AI and computer
science...
(The CEO of D)
This search process is experimental. The entrepreneurs did not know which
idea to go with, but they had a very concrete area of interest. Around this time
they started to experiment, until eventually they found one considered worth
pursuing.
4.3.2
Dating: ﬁnding a co-founder
I went to networking events and so on. Everyone was pretty much
taken like dating. Or at least the good ones.
(The CEO of G)
One of the major targets that participants needed to speciﬁcally search for in
the beginning of their venture was their co-founder. This is a major milestone,
therefore, it received a lot of attention in most cases. When participants were
asked about one large diﬃculty they had to overcome, multiple of them de-
scribed a situation when they had to deal with diﬃculties arising from one of
the co-founders’ leaving the company.
Neither of the interviewed companies
were founded by only one person.
==PAGE:52==
42
Results
Both of the non-technological ventures started with a pre-established team,
whose members were together since the inception of the idea. In their case, no
eﬀorts were invested into ﬁnding a partner.
On the contrary, in the case of the technological ventures, everyone except B
had to go through searching for a colleague. For the company A the search
process was very quick. The CTO found their co-founder during exploitation,
in their own network. At that point, they had a weak connection. They knew
each other, but only vaguely.
For D, C and G, the task was more diﬃcult. In all of their cases, they had to
engage in experimental search. the CEO’s of D and C found their co-founders
fairly quickly through networking events. For the CEO of G, the process took
much longer and multiple tries.
This is someone that I will be spending more than eight hours a
day with and if we can’t really collaborate and so on then this is
probably not a good idea...
(The CEO of G)
The reason for the diﬀerences in search between the technological ventures might
have been due to their initial team composition, and partner requirements. In
A’s case, the founder needed someone to take care of the business side of things,
while they wanted to take care of the technological development. In all the other
cases the process was reversed, someone with the idea was seeking for someone
to develop it.
Another reason could be originated from the network diﬀerences between the
participants. This view is supported by the fact that only the CEO of A had long
previous work experience of the four ventures engaged in ﬁnding a co-founder.
4.3.3
Money does not grow on trees
Another commonality amongst the interviewed companies was their requirement
for ﬁnancial capital. All of the ventures required investments of some sort and
with that, the founders had to ﬁnd ways to secure the ﬂow of money.
In the case of E and F, the two non-technology ventures, the founders had
enough ﬁnancing either themselves, or within the family, that it proved to be
enough. In their cases, no additional eﬀorts were invested into ﬁnding more
==PAGE:53==
4.3 What do entrepreneurs search for?
43
ﬁnance. Their ventures diﬀer from the others in that they did not require to
ﬁnance months of work upfront to test their products.
In the ventures based on technology, everyone engaged in search with similar
strategies. All companies tried acquiring soft money ﬁrst, through applying for
funds and competitions, with more or less success. The interviewed CEO of
the oldest tech company, C, also acquired a round of investment from a private
investor, who later became their mentor.
The founders of A had done the most experiments to acquire money, and they
also developed the most elaborate strategy. They enrolled in a program, through
which they could receive small investments from multiple small investors. Even
though they achieved successes, they decided to abandon it, due to its time
consuming nature.
Considering how little money we actually get and how much time
we would have to talk to one investor, we ended up deciding this is
not worth our time...
(The CEO of A)
They also considered crowd-funding, but decided not to pursue it due to lack of
experience. Their strategy is to focus solely on writing high-quality applications
to funds, or searching for relevant investors through their network, and confer-
ence meetings. Regarding the latter, they said that ﬁnding the right person is
the biggest challenge. They always try to have a few applications out there.
The situation of D is somewhat exceptional amongst the others in a way that
they have actually been oﬀered investments, without them searching for it. The
CEO of the company said investors hear of what they are doing, and reach out
to them.
4.3.4
Finding the right person to employ
Every company, with the exception of D, encountered the problem of requir-
ing to hire someone in their early development. Due to the small sizes of the
companies, the ﬁrst few employees have a large impact, therefore, the need to
acquire someone with a guaranteed quality was very high.
None of the ventures used traditional job portals to search for the suitable
candidate. Everyone had a large emphasis on trying to on-board people they
==PAGE:54==
44
Results
knew, in A’s case, this was a straight up policy. The CEO of B explained that
they used to only employ friends, then tried hiring through job portals, but due
to their negative experiences they returned to hiring only people they knew.
The interviewee also explained that soon they will require someone for a crucial
role, and that they do not have a strategy for it yet. Knowing the quality of the
person they hire is, therefore, considered to be highly important.
It’s just because we don’t have the resources to spend a lot of time
looking for somebody unless they’re really really important. And I
think it could become like a full-time job going out and talking to
all the people...
(The CEO of B)
The companies that were not able to resolve their missing human capital through
their network, ended up experimenting until they found a creative solution that
worked. After trying out job portals with little success, F found a steady solution
through a governmental institution that helps unemployed people to ﬁnd a job.
G had budget constraints. To cope with it they found ways to on-board students
doing their internships. Their strategy was to be very strict on their process of
selecting the students, this way, after picking a suitable candidate, they were
able to meaningfully contribute almost immediately. This process worked out so
well, that they said a large portion of the product was actually built by students.
4.3.5
Psychological capital - the found one
It is diﬃcult to deﬁne what level of psychological capital is enough. As a conse-
quence of this, it is also diﬃcult to grasp when it is not enough and, therefore,
when it should be subjected to search.
In this study, no types of psychological capital introduced in the literature re-
view were ever mentioned as the subject of search. Many participants talked
about motivating events, and impactful milestones that ﬁlled them with hope
and motivated them during uncertain times, but these were never a subject of
purposeful search.
Instead, entrepreneurs received enough boost to keep their levels of psychological
capital through passive search. Often times, interviewees elaborated on the fact
that winning an investment, or being noticed by other companies served as a
meaningful boost in conﬁdence and motivation.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 What entrepreneurs do not search for?
45
Google approached us in Q1 2018 just for dialogue and “see okay
you’re working with AR, we are working with AR, how does these
two things match up” and that was quite motivating that Google
writes you...
(The CEO of B)
This observation suggest, that psychological capital is always acquired through
passive search, as a fortunate by-product of other resource acquisitions and
events.
4.4
What entrepreneurs do not search for?
4.4.1
Networking - the used but not needed
Social capital seems to be a resource that is unique amongst the others in a
sense that it transmits other resources, but in itself, it is not something that
provides value. It helps the acquisition of other resources by facilitating search,
and by allowing quick access to the resources embedded in it. Bourdieu referred
to this phenomena by calling it a virtual resource that needs to be activated
[Bourdieu, Pierre. Woolsey Biggart, 1986].
Unlike the pursuit to acquire human capital in the form of hiring an employee,
or to acquire ﬁnancial capital as an investment, the need for social capital is not
that apparent. The value it provides is displaced from its acquisition date. It
only contributes value later on, if ever.
In this study, none of the interviewees set out to acquire social capital on its
own. It was always a byproduct of searching for something else. Networking
served multiple times as a pathway to acquire a co-founder leading to a trusted
source of human capital, or a way to acquire investors to potentially pin down
a much needed investment.
In a sense, behaviours related to networking were constantly hindered by the
need for the immediate acquisition for resources. The pursuit of eﬃciency re-
sulted in the absence of proactive networking.
==PAGE:56==
46
Results
4.4.2
Other types of capital
Since none of the interviewees had access to inﬂuential networks, nor have they
mentioned purposefully seeking access to it, the role of cultural capital was not
explored in the study. Similarly, no data was collected about whether family
members were entrepreneurs.
Therefore, this study has no traces of search
activities related to cultural capital.
Speciﬁcally ethnic capital and its role was not explored either since it was not
in the direct scope of the study, but there was one case where it presumably
could have played a role. When the CEO of D, who is not a native resident in
Denmark and who does not speak the local language, faced the issue of needing
a co-founder in the role of a CTO, they went to a networking event. In this
networking event they found a person from the same ethnic group, and then
became co-founders.
Since this was only one case, it is not conclusive as to whether their ethnic capital
played a role in facilitating search in this case or not. But it is an interesting
insight, because their situation was very similar to the case of the CEO of G,
who is also not a native Danish citizen, and who needed a co-founder as a CTO,
but who went through a very long search process to ﬁnd one.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
How do entrepreneurs search and for what?
This study found that entrepreneurs do not engage in active search for psy-
chological capital in their early ventures, instead, they always rely on passive
search. One could argue that they might not consciously realise their need for
psychological capital, and, therefore. this process should not be considered pas-
sive search. This argument ties back to the diﬃculty of deﬁning what level of
psychological capital is not enough, therefore, yields searching.
Another argument is that when engaging in a venture the entrepreneurs are
initially motivated and cheerful about the prospects of their new ﬁrm. They
are committed and hopeful that the venture will be successful. It is arguable
that this initial stash fuels the venture in the early days. Eventually this eﬀect
wears out as the novelty of the situation fades, which yields in engaging in active
search.
Both of these arguments would require further more focused research on how
psychological capital is acquired, and how the need for it is built up as the
venture matures. In the context of this study, the notion that psychological
capital was acquired only through passive search, suggests that some search
processes are more adequate for certain types of resources than others. Contrary
==PAGE:58==
48
Discussion
to this, during the analysis, no other capital was acquired utilising only one type
of search. A participant even received oﬀers for ﬁnancial capital through passive
search. The observations on which search type is used for which resource are
summarised on table 5.1.
Resource type
Search type used to acquire
it
Human capital
Exploitational
Experimental
Passive
Financial capital
Exploitational
Experimental
Passive
Psychological capital
Passive
Social capital
Table 5.1: Summary of which search type is used for which resource.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 A problem with problemistic search
49
5.2
A problem with problemistic search
Engaging in search starts with the realisation of a need for something. In the
case of the most popular behavioural search model for ﬁrms by [R. M. Cyert;
J. G. March, 1963], it is a need to restore the performance to an aspired level.
This model begins by assuming that the original level of equilibrium has been
disrupted by some kind of problem. Hence the name, problemistic search. An
illustration of the model can be seen on ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Behavioural model for ﬁrms: the problemistic search. It assumes
that ﬁrms engage in either slack of problemistic search depending
on their performance related to their level of aspirations. With the
performance restored, the search stops. In this model, aspirations
refer to the aspired performance of the ﬁrm.
This model did not ﬁt the way entrepreneurs behaved in this study. When asked
about their goals for their ﬁrm, they described a state that was far away from
their current level of performance (see in table 4.1), leaving them in a state of
being overwhelmed by problems and resource shortages.
To cope with this situation, and try to make the best of their possibilities, they
only addressed the pressuring issues, while remained mindful about the others,
helping them recognise eﬃcient solutions that popped-up along the development
of their ventures. This behaviour was referred to as passive search in this study.
Aligned with the idea of [Clough et al., 2019], two participants described that
they engage in preliminary search activities to deﬁne what the problem is exactly
about. If the need for resolution is deemed important enough, entrepreneurs ac-
==PAGE:60==
50
Discussion
tively engage in search. Due to their initially low amount of controlled resources,
their possibilities are limited. To remain eﬃcient, the search process starts by
investigating whether the solution can be found within their controlled set of
resources. This behaviour was referred to as exploitational search.
In case of unsuccessful exploitation, the search radius has to be increased, there-
fore, the actor engages in experimental search. This type of behaviour is costly,
since the quality of the solution is not foreseeable, resulting in repeated attempts
in case of unsatisfactory results. To increase the chances of ﬁnding a feasible
solution quicker, entrepreneurs utilise their human capital and their network
for recommendations on what to try. This way, they experiment in a targeted
manner. An illustration of the proposed model can be seen on ﬁgure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Behavioural search model for entrepreneurs in their early ventures.
The problem is approached by either passive search, or by ex-
ploitation.
If exploitation does not lead to desired results, the
entrepreneur engages in experimentation.
5.3
The quality of the resources
Linder examined resource conﬁgurations and their eﬀects for startup survival
and found that having only ﬁnancial capital with no social and human capital
appears to be the least useful composition at the start of a venture [Linder et al.,
2019]. This study provides support and explanations, as to why this phenomena
appears. Social and human capital is used twice in the search process. Once
during exploitation and once during targeted experimentation. Therefore they
play a more crucial role in making sure that resources are spent eﬃciently. Their
absence results in ineﬀective random experimentation, which then results in a
higher chance of running out the them.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 The quality of the resources
51
Figure 5.3: Exploitative search aims to utilise the already controlled resources.
Experimental search relies on trying out new alternatives.
There is a qualitative diﬀerence between networks based on their adequacy to
complement the problems an entrepreneur has to face.
The same way it is
diﬃcult to map someone’s network structure (bridging and bonding contacts,
structural holes...), it is also diﬃcult to measure the quality of their network.
When participants faced the same problem, ﬁnding a co-founder for the role of
a CTO, some of them had a vastly diﬀerent experience. The CEO of D found
someone immediately, because they knew where to look. Their network was of
high quality to facilitate a search like this, since they already had a venture
beforehand in tech. Whereas the CEO of G who did not study, nor work in
tech related ﬁelds experienced a lot of diﬃculties.
Similarly, when searching for a team to develop an application, the CEO of D,
who already engaged in a venture which had a similar product, was able to
utilise their previous experience, and ﬁnd a suitable candidate for the job. The
CEO of C on the other hand, did not have any previous experience to facilitate
their search, nor was their network of high quality for a search like this. All
these resulted in a costly and ineﬃcient search.
==PAGE:62==
52
Discussion
5.4
Closure and brokerage
In the context of organisational learning, two contrasting models have been
introduced by March (1991): exploitation and exploration. Exploitation builds
on perfecting the already known, making it more eﬃcient. On the contrary,
exploration is proﬁled as a more labour intensive and uncertain process, which
oﬀers the possibility to get to knew new methodologies. [J. March, 1991].
Burt (2019) pointed out the similarity between this division and the two net-
working models amongst entrepreneurs: closure and brokerage. Closure oﬀers
more stability while relying on less maintenance, whereas brokerage favours in-
novation and growth, but it costs more to maintain [Burt, 2019].
This analogy can be advanced to the context of this study. Exploitative search
aims to be low cost and oﬀers quick solutions utilising the already controlled
resources, whereas experimental search takes substantial eﬀort and yields a so-
lution with an uncertain quality.
In all of these cases, there is a trade-oﬀbetween variety and eﬃciency. The
natural question that arises is: what is the optimal distribution of the two?
Burt argued that the best case scenario occurs if the venture starts with a closed
network, and then progressively translates to brokerage as the ﬁrm matures.
This study examined entrepreneurs in their early ventures. The observed be-
haviour was that entrepreneurs emphasised eﬃciency above everything. This
aligns with Burt’s recommendation, which in this case of search in early ven-
tures would translate into the preference of exploitative search. These two do-
mains can have a causal relationship. A closure might be better at facilitating
the unique search tasks an entrepreneur encounters in the beginning of the ven-
ture, or brokerage can be a consequence of an expanded social network, due to
experimental search.
Another similarity is that none of the observed entrepreneurs engaged in search-
ing for social capital. Networking was always a necessity in the process of search-
ing for another resource. This also aligns with Burt, who suggests that in the
early days of a venture, a closed network might be advantageous due to its
stability.
This yields, that if an entrepreneur in a nascent venture has to do more experi-
mental search, which results in an involuntary expansion of the actors network,
that entrepreneur is not progressing on the path leading to the highest chance
for success according to both Burt and this study.
This observation seems
counter-intuitive, but the phenomenon can be understood by highlighting that
==PAGE:63==
5.5 An unmentioned resource: time
53
this increase in social capital requires an investment of resources from the en-
trepreneur, which is a bigger burden in the beginning of a venture, due to its
resource scarce nature.
Furthering this parallel between the preferred networking and search behaviours,
Burt’s suggestion yields that as successful ventures progress, the entrepreneurs
would start practising more intentional networking behaviours in parallel with
engaging more in experimental search. The notion that supports this view is
that out of the important search subjects listed in the study, such as opportunity,
co-founder, money, co-workers, both the idea search as well as the co-founder
search should seize to be a problem as the ﬁrm grows. This allows resources
to be focused elsewhere. Of course whether this relation continues has to be
subject to further research.
5.5
An unmentioned resource: time
During the discovery of the relevant literature, to get a good grasp on what
entrepreneurs recognise worth considering during the search process, and to
understand what they search for, a high emphasis was aimed towards ﬁnding
out what the resources are, how they are categorised, and what each category
includes.
During this process none of the studies seemed to mention time as a separate re-
source. In this research every interviewee expressed in some way the importance
of considering it as an investment when engaging in an activity.
Tasks taking too much time were considered undesirable, due to their ineﬃ-
ciency. The CTO of A stopped looking for small scale investors, because it did
not yield enough money to be worth their time. The CEO of B expressed that
they desperately need an employee for a crucial role in their venture, but they
do not have the time to be able to engage in search. The CEO of C suggested
diﬃculties in ﬁnding an investor now that their company is being considered
old.
Eﬃciency was a core consideration for entrepreneurs when deciding whether
or not to engage in search activities. To be eﬃcient, one has to consider the
resources invested, and their envisioned returns. When entrepreneurs considered
time as an investment, they expressed that it is a valuable and ﬁnite resource
for them, that needs to be managed.
Social capital is considered a special type of resource, one that in itself is not
==PAGE:64==
54
Discussion
valuable [Bourdieu, Pierre. Woolsey Biggart, 1986], that needs to be activated
to provide its beneﬁts. This study argues that time is a special resource as well.
One that needs to be managed, the process of which translates to the pursuit
of eﬃciency.
5.6
The cost of ignorance
Passive search can be a very eﬀective tool if used correctly. It can provide high
value without investing a lot of resources.
But, it relies on the notion that
the entrepreneur has a clear overview of the eﬀects of potentially delaying the
acquisition of certain resources. What happens when this is not the case?
The cost of misjudging the need for a certain resource might overthrow the
positive eﬀects imposed by passive search. Some resources could have branching
eﬀects resulting in previously unforeseeable opportunities for future prospects.
Or their earlier acquisition might impose an unanticipated positive avalanche
eﬀect.
For example, an entrepreneur might decide not to actively search for someone
with marketing skills, thinking that it is not essential just yet, therefore, can be
postponed. This way the entrepreneur starts to passively search for a person
to fulﬁl the role.
Later on someone might pop-up naturally.
But it can be
argued, that during the elapsed time between acquiring the person through
passive search and the realisation of the need, someone with adequate skills to
fulﬁl the role would have made more value to the company, than the cost of
acquisition when the need arises. Therefore, considering the opportunity cost,
it would have been more wise to immediately engage in active search instead.
It can be diﬃcult to predict a value of a resource before actually acquiring it.
And, therefore, to predict at which point does it make sense to actively engage
in search. These arguments suggest that while passive search is a powerful tool,
it has the potential to be a fatal mistake as well, therefore, it has to be used
with special care.
5.7
The reward of low-aspirations
According to the proposed model on how entrepreneurs behave when facing
search, the core driving element that forces one to utilise exploitational search
==PAGE:65==
5.7 The reward of low-aspirations
55
above all is the need for eﬃciency. This need arises due to the distant goals
and high aspiration levels entrepreneurs pursue. In this sense, aspiration levels
refer to the diﬃculty to achieve the goals entrepreneurs set themselves for their
venture. High aspiration levels result in a goal that is far away from the current
state of the ﬁrm, and, therefore, is diﬃcult to achieve, whereas a low-aspiring
entrepreneur pursues a goal that is easier to achieve.
What happens if an entrepreneur puts the bar lower? Lower aspiration levels
mean that the pursued goal is closer to the current state and, therefore, is more
approachable. This yields in a moderation of the need to be eﬃcient. If the
goal is easier to achieve, there is more room to fail. The pursuit of eﬃciently
investing every bit of the resources is relaxed.
For example an entrepreneur who sets a goal to make a functioning family
business more eﬃcient in order to get more out of it and does not pursue to
grow fast and to became international has a low aspiration level. Therefore,
along the way of achieving this goal there is less penalty for not being that
eﬃcient.
This yields that contrary to what we expect, low-aspiration entrepreneurs can
aﬀord to engage more in experimental search, which in turn makes them more
prone to explore new and niche ways to solve problems and to access resources.
This yields, that they would be perceived as being more innovative.
Since their strive to be eﬃcient is lower, they can also allow themselves to engage
in proactive networking, and they have a higher tolerance for accessing resources
later leading into being more prone to use passive search.
It seems counter-intuitive that entrepreneurs with lower aspiration levels seem
to be the ones emerging as being more innovative.
==PAGE:66==
56
Discussion
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
6.1
Concluding remarks
The aim of this study was to examine how entrepreneurs engage in search from
the behavioural perspective.
The scope of the research was narrowed down
to the beginning of the venture. One crucial goal of the research was to de-
termine whether the problemistic search model used for ﬁrms is applicable to
entrepreneurs or not.
The exploratory research was carried out through 11 semi-structured interviews,
out of which 7 ended up being used. This is considered to be a representative
sample size [W. Creswell, 2009]. The interviewees were all entrepreneurs cur-
rently actively engaged in a young venture.
The study concluded that problemistic search does not align with the way en-
trepreneurs search. According to the framework, the search begins with the dis-
ruption of an equilibrium point between aspired and the current performance.
In the case of entrepreneurs, this equilibrium was not there at the ﬁrst place,
since their aspired goals were way above their ﬁrms current state.
Instead, the introduced behavioural model builds upon the notion that the be-
ginning of the venture is characterised with scarce resources and high ambitions.
==PAGE:68==
58
Conclusions
These forces combined result in a need for the eﬃcient acquisition of resources.
Three search related behaviours are elaborated. Exploitation utilises already
controlled resources. This type of search is eﬀective and desirable. The solutions
oﬀered by it have a known value, and are easily acquired.
Experimental search happens when exploitation did not work. In this case the
entrepreneur resolves to experiment to acquire the needed resources. This re-
quires a lot of investment, and the quality of the solution is unknown beforehand.
The process translates to experience, that the entrepreneur can rely upon if a
similar situation occurs next time.
The third introduced behaviour was passive search, which happens when the
entrepreneur acknowledges the need for a resource, but does not engage in any
kind of activity aimed at acquiring it. By being alert about the necessity, upon
an opportunity presenting itself, the entrepreneurs can easily harvest it, there-
fore, resolving the issue with little to none invested resources.
To take into account the consequences of event sequentiation, the research
explored the eﬀects imposed by achieving important milestones throughout
the venture. Special attention was towards uncovering how search related be-
haviours change over time. This approach failed, with the conclusion that en-
trepreneurs did not change their behaviours after milestones. What changed
instead was the subject of their search.
The common targets entrepreneurs were searching for were subjected to further
analysis to discover unique insights about them. They included searching for
the opportunity, for co-founders, for ﬁnancial investment and for coworkers.
Search was also explored from the perspective of resources. This showed, that
no entrepreneurs engaged in any proactive networking activities to acquire social
capital on its own. It also uncovered that psychological capital was only acquired
through passive search.
6.2
Limitations
Due to the design of the study, some limitations apply on generalising the ﬁnd-
ings. The research was carried out in Denmark. Further studies should conﬁrm
whether the same behaviours apply in diﬀerent cultural settings. The study fo-
cused on entrepreneurs in their early ventures. Therefore, the ﬁndings are only
applicable in this part of the venture.
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Implications
59
The role of cultural and ethnic capital did not get explored due to them not
being represented in the data. Exploring these requires more targeted research
focusing on these alone.
The study initially started on focusing only on entrepreneurs with ventures
situated in the technology space. Due to time limitations, this restriction had
to be relaxed to get a representative amount of participants. Nevertheless, this
initial focus might have caused the data to over-represent technological ventures
in the sample.
6.3
Implications
This study clearly answers Clough’s (2019) call to examine problemistic search in
an entrepreneurial perspective. Therefore, contributing to the existing literature
by concluding that problemistic search does not apply to entrepreneurs in their
early venture [Clough et al., 2019]. Instead, a new behavioural model is proposed
to ﬁll in this gap in the literature.
The study also suggests a reason as to why a closed network is more beneﬁcial in
the beginning of a venture according to Burt. The lack of wasteful experimental
search in the early venture yields a lack of involuntary expansion of the social
capital, and, therefore, a closed network. This suggests that Burt’s ﬁnding could
be a consequence of searching behaviours.
It is also suggested that low-aspiring entrepreneurs are expected to be more
innovative throughout their venture.
Evidence is provided on how mentorship and other stable strong relationships
help entrepreneurs in making their search processes more eﬃcient through shar-
ing, and, therefore, enabling them to achieve more with investing less. A practi-
cal implementation of this knowledge is to seek more stable, mutually beneﬁcial
relationships with others to facilitate each others search processes.
By introducing the concept of passive search, entrepreneurs are encouraged to
carefully evaluate whether the need for something is worth investing resources
in its acquisition. Outlining this seemingly controversial process might provide
a new tool in an entrant entrepreneur’s repertoire to facilitate search.
The notion of passive search also explains and emphasises the advantage that
arises from the ability to foresee and predict future resource scarcities ahead
of time. Entrepreneurs capable of predicting these upcoming shortages earlier
==PAGE:70==
60
Conclusions
than others have more time to resolve the issue through passive search, therefore,
without investment. By seeing the obstacle earlier, and, therefore, not letting it
becoming an urgent issue, the solution could be acquired with less investment.
6.4
Future work
Due to its exploratory nature, the study provides a fertile ground as the base
for further research. The eﬀects observed create a lot of questions that can be
explored in the future studies.
Problemistic search is a well known and accepted model in an organisational
setting. This study concluded that entrepreneurs start out with diﬀerent be-
haviours when it comes to search. Still, the connection between the two models
remains unexplored. As ventures mature, some grow up to be organisations on
their own. This implies that along this process, behaviours related to search
should transition from entrepreneurial to problemistic search. Exploring this
conversion could be the subject of a future research.
Another important implication of the ﬁndings presented in this study is that en-
trepreneurs capable of better utilising their existing resources for exploitational
search are subject to a competitive advantage over the others. Exploring what
makes an entrepreneur’s resources be better to facilitate this kind of search can,
therefore, be a decisive factor in why some succeed and some fail over time. An
additional dimension to explore is what promotes more eﬃcient experimental
search, which could also serve as an important advantage.
The discussion on the acquisition of psychological capital concluded that further
studies are required to clear out how entrepreneurs acquire this type of resource.
Studies having a longer scope could explain whether their acquisition strategy
changes as the venture matures.
Uncovering how search related behaviours change in regards to diﬀerent meth-
ods of entrepreneurship could help further establishing the diﬀerences amongst
them. For example, search might happen diﬀerently in an extremely resource
scarce environment, which could be examined by researching someone engaged
in bricolage [Baker and Nelson, 2005]. Based on the presented model, the suc-
cess of someone engaged in entrepreneurial bricolage would rely on their ability
to eﬃciently do experimental search.
This research suggests that entrepreneurs with lower aspirations should be able
to aﬀord more experimental search than their counterparts. This concludes, that
==PAGE:71==
6.4 Future work
61
lower aspirations are a facilitator to being more innovative. As this was not in
the direct scope of this research, it remained unexplored. Further analysis could
shed light as to whether this seemingly counter-intuitive phenomena appears or
not.
==PAGE:72==
62
Conclusions
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Interview guide
The ﬁnal version of the interview guide.
==PAGE:74==
Interview guide 
 
Research 
question:  
How do entrepreneurs in their early ventures search for new resources?  
From a behavioral point of view. What search methodologies do they employ? 
 
The first question is just the warmup question. No notes are being taken here. Just breaking the ice, and easing 
into the conversation. Understanding the topic and the setting, getting to know each other.  
1. Could you tell me about your venture? What part are you playing in it? 
2. Could you tell me about your background? 
3. Could you describe your goals for this venture? What are you trying to achieve? 
a. personal goals 
Then we start to walk through the venture from start to finish. Always focusing to explore the behavior of the 
subject in regards of searching. 
Discovery of opportunity 
1. How did you find the business idea? Why exactly this and not something else? 
a. Search or accident.  
i. Based on human-capital: experience, knowledge, previous work… 
ii. Based on social-capital: family and friend 
iii. Based on other: need for achievement, proving self 
2. Could you describe an average day, when working mainly on ideation?  
Establishing the core team 
1. Could you describe the establishment of the core team? How did you search for 
each other? Why did you needed each other? 
a. Missing knowledge, ways of searching for partner. Methodology of search. Networking. 
2. Could you describe an average day, that you spent actively looking for a partner? 
Establishing a legal entity 
1. Could you tell me about the time you established your company? Did anything 
change in the venture afterwards? 
a. Legal knowledge, credibility, investment 
2. Was there any reason as to why then?  
a. Credibility for acquiring/searching… 
3. Do you see changes in behavior before and after being a legal entity in your search for _? 
Testing first prototype 
1. Could you describe the first time you tested a prototype?  
a. Family, friends, networking, credibility, investment, motivation, hope 
2. How did you search for the testers? Did anything change in the venture afterwards? 
Securing financing 
64
Appendix
==PAGE:75==
1. Could you describe the time you received financing for the first time? How did you 
search for an investor?  
a. credibility, financial, networking 
2. 
 Did having financial capital changed the way you search for _? 
Product release 
1. Could you describe the time you released the product? 
a. credibility, motivation 
2. What problems were you facing at the time? How did you dress them? Did this behavior change 
after the product release? 
Acquiring first customer 
1. Could you tell me about the time you acquired the first paying customer? 
a. motivation, credibility 
2. How did the venture change afterwards? When looking for investment? How about for coworkers? 
Critical events 
1. Could you describe a few positive/negative critical events during the venture?  
General side-questions 
1. Looking back, do you see your way of searching for _ change? If so, how and when? 
2. Could you compare searching for _ before and after _? 
3. What experiences do you have when searching for _? 
4. Could you describe the difference between searching for _ and _? 
5. Could you describe an average/impactful/unsuccessful day of working on the venture? What is it 
that you do? 
6. How was that different from before _? 
A.1 Interview guide
65
==PAGE:76==
66
Appendix
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[Bru, 2015] (2015). New ﬁnancial alternatives in seeding entrepreneurship: Mi-
croﬁnance, crowdfunding, and peer-to-peer innovations.
Entrepreneurship:
Theory and Practice, 39(1):9–26.
[Argote and Greve, 2007] Argote, L. and Greve, H. R. (2007). A Behavioral
Theory of the Firm - 40 years and counting: Introduction and impact. Orga-
nization Science, 18(3):337–349.
[Arrfelt et al., 2013] Arrfelt, M., Wiseman, R. M., and Hult, G. T. M. (2013).
Looking backward instead of forward: Aspiration-driven inﬂuences on the
eﬃciency of the capital allocation process. Academy of Management Journal,
56(4):1081–1103.
[Baker and Nelson, 2005] Baker, T. and Nelson, R. E. (2005). Creating some-
thing from nothing: Resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(3):329–366.
[Baluku et al., 2016] Baluku, M. M., Kikooma, J. F., and Kibanja, G. M.
(2016). Psychological capital and the startup capital–entrepreneurial success
relationship. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 28(1):27–54.
[Bhardwaj et al., 2006] Bhardwaj, G., Camillus, J. C., and Hounshell, D. A.
(2006).
Continual corporate entrepreneurial search for long-term growth.
Management Science, 52(2):248–261.
[Billinger et al., 2014] Billinger, S., Stieglitz, N., and Schumacher, T. R. (2014).
Search on rugged landscapes: An experimental study. Organization Science,
25(1):93–108.
==PAGE:78==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Block and MacMilan, 1985] Block, Z. and MacMilan, I. C. (1985). Growing
Concerns: Milestones for successful venture planning. Harvard Business Re-
view, 63(September - October):184–196.
[Bourdieu, Pierre. Woolsey Biggart, 1986] Bourdieu, Pierre. Woolsey Biggart,
N. e. (1986). The Forms of Capital. Readings in economic sociology, pages
280–291.
[Bricki and Green, 2002] Bricki, N. and Green, J. (2002). A Guide to Using
Qualitative Research Methodology. Technical report.
[Burnard et al., 2008] Burnard, P., Gill, P., Stewart, K., Treasure, E., and
Chadwick, B. (2008).
Analysing and presenting qualitative data.
British
Dental Journal, 204(8):429–432.
[Burt, 2019] Burt, R. S. (2019). Network Disadvantaged Entrepreneurs: Den-
sity, Hierarchy, and Success in China and the West. Entrepreneurship: Theory
and Practice, 43(1):19–50.
[Chell and Baines, 2000] Chell, E. and Baines, S. (2000).
Networking, en-
trepreneurship and microbusiness behaviour. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development, 12(3):195–215.
[Chen and Miller, 2007] Chen, W. R. and Miller, K. D. (2007). Situational and
institutional determinants of ﬁrms’ R&D search intensity. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 28(4):368–381.
[Clough et al., 2019] Clough, D. R., Fang, T. P., Bala Vissa, B., and Wu, A.
(2019). Turning lead into gold: How do entrepreneurs mobilize resources to
exploit opportunities? Academy of Management Annals, 13(1):240–271.
[Davidsson and Honig, 2003] Davidsson, P. and Honig, B. (2003). The role of
social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. Journal of Business
Venturing, 18(3):301–331.
[Dimitratos et al., 2014] Dimitratos, P., Amorós, J. E., Etchebarne, M. S.,
and Felzensztein, C. (2014). Micro-multinational or not? International en-
trepreneurship, networking and learning eﬀects.
Journal of Business Re-
search, 67(5):908–915.
[Gavetti and Levinthal, 2000] Gavetti, G. and Levinthal, D. (2000). Looking
forward and looking backward: Cognitive and experiential search. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 45(1):113–137.
[Gimeno et al., 1997] Gimeno, J., Folta, T. B., Cooper, A. C., and Woo, C. Y.
(1997). Survival of the ﬁttest? Entrepreneurial human capital and the per-
sistence of underperforming ﬁrms. Technical Report 4.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[Haunschild and Miner, 1997] Haunschild, P. R. and Miner, A. S. (1997). Modes
of interorganizational imitation: The eﬀects of outcome salience and uncer-
tainty. Technical Report 3.
[Huang, 2016] Huang, H. C. (2016).
Entrepreneurial resources and speed of
entrepreneurial success in an emerging market: the moderating eﬀect of en-
trepreneurship.
International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal,
12(1):1–26.
[J. March, 1991] J. March (1991). Exploration and Exploitation in organiza-
tional learning. Technical Report 1.
[Jay B. Barney and Delwyn N. Clark, 2007] Jay B. Barney and Delwyn N.
Clark (2007). Resource Based Theory Creating and Sustaining Competitive
Advantage. Technical report.
[Jay Barney, 1991] Jay Barney (1991). Firm Resources and Sustained Compet-
itive Advantage.
[Katila and Ahuja, 2002] Katila, R. and Ahuja, G. (2002).
Something old,
something new: A longitudinal study of search behavior and new product
introduction. Technical Report 6.
[Kim et al., 2006] Kim, P. H., Aldrich, H. E., and Keister, L. A. (2006). Access
(not) denied: The impact of ﬁnancial, human, and cultural capital on en-
trepreneurial entryin the United States. Small Business Economics, 27(1):5–
22.
[Kontos, 2003] Kontos, M. (2003). Considering the Concept of Entrepreneurial
Resources in Ethnic Business: Motivation as a Biographical Resource?
In-
ternational Review of Sociology, 13(1):183–204.
[Lazega and Burt, 1995] Lazega, E. and Burt, R. S. (1995). Structural Holes:
The Social Structure of Competition, volume 36. Harvard University Press;
1st Paperback Edition edition (August 11, 1995).
[Levinthal and March, 1981] Levinthal, D. and March, J. G. (1981). A model
of adaptive organizational search. Journal of Economic Behavior and Orga-
nization, 2(4):307–333.
[Linder et al., 2019] Linder, C., Lechner, C., and Pelzel, F. (2019).
Many
Roads Lead to Rome: How Human, Social, and Financial Capital Are Re-
lated to New Venture Survival. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, page
104225871986755.
[Lukeš and Zouhar, 2016] Lukeš, M. and Zouhar, J. (2016). The causes of early-
stage entrepreneurial discontinuance. Prague Economic Papers, 25(1):19–36.
==PAGE:80==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Maritz, 2010] Maritz, A. (2010). Networking, entrepreneurship and productiv-
ity in universities. Innovation: Management, Policy and Practice, 12(1):18–
25.
[Mark S. Granovetter, 1973] Mark S. Granovetter (1973).
The Strength of
Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78(6):1360–1380.
[Martin et al., 2013] Martin, B. C., McNally, J. J., and Kay, M. J. (2013).
Examining the formation of human capital in entrepreneurship: A meta-
analysis of entrepreneurship education outcomes. Journal of Business Ven-
turing, 28(2):211–224.
[Marvel et al., 2016] Marvel, M. R., Davis, J. L., and Sproul, C. R. (2016). Hu-
man Capital and Entrepreneurship Research: A Critical Review and Future
Directions. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 40(3):599–626.
[Marvel and Lumpkin, 2007] Marvel, M. R. and Lumpkin, G. T. (2007). Tech-
nology entrepreneurs’ human capital and its eﬀects on innovation radicalness.
Technical Report 6.
[Maxwell, 2013] Maxwell, J. A. (2013). Qualitative Research Design - An inter-
active approach. 3rd edition.
[McCracken, 1988] McCracken, G. D. (1988). The long interview. Sage Publi-
cations.
[McKeever et al., 2014] McKeever, E., Anderson, A., and Jack, S. (2014). En-
trepreneurship and mutuality: social capital in processes and practices. En-
trepreneurship and Regional Development, 26(5-6):453–477.
[Mcmullen and Dimov, 2013] Mcmullen, J. S. and Dimov, D. (2013).
Time
and the entrepreneurial journey: The problems and promise of studying en-
trepreneurship as a process.
Journal of Management Studies, 50(8):1481–
1512.
[Montanye, 2006] Montanye, J. A. (2006). Entrepreneurship. Technical report.
[Perren, 2003] Perren, L. (2003).
Deﬁnitions of entrepreneurship.
Technical
Report 2.
[Posen et al., 2018] Posen, H. E., Keil, T., Kim, S., and Meissner, F. D. (2018).
Renewing research on problemistic search — A review and research agenda.
[Putnam, 2001] Putnam, R. D. (2001). Bowling Alone - The Collapse and Re-
vival of American Community, volume 53.
[R. M. Cyert; J. G. March, 1963] R. M. Cyert; J. G. March (1963). A behavioral
theory of the ﬁrm.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[Rehme and Svensson, 2011] Rehme, J. and Svensson, P. (2011). Credibility-
Driven Entrepreneurship. The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and
Innovation, 12(1):5–15.
[Ries, 2011] Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup : how constant innovation creates
radically successful businesses. Portfolio Penguin, London; New York.
[Shane et al., 2003] Shane, S., Locke, E. A., and Collins, C. J. (2003).
En-
trepreneurial motivation. Human Resource Management Review, 13(2):257–
279.
[Siisiäinen, 2000] Siisiäinen, M. (2000). Two Concepts of Social Capital: Bour-
dieu vs. Putnam. Technical Report 2.
[Spinelli and Timmons, 2004] Spinelli, S. and Timmons, J. A. (2004). New Ven-
ture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century - A Paciﬁc Rim Per-
spective. Technical report.
[Torres-Coronas et al., 2015] Torres-Coronas, T., Vidal-Blasco, M.-A., and De
Andrés Sánchez, J. (2015).
The Role of Emotional Intelligence in En-
trepreneurial Networking. Journal of Entrepreneurship: Research & Practice,
2015.
[Trenton, 2019] Trenton, Eric, G.-S. D. (2019).
Getting more for less: The
role of resourcefulness in entrepreneurship?
https://www.journals.
elsevier.com/journal-of-business-venturing/call-for-papers/
the-role-of-resourcefulness-in-entrepreneurship. [Online; accessed
14-October-2019].
[Unger et al., 2011] Unger, J. M., Rauch, A., Frese, M., and Rosenbusch, N.
(2011). Human capital and entrepreneurial success: A meta-analytical review.
Journal of Business Venturing, 26(3):341–358.
[W. Creswell, 2009] W. Creswell, J. (2009). Research Design Qualitative Quan-
titative and Mix Research Method 3rd edition.
[Wernerfelt, 1984] Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A Resource-based View of the Firm.
Technical report.
[Xiaoying Qi, 2018] Xiaoying Qi (2018). Social capital. Technical Report 5.
[Yetisen et al., 2015] Yetisen, A. K., Volpatti, L. R., Coskun, A. F., Cho, S.,
Kamrani, E., Butt, H., Khademhosseini, A., and Yun, S. H. (2015).
En-
trepreneurship.
