==PAGE:1==
DTU Space
Master Thesis
Arctic ocean sea ice properties from
airborne laser scanner observations
Author:
Mathias Lindeberg Kristensen
Supervisors:
Sine Munk Hvidegaard
Sebastian Bjerregaard Simonsen
December 31, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Various data acquired during the CryoVex 2017 campaign have been com-
bined, to create deeper understanding of current sea ice data. From earlier work,
methods of acquiring sea ice freeboard from airborne laser scanner data was
developed. This have been built upon, such that other data sources could be
included. The method the diﬀerent data is introduced into the analysis, is a step
by step approach. The ﬁrst thing that is done, is to look at the entire data. This
is done by looking at the spatial parameters, as well as the statistical parameters.
This enable a general comparison of the various measurement methods.
The next step is then to zoom in, to see how the data behaves, when looking at
individual measurements. This is done at 3 diﬀerent sites, where the spatial and
statistical parameters is again assessed.
While some of the data, have clear correlations, other show a lot of variation.
Through the diﬀerent analyses conducted, diﬀerent results were obtained, it is
thus diﬃcult to say anything conclusive at this point. What can be said, is that
there is a mismatch between the snow- and ice freeboard, that can only be partly
explained. It is thus suggested, that further research be conducted.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Sea ice in surveyed area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Measurement method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Data processing
8
3.1
Mean Sea Surface Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Minimum value corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Freeboard conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Data sources
12
4.1
Output ALS freeboard data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Comparison/validation of freeboard data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Snow data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Cryosat freeboard data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.5
KAREN Freeboard data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
In situ data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Sea ice Roughness
26
6
In depth looks
30
6.1
Site 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.1.1
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Site 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2.1
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Bonus site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3.1
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Discussion & Conclusion
40
8
Appendix
44
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
In this report i investigate diﬀerent data, captured over sea ice in the Lincoln sea be-
tween Canada and Greenland. All of the data have been captured during the CryoVEx
2017 campaign, which aims to validate CryoSat data, and involves several countries.
The data used have been made available, by either DTU or NASA, through their Op-
eration Ice Bridge program.
The reason for this report, is an eﬀort to improve the utilization of the large amount
of data, that is collected each year, as part of the diﬀerent CryoVEx campaigns. As
this data is captured to validate the satellite data, that is mostly what it is used for.
There is thus a large amount of data, that have not been investigated thoroughly, and
which might be useful, for a wide range of other activities.
The initial work was focused on identifying parameters of the sea ice, which might be
characterized by the available data. The surface roughness was found to be an ideal
candidate, and ways to describe this was quickly developed.
After this the focus shifted slightly, and it instead became upon describing the avail-
able data in diﬀerent stages and evaluating their diﬀerences. This is done by ﬁrst
evaluating the data on a large scale, and then subsequently zooming in on various
areas. These comparisons are then accompanied by the estimated roughness, as well
as images where those are available.
As the task of comparing a multitude of diﬀerent data is a big one, the areas covered
here are just some of those available. Whenever some new data was included into the
analysis, new ways of comparing, or new data sources also became interesting. How-
ever as the scope of this report had to be limited, due to time concerns, some data
had to be left out. The reader of this report should thus expect preliminary results
and conclusions, as well as suggestions for further research into the area.
1
==PAGE:5==
2
Theory
Sea ice is one of many diﬀerent types of ice. It is made of frozen seawater, and ﬂoats on
the ocean surface. It exists on both hemispheres, but only Arctic sea ice is considered
in this report. Sea ice forms when the water temperature drops, such that tiny ice
crystals can form on the ocean surface. These then coalesce into larger ice ﬂakes. The
way this happens depends on the local weather. If there are calm seas, what is called
nilas are formed. This is what appears to be perfectly smooth, thin ice sheets, which
then slide over and under each other to create thicker ice sheets. On the other hand if
there is rough weather, the crystals will form slushy ice sheets. These can then either
slide over each other to create smooth sheets, or collide to create uneven ice ﬂakes
with ridges above and keels below.
Some of this ice gets stuck on either the sea ﬂoor or the coastline, and is then cat-
egorized as fast ice. The other form is ice packs that ﬂoat freely, and is called pack
ice. Since this ice ﬂoats freely, it will sometimes collide and create thicker sheets. In
this process there will often form ridges around the colliding edges. At the same time,
currents or wind can break up the ice sheets, which then create open leads that ﬁlls
with sea water. These can range from a few meters to kilometers, and may open and
close within a short time period. These eﬀects are referred to as convergence, when
the ice collide, and divergence when the ice drift apart. This is also illustrated in
ﬁgure 1. As the pack ice drifts around, some of it will end up suﬃciently south, that
they melt in the summer. That which does not melt becomes multiyear ice (MYI) and
may survive for many years without melting. As the ice survives the melting season,
it loses salt and hardens, making it less prone to melt in subsequent years. MYI can
then grow in thickness up to a limit of about 3-4 meters, due to thermal eﬀects. If
the ice thickens, the ocean must give away some heat to the atmosphere, but as the
ice thickens, it acts as an increasingly better insulator. At around 3-4 meters the ice
can not thicken anymore. From this stage the only way to increase in thickness is by
collision.
The reason sea ice gets a lot of attention these years, is because it plays a vital role in
both the regional and global climate.
Around the poles where the ice primarily forms, there is a process where the forming
ice crystals expels the salt, which then sinks and gets carried by cold deep currents
towards the equator, giving a less salty environment around the poles. As the ice is
more rigid than water, it severely lessen the impact of the wind and waves on the
coastlines. The eﬀect of this, is that there is little to no erosion, in areas with a lot
of sea ice, which in turn can protect the ice shelves close to the sea. It also reduces
evaporation from the ocean, which creates a colder and drier environment around the
poles, which is what the ecosystem have acclimatized to. The ice itself also serves a
vital role for many animals. It is home to many land animals such as penguins, polar
bears, seals and foxes. For water animals, the sea ice melting helps spur photosynthesis
in the phytoplankton in the water, which is an essential part of the food chain. When
the ice freeze again, the saltier water that sinks, acts as a mixer of the water column,
bringing vital nutrients from the deep to the surface
On a global scale, sea ice increase the earths albedo, which means that sea ice reﬂects
2
==PAGE:6==
far more sunlight than regular sea water, decreasing the energy absorbed from the
sun. On the other side, once sea ice begins to melt, the increased energy absorption
of the sea water, creates a positive feedback loop, which accelerates the melting of sea
ice, unless there is a cold winter to freeze what have been lost during the summer. In
recent years this have not happened, which means the sea ice extent have diminished,
leaving more sea water open to absorb the radiation from the sun, and thus warming
the entire planet.
Arctic sea ice varies from Antarctic sea ice in several ways. As there is no landmass
at the north pole, the northern sea ice have bigger ﬂuctuations between winter and
summer than the southern counterpart. The ice also have less ability to move around,
as there are landmasses all round the northern basin. The ice extent is normally at a
maximum in March, and minimum in September.
Figure 1: Illustration of how sea ice either clumps together where there is convergence,
creating ridges and rough ice, or drift apart where there is divergence, opening up leads to
generate new ice. SWIPA (2011)
There are several diﬀerent ways to measure sea ice. The most direct and precise way,
is to drill down and extract an ice core in a given location, which will then give a direct
measurement of the thickness of the ice. Other instruments can also be used on the
ice surface, with varying degree of uncertainty. Pressing down a stick can give a direct
freeboard measurement. But it can introduce an error, in that you can not see if you
hit the ice, or some hard snow. Another approach that can be done in situ, is with
Electromagnetic induction(EM), which penetrate to the ice-water interface. However
the snow cover and ice properties can lead to ambiguities, which can make it diﬃcult
to get a clear result. But as one can imagine, no approach that requires people on the
ground is a viable way keep track of ice thickness for large areas, and especially not
for sea ice as this ice is not easily accessible.
Therefore remote sensing is used to capture the vast majority of the data we have
today. This can be done in various ways, which is summed up in ﬁgure 2.
Laser altimeter works by sending out laser pulses, that bounce oﬀof the ﬁrst thing
it hits, whether this is a cloud, water, ice or snow. When ﬂying this instrument over
3
==PAGE:7==
Figure 2: Cross section of sea ice, with the diﬀerent measurement methods shown
sea ice, most often it measures the distance from the plane to either the water in
open leads, or the top if the snow. This diﬀerence can then be used to obtain the
freeboard. Since this freeboard includes the snow, the snow layer properties have to
be well known, which is often quite hard, and can introduce errors. Since the freeboard
only amounts to about 10-15% of the total thickness, such errors can be ampliﬁed.
A radar altimeter can be used in much the same way as a laser altimeter. However
due to the longer wavelengths that are used, the signal can penetrate the snow layer,
and thus the measured signal is only that of the ice. Because the radar altimeter
penetrates the snow, some of uncertainty is avoided. However one thing is theory, and
another is what really happens. As the snow can be submerged, or have an ice layer
within, even radar have issues with snow. And the snow properties are still needed to
convert ice freeboard to total thickness.
EM instruments can also be used remotely, but again requires a lot of data processing,
due to the complex interactions within the snow/ice interface.
In the future a penetrating radar might be used, as this can give information of both
the snow cover, and the total thickness in one go. However as of now, it have not been
suﬃciently tested.
A last method is from below the water. Here it is possible to use submarines or drones
equipped with a sonar or radar. The emitted signal will bounce of the ice, and give a
precise distance from the vessel to the ice. It is then possible to use the depth gauge, to
estimate the ice thickness, by taking the measured depth minus the distance to the ice.
This can produce quite accurate measurements, but is not a viable way for scientiﬁc
research, since it still requires presence of submarines or drones in inaccessible parts
of the earth. It is therefore mostly something that is used by submarines when they
have to surface through the ice.
4
==PAGE:8==
2.1
Sea ice in surveyed area
The area investigated in this paper, is an area surveyed by both airborne and satellite
mounted instruments, as well as some expeditions, that have done measurements at
certain areas under the ﬂight paths. This makes it possible to compare data from
several diﬀerent sources, to see how they diﬀer, and validate the data obtained from
satellite missions. The data have been measured in March and April 2017, ie. close
to the seasonal maximum, where we would expect the thickest ice. The area is in the
Lincoln Sea, between Canada and Greenland, stretching from the coast of Greenland
to 86◦N. It is an area that is expected to consist primarily of MYI. We generally see
the thickest ice in the Arctic along the north coast of Greenland, and along the coast
of the Canadian archipelagos. The explanation for this can be found in the Arctic
sea ice circulation, where there is a general tendency towards the top of Greenland
and then down the sides. There is also a circular motion along the northern border
of Canada and Alaska called the Beaufort Gyre. The Ice is behaving the way it is,
due to the fact that the Arctic sea is somewhat boxed in at all sides. Between Alaska
and Russia there’s only a small corridor, the Barring Strait, where ice can get out,
and this is often frozen in the winter. There is then the entirety of Russia where
nothing can get out, and the Canadian archipelagos that also easily block or diminish
the amount of ice and water that can escape. What is left is then only a small space
between Greenland and Canada, and then a large open area, the Fram Strait between
NE Greenland and Svalbard, where only Iceland lies in the way. Because of this, ice
tends to move towards northern Greenland and pile up, which is why there are thick
ice here. All of the above is shown in ﬁgure 3. As the sea ice collide and pile up
towards the coast, it creates ridges, and we would thus expect both the thickness and
roughness to decrease the further north we get.
2.2
Measurement method
When measuring sea ice remotely, it is often done in straight lines, either by satellite,
which naturally ﬂy in a straight line, or by plane, which often have large parts of the
ﬂight track that is straight. When the CryoSat satellite passes over a region with
sea ice, it uses a SAR (Synthetic Aparature Radar), where coherently transmitted
echoes can give a higher resolution than single echoes can, if correct data processing
is applied to the output data. This operational mode is also called SARM (Synthetic
Aperature Radar Mode), where the output is equivalent to splitting the main beam
into 64 smaller beams. This enhance the spatial resolution from 15 km to 250 m. This
is possible because in a SAR, each point on the ground is hit by multiple radar pulses,
from diﬀerent angles, that can then be combined to yield a high resolution, which is
known as range compression ESA (b). The CryoSat SAR is a Ku band radar
On the other hand, we have measurements done by airplane. Typically a turbo-prop or
Twin Otter plane is used for this. These are used as there need to be continuous slow
ﬂight, close to the ground at around 300 m, which is not possible for jet planes. On
board the plane there is ASIRAS (Airborne Synthetic Aperature and Interferometric
Radar Altimeter), which is a Ku band radar. It is the same system used on CryoSat,
5
==PAGE:9==
Figure 3: Arctic sea ice drift together with typical winter sea ice thickness. The size of the
arrows represents the various drift speeds.SWIPA (2011)
and works the same way, only on a smaller scale, due to the low altitude ESA (a). The
suite of instruments also include an ALS (Airborne Laser Scanner), which measure
the distance from the plane to the ground. By sending out a laser pulse and receiving
the return signal, the time diﬀerence can be converted to a distance. To enhance the
amount of information one can get out of the ALS, multiple pulses are sent out at
diﬀerent angles, such that a height information can be extracted, not only from right
below the plane, but also out to the sides. The ALS can achieve high spatial resolution
since it is close to the ground, however the resolution for a given survey depends on the
ﬂight altitude and velocity. Hvidegaard et al. (2015) The satellite and plane methods
are shown in a simpliﬁed manner in ﬁgure 4, where it is shown how the ground below
is swept in both cases.
Since it is required to have detailed information about the snow layer, campaigns are
also done that measure this. While the snow is easily measured with in-situ surveys,
it is a bit harder by remote sensing. A snow radar is normally used to map the snow
depth. Again a Ku band radar on a plane is used, which will receive a return signal
from both the snow layer, and the ice layer. The diﬀerence will then produce a snow
layer. However as have been established, the snow layer can be complex, which can
lead to the two diﬀerent return signals being indistinguishable. Since the individual
return signals can be complex, and thus the snow depth erroneous, snow data is often
averaged over larger areas, to cancel out such errors. NASA
The in situ measured snow depth, which proves as a true value reference in this report,
was measured over the course of one day, for the CryoVEx 2017 campaign. The snow
6
==PAGE:10==
Figure 4: CryoSat (ls) uses a Ku band SAR when over sea ice to be able to map small ice
ﬂoes. It can achieve a footprint of 250 m in the along-track direction and 1650 m across
track. ALS (rs) sweeps the ground below with many individual pulses. Resolution depends
on ﬂight speed and altitude. SemanticScholar
depth is measured with Snow-Hydro Magnaprobes, which have an expected precision
of 3 mm. These work by an operator inserting the rod into the snow, until the ground
below is felt. The rod have a sliding ice basket, with an axial ring magnet attached,
that ﬂoats on top of the ice. When the measurement is taken, an electric current runs
down the stick, and when the current passes through the magnetic ﬁeld induced by the
magnet, the rod will twist. This twist travel up the rod, and this travel time, can then
be used to measure the height of the snow. A precise GPS is used to get a position in 3
dimensions Sturm and Holmgren (2018). Since the measurements are done manually,
the data distribution naturally becomes uneven, and are not necessarily in straight
lines, as there might be various areas that are inaccessible, or just diﬃcult to traverse.
The spatial resolution is thus 1-3 meter for this data. Haas et al. (2017)
7
==PAGE:11==
Figure 5: Full setup when measuring snow depth with in situ measurements, using a
magnaprobe from Snow-Hydro. Sturm and Holmgren (2018)
3
Data processing
The data in the CryoVEx(Cryosat Validation Experiment) campaign is acquired by
plane, and simulates the way data is acquired from the satellite Cryosat-2. As the name
suggests, this acts as a validation for satellite measurements. The instrument package
includes as described in chapter 2.2, ASIRAS(Airborne Sar/Interferometric Radar Al-
timeter), ALS(Airborne Laser Scanner), two precise GPS and an inertial navigation
system(INS), for accurate attitude determination. Only the processed ALS, KAREN,
and GPS data is used in this analysis. By processed data is meant L2 data, where the
INS and GPS data have been applied, such that a raw elevation is used. Therefore
this needs to be converted to a freeboard, to compare it with that of CryoSat.
The laser scanner works by sending out laser pulses at a 10 kHz frequency, that then
bounces of a rotating mirror doing 40 rotations a minute. This gives the eﬀect that
the laser scanner eﬀectually sweeps the ground below. This creates a data structure
with 250 data points in a line in the across-track direction, and 40 lines per minute
in the along-track direction. This data is a simple range measurement, which uses the
return time of the pulse to determine a distance to the ground below. From that a
height of the ice can be determined by the use of the two precise gps systems and the
INS. From a typical ﬂight at 300m, the resolution will be 0.7x0.7 m, with a height
uncertainty of 10cm. Hvidegaard et al. (2015)
As was mentioned, the data we have from measurements done by plane, is not the
8
==PAGE:12==
ﬁnal product, since those elevations are based on information provided by the onboard
GPS. This GPS uses the reference ellipsoid to establish an elevation of the craft, and
from that a terrain elevation, relative to the ellipsoid can be determined. What is
needed though, is a sea ice height relative to the local water level. To get to that a
few corrections have to be applied to the data. These are described in the next sections.
3.1
Mean Sea Surface Correction
This correction is done to bring the elevation data, down to mean sea level. This is
usually the biggest correction that is made. A mean sea surface model consists of
both the geoid information and mean dynamic topography. It is therefore one of the
best theoretical estimates of where the water level should be. This model changes over
time, so to get the most precise correction, the newest model should be used. There
are various diﬀerent models available that could be used to do a mean sea surface
correction, and one of them, and the one used in this paper is the DTU15 model.
There is a newer MSS model available, but as of this writing, some errors still have to
be corrected with that. The model is visualized in ﬁgure 6.
Some areas are more clear that others, but south America are clearly visible in the
right side of the image, and Africa can somewhat be seen in the middle of the image.
The model comes with diﬀerent resolutions, but none ﬁne enough to match the data.
Therefore a 2D interpolation model is created from the MSS model. The coordinates
of the ALS and KAREN data, is then simply assigned an MSS value based upon this
linear interpolation.
Figure 6: DTU15 MSS model
9
==PAGE:13==
3.2
Minimum value corrections
While the mean sea surface corrects for large scale variations, there will still be a
small scale component left in the data, which needs to be corrected, to get an accurate
estimate of sea ice heights above the local water level. This is due to the current local
weather and wave variations, that cannot be taken into account when making a model.
This correction is achieved by looking at the data itself, after the ﬁrst correction, and
ﬁnding the lowest measured heights. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 7. With this method
we assume that the lowest point in the data, is points where the actual water have
reﬂected the signal, which means these points represent the local true sea level. The
way to use these points, is then to deﬁne how far between they should be, and then
ﬁnd one point within each of those limits. These points will then act as points, for
which to ﬁt some kind of function to mimic to local sea level. The limit deﬁned in this
report is one minimum point every 5 km.
As can be seen in the example, this may lead to unevenly distributed points to be
Figure 7: Illustation of how a minimum value correction is usually performed.
Top: Scattered heights after mean sea surface correction. Middle: The data is split into
segments, here every 3rd point is a new segment. Within these a minimum point is found,
here illustrated in red. Bottom: With the help of the minimum points, a function is ﬁtted,
here a linear, which can then be used to move all the measurements down around 0 (true
water level)
ﬁtted, since two adjacent points can act as minimum for diﬀerent sections, which can
then introduce a small error. However this is less of a problem when the data set is
larger, and there are thousands of points to choose from. In the example in ﬁgure
7, the calculation of sea ice freeboard is done by a linear interpolation. This is the
simplest and most direct way of getting a sea level reference function. But as can be
seen it will often have some rapid changes, which is not a good representation of how
water behaves naturally. Therefore some kind of smoothed function is usually applied
instead.
10
==PAGE:14==
3.3
Freeboard conversion
As have been described, the sea ice freeboard, is a useful ﬁrst step in getting an ice
thickness through remote sensing methods. To get a total thickness one have to rely
to a rewritten version of the hydrostatic balance equation. This looks one way for
the obtained snow freeboard, as we get from ALS and KAREN, and another for ice
freeboard, such as that from CryoSat, as described in King et al. (2018). For snow
freeboard, here deﬁned as hfsnow, equation 1 is used. When dealing with ice freeboard
hfice, equation 2 is used. There are other equations that can be utilized, when certain
conditions are present, such as higher snow than freeboard for the snow freeboard,
ie. negative freeboard. If this is the case, equation 3 can be used. However such
conditions are very few ALS and KAREN data presented here.
hi =
ρw
ρw −ρi
hfsnow + ρs −ρw
ρw −ρi
hs
(1)
hi =
ρw
ρw −ρi
hfice +
ρs
ρw −ρi
hs
(2)
hi =
ρs
ρw −ρi
hfsnow
(3)
Where ρw, ρi, ρs is the densities of water, ice and and snow respectively. hs is the
thickness of the snow on top of the ice. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 8. Each of these
densities have table values that can be used, but to get a more precise estimate, data
describing these parameters should be included.
Common values for these parameters are ρi = 900 kg m−3, which is an average over
multi year ice, and ﬁrst year ice, and the density of water ρw = 1024 kg m−3 Wadhams
et al. (1992). The density of snow should preferably be input data, but table values
of ρs = 240 kg m−3 and ρs = 340 kg m−3 which corresponds to wintertime min and
max can be used. Snow height should likewise be input data, since it can vary a lot
both spatially and temporal. If no such data is available, table data can be used, or a
height can be modelled as presented in Warren et al. (1999).
However as the conversion to total thickness introduces additional error sources, only
the freeboards are compared in this report, with the total thickness saved for further
study.
11
==PAGE:15==
Figure 8: Illustration of the diﬀerent parts of sea ice. The freeboard fb can be deﬁned as the
ice above water, but below the snow as in the ﬁgure, or together with the snow, typically
called fbsnow NOAA
4
Data sources
In this chapter we take an overall look into the diﬀerent data that is available, yield-
ing a macro look of the area. All the data represents roughly the same area within
the Lincoln sea, with the exception of in situ data, which only covers a small area.
Measurement have been conducted between March 9th, and April 17th.
Date of measurement
Data
Date
ALS & KAREN
16/4-2017
CryoSat
24/3-2017
NASA-OIB
9/3-2017
In-situ
17/4-2017
Table 1
4.1
Output ALS freeboard data
The freeboard calculated from the ALS data is the sea ice with snow op top, referred
to as fbsnow. The height distribution is investigated in ﬁgure 9. As expected there is a
larger amount of thin ice, and a decreasing amount of thicker ice. The most interesting
aspect of this is if there is a notably diﬀerence in ice thickness geographically, since
the expectation is that the thicker ice should be near the coast. However this does not
seem to be the case with this data set, as the freeboard values stay largely the same
12
==PAGE:16==
from south to north. This is shown in ﬁgure 9, and have also been investigated closer,
which actually shows slightly thicker ice to the north.
An important feature with this speciﬁc data set, is that it was made such that it can be
directly compared to the data from CryoSat. This is done by taking several trips back
and forth in parallel lines, such that the combined footprint matches that of CryoSat.
At the same time it have been measured at such a time that the ice measured should
be the same measured by CryoSat during orbit 36892. The ﬂight path can be seen in
ﬁgure 10.
The uncertainties associated with the ALS freeboard is estimated to around 10 cm
vertically for each data point. This uncertainty arise primarily due to uncertainties in
the on-board GPS system. However this uncertainty should cancel out when averaging
over larger distances Skourup et al. (2018).
From the freeboard distribution in ﬁgure 9, we see that freeboard values range primarily
between 0-1.5, with comparatively few points higher than this. From the computed
statistics we see that the data mean is 78 cm, while the most common freeboard is
70.6 cm. This corresponds to ∼5.6 m ice thickness.
Figure 9: Left: ALS freeboard distribution. Right: together with the full data set of freeboard
values.
4.2
Comparison/validation of freeboard data
Since the freeboard used in this report, is calculated using a homemade and non
validated program, DTU_Freeboard, an older program called thinlinc made by Sine,
doing almost the same corrections as described in section 3, is run on the same data
for comparison.
The biggest diﬀerence between the two programs is the way the
minimum value correction is done. The two programs use diﬀerent ways of making the
corrections, which means that the output freeboard can not be compared directly, but
only the overall structure and statistics of the two output can be compared. The two
freeboard outputs are compared in ﬁgure 11. It is clear that the two distributions are
almost identical, with the only true diﬀerence, being the amount of data points that
goes into each ﬁgure. Again looking at the statistics of the two methods, they yield
close to identical mean and median values, with only the spread diﬀering. The reason
the spread of values diﬀer, is due to the fact, that the thinlinc output is averaged over
a 5x5 grid, while DTU_Freeboard does no averaging.
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 10: Flight path followed when measuring with the ALS. Something special about this
path is the northern part, where several parallel lines have been measured. This is done to
compare the data directly to CryoSat, as these 5 parallel lines together have the same width
as the CryoSat track.
Figure 11: Thinlinc estimated freeboard (ls) vs. DTU_Freeboard estimated freeboard (rs).
The estimated freeboard from the two programs yield the same result, which is a good
validation of the freeboards used in this report
4.3
Snow data
As described in chapter 3.3, it is desirable to have some information, about the depth
of the snow layer. This is achieved by data from the NASA program Operation Ice
Bridge, which have made a ﬂyover mimicking the track taken, when the laser scanner
data was acquired . This data was acquired 9th of march 2017, where the ALS data
was acquired 16th of April. The two ﬂight paths taken is seen in ﬁgure 12. While they
are some way apart, the general ice movements have been taken into account, such
14
==PAGE:18==
Figure 12: OIB and ALS track shown together. They have roughly the same tilt slightly
away from the north pole. However they lie i parallel and not directly on top of each other.
that the sea ice measured should be roughly the same. There are however more than
a month between the data acquisition. While there are no formal data error given,
studies with in situ data have been conducted, which estimates an error of 5.7 cm
Kurtz et al. (2013).
To get an impression about how the snow data looks, some statistics is computed, as
well as a simple plot of the data in ﬁgure 14. When looking at the raw snow data, it
is clear that there is no trend in the data. It seems like a random distribution with
a few exceptions. It can thus be argued that a mean, or median value, can be used
as the snow depth for the entire area in the future. However in this report a function
of snow depth over latitude is created, that can then be applied to multiple data sets.
The statistics of snow data shows us, that there is a wide variety of snow depths, but
also that the peak is wide, which means that most snow depths are similar, with a
decaying amount of thicker snow layers.
Snow depth is measured with a Ku CReSIS UWB Snow Radar, operating with a fre-
quency between 2 and 18 GHz, yielding a centimeter accuracy. There is an uncertainty
in the fact, that the boundary between snow and ice is often vague. When using a
radar, one gets a return as shown in ﬁgure 13. There is a small reﬂection from the
snow, but a big reﬂection from the ice. This works well in most cases, but in areas
with deep or compact snow, the signal might be reﬂected as if it is the ice, before the
signal have reached the ice, thus giving a snow depth less than actual.
15
==PAGE:19==
Figure 13: Radar return signal from CReSIS snow radar. There is a clear response from
both the snow and the ice boundaries. Some areas of interest are the various peaks. The 3
big ones around the middle seems to show a peak of snow, but no return signal from ice. An
ice layer level will thus have to be inferred or the data discarded. NASA
Figure 14: Left: Snow data versus latitude. Right: Statistics of the data.
4.4
Cryosat freeboard data
The cryosat satellite have been in operation since April 2010. Amongst other things,
it can be used to measure sea ice freeboard. This is done by the use of its Synthetic
Aperture Interferometric Radar Altimeter (SIRAL) instrument, which is a Ku band
radar altimeter. As with the snow radar, it penetrates the snow, and gives a strong
return signal, when the ice layer is encountered. However studies have shown that
moisture and snow density can impact the penetration depth of the radar, such that
the retrieved sea ice freeboard appears higher than it actually is. This is something to
take into account when comparing this freeboard data, with the ALS freeboard Ricker
et al. (2014).
The Cryosat data is retrieved from orbit 36892 which is seen in ﬁgure 15.
CryoSat freeboard is calculated in a similar way as the ALS freeboard is calculated
in section 3, where a mean sea surface is subtracted, and then a minimum value cor-
16
==PAGE:20==
Figure 15: Cryosat orbit 36892 over the north pole. Part of the track around the other data
is taken out for further processing.
rection is applied based on identiﬁed leads within the data. CryoSat uses the MSS
named UCL13, and then a linear interpolation on identiﬁed open leads, to get the sea
surface height anomaly (SSHA). This is exactly the same procedure as have been used
in processing the the ALS freeboard, with the only 2 exceptions being that a diﬀerent
MSS model have been used, which should be perfectly ﬁne, and then that i have used
identiﬁed minimum heights, and not identiﬁed open leads for a linear interpolation.
This should amount to roughly the same correction, albeit with a ﬁner resolution in
the linear correction for ALS, but maybe also a small oﬀset.
Freeboard obtained from CryoSat is normally averaged over an entire month, which is
about 4 orbit passes. When this is done the freeboard error can be reduced to about
2 cm. However as this is a comparison on individual freeboard measurements, the
error is larger. The error is a combination of radar speckle from SIRAL, and spatially
correlated errors in the linear ﬁt. When taking an arctic mean error, this amounts to
∼8 cm of individual freeboard measurement error Tilling et al. (2018).
The freeboard data is seen in ﬁgure 16, together with a geographical representation of
the data location. As with the snow data, the data size is determined by the highest
latitude in the ALS data, which yields three similar tracks, shifted slightly sideways
from each other.
Looking at the distribution of freeboards, it appear to resemble a normal distribution,
with a center around 0.3 meters. Furthermore we see that there are a few freeboard
values that is below 0, ie. below sea level. This is a common occurrence with the
CryoSat freeboard product, and does not indicate faulty values. Since the Ku band
radar does not measure the surface, but the snow/ice interface, this can easily get
negative. If the snow on top of the ice is heavy enough, it can get the ice ﬂoe to
submerge, which can give a negative freeboard. It can also happen if SSHA is such
that the modelled sea level is higher than some of the measurements. This can also
happen when processing the ALS data, but is not as likely, as the local minimums is
found within close proximity to each other.
As described the CryoSat freeboard should theoretically be only the height of the ice
without any snow, so to compare it with the ALS freeboard, the snow heights should
be added to the CryoSat freeboard, or subtracted from ALS and KAREN. For this
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 16: Statistics for cryosat data (left side), geographical representation of the 3 data
tracks, ALS, Snow, and Cryosat. (right side)
the snow depth function is used, with the latitude of the CryoSat data. The two data
sets are shown in ﬁgure 17, as well as their combined output. Looking at the CryoSat
freeboard with the snow added, it seems like there is a small trend towards lower
values at higher latitudes. It is not a clear trend, since the range of freeboards at each
latitude is quite wide. However the range diminishes, and the overall freeboard values
also gets slightly lower. It should also be noted that the two datasets have diﬀerent
length. This is due to the Cryosat freeboard, unfortunately lacking a big amount of
data points, towards the lower latitudes. Because of this some of the snow data is
removed, to ﬁt the length of the Cryosat data. luckily it is at the same latitudes that
already needed to be removed, due to faulty snow data, as can be seen in ﬁgure 17
(a). With the snow data added, the two freeboard data sets can be compared, as they
Figure 17: a) we see the scattered snow data. b) is the original CryoSat data. Notice how
there is a diﬀerence in x-axis, indicating missing data for CryoSat. c) is the combination of
the two plots above ie. snow data added to CryoSat freeboard to yield the CryoSat snow
freeboard fbsnow
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 18: ALS and CryoSat freeboard data sets compared vs. latitude. ALS freeboard (blue)
is almost constant a little bit higher than CryoSat (orange). Towards the higher latitudes the
two data sets diﬀers the most.
should theoretically now measure the same thing, the snow freeboard hfsnow. Because
the CryoSat data is much coarser than the ALS data, a mean is taken such that the
ALS resolution ﬁts that of CryoSats 250 m in the along track direction. This is done by
taking a mean over 357 scan lines. As have been done before, this is then investigated
by looking at the statistical parameters for the data, as well as the full data sets. This
is seen in ﬁgure 19 and 18 respectively.
From the height distributions seen in ﬁgure 19, we see that while the mean of the
ALS data is unaﬀected by averaging to CryoSat resolution, the median gets bigger.
Naturally the spread diminishes. Comparing the original and average ALS data to
that of Cryosat, we see that the mean values have a diﬀerence of approximately 15
cm, while the median values diﬀer by 7 cm and 15 cm respectively. From this it then
seems that the data ﬁts best when the ALS freeboard is not averaged to ﬁt CryoSat
resolution. With this in mind, we can then compare the two data sets directly by
looking at ﬁgure 18. Note that the comparison in this ﬁgure uses the averaged ALS
data, since it is not useful to compare the full ALS data directly. Looking at the spatial
comparison, the data does not look that diﬀerent. To the south it seems the two data
sets ﬁt each other almost perfectly, albeit with a bit of lag. In the middle the the data
crosses over each other a few times, which also suggest there is a fair bit of uncertainty
in the data, as we don’t see a constant oﬀset of any kind. At the northern part the
CryoSat data shows a downward trend, which is also what one would theoretically
expect, as the ice should be thinner away from the coast. However this is not always
true. The ALS data seems more constant in this area, until the very end, where we
see a big drop, but only temporary. It is unclear what causes this discrepancy towards
he higher latitudes, but to get a better understanding, we see how the two data sets
compare with the snow layer removed.
This is seen in ﬁgure 20.
Here things are
simpliﬁed a bit, as we only look at an averaged function over the diﬀerent data. We
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 19: Freeboard height distributions with the diﬀerent data sets
can see towards the higher latitudes, that the snow depth becomes quite small, and
especially from around 84.6 lat, the snow declines more rapidly than the CryoSat data.
This is some of the reason why we in ﬁgure 18 see the CryoSat snow freeboard decline
so much to the north. However there is still a downward trend in the raw CryoSat
data, that is not as clear in the ALS data. This ﬁgure also clearly shows some of the
limitations in the data, as around 84.4 there is a big decline in snow depth, which
seems out of place. It appears that a part of the diﬀerence between ALS and CryoSat
seen in ﬁgure 18, can be attributed to the snow data. Some of this could be due to
the fact that some time have passed between the measurements, as there are more
than a month between the snow data was captured and the ALS data was. However
as the CryoSat data also slopes downward towards the north, it appears there are still
diﬀerences in the raw data.
Figure 20: Running mean functions of the diﬀerent data sets. Snow and CryoSat data
shows a declining trend towards the higher latitudes, while the ALS data does not. The snow
data seems to be declining the most.
20
==PAGE:24==
4.5
KAREN Freeboard data
On the same ﬂight that have given the ALS data, described earlier in this section, was
a Ka band radar system called KAREN. This is a rather new system, ﬂown for the
ﬁrst time in the fall of 2016. Because of this, the system is not as well understood or
validated as the rest, but should give the same output as the ALS, ie. the sea ice snow
freeboard fbsnow. The data from this instrument, comes in the form of waveforms for
each return signal along the ﬂight path. These need to be converted to a freeboard
value, and to do this an older Matlab script is used, which was made in a previous
student project. Only a few alterations was made, to make the data output ﬁt for
import into the python program. The KAREN data is compared to the rest of the
data, by once again looking at the distribution of freeboard values, and in particular
comparing it directly to those obtained with ALS in ﬁgure 21. By ﬁrst glance, the
two data sets look identical, which is good as they should measure the same thing.
From the statistics we do see a small diﬀerence of ∼2 cm in the mean and ∼3.5 cm in
the median, both larger for KAREN. There is no clear explanation for this, but there
are a few things that could explain this discrepancy. One is that the KAREN data is
not covering the full area that the ALS is. As an example it only contains 4 of the 5
parallel lines at the northern end of the path, and also have other areas with missing
data. It is unknown if this is due to an instrument error, or the measurements have
simply not been included in the data ﬁles. Another explanation could be, that there
is a coarser resolution in the KAREN data, which could result in bigger values.
Figure 21: Freeboard estimates from ALS and KAREN compared. KAREN freeboard shows
slightly higher freeboard values
4.6
In situ data
As we now have a lot of data captured by remote sensing, it is desirable to also have
some manually collected data, that we can compare it to.
For this two areas are
available, which is close to the other data sources, and have been measured at the
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 22: Geographic representation of where the diﬀerent data sets have been taken. In
situ data are marked with 2 dots
same time (1 day after the ALS ﬂyover). While there are always measurement errors,
it is diﬃcult to determine these properly with this kind of measurement. A typical
error would be not hitting the ice layer with the measurement stick, not measuring
vertically, or uncertainties in the GPS location. As described in Haas et al. (2017),
the expected uncertainty is 2 mm, which is next to nothing, and for all intents and
purposes, the in situ data shall be treated as a true value. The two sites have been
marked on the map in ﬁgure 22.
Contrary to the other data sets, the in situ data have not been acquired in a straight
line, and as a result, the data is not evenly distributed, which is especially clear when
looking at it as a function of latitude. Site 2 is especially diﬃcult to compare in this
way, since it have measurements mostly in the east/west direction. However as we
want to compare the data without over-complicating things, this is how it will be
presented. For reference the true paths is shown in ﬁgure 25.
In ﬁgure 23, the snow depth distributions on the two sites are shown. We can see
that the overall snow depths is larger to the north (site 3), which also shows a smaller
variability compared to site 2. On the other hand, the mean depth on site 2 is more
than 5 cm. larger than on site 3. However this appears to be mainly due, to the
large amount of measured depths of around 1.2 meter. It is unclear whether these
are erroneous measurements or not, as they vary slightly between 1.201 and 1.204 m,
and they all lie in an area with other high values as seen in ﬁgure 24. They have the
appearance of an upper boundary, in regards to what the instrument is capable of
measuring. Because of this they are not removed from the data.
If the snow distribution at the two sites, are compared to the larger picture, we saw
with the OIB data in section 4.3, the data seems to ﬁt each other quite well. The
OIB snow data show a slightly thinner snow layer overall, than what is seen at the
two sites, but this is also averaged over a larger area. If we instead put our attention
at the direct comparison at the two sites in ﬁgure 24, it seems that the two snow data
22
==PAGE:26==
sets give close to the same heights. The interpolated snow function lies well in the
middle of the in situ data, with only some minor exceptions on site 3, where we also
see large amount of data, for a given latitude. From the parameters seen in table 2,
we see that for site 2, the OIB snow data ﬁts quite well with the in situ measured
data, with a perfect mean, and only 4 cm between the medians. The OIB function,
interpolated to in-situ coordinates, on the other hand diﬀers with 2.6 cm mean, and
more than 7 cm for the median. This large diﬀerence between the actual data points,
and the interpolated function, is likely because of missing data at this site. If we look
at the relevant plot in ﬁgure 24, we see that there are no actual data points (green
dots), for the last half of the area. This means that the function use points outside of
the area, to give a snow depth for some of site 2.
Moving on to site 3, we have another scenario. Here both the OIB data, and the
interpolated snow depth diﬀers quite a lot from in-situ data. For the median there
is a diﬀerence of 15 and 14 cm, while there is 11 and 9 cm for the mean. This is a
substantial diﬀerence, as the manually measured snow depth, shows a depth 1.5 times
as large as the remotely sensed one, and is well outsite the uncertainty of 5.7 cm.
However if we compare this with the relevant plot in ﬁgure 24, the data does not seem
to be all that diﬀerent. Instead it seems that because so many measurements have
been done at some areas, yielding a large number of large snow depths, that these have
a large impact when computing a median value. It is thus likely that this discrepancy
would be diminished, if the in situ data had been measured in straight lines. This will
be investigated further in chapter 6
From this analysis there’s no clear indication, that the OIB snow data should be
wrong. There might be problems towards the higher latitudes. This have now been
seen both when comparing ALS with CryoSat, and also when comparing these two
snow data sets. For now however, we will proceed with using OIB data, together with
the CryoSat data.
Snow comparison
Site
2
3
Mean(µ)
Median
Spread(σ)
Mean(µ)
Median
Spread(σ)
In situ data
0.400
0.297
0.331
0.348
0.355
0.224
OIB Snow data
0.400
0.340
0.122
0.259
0.216
0.148
Interpolated snow depth
0.426
0.374
0.103
0.234
0.203
0.107
Table 2: Snow data statistics for available data on the two in situ sites. The interpolated
function use the coordinates from in situ data, and thus have same resolution.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 23: In situ measured snow depth distribution. Left: Site 3, Right: Site 2
Figure 24: All snow data shown together. The OIB data is shown both as the original data
points, and the ﬁtted function, which is used together with the Cryosat data. Since the in
situ data are not measured in straight lines, we see a clear uneven spatial distribution.
24
==PAGE:28==
Figure 25: 2D geographical plot of the measurement positions. Site 2 is interesting, since it
is very narrow vs latitude, and thus almost perpendicular to the other data.
4.7
Summary
In this chapter various data sources have been described. It is meant as a quick look
into what the data measures, and how its overall appearance is. While the data have
been resized, to ﬁt within the min and max lat of the ALS data, nothing else have
been done at this point. The comparison below in table 3, is thus only indicative
of the relationship between data sets, since there might be missing data points, or
undetected errorneous measurements in some of the data. A more in-depth and precise
comparison, will be conducted in chapter 6.
25
==PAGE:29==
Freeboard Statistics
Data set
Mean(µ)
Median
Spread(σ)
ALS
0.785
0.700
0.475
KAREN
0.802
0.736
0.434
CryoSat w/o. snow
0.298
0.3
0.163
CryoSat w. snow
0.622
0.616
0.268
ALS at CryoSat Reso-
lution
0.768
0.767
0.253
Snow Statistics
OIB snow data
0.307
0.282
0.188
In situ site 2
0.400
0.297
0.331
In situ site 3
0.348
0.355
0.224
Table 3: Summary of the statistical parameters computed for each data set throughout the
chapter.
5
Sea ice Roughness
To add some more information, other than just heights, into the data analysis, a rough-
ness parameter for the sea ice is included.
The roughness of sea ice, is a parameter that is of special interest when modelling how
the ice will drift over time, since a rough surface will experience more pull from the
wind, than a ﬂat surface. There is no agreed upon method for calculating this param-
eter, and it can have varying dimensions. However since the roughness is a measure
of the diﬀerence in height over a surface, it is common to use meters or a gradient to
describe it, since these are easier to work with in models.
To get a roughness in meter, it is common to deﬁne a lower and upper level, and then
use points outside to calculate a roughness. These levels are typically deﬁned by the
standard deviation as have been described in Beckers et al. (2015). Here the standard
deviation of the relative surface elevation measured by the laser scanner for each scan
line is computed, and for the altimeter the standard deviation of a ﬁve-data-point
moving window. This means that one roughness estimate will be obtained for each
scan line, with the ﬁrst and last 4 points removed. Typically these estimates are then
averaged over a given area to provide a roughness estimate for that area.
When the gradient is used it is often calculated in the same way, the only diﬀerence is
that instead of the relative height diﬀerence, it is the slope between the measurement
points that is used.
In this report, a self deﬁned, and somewhat simplistic, roughness deﬁnition have been
used, based on the available data, and the knowledge of how it have been calculated
in the past.
26
==PAGE:30==
Figure 26: Calculated roughness for a full data set, with the diﬀerence between points is
taken, and then meaned every 5 lines.
The initial thoughts about how to calculate a roughness from obtained freeboard data,
involved getting a number representing the diﬀerence in height between neighboring
points. Because the data structure is 2-dimensional, getting a diﬀerence value for a
single point is not straight forward, as there might be numbers both to the left and
right, and before and after. This means that a normal diﬀerence between two points
can not accurately be used. To get around this, two methods was investigated: One
was to ﬁrst get the diﬀerence within each scan-line, then take the diﬀerence between
the lines, 5 lines at a time, and then calculate a mean for those 5 lines. With a normal
plane traveling 250 kph. that is approximately a roughness given for each 8.5m. This
was thought to give some indication of the small scale height variations of the sea-ice.
However as can be seen in ﬁgure 26, the result of this approach did not give any clear
indication of roughness, with only small variations throughout the entire data set, with
a few big peaks. To see how well the surface roughness is described when looking at
smaller areas, we take a look at an area with high apparent roughness, and one with
low. This is seen in ﬁgure 27
It is clear that the calculated roughness does not represent the picture displayed in
any good way. There is what appears to be a ridge going right across the left image
in the ﬁrst part, that can not be seen in the roughness data. Looking at the right
image, we see that the only place this method gives something that does not resemble
random noise, is when the original image is missing most of its data. It is clear that
this method is not useful.
To try and improve the estimation, a diﬀerent but similar approach was investigated.
27
==PAGE:31==
Figure 27: Diﬀerence approach to roughness calculation
Figure 28: Roughness calculation for a full data set, using a 2D mean diﬀerence method
In this the diﬀerence within each scan-line was yet again calculated, but this time
stored as a separate array. The same was then done between the lines on the original
array, again 5 lines at a time. The mean of these two arrays was then calculated to
give an average point diﬀerence. This approach seemed a bit more promising, since
there are some variance in the data, and it is not only around zero. It can be seen in
ﬁgure 28. To better see how it behaves in the diﬀerent scenarios, the two same areas
as before is investigated in ﬁgure 29.
It’s clear that there is an improvement, compared to the previous approach in both
areas. In the low roughness area (left side), it is now possible to see a clear spike be-
cause of the sudden change due to the lead in the left side of the image. However the
rest of the area, just seems to be very ﬂat when looking at the roughness. This does
not ﬁt well with visual inspection. When looking at the area where there is bad data
coverage, we see a better response than with the previous method. There is only one
area where data is missing, and the values don’t seem as extreme as before. However
there are still the problem, with the roughness looking like random noise for the most
part.
It seems that taking the diﬀerence between the points can be used in some way if done
right. However there seems to be limitations in the amount of information, that can be
extracted from this approach. Because of this, the attention is shifted towards using
28
==PAGE:32==
Figure 29: 2D Diﬀerence approach to roughness calculation
the value of the points themselves, without looking at their diﬀerence directly.
This leads to a third method, which uses a similar approach as described by Beckers
et al. (2015), where the standard deviation is utilized as a limit, deﬁning points to
use in a roughness calculation. It follows a similar approach to the diﬀerence cal-
culations described earlier, where the mean values are used. As before the data is
split up into segments of 5 lines. The mean of points outside the limits deﬁned by
the std of those 5 lines, is then the calculated roughness for those 5 lines. As can
be seen in ﬁgure 30, this method seems to yield a better result, with numbers more
spread out. However to see what is really going on, we zoom in once again in ﬁgure 31.
Looking at the ridge (left side) once again, there is a good response in the roughness,
like was seen with the previous method. For the rest of the area, it seems like there
is a better representation of the actual height diﬀerences. Looking at the area around
600 on the x-axis, it seems there are some changes in the surface, which is also seen in
the roughness plot. We also retain the unit of meter on the parameter, which is a plus
for further data processing. Looking at the right image in ﬁgure 31, it seems there’s
also a better response in the area with only a few points. Since this method only needs
one point for each 5 scan lines to give a number, there’s no gaps in the data. It can
be debated whether this is good or bad. One could argue that an area like this, is
not covered good enough, and should be discarded. With this method such an area
should be removed before calculating a roughness, since it can not be seen from this
parameter. Perhaps this could be achieved, with one of the earlier described methods.
There are some limitations, that are clear when inspecting the roughness, together
with a plot of the entire area. The fact that this method does not take into account
the number of points included in the calculation, means that a few outliers can give
a high roughness, if they all have a high deviation. It is therefore preferable to do an
outlier rejection before calculating the roughness. However with the amount of points
in the data, and the fact that the data is often averaged, these occurrences should
disappear. Given that the calculation of roughness is done along-track, there is a high
susceptibility to sudden changes in this direction, while changes in the across-track
direction will not get picked up as easily. This means that the roughness can be used
to ﬁnd boundaries of structures in the ice, such as ﬂat plains, leads and ridges in the
along-track direction better than across-track.
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 30: Roughness calculation for a full data set, using standard deviation as a parameter
Figure 31: Standard deviation approach to roughness calculation
6
In depth looks
In the previous chapters, the diﬀerent parameters of arctic sea ice have been inves-
tigated on large scales, which is typically how it is also used in models. However in
order to truly know what is happening, and what we are measuring, we will zoom in
on 3 diﬀerent areas, and look at those in-depth. Two of the areas are chosen, as the
sites where the in situ measurements have been made, as this is the areas with the
most data. The last area is chosen, such that we have all available data, except the in
situ measurements.
6.1
Site 2
Site 2 have already been described a bit in chapter 4.6. It is the in situ site closest to
the coast, and also the smallest of the two sites. It is unfortunately not possible to get
any CryoSat freeboard data over this site, as there are invalid data in the southern
part of the CryoSat track. This is most likely due to the absence of open leads within
a 100 km radius, in which case the data will be discarded, as it is not possible to ﬁt a
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 32: Site 2 is the most southern site. It is somewhat lacking in data, as there are no
CryoSat data, only half of the area is covered by actual OIB measurements, and there are no
images. However due to the in situ measurements, it is investigated.
local sea surface.
To add to the misfortune, there is only actual OIB snow data for about half of the
site, however it is still possible to infer whether or not this data seems accurate or not,
as was also done in chapter 4.6.
Looking at ﬁgure 32 we see all available data. In this ﬁgure only the nadir freeboard
for the ALS is used, as the amount of data points for a full swath would make it
diﬃcult to conclude anything.
There is a very clear increase in freeboard thickness in the left side of the ﬁgure, with
values going all the way up to 4 meter. This is not impossible, but is unlikely, since
that would translate to total ice thickness of about 32 meter. After this initial rapid
increase, and subsequent decrease in thickness, the data seems to be more or less
smooth, with a little peak between 83.216 and 83.217. At the last half of the site, the
snow data and ALS data seems to be around the same height. Since the ALS data is
sea ice with snow on top, this means that if we take the ALS height and subtract the
snow height, we should have the pure sea ice freeboard height. However if the snow
height and ALS height is the same, or the snow height is more, this means that we get
a zero or negative freeboard. The OIB snow depth on the other hand, remains below
the ALS data for the most part.
Below the main data plot, we have the roughness for the area illustrated. It is increas-
ing steadily in the beginning, until there is a peak, which is in the area where the ALS
data have decreased rapidly. This ﬁts somewhat with what we would expect from the
way the roughness is calculated. Recall chapter 5, where the roughness was calculated
by the standard deviation of the surrounding points. This means that when we see a
big diﬀerence in ALS heights, as is the case here, we would expect the roughness to
capture that, which it seems that it does. Again with the small peak between 83.216
and 83.217, we ﬁrst see a decrease before the peak, and then an increase. It thus
seems that the way this parameter have been deﬁned, gives a pretty good image of
31
==PAGE:35==
how the surface looks in this site. There is unfortunately, for reasons unknown, no
images taken whilst ﬂying over this site.
6.1.1
Statistics
Now that site 2 have been shown with all the data, we’ll supplement this by looking
at some of the statistical parameters for the site, and how they compare.
On of the interesting things to look at, is the snow data, since it was already shown
in section 4.6 that there are some discrepancies between the data. As was mentioned,
it is likely that some of this, is due to the in situ measurements having an uneven
distribution, when only looking vs. the latitude. To change this, i ﬁt a function that
utilize the ALS coordinates. These have close to even spacing along latitude, such that
the high amount of points in some areas, will be averaged, and give a better ground
to compare with the OIB data. The OIB function parameters will also change, since
less coordinates is used this time. The change is seen in table 4.
As we can see, the in situ data now ﬁts quite well with the interpolated OIB data.
The true OIB data is of course still the same, but is included to ease the comparison.
However if we compare the in situ data with the OIB interpolation, we have two data
sets, that have the same length, and cover the same exact area. This provides the
best ground for an accurate comparison. We now only see a discrepancy of 0.6 cm in
the median, and 2.5 cm for the mean. This is a good improvement, compared to the
original 2.6 cm and 7.7 cm.
New site 2 snow statistics
Data
Mean (µ)
Median
Spread (σ)
In situ
0.459
0.408
0.303
OIB
0.400
0.340
0.122
OIB interpolation
0.424
0.402
0.097
Table 4: Site 2 snow statistics when ﬁtting the in situ data only along latitude.
For the freeboard, there is only 3 diﬀerent comparisons that can be made for this site,
since the CryoSat data is missing. From the visual plot in ﬁgure 32, the ALS and
KAREN data look to be following the same pattern, but have some diﬀerences in a
few areas. This is also what is seen in table 5, where the ALS mid line and KAREN
shows close to the same median value, the mean is substantially higher for ALS. This
discrepancy seems to be due to the ALS data staying high, for longer than KAREN
in the southern end of the site. The parameters of ALS full width, ﬁts quite well with
KAREN, but this is just by chance.
32
==PAGE:36==
Site 2 freeboard statistics
Data
Mean (µ)
Median
Spread (σ)
ALS mid line
1.087
0.757
0.749
ALS full width
0.757
0.654
0.411
KAREN
0.773
0.716
0.408
Table 5
Figure 33: Site 3 is the most northern site where data is investigated in detail. In the ﬁgure
all available data is shown as is, except the OIB snow data, which have been shown as a
function, to cover the entire area.
6.2
Site 3
This site is a little more interesting, since it is a bit larger, and there is no missing
data for any of the data sources. All the data is seen in ﬁgure 33
There seems to be various peaks in the ALS data, some very distinct, while others are
made up of many points, making them wide, and very uneven. The structure seems
to be split in 3 areas, where the ﬁrst contains primarily mid level values, with some
peaks. In the middle area, there are primarily low values, until around 84.820, where
we see a sharp decline followed by a major increase up to around 2 meter. In the last
part of the area, we generally see high values with some big peaks. Especially one of
these in the ALS data being very clear. However as was also mentioned on site 2, such
a high freeboard value seems doubtful, especially when it comes in the form of such
a sharp peak as we see here. Contrary to what we saw on site 2, here there’s almost
no in situ snow values,that lie above the ALS measured heights. This ﬁts better with
what is expected, as this will then yield a positive ice freeboard, and from the images
the area appears well covered. It seems that the only place that show a higher snow
33
==PAGE:37==
depth, is right at the start, where there is an increased data density. It is however
only a few points that lie above, and the mean looks to still be below ALS.
The same is true for the OIB snow data, which also lies well below ALS and KAREN
as is expected, as it was concluded in chapter 4.6 ﬁgure 24, that it follows the in situ
data quite nicely, even though their statistical parameters diﬀered quite a lot.
Between ALS and KAREN, we again see that they show almost the same, but with
some of the more sharp ALS peaks not present in KAREN. This is also true with the
large peak right before 84.824, which is not shown by the KAREN data. This ﬁts well
with the expectation, that this is probably a faulty reading in the ALS data. All in
all there are only minor discrepancies, and overall the two freeboard data set, appears
to ﬁt well together in this area.
This leads on to the third and ﬁnal freeboard data set in this area, that from CryoSat.
In the ﬁgure we see 2 big green dots, representing the only two CryoSat measurements
within this area. The dots represent CryoSat snow freeboard, ie. CryoSat freeboard
with the snow data added on top. As described in chapter 4.4, the CryoSat data is
an averaged value over an approx. 250*1600 m. large footprint. It is thus not easy
to compare it directly in ﬁgure 33, since the other data is not averaged. What can be
said is, that the ﬁrst point (left side), appears to lie pretty well within the KAREN
and ALS data, albeit a little to the low end. The second point (right side), appear
pretty low compared to the two other data, lying below almost all points in both data
sets. It especially seems odd that the ﬁrst point shows a bigger value than the second
point, since the overall heights with ALS and KAREN in the last half appears bigger
than in the ﬁrst half.
Comparing the data with the calculated roughness, it again seems that it ﬁts pretty
well. It is not as clear as on site 2, but there is also more data, and it is more evenly
distributed in the area. However we can see that in the middle, where the freeboard
height changes quickly, there is also a quick change in the roughness, as is what we
would expect when going from a relatively ﬂat area, and then suddenly encounter a
higher area. The large peak is also clearly visible in the roughness, as well as what
appears to be a very uneven surface, in the the last part of the area. Here we have
both very high and low values, which also shows in a high roughness.
Below the two plots, there is a composite image of pictures taken while ﬂying. The
coordinates do not ﬁt together perfectly, so a little of both ends should be discarded.
Overall the image conﬁrms what is seen in the data, that this is a uneven area. There
is also a more ﬂat area around the middle, which is also what is seen in the data,
although it appears to be shifted slightly. There is also the one data point in the
ALS data at 84.820, that shows a freeboard of 0. There is no clear open leads in the
image, but there is what appears to be a refrozen lead, which could be where this
measurement comes from. The last part of the image ﬁts well with the data, as it
appears to be a ﬂat area, with various high points. A large version of the image can
be seen in appendix.
34
==PAGE:38==
6.2.1
Statistics
Here we take a deeper look into the statistical parameters, for all the data available
for site 3, starting with the snow data. A problem with the in situ snow data on this
site, seemed to be that 2 areas were densely populated by measurements with a large
spread. To solve this, and get an even representation a function vs. latitude is deﬁned,
which is then called with the ALS coordinates, such that all the data have the same
coordinates and same length. This yields the information shown in table 6. Contrary
to what was seen on site 2, this sorting of the data, does not show a signiﬁcant im-
provement. There are still big diﬀerences between the data, however we do see a small
improvement. On the original data, there is a diﬀerence in mean of 11.4 cm, and on
the median of 15.2 cm. With this improved data the diﬀerence is down to 4.1 cm and
8.1 cm respectively. Back in chapter 4.4, it was concluded that there was a divergence
in the ALS and CryoSat snow freeboard, which could likely be due to the snow data.
The numbers here seem to back that theory, as the OIB snow have lower values than
the in situ. It thus seem likely that the snow data from OIB, have some problems
in the higher latitudes, as a result of the time between measurements. However the
diﬀerence in snow data, can not account for the full diﬀerence seen in ﬁgure 33.
Looking at the diﬀerent freeboards, we can obtain from site 3, our selection is quite
large. In the freeboard ﬁgures, such as ﬁgure 33, the nadir freeboard is used. But
as described the ALS data consists of scan lines with 250 measurements. This means
that all these points can be included, yielding information in 2 dimensions. To add to
this, there is also multiple parallel measurement lines, that can be combined to yield
one large area, as wide as the CryoSat footprint. This gives a lot of information, that
can be used as an indication, of how much extra information one gets, by including all
the data, and also how much is needed to compare with CryoSat. Furthermore it is
possible at this site only, to get a CryoSat snow freeboard with in situ measured snow,
which should be more precise than when using OIB data.
All these diﬀerent combinations of the data are compared in table 7.
It is clear that 2 data set show almost the same, and that is ALS mid line and KAREN.
This is what is expected, since they both only measure the nadir freeboard. They both
show a far oﬀfreeboard, when they are averaged to match the CryoSat freeboard. This
is also what is expected after looking at the spatial data plot in ﬁgure 33, however
under normal circumstances, these data should match each other better. It is also
clear, that there is a lot of diﬀerence between the ALS statistics, which is surprising.
Both the mean and median values diﬀer by more than 0.5 m, when including more
than only the middle line. There is also a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between including a
full track, and including all tracks. This indicates that this area is highly anisotropic,
which can also be hinted by the roughness plot, showing an uneven surface.
We see that none of the plane freeboards, come close to match the Cryosat snow
freeboard from OIB data, even though it is averaged to match the resolution. There
is a slight resemblance for the second point, where the ALS mid full width is within
9 cm diﬀerence, and ALS at CryoSat width is within 13 cm. This is not terrible, but
still a large diﬀerence. This bring us to the CryoSat freeboard with the in situ snow
data added, which seems to yield the best result. At least if we give any truth to the
35
==PAGE:39==
New site 3 snow statistics
Data
Mean (µ)
Median
Spread (σ)
In situ
0.307
0.324
0.188
OIB
0.259
0.216
0.148
OIB interpolation
0.266
0.243
0.123
Table 6: Site 3 snow statistics when ﬁtting the in situ data only along latitude.
ALS data. When the in situ snow is added, the mean and median only change slightly,
but there is a large diﬀerence for the ﬁrst point. Instead of a freeboard of only 0.28 m,
we have one of 0.6, which ﬁts much better with the ALS data, especially the ALS mid
full width. For the second point, it is instead the ALS at CryoSat width, that gives the
closest result.
All in all there is good conﬁrmation, that there is indeed something wrong with the
OIB data in this area. We can also see, that it is possible to compare CryoSat and
ALS directly, and get results that agree to some extent. However it is not possible to
say, whether the full swath or a single ﬂyover is best.
Site 3
freeboard statistics
Averaged to
resolution
Data
Mean
(µ)
Median
Spread
(σ)
First
point
Second
point
ALS mid line
1.018
0.947
0.539
0.826
1.211
ALS mid full width
0.481
0.389
0.296
0.545
0.413
ALS at CryoSat width
0.664
0.561
0.500
0.700
0.630
KAREN
1.047
1.017
0.432
0.877
1.220
CryoSat w/o. snow
0.200
0.200
0.080
0.12
0.300
CryoSat w. snow
0.401
0.401
0.101
0.280
0.502
CryoSat w. in situ snow
0.437
0.437
0.258
0.603
0.671
Table 7: Freeboard statistics for site 3. The column Averaged to resolution sums up the
diﬀerent data if they are averaged to ﬁt the CryoSat footprints.
6.3
Bonus site
Because site 2 did not have any CryoSat data, the information and possible compar-
isons possible there was limited. Therefore a third site is chosen, which is similar to
site 3, in that it lies in the beginning of where 5 tracks are present, ie. south of site 3.
36
==PAGE:40==
Figure 34: Third site investigated, is a backup site chosen semi randomly. The area looks
even from both the data and roughness estimate. The images seen oﬀer little info, since they
are very unclear.
This means that most of the same information available on site 3, is also present here.
But since there is no in situ snow, this comparison will be absent. As with the two
other sites, the ﬁrst step is to see the data shown together. This allow us to get a feel
for how the area looks, and better understand the site speciﬁc statistics afterwards.
The data is plotted in ﬁgure 34 as a function of latitude.
As have also been the case with the other two sites, we see the ALS and KAREN data
follow each other closely, albeit with KAREN looking slightly lower. The area appears
quite ﬂat, with one big peak close to the middle, and then a little higher values towards
the end. However the highest point in this area is around 2 meter, while the other
sites had multiple measured heights above 2 and even 3 meter.
The snow data also seems to ﬁt well in this area, with it being well below the ALS
and KAREN freeboard, for most of the area.
For the CryoSat freeboard, there is a total of 4 valid measurements, which is a nice
improvement over the other sites. Furthermore they seem to lie well within the ALS
and KAREN freeboard values, although with one point being clearly above ALS and
KAREN. This almost perfect ﬁt, is most likely due to this area being ﬂat, as this
gives a good probability of having coincident data points. There is one CryoSat point
missing in the right side of the ﬁgure, due to it being marked as faulty.
Moving on to the roughness, it appears to show a surface with no sudden changes, for
the ﬁrst half of the plot, and then a sudden change. This change appears to be lacking
behind the big peak, which from a visual inspection, would be the area to expect the
change. The last half of the roughness plot shows a more uneven surface. This ﬁts well
with what is seen, as there are a small trend towards higher values, with various peaks
along the way. Overall the calculated roughness appears to match somewhat what
is seen, albeit with some discrepancies. However we also have to take into account,
that the lines in the ﬁgure represent only the nadir freeboard, while the roughness is
37
==PAGE:41==
Backup site freeboard statistics
Data
Mean (µ)
Median
Spread (σ)
ALS mid line
0.797
0.752
0.228
ALS mid full width
0.913
0.816
0.484
ALS at CryoSat width
0.742
0.661
0.475
KAREN
0.714
0.676
0.179
CryoSat w/o. snow
0.318
0.28
0.120
CryoSat w. snow
0.684
0.650
0.137
Table 8
calculated from the 2D freeboard.
The photos taken at this site, seems to conﬁrm that it is indeed a ﬂat area. There
are only a few minor ridges visible. The large changes seen in the ALS and KAREN
data, are not visible in the images. It is thus unclear why these appear, but it could
be ridges covered by snow, in such a way that makes it diﬃcult to see from the air.
However either the area is just void of any visible characteristics, or the images are
very unclear, maybe due to thin clouds. A large version of the image can be seen in
appendix.
6.3.1
Statistics
As have been done with the two other sites, we will take a deeper look into how the
data compares. There is no snow data to compare for this area, but instead there
are multiple CryoSat data points, that can give further insight into how these ﬁt with
ALS. Since there is a lot more CryoSat data on this site, the data averaged to ﬁt these
points are shown in table 9, while the full site statistics are shown in table 8.
From table 8, we can see that KAREN is indeed lower than ALS, as was what was
suspected, after looking at the plot in ﬁgure 34. There is however only an 8 cm dif-
ference in the mean, and 7.5 cm for the median, which is not a lot, and is in line
with what was seen at site 2 and 3. Comparing the three diﬀerent ALS data, they
are more similar, than what was seen at site 2 and 3. This also makes sense, since it
was established, that this was a relatively ﬂat area, which means it is isotropic, so the
parameters should not change much when widening the area. All in all there is around
15 cm diﬀerence in the median, and 17 cm for the mean.
When comparing ALS and KAREN with CryoSat, the ALS at CryoSat width produce
very similar results, with a median diﬀerence of only 1 cm, and a mean of ∼6 cm. ALS
mid full width on the other hand, shows far from the same values, contrary to what was
the case at site 3. It is also interesting to see, that KAREN actually looks to be very
close to the CryoSat values, due to it’s slightly lower than ALS freeboard estimates.
38
==PAGE:42==
Backup site freeboards averaged to CryoSat resolution
Data
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
ALS mid line
0.763
0.784
0.679
0.963
ALS mid full width
0.921
0.823
0.973
0.937
ALS at CryoSat width
0.795
0.712
0.730
0.749
KAREN
0.715
0.710
0.619
0.817
CryoSat w/o. snow
0.520
0.170
0.280
0.370
CryoSat w. snow
0.532
0.678
0.904
0.550
Table 9
If taking CryoSat uncertainty into account, both KAREN and ALS at CryoSat width
seem to match the CryoSat snow freeboard.
Moving on to where ALS and KAREN gets averaged to CryoSat resolution in table 9,
we get some mixed results. There are no clear data source that gives the best ﬁt to
the CryoSat data. For point 1 and 2, the averaged KAREN data provides the closest
estimate. However for point 1 the diﬀerence is 18 cm, and for point 2 it is 3 cm, and
there is only 0.2 cm diﬀerence between KAREN and ALS at CryoSat width at this
point. KAREN is thus only marginally better. For the third point the closest data
is ALS mid full width, where the diﬀerence is 9 cm. The three other data sets are
between 17 and 38 cm oﬀ, which is a huge diﬀerence For the last point, the closest
data is ALS at CS width, which is 20 cm away. This is far too much, to say that they
show a similar freeboard. For the other data, it gets even worse, as they are oﬀby
between 26 and 41 cm.
Since there are 3 diﬀerent data sets that provide a closest average, and 2 of them lie
outside the uncertainty, it does not appear that this is a valid way to compare the
data. From the overall statistics in table 8, and the plot in ﬁgure 34, we saw that the
diﬀerent data appeared to yield the same result, so that is likely not the problem. A
likely problem with this way of comparing the data is probably, that it is unknown
exactly where the CryoSat footprint start and end. Another problem could be, that
the comparison is done along latitude, while the tracks are not directly north. When
looking at data at a speciﬁc latitude, it will thus not be perpendicular to the CryoSat
track, if the same latitude is used for all 5 lines, which it is in this case. If the ice is
somewhat isotropic as it looks to be here, it should not pose a problem, but it can
introduce some error.
39
==PAGE:43==
7
Discussion & Conclusion
Prior to looking at the diﬀerent data included in this report, it was expected that they
would all add up, and give the same picture. Some places this have been the case,
while others have shown something that could not be explained by any uncertainty.
In chapter 4, the full data sets was investigated, yielding information over a large area
of the Lincoln Sea. Because we are dealing with data over a large area, the expectation
is that their average should be similar, since their uncertainties cancel out. This is also
somewhat what is seen. For ALS and KAREN there is a 2 to 3 cm diﬀerence depend-
ing on whether the mean or median is used. This diﬀerence seems quite reasonable,
with KAREN having a more coarse resolution, some diﬀerence is to be expected. It
is a diﬀerent story with the CryoSat data. The expectation is once again, that the
uncertainties should cancel out, and the mean and median should be similar. Instead
we see the CryoSat data being signiﬁcantly lower, which turns out to be primarily due
to a discrepancy for high latitudes. The main driver for this lies with the OIB snow
data, but whether or not something is wrong with this data, can not be conﬁrmed
at this point. It is though heavily hinted from the statistical parameters described
in chapter 6, site 2 and 3, that the available OIB data can not be used for some of
the track, since the values improve signiﬁcantly with in situ measurements. There
are however still diﬀerences when using in situ data, that can not be explained. For
further study, it would be advisable to include other snow data, to conclude whether
or not the fault lies within the data, too much time have passed between observations,
or something else.
It was found both with the entire data sets, and also on the smaller scales, when
operating with the two sites containing CryoSat data, that a comparison at CryoSat
resolution was diﬃcult. As it should be possible with the given ALS data, to match that
of CryoSat 1:1, this begs for a more in-depth look. Information about the exact start
and end coordinates for each CryoSat footprint, could yield a better representation of
the diﬀerences in measurement method. This could also lead into a description of the
correlation length for the diﬀerent data, as it would be useful to know, how small a
data size one can use, to get an accurate estimate of the overall area.
The combination of the diﬀerent data on the 3 sites in chapter 6, seemed to be a good
way to compare the data, as it takes the vast amount of data points and shrinks it
down, to something that can be visualized. On the other hand, the roughness did not
oﬀer much added value, when included in this way. As it is a 2D parameter, that
is compared to a 1D, other ways of displaying the ALS data, such as averaging over
the entire swath, might make the inclusion of the roughness more valid. However this
would then create a mismatch between ALS and KAREN. There were also problems
with the composite images, especially at the backup site, where it appears thin clouds
are covering the ground. On site 3, they gave a bit more information, as they were
quite clear. However as it is diﬃcult to match speciﬁc features in the data, to those
on the images, they currently only serves to conﬁrm the general look of the area.
While this report includes data from many diﬀerent sources, even more could have
been included, which had to be left out due to time limitations. These could provide
valuable insight, or just add into the comparison of the data which have been started
40
==PAGE:44==
in this report.
Since it is only the freeboard used in this report, a natural extension would be to
convert these to total thickness where possible. This would be especially interesting
for the two in situ sites, since the certainty in the snow data, improves the estimation
signiﬁcantly. Furthermore detailed thickness measurements have been made on the
two sites, which again can act as a true reference, when comparing the other total
thickness estimates.
For the full data sets, it is likewise possible to widen the information included in the
comparison. While only the OIB snow data have been utilized in this report, a large
amount of other parameters have been measured for the same ﬂight path. It is thus
possible to also include a freeboard, a total thickness and a roughness from this area.
It would be a welcomed addition, to have data available to compare the estimated
roughness presented in this report, as it currently stands alone, and thus gives limited
information.
Lastly, since some of the data utilized in this report, have been measured a month
apart, it could thus be useful making a similar comparison, using data with less tem-
poral variability, to see if that conﬁrms what is presented here.
References
J. F. Beckers, A. H. Renner, G. Spreen, S. Gerland, and C. Haas. Sea-ice surface
roughness estimates from airborne laser scanner and laser altimeter observations in
fram strait and north of svalbard. Annals of Glaciology, 56(69):235–244, 2015. doi:
10.3189/2015AoG69A717.
ESA.
Asiras,
a new esa airborne instrument sees ice for the ﬁrst time,
a.
URL https://www.esa.int/Applications/Observing_the_Earth/CryoSat/
ASIRAS_a_new_ESA_airborne_instrument_sees_ice_for_the_first_time.
ESA. Cryosat-2 (earth explorer opportunity mission-2), b. URL https://earth.esa.
int/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/c-missions/cryosat-2.
C. Haas, J. Beckers, J. King, A. Silis, J. Stroeve, J. Wilkinson, B. Notenboom,
A. Schweiger, and S. Hendricks.
Ice and snow thickness variability and change
in the high arctic ocean observed by in situ measurements.
Geophysical Re-
search Letters, 44(20):10,462–10,469, 2017.
doi:
10.1002/2017GL075434.
URL
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2017GL075434.
S. Hvidegaard, J. Nielsen, L. Sørensen, S. Simonsen, H. Skourup, R. Forsberg, V. Helm,
and T. Bjerg. ESA CryoVEx 2014 - Airborne ASIRAS radar and laser scanner
measurements during 2014 CryoVEx campaign in the Arctic. Technical University
of Denmark, 2015. ISBN 978-87-91694-26-4.
J. King, H. Skourup, S. M. Hvidegaard, A. Rösel, S. Gerland, G. Spreen, C. Po-
lashenski, V. Helm, and G. E. Liston. Comparison of freeboard retrieval and ice
thickness calculation from als, asiras, and cryosat-2 in the norwegian arctic to
ﬁeld measurements made during the n-ice2015 expedition. Journal of Geophysi-
41
==PAGE:45==
cal Research: Oceans, 123(2):1123–1141, 2018. doi: 10.1002/2017JC013233. URL
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2017JC013233.
N. T. Kurtz, S. L. Farrell, M. Studinger, N. Galin, J. P. Harbeck, R. Lindsay, V. D.
Onana, B. Panzer, and J. G. Sonntag. Sea ice thickness, freeboard, and snow depth
products from operation icebridge airborne data. The Cryosphere, 7(4):1035–1056,
2013. doi: 10.5194/tc-7-1035-2013. URL https://www.the-cryosphere.net/7/
1035/2013/.
NASA.
Operation IceBridge snow radar.
https://icebridge.gsfc.nasa.gov/
?page_id=157. Accessed: 2019-11-17.
NOAA.
Measuring sea ice freeboard.
https://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/sod/
lsa/SeaIce/background.php. Accessed: 2019-11-20.
R. Ricker, S. Hendricks, V. Helm, H. Skourup, and M. Davidson.
Sensitivity
of cryosat-2 arctic sea-ice freeboard and thickness on radar-waveform interpreta-
tion. The Cryosphere, 8(4):1607–1622, 2014. doi: 10.5194/tc-8-1607-2014. URL
https://www.the-cryosphere.net/8/1607/2014/.
SemanticScholar.
Airborne
laser
scanner:
principles
of
operation,
re-
cent
uses
in
brazil
and
regulatory
issue
from
laws
and
parame-
ters
in
brazil
and
in
the
usa.
URL
https://www.semanticscholar.
org/paper/Airborne-Laser-Scanner%3A-principles-of-operation%
2C-in-Sopchaki-Sampaio/d8f5471a40a964d6a7afc6c76f60137ec5da1893,
keywords=.
H. Skourup, S. Simonsen, L. Sørensen, V. Helm, S. Hvidegaard, A. Di Bella, and
R. Forsberg.
ESA CryoVEx/EU ICE-ARC 2016 - Airborne ﬁeld campaign with
ASIRAS radar and laser scanner over Austfonna, Fram Strait and the Wandel Sea.
Technical University of Denmark, 2018. European Space Agency Contract Report.
ESA Contract No. 4000110600/14/NL/FF/lf (CCN3).
M. Sturm and J. Holmgren.
An automatic snow depth probe for ﬁeld valida-
tion campaigns.
Water Resources Research, 54(11):9695–9701, 2018.
doi:
10.
1029/2018WR023559.
URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1029/2018WR023559.
SWIPA. Climate change in the arctic - a hot topic. swipa 2011: Snow, water, ice
and permafrost in the arctic. 2011. URL https://www.amap.no/documents/doc/
snow-water-ice-and-permafrost-in-the-arctic-swipa-climate-change-and-the-cryosphe
743.
R. L. Tilling, A. Ridout, and A. Shepherd.
Estimating arctic sea ice thick-
ness and volume using cryosat-2 radar altimeter data.
Advances in Space Re-
search, 62(6):1203 – 1225, 2018. ISSN 0273-1177. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.asr.2017.10.051. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0273117717307901. The CryoSat Satellite Altimetry Mission: Eight Years of Sci-
entiﬁc Exploitation.
P. Wadhams, W. B. Tucker III, W. B. Krabill, R. N. Swift, J. C. Comiso, and N. R.
Davis. Relationship between sea ice freeboard and draft in the arctic basin, and
42
==PAGE:46==
implications for ice thickness monitoring. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans,
97(C12):20325–20334, 1992.
doi: 10.1029/92JC02014.
URL https://agupubs.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/92JC02014.
S. Warren, I. Rigor, N. Untersteiner, V. Radionov, N. Bryazgin, Y. Aleksandrov, and
R. Colony. Snow depth on arctic sea ice. Journal of Climate - J CLIMATE, 12:
1814–1829, 06 1999. doi: 10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<1814:SDOASI>2.0.CO;2.
43
==PAGE:47==
8
Appendix
Figure 35: Pictures taken of site 3
44
==PAGE:48==
Figure 36: Pictures taken of backup site
45
