==PAGE:1==
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
_____________________________________ 
Improved prediction of MHC ligand hotspots 
by use of Deep artificial neural networks 
 
 
 
Author: 
Asbjørn Eller Skaarup  
s143849 
January 5th 2020 
 
 
Supervisor:
Co-supervisor: 
Morten Nielsen
Carolina Barra Quaglia 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Abstract (English) 
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II presentation is an important step in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determining immunogenicity of proteins, which in turn is critical for protein drugs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NNAlign_MA which is a state-of-the-art model that predicts likelihood of MHC class II
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation for peptides. It is good at determining the peptides that are not presented, but the
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides predicted to be presented are not always right. We investigated how these falsely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predicted ligands differed from the true ligands by analysing predicting presentation profiles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for source proteins of the mass-spectrometry data that NNAlign_MA was trained on. The low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality data and contamination was removed from the data set. We then developed a method
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to predict presentation profile for proteins by using NNAlign_MA but managed to avoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overfitting. The source proteins of the data set were predicted using this method, and five
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structural features was predicted using NetSurfP-2.0. The predicted presentation profiles were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to profiles constructed from experimental data. The regions of the protein that was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predicted to be presented by MHC class II but did not show up in the experimental profiles
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(false-positive) were compared to the regions that showed up in the experimental profiles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(true-positive). This analysis showed that the false-positives regions were more often located
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the core of proteins. Furthermore, they had significant less proline, lysine and serine whilst
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having more cysteine, glycine, leucine, methionine and tryptophan. We then investigated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether deep learning models that used either convolutional layers, long-short-term-memory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
units or both of these two layers could determine which regions were the true-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions. The models were given the predicted presentation profile, a Blosum50 encoded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
protein sequence and the five predicted structural features as input and a target as a profile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
created from experimental data. The models were overall not able to distinguish between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
false-positive and true-positive regions. They managed to overall increase correlation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between predicted profiles and target profiles when the input profile had poor correlation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with experimental profiles. This was obtained by smoothing out the peaks in the profiles. We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
therefore tried to focus the models on the false-positive regions by only including these as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
target. This type of model was not able to distinguish false-positive regions from true-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
regions either. In summary, there are structural and amino acid frequency differences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between false-positive and true-positive regions, but the models were not able to use the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences to improve distinction between these two regions. 
1 out of 70 
==PAGE:3==
 
Summary (Danish) 
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) II præsentation er et vigtigt trin i bestemmelse af
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
immunogenicitet af proteiner, hvilket er kritisk for proteinlægemidler. NNAlign_MA, som er
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
en af de bedste nuværende modeller forudsiger sandsynligheden for MHC II præsentation for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
peptider. Den kan bestemme de peptider, der ikke er præsenteret, men er ikke altid korrekt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mht. peptider, der er forudsagt at blive præsenteret. Vi undersøgte, om disse falske ligander
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adskiller sig fra de ægte ligander ved at analysere forudsigelser af præsentations profiler for
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteiner fra massespektrometri-data, som NNAlign_MA blev trænet på. Data af lav kvalitet,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
samt forurening blev fjernet fra datasættet. Derefter udviklede vi en metode til at forudsige
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
præsentations profil for proteiner ved hjælp af NNAlign_MA og formåede at undgå
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overfitting. Proteinerne i datasættet blev forudsagt ved at anvende den udviklede metode,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
samt fem strukturelle træk der blev forudsagt med NetSurfP-2.0. De forudsagte præsentations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiler blev sammenlignet med profiler konstrueret ud fra eksperimentel data. Regioner af
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteiner, som blev forudsagt til at blive præsenteret af MHC II, men ikke dukkede op i de
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
eksperimentelle profiler (falsk-positive) blev sammenlignet med regionerne, der dukkede op i
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
de eksperimentelle profiler (sandt-positive). Analysen viste, at de sandt-positive regioner
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
oftere var fra overfladen af proteinerne. Desuden indholdte de mindre prolin, lysin og serin,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mens de havde mere cystein, glycin, leucin, methionin og tryptophan. Vi undersøgte derefter,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
om modeller, der brugte convolutional lag, long-short-term-memory enheder eller begge lag,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
kunne bestemme, hvilke regioner var de sandt-positive regioner. Modellerne fik som input
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forudsagte præsentations profil, en Blosum50-kodet proteinsekvens og forudsagte strukturelle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
træk og havde en profil dannet ud fra eksperimentel data som mål. Modellerne var generelt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ikke i stand til at skelne imellem de falsk-positive og sandt-positive regioner. Det lykkedes
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dem samlet at øge korrelationen mellem forudsigelserne og målene, når inputtet havde dårlig
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
korrelation med eksperimentelle profiler. Dette blev opnået ved at udjævne toppene i
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
profilerne. Vi forsøgte derfor at fokusere modellerne på de falsk-positive regioner ved kun at
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
inkludere disse som mål. Den type model var heller ikke i stand til at skelne falsk-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
regioner fra sandt-positive regioner. For at opsummere er der både strukturelle og aminosyre
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frekvens forskelle imellem falsk-positive og sandt-positive regioner, men modellerne var ikke
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i stand til at bruge forskellene til at forbedre forskellen mellem disse to regioner. 
2 out of 70 
==PAGE:4==
 
Preface 
This Master thesis ’Improved prediction of MHC ligand hotspots by use of Deep artificial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neural networks’ was done at the health tech department at Technical University of Denmark.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The project was done with very limited prior knowledge and experience with of deep learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models, so only common deep learning methods has been explored. The project lasted from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 5, 2019 to January 5, 2020 and constitutes from 30 ECTS. 
 
I would like to thank my two supervisors Morten Nielsen and Carolina Barra Quaglia for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
giving lots of constructive feedback and especially for taking time during christmas holiday
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to help and read through the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 out of 70 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Abstract (English)
1 
Summary (Danish)
2 
Preface
3 
Introduction
6 
Immune system
6 
Major histocompatibility complex
7 
MHC diversity
10 
Training data types
10 
MHC class II predictors
11 
NetSurfP
13 
Theory
14 
Unsupervised learning
14 
Neural network
15 
CNN
15 
LSTM
16 
Adam
17 
Overfitting
18 
Materials and methods
19 
Data
19 
Filters
20 
Removing contaminants
20 
NNAlign_MA
20 
Profile creation
22 
Features
23 
Performance measures
24 
Model
25 
Partition
26 
Model training
27 
Results
28 
Data exploration
28 
Data quality
32 
Method comparison
35 
Composition of false-positive regions
41 
Partition
43 
Model performance
45 
Performance gain
49 
4 out of 70 
==PAGE:6==
 
Discussion
53 
Overfitting issue
54 
Data quality
54 
Structural features
55 
Amino acid preference
55 
Model performance
56 
Bibliography
57 
Appendix
60 
AUC per protein
60 
Method comparison
66 
 
 
 
 
5 out of 70 
==PAGE:7==
 
Introduction 
To treat inflammatory diseases such as Crohn's disease, the antibody Infliximab has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used, since it down regulates the inflammation in the bowel (Agnholt et al. 2003). A major
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
issue with this treatment is the frequent formation of anti-drug antibodies (ADA) that form
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immune-complexes with the drug, which leads to lowering of the drug level in patients (van
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
der Laken et al. 2007). These ADA are formed in patients since the antigen-presenting-cells
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(APC) break down proteins that enters the body and present the immunogenic parts of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules. If a T-cell can bind
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
to the peptide, it can induce a signal to the B-cells to form an antibody against the protein
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Neefjes et al. 2011). A way to prevent the formation of the antibody is to change the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immunogenic parts of the proteins such that they still retain their function, but prevent the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MHC class II from presenting peptides from the protein. Currently MHC-associated peptide
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteomics experiments are used to determine which part of drugs are immunogenic. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiments are expensive and have limited sensitivity (Nelde, Kowalewski, and Stevanović
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019). The experiment must therefore be repeated many times to verify that a drug is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
presented in a broad MHC allele context. As an alternative, in-silico methods have been
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed, but the accuracy of these is still relatively low. Accurate predictions of such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ligands will move the field of protein drugs forward by limiting unwanted immune responses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against the drug. The problem with state-of-the-art models such as NNAlign_MA is that they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
predict too many ligands which are not presented on MHC class II (Barra et al. 2020). We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
hypothesis that this problem is due to the fact that the model are focused on MHC binding
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only and hence to a large degree ignore the antigen processing steps of the protein leading up
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to MHC presentation. Given this, we speculate that deep learning models will be able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distinguish the true-positive ligands from the false-positive by capturing long-range
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactions contained in the full protein sequence and local structural features.  
 
 
6 out of 70 
==PAGE:8==
 
Immune system 
To protect the human body against pathogens, the immune system has developed two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different branches. The innate immune system is fast activated by effectively recognising and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
destroying nonspecific pathogens. The adaptive immune system is specifically directed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against the antigen compartment (usually a protein or peptide) of the pathogen. The adaptive
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immune system is composed of cells specialized to recognise and eliminate pathogens. After
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exposure to an antigen, growth and multiplication of antigen-reactive lymphocytes are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generated. The antigen-reactive lymphocytes persists for years and lead to long-term
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immunity against the specific antigen. The antigen-reactive lymphocytes are divided into T
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cells and B cells that produce a unique protein, called T-cell (TCRs) and B-cell (BCRs)
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
receptors respectively, and that each have specificity to interact with a single antigen. Prior to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
TCR recognition, the antigen has to be uptaken by an antigen presenting cell and degraded to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
smaller peptides that form complexes with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found on host cell surfaces. Two different types of T-cells, either cytotoxic T-cells (CD8+ T
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cells) or T-helper cells (CD4+ T cells) can get activated by interacting and with the MHC
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
molecules and initiate a suitable response. After activation, CD8+ T cells will mature and be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
able to directly eliminate directly eliminate infected cells which present the antigen. CD4+ T
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cells can migrate to lymph nodes where they can activate B-cells that in turn will produce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antibodies specific to the antigen that the CD4+ T cell presents to them. These antibodies can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
bind to pathogens directly and neutralize or tag the pathogen to be eliminated by other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immune cells (Madigan 2015; Neefjes et al. 2011). 
Major histocompatibility complex 
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are the proteins that present antigens to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
T-cells. The MHCs are divided into MHC class I and MHC class II and are in humans called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
human leukocyte antigens (HLAs). Both MHC class I and MHC class II are transported
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the cell surface and present self peptides or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides derived from antigens from outside the cell respectively. MHC class I can bind to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CD8+ T cells while MHC class II can bind CD4+ T cells (Madigan 2015; Denyer, Hodges,
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
and Gorman 2007; Neefjes et al. 2011). 
7 out of 70 
==PAGE:9==
 
MHC class I proteins are located in the ER of all nucleated host cells, and are transported to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the membrane surface when presenting a peptide, usually a self-peptide. MHC class I
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
proteins consist of two polypeptides, forming the antigen binding site, an invariant alpha
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chain embedded in the cell membrane and a β​2​-microglobulin encoded by a non-MHC gene.  
After transcription and translation, many proteins are defective because of deficient
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
production. The defective protein is degraded by proteasomes in the cytosol or in the nucleus
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
and most of the peptides are destroyed by aminopeptidases. However, some peptides escapes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the aminopeptidases and are transported via the transporter associated with antigen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processing into the peptide loading complex (PLC) of the ER, where the MHC class I is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
found. The peptide may either bind directly to the MHC class I or be further degraded by ER
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
aminopeptidases associated with antigen processing before binding to the MHC class I. MHC
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
class I proteins has a binding groove which generally can bind peptides of 8-9 amino acids.
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The length of the peptides are limited, since the ends of the binding groove are closed. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptide-MHC class I complex is transported out of the PLC and the ER and via the Golgi
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
apparatus, the complex is expressed on the cell surface and able to interact with CD8+ T
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cells. The surface MHC class I is inactivated by ubiquitin attaching to promote internalization
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
and lysosomal degradation (Neefjes et al. 2011). 
The pathway of MHC class II presentation can is shown in ​figure 1​. The mechanism of action
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
of the MHC class II differs from the mechanism of MHC class I. MHC class II compounds
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
are primarily found in antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells, B cells and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
macrophages (Madigan 2015). MHC class II consists of a transmembrane ⍺-chain and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
transmembrane β-chain that assemble in the ER (Neefjes et al. 2011). A chaperone protein or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
an invariant chain (Ii) attaches to the MHC class II, blocking for peptide binding in the ER.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The MHC class II-Ii complex is transported either directly or through the plasma membrane
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the ER to an MHC class II compartment (MIIC). In the MIIC proteases degrade the Ii
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
and other proteins inside the MIIC, but the class II Ii peptide (CLIP) fragment of the Ii
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
protein still blocks the peptide binding site. A chaperone, HLA-DM, permits the exchange of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the CLIP fragment with an antigen peptide forming the MHC class II-peptide complex. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HLA-DM is in turn regulated by HLA-DO, which is bound to the HLA-DM (Nanaware et al.
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
2019). MHC class II generally binds to peptides consisting of 11-15 amino acids, but can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bind peptides of any length, since the ends of MHC class II are open (Madigan 2015). This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
class also binds to a 9-mer core of the peptide like MHC class I, while both ends of the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
8 out of 70 
==PAGE:10==
 
peptide protruding from each end of the binding groove. The complex is transported to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
plasma membrane of the APC, where it interacts with CD4+ T cells, promoting an immune
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
response (Neefjes et al. 2011).  
 
Figure 1​: MHC class II presentation pathway. The MHC class II is formed in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) from the ​⍺- and β chain and form a complex with invariant chain
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(Ii). This is transported through the Golgi directly or via the cell membrane to the MHC class
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
II compartment (MIIC), which are fused with early endosomes, that contain proteases and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exogenous proteins. The proteases degrade the exogenous proteins into peptides and cut the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ii so the class II‑associated Ii peptide (CLIP) fragment remains bound to MHC class II. The
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
chaperone HLA-DM then help the peptides to bind MHC class II, and the MHC class II is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
then transported to the cell membrane, where it can bind CD4+ T cells via T cell receptors
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
that are specific to the peptide. 
  
 
9 out of 70 
==PAGE:11==
 
MHC diversity 
The MHC molecules are some of the most polymorphic genes in vertebrates. The diversity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MHC molecules comes both from joining of chains and from genetic diversity. As mentioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
above, MHC class I molecules consist of two chains, but it is only the membrane-bound
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
chain (⍺-chain) which define the peptide binding groove. MHC class II also consists of two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
membrane-bound chains (⍺and β), but for this molecule, both chains are part of the binding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
groove and thus both affect the binding affinity for peptides. Since many different alleles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exists for each chain, the peptide binding affinity between MHCs varies. The MHC class I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
has three genes in humans: HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C. Since a person gets all three from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
each of their parents, each person can have up to 6 different MHC class I molecules. Despite
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
MHC class II also having three different genes, HLA-DR, HLA-DP, and HLA-DQ, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diversity for a person is doubled compared to MHC class I. This is caused by both the ⍺and
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
β chain being polymorphics (for HLA-DQ and DP). These can be combined with either of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
isoforms of the other chain to form an MHC class II complex, and an individual can thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
form four different isoforms of each HLA type since there is one copy of the ⍺and β gene on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
both chromosomes for HLA-DQ and HLA-DP. The HLA-DR is a little different from the two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
others since the ⍺gene is invariable. Even though the ⍺gene of HLA-DR is invariable, four
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
different isoforms can still be formed within an individual, since the HLA-DR β gene can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
have two different copies on a single chromosome (Voorter, Brandts, and Van den
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Berg-Loonen 2006).  
All these isoforms have different affinity to different peptides, but the affinity mostly depends
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the anchor positions 1st, 4th, 6th, and 9th in the core of the peptide (Ferrante and Gorski
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2007). 
 
 
10 out of 70 
==PAGE:12==
 
Training data types 
To test how strong peptides bind to certain MHC, in-vitro experiments have been made, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which the binding affinity (BA) is found by measuring the dissociation constant (IC​50​) of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pMHCII
complexes.
Such
experiments
have been gathered in the IEDB database
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​www.iedb.org​). These experiments are done in relatively low volume since assays are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usually made one peptide at a time, and is, therefore, a low-throughput method (BUUS et al.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
1995). The benefit from these experiments is that the allele is known and the affinity is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continuous, which makes it easier for models to learn from, compared to multiallelic data.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore the output is a continuous values, which gives multiple degree of binding, so the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ligands can be ranked from best binders to worst binders. 
Another type of experiment, which has gained popularity in the last few years is an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiment done in-vivo. Since the test is done in-vivo, the peptides also contain information
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about how the antigen is processed before bound to the MHC class II. The processes which
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an antigen goes through are, among other, protein internalization and protease digestion. 
The peptides are found by characterizing the eluted ligands which are presented on the cell
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surface by using both liquid chromatography (LC) and mass spectrometry (MS). To extract
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the peptides from the cell, the cells are lysed and an affinity column with a monoclonal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
antibody specific for an MHC allotype then binds the pMHCII. The peptides are then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
separated from the MHC complex using high performance LC (HPLC), and the peptides are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identified and quantified by LC-MS (Croft et al. 2013).  
The output of this experiment is the sequence of bound peptides together with information of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the (potentially multiple) MHC alleles expressed in the given cell that the antibody is specific
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to. Therefore, only binary data can be extracted, and it is therefore not possible to directly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
distinguish which peptides are more likely to be presented among the presented peptides.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is a problem since mass-spectrometry experimental replicates only have a 60 percent of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
replicability (Nelde, Kowalewski, and Stevanović 2019). It is therefore difficult to determine
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
whether the same peptides will be presented in future experiments. Furthermore, a single
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
experiment can potentially have missed multiple MHC class II peptides that can be presented
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
if the experiment was replicated.  
11 out of 70 
==PAGE:13==
 
MHC class II predictors 
Over the last decade, BA data has been used to develop prediction models for MHC class II
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(Nielsen, Lundegaard, and Lund 2007). The amount of this type of data has increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout the years, and this increase in training data has advanced the performance of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models (Jensen et al. 2018).  
State-of-the-art models benefit from a combination of both BA data and data from eluted
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ligands (EL) (Alvarez et al. 2019). To learn from multi-allelic (MA) data, the models have to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
deconvolute this data, so every peptide is only assigned to one MHC allele. The first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach was to deconvolute MA with the unsupervised learning method GibbsClustering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(unsupervised learned is described further in ​Unsupervised learning section). This method
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uses a heuristic search to find the clusters with most information content and creates a “trash”
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
cluster, which does not align with the clusters it found. The clusters, except the trash cluster,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could then be used to train an artificial neural network model (ANN is described further in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Neural network section) such as NNAlign (Nielsen and Andreatta 2017) to predict binding to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
each allele found by GibbsClustering, where target values were binary for the EL data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Alvarez et al. 2018). 
For further benefit from the complementarity between BA and EL data, the NNAlign method
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was refined to include two different output neurons, one for BA and one for EL data, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enable learning from the two data types, and learn the antigen processing information that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EL data contained. The weights between the input and the hidden neurons were shared and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trained with both types of input data (Barra et al. 2018).  
Later, the method was further improved to handle EL data with multiple potential MHC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
restrictions. This updated method was termed NNAlign_MA, and functions in short as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
follows. First, a neural network is pre-trained on single allelic data (SA) and learns the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binding motifs from these. After this pre-training, the model is used to predict each of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MA peptides to all the alleles expressed by the cell-line and uses the best prediction score to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
annotate each peptide to an allele. Thereafter, it trains on the whole data set with the newly
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
annotated peptides and after this new model, predicts and reassigns again MA peptides to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
allele with the best score. This annotation of MA peptides is done in an iterative manner in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
each of the training cycles until convergence (Alvarez et al. 2019). This method improved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 out of 70 
==PAGE:14==
 
upon the GibbsClustering approach, since this method often was not able to fully deconvolute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
all MHCs present in a data set. It mainly had problems when cell-lines contain overlapping
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binding motifs or there are not enough examples to learn the motif, due to low expression
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Alvarez et al. 2019). Moreover, the GibbsClustering also needed the guidance of prior
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge about the binding motif of alleles, to associate the clusters with the correct allele
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and correctly annotate the clusters (Nielsen, Connelley, and Ternette 2018).  
Furthermore, this method also found that the context of the peptide contains information of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the processing signal, which improved the model. The context is in this case the three amino
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
acids surrounding the peptide in the C- and N-terminal together with the three most C- and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N-terminal amino acids of the peptide itself. The information found in the context is in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contrast to earlier findings, in which no specific cleavage of antigens was found (Hsing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rudensky 2005), which might explain why the context has not been used for prediction in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
earlier models. The information contained within the context was only found for flanking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions longer than 2 amino acids where the binding of the core residues between the MHC
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
molecules does not protect the peptide against proteases.  
The state-of-the-art MHC class II predictor uses a semi-supervised approach to deconvolute
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
MA data instead of GibbsClustering. First, a neural network is pre-trained on SA and learns
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the binding motifs from these. After this pre-training, the model is used to predict each of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
MA peptides to all the alleles expressed by the cell-line and uses the best prediction score to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
annotate each peptide to an allele. Thereafter, it trains on the whole data set with the newly
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
annotated peptides and after this new model, predicts and reassigns again MA peptides to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
allele with the best score. This annotation of MA peptides is done in an iterative manner in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
each of the training cycles until convergence (Alvarez et al. 2019). 
 
 
13 out of 70 
==PAGE:15==
 
NetSurfP 
As mentioned earlier the processing of protein has influence on presentation of peptides. An
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important feature which has shown to influence protein processing is the protein structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(Winther Jørgensen, Buus, and Nielsen 2013). This is likely due to protein structure can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highly influence the protein function, including the protein-protein interactions. For example,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein structure can influence how a protein is degraded by proteases in the endosome by
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limiting access to certain parts of the protein. The 3D structure can be determined by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiments such as X-ray and NMR, but it is difficult to get good resolution of the structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
with these experiments. A tool which addresses part of the problem by predicting the several
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structural features, is the model called NetSurfP-2.0 (Klausen et al. 2018). This tool uses the
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
primary sequence to predict protein features such as relative surface accessibility (RSA),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probability of disorder, and the three secondary structure classes, α-helix, β-strand, and coils.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It makes a profile of the protein, by using the software HH-suite (Remmert et al. 2012),
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which returns a profile containing information of how frequent each amino acid is for the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
queried, and for very similar proteins. It then uses this profile as input to predict structural
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
features. To predict the structural features, a network is trained, first on two convolutional
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
layers
(CNN
is
further
described
in
​CNN
section)
then
followed
by
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
long-short-term-memory layer (LSTM is further described in ​LSTM section), and finally with
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
a fully connected layer like the layers in ANN. CNN and LSTM are described in the sections
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
below. This updated version of NetSurfP improved the predictions significantly compared to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the earlier model developed in 2009, since more data was used for training and a deep
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
network was used instead of only a traditional ANN (Petersen et al. 2009).  
 
 
14 out of 70 
==PAGE:16==
 
Theory 
As mentioned in sections above models which can learn from existing data have been 
developed to predict the ligands that are presented. This is done since the pathway for 
presentation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II ligands is complex and can 
therefore not easily be described with a few set of rigid rules. In the following section the 
algorithms used the models will be described in more detail to gain insight in how the models 
benefit from using these algorithms. 
Unsupervised learning 
In the last couple of decades, machine learning has increased in popularity, due to new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods and to increasing computational performance, which makes it possible to use these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
methods on big data sets. 
Machine learning is an algorithm that learns from data and finds patterns within this data. It
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
can either be supervised or unsupervised. In supervised learning labelled data is used as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
target value for a given input. The model then has to learn how to map from the input to the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
label of the target. In contrast, is unsupervised learning used to learn patterns from unlabeled
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
data. The purpose of this is usually to find patterns within the data to cluster the data in a
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
meaningful way (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). An example of such an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
algorithm is single linkage. This algorithm clusters data in a hierarchical manner so each data
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
point starts as an individual cluster. The clusters which are least different are then combined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
until only big clusters remains. The difference between the clusters is defined as the smallest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
distance between any data points in two different clusters (ROSS 1969). 
 
 
15 out of 70 
==PAGE:17==
 
Neural network 
Supervised learning is used to find the best function which maps from an input to a given
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
output. An artificial neural network (ANN) is a popular supervised learning algorithm and is
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
somewhat based on the human brain, where interconnected neurons that send signals between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each other activate certain neurons. An ANN consists of layers of nodes which, like the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neurons in the brain, send signals between each other. In conventional feed-forward ANN,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the signal is only sent in one direction, so from one layer to the next. The signal is sent by
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
connecting the nodes with weights. These weights are multiplying by the output of a node
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and is added at the receiver node together with a bias, which is independent of the input of
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
any nodes. The receiver node is then activated with a nonlinear function, such as the sigmoid
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
function, which ensures that the model can learn non-linear patterns. This is important since
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
some patterns are more complex than it is possible to describe with linear models. After
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activation, the nodes send their output to the next layer. This sending of signals and activation
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of nodes continues until the signals are sent to an output node, which is then compared to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
target value of the output. A batch randomly sampled from the input is predicted using the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
model and the difference between the target of the model and the actual output is calculated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
as the error. The weights are then updated depending on how much they contribute to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
error. This contribution is calculated by partially differentiating the error with respect to each
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
weight. The weights are changed in the opposite direction of the average gradient and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiplied by a learning rate, to minimize the error. 
CNN 
Convolution neural networks (CNN) is a deep learning algorithm that finds importance to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different patterns within the input. By using multiple layers, these patterns can have a high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
level of abstraction and can therefore be used to find complex patterns. These patterns are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found by sliding filters across the input, and activates depending on how well a part of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
input matches with the pattern of the filters. This creates a feature map, which at first find
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
simple patterns, but when additional filters slide across the feature map, more abstract
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns are found. Each filter is a set of weights which are multiplied by the input that the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
filter covers during sliding. After the feature map has been created, it is usually followed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
16 out of 70 
==PAGE:18==
 
an activation and pooling layer. The activation layer ensures that the model can learn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-linear patterns, since some patterns are more complex than is possible to describe with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
linear models. The pooling layer combines the information like a small filter, but instead of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
using separate weights for every feature, the pooling calculates a summary statistic of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
nearby outputs. Such as summary statistic could be the maximum value or an average, and is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
used to make the model robust to small changes in the features. When using multiple filters,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the output are concatenated after every layer, so the filters in the next layer are applied on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
output from every filter in the previous layer. The filters in convolutional networks are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
key to why convolutional layers can outperform ANNs. The filters is a benefit due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
parameter sharing, meaning that the same filters are used across the whole input. Thus, rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than learning a separate weight for every position in the input as for ANNs, the CNN
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
networks only has to learn a set of weights, which has proven to be highly efficient. This type
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of layer excels at finding novel patterns and is therefore often used as the first layers in deep
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
learning models (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). 
LSTM 
Long-short-term-memory (LSTM) models are a variant of recurrent neural networks (RNN)
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
which like the CNN also share weights when running across the input. The LSTM models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have cells which keep track of long-term relationships between the input at different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positions. An illustration of a cell is shown in ​figure 2​. This is done by having a cell state
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
which has a weight which goes from the cell to the same cell at the next position, when a new
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
input arrives at the input. By having this self-connection the cell state can learn relationships
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the previous positions influences and the output of current position. To control the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cell three gates are used; input, output, and forget. Every gate is a multiplication of the input
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
with a separate set of weights, and a sigmoid activation function. The gates each have a
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
different function. The forget gate is used to determine whether to forget the cell state or not.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The input gate determines whether the input should be added to the cell state. The output gate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
determines whether the cell state should be used for output. The input is modulated by a tanh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
function before the input gate determines which parts that should be added to the cell state.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The LSTM layers can be bidirectional so the sequence is processed in both directions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 out of 70 
==PAGE:19==
 
Therefore, LSTM layers excel at learning long-term dependencies, and are therefore usually
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used when regions far apart influences each other (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). 
 
Figure 2​: A sketch of an LSTM unit. x​t is the input at one position. σ is a sigmoid function and
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
tanh is a tanh function. The arrows show the dataflow. h​t-1 is the output from the previous
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
position, while h​t is the output from the current position. The h​t is given as input to every
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
LSTM units in the same layer at the next position. c​t-1 is the output cell state at the previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
position, while c​t is the cell state output at the current position, which is used for the same
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LSTM unit at the next position. The w are the weights multiplied by the input features. i​gate is
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the input gate, f​gate is the forget gate, o​gate is the output gate and i​mod is the modulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
input. The ‘​╳​’ indicates that the inputs are multiplied while ‘+’ indicates that they are added. 
 
 
18 out of 70 
==PAGE:20==
 
Adam 
To update the weights in a neural network, different methods can be used. One of the most
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effective methods is the method called Adam, which stands for adaptive moments. As the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
name states, Adam is a combination of a method which uses adaptive learning rates and a
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
method which uses momentum. It individually adapts the learning rate for the model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parameters, so parameters with the biggest partial derivative will decrease the learning rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most. Furthermore, it includes momentum which has both a first order and a second order
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
momentum by accumulating the gradient of the past. The momentums is used so the model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
will not get stuck in the first local minima it finds, since it has momentum and can therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
continue through until it finds the global minimum. Adam does this by accumulating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gradients of the past updates, so the step size not only is influenced by the gradient, but also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
by how aligned the gradients are. The gradients are accumulated by using an exponentially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decaying average, which ensures that the gradients far back in time have vanishing influence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
on the step. To ensure that the model will not keep fluctuating by bouncing between each side
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of a minima, the momentums are constantly decreased after each update, each with a different
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
hyperparameter. This will ensure that the model will end at a minima after the model has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
been updated several times (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). 
Overfitting 
Machine learning models have the capabilities to overfit to a problem by optimizing model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
parameters so much for a certain set of data points that it does not correlate well with new
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
data. Especially deep learning models which has many weights due to the multiple layers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have an increased capability for overfitting. The overfitting happens when the model has used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same data many times to update the weights of the model. To stop training before this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overfitting happens, we can use a validation set, which is not used to optimize model weights
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
but only used to test, when the model stops to fit general trends of every data point. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach is called early stopping, but leaves out a small part of the dataset to use it for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
validation. If data is limited, this approach may exclude too many training examples which in
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
turn decrease the models ability to fit well on a wide variety of data points. If there instead is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
plenty of data available, early stopping might not be needed, since it will make it harder for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
19 out of 70 
==PAGE:21==
 
model to fit the weights to every single datapoint (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, models can still overfit huge amount of data if there is redundancy between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training data and validation data and data redundancy therefore has to be taken into account
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when training a model.  
One approach to prevent overfitting which does not revolve around the amount of data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available is to use regularization. Regularization is about limiting the capacity of a model, so
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
it cannot overfit to a specific problem. This can be done in several ways. For example can the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
L2 regularization be used, which penalizes large weights equal to half of the squared size of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the gradient. This drives the weights to become as small as possible, so the model cannot
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase certain weights to fit every point perfectly. Another type of regularization is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduce dropout layers. By introducing dropout layers which randomly puts weights to zero,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the model is forced to accumulate output from all the nodes, which ensures that no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination of nodes are fitted to only be used for one data point (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courville 2016). 
Instead of using regularization, we can use an ensemble of models trained on different data,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since the ensemble minimizes any biases one model might have. This requires multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models to be trained and is therefore both a time consuming process and limits the amount of
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training data for each model (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). 
At last, overfitting can also be a problem when reporting the overall performance of a model,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
if the model is trained on data similar to the ones used to evaluate the model. Therefore, a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
separate data set should be used for evaluation of the model. If no separate data set is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available a method called cross-validation can be used. This approach also needs to train
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different models each leaving out a different part of the data to use for evaluation while the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rest is used for training.  
 
 
20 out of 70 
==PAGE:22==
 
Materials and methods 
Data 
The mass spectrometry data consists of ​102.578 peptides from ​14 papers and was collected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from Reynisson et al. 2019. In each of the original sources, mass spectrometry peptides have
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been assigned to a parent protein by searching against Uniprot, however due to different
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
database versions used in the different sources, not all the peptides matched the protein ID
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided in the original papers. To account for these cases, a Blast search was done in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Reynisson et al. 2019 against both human and mouse proteomes, including isoforms, and the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides were assigned to the top-scoring protein. 
In addition of the protein ID and the peptide sequence, all the alleles expressed in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assessed cell-line were gathered from Reynisson et al. 2019 and these alleles will be referred
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as cell-line. In total, these peptides mapped back to 10,742 different proteins. 
Filters 
Proteins with less than 5 ligands per 100 amino acids were excluded. This was done to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decrease the number of proteins with false-negative regions, meaning regions of the proteins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the cell-line would present ligands from, but were not captured in the experiment due
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to low sensitivity of mass-spectrometry (MS) experiments. 
Further, only proteins within the range of 100-1000 residues were included. This was done
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since the length of the proteins can affect features far away in the protein due to long-range
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactions (Ma, Liu, and Cheng 2018). This would have made it more difficult to find the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
part of the proteins which had influence on the presentation, since a lot more interactions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
could occur. 
After applying the filters 1,106 proteins were selected, with a total of 54,037 peptides
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
mapped to them. These peptides will be referred to as positives. 
21 out of 70 
==PAGE:23==
 
Removing contaminants 
Except for the filters mentioned above, a filter which should remove contaminants was
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied. After the were predicted with NNAlign_MA (Reynisson et al. 2019), the true ligands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
were assigned a target value of 1 and artificial ligands had 0 assigned (see ​Profile creation
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
section for detail about how artificial were created). The predictions was then split up to only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
contain one unique protein and one unique cell-line. An area-under-the-roc-curve (AUC) was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculated for every protein-cell-line pair. The proteins which had an AUC less than 0.5 for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
protein-cell-line pair were removed, since these were most likely contaminants. This filter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
excluded 75 proteins, which left out 1031 proteins. 
NNAlign_MA 
From the predicted ligands from NNAlign_MA a presentation profile was created for each
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein. The NNAlign_MA model trained in Reynisson et al. 2019 was used for this project.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was trained on the same mass spectrometry data as described earlier in the ​Data section,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together with binding affinity (BA) data retrieved from IEDB (​www.iedb.org​) in 2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Jensen et al. 2018) which contained 134,281 peptide binding affinity values distributed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
among 36 HLA-DR,27 HLA-DQ, 9 HLA-DP, and 8 H-2 molecules. The binding affinity
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
measures (IC​50 values) were log-transformed with
, so every value was in the
 
 
 
 
 
 1 −
log(IC
 nM)
50
log(50 000 nM)  
 
 
 
  
 
range 0-1, as all negative values were replaced with 0 (Buus et al. 2003). All peptides were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
filtered to only include peptides with a length between 13 and 21 residues. The negative
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dataset
for
MS
data
was
made
by
extracting
random
proteins
from
UniProt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​www.uniprot.org​), and then random peptides were extracted from those proteins. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negatives were created so the amount of each peptide length in total, including the positives,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equal to five times the amount of peptides for the most prevalent peptide length among the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positives. 
The training data was split into five partitions by using a Hobohm inspired algorithm (From
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
et al. 2008) to cluster the data with a common motif of 9 for each allele. After the data was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clustered, five partitions were created each including 4/5 of the proteins. The 1/5 that was not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
included differed between each partition, so each cluster were excluded from one partition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 out of 70 
==PAGE:24==
 
each. These partitions were used to do five-fold cross-validation, and generate five different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models each leaving out a different part of the dataset for training. 
The model was trained on peptides encoded with a blosum50 matrix, together with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
pseudo-sequence of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) allele, which consisted of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 contact residues of the MHC class II within 4.0 Å of the peptide (Nielsen et al. 2008).
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two models were trained, with and without context. Context information refers here to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition of 12 amino acids beyond the peptide sequence; three residues upstream and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
downstream of both N- and C-termini of the peptide. To update the weights stochastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gradient descent was used with a fixed learning rate of 0.05.  
SA data were used to train the network for 20 epochs, where a feed-forward network predicts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
all possible 9-mers of a given peptide and assigns the core to the peptide with the highest
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prediction score (Nielsen and Lund 2009). The BA and eluted ligand (EL) data were trained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on different output neurons. After the 20 epochs, the models assigned each of the multi-allelic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(MA) data to the allele with the highest prediction score. The model was then trained for 380
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
epochs with all peptides, and after each epoch, the MA was assigned to the allele with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highest prediction score. When predicting a peptide with MA data, the network will return the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allele which it finds most likely. 
An ensemble of networks was trained for each partition both with and without context. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different ensembles consisted of 50 different networks which included 5 different number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
hidden neurons (2, 10, 20, 40, and 60) and 10 different seeds (1-10). In total, 250 models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were trained, but when the models were used only one ensemble consisting of 50 networks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was used at a time, by calculating the average prediction score of the ensemble. A peptide
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
could thereby be predicted with 5 different ensembles which each excluded a different
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
partition of the training set.  
 
 
23 out of 70 
==PAGE:25==
 
Profile creation 
After the positive peptides were mapped back to the source protein, two different profiles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were created per protein. One was created by counting mapped peptides per position and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other which is referred as promiscuity counted the number of unique alleles per positions. A
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
min-max normalization was used to bring all values into the range 0-1. Each position had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thereby a value of how likely it was that it was presented by an MHC class II molecule. This
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
profile will be referred as experimental presentation profile. 
 
To use NNAlign_MA for creating a predicted presentation profile for each protein, a set of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
peptides with assigned alleles had to be made, since NNAlign_MA uses peptides and lists of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible MHC molecules as input. A set of peptides was created by splitting up the protein
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into all possible continuous peptides of length 13-21. The set of peptides were combined with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a set consisting of either every allele or every cell-line which the positive ligands from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein had been found to bind in the MS experiments. The set of peptides and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allele/cell-lines were combined, so every allele/cell-line were assigned to every peptide in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
set. This was done for every protein. The pairs of peptides with an assigned allele/cell-line
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be referred to as artificial pMHCII. 
All the artificial pMHCIIs were then predicted with the five cross-validation ensamples
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned in the section above both with and without context. Every step from this point was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
done for both the predictions with and without context. 
 
The pMHCII that also appeared in the positive peptides were evaluated with the ensemble
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network where those peptides were excluded from training. For the negatives (absent in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training dataset) two different scenarios were handled differently. The first case were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative peptides sharing a common motif of at least 9 amino acids with a training peptide
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
that had at least one of the same alleles assigned. In those cases, the negatives were evaluated
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using the same ensemble as the positives to avoid overfitting of the prediction. Second,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides that did not share a common motif of 9 were randomly assigned an ensemble or an
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
average prediction of all ensembles was assigned. The random and average method were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared. 
24 out of 70 
==PAGE:26==
 
At last, a third case was handled differently, when the negatives which share a common motif
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
with a training peptide and an allele in every ensample network. To make sure every peptide
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were predicted with at least one model, those peptides were handled in the same manner as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the second case where no common motif was found. This was done to cover the whole
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein sequence with pMHCII, as false-negative regions might otherwise appear due to no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides were predicted for at certain region with any of the models. 
To make the profiles two different schemes were used, 1) the top 1% scoring pMHCIIs for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each protein or 2) for each allele for each protein, and then those peptides were mapped back
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to their source protein. The profiles were then created as for the experimental presentation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiles, where the peptides and unique alleles were counted per position and the profiles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
afterwards were min-max normalized. The profile created by allele count will be referred to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as promiscuity, and was created because it was the method used in Barra et. al 2020, and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since it should balance the influence of the different alleles. 
Features 
The predicted presentation profile from each protein was used as input for the deep learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model together with the sequence encoded with a blosum50 matrix. The blosum encoding
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
includes the 20 amino acids as well as 1 unknown amino acid, "X". They were encoded with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blosum50 since the blosum matrix contains information about amino acid similarity and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abundance of amino acids, so the model should generalize better (Nielsen et al. 2003). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
sequence was included for the model to be able to learn amino acid patterns and their features
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which were responsible for false-positive predictions. 
Besides the blosum encoding and the predicted profile, the three types of secondary structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together with two other structural features were also used as input at each position. 
This was obtained by using the web version of NetsurfP-2.0 (Klausen et al. 2018). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
features used from this prediction were the probability of each of the three types of secondary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structure (q3​prob​), the relative surface accessibility (RSA) and the probability of disorder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(disorder). 
 
25 out of 70 
==PAGE:27==
 
In total, this made 27 features per position. The input was extended to 1000 positions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent of the protein length, so every feature at positions after the protein length only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
had 0 values. The input size was therefore in total 1000*27. 
Performance measures 
When comparing predicted profiles with experimental profiles three performance measures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are used. A Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) is a measure of how well a linear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
correlation between two normally distributed variables describes their relationship (Hauke
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Kossowski 2011). It is calculated like this
, where d​i and m​i
 
 
   
 
 
 
CC
P
= ∑
 
i
 
σ σ
D
M
(d −d
)(m −m
)
i
mean
i
mean
 
  
 
 
are the data points in the variables D and M, and σ is the standard deviation of the variable
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Baldi et al. 2000). 
The correlation is between -1 and 1, ranging from a perfect negative and positive correlation,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
respectively, and with 0 being no correlation. The PCC is a summary measure of how much
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the height of the peaks in the profiles differs and whether the binding regions are at the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
regions.  
Another measure of correlation is the Spearman correlation coefficient (SCC). This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation is the Pearson correlation applied to the ranks of the data points instead of their
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actual values (Hauke and Kossowski 2011). Thus the values do not have to increase with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
same rate to give perfect correlation, as long as they both increase. This might be beneficial if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the height of the peaks in the profile are hard to predict as in the work by Barra et al. 2020. 
If the height of the peak is totally irrelevant, the profile can be viewed as a binary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
classification where each peak will be positive and the rest will be negative. In the case of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binary data, the Pearson correlation is also called the Matthew correlation (MCC) (Baldi et al.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2000). To transform the profile into binary classification, the threshold for positive - and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
negative regions was used. The parts of the normalized predicted profile which were above
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.05 were evaluated as positive regions, while the rest was negative regions. The threshold
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differed from 0 because the profiles had a lot of small peaks. The experimental profiles were
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluated as positives where the height was above 0, while the rest was negative. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-positives are the regions where the experimental profile is negative while the predicted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
profile is positive. 
26 out of 70 
==PAGE:28==
 
The most balanced performance measure was the SCC, since this did not rely on height as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
much as PCC, but did neither use a threshold as MCC, which was very sensitive to minor
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changes around the threshold. Therefore the SCC was the preferred performance measure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when comparing how well profiles were correlated, but the two other measures were also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculated, since they gave different insights in the correlation between profiles. 
Model 
Three different types of models were trained, a convolutional neural network (CNN), a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
long-short term memory network (LSTM) and a combination (CNN+LSTM). Every model
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
had minimum one dense layer at the end to predict the output, with a sigmoid function to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
squeeze the output between 0 and 1. The weights of CNN and dense layers were initialized
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a uniform Glorot initialization (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016), while the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LSTM was initialized with a normal distribution with a mean 0 and a standard deviation of
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
0.1. The biases were initialized as 0. The initialization of the weights was done with the same
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seed for every model, so they started from the same starting point. After every layer, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
rectified linear activation function was used. The number of hidden neurons for both the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dense - and LSTM layers was 200, but since a bidirectional LSTM was used, in total 400
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hidden neurons are used for every LSTM layer.  
The hidden state and cell state of the LSTM are initialized with the values of 0. 
Three different filters with 16 output channels each are used. One model used filter sizes of 1,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
5, and 13 while the rest of the models used filter sizes of 1, 9 and 21. The filter sizes of 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
were chosen to be able to capture, MHC core regions, while the 21 were chosen since the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maximum length of a positive peptide was 21. The filter size of 1 was chosen so the model
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
could easily map from input to output. No pooling was used since this would make it difficult
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to map directly from input to output as information from multiple positions would be lost.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some models also had dropout layers with a dropout probability of 50% after every layer
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
type (CNN, LSTM or dense).  
The models were trained with a batch size of 10 and a mean squared error (MSE) as loss
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
function. The weights were updated using the Adam algorithm with exponential decay rates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of first and second-order moments
and
to ensure that the method would
 
 
 
 
 
.9
β1 = 0
 
 
.999
β2 = 0
  
 
 
 
 
 
stabilize at a minimum loss. An
was used to prevent any division with zero. An
 
  
 
 
 
e
ε = 1 −8  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 out of 70 
==PAGE:29==
 
L2 regularization of 0.0001 was also used for every model, to minimize overfitting. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning rate was 5e​-5 since this was found to be a fitting rate, which arrived at a loss plateau
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
in a reasonable amount of time. The learning rate was 10 times higher for the two first epochs
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to save time. 
Partition 
To decrease overfitting and to estimate the true general performance, the data set was split up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into five partitions to do five-fold cross-validation.
The partitions were created by first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculating similarity scores between every protein. The similarity score was calculated by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first blasting every protein against the rest of the proteins. The blast program version 2.8.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was run with a Blosum62 matrix and an e-value cutoff, so no alignment was excluded
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Camacho 2019). The blast algorithm needs at least a near match of three amino acids to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create alignment, and the pairs where no alignment was made had a similarity score of 0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
assigned. For pairs where multiple alignments were created the alignment with the highest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blast score was chosen. 
The number of gabs was subtracted from the alignments and the length of the alignments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were then divided by the length of the shortest of the two protein pairs. The score was thereby
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between 0 and 100%, where 100% meant the proteins were exactly the same.  
To cluster with single linkage, the scores were transformed to distance score by subtracting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the score from 100. A single linkage algorithm was then used with a threshold of 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(meaning 70% similarity) to form clusters. The five biggest clusters were put into different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partitions while the rest was randomly assigned a partition until every partition had the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of proteins. 
 
 
28 out of 70 
==PAGE:30==
 
Model training 
When training the deep learning model, the proteins with low performing profiles were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
removed from the training set and only included in the test set. This was done to reduce the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of very noisy profiles, so the model did not learn noise. Two different thresholds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were used for low performing profiles, one where SCC had to be greater than 0.2 and another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 0.4.  
As target for the deep learning model two different profiles were tested. The first had the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimental profile as target and the other had all the false-positive regions as the target,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defined as regions where the predicted profile of NNAlign_MA was higher than 0.05 while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the experimental profile was 0. To convert the output from the second model, the outputs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the deep learning model were subtracted from the input profile. In the cases where the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predictions of the second model were bigger than the value of the input profile the values
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were replaced with 0 for the converted output. 
To find the best number of epochs for training, early stopping was used. The training was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stopped when the average loss of the validation set for the last three epochs were greater than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the three epochs before them.  
Two different approaches for training were used. One which was the fastest method, left out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one partition for both early stopping and for evaluation. By doing this only one network had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be trained, and most of the data was used for training. This was done to get a quick insight
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
into which parameters were the best for training the model. Another approach was slower but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resulted in a more general performance of a model. It was a nested five fold cross-validation
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
approach, where one partition of the training data was left out for evaluation for each fold.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another partition was used for determining the early stopping, which resulted in 25 trained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
networks. By doing so, no partition was both used for evaluation and training of a model. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
ensemble of predictions for each fold was then averaged, so each partition was predicted with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an average of different network-ensembles.  
 
 
29 out of 70 
==PAGE:31==
 
Results 
To improve immunogenicity predictions of proteins the models has to be better at predicting 
which peptides are presented and which are not presented by major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) class II molecules. Therefore, regions that are predicted to be presented by 
MHC II molecules but does not show in mass-spectrometry experiments are compared to the 
regions which does show up in the experiments. We suggest that there is a difference between 
these two types of regions due to processing of the proteins before binding to MHC class II 
molecules. We further suggest that deep learning models can learn the differences between 
the two types of regions, and thereby improve prediction of immunogenicity. 
Data exploration 
To test these hypotheses a dataset of mass-spectrometry (MS) data was used. Although
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around ten thousand proteins were mapped with data from mass spectrometry ligands, not all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins were equally represented with experimental data. MS experimental replicates have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only a 60 percent of replicability, therefore in a single experiment many potential MHC class
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
II presented peptides could be missed (Nelde, Kowalewski, and Stevanović 2019). To
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand which proteins had enough and reliable data to train a neural network model,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
different aspects of the data were explored to define a set of thresholds and filters that would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
optimize data quality and reliability.  
The distribution of alleles was analyzed to see how many different alleles were covered and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the amount of peptides assigned to each. A coverage of many different alleles would ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that models trained on this data generalize well and can be used for different alleles. 
In total 41 different alleles were present in the cell-lines and covered the peptides found in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
MS experiment as shown in ​figure 3​. Most of the peptides in the dataset were tested on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cell-lines expressing HLA-DRB1, as 24 alleles of type HLA-DRB1 covered 75 % of all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides while only 18 % of all peptides were covered by 2 HLA-DRB3 alleles and 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
HLA-DRB5 allele. The 11 DQ allele pairs covered 17 % of the peptides. None of the tested
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cell-lines contained DP alleles. 7 % of peptides were from mice and these peptides were
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covered with three different alleles called H-2. 
30 out of 70 
==PAGE:32==
 
The dataset therefore covered several different alleles, while DRB1 was the type which was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mostly responsible for the diversity. 
 
Figure 3​: Sorted amount of peptides that each allele cover. ‘others’ are the last 22 alleles. 
 
The current MHC class II predictor, based on NNAlign_MA framework, benefits from single
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allele (SA) mass spectrometry data, which are experiments performed on genetically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engineered cell lines expressing only one allele (Alvarez et al. 2019). A pre-training step with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
this type of data in a pan specific architecture, ensures the model can learn the initial binding
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns of MHC class II alleles. In a subsequent step, regular cell-lines expressing multiple
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
alleles (MA) can be annotated with this prior learning and through the iterative steps of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training process finally be deconvoluted.  
 
To see how many alleles were covered with SA data, the number of alleles per cell-line was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated as shown in ​figure 4​. 51 different cell-lines were MA and had mostly two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different alleles while 14 of the cell-lines were SA. Most of the alleles were therefore only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covered with MA MS data and binding affinity (BA) data. 
31 out of 70 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
Figure 4​: Histogram of allele distribution per cell-line. 
 
To further explore the data, distributions of different features of the proteins were analyzed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
see how these varied, and whether they might influence the performance of a model trained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
on the data. Therefore the following 6 features were investigated. First the number of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides assigned per protein (ligand count) was investigated as we expect that the more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides were found from a protein, the more likely that all the possible ligands for a protein
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
were presented despite the low sensitivity of MS. We observed that 56 % of the proteins were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covered by 3 or less ligands (​figure 5​a). 
Next, since the few ligands could be due to very small proteins with few regions matching the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
binding of an allele, the average number of ligands per 100 amino acids (coverage) were also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspected. Here we realized 74 % of the proteins had less than 2 ligands per 100 amino acid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(​figure 5​b). 
The length of the proteins were also studied, since this could indicate how different the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins were as long proteins could potentially be much more diverse than short proteins.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This revealed that 90 % of the proteins were between 50 and 1100 amino acids long, while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the rest were much longer (​figure 5​c). 
Despite a high number of ligands per protein would increase the probability of which ligands
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be presented by an allele, the positions of where those ligands mapped back were also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important. The ligands should map across the whole sequence of a protein and not only to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
small part of the protein. Therefore the mapping coverage (% of sequence covered with at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
least one ligand) were also investigated. This further indicated that a lot of regions for each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
protein was not presented, due to low sensitivity of MS experiments, since most of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein (70 %) had less than 10 % of the sequence covered (​figure 5​d), which was much
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 out of 70 
==PAGE:34==
 
lower than the two chains of infliximab shown in Barra et al. 2020, which had approximately
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
40 % and 50 % of the sequence covered with ligands. 
The mapping coverage could be correlated with the number of different alleles tested per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein considering different alleles would present peptides from different protein regions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore the number of unique alleles tested per protein were also tested. This showed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more than 50 % of the proteins had at least 3 different alleles tested, and multiple regions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
should therefore be presented for each protein (​figure 5​e). 
Finally, the number of unique sources which found ligands for the same protein was also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examined, since multiple labs would perform the MS experiment slightly different and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thereby decrease the bias from one lab, when multiple sources tested a single protein. 84 % of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the proteins were only tested by one source as (see ​figure 5​f), so the presentation profile of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each protein depended a lot on how well the source were able to extract the correct ligands.  
 
Figure 5​: Boxplot of features for every protein. A) Count is the total amount of ligands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapped to a protein. B) Coverage is the number of ligands mapped to protein per 100 amino
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
acids. C) Length is the length of protein. D) Mapping_coverage is the percentage of a protein
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
which is covered by ligands. E) Allele_unique_count is the number of allele tested per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protein. F) Source_unique_count is the amount of papers that tested the protein. 
 
33 out of 70 
==PAGE:35==
 
Overall a large proportion of the presentation profile of the proteins seemed to be of low
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality, mainly due to few ligands were found per protein and it confirmed the low sensitivity
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
of MS experiments. 
Data quality 
To test whether proteins with low coverage had missing regions of proteins, a small sample
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of the proteins presentation profiles were predicted with NNAlign_MA as described in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Profile creation section. The presentation profile is a profile of which regions of a protein that
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
are presented by MHC class II proteins, where high values means likely binding between a
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
region and MHC class II and low values means the opposite. An example can be seen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
figure 11​. 
NNAlign_MA would be able to overall predict the regions that would be presented and thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
catching the false-negative regions. ​Figure 6 shows the Spearman correlation coefficient
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(SCC) between predicted profiles and the target profiles for every feature. A Pearson’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation test was used to see whether the SCC was correlated with any of the features and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the result showed that every feature was significantly correlated, except the number of alleles.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The number of ligands were positively correlated with SCC as expected (​figure 6​a,b). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapping coverage was also positively correlated. This was also expected since the proteins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were expected to have regions which were not covered by ligands, due to too low sensitivity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of the experiment. The number of sources were also significantly correlated, but it was not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
possible from this analysis to determine if it was due to correlation between number of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sources and number of ligands or if the number of sources was truly correlated with SCC.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The only feature negatively correlated with SCC was protein length, which might be due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the longer proteins have more complex interactions within the protein, which NNAlign_MA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cannot predict, since it only uses the peptide sequence and few surrounding amino acids. 
Even though the variance was high for every feature, the experiments indeed seemed to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
low sensitivity, since a lot of binding regions were missing from the presentation profiles.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The negative correlation with the length of the proteins also suggested that a model would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
benefit from using the whole protein sequence, instead of just the peptide.  
34 out of 70 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
Figure 6​: Black line shows a linear correlation between features of each protein in the small
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
sample and the SCC (Spearman correlation coefficient) between predicted presentation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiles and profiles created from experimental data. The x-axis of each plot A-F are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same as for ​figure 5​. 
 
To decrease the influence of too few ligands mapping a protein, a “coverage” filter was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
applied, to exclude all the proteins without enough reliable data to be used in a model. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
filter should stop the dependency on the amount of ligands, by ensuring low amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-negatives. An additional filter was set to restrict protein length, so a model which used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
long-short-term-memory layers (LSTM) would not have to learn dependencies too far from a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
certain position. The coverage filter was the most restrictive filter, since it removed 88 % of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the proteins, while the length filters only removed 10 % of the remaining proteins. In total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1106 proteins were left after the filters were applied. 
By applying these two filters the distributions of each feature, except the length, got more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evenly distributed as seen in ​figure 7​. The change in distribution must be due to high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation between the coverage and each feature. 
35 out of 70 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
Figure 7​: Boxplot of distribution of features per protein before and after applying filters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which only include proteins with lengths between 100-1000 amino acids and proteins that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have more than 5 ligands per 100 amino acids. The x-axis of each plot A-F are the same as
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for ​figure 5​. 
 
After the filters were applied, there was no big correlation between SCC and the count,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coverage, or number of sources (​figure 8​). This was contrary to the correlations found in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
figure 6​. Only for the length, mapping coverage and number of alleles were the correlation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significantly different from 0 with p-values of 0.0015, 0.0035, and 0.000044 respectively
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when using a Pearson correlation test. The mapping coverage and number of alleles were
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opposite correlated compared to before filtering (​figure 8​d,e and ​figure 6​d,e). This might be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to the filters have removed the false negative regions, and the proteins with high mapping
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coverage are then more likely to contain false positive regions. The number of alleles were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also negatively correlated, which might be due to NNAlign_MA, did not have equally many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training examples for each allele, and the proteins with few alleles tend to only be tested on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the with the most common alleles. The length was still negatively correlated (​figure 8​c), so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the long proteins are still more difficult for NNAlign_MA to predict, probably due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing amount of interactions within the protein. 
36 out of 70 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
Figure 8​: Black line shows a linear correlation between features of each protein and the SCC
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(Spearman correlation coefficient) between predicted presentation profiles and profiles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
created from experimental data. The x-axis of each plot A-F are the same as for ​figure 5​. 
 
Other additional filters were were tried out, but no additional filters improved the overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance of the proteins. Therefore the coverage filter must have removed most of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins that had false-negative regions, since the mapping coverage was negatively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlated and no correlations between the SCC and the coverage features were found. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative correlation between the length and the SCC still suggested, that a model which used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the whole protein sequence would benefit compared to NNAlign_MA. 
Method comparison 
To test whether NNAlign_MA had a tendency to predicts more false-positives than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-negatives, the number of false-positives and false-negative regions were compared.  
To create the predicted presentation profiles, which should resemble the presentation profile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the experimental data, different methods could be used as described in ​Profile creation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 out of 70 
==PAGE:39==
 
section. Initially, the artificial peptides, meaning all possible 13-21mers from the proteins,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were created and paired with every cell-line per protein. The pairs were then predicted with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NNAlign_MA in a special manner to avoid overfitting described in ​Profile creation section.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The pairs that were the exact same as for an eluted ligands for a protein had an assigned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
target value of 1 while the rest had 0. The pairs were predicted both with and without context
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as input and the area-under-the-roc-curve (AUC) per protein per cell-line can be seen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
figure 9 and shows that the predictions for eluted ligands (true-positives) were generally
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
higher with context than without context. Even though the 75 % of the protein-cell-line pairs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had AUC above 0.9 some of them had AUC down to ~0. This showed that filters applied in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the section above did not manage to exclude all proteins of bad quality and further analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had to be done to figure out, what caused these poor performing protein-cell-line pairs. 
 
Figure 9​: Area-under-roc-curve distribution of each protein per cell-line both with and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without context as input.  
 
To investigate if the problem of poor protein-cell-line pairs was due to low data quality or the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
models capabilities, the AUC was calculated per cell-line for the model with context. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results is shown in ​figure 10​. One trend that could be observed among the cell-lines was that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the worst-performing cell-lines were from the same experimental source (Ritz et al). Cell
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lines included in this study were the only that include DQ alleles, which are also the alleles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the worst performance for the model in Reynisson et al. 2019. Therefore, some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
bad performing pairs seemed to be due to the models capabilities for prediction of alleles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with low abundance in the training data, but still, every cell-line had pairs with AUC less than
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.5, so this could not explain all of the poor performing protein-cell-line pairs.  
38 out of 70 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
Figure 10​: ​Area-under-the-roc-curve distribution of proteins per cell-line. Labels on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x-axis are first the name of the author of papers from which the cell-line was used, and then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the alleles present in the cell-line. 
 
The AUC per protein was also investigated, and this showed that the proteins with the lowest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUCs, also had worse AUC distributions, meaning almost every quantiles were lower than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the quantiles of rest of the proteins. The results for all proteins are shown in appendix ​AUC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
per protein​. This indicated that these proteins contained some properties that made them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
harder to predict for the model.  
The amino acid composition and the structural features predicted with NetsurfP-2.0 of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins with low AUC scores were compared to the overall distribution of these features.  
There was a significant difference for several amino acids but no patterns was observed for
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether hydrophobic amino acids more or less present in the low scoring proteins. The low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scoring proteins were also less likely to have helices, but this did not clearly explain why they
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had low AUC scores. 
39 out of 70 
==PAGE:41==
 
To further find similarities between these proteins, the gene ontology terms were analyzed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using the program GOrilla (Eden et al. 2009; 2013). This revealed that the proteins were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mostly ribosomal proteins and histones, which made sense as these tend to be contaminants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of MS data (Mellacheruvu et al. 2013; Hodge et al. 2013). Therefore, it seemed like the worst
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
predicted proteins were due to the data quality, and they were therefore removed from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis from this point as mentioned in the method section ​Removing contaminants​. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of protein was from this point reduced to 1031. 
 
To further analyze the difference between the two models (with and without context), their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation profiles were compared for a single protein. The protein was chosen as a random
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
protein with an AUC maximum 0.01 from the median of both the model with and without
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context in order to resemble a usual profile. The chosen protein had an average AUC at 0.987
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
for the model with context and 0.983 for the model without. Since the model with context
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also had higher AUC for this particular protein, it was expected to resemble the experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
profile the most. The protein is shown in ​figure 11​, which show the comparison of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapped experimental peptides compared to the two predicted profiles both including and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
excluding context information as input. Both models found the peaks at E, F and G, but did
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
not predict the B peak, despite the model without context was the closest to finding the peak,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
since it had a small overlap with one of its peaks. They also both predicted multiple
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-positive at e.g. A and H. The models seem to predict equal number of false-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions even though the false-positive regions was not always at the same position. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model with context did therefore not clearly resemble the experimental profile better than the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model without context, even though it had higher AUC for the protein. Further analysis was
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore conducted, to see if any of the models would be better to improve with a deep
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
learning model.  
40 out of 70 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
Figure
11​:
Normalized
presentation
profile
for
the
protein NP_001167453.1 with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
area-under-the-roc-curve (AUC) for each cell-line ranging from 0.976 to 0.997 for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NNAlign_MA with and 0.971 to 0.993 without context. The target is the experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation profile. The letters indicate peaks in the different models. 
 
Their ability to distinguish true-positive regions from false-positives was then compared, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seen in ​figure 12​. This analysis showed more false-positive regions predicted than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-negatives for the model with context, as the original hypothesis of this project stated,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while this was not the case for the model without context.  
The model without context, on the other hand, better resembled the amount of positive and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative regions and had more true regions overall. This seemed to be due to predicting too
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many negative regions. Since the model with context predicted most of the negative parts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correct, it seemed as this model would be the best model to improve, since a deep learning
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
model would not have to learn which regions were not predicted as positive. 
 
 
41 out of 70 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
Figure 12​: ​Boxplot of the amount of sequence in percent that is either true-positive (TP),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
true-negative (TN), false-positive (FP), or false-negative (FN). The percentage of true (T)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and false (F) regions are also shown, as well as the true percentage of positive (P) and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
true percentage of negatives (N). Predicted positives (PP) are also regions of predicted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation profiles, with a profile score higher than 0.05, while the predicted negatives
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(PN) are the regions with a score less than 0.05. The blue boxplots were for proteins
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predicted with context and the green were without context. 
 
To get further insight into which model better resembled the experimental presentation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiles, the Pearson, Spearman, and Matthew correlation coefficients (PCC, SCC and MCC)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were calculated for both models. The models were also compared to other methods for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating profiles as mentioned in the ​Profile creation section, by e.g. using promiscuity,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which counts the number of alleles mapped per position instead of peptides mapped. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results for context and promiscuity are shown in ​figure 13​, while the rest of the models are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown in appendix ​Method comparison​. The methods which used promiscuity all performed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significantly worse for every performance measures compared to the methods using the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptide count. The p-values were calculated with a paired t-test. The models without context
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally performed better than the models with context, even though the models with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context had higher AUC. The difference between the model with context and the model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without was only significant for the MCC, where the model without context was significantly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
better. 
The models without context might have performed better overall since they predicted more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative regions, which is correct for most cases. Despite this the AUC was higher for the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model with context, and it was therefore the model with context that was used from this point
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 out of 70 
==PAGE:44==
 
on. Furthermore the model with context increased the amount of false-positive regions, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
according to the original hypothesis should be able to remove by using the information from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the rest of the protein. 
  
Figure 13​: Mean Pearson (pcc), Spearman (scc), and Matthew (mcc) correlation coefficients
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for every profile creation method. The x label is the combination of methods of promiscuity
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and context. 
Composition of false-positive regions 
To see if the false-positive regions could be differentiated from true positive regions,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different features of the false-positive regions were investigated. An aspect where they might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differ was the height of the peaks, since the model should predict most of the peptides at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
correct positions.
The height of both the true- and false-positive peaks were therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared for the model with context. As shown in ​figure 14​, the height of the false-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions were in general lower compared to true-positive peaks. 
A test was done to test if removing every small peak for different thresholds would increase
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the performance, but this was not the case, since too many regions of the experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation profile had small peaks. 
43 out of 70 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
Figure 14​: Boxplot of height distribution of the peaks in presentation profiles. High means
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normalized height above 0.66. Medium means above 0.33 but below or equal to 0.66. Low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means less or equal to 0.33 and ‘no’ means where there are no peaks. The green boxplots are
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the distribution for the target profiles, meaning profiles created from experimental data. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blue boxplots are the distributions for false-positive (FP) regions, and red boxplots are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributions of true-positive (TP) regions. 
 
The differences were further analyzed by comparing the amino acid composition and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structural features (​figure 15​). Earlier, Winther Jørgensen, Buus, and Nielsen 2013 had found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the positive ligands had in general more coils and was located in regions which were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more exposed. This was suggested to be due to peptides presented by MHC class II usually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
on the protein surface, which made them more likely to be released from the antigen protein.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15 shows the differences between false-positive regions and true-positive regions for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the amino acid compositions and secondary structure features. There is a significantly lower
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
frequency of the charged and polar amino acid K and S, for false-positive regions, while there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is a significantly higher frequency of the hydrophobic amino acid C, G, L, M, and W. This
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might align with the hypothesis suggested by Winther Jørgensen, Buus, and Nielsen 2013,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since the proteins core is generally hydrophobic. This was further confirmed since the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-positive regions were also less exposed. They had also observed fewer B-sheets and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more coils, which did not completely align with the results found here but it might be due to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
newer version of NetsurfP that the one used in that paper. Therefore, there seemed to indeed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
44 out of 70 
==PAGE:46==
 
be differences between the true-positives and false-positives, which hopefully could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learned by a machine learning model. 
 
Figure 15​: p-value and the mean difference between frequencies for the false-positive regions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and true-positive regions. One star means p-value<0.05, two means <0.01, three means
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<0.001 and four means <0.0001. A) x labels are one-letter amino acid code. B) x labels are
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
RSA (relative surface accessibility), Disorder (probability of disorder), Coil (probability of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coils), Helix (probability of helices), Sheet (probability of sheets). 
Partition 
To train a model, and get a general performance of the model, cross-validation should be
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used, so data should be split up into partitions, in order to prevent similar proteins being used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
for both training and testing as the performance will otherwise be overestimated. To ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this, a single linkage clustering algorithm with a threshold of 70% similarity was used to
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create clusters, and the clusters were randomly sampled to get five partitions of the same size.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The heatmap in ​figure 16 shows the similarity score of the selected 1031 proteins used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
train the model, compared to each other from a blast alignment. Two big groups have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
similarity above 30% was found in ​figure 16 and the group to the left consisted of RAS and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAB proteins, which play a key role in antigen uptake (Ghittoni et al. 2006). The other group
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to the right of the heatmap had two sub-groups with similarity above the 70% threshold. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biggest of the two groups were MHC class I molecules, while the smallest were MHC class
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. These proteins were not listed as likely contaminants, and would probably overrepresented
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since MHC class II, RAS and RAB proteins are always present in endosomes, and is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 out of 70 
==PAGE:47==
 
therefore more likely to be presented by MHC class II. The MHC class I might be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
overrepresented since the endosomes containing the MHC class II might also contain MHC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
class I, when the ER sends endosomes to fuse with the endosome containing the antigen.  
After clustering most other clusters had sizes of 1 and 2, which were randomly sampled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
together to form 5 partitions of equal size with ~200 proteins in each.  
 
Figure 16​: Heatmap of protein similarity. The proteins are the same on the x- and y-axis and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
is sorted based on the hierarchical clustering of proteins that uses single linkage. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clustering is showed as a dendrogram in the top. The proteins are clustered based on protein
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarity, where 0 % means 0 alignment could be made between the proteins and 100 %
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means one protein is a subpart of the other protein. Between the heatmap and dendrogram is
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
a colorrow, which show which partition each protein belongs to. 
46 out of 70 
==PAGE:48==
 
Model performance 
To predict a new presentation profile which should better resemble the experimental profiles,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
three types of input were used. The inputs were the normalized profile predicted by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NNAalign_MA together with both the amino acid sequence encoded with a blosum50 matrix.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The three types of secondary structure were also used as input together with the probability of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surface accessibility and disorder all predicted by NetsurfP-2.0. Three different architectures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were tested and the model architecture can be seen in ​figure 17​, with a further description in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
section ​Model​.  
 
Figure 17​: Overview of networks trained. Structure (features predicted by NetsurfP-2.0),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blosum (Blosum50 encoding) and Profile (presentation profile created by NNAlign_MA) are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the input features. Convolutional neural network (CNN) layers take different lengths of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sequence as input depending on filter sizes, visualized with different size triangles, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creates multiple feature maps, showed as the bar under the filters. The Dense layer (artificial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neural network) or bidirectional long-short-term-memory (BiLSTM) takes all features for one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
position at a time as input and outputs new features which are either used as input for the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
next layer or they are used as output for presentation profile. 
 
 
47 out of 70 
==PAGE:49==
 
To quickly get an idea of how the models performed and to roughly find the best architecture,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the model was trained once with 4/5 of the data set while the partition 1 was both used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
early stopping as well as for evaluation of the model. The training was first stopped when the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
error on the validation set increased. This method induced overfitting, and a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generalizable model was therefore later developed with nested cross-validation. The models
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tested with nested cross validation was chosen as the models which performed the best in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
initial models.  
The proteins with SCC less than 0.2 were removed only from the training set, to decrease the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
number of noisy data. Two CNN+LSTM models were also trained with proteins with SCC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less than 0.4 removed, to see if the model would improve from even less noisy data but also
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less false-positive training examples. One and three layers were tested for both CNN, LSTM,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and dense layers, to see if an increased number of layers enabled the models to learn more
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complex patterns. Two different combinations of convolutional filters, were tested on a CNN
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
model with one layer to see if one set was better at capturing the true patterns in the data.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two models were tested with and without dropout to see if regularization could resolve any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
potential overfitting issues that the models might have.  
The performance measures for each model can be seen in ​table 1​. Every model managed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decrease the mean squared error (MSE) to below the error of the input profiles (model no. 0),
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but none of them increased the PCC, SCC, or MCC significantly. MSE is therefore maybe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
not an optimal loss function for this problem, but it should still be correlated with especially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCC, and no other loss functions were therefore tried. In general the differences between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCC and SCC of each model was small so any observed trends might just be random. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MCC on the other hand differ much more between the models, but is also the most sensitive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
measure of the tested. Therefore, the relative big differences are probably do to too high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensitivity, and the differences is probably not as dramatic as they look for MCC. Even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
though the performance measures did not show any significant differences they were still
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to guide the choice of models since this was the best tool available. 
First the filter size was tested and this showed that the bigger filters in model 2 improved for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
every performance measure compared to model 1, which used the smaller filters. It was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
expected that the bigger filters performed best since they resembled the length of the ligands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most. Next, the three layers of CNN used in model 3, 8, and 9 decreased the performance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
for almost every parameter compared to model 2, 6, and 7, which only used one CNN layer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 out of 70 
==PAGE:50==
 
This was contradictory to what was expected, since the models with three CNN layers should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be able to learn more abstract features. However, the features might not be very complicated,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the three layers therefore might overfit to the training data. Therefore, one layer of CNN
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was chosen for the nested cross-validation models.  
The three layers of LSTM seemed to improve for every performance measure for model 5, 7,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
8, and 11 compared to their counterparts 4, 6, 9, and 10, which had one layer of LSTM. 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
layers were therefore chosen for nested cross-validation model.  
The three dense layers seemed to be better for PCC and MSE, but mixed results were found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for SCC and MCC for model 10 and 11 compared to their counterpart 9 and 8, which only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
had one dense layer. Since it was not better on every parameter, the simpler model with one
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dense layer was chosen, since the complexity was expected to be captured by the LSTM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
layers.  
The dropout layers overall decreased the performance for model 12, and 14 compared to 11
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and 13, which did not include them. Since dropout layers should decrease overfitting, an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intuitive conclusion would be that the models did was not overfitted. Since this conclusion is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
based on a model which is already overfitted by using early stopping on the evaluation set,
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this is not not the case, but the overfitting does not seem to be a problem. Therefore, dropout
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
was not used.  
At last, model 13 that was trained with more noisy training data seemed to perform better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than model 7 which was trained with fewer but less noisy data. The model therefore seemed
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be sensitive to the number of training examples, and the training proteins were therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only excluded if their SCC was lower than 0.2.  
The best performing method of each type was then tested with nested cross-validation to get a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
more realistic estimate of the general performance as described in ​Model training section.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The performance can be seen in ​table 2​, and the best model seemed to be the CNN method,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since this was better in every performance measure except the MSE. It managed to increase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the PCC but decrease SCC and MCC compared to the input profile. It was unexpected that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the CNN performed the best, since the length and features further from the peak should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learned by the other models which used LSTM, but since the CNN model performed the best
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it indicated that it was only features close to a region that influenced binding. 
 
 
 
49 out of 70 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
Table 1​: Mean performance for different models architectures, where experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation profiles are used as target. The performance measures are Pearson (PCC),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spearman (PCC), Matthew correlation coefficients (MCC) and mean squared error (MSE).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Convolutional neural network (CNN), long-short-term-memory (LSTM), and artificial neural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network (Dense) layers are the amount of layers of that type used in the deep learning model.
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Filters are the filter sizes used in the CNN layer. Drop out is whether drop out layers was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
used or not. SCC exclusion is the cut-off used to exclude proteins from training. Model nr. 0
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
is the profile predicted with NNAlign_MA which is used as input for the deep learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models. 
 
 
Table 2​: Mean performance for nested cross-validation of different model architectures,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where experimental presentation profiles are used as target. The columns describes the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as in are the same as in ​table 1​. 
 
The results for the deep learning models did not improve the overall performance as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected, even though the CNN model managed to improve the PCC slightly compared to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
profile predicted by NNAlign_MA. Therefore, another approach was tried out. Instead of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 out of 70 
==PAGE:52==
 
using the experimental profile as a target, only the false-positive peaks were used as the new
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
target, and the predicted profile was then subtracted from the NNAlign_MA profile. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
method will be referred as false-positive model, and the results can be seen in ​table 3​. Here
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
again the dropout and higher SCC exclusion seemed to decrease the performance, when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to the models without dropout and lower SCC exclusion. The models without
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dropout layers seemed to improve the performance slightly compared to the input profile.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This was also the case for the model trained with nested cross-validation as seen in ​table 4​.  
 
 
Table 3​: Mean performance for different model architectures, where false-positive peaks are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used as target. The columns describes the same as in are the same as in ​table 1​. 
 
 
Table 4​: Mean performance for nested cross-validation of different model architectures,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where false-positive peaks are used as target. The columns describes the same as in are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same as in ​table 1​. 
Performance gain 
The performance of each protein was analysed to investigate whether some of the proteins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were more difficult to handle for the models and thereby driving the overall performance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
down. The gain in SCC compared to the SCC of the input profile was investigated for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models and shown for CNN+LSTM models in ​figure 18 with the two different targets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previously commented. A significant correlation between the SCC gain and the SCC of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
input profiles could be observed for the model with the experimental profile target in ​figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 out of 70 
==PAGE:53==
 
18​a. This was also the case for the CNN and LSTM models, but their plot is not shown. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
negative correlation meant that the profiles which had an input SCC less than 0.42 generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gained performance, while the profiles with input SCC above lost performance. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-positive method seems to very slightly improve SCC as seen in ​figure 18​b, but the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation is not nearly as significant as for the model with an experimental target. It made
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
sense that the false-positive model could not improve the negative correlated profiles as much
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the experimental model, since the experimental model could learn both the false-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the false-negatives.  
 
Figure 18​: Gain in Spearman correlation coefficient (SCC) compared to the SCC of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiles
predicted
with
NNAlign_MA
(input SCC). A) Deep learning model using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convolutional layers and long-short-term-memory layers (CNN+LSTM) with experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profile as target. B) Deep learning model CNN+LSTM with false-positive regions as target. 
 
To further test if other features could explain why some proteins gained performance using
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deep learning models, while others lost performance, the correlation between protein features
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the gain was tested. The CNN+LSTM model with experimental target is shown in ​figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
19​, and shows that the profiles that benefited by using this model, were the profiles with high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapping coverage (​figure 19​d). The model also seemed to improve the profiles which had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
higher coverage and more alleles tested (​figure 19​b,e). However, these two features were also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlated with mapping coverage, so it was not possible to determine which of the features
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were responsible for the correlation in SCC gain. Surprisingly, there was no significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation between the length of the proteins (​figure 19​c) and how much the model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 out of 70 
==PAGE:54==
 
improved. It was expected to improve for longer proteins since the LSTM layer in the model
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
was supposed to learn some of the interactions that occurred within the protein. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction was probably reason for the initial decrease in performance for longer protein that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
was observed in ​figure 8​c, but the model did not learn how to use them to increase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance. This indicated that either the models were not complex enough or that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions close to the binding region was the only ones that affected binding. The same analysis
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was performed with CNN and LSTM models, which showed very similar patterns, while the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
three models with false-positive as target showed no significant correlation between any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feature and the gain in SCC.  
 
 
Figure 19​: Gain in SCC (Spearman correlation coefficient) for the deep learning model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convolutional neural network and long-short-term-memory layers with experimental profile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the target compared to the different features of the proteins. The x-axis of each plot A-F
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are the same as for ​figure 5​. 
 
 
 
53 out of 70 
==PAGE:55==
 
A representative profile was also investigated and shown in ​figure 20 for the experimental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models. This was done to see how each predicted profile differed, and see if the difference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
could explain the gain and losses in performance. The profile was the same as for comparison
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the model with and without context in ​Method comparison​ section. 
The peaks for the model with experimental target are overall lower and more smooth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to the peaks in the NNAlign_MA model. 
The smoothened profiles would explain why the output profiles with good input performance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had lower performance than the input profile since the peak in the input profile were correct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the start. The profiles with poor input correlation benefited from using the deep model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by better correlating with the experimental profiles. This was due to the input peaks were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
often placed at the wrong regions and a smooth peak would therefore more often overlap with
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a peak from the experimental profile. 
Since this is only one example we cannot draw any general conclusion on how the models do,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but still it is interesting to see that the LSTM model (green curve in ​figure 20​) is able to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
determine that the D peak is not a very likely binder even though it is in the NNAlign_MA
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
profile. When summing up for every protein it was also the LSTM model which predicted
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lowest values for false-positive regions, so this trend seemed to be general. Furthermore the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LSTM model is able to find that the B peak was missing from the NNAlign_MA profile. This
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might also explain why the gain in SCC was mostly for the profiles with negative input
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlations, since these most likely had many false-negative regions.  
The profiles also shows that the A peak was only slightly misplaced and therefore this peak
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might not be incorrect, but only be false due to low sensitivity of the MS experiments. Better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data quality would therefore improve model performance and decrease the smoothening of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the profiles.  
54 out of 70 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
Figure 20​: Predicted presentation profiles for protein NP_001167453.1 for the threes model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described in ​table 2​. NNAlign_MA is the profile given to the deep learning network and the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
target is the experimental profile. The letters written above the profile is the reference to each
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
predicted binding region of the models. 
 
The same analysis for the false-positive models were done but the models did not seem to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
able to distinguish between false-positives from true-positives, since the output profile was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equally lower than the NNAlign_MA profile both for the true-positive peak F and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-positive peaks D. This explains why the gain in SCC was not really greater for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profiles with low input performance compared to the high input performance.  
 
Therefore it seemed like the attempt to focus the model to perform better at one task, by
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
removing the regions which was already predicted correctly, also removed necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information for determining the true positive regions. Since the experimental model was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sometimes able to distinguishing true-positive from false-positive regions it seemed to be the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
better approach of these two methods. 
 
 
55 out of 70 
==PAGE:57==
 
Discussion 
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II presentation is an important step in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determining immunogenicity of proteins, which in turn is critical to avoid for protein drugs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A current state-of-the-art model (NNAlign_MA) that predict likelihood of presentation for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides tend to be good at determining the peptides that are not presented, but struggle to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determine which are in fact presented by MHC class II molecules. We suggest that this is due
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
to processing of the protein before binding and presentation by MHC class II molecules. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
tested deep learning models did not validate this hypothesis, since the models did improve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to the NNAlign_MA model. Still several differences were observed between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimental presented peptides and peptides that were only predicted to be presented. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demonstrates that it should be possible to differentiate between the peptides, but the quality
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the data and quality of the models used to predict structural features are probably the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reason why the model failed to improve.  
Overfitting issue 
The dataset used to both train and evaluate the model was collected from Reynisson et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019, and was chosen even though it was the training set for NNAlign_MA. Ideally, a set of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
peptides from proteins could have been excluded, and NNAlign_MA retrained without those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be used to predict NNAling_MA profiles, and train a deep neural network with those.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
However, due to the time limitation in this project, the main interest was to focus on data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
filtering, partitioning and training the deep neural model. Since the same data was used both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to train the NNAlign_MA model and create the presentation profiles, overfitting was a big
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
concern. To decrease overfitting, the positives were not predicted with models which used it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
for training or had an overlap of 9 amino acids with a training peptide. This should prevent
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the issue with peptides used for both training and evaluation. However, some positives and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other artificial pMHCII shared a common motif of 9 amino acids with multiple partitions. An
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
option was to exclude them, but they accounted for 10 % of the pMHCII and were present
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
across most of the proteins, thus, excluding them would leave out too many regions with high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probability of binding to MHC class II.  
56 out of 70 
==PAGE:58==
 
Data quality 
The proteins were filtered to only include proteins with more than 5 ligands per 100 amino
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
acids and to have a protein length range of 100-1000 amino acids. The “coverage” filter
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should have excluded proteins with false experimental negative regions due to poor technical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
sensitivity, while the minimum protein length filter, was chosen since it both excluded short
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
proteins with few ligands. The maximum length was chosen to decrease the diversity among
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the proteins, since the length of the proteins can affect features far away in the protein such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
secondary structure due to long-range interactions (Ma, Liu, and Cheng 2018). This would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have made it more difficult to find the part of the proteins which had influence on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation profile, since more interactions could occur. Although it was found that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
coverage had a correlation with performance, these precise values were arbitrarily chosen, to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
remain with at least 1000 proteins, since this was thought to be an appropriate amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins to train on. The coverage filter seemed to be restrictive enough since the correlation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the predicted profile with NNAlign_MA and the experimental profiles were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent of the coverage after the filters were applied, while it was highly dependent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
before the filters were applied, but it is uncertain whether less restrictive filters would have
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resulted in the same result. 
Another filter was also applied since some proteins were found likely to be contaminants.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, only proteins where every cell line had an area-under-the-roc-curve (AUC) above
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.5 were included, since an AUC less than 0.5 seemed unlikely proteins with only true
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ligands.  
Another approach would have been to exclude every protein which belonged to a protein
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
class that is known to be contaminants in MS experiments. The first method was chosen due
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to easy implementation, but since proteins with low AUC were still present it probably did
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
not remove every contaminant.  
 
 
57 out of 70 
==PAGE:59==
 
Structural features 
The structural features were predicted with NetsurfP-2.0, which also uses a combination of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
convolutional neural networks (CNN) and long-short-term-memory (LSTM) layers. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structures predicted were the three types of secondary structure as well as surface
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accessibility and probability of disorder. It was not possible to validate whether these features
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
were correctly annotated, but the paper Klausen et al. 2018 showed that the predictions are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
still not perfect. Overall it should be correct most of the time however by using these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predictions noise from the prediction will be introduced to the input. This makes it difficult
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
for the model to learn the true patterns, since structural features for the binding regions might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not be consistent. A way to address this problem would be to train on proteins with which has
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
had their 3D structure determined experimentally. This would decrease the amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proteins significantly, and therefore decrease the number of training examples, so it also has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
clear disadvantages. Still this might be worth testing with more time available.  
Amino acid preference 
The false-positive regions had more hydrophobic and less hydrophilic residues compared to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the true-positive regions. Furthermore proline was also predominantly absent from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-positive regions. Since proline is not a hydrophilic residue it might be absent due to the
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
processing of proteins before binding to MHC class II. Barra et al. 2018 found proline to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
enriched in the flanking regions of ligands, and suggested this was due to cleavage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preferences of the proteases. Since many different proteases could digest peptides that bind to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MHC class II complexes, and since they have different specificities, their role for selecting
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peptides is probably secondary to the binding preference of MHC class II alleles. One
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
common feature shared by several proteases called cathepsins is that proline is an unfavorable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
amino acid when cleaving. These cathepsins are known to participate in processing proteins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coupled to MHC class II presentation (Colbert et al. 2009), and the false-positive regions are
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore probably not found in MS experiment due to cleavage of these regions by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cathepsins. The NNAlign_MA model should be able to distinguish the false-positive regions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that have less proline from the true-positive since it uses the sequence as input, since this was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a general feature. However the cleavage preference is probably more complex than simply a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
58 out of 70 
==PAGE:60==
 
decreased cleavage of in the presence of proline. The model might therefore benefit from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cleavage predictor as the predictor used in the MARIA model in Chen et al. 2019, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found that a cleavage predictor improved prediction of MHC class II ligands.  
The other amino acids which are significant less present in false-positive than true-positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions are K and S, while C, L, M, and W are more present. Cysteine can form disulfide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bridges and can therefore generate ramifications that could void peptides to interact with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MHC. Additionally, these amino acid preferences could be due to a correlation of these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
amino acids with surface exposure and core regions of the proteins, since the core regions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected to be less likely to presented. This hypothesis seems more plausible than a protease
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
preference, since cathepsins mostly cut the proteins between positions which contain a K at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
one side and C, L, M on the other (Choe et al. 2006). Thus C, L, M and K should all be more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
present in true positive regions, not being the case, except for K, if the protease preference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
were the only reason for this difference. Therefore, structural features are more likely to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the reason for the false-positive regions, but it might as well be due to more complex
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cleavage signatures of the combined set of proteases in the lysosomes. 
Model performance 
The
deep learning model tested did not improve the overall performance of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NNAlign_MA profile. This might be both due to noisy and low quality data still remained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
among the proteins, or that differences between false-positive and true-positive was too
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subtle. The differences between the two regions were maximum 4 % different overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
between the two regions, and therefore the models might not be able to pick up this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difference. However, it might also be due to the limited capabilities of the models to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determine cleavage for the protease that degrade the proteins. 
Since the models was not able to improve the overall performance another method was used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to focus the attention of the model towards the false-positive regions. This model did neither
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the performance of the NNAlign_MA model.  
 
 
 
59 out of 70 
==PAGE:61==
 
With more time available more complex model would have been tested with even more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
layers and inclusion of an auto-encoder, to better represent and differentiate the features at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
each position. A cleavage probability would also be included across the protein sequence, to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ensure that the model is able to capture this information as well. The structure from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimentally determined 3D structure would also be tested to see if this the quality of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
NetSurfP-2.0 is too low. 
At last with new and more data available with higher quality, the filters would have to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluated again to see if this would resolve the problem of proteins on which the model
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performed poorly.  
Bibliography 
 
Agnholt, J., J. F. Dahlerup, S. Buntzen, A. Tøttrup, S. Lyhne Nielsen, and E. Lundorf. 2003. 
“Response, Relapse and Mucosal Immune Regulation after Infliximab Treatment in 
Fistulating Crohn’s Disease.” ​Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics​ 17 (5): 
703–10. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2036.2003.01487.x. 
Alvarez, Bruno, Birkir Reynisson, Carolina Barra, Søren Buus, Nicola Ternette, Tim 
Connelley, Massimo Andreatta, and Morten Nielsen. 2019. “NNAlign_MA; MHC 
Peptidome Deconvolution for Accurate MHC Binding Motif Characterization and 
Improved T Cell Epitope Predictions.” ​Molecular &amp; Cellular Proteomics​, 
January, mcp.TIR119.001658. https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.TIR119.001658. 
Baldi, Pierre, Søren Brunak, Yves Chauvin, Claus A. F. Andersen, and Henrik Nielsen. 2000. 
“Assessing the Accuracy of Prediction Algorithms for Classification: An Overview.” 
Bioinformatics​ 16 (5): 412–24. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/16.5.412. 
Barra, Carolina, Bruno Alvarez, Sinu Paul, Alessandro Sette, Bjoern Peters, Massimo 
Andreatta, Søren Buus, and Morten Nielsen. 2018. “Footprints of Antigen Processing 
Boost MHC Class II Natural Ligand Predictions.” ​Genome Medicine​ 10 (1): 84. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-018-0594-6. 
Buus, S, SL Lauemoller, P Worning, C Kesmir, T Frimurer, S Corbet, A Fomsgaard, J 
Hilden, A Holm, and S Brunak. 2003. “Sensitive Quantitative Predictions of 
Peptide-MHC Binding by a ‘Query by Committee’ Artificial Neural Network 
Approach.” ​Tissue Antigens​ 62 (5): 378–84. 
Camacho, Christiam. 2019. ​BLAST+ Release Notes​. National Center for Biotechnology 
Information (US). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK131777/. 
Chen, Binbin, Michael S. Khodadoust, Niclas Olsson, Lisa E. Wagar, Ethan Fast, Chih Long 
Liu, Yagmur Muftuoglu, et al. 2019. “Predicting HLA Class II Antigen Presentation 
through Integrated Deep Learning.” ​Nature Biotechnology​ 37 (11): 1332–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0280-2. 
Choe, Youngchool, Francesco Leonetti, Doron C. Greenbaum, Fabien Lecaille, Matthew 
Bogyo, Dieter Brömme, Jonathan A. Ellman, and Charles S. Craik. 2006. “Substrate 
Profiling of Cysteine Proteases Using a Combinatorial Peptide Library Identifies 
60 out of 70 
==PAGE:62==
 
Functionally Unique Specificities.” ​Journal of Biological Chemistry​ 281 (18): 
12824–32. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.m513331200. 
Colbert, Jeff D., Stephen P. Matthews, Gail Miller, and Colin Watts. 2009. “Diverse 
Regulatory Roles for Lysosomal Proteases in the Immune Response.” ​European 
Journal of Immunology​ 39 (11): 2955–65. https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.200939650. 
Denyer, Stephen P., Norman A. Hodges, and Sean P. Gorman. 2007. ​Hugo and Russell’s 
Pharmaceutical Microbiology: Seventh Edition​. Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470988329. 
Eden, Eran, Doron Lipson, Sivan Yogev, and Zohar Yakhini. 2013. “Discovering Motifs in 
Ranked Lists of DNA Sequences.” 
Eden, Eran, Roy Navon, Israel Steinfeld, Doron Lipson, and Zohar Yakhini. 2009. “GOrilla: 
A Tool for Discovery and Visualization of Enriched GO Terms in Ranked Gene 
Lists.” ​Bmc Bioinformatics​ 10 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-48. 
Ferrante, Andrea, and Jack Gorski. 2007. “Cooperativity of Hydrophobic Anchor 
Interactions: Evidence for Epitope Selection by MHC Class II as a Folding Process.” 
The Journal of Immunology​ 178 (11): 7181. 
https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.178.11.7181. 
Ghittoni, Raffaella, Giorgio Napolitani, Daniela Benati, Cristina Uliveri, Laura Patrussi, 
Franco Laghi Pasini, Antonio Lanzavecchia, and Cosima T. Baldari. 2006. 
“Simvastatin Inhibits the MHC Class II Pathway of Antigen Presentation by 
Impairing Ras Superfamily GTPases.” ​European Journal of Immunology​ 36 (11): 
2885–93. https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.200636567. 
Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016. ​Deep Learning​. MIT Press. 
http://www.deeplearningbook.org/. 
Hauke, Jan, and Tomasz Kossowski. 2011. “Comparison of Values of Pearson’s and 
Spearman’s Correlation Coefficients on the Same Sets of Data.” ​Quaestiones 
Geographicae​ 30 (2): 87–93. https://doi.org/10.2478/v10117-011-0021-1. 
Hodge, Kelly, Sara Ten Have, Luke Hutton, and Angus I. Lamond. 2013. “Cleaning up the 
Masses: Exclusion Lists to Reduce Contamination with HPLC-MS/MS.” ​Special 
Issue: New Horizons and Applications for Proteomics [EuPA 2012]​ 88 (August): 
92–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2013.02.023. 
Klausen, Michael Schantz, Martin Closter Jespersen, Henrik Nielsen, Kamilla Kjærgaard 
Jensen, Vanessa Isabell Jurtz, Casper Kaae Sønderby, Morten Otto Alexander 
Sommer, et al. 2018. “NetSurfP-2.0: Improved Prediction of Protein Structural 
Features by Integrated Deep Learning.” ​BioRxiv​, January, 311209. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/311209. 
Laken, C J van der, A E Voskuyl, J C Roos, M Stigter van Walsum, E R de Groot, G 
Wolbink, B A C Dijkmans, and L A Aarden. 2007. “Imaging and Serum Analysis of 
Immune Complex Formation of Radiolabelled Infliximab and Anti-Infliximab in 
Responders and Non-Responders to Therapy for Rheumatoid Arthritis.” ​Annals of the 
Rheumatic Diseases​ 66 (2). 
Ma, Yuming, Yihui Liu, and Jinyong Cheng. 2018. “Protein Secondary Structure Prediction 
Based on Data Partition and Semi-Random Subspace Method.” ​Scientific Reports​ 8 
(1): 9856–9856. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-28084-8. 
Madigan, Michael T. 2015. ​Brock Biology of Microorganisms​. Pearson Education,. 
Mellacheruvu, Dattatreya, Zachary Wright, Amber L Couzens, Jean-Philippe Lambert, 
Nicole A St-Denis, Tuo Li, Yana V Miteva, et al. 2013. “The CRAPome: A 
Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification–Mass Spectrometry Data.” ​Nature 
61 out of 70 
==PAGE:63==
 
Methods​ 10 (8): 730–36. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2557. 
Neefjes, Jacques, Marlieke L. M. Jongsma, Petra Paul, and Oddmund Bakke. 2011. “Towards 
a Systems Understanding of MHC Class I and MHC Class II Antigen Presentation.” 
Nature Reviews Immunology​ 11 (12): 823–36. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri3084. 
Nelde, Annika, Daniel J Kowalewski, and Stefan Stevanović. 2019. “Purification and 
Identification of Naturally Presented MHC Class I and II Ligands.” ​Methods in 
Molecular Biology​ 1988. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9450-2_10. 
Nielsen, Morten, Claus Lundegaard, Thomas Blicher, B Peters, A Sette, S Justesen, S Buus, 
and Ole Lund. 2008. “Quantitative Predictions of Peptide Binding to Any HLA-DR 
Molecule of Known Sequence: NetMHCIIpan.” Edited by Ruth Nussinov. ​P L O S 
Computational Biology (Online)​ 4 (7). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000107. 
Nielsen, Morten, Claus Lundegaard, Peder Worning, Sanne Lise Lauemøller, Kasper 
Lamberth, Søren Buus, Søren Brunak, and Ole Lund. 2003. “Reliable Prediction of 
T-Cell Epitopes Using Neural Networks with Novel Sequence Representations.” 
Protein Science​ 12 (5): 1007–17. https://doi.org/10.1110/ps.0239403. 
Reynisson, Birkir, Carolina Barra, Bjoern Peters, and Morten Nielsen. 2019. “Improved 
Prediction of MHC II Antigen Presentation through Integration and Motif 
Deconvolution of Mass Spectrometry MHC Eluted Ligand Data.” ​BioRxiv​, October, 
799882. https://doi.org/10.1101/799882. 
ROSS, GJS. 1969. “SINGLE LINKAGE CLUSTER ANALYSIS.” ​Royal Statistical Society 
Series C-Applied Statistics​ 18 (1). 
Voorter, Christina E. M., Roel Brandts, and Ella M. Van den Berg-Loonen. 2006. “The 
HLA-DRA Gene and Its Extending Polymorphism.” In ​Human Immunology​. Vol. 67. 
Winther Jørgensen, Kasper, Søren Buus, and Morten Nielsen. 2013. “Structural Properties of 
MHC Class II Ligands, Implications for the Prediction of MHC Class II Epitopes.” 
 
62 out of 70 
==PAGE:64==
 
Appendix 
AUC per protein 
 
 
63 out of 70 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
 
64 out of 70 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
65 out of 70 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
 
66 out of 70 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
67 out of 70 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
 
68 out of 70 
==PAGE:70==
 
Method comparison 
 
69 out of 70 
