==PAGE:1==
Distributed Identities in the
Maritime Domain
Oliver Steensen-Bech Haagh
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to analyse and implement a solution to distribute the
Maritime Connectivity Platform Identity Registry (MIR). The analysis contains
a description and comparison of diﬀerent technologies that can be used to de-
velop a distributed solution, that can be used to authenticate diﬀerent parties
in the maritime domain, and deﬁnes a number of requirements that an identity
provider must live up to in order to become endorsed.
Based on the results of the analysis, the design and implementation of a solution
based on blockchain, that can be used to hold and maintain a list of endorsed
and revoked root certiﬁcate authorities, is described.
The implemented solution provides a good foundation for the distribution of the
MIR, but does have some limitations and a vulnerability that need to be ﬁxed
before the solution can be used in practice.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at analysere og implementere en løsning til at
distribuere Maritime Connectivity Platforms Identitetsregister (MIR). Analysen
indeholder en beskrivelse og sammenligning af forskellige teknologier, der kan
bruges til at udvikle en distribueret løsning til autentiﬁcering af forskellige parter
i det maritime domæne, og deﬁnerer en række krav en identitetsudbyder skal
leve op til for at blive anerkendt.
Baseret på resultater fra analysen beskrives designet og implementationen af en
løsning baseret på blockchain, der kan bruges til at holde og vedligeholde en liste
af anerkendte- og ikke længere anerkendte identitetsudbyderes rodcertiﬁkater.
Løsningen er implementeret i form af en smart contract, der kan udgives på en
Ethereum blockchain.
Den implementerede løsning er et godt udgangspunkt for distribueringen af
MIR, men har også nogle begrænsninger og en enkelt sårbarhed, som skal løses
for at løsningen kan bruges i praksis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in cooperation with Digital Maritime
Consultancy and University of Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science
in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with an analysis and comparison of diﬀerent technologies that
can be used for developing a distributed solution for authenticating actors in
the maritime domain. Factors that will be taken into consideration are strength
of security, computational complexity, connectivity and degree of distribution.
Based on the analysis and comparison of the diﬀerent technologies an imple-
mentation of a proof-of-concept solution will be described.
The source code for the software developed for this thesis is available at the
following link:
https://github.com/oliverhaagh/Thesis-Code
Kongens Lyngby, 24-January-2020
Oliver Steensen-Bech Haagh
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Christian D. Jensen for wanting to supervise
this project and for providing me with constructive feedback and input.
My external supervisor Michael Kirkedal Thomsen for also wanting to supervise
me, and especially for our weekly meetings which have been very helpful for me
in order to progress with the project.
My second external supervisor and boss Thomas Steen Christensen for encour-
aging me to do this project for my thesis, and for his knowledge of the maritime
domain.
I would also like to thank Omri Ross from University of Copenhagen for using
his knowledge about blockchain technology to give me guidance about how to
implement blockchain based solutions.
Finally I would like to thank my family, friends and colleagues for supporting
me throughout the project.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Analog Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Radio Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Electronic Navigational Charts (ENC) . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) 13
2.3
Common Elements in Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
The CIA Triad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
The CAP Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
The Byzantine Generals Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Public Key Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.5
Public Key Certiﬁcates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Technologies for Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Conventional PKI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
2.4.2
Web of Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5.1
Types of Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5.2
Smart Contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5.3
Using Blockchain for Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6
Maritime Connectivity Platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6.1
The Identity Registry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.6.2
Governance of MCP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Analysis
29
3.1
Technology Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Need for Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.3
Integration with On-board Equipment . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.4
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
Distributing the MIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.1
Choice of Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.2
Blockchain Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.3
Requirements for Identity Providers
. . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Design
39
4.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Blockchain Peers and Permissions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Data on the Blockchain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.3
Addition of a Root CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.4
Revocation of a Root CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.5
Querying of List of Root CAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Implementation
43
5.1
Technologies Used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Ethereum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2
Solidity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.3
Remix IDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Permission Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
Roles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.2
Proposer Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.3
Endorser Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.4
Default Role
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Main Smart Contract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Custom Data Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.2
Addition of a new Root CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3.3
Revocation of a Root CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4.1
Unit Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
5.4.2
Live Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
61
6.1
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.3
Resilience to Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3.1
Malicious Validator Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3.2
Hijacking of Proposing and Endorsing Nodes
. . . . . . .
63
6.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Conclusion
65
A MIR Role Hierarchy
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The maritime domain has since early times been an important part of society.
Fishery has been a great source of food throughout history, ships and boats
have been used to transport people and goods across water and even discover
new parts of the world.
Nowadays, even though the international shipping industry is responsible for
moving about 90% of all global trade [Inta], there is still no uniﬁed way of digi-
tally authenticating entities across the maritime domain. Trust in the maritime
domain is very much deﬁned by diﬀerent actors such as governmental authori-
ties, shipowners, etc. using diﬀerent means such as physical documents signed
by authorities, call signs, identiﬁcation numbers, etc.
Several diﬀerent solutions have been proposed for a uniﬁed way of identifying
entities in the maritime domain. One of these is the Maritime Connectivity
Platform (MCP)1.
The scope of this project is to implement a proof-of-concept solution that builds
further upon the concept of the MCP using a more distributed approach where
identities are issued by diﬀerent trusted parties in the maritime domain instead
of just one.
1https://maritimeconnectivity.net/.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
1.1
Problem Deﬁnition
The current implementation of the Maritime Connectivity Platform Identity
Registry (MIR) was developed in a collaboration between three research projects
as a proof-of-concept solution for a system that could be used for providing
trusted identities to actors in the maritime domain. A limitation of the current
implementation is that it is built as a centralized system where all identities
are issued from and stored. This is not a viable solution for a number of rea-
sons. First, the system will become a single point of failure. If the system gets
compromised, the identities of all maritime entities that are using the system
for identiﬁcation, might potentially also be compromised. Second, because the
system would potentially be used by users all over the world, availability for
a centralized system can be an issue for some users due to limitations such as
latency and network partitioning. Third, which is maybe the most important
reason, is that for political reasons it might not be possible for nations or orga-
nizations to use or trust identities that are issued by a system that is hosted by
a third party.
Based on the limitations of the current implementation of the MIR the following
overall goals have been set for a distributed implementation of the MIR:
• It should be possible for more than one instance of the MIR to exists at
the same time.
• Each MIR should have its own root CA and its own database of users.
• Users from one MIR should be able to authenticate users from another
MIR.
• The list of MIR instance providers with their respective root CAs should
be publicly available, and should be agreed upon by chosen actors using a
suitable consensus mechanism.
1.2
Scope
This thesis will cover the analysis of distribution of the MIR. Based on the
analysis, a design and an implementation of a solution will be described.
Finally, the implemented solution will be evaluated with regards to the problem
deﬁnition, and limitations, and possible solutions to these, will be discussed.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Structure
3
1.3
Structure
• Chapter 2 gives background information about diﬀerent technologies
used in the maritime domain, and some of their limitations. It also gives
information about diﬀerent technologies for authentication and blockchain.
• Chapter 3 compares the strengths and limitations of the diﬀerent tech-
nologies for authentication.
It also analyses the considerations and re-
quirements for the solution to be made.
• Chapter 4 describes the design of the implemented solution based on the
analysis made in the previous chapter.
• Chapter 5 describes the implementation of the solution for distributing
the MIR.
• Chapter 6 discusses the results and limitations of the solution.
• Chapter 7 concludes and summarises the work that has been done.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter some background knowledge about technologies used in the mar-
itime domain for communication and navigation will be given. Apart from that,
the technologies that will be analysed in Chapter 3 will also be described.
2.1
Communication
In the maritime domain various forms of communications are used to exchange
information between actors.
Some of these have been used by mariners for
centuries, whereas others have been used for only a few decades or maybe even
only a few years.
2.1.1
Analog Communication
Several forms of analog communication are used in the maritime domain. Similar
for many of these is that they have been used for many years, and are still used
as a supplement to other forms of communications.
==PAGE:20==
6
Background
2.1.1.1
Signal Flags
Signal ﬂags are widely used on ships to visually signal messages to other ships.
Figure 2.1 shows all the possible ﬂags which are deﬁned in the International
Code of Signals. Flags can either be combined with each other, or they can be
used individually. When combined, the ﬂags can be used to spell out messages,
where each ﬂag corresponds to a letter or a number, and when used individually
each ﬂag has a speciﬁc meaning[NAT03].
Figure 2.2 shows two ships displaying their signal ﬂags. When ships are dressed
like this it is a sign of celebration, and the ﬂags are not meant to spell out any
speciﬁc messages[Wika].
2.1.1.2
Signal Lamps
Another form of analog communication used at sea is signal lamps. A signal
lamp is a lamp that can be used to physically transmit messages, typically
using Morse code by turning the light on and oﬀ.
Signal lamps are usually
used when other forms of communications are not suitable or available. This
could for example be a navy vessel that needs to maintain radio silence in order
to hide from the enemy, but still needs to be able to communicate with other
allied vessels. Just like signal ﬂags, the use of signal lamps is described by the
International Code of Signals[NAT03].
Figure 2.3 shows a navy sailor using a signal lamp to send light signals.
2.1.2
Radio Communication
Radio based communication is widely used for various purposes in the maritime
domain due to it being inexpensive and having long range.
The most simple usage of radio communication in the maritime domain is voice
communication where diﬀerent parties can talk with each other over designated
radio channels.
2.1.2.1
Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS)
The Automatic Identiﬁcation System (AIS) is an automatic system that is used
on ships to send out digital messages containing information like ship identiﬁ-
cation, position, heading, etc. over VHF radio, which can then be received by
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Communication
7
Figure 2.1: Signal ﬂags in the International Code of Signals via [NAT03].
==PAGE:22==
8
Background
Figure 2.2: Signal ﬂags on display on two ships via https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Signalflagga_-_Gladan-Falken_
-_Ystad-2015.jpg.
Figure 2.3: A navy sailor sends light signals using a signal lamp via
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Seaman_send_
Morse_code_signals.jpg.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Communication
9
other ships, port authorities, government authorities as well as satellites in orbit.
The International Maritime Organization (IMO) Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS)
convention mandates that all passenger ships, all ships of 300 gross tonnage and
upwards sailing international routes and cargo ships of 500 gross tonnage and
upwards that do not sail international routes need to be equipped with an AIS
transponder to send and receive AIS message. For vessels that do not fall within
any of these categories, having an AIS transponder is optional[Intb].
AIS messages are based on the NMEA 0183 speciﬁcation which is a standard
for communication between marine electronics, and is based on ASCII printable
characters. An example of an AIS packet is:
!AIVDM,1,1,,B,177KQJ5000G?tO`K>RA1wUbN0TKH,0*5C
The packet is divided into 7 ﬁelds that are comma divided.
Field 1 , !AIVDM, identiﬁes that it is an AIVDM packet, meaning that it is
an AIS packet coming from a vessel other than one’s own. Packets sent
by one’s own vessel will have !AIVDO instead.
Field 2 , which is 1 in this example, is how many fragments the current message
is divided into. NMEA 0183 requires that packets can at maximum be 82
characters in length, so therefore it can sometimes be necessary to split a
message into several fragments.
Field 3 , which is also 1 in this example, is the fragment number of the current
message. A message where both ﬁeld 2 and 3 are 1 is complete in itself,
as it is not split into several fragments.
Field 4 , which is empty in this example, is a sequential message ID that is
used to distinguish diﬀerent multi-fragment messages from each other.
Field 5 , which is B in this example, is the radio channel code the message
was sent on. Messages on AIS channel B are sent by vessels that are not
required to have an AIS transponder. Messages on AIS channel A are sent
by vessels that are required to have an AIS transponder - the value of ﬁeld
5 would then be A in that case.
Field 6 , which is 177KQJ5000G?tO`K>RA1wUbN0TKH in this example, is the
data payload of the message, which is 6-bit ASCII encoded. How this
can be decoded is outside the scope of this project, but an explanation is
given at [Ray16] where this example has been taken from. The payload
usually contains information about the ship’s identity in the form of a
MMSI number2, its course, speed, etc.
2The MMSI number is a 9 digit number that is used to identify maritime radio equipment,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maritime_Mobile_Service_Identity.
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
Field 7 , which is 0 in this example, is the number of ﬁll bits that are required
to pad the payload to a 6-bit boundary and ranges from 0 to 5.
The last *-separated ﬁeld is the data-integrity checksum of the packet. It is
computed on the entire packet by doing the XOR (exclusive OR) operation over
all characters in the message, excluding the leading ! and itself. It is encoded
as a two digit hexadecimal number[Ray16; Ray19].
Due to the fact that AIS neither utilizes encryption or authentication and only
uses a simple XOR checksum for integrity, this means that attackers are easily
able to spoof AIS messages using relatively inexpensive equipment. This was
proven by a research team from the security company Trend Micro in 2013. The
team managed to broadcast AIS messages that looked like they were coming
from an Italian yacht so it, according to the broadcasted messages, looked like
the vessel, over a two minute period, followed a path that spelled out the word
PWNED3, as seen in Figure 2.4 [Arn13; Bal13].
Figure 2.4: Positions of spoofed AIS messages spell out the word PWNED
on a map via [Bal13].
2.1.2.2
Internet
As for many other domains, the maritime domain is also increasingly getting
reliant on having an internet connection for communication with the rest of
the world. Ships sailing primarily in coastal areas are able to use the normal
3G/4G mobile networks to connect to the internet at a low cost. A disadvantage
3Slang for defeated.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Communication
11
of conventional mobile networks is that individual network transceiver stations
have limited range. On land this problem is solved by having several transceiver
stations whose areas overlap each other. This cannot be done as easily at sea
though, and therefore a new technology called LTE-Maritime is being developed.
LTE-Maritime diﬀers from normal 4G/LTE by having a coverage radius from
network transceivers of at least 100 kilometers.
The technology is currently
being developed and tested in the Republic of Korea by Korea Research Institute
of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO) as part of the national research project
SMART-Navigation Project, which is funded by the Korean Ministry of Oceans
and Fisheries (MOF)[Jo+18].
Ships that are sailing at open sea far from the coast can choose to get satellite
based internet. This is fairly expensive though, indicated by that the Fleet-
Broadband service by the company Ground Control costs $25 per month for 25
MB of data exclusive equipment4. For large ship owners this might not be an
issue though, as this expense is much lower than their expenses for bunkering,
crews, etc.
2.1.2.3
VHF Data Exchange System (VDES)
A new VHF based technology called VHF Data Exchange System is currently
being developed, and is envisioned to be a replacement for AIS (see Section
2.1.2.1) by incorporating the current functionalities of AIS, as well as being
able to provide more general purpose communications at higher data rates. AIS
normally has a data rate of 9.6 kbits/s, whereas VDES can achieve data rates
up to 307.2 kbits/s. Messages in VDES can either be sent or received between
ships or other entities that are close to each other, or they can be relayed via
satellites[Itu15].
This means that when VDES in the future becomes more widespread, ships will
be able to have an inexpensive constant connection to the rest of the world using
radio and satellite equipment, that in most cases already are installed on ships.
4https://www.groundcontrol.com/Fleet_Broadband.htm.
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
2.2
Navigation
2.2.1
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS)
An integral part of marine navigation today is the Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS). GNSS is an umbrella term for the diﬀerent types of satellite
navigation systems like the American GPS, the Russian GLONASS, the Euro-
pean Union’s Galileo, etc.
GNSS is used by sailors to ﬁnd out the current position of their ship, either in
the form of geographic coordinates, which the sailor can then use to ﬁnd their
position on a paper chart, or in the case of large ships the signals from the
GNSS equipment are fed into the ECDIS (Section 2.2.3) on the bridge of the
ship, which can show the current position on an ENC (Section 2.2.2).
The signals from the GNSS equipment are also used by the AIS transponder
(Section 2.1.2.1) to get the current position of the ship, and put it in the AIS
messages that are broadcasted from the ship.
2.2.2
Electronic Navigational Charts (ENC)
Traditionally paper sea charts have been used for navigation on ships. These
charts are usually physically quite big, and ships that sail long routes might
need to have several diﬀerent charts on board for the diﬀerent areas they are
sailing in. A big disadvantage of using physical sea charts, is that when changes
are made to charts, existing charts need to either be edited manually to include
the changes, or in worst case be replaced with new ones. Also when navigating
using the charts, a navigator will need to know the ship’s geographical position
before he can choose the correct chart for the area, and thereafter he can then
ﬁnd the position on the chart. All of these are time consuming manual tasks
that could easily be digitalized.
The solution for this is Electronic Navigational Charts (ENC). ENCs are digital
vector based sea charts that contain detailed information about objects, water
depth, etc. and can be displayed on a ships ECDIS (Section 2.2.3). How ENCs
should be produced and how the data format should be, are deﬁned by the
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) in their S-57 publication[Int00].
How they should be displayed is speciﬁed in the IHO S-52 publication[Int10],
and how they should be secured, including digital signatures from providers and
encryption, is described in the IHO S-63 publication[Int12; IHO16].
An example of an ENC can be seen in Figure 2.5.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Common Elements in Technologies
13
Figure 2.5: An example of an ENC via https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Enc.jpg.
2.2.3
Electronic Chart Display and Information System
(ECDIS)
An Electronic Chart Display Display and Information System (ECDIS) is a
computer based system that can receive information from other equipment on
the ship, like the ship’s position from GNSS equipment and also the positions
of other ships coming from the AIS transponder, and show them on a ENC. All
ships built after 2011 are required by the SOLAS convention to have an ECDIS
installed[Intc].
Figure 2.6 shows an example of an ECDIS.
2.3
Common Elements in Technologies
This section gives an explanation of some elements that the diﬀerent technologies
that will be analysed and compared have in common.
2.3.1
The CIA Triad
The CIA triad is one of the simplest and most used security models and stands
for Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability.
==PAGE:28==
14
Background
Figure 2.6: An example of an ECDIS via https://www.gnsworldwide.com/
wp-content/uploads/2019/06/ecdis.jpg.
Conﬁdentiality means that information can only be read by actors that are
authorized to do so. It is usually ensured by utilizing encryption or pass-
word protection.
Integrity means that information has not been altered since it was created.
Integrity can be ensured by utilizing cryptographic hash functions.
Availability means that information is always available to those who are au-
thorized to see it.
2.3.2
The CAP Theorem
CAP stands for Consistency, Availability and Partition tolerance, and are
diﬀerent aspects that can be guaranteed in a distributed system.
Consistency in a distributed system means that, when data is requested, the
most recent data or an error will be returned.
Availability in a distributed system means that, when data is requested, data
will always be returned without an error, but does not guarantee that the
most recent data is returned.
Partition tolerance in a distributed system means that, even though a par-
tition happens between nodes in the system, the system will continue to
operate.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Common Elements in Technologies
15
The CAP theorem states, that for any distributed system, only a combination
of at most two of these three aspects can ever be guaranteed, also meaning that
all three aspects can never be guaranteed at once[Bro18].
2.3.3
The Byzantine Generals Problem
The Byzantine generals problem is a hypothetical problem invented by Leslie
Lamport et al.[LSP82], as an analogy to distributed computer systems, where
three or more generals are to agree to attack or to retreat. The generals are only
able to communicate with each other via messengers, who are assumed to not
always be reliable. One of the generals is the commander and issues orders to
the other generals. The other generals are then lieutenants to the commander,
and must obey orders from the commander.
Any of the generals can choose to act maliciously though. We call these byzan-
tine generals. One such scenario could be that a commander with two lieu-
tenants acts maliciously, by sending the order attack to one lieutenant, and
retreat to the other. Another scenario could be that the commander sends the
order attack to both lieutenants, but one of the lieutenants acts maliciously by
saying to the other, that the commander sent the order retreat.
Lamport et al. proved that, in the case with three generals, reaching an agree-
ment is impossible with just one malicious general, and that in general 3m + 1
generals are required to reach an agreement, where m is the number of malicious
generals[LSP82].
2.3.4
Public Key Cryptography
Public Key Cryptography is a type of asymmetric cryptography where a pair
of keys are used for encryption and decryption of information. This key pair
consists of a public key which is publicly known, and a private key which is
only known by the owner of the key pair. The two keys are mathematically
connected in the way that if a message is encrypted using one of the keys, it can
only be decrypted using the other key.
That means, that if somebody wants to send a secret message where only the
receiver should be able to read the message, the sender can encrypt the message
using the receiver’s public key. The receiver can then decrypt the message using
their own private key, which only they know.
Another way that public key cryptography can be used is by using digital sig-
natures for ensuring authenticity5 and integrity6 of a message. The way that
5It can be validated that a message is sent by someone speciﬁc
6It can be validated that a message has not been tampered with
==PAGE:30==
16
Background
this works, is that the sender makes a digital signature by ﬁrst computing a
hash digest of the message which they then encrypt using their private key. The
sender then appends the digital signature to the message, and sends it along to
the receiver.
To validate the authenticity and integrity of the message the receiver can then
decrypt the digital signature with the public key of the sender, giving the hash
digest of the original message, and then compute a hash digest of the message
without the digital signature. If this matches the hash digest in the digital sig-
nature, the receiver can verify that the message has been made by the owner of
the key pair, and that it has not been tampered with[Ske19].
2.3.5
Public Key Certiﬁcates
A public key certiﬁcate is a digital certiﬁcate that contains information about the
identity of the certiﬁcate owner, the owner’s public key and a digital signature
made by either the certiﬁcate owner themselves or a trusted third party[IBM].
2.4
Technologies for Authentication
2.4.1
Conventional PKI
A Public Key Infrastructure, or PKI from now on, is a technology for authen-
tication that builds on the concepts of public key cryptography and public key
certiﬁcates (Sections 2.3.4 and 2.3.5).
In a conventional PKI digital certiﬁcates are issued and signed by a certiﬁcate
authority, or CA from now on, who is a trusted third party. The digital certiﬁ-
cate of the CA can itself be signed by another CA. In that case the CA that
has signed the end-user certiﬁcate is called a intermediate - or subordinate CA,
commonly called a sub CA for short. If a CA is not signed by another CA, it is
called a root CA, and is signed by its own private key. In that way the validity
of digital certiﬁcates in a PKI is deﬁned by a tree like trust hierarchy with the
root CA as the root node, and end-user certiﬁcates as leaf nodes[Glo].
Figure 2.7 shows a PKI structure where a root CA signs end-user certiﬁcates
directly, and Figure 2.8 shows a PKI structure where a root CA signs one or
more sub CAs, that then sign end-user certiﬁcates.
The structure shown in
Figure 2.8 is the one that is most commonly used, as it allows for the root CA
to be kept completely oﬄine when it is not used to sign sub CAs. The reason
for doing this is that trust in end-user certiﬁcates from a PKI is usually based
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Technologies for Authentication
17
in trust of the root CA. If the root CA is used to issue end-user certiﬁcates
directly that means that the root CA is at higher risk of being compromised
which would compromise the entire trust chain, whereas if end-user certiﬁcates
are issued by a sub CA it is possible to keep the root CA oﬄine, and if a sub
CA is compromised it is only necessary to revoke the compromised sub CA and
the end-user certiﬁcates that have been issued by it (Section 5.3.3 about revoca-
tion). This keeps the trust in the root CA that can then be used to issue a new
sub CA and then be taken oﬄine again.[Glo] Public key certiﬁcates in a PKI
Root CA
User 1
User 2
User n
Figure 2.7: PKI where end-user certiﬁcates are signed directly by the root CA.
Root CA
User 2
User n
Sub CA 1
Sub CA 2
User 1
User n-1
Figure 2.8: PKI where end-user certiﬁcates are signed by a sub CA.
are usually issued following the X.509 format, which is a standardized format
deﬁned by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU).
Certiﬁcates following this format include information about the identity of the
owner of the certiﬁcate, the public key of the certiﬁcate, date of issuance and
expiration, and a digital signature made by the private key of the CA that has
issued the certiﬁcate[Coo+08].
2.4.1.1
Revocation of Certiﬁcates
Sometimes the validity of a certiﬁcate in a PKI may need to be revoked, for
one reason or another, before they expire. To do this all CAs (both root and
==PAGE:32==
18
Background
subordinates) must maintain a certiﬁcate revocation list (CRL). A CRL of a
CA contains a list of certiﬁcates that have been issued by that CA and has for
one reason or another been revoked. Each entry in the list contains the serial
number of the certiﬁcate, the revocation date, and optional additional ﬁelds
such as reason for revocation.
Apart from this, the CRL also contains a date of issuance, the date of issuance
of the next CRL, i.e. the expiration date of the current one, and a signature
made by the CA that has made the CRL. The CRL must then be available
online, and optionally certiﬁcates can contain a URL for the CRL from the CA
that has issued them. Then whenever a certiﬁcate is used for authentication the
party that should validate the certiﬁcate can download the CRL from the URL
in the certiﬁcate, and check if it is on the list[Coo+08].
Another way of providing revocation status for certiﬁcates is using the Online
Certiﬁcate Status Protocol (OCSP). OCSP is diﬀerent from CRLs in that in-
stead of checking revocation based on whether a certiﬁcate is included in a list of
revoked certiﬁcates or not, OCSP can be used by asking the CA of the certiﬁcate
directly about the revocation status of the certiﬁcate. The CA will then give
a response containing the revocation status of the certiﬁcate and a signature
made by the CA. Like in the case of CRL, certiﬁcates can optionally contain a
URL for OCSP[San+13].
2.4.1.2
Authentication in a Conventional PKI
For one party to authenticate themselves towards a second party using a conven-
tional PKI, what they will do is that they send their public key certiﬁcate, which
is signed by a trusted CA, and a digital signature made using the private key
that corresponds to the public key in the certiﬁcate. The second party can then
verify the identity of the ﬁrst party by checking whether the digital signature
can be decrypted using the public key in the certiﬁcate. If it can, they can then
verify whether the certiﬁcate contains a digital signature made a trusted CA.
If it does they can then ﬁnally check whether the certiﬁcate has been revoked
using CRL or OCSP (Section 2.4.1.1). If none of these checks fail the second
party can verify that the identity of the ﬁrst party is valid and therefore making
the ﬁrst party authenticated towards the second party.
2.4.2
Web of Trust
Web of trust (WOT) is, like a conventional PKI (Section 2.4.1), also based on
public key certiﬁcates (Section 2.3.5). Where trust in a PKI is deﬁned as a
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Technologies for Authentication
19
hierarchy where end-user certiﬁcates are signed directly by a trusted root CA
or a subordinate CA, that itself is signed by a trusted root CA, web of trust
deﬁnes a more decentralized structure of trust.
A well known implementation of WOT is Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)7 and
GNU Privacy Guard (GPG)8. In PGP and GPG there are no CAs that deﬁne
the trust. Instead users are able to deﬁne themselves who they trust, and how
much they trust them.
If two users, Alice and Bob, wants to specify that they trust each others iden-
tities, they exchange their public keys which they then sign with their private
keys, and then exchange the signed public keys again. They can then both sep-
arately specify whether they fully trust the other party, or they only marginally
trust the other or not at all.
If Alice then sends her public key to Carol who also trusts Bob, Carol can vali-
date the identity of Alice because Alice’s public key is signed by Bob’s private
key. This does not guarantee though that Carol can fully trust Alice, which she
must specify herself.
Where a user can fully validate the identity of a user whose public key is signed
by another user that they fully trust, users need to deﬁne themselves how they
validate the identity of users whose public key are signed by users they only
marginally trust. An example here is that a user can deﬁne that they will only
validate the identity of a user whose public key is signed by at least three other
users that they marginally trust[Rya14].
An example of how trust between users in a web of trust can be shown as a
diagram can be seen in Figure 2.9. Here the direction of the arrow indicates
that the user an arrow points away from has signed the public key of the user
that the arrow points towards. An example from the diagram is that Vicente
has signed the public key of Lucía, meaning that Vicente fully trusts Lucía.
Similarly Lucía has signed the public keys of Juan José and Carlos. This means
that Vicente, given the public keys of Juan José and Carlos, would be able to
validate their identities, because their public keys are signed by Lucía.
2.4.2.1
Revocation of Certiﬁcates
Revocation of certiﬁcates in a WOT is not as trivial as in a PKI. In a WOT
revocation is done by the user generating a so called revocation certiﬁcate, that
is signed using their private key. One problem about this, is that in case that the
certiﬁcate has been revoked because the private key has been compromised, the
user needs to communicate out to other users that their certiﬁcate can no longer
be trusted. One way of doing this is to upload the revocation certiﬁcate to a
public server, where all other users can check if a certiﬁcate has been revoked.
7https://www.openpgp.org/.
8https://gnupg.org/.
==PAGE:34==
20
Background
Figure 2.9: An
example
of
trust
between
users
in
a
web
of
trust
via
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/517a/
0262761beb174de159cc5f9556afbffafbd9.pdf.
Another problem is that, if a user wanting to revoke their certiﬁcate has lost
their private key, they are not able to generate the revocation certiﬁcate. A
solution to this is to already generate the revocation certiﬁcate at the same
time as the original certiﬁcate, and only upload the revocation certiﬁcate if it
becomes relevant[ES].
2.5
Blockchain
Blockchain is a list of records, called blocks, that are linked together crypto-
graphically. The technology was invented by the pseudonymous person Satoshi
Nakamoto, whose real identity is unknown, in his white-paper on the Bitcoin
cryptocurrency.
The blockchain is deployed in a peer-to-peer network where all nodes have a copy
of the blockchain that they can validate independently. In the case of Bitcoin,
each block in the chain contains a number of transactions. Each transaction is
digitally signed using the private key of the node making the transaction. The
way that blocks of transactions are validated in Bitcoin is using a consensus
mechanism called proof-of-work, where nodes in the network need to ﬁnd a
nonce9, that when added to the block gives a hash value of the block, using a
suitable hash function like SHA-256, beginning with a speciﬁc number of zero
bits. When this nonce has been found, it is added to the block, and the resulting
hash value is added to the next block. The ﬁrst node that ﬁnishes this proof-
of-work will then broadcast it to all other nodes, that can then validate that
the found nonce actually yields in the correct hash value. If at least 51% of the
9A random generated number that is used only once.
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Blockchain
21
nodes in the network validate that the found nonce is correct, the block will be
added to the chain and the nodes will go on to work on the next proof-of-work.
The node that ﬁnished the proof-of-work ﬁrst will be given a number of Bitcoins
as a reward, giving incentive to validating transactions.
By always having the hash value of the previous block in a block, means that if
a dishonest node in the network tries to change the content of any other block
than the one currently being validated, all blocks following the changed block
will need to be re-validated. If the combined computational power of all honest
nodes surpass that of dishonest nodes, the change will be detected by the honest
nodes and discarded[Nak].
The structure of the Bitcoin cryptocurrency can be seen in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: The structure of the Bitcoin blockchain via https://commons.
wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=26816920.
Another way of validating blocks of transactions and reaching consensus in newer
implementations of blockchains, is using a method called proof-of-stake. The
way that this is being implemented in the Ethereum blockchain, is that nodes
in the network, that want to have a stake in validating transactions, make a
special transaction on the blockchain where they freeze up an amount of their
ether, which is the native currency of the Ethereum blockchain, as a deposit.
There are two diﬀerent proposed methods of achieving consensus - chain-based
proof-of-stake and BFT-style proof-of-stake. In chain-based proof of stake
validators are pseudo-randomly chosen to promote and validate what should be
the next block of the chain.
In BFT-style proof-of-stake validators are randomly chosen to promote new
blocks, but agreeing on what blocks to add to the chain is done through a
process where all validators vote whether a block should be added to the chain
or not[Ethb].
A third method for validation of blocks of transactions and reaching consensus
is called proof-of-authority. In proof-of-authority a set of N trusted nodes in
==PAGE:36==
22
Background
the network are chosen in advance to become so called authorities. Each one of
these authorities is identiﬁed by a unique ID, and at least N/2 + 1 are assumed
to be honest.
Validation of blocks of transactions is done using a rotation
scheme which fairly distributes the block validation responsibilities among the
authorities.
The Ethereum blockchain has two diﬀerent implementations of
proof-of-authority - Aura, which is implemented in the Parity10 Ethereum client,
and Clique, which is implemented in the Go Ethereum11 client.
In Aura, a leader is chosen among the authorities on a turn basis each time a
new block is validated. After the leader has validated the block, it will send the
validated block to all other authorities. The other authorities will then send the
received block to all other authorities. If the same block is received from all other
authorities, an authority will put the block in a queue, where it will keep it until
it has received a new block proposal from a majority of the other authorities,
where after the block will then be committed to the blockchain. If the authorities
cannot agree on the validity of a new block, a voting is triggered to decide
whether the current leader is malicious. If the majority of the authorities are in
favor, the leader will be kicked out and its proposed block will be discarded.
In Clique, authorities are only allowed to propose new blocks every N/2 + 1
blocks, and at any point in time N −(N/2 + 1) authorities, with one of the
acting as the leader, are allowed to propose a new block. When an authority
proposes a new block, it sends it to all the other authorities, who will commit it
directly to the blockchain. This can, though, result in forks as blocks received
from two diﬀerent authorities might refer to the same previous block. If this
happens the fork will eventually be solved by choosing one of the branches based
on a scoring approach, where branches made by a leader are scored higher than
other branches, meaning that they will be chosen ﬁrst. Also similar to Aura, if a
validating node is acting maliciously, it can be voted out by the other validating
nodes[De +].
A fourth method for validation of blocks of transactions and reaching consensus
is called Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT), and is made as an solution
to the Byzantine Generals Problem (Section 2.3.3). The algorithm works by
that a number of nodes in the network are chosen in advance to be validators of
transaction (generals). Reaching consensus for validation of transactions is done
in a ﬁve step process. The ﬁrst step is that a client sends a transaction request,
that is signed by the client, to one of the validators. This validator will then
act as the leader. The second step is the pre-prepare step, where the leader will
send a pre-prepare message with the request, along with a digest of the request
and a signature, to all other validators. The third step, the prepare step, is that
each validator sends a prepare message with the digest of the request, along with
their unique ID and a signature, to all other validators. The fourth step is the
10https://github.com/paritytech/parity-ethereum
11https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Blockchain
23
commit step, where when a validator has received a prepare message from at
least 2f other validators, where f is the number of faulty validators, it will send
a commit message to all other validators with a digest of the request, its unique
ID and a signature. The ﬁfth step is the reply step, where when a validator has
received at least 2f +1 commit messages from the other validators, it will send a
reply to the client that made the request. When the client has received at least
f + 1 diﬀerent replies with the same result, the client accepts the result[CL99].
2.5.1
Types of Blockchain
When talking about blockchain we typically distinguish between three types of
blockchain - public blockchain, private blockchain and consortium blockchain.
All three will be described here in this section.
Public Blockchain: A blockchain where everybody can join as a node in the
network and validate transactions to obtain consensus. This type of blockchain
is completely decentralized and every node in the network have their copy of the
entire blockchain which makes a public blockchain extremely secure as long as
the majority of the nodes are honest. This also means that anonymity of nodes
and transparency of transactions can be assured. On the other hand it also very
slow and ineﬃcient for the same reason especially in the case of proof-of-work
where all nodes race to be ﬁrst at validating blocks.
Private Blockchain: A restricted type of blockchain that allows for a more
strict management of who are allowed to read and write data. Transactions are
not validated by any of the nodes in the network, but are instead validated by
the company or organization who owns the blockchain. This means that private
blockchains are way more eﬃcient than public blockchains for fast validation of
transactions, but on the other hand does not have the same fault tolerance and
transparency of a public blockchain.
Consortium Blockchain: A type of blockchain that can be seen be seen
as a combination of public and private blockchains. Data on the blockchain
can either be readable by everybody or it can be permissioned meaning that
data can be chosen to only be readable by some. In a consortium blockchain
transactions or whole blocks are only veriﬁed and validated by a predetermined
set of nodes in the network[JHW18].
==PAGE:38==
24
Background
2.5.2
Smart Contracts
A smart contract is a piece of code that can be written to deﬁne business
logic and interactions with the blockchain and other nodes in the network. In
this way the code can be used to programmatically deﬁne "contracts" on the
blockchain. Another commonly used term is chain code. Chain code is the
actual code that describes the smart contract.
One piece of chain code can
therefore be used to describe several smart contracts[Hyp].
2.5.3
Using Blockchain for Authentication
Several authentication frameworks based on the use of blockchain have been
made, such as Hyperledger Indy12. One such solution was made by Theodor
Fleming in his master’s thesis from Linköping University, where he designed and
implemented a proof-of-concept identity management system for the maritime
domain based on the Hyperledger Indy blockchain. Identities in the system are
self-sovereign, meaning that users issue and own their own identities, and are
based on so called Decentralized Identiﬁers (DIDs) that are cryptographically
veriﬁable identiﬁers. In the system, users are able to create, update and delete
DIDs linked to their identity on the blockchain. All DIDs of a user are signed
using the user’s private key and contains also the user’s public key for other
users to be able to verify the integrity and authenticity of the DID. As there
is no central CA in the system, trust of identities are based on the role they
have, which could for example be a steward, a port, etc. When authentication
is done between two diﬀerent parties, both will add DIDs, that are relevant for
the current authentication process, to the blockchain which the other can then
verify[Fle19].
2.6
Maritime Connectivity Platform
The Maritime Connectivity Platform (MCP) was originally developed as a col-
laboration between the three research projects EﬃcienSea213, led by the Danish
Maritime Authority and funded by the European Union Horizon 2020 fund-
ing program, Sea Traﬃc Management Validation Project (STM)14, led by the
Swedish Maritime Administration and funded by the European Union Interreg
12https://www.hyperledger.org/projects/hyperledger-indy.
13https://efficiensea2.org/.
14https://www.stmvalidation.eu/.
==PAGE:39==
2.6 Maritime Connectivity Platform
25
funding program, and the SMART Navigation Project15, led and funded by the
South Korean Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries. It was originally called the
Maritime Cloud, which is why some of the documents that are referenced in
this thesis use that name. The name was later changed to avoid misconceptions
of what the platform is, and what it can be used for16.
The MCP consists of three parts - a service registry (MSR) where service
providers can register details about their maritime services and where service
consumers can ﬁnd them, a messaging service (MMS) that can facilitate seamless
roaming of digital communication across diﬀerent communication channels, and
ﬁnally an identity registry (MIR) where organizations across the entire maritime
domain can register information about their own identities and identities of enti-
ties within their organization. Based on the information that is registered in the
identity registry, organizations can then get digital certiﬁcates (Section 2.3.5)
issued by the MCP to their entities, that can then be used to authenticate them-
selves towards other actors. This way the MCP identity registry can be used as
a uniﬁed way of identifying entities in the maritime domain[Mar17].
All the components of MCP are open source and based on open and established
standards. Their source code can be found on Github17.
An disadvantage of this solution, though, is that it requires that identities issued
by the MIR need to be widely trusted in the maritime domain. Another and
also more serious disadvantage from a cyber security aspect, is that if the MIR
itself becomes compromised, all identities, that have been issued by it, become
invalidated.
2.6.1
The Identity Registry
The functionality of the MCP Identity Registry (MIR) can generally be broken
into two main components:
• The Identity Registry API.
• The Identity Broker.
The API is a REST based frontend for users for the internal identity manage-
ment system and PKI of the MIR.
The identity broker is based on the OpenID Connect18 protocol, which itself
15http://smartnav.org/eng/html/Index/.
16https://efficiensea2.org/the-maritime-cloud-becomes-maritime-connectivity-platform/.
17https://github.com/MaritimeConnectivityPlatform.
18https://openid.net/connect/.
==PAGE:40==
26
Background
is based on the OAuth 2.019 protocol, and is used both for authentication for
using the MIR API, and can also be used for authentication for other service
providers.
The internal identity management system is built of a hierarchy with organi-
zations on top, that can have diﬀerent types of entities below them, where one
entity can only belong to one organization. The possible types of entities below
an organization are:
• Users,
• Vessels,
• Devices,
• Services.
A user is based on the identity of a human user, and can be tied to an identity in
the identity broker. Therefore it is also this type of entity that is used to manage
entity identities in the identity management system. A user can only see and
manage users belonging to the organization that they themselves belong to, and
what entities they can manage is deﬁned by a given role in the role hierarchy
shown in Table A.1.
A vessel entity can be a ship or other water born vehicles, and contains the
name of the vessel and other optional attributes such as a MMSI number20 or
an IMO number21.
A device can be any type of digital device such as computers and sensors.
Finally, a service can be any type of digital service that needs to have a digital
identity associated with it for authentication purposes.
When an entity has been created in the identity management system, a user
with the necessary roles can have a digital certiﬁcate (Section 2.3.5) issued for
it in the PKI of the MIR.
2.6.2
Governance of MCP
As described in Section 2.6 MCP was originally developed by the three projects
EﬃcienSea2, STM and SMART Navigation Project. For the purpose of col-
laboration of development of MCP, two working groups were established with
19https://oauth.net/2/.
20https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maritime_Mobile_Service_Identity.
21https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IMO_number.
==PAGE:41==
2.6 Maritime Connectivity Platform
27
members from all three projects. The ﬁrst working group was the MCP De-
velopment Forum (MCDF), which was where all high level decisions for the
development of MCP were made.
The second working group was the MCP
Development Team (MCDT), which consisted of the developers from the three
projects that were actually making the technical implementation of MCP. The
purpose of the MCDT was both to coordinate the implementation of MCP us-
ing biweekly online scrum-like meetings, and also to give technical input to the
MCDF.
One of the deliverables of the EﬃcienSea2 project was to discuss how the MCP
should be governed after the end of the three projects. This was realized as a
workshop called How to Run the MCP, which was hosted by IALA22, on 21
to 22 November 2017 in Paris. The results from this workshop were compiled
to the report in [DW17]. Some of the highlights of this report were that the
governance model of the MCP should neither based on a fully commercial model
or state based model, and stakeholders should consist of both service providers
and consumers to conserve service neutrality of the MCP.
2.6.2.1
The MCP Consortium
On the 8 February 2019 the MCP Consortium (MCC) was presented at the
yearly e-Navigation Underway International23 conference. The consortium is
modelled after the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)24, and the host mem-
bers consist of non-proﬁt organizations. The overall purpose of the MCC is to
govern the MCP, work on realisation and promotion of the MCP, and work on
standards, guidelines and procedures that are associated with or relevant to the
MCP. The MCC will not operate any operational instances of the MCP, but
will instead facilitate root certiﬁcations of organisations who want to operate
an operational instance of the MCP[19a; 19b].
22https://www.iala-aism.org/.
23https://www.iala-aism.org/news-events/e-nav-underway/.
24https://www.w3.org/.
==PAGE:42==
28
Background
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Analysis
In this chapter the diﬀerent technologies for authentication, that were described
in Section 2.4, will be compared on diﬀerent parameters like strength of security,
need for connectivity, computational complexity, integration with on-board ship
equipment, and in what degree they can be distributed.
Finally an analysis will be made on how to distribute the MIR.
3.1
Technology Comparison
3.1.1
Security
Similar for all of the three technologies described in Section 2.4, is that they
are all based on public key cryptography. That means that on the level of the
cryptographic primitives used by the technologies the strength of security is
the same as long as the same public key algorithms and cryptographic hash
functions are used, and private keys are kept safe. The diﬀerences in various
aspects of security of the diﬀerent technologies, though, lie in how they work,
and how they are used.
==PAGE:44==
30
Analysis
3.1.1.1
Trust of Identities
Trust in individual identities are deﬁned very diﬀerently in traditional PKIs,
Web of Trust and blockchain based identity solutions, like the one described
in Section 2.5.3. Trust in an individual identity, in the context of this section,
means that it can be trusted that the identity is valid, and not whether the
holder of the identity can be trusted in general.
Trust in an identity in a PKI is based on whether the identity has a trust
anchor in a trusted CA, meaning that the CA has either directly signed the
given identity, or signed an intermediate CA that has in turn signed the given
identity.
In a Web of Trust, trust in a given identity can be deﬁned by that users directly
agree that they trust each others identities by signing each others public keys,
or it can be deﬁned by that the given identity’s public key is signed by one or
more identities that are trusted.
In the blockchain based solution described in Section 2.5.3, trust in an identity
is based both on whether the owner of a given identity can prove that they
actually own the identity based on DIDs that are signed using the identity
owner’s private key, and based on the role the owner has.
All three technologies have advantages and disadvantages.
An advantage of a PKI is that due to the fact that all digital certiﬁcates have a
trust anchor in a root CA, a third party can verify the validity of the certiﬁcate
as long as they trust the root CA. A disadvantage of a PKI, though, is that
if the private key of a root CA or an intermediate CA gets compromised by a
malicious third party, the certiﬁcate of the CA will need to be revoked, which
in turn also revokes all certiﬁcates issued by the CA, as these may potentially
have been issued by the malicious third party.
An advantage of a WOT is that trust in identities can be deﬁned more ﬁne
grained than in a PKI, in that users are able to deﬁne the trust in other users’
identities. Users are able to either stating directly that they trust the identity
of another user by signing the other user’s public key, or determine if they trust
a user based on how many other trusted users have signed the public key of
the user in question. A disadvantage of this, though, is that it requires a lot of
manual interactions between users to state that they trust each other’s identities.
Another disadvantage is also that revocation of a certiﬁcate, as described in
Section 2.4.2.1, requires that other users need to know where they should look
to ﬁnd whether a revocation certiﬁcate has been issued for a certiﬁcate.
An advantage of the blockchain based identity solution described in Section 2.5.3
is that users are able to prove their identities to other users by proving properties
about their identities. This means that users can verify other users’ identities
without sharing a common trust anchor or having interacted manually before.
A disadvantage, though, is that both users need to have access to the blockchain
to read and update it, and also need to have an up-to-date version of it to be
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Technology Comparison
31
able to verify DIDs, which may not always be possible due to limited internet
access.
3.1.2
Need for Connectivity
The need for connection to the internet as part of authentication is very diﬀerent
for the three technologies described above.
In a PKI, connection to the internet is required for both checking revocation
status of the certiﬁcate to be veriﬁed, and also to check the revocation status
of the certiﬁcate of the CA that has signed the certiﬁcate. If revocation status
checking for some reason is not necessary as part of the authentication process,
certiﬁcate veriﬁcation can be done oﬄine as long as the verifying party can
verify the trust chain from certiﬁcate to root CA.
In a WOT the need for internet connectivity as part of authentication is the same
as for a PKI - if revocation status checking is important internet connectivity
is needed, but if it is not, authentication can be done by just checking if a
certiﬁcate is either directly trusted, or if it is trusted by a chosen number of
other certiﬁcates that are directly trusted.
The blockchain based identity solution described in Section 2.5.3 requires an
active internet connection for authentication between two parties, as both are
required to both add to and read DIDs from the blockchain as part of the
authentication process.
3.1.3
Integration with On-board Equipment
Integration of authentication technologies with on-board equipment on a ship,
such as the ECDIS (Section 2.2.3), is important for a ship to both be able to
authenticate itself towards a service that may require authentication, but also to
be able to verify the authenticity and integrity of data from a service provider
such as ENCs (Section 2.2.2) which are signed with a digital signature made
using the private key of the ENC provider.
Of the three technologies described above, PKI and WOT are the easiest to
integrate with the ECDIS of the ship. Both of these technologies are based on
well known standards and can therefore be integrated into the ECDIS, as long
as it is possible to install a digital certiﬁcate and a public/private key-pair in the
ECDIS. For PKI it is also necessary to install the certiﬁcates of the trusted root
CAs. Due to the fact that ECDIS’s usually are based on normal PC hardware,
==PAGE:46==
32
Analysis
and are also using the same operating systems25, this is normally easily achieved.
Blockchain based solutions are also possible to integrate into the ECDIS, but
require in a higher degree that the ECDIS is connected to the internet to be
able to interact with the blockchain and keep its local copy up-to-date.
3.1.4
Distribution
Distribution, in the context of this section, means the degree of how much a
technology can be used in a distributed manner.
PKIs can be distributed in the way that is possible for more than one root CA to
exist at once, where each root CA represents its own PKI. This is the approach
that is used in the world of TLS certiﬁcates, where companies like DigiCert26,
Comodo27, Let’s Encrypt28, etc. have their own PKI that can issue TLS cer-
tiﬁcates, that are used for authenticating a server as part of a TLS handshake
between a client and a server. Some of these companies distribute their own PKI
even further by endorsing other companies to have an intermediate CA under
their root CA. An example of this is RapidSSL29 that have an intermediate CA
under DigiCert’s root CA.
Due to the nature of WOT, where everyone is in principle their own CA, it can
already be considered a distributed system. The only limitation with regards to
distribution in a WOT, is that revocation status of certiﬁcates must be provided
in a centralized manner.
Blockchain is also in its nature a highly distributed system, due to the fact
that instead of data being stored and served from a centralized location, every
node that is part of the blockchain network has their own local copy of the
blockchain, and all changes are distributed among all nodes. This also means
that if anybody tries to make changes to blocks in the chain, it will be detected
by the other nodes in the network.
25An example of this are the ECDIS’s from Danelec which are running Linux on PC hard-
ware.
https://www.danelec-marine.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Danelec_catalog_
27-05-19_WEB.pdf.
26https://www.digicert.com/.
27https://www.comodoca.com/.
28https://letsencrypt.org/.
29https://www.rapidssl.com/.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Distributing the MIR
33
3.2
Distributing the MIR
In order to distribute the MIR according to the problem deﬁnition deﬁned in
Section 1.1, possible solutions need to be identiﬁed and analysed.
3.2.1
Choice of Technology
Due to the general hierarchical structure of the maritime domain where entities
like ships, buoys, sailors, etc. are associated with some organization or country,
a PKI is still the most viable option for authentication of maritime entities,
instead of using completely decentralized identities as used in WOT and the
blockchain based solution described in Section 2.5.3.
As it is the intention that there will be more than one instance of the MIR in the
future, that will each host their own PKI with its own root CA, a list of these
root CA certiﬁcates will need to be agreed upon, maintained and distributed
amongst anybody who wants to authenticate an identity coming from the PKI
of any of the root CAs in the list. A blockchain can be used for this, as it can
ensure, using a suitable consensus mechanism, whether any root CA certiﬁcate
should be in the list or not. Due to the immutability of a blockchain it can, apart
from storing current root CAs, also be used to store root CAs that have been
revoked for any reason, such as the root CA private key being compromised
or the root CA not being trusted anymore.
Finally due to the nature of a
blockchain, anybody who has a node in the blockchain network will have their
own copy of the blockchain and therefore also the list of root CAs.
3.2.2
Blockchain Considerations
In order to build the blockchain based system a number of diﬀerent aspects of
the blockchain - such as type of blockchain, consensus mechanism, what data
should be stored, etc. - need to be considered.
3.2.2.1
Data on the Blockchain
The blockchain should be used to contain the list of trusted root CAs and also
any revoked root CAs. Adding or revoking a trusted root CA are believed to
happen rarely, and therefore the size of the blockchain can be considered to
be relatively static. This is a big advantage for devices that may have limited
==PAGE:48==
34
Analysis
internet connectivity, as they will not need to update their local copy of the
blockchain, as if trusted root CAs were added often. It also adds the beneﬁt
that nodes in the network will not have as big a storage requirement, as for the
constantly growing Bitcoin blockchain.
3.2.2.2
Type of Blockchain
The type of blockchain that should be used for the solution is related to the
data that should be stored as described above in Section 3.2.2.1. Because the
blockchain should be relatively static a public blockchain will not be suitable
as that would allow nodes in the network to add data to the blockchain, and
thus increasing the size of the blockchain. A private blockchain is not suitable
either as it would require a lot of management to allow parties access to the
blockchain, which would not be viable if the solution should be used as part
of a general authentication mechanism in the maritime domain. Therefore a
consortium blockchain - where all nodes are allowed to read the blockchain, but
only a predetermined set of nodes are allowed to add data - is more suitable.
3.2.2.3
Consensus Mechanism
The choice of the consensus mechanism is important when designing a blockchain
based solution, as it is what in the end determines whether and how data should
be added to the blockchain or not.
Two examples of consensus algorithms, proof-of-work and proof-of-stake, are
described in Section 2.5. Proof-of-work consensus is based on that new blocks
are validated by nodes solving a diﬃcult problem related to the new block. The
ﬁrst node that solves the problem will then distribute the solution to all other
nodes, that can then easily verify whether the solution is correct or not, thus
achieving consensus. If more than half of the verifying nodes verify that the so-
lution is correct, the node that solved the problem will receive a reward, which
gives incentive for nodes to participate in achieving consensus.
Proof-of-stake consensus is based on that nodes in the network "stake" a part of
their wealth in exchange of having the possibility of being chosen by the network
to validate new blocks.
A third consensus mechanism is proof-of-authority. In proof-of-authority vali-
dating nodes are chosen based on a proven and veriﬁable authority that they
have.
The identity of validating nodes must be available on the blockchain,
putting their reputation at stake. This gives validating nodes incentive to be-
have correctly to not loose reputation.
A fourth consensus mechanism is Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT).
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Distributing the MIR
35
In PBFT new blocks are validated by validating nodes that are chosen in ad-
vance, where one of the nodes acts as a leader. Consensus is reached between
validating nodes in a multi-step process that is initiated by the leading node.
As one of the responsibilities of the MCP Consortium (Section 2.6.2.1) is to
facilitate certiﬁcation of MCP instance providers, either proof-of-authority or
PBFT seems to be the best choice of consensus mechanism for this project.
In their paper[De +] et al. made a comparison between proof-of-authority and
PBFT by applying the CAP theorem (Section 2.3.2) to both. Here they con-
cluded that, due to blockchains being able to resolve branching conﬂicts, both
consensus mechanism are able to guarantee partition tolerance. They then also
conclude that the two proof-of-authority mechanisms Aura and Clique are both
AP, meaning that they guarantee availability and partition tolerance, whereas
PBFT is CP, meaning that it guarantees consistency and partition tolerance.
Additionally Clique does guarantee eventual consistency, due to forks eventually
being resolved, and thus eventually synchronizing the network[De +]. In this
case, consistency is preferred over availability as it guarantees the integrity of
transactions recorded in the blockchain. On the other hand, as the addition and
revocation of trusted root CAs are expected to rarely occur, guaranteed con-
sistency can be sacriﬁced in exchange for availability and eventual consistency,
meaning that proof-of-authority using Clique is a good choice for the consensus
mechanism.
There are then diﬀerent options of who should be chosen as validating nodes.
One such option could be that validating nodes are chosen to be the MCP
providers that have already been approved. The problem with this approach is
that validating nodes may, for political or economic reasons, not validate that
a certiﬁcation should be approved or revoked.
A better option would be to have the validating nodes in the network be the host
members of the MCP Consortium, as their reputation is already well established
by being a host member.
3.2.3
Requirements for Identity Providers
Becoming certiﬁed as an identity provider, and therefore have your root CA
registered on the blockchain, should not be possible for anyone. Therefore some
requirements need to be made. These requirements should include both formal,
legal and technical requirements. It should be noted that possible requirements
for certiﬁcation of MCP identity providers are already discussed internally in
the MCP Consortium, and the requirements below, may therefore or not reﬂect
these.
==PAGE:50==
36
Analysis
3.2.3.1
Formal and Legal Requirements
The ﬁrst requirement that an identity provider must adhere to, is that they
must provide a document giving a rationale for why they should be certiﬁed as
an identity provider. An example of this could be that an equipment manufac-
turer wants to be certiﬁed as an identity provider to be to able to issue trusted
identities to on-board vessel equipment, like the ECDIS (Section 2.2.3), that
needs to be able to identify itself for authentication.
Another example could be that a country wants to be able to issue trusted iden-
tities to organizations registered in the country and the entities belonging to
these organizations.
The second requirement that an identity provider must adhere to, is that they
need to provide documentation that they have a certiﬁcation in information
security management (ISM). A well known ISM standard is ISO/IEC 27001
which is jointly deﬁned by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO)30 and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)31[Intd].
The third requirement is that if the identity provider is storing or handling
personal data about individuals living in the European Union (EU), they must
comply with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). The GDPR is a
law that was put into eﬀect 25 May 2018 by the EU and deﬁnes requirements
that organizations must adhere to regarding storing and handling personal data
about EU citizens and other individuals living in the EU[Pro].
3.2.3.2
Technical Requirements
The ﬁrst technical requirement that an identity provider must adhere to, is that
they must host their own instance of the MIR. The PKI of the MIR must have
its own root CA. This root CA will, once the identity provider has been certiﬁed,
be registered on the blockchain to identify the organization as a trusted identity
provider.
The second technical requirement is that the identity provider may not sign
end-user certiﬁcates with the private key of the root CA. Instead the private
key of the root CA shall be used to sign one or more intermediate CAs. Signing
of end-user certiﬁcates shall then be done using the private key of one of the
intermediate CAs.
30https://www.iso.org/home.html
31https://www.iec.ch/
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Distributing the MIR
37
The third technical requirement is that the identity provider must store the
private keys of the root CA and intermediate CAs in hardware security modules.
A hardware security module (HSM) is a specialized piece of hardware that can
securely generate and store cryptographic keys, and provide acceleration for
cryptographic operations such as creating digital signatures[Wikb]. To avoid
potential exploitation of the root CA private key, the HSM for this must only
be used whenever a intermediate CA should be signed or revoked. All other
times the HSM for the root CA shall be kept completely oﬄine, and physical
measures such as vaults, surveillance and alarm systems must be used to keep
the HSM physically secure.
==PAGE:52==
38
Analysis
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Design
In this chapter the design of the proof-of-concept solution for distribution of the
MIR will be described.
4.1
Architecture
As described in Section 3.2 the proof of concept solution will be using a blockchain
to manage and distribute the list of trusted identity providers. It should be a
permissioned blockchain where everyone are allowed to subscribe to the list of
trusted and revoked root CAs, but only a chosen set of peers should be allowed
to propose the addition or revocation of root CAs to the blockchain, and only
another set of peers should be allowed to endorse the addition or revocation.
4.1.1
Blockchain Peers and Permissions
The blockchain network will consist of a set of peers. This set will then be
divided into smaller subsets of peers where the diﬀerent subsets have diﬀerent
permissions.
==PAGE:54==
40
Design
Normal Peers All peers in the network are by default a normal peer. A normal
peer only has permission to query the list of trusted and revoked root CAs.
Proposing Peers A proposing peer is a peer that has permission to propose
the addition or revocation of a root CA.
Endorsing Peers An endorsing peer is a peer that has permission to endorse
a proposal of the addition or revocation of a root CA.
Figure 4.1 gives a visualization of the permissions of the diﬀerent types of peers.
Normal Peer
Query trusted root
CAs
Query revoked root
CAs
Proposing Peer
Propose addition of
new root CA
Propose revocation
of root CA
Endorse addition of
new root CA
Endorsing Peer
Endorse revocation
of root CA
Figure 4.1: Visualization of the permissions of peers.
4.1.2
Data on the Blockchain
As described in Section 3.2.2.1 the blockchain should contain the certiﬁcates of
all trusted root CAs, and also root CAs that have been revoked. All trusted
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Architecture
41
and revoked root CAs will contain digital signatures from all the endorsing
peers, along with the state of the root CA, which can be either PROPOSED,
ENDORSED or REVOKED, and an unique ID. Root CAs that have been
revoked will also have a revocation reason, which is given as one of the enu-
meration values from RFC 5280 Section 5.3.1[Coo+08]. For peers to be able
to validate that all endorsing peers have signed the addition or revocation of a
trusted root CA, the blockchain will also need to contain the public keys of all
endorsing peers.
For peers to be able to interact with the list of trusted and revoked root CAs, a
smart contract will be deployed to the blockchain. This smart contract will con-
tain a number of functions for getting the list of trusted and revoked root CAs,
proposing the addition or revocation of a root CA, and endorsing the addition
or revocation of a root CA.
4.1.3
Addition of a Root CA
The addition of a new trusted root CA starts by that the organization wanting
to become a trusted root CA contacts the MCC. The MCC will then validate
the organization according to the requirements identiﬁed in Section 3.2.3.
The next step will then be that the proposing peer generates a transaction which
calls the function for adding a new trusted root CA with the certiﬁcate of the
root CA and the state set to PROPOSED. This transaction will then be sent
to the endorsing peers. If all the endorsing peers sign the transaction, the new
root CA will be added to the blockchain with the state set to ENDORSED.
4.1.4
Revocation of a Root CA
The revocation of a trusted root CA is very similar to adding a new trusted
root CA. It starts by that the MCC decide that a root CA should be revoked.
The proposing peer will then generate a transaction for calling the function for
revocation of a root CA with the ID of the root CA in question. This will then
be sent to the endorsing peers. If all of them sign the transaction, the state of
the root CA will be set to REVOKED and the change will be added to the
blockchain.
==PAGE:56==
42
Design
4.1.5
Querying of List of Root CAs
As stated above, querying the list of root CAs should be possible by all peers.
It can be done by calling the function for getting the list of root CAs. This will
then return the list of all root CA certiﬁcates together with their ID and the
state, which can be either ENDORSED or REVOKED.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Implementation
In this chapter the implementation of the proof-of-concept solution for distribu-
tion of the MIR will be described.
5.1
Technologies Used
To implement the proof-of-concept solution a number of diﬀerent technologies
have been used. These technologies will be described in the following sections.
5.1.1
Ethereum
Ethereum has been chosen as the blockchain to host the solution on because it
supports the features identiﬁed in Section 3.2.2. Ethereum is an open source
public blockchain that is based upon the cryptocurrency called Ether. It sup-
ports the creation of decentralized applications, so called dapps, which are im-
plemented as smart contracts[Ethc]. At the heart of the Ethereum protocol is
the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) which is based on a near Turing com-
plete instruction set. Currently Ethereum uses proof-of-work as the consensus
==PAGE:58==
44
Implementation
mechanism, but migration to proof-of-stake type consensus is currently being
developed[Woo19].
Apart from proof-of-work and proof-of-stake, Ethereum also supports proof-of-
authority as the consensus mechanism in private and consortium networks. One
example of this is the Rinkeby test network[Ethd].
For development of smart contracts Ethereum supports a number of diﬀerent
programming languages. One of these, is the language Solidity, which will be
described more in detail in Section 5.1.2.
5.1.2
Solidity
Solidity is the mostly used language for writing smart contracts and libraries
for the Ethereum blockchain. It is a object-oriented, high-level language that
is inspired by the languages C++, Python and JavaScript. Unlike Python and
JavaScript, which are interpreted languages, Solidity is a compiled language and
targets the EVM.
Solidity is a statically typed language, supports inheritance in contracts and
libraries, and deﬁnition of complex types using structs[Eth19].
5.1.3
Remix IDE
Remix is a browser-based IDE32 and compiler that enables developers to write
and compile smart contracts for Ethereum using the Solidity language and also
deploy, interact with and debug smart contracts[Etha].
Figure 5.1 shows a screenshot of the Remix IDE running in a browser.
5.2
Permission Handling
Permission handling has been implemented using diﬀerent roles according to
Section 4.1.1 with some small additions.
32Integrated development environment.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Permission Handling
45
Figure 5.1: A screenshot of the Remix IDE via [Etha].
5.2.1
Roles
To implement roles, a Solidity library called Roles has been made. The library
is based on the library of the same name by OpenZeppelin33 with the additional
functionality of being able to get the addresses of all accounts that are bearers
of a speciﬁc role.
A role is speciﬁed as a struct consisting of two ﬁelds. The ﬁrst ﬁeld is a mapping
called bearer that maps from an address to a boolean value. This is used to
store whether an account is bearer of the role or not.
The second ﬁeld is an array of addresses called bearers. This is used to store
the addresses of accounts that are or have been bearers of the role.
The code for how this struct is deﬁned can be seen in Listing 5.1.
1
struct
Role {
2
mapping (address => bool) bearer;
3
address [] bearers;
4
}
Listing 5.1: The Role struct.
Apart from deﬁning the structure of a role, the library also deﬁnes functions for
giving and removing a role from an address, checking whether a given address
33https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/
access/Roles.sol.
==PAGE:60==
46
Implementation
has the role, getting the list of current bearers of the role, and ﬁnally getting
the list of both current and past bearers of the role.
5.2.2
Proposer Role
As speciﬁed in Section 4.1.1 a proposer is able to propose additions or revoca-
tions of trusted root CAs.
The proposer role has been implemented as a smart contract called Proposer
that uses the Roles library. The contract has an instance of the Role struct
called _proposers, as well as functions for giving and removing the role from an
account, checking whether an account has the role, getting the list of current
bearers and getting the list of current and past bearers. All of these functions are
basically just calling the corresponding functions, as described in Section 5.2.1,
of the _proposers struct.
Finally the contract deﬁnes a modiﬁer called onlyProposer which can be seen in
Listing 5.2. This modiﬁer can be added to the signature of a function, so that
the function can only be called by an account that has the Proposer role. The
way that the modiﬁer works, is that it checks whether the account, calling the
function with the modiﬁer, has the Proposer role. If the account doesn’t have
the role, the modiﬁer will throw the error Caller needs to have the proposer
role!, but if it does the modiﬁer will continue on to call the function.
1
modifier
onlyProposer () {
2
require(isProposer(msg.sender), "Caller
needs to have
the
proposer
role!");
3
_;
4
}
Listing 5.2: The onlyProposer modiﬁer.
The functions for adding and removing the Proposer role from an account are
only allowed to be called by accounts that already have the role, and therefore
these functions have the onlyProposer modiﬁer in their function signatures.
Listing 5.3 shows the addProposer function which is an example of a function
that uses the onlyProposer modiﬁer.
5.2.3
Endorser Role
The endorser role has been, similarly to the proposer role, implemented as a
smart contract called Endorser. It also uses the Roles library and has the same
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Main Smart Contract
47
1
function
addProposer(address
account) public
onlyProposer
{
2
_addProposer(account);
3
}
Listing 5.3: The addProposer function.
functions as the Proposer contract, just for endorsers instead of proposers.
5.2.4
Default Role
If an account has not explicitly been given a role, it will per default just have
the role that corresponds to the normal peer described in Section 4.1.1. This
default role will allow any user to call any public function that does not have a
function modiﬁer that requires a speciﬁc role.
5.3
Main Smart Contract
The main smart contract of the implemented solution is called RootCAs, as it
is the one that contains the functionality to get and maintain the list of trusted
and revoked root CAs.
The contract extends the Proposer and Endorser contracts, and therefore
also inherits the role functionalities from these.
Apart from having the proposer and endorser roles, the smart contract also de-
ﬁnes its own owner role. This is a special role that is given to the account that
has created the contract. When the contract gets instantiated, the account that
creates it will, apart from getting the owner role, also get both the proposer and
endorser roles.
Just like with the proposer and endorser roles, the owner role also has a modiﬁer
called onlyOwner, which can be used on functions that should only be allowed
to be called by the owner. In the contract there are three functions that use
this modiﬁer - changeOwner, changeEndorsementsNeeded and destroy. The ﬁrst
function, changeOwner, takes an account address as input and changes the own-
ership of the contract to that account. It should be noted that if the ownership
is changed this way, the new owner will not automatically get the endorser and
proposer roles.
The second function, changeEndorsementsNeeded, changes the number of en-
dorsements that are needed to add or revoke a trusted root CA to be the un-
==PAGE:62==
48
Implementation
signed integer that is given as input to the function.
The third function, destroy, is a special function that destroys the contract by
calling the built in selfdestruct. Due to the immutable nature of the blockchain,
a call to the selfdestruct function does not delete the data stored in the smart
contract, but instead makes its functions uncallable.
The list of trusted and revoked root CAs is stored in the global variable rootCAs,
which can be read by anybody using the getRootCAs function.
5.3.1
Custom Data Types
To be able to implement the desired functionality of the smart contract, a
number of custom data types have been deﬁned. The ﬁrst one of these is the
RootCA struct, which can contain information about a root CA. As seen in
Listing 5.4 this consists of four attributes - id, state, caCert and revocationRea-
son. The id is a sequential unsigned integer that is incremented by one for each
new root CA. The state is an enumeration that can have the value Proposed,
Endorsed or Revoked. The caCert attribute contains the certiﬁcate in a string
based format. The last attribute, revocationReason, contains the reason why
a root CA has been revoked. It is deﬁned by the custom enumeration type,
RevocationReason, which can be seen in Listing 5.5. The enumerations con-
tains all the diﬀerent options for revocation reasons that are deﬁned in RFC
5280 section 5.3.1[Coo+08] with the added option NotRevoked, which is used
for when a root CA has not been revoked.
1
struct
RootCA {
2
uint id;
3
State
state;
4
string
caCert;
5
RevocationReason
revocationReason ;
6
}
Listing 5.4: The RootCA struct.
1
enum
RevocationReason {
2
Unspecified , KeyCompromise , CACompromise ,
AffiliationChanged , Superseded ,
3
CessationOfOperation , CertificateHold , RemoveFromCRL ,
PrivilegeWithdrawn , AACompromise , NotRevoked
4
}
Listing 5.5: The RevocationReason enum.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Main Smart Contract
49
Another custom type is the Proposal struct, which can contain the proposal
of the addition or revocation of a root CA. As seen in Listing 5.6, the struct
consists of the attributes proposedState, rootCA, endorsements, endorsers and
proposer.
The proposedState attribute is the state of the root CA that the
proposal should result in, if endorsed.
The rootCA attribute is a RootCA
struct that contains the information about the root CA that the proposal is
about. The endorsements attribute contains the number of endorsements, that
the proposal has received.
The endorsers attribute is a mapping that keeps
keeps track on whether addresses of accounts with the endorser role have already
endorsed the proposal or not. Finally the proposer attribute contains the address
of the account that has made the proposal.
1
struct
Proposal {
2
State
proposedState;
3
RootCA
rootCA;
4
uint
endorsements;
5
mapping(address => bool) endorsers;
6
address
proposer;
7
}
Listing 5.6: The Proposal struct.
5.3.2
Addition of a new Root CA
The addition of a new trusted root CA is a two step process - the ﬁrst step is that
that an account with the proposer role makes a proposal to add a new trusted
root CA, and the second step is that a number of accounts with the endorser
role will have to endorse the proposal. The number of endorsements that are
needed to add a new trusted root CA, is given as an input to the constructor
function of the contract and stored in the variable _endorsementsNeeded. As
described in Section 5.3 this variable can also be changed by the owner of the
contract using the changeEndorsementsNeeded function.
5.3.2.1
Proposal
As stated above, a proposal can only be done by an account that has the proposer
role. To propose the addition of a new trusted root CA, an account with the
proposer role will call the proposeRootCAAddition function, which can be seen
in Listing 5.7, with the certiﬁcate of the proposed root CA given as input to
the function. The function will start by checking whether a proposal already
==PAGE:64==
50
Implementation
exists - if there is, an error will be thrown saying that a proposal already exists.
If not, the function will go on to create an instance of the RootCA struct
with the given certiﬁcate and the state set to Proposed. This will then be put
into an instance of the Proposal struct, which will have the proposed state
set to Endorsed, and the address of the account making the proposal is set in
the proposer ﬁeld. This proposal will then be assigned to the global variable
additionProposal, which can be read by anybody using the getAdditionProposal
function, and ﬁnally the NewProposal event containing the proposal is emitted.
1
function
proposeRootCAAddition (string
memory
_caCert)
public
onlyProposer {
2
require( additionProposal .proposedState == State.
Proposed , "An addition
proposal
already
exists!")
;
3
RootCA
memory
_rootCA = RootCA (0, State.Proposed ,
_caCert , RevocationReason .NotRevoked);
4
Proposal
memory
_proposal = Proposal ({ proposedState :
State.Endorsed , rootCA: _rootCA , endorsements : 0,
proposer: msg.sender });
5
additionProposal = _proposal;
6
resetEndorsements ( additionProposal );
7
emit
NewProposal(ProposalSimple (_proposal.
proposedState , _rootCA));
8
}
Listing 5.7: The function for proposing the addition of a new root CA.
5.3.2.2
Endorsement
After a proposal has been made to add a new trusted root CA, the proposal
needs to be endorsed. This is done by an account with the endorser role will
call the endorseRootCAAddition function, which can be seen in Listing 5.8.
The function will start by checking whether the proposal actually exists, and
whether the endorser has already endorsed the proposal. If any of these checks
fail, an error will be thrown. If not, the endorsement will be registered in the
proposal. After that the function will check whether the number of registered
endorsements on the proposal have reached or exceeded the globally deﬁned
number of endorsements needed to add or revoke a root CA. If it has, the
proposed root CA will be added to the list of trusted root CAs, and the proposal
will get deleted. Finally the RootCAsChanged event, containing the new root
CA, is emitted.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Main Smart Contract
51
1
function
endorseRootCAAddition () public
onlyEndorser {
2
Proposal
storage
_proposal = additionProposal ;
3
require(_proposal.proposedState == State.Endorsed , "
This
function
can only
endorse
additions!");
4
require (! _proposal.endorsers[msg.sender], "Endorser
can only
endorse
once!");
5
_proposal.endorsements ++;
6
_proposal.endorsers[msg.sender] = true;
7
if (_proposal.endorsements
>= endorsementsNeeded ) {
8
RootCA
memory
_rootCA = _proposal.rootCA;
9
_rootCA.id = numOfRootCAs;
10
_rootCA.state = State.Endorsed;
11
rootCAs.push(_rootCA);
12
numOfRootCAs ++;
13
delete
additionProposal ;
14
emit
RootCAsChanged(_rootCA);
15
}
16
}
Listing 5.8: The function for endorsing the addition of a new root CA.
5.3.3
Revocation of a Root CA
The revocation of a trusted root CA is very similar to the addition of a new
trusted root CA, in that it is a two step process, where the ﬁrst step is that a
proposal of revocation of a root CA is made, and the second step is that the
proposal needs to be endorsed.
5.3.3.1
Proposal
Similarly as for the proposal of the addition of a new trusted root CA, the
proposal of the revocation of a trusted root CA can only be made by an account
that has the proposer role. This is done by an account that has the proposer
role calling the proposeRevocation with the ID of the root CA, that is proposed
to be revoked, and the revocation reason given as inputs to the function. The
function is very similar to the function proposing the addition of new trusted
root CA. It starts by checking whether a revocation proposal already exists,
whether the given ID is within the range of IDs that have been assigned, and
whether the root CA proposed to be revoked might already have been revoked.
If any of these checks fail, an error will be thrown. If not, the function will make
a copy of the root CA proposed to be revoked, set its state to Revoked, and its
revocation reason to the one given as input to the function. This will then be
==PAGE:66==
52
Implementation
put in an instance of the Proposal struct, which will have its proposed state
set to Revoked, and the address of the proposing account is set in the proposer
ﬁeld. This proposal is then assigned to the global variable revocationProposal,
which can be read by anyone using the getRevocationProposal function. Finally
the function emits the NewProposal event containing the proposal.
5.3.3.2
Endorsement
After a proposal has been made to revoke a trusted root CA, the proposal
needs to be endorsed. As for the endorsement of adding a new trusted root
CA, the endorsement of revocation of a trusted root CA can only be done by
accounts that have the endorser role.
This is done by an account that has
the endorser role calls the endorseRevocation function, which is very similar to
the endorseRootCAAddition function. The function starts by checking whether
the account has already endorsed the proposal - if it has, the function will
throw an error. If not, it will register the endorsement from the account in
the proposal. After that the function will check whether or not the number
of endorsements received on the proposal has reached or exceeded the globally
deﬁned number of endorsements needed. If it has, the root CA that has been
proposed to be revoked, will be updated in the list of root CAs with its state
set to Revoked, and its revocation reason set to the one given in the proposal.
Finally the RootCAsChanged event is emitted containing the root CA that has
been revoked.
5.4
Testing
To test the functionality of the implemented smart contract unit testing and
live testing have been used.
5.4.1
Unit Testing
To unit test the implemented smart contract the OpenZeppelin Test Environ-
ment framework and OpenZeppelin Test Helpers have been used. The Open-
Zeppelin Test Environment is a framework that provides a sandbox environment
for unit testing smart contracts[Opea], whereas OpenZeppelin Test Helpers is
a library that provides complex assertion functions, such as asserting that an
event has been emitted or a function call fails, and can be used seamlessly on
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Testing
53
top of the OpenZeppelin Test Environment[Opeb].
A number of diﬀerent tests have been deﬁned to test whether all the functions
of the main smart contract behave as expected, and also that events are emitted
when expected.
An example is the test endorsing an addition proposal, which can be seen
in Listing 5.9. This test tests the endorsement of the addition of a new trusted
root CA. It starts by that the number of endorsements needed is set to two. An
account with the proposer role then makes a proposal to add a new trusted root
CA. The test then retrieves this new proposal, and checks whether it has its
proposed state set to Proposed, and afterwards it gets the list of root CAs and
checks that its length is zero. An account with the endorser role then endorses
the proposal, and afterwards it is again checked that the proposal still exists,
and that the length of the root CA list is still zero. After that another account
with the endorser role then also endorses the proposal. Finally it is checked that
the proposal has now been deleted, the length of the root CA list is now one,
and that the RootCAsChanged event has been emitted.
5.4.2
Live Testing
For live testing of the implemented smart contract, two diﬀerent methodologies
have been used. The ﬁrst one is to interact directly with the smart contract
using the Remix IDE (Section 5.1.3), and the second one is using a custom made
web application that uses the list of root CAs to validate a given certiﬁcate.
5.4.2.1
Using Remix IDE
The smart contract has been live tested using the Remix IDE and the Meta-
Mask34 browser extension, which allows users to interact with an Ethereum
network without running a full Ethereum node locally, and deployed to the
Rinkeby Ethereum test network, which uses proof-of-authority in the form of
Clique as the consensus mechanism.
To do this, the ﬁrst step is to enable the plugins for compiling and deploying
smart contracts. This is done in the Plugin Manager tab of Remix, as seen
in Figure 5.2.
The second step is to import the source code ﬁles for the implemented smart
contract into the File Explorers tab. Figure 5.3 shows the File Explorer con-
taining the source code ﬁles with the main smart contract ﬁle open.
The third step is then to compile the smart contract. This is done in the
Solidity Compiler tab, as seen in Figure 5.4. Here the correct version of the
34https://metamask.io/
==PAGE:68==
54
Implementation
1
it('endorsing an addition
proposal.', async
function () {
2
// set the
required
endorsements to 2
3
await
this.contract. changeEndorsementsNeeded (2, {from
: owner });
4
5
await
this.contract. proposeRootCAAddition ("test", {
from: proposer });
6
7
// expect the
proposal to exist and the length of the
list of root CAs is 0
8
expect (( await
this.contract. getAdditionProposal ()).
proposedState).to.be.equal('1');
9
expect (( await
this.contract.getRootCAs ()).length).to.
be.equal (0);
10
11
await
this.contract. endorseRootCAAddition ({ from:
endorser1 });
12
13
// expect the
proposal to still
exist and the length
of the list of root CAs is 0
14
expect (( await
this.contract. getAdditionProposal ()).
proposedState).to.be.equal('1');
15
expect (( await
this.contract.getRootCAs ()).length).to.
be.equal (0);
16
17
const
receipt = await
this.contract.
endorseRootCAAddition ({ from: endorser2 });
18
19
// expect the
proposal to have been deleted , the
length of the root CA list to be 1, and that an
event has been
emitted
20
expect (( await
this.contract. getAdditionProposal ()).
proposedState).to.be.equal('0');
21
expect (( await
this.contract.getRootCAs ()).length).to.
be.equal (1);
22
expectEvent(receipt , 'RootCAsChanged ');
23
});
Listing 5.9: Test for endorsing the addition of a new trusted root CA.
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Testing
55
Figure 5.2: The plugins that need to be enabled in Remix.
Figure 5.3: The Remix IDE File Explorer.
==PAGE:70==
56
Implementation
compiler and the main ﬁle for the contract must be chosen. The smart contract
is then compiled by clicking the Compile RootCAs.sol button.
The fourth step is then to deploy the smart contract to the network. This is
Figure 5.4: Compilation of smart contract using Remix.
done in the Deploy & Run Transactions, as seen in Figure 5.5. Here the
environment, for executing transactions, must be chosen. By default, this is set
to use a JavaScipt based VM that is not connected to any Ethereum network,
but instead runs a blockchain network in memory. This can be used for sim-
ple testing of the smart contract, but to be able to interact with an Ethereum
network using MetaMask, the option Injected Web3 must be chosen. Then the
number of endorsements needed to add or revoke a root CA must be deﬁned in
the text ﬁeld next to the orange Deploy button. Finally the contract is deployed
by clicking the Deploy button. This will result in a notiﬁcation from MetaMask,
as also seen in Figure 5.5, asking to conﬁrm or reject the transaction containing
the deployment of the contract.
After the contract has been deployed to the network, the contract will be
added to Deployed Contract, and if clicked, a list with all available functions
of the smart contract will be shown, as seen in Figure 5.6. All functions that are
highlighted in orange, are functions that require data to be added or altered in
the contract, such as adding a new root CA, and therefore needs to be validated
by a validating node. Using one of these functions will, just like deploying a
contract, result in a notiﬁcation from MetaMask to conﬁrm or reject the trans-
action. All functions that are highlighted in blue, are functions that only read
data from the blockchain without side eﬀects, and don’t need conﬁrmation.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Testing
57
Figure 5.5: Deploying the smart contract using Remix and accepting using
MetaMask.
5.4.2.2
Using Custom Web Application
Apart from testing the contract using the Remix IDE, the contract has also been
tested using a custom web application. The application consists of a simple
REST based server, that is written in JavaScript using the Node.js35 runtime,
and a simple frontend web page, which can be seen in Figure 5.7.
The purpose of the REST based backend service is to be able to receive a PEM
encoded certiﬁcate36 in a HTTP POST request, and validate it against the list
of root CAs in the smart contract. To get the list of root CAs from the smart
contract, the backend service uses Web3.js37, which is a JavaScript framework
that can be used to interact with an Ethereum network.
The frontend, seen in Figure 5.7, allows the user to send a PEM encoded cer-
tiﬁcate to the backend, by either typing it into a text box or uploading it from
a ﬁle.
When the user has uploaded or typed in a PEM certiﬁcate they can click the
Send! button, which will send the certiﬁcate to the backend service in the body
of a HTTP POST request. When the backend receives the request, it will use
the Web.js framework to call the getRootCAs function of the smart contract to
get the list of root CAs. Then it will ﬁlter out all root CAs that have been
revoked, ending up only with the list of root CAs that are not revoked. The
35https://nodejs.org/en/
36PEM encoding is a method of base64 encoding X.509 certiﬁcates.
37https://github.com/ethereum/web3.js/
==PAGE:72==
58
Implementation
Figure 5.6: All functions of the smart contract listed in Remix.
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Testing
59
Figure 5.7: The frontend for the custom web application.
service will then validate the received PEM encoded certiﬁcate against the list
of root CAs. If the signature of the received certiﬁcate can be validated by the
public key of any of the root CAs, the service will send the response Certiﬁcate
is trusted to the frontend, which will then show this message to the user, as
seen in Figure 5.8. If the signature of the certiﬁcate cannot be validated, the
service will send the response Certiﬁcate is NOT trusted to the frontend, as
seen in Figure 5.9.
==PAGE:74==
60
Implementation
Figure 5.8: Validation of a certiﬁcate that is signed by a trusted root CA.
Figure 5.9: Validation of a certiﬁcate that is signed by a root CA that is not
trusted.
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In this chapter the implemented proof-of-concept solution will be evaluated with
regards to the problem deﬁnition, and strengths and shortcomings of the solution
will be discussed.
6.1
Evaluation
In the problem deﬁnition of the project the ﬁrst two goals that were deﬁned were
that it should be possible for more than one instance of the MIR to exists at the
same time and each MIR should have its own root CA and its own database of
users. Based on that the proof-of-concept solution, that has been implemented
as part of this thesis, is not itself dependant on the implementation or function-
ality of the MIR, but merely acts as a distributed tool to maintain and query
a list of trusted and revoked root CAs, these goals can be said to have been
reached, as the solution in principle can be used to not only maintain and query
a list of trusted and revoked root CAs of diﬀerent MIR providers, but can also
be used to do the same for root CAs from any PKI-based identity management
system.
The third goal that was deﬁned was that users from one MIR should be able
to authenticate users from another MIR. This goal can also be said to have
==PAGE:76==
62
Discussion
been reached using the method for authentication in a PKI, as described in
Section 2.4.1.2, combined with the proof-of-concept solution implemented in
this thesis. A scenario using this could be that the user Alice, who has her
identity registered in MIR 1 and is signed by root CA 1, wants to authenticate
the user Bob, who has his identity registered in MIR 2 and is signed by root
CA 2. To do this Bob would send a message with his certiﬁcate and a digital
signature signed by his private key, to Alice. Alice would then ﬁrst check that
the digital signature can be veriﬁed using the public key in Bob’s certiﬁcate.
After that she would then retrieve the list of root CAs from the smart contract
of the implemented solution, and ﬁlter out all revoked CAs, ending up with a list
of only root CAs that are currently trusted. She would then verify that Bob’s
certiﬁcate is signed by one of the CAs in the list of trusted root CAs. If it is,
she would ﬁnally check, using a CRL or OCSP from the MIR that issued Bob’s
identity, that Bob’s certiﬁcate has not been revoked. If none of these checks fail,
Alice has successfully authenticated Bob.
The fourth and ﬁnal goal that was deﬁned was that the list of MIR instance
providers with their respective root CAs should be publicly available, and should
be agreed upon by chosen actors using a suitable consensus mechanism. This
goal can also be said to have been reached as the implemented proof-of-concept
solution consists of a smart contract that, when deployed on a blockchain, pro-
vides a public accessible function to retrieve the list of trusted and revoked root
CAs. Proposing and endorsing the addition or revocation of trusted root CAs
is done using a role based approach, where only users with the proposer role
are allowed to propose additions and revocations, and only users with the en-
dorser role are allowed to endorse additions and revocations. The consensus
mechanism chosen for the blockchain is proof-of-authority using Clique. Proof-
of-authority guarantees partition tolerance and availability, meaning that even
though a partition happens between nodes in the network, the system will still
continue to operate, and that any node, when requested, will return the latest
data that it has without error. Additionally, Clique guarantees that the network
will eventually be consistent, meaning that all nodes in the network will even-
tually have the latest data. One caveat of the solution though, is that, apart
from the certiﬁcates of trusted and revoked root CAs, the implemented smart
contract does not contain any additional information about the root CAs.
6.2
Limitations
As is also pointed out in Section 6.1 the implemented solution does not contain
any information about trusted and revoked root CAs apart from their certiﬁ-
cates.
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Resilience to Attacks
63
Additionally, in the Design chapter in Section 4.1.2 it was described that every
entry in the list of root CAs should contain digital signatures of all the peers
that have endorsed the addition or revocation of the root CA. This has not been
implemented as it turned out that the Solidity language, that the smart contract
is written in, doesn’t have any built in features to create digital signatures. It
is, though, possible to verify who has endorsed an addition or revocation by fol-
lowing the blockchain, and ﬁnd and validate the signatures of the transactions
containing the endorsements.
6.3
Resilience to Attacks
6.3.1
Malicious Validator Nodes
A possible attack vector of the implemented solution is that one or more valida-
tor nodes become malicious. As long as no more than half of all of the validator
nodes become malicious, this is no problem. In this case the Clique proof-of-
authority consensus mechanism will vote out malicious nodes, and any block
proposals made by them will be rejected.
In the case that an attacker take over more than half of the validating nodes,
they will be able to reject any future transactions. They will not be able, though,
to alter previous transactions, as that would be noticed by any non-malicious
nodes in the network. They will also not be able to falsify transactions contain-
ing proposals or endorsements of adding or revoking root CAs, as that would
require that they also have the private key of a node having the proposer or
endorser role. This also means that in case of such an attack, it needs to be a
requirement that a validating node should not also have the proposer or endorser
role.
6.3.2
Hijacking of Proposing and Endorsing Nodes
If an attacker hijacks a proposing node, they will be able to make addition
and revocation proposals and they will be able delete existing proposals. As
proposals are expected to be decided on beforehand in the MCP Consortium, a
proposal made without the decision having been made will quickly be discovered,
and the proposer role of the compromised node can be removed. Deletion of
proposals will also be discovered, as they might result in that endorsement of
additions or revocations may be blocked indeﬁnitely.
In the case that an attacker hijacks an endorsing node, the implemented solution
==PAGE:78==
64
Discussion
has a vulnerability, in that nodes with the endorser role are able to give the
endorser role to other nodes.
The attacker, though, would only be able to
exploit this to endorse any existing proposals. To actually be able to add or
revoke root CAs as they like, the attacker would need to hijack both a proposer
node and an endorser node.
6.4
Future Work
As pointed out in Sections 6.1 and 6.2, the implemented solution has some limi-
tations in that it does not contain information about root CAs apart from their
certiﬁcates, and that entries in the list of root CAs do not contain digital sig-
natures from the nodes that have endorsed the addition or revocation.
Both of these can be implemented quite simply. The ﬁrst one can be imple-
mented for addition of new trusted root CAs by modifying the smart contract
to include documentation for adhering to the requirements identiﬁed in Sec-
tion 3.2.3 in the addition proposal. When the addition has been endorsed, these
documents will then be added to a mapping, that maps from the root CA to
the documents, where users will be able to look the documents up.
The second one can be implemented by making a custom application to endorse
additions using the Web3.js framework, as this contains functions to generate
digital signatures, which can be added to an array in the RootCA struct of the
smart contract.
In Section 6.3.2 it was pointed out, that if an attacker hijacks nodes with both
the proposer and endorser roles, they would be able to add and revoke root
CAs as they like. This means that the implemented smart contract should be
modiﬁed to not allow a node having more than one role, and nodes with one
role should not be able to directly give the same role to another node.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis diﬀerent methods and technologies for distribution of the Maritime
Connectivity Platform Identity Registry (MIR) have been described, analysed
and compared. Based on the comparison and analysis of the diﬀerent technolo-
gies, it was chosen that a suitable solution for distribution of the MIR, is one
where each MIR instance will host their own PKI with its own root CA. A
blockchain based solution will then be used to maintain and agree upon a list
of trusted and revoked MIR root CAs.
A number of formal, legal and technical requirements, that an MIR instance
provider will have to live up to in order to become a trusted root CA, have been
identiﬁed.
For the blockchain based solution it was identiﬁed that a consortium blockchain
would be the the most suitable option, as it allows anybody to read data stored
in the blockchain, but only a predetermined set of nodes are allowed to write to
the blockchain.
The consensus mechanism that was chosen for the blockchain is the proof-of-
authority based Clique algorithm, where a set of nodes are chosen to validate
transactions in the network, as it guarantees partition tolerance and availability
with eventual consistency.
Based on the results of the analysis, a smart contract for the Ethereum blockchain
has been developed. This smart contract contains functions, which can only be
called by nodes who have been given proper roles, for proposing and endorsing
==PAGE:80==
66
Conclusion
additions and revocations of trusted root CAs to a list in the contract, and also
a function for getting this list, which can be called by anyone.
The implemented solution currently has the limitations that the root CAs reg-
istered in the smart contract do not contain documentation for living up to
the requirements identiﬁed in the analysis, and also that they do not contain
digital signatures from the nodes that have endorsed them, meaning that it is
not directly possible to verify who has endorsed the addition or revocation of
a root CA. These limitations can be solved in the future, relatively simple, by
extending the smart contract to include the required information.
The consensus mechanism of the solution is resilient to attacks, as long as no
more than half of the validating nodes in the network are malicious.
Even
if an attacker controls more than half of the validating nodes, they will be
able to block transactions, but will not be able to modify or falsify new or old
transactions.
The mechanism for proposing and endorsing additions and revocations of root
CAs has a vulnerability, though, in that if an attacker controls both a proposing
node and an endorsing node, they will be able to add or revoke root CAs as
they like. This can be solved by not allowing nodes to have more than one role,
and also not allowing them to directly give the role they have to other nodes.
Overall, the analysis and proof-of-concept solution made in this thesis gives a
good starting point for distribution of the MIR, but more work will need to be
done in the future to validate whether it is truly viable or not.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
MIR Role Hierarchy
==PAGE:82==
68
MIR Role Hierarchy
Role
Approve New Org
Edit Own Org
Maintain Org Users
Maintain Org Vessels
Maintain Org Services
Maintain Org Devices
Maintain Org Roles
Delete Org
ROLE_SITE_ADMIN
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
ROLE_ORG_ADMIN
X
X
X
X
X
X
ROLE_ENTITY_ADMIN
X
X
X
X
ROLE_USER_ADMIN
X
ROLE_VESSEL_ADMIN
X
ROLE_SERVICE_ADMIN
X
ROLE_DEVICE_ADMIN
X
ROLE_APPROVE_ORG
X
ROLE_USER
Table A.1: The MIR role hierarchy
Source: https://developers.maritimeconnectivity.net/identity/index.html#authorization
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[19a]
Launching the Maritime Connectivity Platform Consortium - to-
wards the 4th industrial revolution in Maritime Sector. 2019. url:
https://maritimeconnectivity.net/docs/Press%7B%5C_%7Drelease.
pdf (visited on 11/06/2019).
[19b]
Maritime Connectivity Platform Consortium Arrangement. 2019. url:
https://maritimeconnectivity.net/docs/Consortium%7B%5C_
%7Darrangement%7B%5C_%7D1-1-1%7B%5C_%7Dclean.pdf (visited
on 11/06/2019).
[Arn13]
Isaac Arnsdorf. Phantom Ships Expose Weakness in AIS Vessel-
Tracking System – gCaptain. 2013. url: https://gcaptain.com/
phanton-ships-expose-weakness-in-ais-vessel-tracking-
system/ (visited on 10/27/2019).
[Bal13]
Marco Balduzzi. Captain, Where Is Your Ship - Compromising Ves-
sel Tracking Systems - TrendLabs Security Intelligence Blog. 2013.
url: https : / / blog . trendmicro . com / trendlabs - security -
intelligence/captain- where- is- your- ship- compromising-
vessel-tracking-systems/ (visited on 10/27/2019).
[Bro18]
Julian Browne. Brewer’s CAP Theorem. 2018. url: http://www.
julianbrowne.com/article/brewers- cap- theorem (visited on
01/21/2020).
[CL99]
Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. Practical Byzantine Fault Tol-
erance. Tech. rep. 1999.
==PAGE:84==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Coo+08]
D. Cooper et al. Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certiﬁcate
and Certiﬁcate Revocation List (CRL) Proﬁle. Tech. rep. 1. 2008,
p. 151. doi: 10 . 1007 / s13398 - 014 - 0173 - 7 . 2. arXiv: arXiv :
1011.1669v3. url: https://tools.ietf.org/pdf/rfc5280.pdf.
[De +]
Stefano De Angelis et al. PBFT vs Proof-of-Authority: Applying the
CAP Theorem to Permissioned Blockchain *. Tech. rep.
[DW17]
S. Doyle and N. Ward. Deliverable D1.28 Workshop Report How to
Run the MCP (Maritime Connectivity Platform). 2017. url: https:
/ / efficiensea2 . org / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 12 / MCP -
Workshop-2017-final-20171127.pdf (visited on 11/06/2019).
[ES]
Arnoud Engelfriet and Wouter Slegers. Revoking a key. url: http:
//www.pgp.net/pgpnet/pgp-faq/pgp-faq-key-revocation.
html (visited on 11/10/2019).
[Etha]
Ethereum. ethereum/remix-ide: Browser-Only Ethereum IDE and
Runtime Environment. url: https : / / github . com / ethereum /
remix-ide (visited on 01/10/2020).
[Ethb]
Ethereum. Proof of Stake FAQ - ethereum/wiki Wiki. url: https://
github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Proof-of-Stake-FAQ (visited
on 10/14/2019).
[Ethc]
Ethereum. What is Ethereum? | Ethereum. url: https://ethereum.
org/what-is-ethereum/ (visited on 01/05/2020).
[Ethd]
EthHub. Ethereum Test Networks - EthHub. url: https://docs.
ethhub.io/using-ethereum/test-networks/ (visited on 01/05/2020).
[Eth19]
Ethereum. Solidity — Solidity 0.6.1 documentation. 2019. url: https:
//solidity.readthedocs.io/en/v0.6.1/ (visited on 01/05/2020).
[Fle19]
Theodor Fleming. “Decentralized Identity Management for a Mar-
itime Digital Infrastructure : With focus on usability and data in-
tegrity”. MA thesis. Linköping University, Software and Systems,
2019, p. 44. url: http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:
liu:diva-155115 (visited on 10/15/2019).
[Glo]
GlobalSign. What Are Subordinate CAs and Why Would You Want
Your Own? url: https : / / www . globalsign . com / en / blog /
what - is - an - intermediate - or - subordinate - certificate -
authority/ (visited on 10/07/2019).
[Hyp]
Hyperledger. Smart Contracts and Chaincode — hyperledger-fabricdocs
master documentation. url: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.
io/en/release-1.4/smartcontract/smartcontract.html (vis-
ited on 12/02/2019).
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[IBM]
IBM. Public Key Certiﬁcates. url: https://www.ibm.com/support/
knowledgecenter/en/SSYKE2%7B%5C_%7D8.0.0/com.ibm.java.
security.component.80.doc/security-component/jsse2Docs/
publickeycertificates.html (visited on 09/27/2019).
[IHO16]
IHO. ENC Production. 2016. url: https://www.iho.int/srv1/
index.php?option=com%7B%5C_%7Dcontent%7B%5C&%7Dview=
article % 7B % 5C & %7Did = 332 % 7B % 5C & %7DItemid = 408 % 7B % 5C &
%7Dlang=en (visited on 10/30/2019).
[Inta]
International Chamber of Shipping. ICS | Shipping and World Trade.
url: https://www.ics-shipping.org/shipping-facts/shipping-
and-world-trade (visited on 10/07/2019).
[Intb]
International Maritime Organization. Automatic Identiﬁcation Sys-
tems (AIS). url: http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Safety/
Navigation/Pages/AIS.aspx (visited on 10/25/2019).
[Intc]
International Maritime Organization. Electronic Nautical Charts (ENC)
and Electronic Chart Display and Information Systems (ECDIS).
url: http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Safety/Navigation/
Pages/ElectronicCharts.aspx (visited on 10/30/2019).
[Intd]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO/IEC 27001:2013(en),
Information technology — Security techniques — Information secu-
rity management systems — Requirements. url: https://www.iso.
org/obp/ui/%7B%5C#%7Diso:std:iso-iec:27001:ed-2:v1:en
(visited on 11/21/2019).
[Int00]
International Hydrographic Organization. IHO TRANSFER STAN-
DARD for DIGITAL HYDROGRAPHIC DATA. Tech. rep. 2000.
url: https://www.iho.int/iho%7B%5C_%7Dpubs/standard/S-
57Ed3.1/31Main.pdf.
[Int10]
Internation Hydrographic Organization. INTERNATIONAL HY-
DROGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION SPECIFICATIONS FOR CHART
CONTENT AND DISPLAY ASPECTS OF ECDIS. Tech. rep. 2010.
url: https://www.iho.int/iho%7B%5C_%7Dpubs/standard/S-
52/S-52%7B%5C_%7De6.0%7B%5C_%7DEN.pdf.
[Int12]
Internation Hydrographic Organization. IHO Data Protection Scheme.
Tech. rep. 2012. url: https://www.iho.int/iho%7B%5C_%7Dpubs/
standard/S-63/S-63%7B%5C_%7De1.1.1%7B%5C_%7DEN%7B%5C_
%7DApr12.pdf.
[Itu15]
Itu-r. Technical characteristics for a VHF data exchange system in
the VHF maritime mobile band. Tech. rep. 2015. url: http://www.
itu.int/publ/R-REC/en.
==PAGE:86==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[JHW18]
Archana Joshi, Meng Han, and Yan Wang. “A survey on security
and privacy issues of blockchain technology”. In: Mathematical Foun-
dations of Computing 1 (2018), pp. 121–147. doi: 10.3934/mfc.
2018007.
[Jo+18]
Sung Woong Jo et al. “A Validation of Field Test Results for LTE-
Maritime”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 51.29 (Jan. 2018), pp. 153–158.
issn: 24058963. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.09.485.
[LSP82]
Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. The Byzantine
Generals Problem. Tech. rep. 1982.
[Mar17]
Maritime Cloud Development Forum. “Maritime Cloud conceptual
model”. 2017. url: https://maritimeconnectivity.net/docs/
IALA%20Input%20-%20Maritime%20Cloud%20conceptual%20model.
pdf.
[Nak]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.
Tech. rep. url: www.bitcoin.org.
[NAT03]
NATIONAL IMAGERY AND MAPPING AGENCY. INTERNA-
TIONAL CODE OF SIGNALS. Tech. rep. 2003. url: http://www.
seasources.net/PDF/PUB102.pdf (visited on 01/04/2020).
[Opea]
OpenZeppelin. Test Environment - OpenZeppelin Docs. url: https:
//docs.openzeppelin.com/test-environment/0.1/getting-
started (visited on 01/19/2020).
[Opeb]
OpenZeppelin. Test Helpers - OpenZeppelin Docs. url: https://
docs.openzeppelin.com/test-helpers/0.5/ (visited on 01/19/2020).
[Pro]
Proton Technologies AG. What is GDPR, the EU’s new data pro-
tection law? - GDPR.eu. url: https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/
(visited on 11/21/2019).
[Ray16]
Eric S. Raymond. AIVDM/AIVDO protocol decoding. 2016. url:
https://gpsd.gitlab.io/gpsd/AIVDM.html (visited on 10/25/2019).
[Ray19]
Eric S. Raymond. NMEA Revealed. 2019. url: https : / / gpsd .
gitlab.io/gpsd/NMEA.html%7B%5C#%7D%7B%5C_%7Dnmea%7B%5C_
%7Dencoding%7B%5C_%7Dconventions (visited on 10/25/2019).
[Rya14]
K. Ryabitsev. “PGP Web of Trust: Core Concepts Behind Trusted
Communication”. In: 18 (2014). url: https://www.linux.com/
learn/pgp-web-trust-core-concepts-behind-trusted-communication.
[San+13]
S. Santesson et al. “RFC 6960 X.509 Internet Public Key Infras-
tructure Online Certiﬁcate Status Protocol - OCSP”. In: IETF RFC
(2013). issn: 2070-1721.
[Ske19]
Brandon Skerritt. Public Key Cryptography Simply Explained. 2019.
url: https : / / hackernoon . com / public - key - cryptography -
simply-explained-e932e3093046 (visited on 09/27/2019).
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[Wika]
Wikipedia - The Free Encyclopedia. Dressing overall - Wikipedia.
url: https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Dressing % 7B % 5C _
%7Doverall (visited on 01/14/2020).
[Wikb]
Wikipedia - The Free Encyclopedia. Hardware security module -
Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware%
7B%5C_%7Dsecurity%7B%5C_%7Dmodule (visited on 11/22/2019).
[Woo19]
Gavin Wood. ETHEREUM: A SECURE DECENTRALISED GEN-
ERALISED TRANSACTION LEDGER. Tech. rep. 2019. url: https:
/ / ethereum . github . io / yellowpaper / paper . pdf (visited on
01/05/2020).
