==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER THESIS AT DTU MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE IN
COLLABORATION WITH POSTNORD
DUTY PLANNING FOR DRIVERS AT POSTNORD
s145435 NILSSON, ANDERS
Supervisor
PACINO, DARIO
JANUARY 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Abstract
In recent years academic research into the vehicle routing has increased the focus of hours of
service regulations. However logistic ﬁrms often operates under different regulatory frameworks
based on country and union agreements. This means that solution methods are either too general
or unrelated. For this reason it is important to have a wide basis of academic work. This project
seeks to ﬁnd the lowest number of drivers needed to carry out a list of tasks and produce a feasible
schedule that covers all tasks with minimum positioning time. The ﬁndings shows that the set of
possible duties when truck type and hours of service regulations is taken into account can be
exhaustively computed and is relatively small for even the largest operating units. Based on the
set of duties the minimal number of drivers can be found without respecting rest regulations that
are otherwise hard to solve. Once the optimal number of drivers is found a feasible schedule can
be found using an expanded set covering formulation.
i
==PAGE:3==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
2
2.1
Set Partitioning and Set Cover formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Problem description
5
3.1
Operational Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Regulatory Framework
8
4.1
Deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Regulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2.1
Task to Task Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2.2
Duty-Duty Regulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2.3
Monthly Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5
Model formulation
11
5.1
Duty Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.3
Model Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3.1
Outsourcing strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3.2
Differentiation between hubs and terminals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Results
20
6.1
Minimization of drivers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2
Schedule view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3
Outsourcing strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Discussion
25
7.1
Branch and price methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2
Other applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8
Conclusion
26
Bibliography
28
ii
==PAGE:4==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
A Appendix
29
A.1 Attributes of all activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.2 Task Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.2.1
Operating Unit ABT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
iii
==PAGE:5==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
1
Introduction
PostNord can be dated back to 1624 when the current king of Denmark, Christian IV, declared the
establishment of a nationwide network of postmen. Today PostNord is among the best postal ser-
vice providers within the European Union and more than 93 % of all domestic letters are handed
in on time the following weekday. To ensure high service levels at competitive prices PostNord
is working towards a more digital mindset by including more operation researches and operation
managements in the decision making process.[1]
Figure 1: Journey of packages and letters from sender to reciever.
A package through PostNord starts its journey either from a customers warehouse or a service
point from which it is driven to a terminal. Once at a terminal it is packed with other items that
is to be sent to the same region. This process is repeated multiple times until the package arrives
at the nearest distribution hub from where it is send to the intended receiver. In each step of the
way the package is assigned to a truck with a given capacity and ﬁxed departure and arrival time
referred to as a task. Each task must be assigned to a duty and each duty must be assigned to a
driver such that all tasks are being carried out. The goal of this project is to propose a method for
estimating the minimum number of drivers needed to carry out all tasks and plan a schedule that
minimizes the total driving time.
Section 2 gives an overview of the current literature of the two most related problems; the vehi-
cle routing and truck driver scheduling problem (VRTDSP) and the driver scheduling problem (DSP).
Section 3 gives a thorough description of the problem while section 4 outlines the regulatory
framework. A procedure to generate all feasible duties and an expanded set covering formula-
tion used to select duties is presented in section 5. The results are presented in section 6 while
the results are discussed and recommendations for future work is given in section 7. Finally the
conclusion of the project is summarized in section 8.
Page 1 of 28
==PAGE:6==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
2
Literature Review
In 2013 the USA followed the European Union’s example and prescribed stricter hours of service
regulations for truck drivers. These regulations meant that the maximum number of driving hours
before a rest must be taken is limited and drivers now need to take breaks or rests after eight hours
of accumulated driving time. According to Goel and Irnich (2014) most of the vehicle routing
problems with time windows (VRPTW) literature fails to include hours of service regulations.
As a result the transportation science community has increasingly attempted to close the gap
between research and industry [2]. In a literature review by Koubâa et al. (2016) [3] of 20 papers
from 2000 and forth only seven have worked with speciﬁc regional hours of service regulations in
the ﬁrst half of this period whereas eleven out of 15 did in the later half. The vast majority of the
work is concentrated around heuristic approaches. Following the EU regulation EC No 561/2006
which came into force in 2007, Goel (2010) [4] proposed a Breadth First Search (BFS) which could
guarantee to ﬁnd a feasible schedule if such existed. In the same paper Goel tested a variant of
the BFS where no split breaks were scheduled (NS-BFS) and showed that it succeeded to ﬁnd a
feasible schedule in almost all cases. For this reason he thus concludes that taking a break in two
parts does not yield a big beneﬁt for long distance haulage. Since the NS-BFS uses fewer labels it
also runs considerably faster.
Kok et al. (2010) [5] studied an extended version of the VRPTW where time dependent travel
times and hours of service regulations was included. They proposed a two step solution that
ﬁrst optimizes the total duration of duties by a restricted dynamic programming heuristic and
secondly optimizes the departure time of each duty using an efﬁcient algorithm. Their results
showed that the method gave close to optimal solutions to known problems. Additionally they
tested the effect of expanded opening hours at the depot and concluded that large cost savings
can be realised by avoiding peak hour trafﬁc.
Many other heuristic approaches have been presented but it was ﬁrst in 2014 that an exact
method was formulated. Goel and Irnich (2014) [2] proposed a branch-and-price approach to
solve the vehicle routing and truck driver scheduling problem (VRTDSP) to proven optimality.
They deﬁne the problem as a special version of the VRPTW where routes cover multiple activities
and that these routes have to obey hours of service regulations. They obtain a model for the
problem by expanding the well known network in vehicle routing problem (VRP), G = (N, A), to an
auxiliary network G′ = (N′, A′). Each arc in the original network G is replaced by an auxiliary sub-
network, G′
n,m. The sub-network has entry n, exit node m and intermediate node ˜nn,m. For each
possible activity between serving two customers an arc starting and ending in ˜nn,m is added. This
allows explicit modeling of each driver activity which is needed to ensure that hours of service
regulations are kept. The duration of these activities can be uniquely computed for the US and EU
Page 2 of 28
==PAGE:7==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
regulations by applying a set of policies that ensure minimum time of unproductive work. This
means that G′
n,m can be reformulated into a parameter-free network, G′′
n,m, as seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Parameter-free sub-graph used to model the driver activities between node n and m.
The pricing problem for the VRTDSP is, similar to the VRPTW, a variant of the shortest path problem
with resource constraints (SPPRC). For the VRTDSP Goel and Irnich suggest using a dominance
heuristic to speed up the process of ﬁnding routes with negative reduced cost. Computational
experiments with a 2-hour cutoff showed that the proposed method was able to solve 53 out 56
instances for the EU regulations with 25 customers and 18 out of 56 with 50 customers.
A problem that relates to the VRTDSP is known as the Driver Scheduling Problem (DSP). The
problem arises in the scheduling of drivers of buses, planes or other vehicle types for transporta-
tion of passengers or goods. As oppose to the VRTDSP the problem does not involves routing
but attempts to combine tasks or work pieces that ﬁts in terms of location, timing, regulations and
type. Desrochers and Soumis describe the complexity of the problem in the following way:
"The transit crew scheduling problem is without a doubt a very complex problem. While the great
variety in problem descriptions makes it difﬁcult to make general statements about the complexity of this
problem, two simpler related problems are known to be NP-hard: the ﬁxed job scheduling problem with
spread-time constraints and the ﬁxed job scheduling with working-time constraints." [6]
As a solution approach Desrochers and Soumis presents a column generation and set cover-
ing procedure where columns represent feasible workdays. The approach was tested on real life
problems of between 40 and 50 drivers. Even though the procedure did not solve the problem
Page 3 of 28
==PAGE:8==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
to proven optimality the proposed solution gave a cost reduction of between 0.8 % and 2.4 % in
comparison of current practice.
The Driver Scheduling Problem has later been studied by Portugal et al. (2006)[7] who proposed
a set covering model on the set of all feasible workdays. The general set covering formulation pro-
duced schedules with a lot of over-cover meaning that a drivers where often assigned to the same
tasks. The workload for planners to reschedule these solutions was much higher than producing
new solutions from scratch. For this reason they reformulate the set covering model to allow a
given tolerance of under-cover and hereby aims at making solutions that are easy to reschedule.
The procedure was tested on instances of a planning horizon of one day with between 131 and 347
tasks which required between 30 and 120 drivers. The total number of task combination ranged
from 2,00 to 42,500 feasible workdays. All instances was solved to optimality within 24 hours but
the largest problem was solved by one of the proposed methods.
2.1
Set Partitioning and Set Cover formulation
Many variants of the VRP problem share the property of a very weak linear relaxation and is
therefore not suited to work well with traditional branch-and-bound methods. Often the problem
is reformulated through a Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition. The resulting model is a set covering/set
partitioning model, called the master problem, that selects the set of routes that has lowest cost
whilst ensuring that all customers are visited exactly or at least once. The master problem has
a much better bound, but the set of possible routes to select from grows exponentially with the
number of customers. To tackle this problem routes are generated through a SPPRC in the so
called sub problem. As branching in the in the master problem affects which routes that can
be generated each branching imposes a constraint in the sub problem which gives raise to the
branch-and-price-and-cut procedure. [8]
If the master problem is a Set Partitioning (SP) as ﬁrst proposed by Balinski and Quandt[9] the
objective is to select the set of routes with minimum cost such that all customers are visited exactly
once. The model formulation can be seen in equation (1)-(4). The binary variable xj, j = {1,...,q},
takes the value 1 if route j is used and zero otherwise. The cost of each route is denoted cj and the
objective is to minimise the product of cj and xj. To ensure that the combination of routes visits all
customers, i ∈V\{0}, a matrix ai,j (that takes the value 1 in element i, j if customer i is visited in
route j) is introduced in equation (2). Finally equation (3) ensures that the total number of routes
used equals K.
Page 4 of 28
==PAGE:9==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Min.
q
∑
j=1
cj · xj
(1)
s.t.
q
∑
j=1
ai,j · xj = 1
∀i ∈V\{0}
(2)
q
∑
j=1
xj = K
(3)
xj ∈{0,1}
∀j = 1,..,q
(4)
When relaxing equation (2)such that customers can be visited more than once the model is
referred to as the Set Covering (SC). If a customer is visited by two or more routes in the opti-
mal solution that customer can be removed from any one of the routes such that equation (2) is
satisﬁed without increasing the cost. The relaxation of equation (2) has the advantage that the
dual variables are restricted to be non-negative and thus considerably reducing the dual solution
space.
3
Problem description
The project has been conducted in collaboration with PostNord which provided a list of current
tasks and helped guide the project. The data consists of rows representing all scheduled driver
activities over the course of one week. Each activity is described by 19 attributes which are elabo-
rated in appendix A.1. It is expected that the activities are repeated each week and it is therefore
also possible for activities to stretch from Sunday to Monday.
A subset of the activities are routes scheduled to serve customers or transport goods between
warehouses and will be referred to as tasks. These tasks are characterized by start and end time
and location, planned capacity and route type. Start and end time are considered to ﬁxed in respect
to internal route dependencies and customer demands. Throughout the service time of a task the
driver will have both driving time and other work. The data set provides no further information
about the task locations and it is therefore assumed that a duty can start at any location but that
the driver must return to the location about which the duty started before the duty is ﬁnished.
Section 5.3.2 discusses possible model extensions that constrain the duties to start in a subset of
locations. The planned capacity attribute indicates how many containment cages are planned for
the task and there by indicate which type of truck is needed. As a driver picks up and delivers all
cargo within a task the capacity through out a duty is not of concern. Tasks with different planned
capacity can however not be combined on the same duty. This can be justiﬁed by the expectation
Page 5 of 28
==PAGE:10==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
of a scarce ﬂeet of larger vehicles, potential road regulations and/or insufﬁcient service equipment
at the task location. No discrepancy between route types is considered. The remaining rows are
activities such as breaks, ramp service and re-positioning which are necessary to carry out all
tasks. All such supportive activities will fall in one of the following categories; rest, break, other
work and positioning and do not create value for the operator.
Based on a set of tasks the goal is to produce a schedule. For this, tasks must be combined
into duties to which drivers will be assigned such that all tasks are executed. Similar literature
tends to either seek a cost minimized schedule or duration minimized schedule. In this problem
any driver assigned to at least one duty will have a ﬁxed number of paid hours over the planning
period. Additionally, driving time is considered a cost which naturally classiﬁes the problem at
hand as a cost minimization problem.
Driving time occurs when a driver is either carrying out a task (1), driving from the end loca-
tion of one task to the start location of the subsequent task (2) or returning to the duty’s start loca-
tion (3). As the ﬁrst (1) is inﬂexible and mandatory driving costs it is considered to be determined
by the time drivers spend on (2) and (3). These will from now on be referred to as positioning time.
Position time can in contrast to other work not absorb delays but may itself cause delays and force
additional breaks and is therefore the least favored supportive activity. Despite this, it is expected
that the cost of a driver weighs heavier than the cost of positioning time. A trade-off between
reduced positioning time at the cost of more drivers is therefore always considered to produce a
higher cost schedule. The problem can therefore be reformulated to: ﬁnd the lowest number of
drivers needed to carry out a list of tasks and produce a feasible schedule that covers all tasks with
minimum positioning time. For a schedule to be feasible it most furthermore complies with the
regulatory framework outlined in section 4.
In a graphical representation the tasks of this problem are similar to the customer nodes of the
VRTDSP described in section 2 with the exception that a task also has an associated driving time
and can serve as a depot. For this reason, the problem can be considered a version of the VRTDSP
with ﬁxed service intervals, nonuniform vehicle ﬂeet, multiple depots and a driving time resource
at each node. The objective of the VRTDSP is to minimize the cost, ci,j, of all arcs traversed. In this
problem the cost is the time required to travel between two locations.
The problem can be visualized as the graph in ﬁgure 3. A duty can be seen as a route that start
and ends in Home. In order to ensure that the driver ends in the location the duty started only
one orange edge can be used during duty. Black lines represent positioning and can be traversed
multiple times. Activities such as break, rest and other work can be scheduled by expanding the
arcs to include activity nodes. All black lines must be replace with a sub network that allows for
breaks and other work and orange lines must be replace with sub networks that allows for rest
periods and thereby tie all duties assigned to a driver together.
Page 6 of 28
==PAGE:11==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Figure 3: Graphical representation of the problem
3.1
Operational Scope
PostNord controls six operating units spread across Denmark. Each operating unit manages its
own drivers, trucks, tasks, hubs and terminals and it is therefore possible to split up the problem
and plan a schedule for each operating unit independently. Table 8 in appendix A.2 gives an
overview over the number of tasks carried out by each operating unit and the number of tasks
operated by externals. Since the regulatory framework for each operating unit is the same this
project focuses on the smallest operating unit, labeled ABT. The operating unit has a daily pattern
from Tuesday-Thursday and a unique pattern for Monday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday as seen
in ﬁgure 4. The starting location of tasks is highly focused around ﬁve locations and more than
half of all tasks start in either ’Aalborg’ or ’Aalborg Øst’. Looking at the distribution of planned
capacity it can be seen that, like the distribution of locations, most tasks is focused around just a
few categories. The distributions can be seen in appendix A.2.1.
The planning horizon is set to be one cyclic week meaning that the end time of a task starting
Sunday inﬂuences when a task can be started on the following Monday. Tasks that start on a Sun-
day can also be combined with tasks that start Monday to form a duty. Finally, the schedule will
be made such that a driver can repeat the same duties in the following weeks without violating
regulations.
Page 7 of 28
==PAGE:12==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Figure 4: Weekly task pattern for operating unit ABT.
4
Regulatory Framework
The regulatory framework for this problem consists of a combination of EU regulations, national
laws, union agreements and company policies. A schedule complying with the below regulations
will be feasible but not necessarily optimal when only EU regulations are considered.
4.1
Deﬁnitions
In order to get a clear deﬁnition of rules and regulation wording is deﬁned in line with those of
the EU regulation EC No 561/2006 from March 2006. It is important to keep in mind that these
regulations only apply when a driver operates a vehicle where the maximum permissible mass of
the vehicle, including any trailer, or semi-trailer, exceeds 3,5 tones. The regulation makes use of the
following deﬁnitions of break, rest, other work, a week and driving time. For a driver’s time to be
classiﬁed as a break he/she must not perform any driving or other work but exclusively spent the
time for recuperation. Rest is an uninterrupted period during which a drive freely can dispose of
his/her time if the time is not considered other work. When a driver carries out any other activities
than driving that are classiﬁed as working time in the Article 3(a) of Directive 2002/15/EC either
by the same or any other employer, within or outside the transport sector the activity is considered
other work. A week is considered the time from Monday 00.00 ‘till Sunday 24.00. Driving time
is the time spent for driving activities recorded either manually, semiautomated or automated by
equipment formulated in regulation EEC No 3821/85. Weekly driving time is thus deﬁned as
the accumulated driving time from Monday till Sunday. When referring to daily driving time it
Page 8 of 28
==PAGE:13==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
is however not the accumulated driving time during a day separated by calendar dates but the
accumulated driving time between two rest periods.
4.2
Regulations
The regulations that forms the constraint of the problem originates from four sources; EU reg-
ulations, National Regulations, Union Agreements and Company Policies. (The four regulation
sources are listed in terms of dominance meaning that national regulations must comply with EU
regulations and so forth.) Each regulation can be classiﬁed based on the operational level it affects.
For this paper regulations are grouped into three classes. The ﬁrst class affects which tasks can be
combined with one another to form a feasible duty. Each duty’s compatibility with every other to
form a weekly schedule is constrained by regulations of class two. Finally, class three is acting on
the combination of weekly schedules to form monthly schedules. Multi manning of vehicles and
rest periods at the vehicle is not considered an option in this project why regulations concerning
these matters is not mentioned.
4.2.1
Task to Task Regulations
To reduce the risk of fatigue related accidents the EU regulations limits the number of hours a
driver can drive before a break is required. If a driver reaches 4.5 hours of driving time between
two rest periods or a rest period and a break the driver must take an uninterrupted break of 45
minutes. This break can be split up in ﬁrst a break of at least 15 minutes followed by a break of at
least 30 minutes. Furthermore, the total daily driving time, i.e. between two rest periods, must not
exceed nine hours. The EU regulation gives options for extending the daily driving time a limited
number of times a week but company policies at PostNord which limits a duty to maximum 10
hours prevents this. PostNord schedules 15 minutes of rigging and stripping of all vehicles larger
than capacity 4 at the start and end of each duty to prepare and check for defects. This means
that the total daily driving time is limited to 10 hours minus 2x15 minutes minus 45 minutes i.e.
8 hours and 45 minutes. At the same time PostNord’s ensure drivers a minimum of 6 hours of
paid work every time a duty is started and that a self-paid break of 30 minutes must be scheduled
within these ﬁrst 6 hours of work which brings the minimum duration of a duty to 6.5 hours. As
mentioned in section 3 service windows are expected to be ﬁxed and it is therefore not possible to
schedule breaks while a driver carries out a task. The only exception is when a task is longer than
6 hours or the driving time is longer than 4.5 hours with sufﬁcient breaks. These are expected to
be included in the task.
Page 9 of 28
==PAGE:14==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
4.2.2
Duty-Duty Regulations
After a duty is completed a driver must begin either a daily rest period or a weekly rest period. A
daily rest period covers two forms of rest; regular daily rest period and reduced daily rest period.
The ﬁrst is deﬁned as an uninterrupted rest period of at least 11 hours while the latter is deﬁned
as an uninterrupted rest period of at least 9 hours but less than 11 hours. Alternatively, a regular
daily rest period can be achieved if an uninterrupted rest period of at least 3 hours is followed by
a reduced daily rest period. However, the EU regulations speciﬁes that within each period of 24
hours after the completion of a rest period a driver must have taken a new daily rest period. In
combination with minimum duty length this prevents drivers at PostNord to have scheduled a
daily rest period that way since two duties of minimum length, a rest period of at least 3 hours
and a rest period of at least 9 hours would mean that a driver earliest can ﬁnish a daily rest period
this way in 25 hours. Additionally, union agreements dictate that a driver must have 4 days off
between 09.00 and 24.00 over a period of two weeks and that two of these days must be a weekend
day. Weekly driving time is limited to no more than 56 hours in any one week and 70 hours in
any two consecutive weeks. Finally, a driver is expected to work no more than 74 hours over two
weeks excluding self-paid breaks.
4.2.3
Monthly Scheduling
In order to produce schedules that covers more than a week, planners need to schedule weekly
rest periods. Like a daily rest period, a weekly rest periods cover a regular weekly rest period and
a reduced weekly rest period. A regular weekly rest period is a rest period of at least 45 hours
while a reduced weekly rest period is a rest period of at least 24 hours and at most 45 hours.
In any two consecutive weeks a driver shall take at least two regular weekly rest periods or one
regular weekly rest period and a reduced weekly rest period. However, if a reduced weekly rest
period is scheduled the difference between the duration of the reduced weekly rest period and 45
hours most be compensated for in one uninterrupted rest before the third week following the two
weeks in question. A rest period taken this way most be attached to another rest period of at least
9 hours. However, for a weekly schedule to be repeatable a driver can only take a regular reduced
rest period. Finally, a weekly rest period must start no later than six 24-hour periods after the end
of the previous weekly rest period and a weekly rest period that falls in two weeks may count in
either one week, but not both.
Page 10 of 28
==PAGE:15==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
5
Model formulation
The proposed produce is to split the problem up in a duty generation phase and a scheduling
phase. In the ﬁrst phase all possible duties will be generated. The fact that tasks have different
capacity requirements and that the task in general are spread out in periods with many tasks at
a time and periods with few tasks means that the scaling of task combinations is expected to be
slow. In the second phase the minimum number of drivers is computed using an expanded set
covering formulation. With the minimum number of drivers, a schedule is produced such that
minimum time is spent on positioning drivers for new tasks.
5.1
Duty Generation
In this section it is described how all feasible duties can be generated by computing all combina-
tions of tasks. The procedure can be summarized in nine steps as listed in table below.
Duty generation procedure.
1.
Clear data for activities other than tasks and improper tasks.
2.
Load between-locations travel times and scale accordingly.
3.
Initialize parameters.
4.
For each task, i, create a subset of tasks that can be followed by task i while respecting
duty capacity, duty length and service windows.
5.
For each subset create every unique combination of tasks using algorithm 1.
6.
Form duties out of each possible task combination by adding the travel back to the start
location and rig- and strip time at the start and end of the duty.
7.
Create cross week duties by combining tasks in duties that starts Sunday with tasks from
duties that starts Monday.
8.
Remove duties where it is not possible to take sufﬁcient breaks using algorithm 2.
9.
Expand duties such that breaks are taken before returning to the starting location
if necessary.
First, all activities other than tasks and tasks that is not well deﬁned is removed. This involves
tasks where either start or end location and time, driving time and planned capacity is missing or
improper. Tasks with a duration longer than 10 hours is not considered improper but are ﬂagged.
The travel time between any two location is taken from Google Maps at departure time 15.00 dur-
ing a weekday and is not considered to be time dependent. To model longer travel times for trucks
all travel times are scaled with the parameter TravelTimeFactor. To limit the number of possible
task combinations the parameter MaxWaitTime is used to determine the maximum waiting time
between any two tasks. Re-positioning between two tasks is not considered as waiting time.
Page 11 of 28
==PAGE:16==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Sets
Ω
Set of all tasks.
Ω(k)
Set of all tasks that can be followed by task k.
Π
Set of all duties.
Π(t)
Set of all duties that starts in time period t.
π
Placeholder set of intermediate combination of tasks.
Ψ
Set of all available drivers.
Table 1: Description of all sets
In order to compute the possible combinations of tasks the set Ωis deﬁned as the set of all tasks
and Ω(k) as the set of tasks that can be followed by task k. For a task to be able to follow another,
the two tasks must share the same planned capacity, the tasks service window can be reach within
driving distance from the end location of the ﬁrst task and the duration between the start of the
ﬁrst task and the end of the later task is not more than 10 hours. Combining multiple task can
now be done by specifying which task the duty starts with and iterate through all tasks that can
follow this task and all tasks that can follow these tasks while still respecting the duration limit
of the duty. With the former deﬁnitions this can be generalized to algorithm 1. Note that setting
v = k inside the third for loop changes the domain of k which is not possible in all programming
languages. However, the same procedure would also work without specifying the number of
tasks in each duty using lists and indexing.
Duty-generation algorithm;
for i ∈Ωdo
π = ∅;
π = π ∪{i};
Π = Π ∪π;
for j ∈Ω(i) do
π = π ∪{j};
Π = Π ∪π;
v = j;
while Ω(i) ∩Ω(v) ̸= ∅do
for k ∈Ω(v) do
π = π ∪{k};
Π = Π ∪π;
v = k
end
end
end
end
Algorithm 1: Generic algorithm for computing every unique combination of tasks while respect-
ing duty capacity, duty length and service windows.
Page 12 of 28
==PAGE:17==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
After forming all tasks combinations, including tasks that starts Sunday with those that starts
Monday, they are turned into duties by returning the duty to the start location and adding rigging
and strip time. In order to ensure feasibility of a duty each combination of consecutive tasks must
be checked for working time, driving time and wait time. Duties are removed if there cannot
be scheduled a break of 30 minutes within the ﬁrst 6.5 hours or the accumulated driving time
surpasses 4.5 hours of driving without the option of scheduling a break of total 45 minutes. The
later break can either be taken as 45 consecutive minutes or as a 15 minutes break followed by a
30 minutes break that is taken before the driving time surpasses 4.5 hours. Breaks that are longer
than 45 minutes cannot count as both an individual break and as the ﬁrst half of a break taken in
two parts. However, a break taken as self-paid break of 30 minutes can serve as part of a driving
hours break.
Duties that only have one task is automatically approved. Duties that are assigned with a task
that includes a break can similarly be approved under the assumption that the break can freely
be scheduled. The reasoning is that if a driver has a task with more than 4.5 hours of driving it
must include a break of 45 minutes and the remaining driving time can never be more than 4.25
hours. If the break can be freely scheduled it will always be scheduled such that no other break
is needed. This holds even though a break also must be held within the ﬁrst 6.5 hours. If the
task with a planned break is done as the last activity of the duty the task will at latest start 4.5
hours after the start of the duty since the task must be at least 5.25 hours long, strip time most be
completed, and a duty can never be longer than 10 hours.
Checking that all duties can schedule a 30 minutes break within the ﬁrst 6.5 hours can be done
by simply checking if a driver has at least 30 minutes of wait time. If the duration of the duty
exceeds 6 hours only when including the driving back time, the duty can be expanded such that a
break is taken before the driver returns to the starting location.
Checking that a duty at no times violates the driving hour regulations while still ensuring
that the duty is kept as short as possible is on the other hand far more complex. All subset of
consecutive tasks in a duty must be checked if the driving hours exceeds 4.5 and if so, there
is the option of taking a break between any two tasks in the subset. With this condition it is
allowed for a driver to stop for a break while driving between two locations. In reality a driver
cannot stop anywhere, and the concept of break window is therefore introduced. If a driver has
two consecutive tasks with each three hours of driving and a two-hour drive between the two
locations a break must be started between 30 minutes and 1.5 hours after departing from the ﬁrst
location. Given that the maximum duration of a duty is 10 hours the break window for any break
taken while positioning is at least 15 minutes long.
To implement a procedure that checks if the condition mentioned earlier is satisﬁed the oper-
ator Ω′(·) is used to compute the set of all consecutive tasks of a duty. If duty Πi is assigned with
Page 13 of 28
==PAGE:18==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
task 1:3 Ω′(Πi) produces the set {{1,2},{2,3},{1,2,3}}. For each subset of Ω′(Πi) the condition
must hold if the duty is feasible. The size of Ω′(·) grows with the function ∑N
n=2(n −1) where N
denotes the number of tasks assigned to the duty. By the given formula it can be seen that set is
considerably small for even large values of N.
A break can be scheduled between any two tasks of the subset and the ﬁrst part of the break
can be scheduled between any two tasks outside of the subset. This means that in order to check if
a break can be taken within the subset it must be checked the ﬁrst part can be taken outside and if
the second part or a full break can be taken between any two tasks within the subset. In algorithm
2 the function NeedBreak checks if the driving time within the subset of tasks exceeds 4.5 hours
and the function CanBreak checks all options for taking a break within the subset of tasks.
Duty-removal algorithm;
for ∀i ∈Π do
if NumTasksi > 1 & HasBreaki == False then
for ∀j ∈Ω′(Πi) do
if NeedBreak(j) == True & CanBreak(j) == False then
DropDuty(i)
end
end
end
end
Algorithm 2: Compacted formulation of the algorithm used to remove duties with insufﬁcient
break options.
In the function NeedBreak the positioning back to the duties start location is not counted in the
amount of driving time. For duties where the driving time back to the start location brings the
total driving time over 4.5 hours a driver must take a break before returning. This expand the
duty with either 30 minutes or 45 minutes depending whether a break of at least 15 minutes can
be scheduled earlier. If any of the duty expansions means that the duty duration increases to more
than 10 hours the duty is removed. The only exception is if a duty only contains one task, in other
cases this task would not be feasible to carry out.
5.2
Model description
Once all feasible duties have been computed the optimal assignment of duties can be found using
a reformulated set covering model. As described in section 3 the ﬁrst objective is to minimize
the number of drivers. Using the variables described in table 4 this can be done by minimizing
Page 14 of 28
==PAGE:19==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
the sum of z over the set of drivers, Ψ. Ensuring that z models the actual number of drivers the
variable x and z must be tied together. This can be done while at the same time ensuring that a
driver has at least 7 −λ days off from 09.00-24.00 per week with equation (9). Ensuring that all
tasks are being carried out by at least one driver is done with equation (10). Planning a weekly
repeatable schedule means that a driver may not work more than 37 hours a week plus 30 minutes
for each duty (see equation (11)). By not setting a lower limit for the number of hours worked it is
assumed that the scheduled duties can be expand such that the driver works exactly 74 hours in
two weeks. If this is not achievable there is the option that two drivers share a two-week pattern,
working one set of duties the ﬁrst week and another set the second week. Equation (12) ensures
that a driver works at maximum one weekend duty and equation (13) serves as a lower bound for
the number of drivers. The lower bounds will be calculated in two ways; either by the rounding
of the LP relaxation or by a relaxed model. The model described by equation (8) to (13) does bot
ensure rest periods but will produce good bounds if the tasks are distributed with at least 11 hours
between peak hours and a period with few tasks of at least 45 hours. The model (8) to (13) will be
referred to as RelaxedMIP.
To model rest periods the notion of time periods is introduced. The entire planning period is
divided into shorter periods at which it is guaranteed that a driver can at maximum work one
duty. With the problem at hand it is guaranteed that a driver can at maximum start a duty every
17.5 hour but for simplicity the planning period is divided into time periods of 12 hours starting
Monday at 00.00. To ensure a daily rest period after each duty a constraint can be formulated in the
following way; There must be at least 11 hours between the end time of a duty in any time period
and the starting time of any duty started within the next two time periods. The mathematical
formulation for duties within the week can be seen in equation 5 and equation 6 ensures that the
schedule can be repeated. Ensuring at most one duty per time period is ensured by equation 14.
∑
i∈Π(t1)
(xi,j · ei) + rday ≤M · (1 −∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j) + ∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j · si
∀j ∈Ψ, ∀t1 ∈[1,T −1], ∀t2 ∈[t1 + 1,t1 + 2|t2 ≤T]
(5)
∑
i∈Π(t1)
(xi,j · ei) + rday ≤M · (1 −∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j) + ∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j · (si + 168)
∀j ∈Ψ, ∀t1 ∈[T −1,T], ∀t2 ∈[t1 −13,t1 −12|t2 ≥1]
(6)
The minimum duration of a weekly rest period is 45 hours and the longest duration of a duty is
10 hours. Weekly rest period must therefore be schedule in consideration of the next ﬁve time
periods. Since only one weekly rest period must be scheduled a binary variable, wrj,t, is used to
Page 15 of 28
==PAGE:20==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
determine if driver j starts a weekly rest period after a duty starting in time period t. Equation (5)
and (6) can now be expanded too (16) and (17) while equation (15) ensures that at least one rest
period can be taken as a weekly rest period.
Once the optimal number of drivers has been found the model MinDrivers can be reformu-
lated to minimize the positioning time. First step is to reduce the set of drivers such that the model
cannot choose more drivers than the optimal number. Second the objective is changed such that
the positioning is minimize similar to the equation below.
Min.
∑
j∈Ψ′ ∑
i∈Π
xi,j · pti
(7)
The model at which the position time is minimized will be referred to as MinPosition. To reduce
the computation time of this model, the optimal number of drivers can help boost the lower bound
by setting ˆm accordingly.
Page 16 of 28
==PAGE:21==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Scalars
λ = 5
Maximum number of times duties cover the time from 09.00-24.00.
∆= 37
Maximum number of working hours per driver.
δ = 0.5
Duration of self-paid break.
rday = 11
Minimum duration of a daily rest period in hours.
T = 14
Total number of time periods.
rweek = 34
Minimum time required to expand a daily rest to a weekly rest.
DC = 37
Cost of assigning a driver to at least one duty.
M = 223
Longest duration from Monday 00.00 until a weekly rest period is ﬁnished.
Table 2: Description and assigned value of all one dimensional parameters. The assigned values
corresponds to a weekly schedule.
Parameters
αi
Number days from 09.00-24.00 duty i covers.
βi,k
One if task k belongs to duty i zero otherwise.
li
Total duration of duty i.
wci
One if duty i covers any weekend day from 09.00-24.00 zero otherwise.
ˆm
Lower bound for number of drivers.
ei
End time of duty i.
si
Starting time of duty i.
pti
Time spent on positioning in duty i.
ck
Cost of outsourcing task k to an external operator.
Table 3: Description of all parameters.
Variables
xi,j
One if driver j carries out duty i.
zj
One if driver j has assigned at least one duty.
wrj,t
One if driver j takes a weekly rest after a duty that starts in time period t.
wk
One if task k is outsourced to an external operator.
Table 4: Description of variables. All variables are binary.
Page 17 of 28
==PAGE:22==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Model: MinDrivers
Min.
∑
j∈Ψ
zj
(8)
s.t.
∑
i∈Π
xi,j · αi ≤λ · zj
∀j ∈Ψ
(9)
∑
j∈Ψ ∑
i∈Π
xi,j · βi,k ≥1
∀k ∈Ω
(10)
∑
i∈Π
xi,j · li ≤∆+ δ · ∑
i∈Π
xi,j
∀j ∈Ψ
(11)
∑
i∈Π
xi,j · wci ≤1
∀j ∈Ψ
(12)
∑
j∈Ψ
zj ≥ˆm
(13)
∑
i∈Π(t)
xi,j ≤1
∀j ∈Ψ, ∀t ∈[1,T]
(14)
T
∑
t=1
wrj,t ≥1
∀j ∈Ψ
(15)
∑
i∈Π(t1)
(xi,j · ei) + rday + rweek ∗wrj,t1 ≤M · (1 −∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j) + ∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j · si
∀j ∈Ψ, ∀t1 ∈[1,T −1], ∀t2 ∈[t1 + 1,t1 + 5|t2 ≤T]
(16)
∑
i∈Π(t1)
xi,j · ei + rday + rweek ∗wrj,t1 ≤M · (1 −∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j) + ∑
i∈Π(t2)
xi,j · (si + 168)
∀j ∈Ψ, ∀t1 ∈[T −4,T], ∀t2 ∈[t1 −13,t1 −9|t2 ≥1]
(17)
x,z,wr ∈{0,1}
(18)
5.3
Model Extensions
5.3.1
Outsourcing strategy
Instead of assuming that every task must be added to a duty that is being carried out by a in
house driver the option of outsourcing can be considered. In this case the objective is to minimize
the cost associated with having an external operator carry out a task and the cost of assigning
an internal driver. In general, the cost of assigning drivers can be calculated as the product of the
Page 18 of 28
==PAGE:23==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
drivers cost, dcj, and the binary variable zj. Note that the cost of drivers that cannot be unassigned
can be set to zero and that the assumption that enough drivers and trucks are available can now
be relax. In order to model tasks that are being outsourced a new variable, wk, is added. The
variable is a binary variable deﬁned over the set of tasks and that takes the value one if a task is
being outsourced and zero otherwise. In practice the variable will however not need to be binary
since all costs are positive the model will try to keep wk as small as possible while equation 19
forces the variable above one if a task is outsourced. If the cost of assigning a driver is the same
for all drivers and the cost of outsourcing task k equals ck the objective function of this model can
be formulated as in equation 19.
Min.
DC
n
∑
j=1
zj +
v
∑
k=1
ck · wk
(19)
With the option of outsourcing tasks equation 10 need to be relaxed such that all tasks either need
to be assigned to a driver or an external operator. This is done by reformulation equation 10 in the
following way. The resulting model is referred to as Outsource_MinCost.
wk +
m
∑
j=1
n
∑
i=1
xi,j · βi,k ≥1
∀k ∈K
(20)
In order to perform computational experiments with this model the cost of outsourcing tasks and
assigning drivers must be estimated. After consultation with PostNord it was decided that the
driving time of a task should be the most important factor when determining the outsourcing
cost. For this reason, the outsourcing cost is estimated to be ck = α · Workk + β · drivek for some
α < β where workk represents the work time of task k and drivek the driving time. In order to have
a relation between outsourcing and drivers the driver cost, DC, is estimated to be equal to the
number of paid hours worked which is ﬁxed to 37. Once the number of drivers and the in-house
tasks has been determined model MinPosition can be used to determine a schedule with minimum
position time.
5.3.2
Differentiation between hubs and terminals
In the current model it is assumed that a driver can start a duty and collect a suitable truck in
any location where a task starts. In practice tasks can however also start at hubs where no trucks
are available. This would make any duty that starts with such a task infeasible. Differentiating
between terminals, at which trucks can be assumed to be stored, and hubs where no trucks are
available would only require a modiﬁcation of step 6. in the Duty generation procedure described in
section 5.1. Intuitively it seems favorable to assign hub starting duties to the terminal at which the
Page 19 of 28
==PAGE:24==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
total driving time from the starting location of the ﬁrst task and the end location of the last task
is minimum. However, since the choice of terminal effects both the starting time and end time of
the duty it will also affect which other duties it can be combined with in the weekly schedule. In
order to ensure optimality, it is therefore necessary to compute a duty for every terminal at which
the duty duration remains within the limit when including extra driving time and new potential
breaks.
If a driver can take a duty from any location controlled by the operating unit may lead to
schedules about which drivers spend a lot of time driving to and from work. One way of relieving
that assumption is to use a driver resource at each terminal or group of terminals. This can be done
by assigning each driver to a subset representing the group of terminals from which the driver can
work. Deﬁning the set of terminal groups as Φ, let Φi be the group of terminals from which duty
i originates and Φj be the group of terminals that driver j is assigned to. A model with a certain
terminal group assigned to each driver can be formulated by adding constraint 21 deﬁned below.
∑
i∈Π|Φi̸=Φj
xi,j = 0
∀j ∈Ψ
(21)
If the number of available drivers is unlimited each group of terminals must have enough driver
such that it will not be a limiting factor. The same holds when optimizing the position time. Once
the optimal number of drivers is found using the model MinDrivers it is not guaranteed that the
number of drivers in each group of terminals will remain the same and the number of drivers
should therefor remain the same. In order to ensure that the optimized position time comes with
as few drivers as possible constraint 22 must be added to model MinPosition.
∑
j∈Ψ
zj ≤¯m
(22)
6
Results
The proposed procedure is tested on data provided by PostNord and contains a list of activities
and tasks. Not all tasks have been assigned to a duty and some duties have a duration of less than
an hour which indicates that they are incomplete. On the other hand, some duties consist of tasks
at which there is exactly 45 minutes between which means that planners may have manually tai-
lored the duty. While tasks are expected to have ﬁxed service windows in the proposed procedure
planners with knowledge of task dependencies may be able to reschedule tasks when presented
with a ﬁnished schedule. Even with a complete assignment of tasks a comparison with current
Page 20 of 28
==PAGE:25==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
practice is difﬁcult since the data does not contain any information on how the duties has been
scheduled to drivers.
The data contains a total of 8,085 tasks about which 903 was removed for either having incom-
plete data or for being a position task. Of the remaining 7,182 tasks 476 are being carried out by
operating unit ABT and 2,434 by operating unit BRT. As seen in table 5 the number of feasible
duties grows substantially when comparing operating unit ABT and BRT. This can be seen as a
consequence of more and shorter tasks. The average task length for ABT is 3.2 hours while it
for BRT is 2.2 hours. Shorter tasks mean that more tasks can be combined before the maximum
duty duration is reached. Even though more task does not directly lead to computationally harder
problems the fact that more duties will share a subset of tasks does. When branching on a binary
problem the split is made on either setting the variable to one or zero. If the similarity between
duties are high there is a high chance that when a variable is set to zero, the tasks can be carried
out by some fractional combination of other tasks. If the similarity on the other hand is low setting
a variable to zero is likely to force another variable to one. Relating this property to the current
version of VRTDSP it can be said that if a task is being carried out by a few duties there will be
few fractional solutions that can cover this task. If this is the case for all tasks in the problem, it is
expected to be computationally easy.
Tag
Number of tasks
Max Wait Time
Travel Time Factor
Feasible Duties
ABT
476
Inf
1.0
1,769
ABT−
440
Inf
1.0
1,727
ABTW2
476
2.0
1.0
1,061
ABTW4
476
4.0
1.0
1,464
ABTT1.5
476
Inf
1.5
1,391
ABTW4T1.5
476
4.0
1.5
1,194
BRT
2,434
Inf
1.0
72,518
BRTW2T1.5
2,434
2
1.5
17,994
BRT−
1,320
Inf
1.0
19,583
BRT−W2T1.5
1,320
2
1.5
8,052
BRT−W4T1.5
1,320
4
1.5
12,576
Table 5: Number of feasible duties for the operating units ABT and BRT based on different Duty
Generation Procedure parameters. A raised - indicates that external tasks are excluded. The running
time of the procedure is a few minutes for the ABT tasks and in all cases less than two hours for
the BRT tasks.
When comparing the number of duties with and without external tasks for ABT the outsourced
tasks ﬁts poorly with the in-house tasks. When including the 36 tasks that are outsourced it is
only possible to form 42 new duties of which 36 is duties with the new tasks as the only task. The
Page 21 of 28
==PAGE:26==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
number of duties that is being removed for having insufﬁcient breaks varies depending on the
maximum allowed waiting time and travel time factor. In the instance ABT 287 out of 2047 was
removed while it for the BRT was 3,568 out of 76,086.
6.1
Minimization of drivers
The mathematical models have been implemented in Julia and solved with the Gurobi 9.0 solver.
The CPU on which the model has run is an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4710HQ @ 2.50GHz with up to
8 threads. The number of available drivers is estimated as double the total duration of all tasks
divided by number of hours a driver can work.
Computational experiments with the model MinDrivers and the ABT duty sets resulted in
non-optimal solutions after 2 hours. With a premature version of the ABT duty set, where not all
regulations where ensured, the model reached optimality after more than 7 hours. The run time
can be reduced by forcing Gurobi to spend more time on heuristics and by providing the model
with good lower bounds. For the ABT duty sets the rounded LP relaxation resulted in the optimal
solution in 4 out of 6 instances while the RelaxedMIP described in section 5.2 gave optimal result
in all 6 instances. Both methods result in good or optimal results much faster than the MinDrivers
model. With the estimated number of drivers, the model MinPosition either renders infeasible
if the estimated number of drivers is too low or produces a schedule with the given number of
drivers.
Drivers
Position Time
Instance
LP
Relaxed MIP
z*
LP
UB
Optimal
ABT
60.9 (1.3s)
62 (29.7s)
62
125.4
126.5 (536s)
Yes
ABT−
53.9 (1.4s)
55 (31.s)
55
109.4
110.5 (2779s)
Yes
ABTW2
66.0 (0.5s)
66 (2.8s)
66
155.9
155.9 (25s)
Yes
ABTW4
62.9 (1.2s)
63 (7.5s)
63
151.3
151.3 (41s)
Yes
ABTT1.5
62.9 (1.1s)
63 (40.8s)
63
200.7
200.7 (2879s)
Yes
ABTW4T1.5
64.9 (1.3s)
65 (5.3s)
65
225.4
225.6 (67s)
Yes
BRT−W2T1.5
156.9 (77.7s)
157 (211.5s)
157
145.9
146.5 (2583s)
Yes
BRT−W4T1.5
147.4 (147.4s)
148 (308s)
-
125.4
-
No
BRTW2T1.5
273.8 (776.7s)
275 (4,867s)
-
-
-
No
Table 6: Minimum drivers and position time for different parameters of the Duty Generation Proce-
dure. A dash (-) Indicates that no feasible solution was found within the time limit of 2 hours.
By comparing the different ABT instances it can be seen that duties with a waiting time between
two tasks of more than two hours help reduce the number of drivers. Even though more drivers
are used for the same tasks the positioning time also grows. However, by not generating duties
with high waiting time between tasks the problem becomes much more computationally easy.
Page 22 of 28
==PAGE:27==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
The results of the BRT instances show that the complexity and size of the problem is too large
to solve to optimality within two hours. Excluding the outsourced tasks means that the instance
BRT−W2T1.5 can be solved within reasonable time while the instance BRT−W4T1.5 does not ﬁnd
a feasible integer solution and thereby does not prove that the problem can be solved with 148
drivers.
In general the models produces good lower bounds but with too many variables for even the
LP relaxation to be efﬁciently solved.
6.2
Schedule view
The ﬁnal result of the optimization procedure is a schedule of which duties are assigned to which
drivers. For each driver a schedule like the one seen in ﬁgure 5 is printed. Here it is showed how
many unassigned hours the driver has, the time he spends at tasks and the degree of productivity.
The latter is deﬁned as the share of time the driver spends carrying out tasks divided by the
number of paid working hours. The average for all drivers can be calculated as the sum work load
for all tasks divided by the total amount of paid hours for all drivers. In general, the productivity
decreases as the parameter Max Wait decreases.
Page 23 of 28
==PAGE:28==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Figure 5: Weekly schedule of driver 62 for the ABT instance. The abbreviation cap is short for
planned capacity.
6.3
Outsourcing strategy
Computational results for the Outsource_MinCost model described in section 5.3.1 and the ABTW4T1.5
instance shows that the problem complexity grows with outsourcing options. Within a 5-hour
time limit the model reached a 1.03 % gap and a best objective of 2,135.4. Out of 476 tasks 126
was outsourced and the remaining task was carried out by 44 drivers. There showed to be no
clear relation between the set of tasks currently being outsourced and the set of tasks proposed
outsourced. Only 9, or 25 %, of the currently outsourced tasks was proposed outsourced. The
equivalent share of tasks that is currently in house but proposed outsourced was 26.6 %.
Page 24 of 28
==PAGE:29==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
7
Discussion
The schedule presented in ﬁgure 5 shows that if a driver is assigned a night duty the rest constraint
prevents the driver to work during the next day and is therefore likely to be assigned a night shift
the following day. In practice it can be relevant to assign such a duty to a different driver each
week.
In this project the role of the planner has been nearly neglected. By taking his role into account
it would be possible to optimize how a monthly schedule would look, and hereby insure that the
weeks with multiple night duties would be distributed between multiple drivers. Additionally
the planner can play an important role in the duty generation procedure. The duties that are
scheduled Wednesday and Thursday in ﬁgure 5 are identical to two duties already planned by
PostNord. If some tasks can be combined by a planner that potentially can exploit ﬂexible service
windows some tasks will only be covered by one duty and the MinPosition model would have less
branching options.
In general applying new policies or regulations can affect the procedure in one of three phases;
duty generation, weekly scheduling or monthly planning. Changes to the duty generation proce-
dure does not impact the modeling and can be expected to be implemented much easier. In the
current procedure it is not possible to schedule the ﬁrst part of a break at the beginning of the
duty. Changing the procedure such that this is allowed would only require to change the resource
formulation of the CanBreak function. Allowing for ﬂexible service windows but ﬁxed duty starts
can similarly be implemented such that only the duty generation procedure is changed to a short-
est path problem with resource constraints. However the current weekly scheduling procedure is
less ﬂexible and would not be ﬁt with ﬂexible duty starts.
7.1
Branch and price methods
Ensuring that a schedule fulﬁlls the rest regulations have showed to be computationally hard.
The problem becomes easier if tight bounds around the number of drivers are available and the
objective seeks to minimize some cost that can be linked directly and independently to each duty.
The problems does however still succumbs to poor scaling. Each feasible duty imposes a new
variable for each driver in the problem. Limiting the number of duties can therefore be expected
to reduce the size of the problem substantially, but at the cost of potential sub-optimal solutions.
In branch and price methods the model is only presented with a subset of solutions and the dual
variables of the constraints are used to expand the set of variables in the so called sub problem.
For the problem examined in this project the entire set of feasible duties is relatively small and
can easily be pre-computed. This means that the pricing problem is a calculation of the reduced
Page 25 of 28
==PAGE:30==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
cost amongst the duties outside of the problem rather than a optimization problem it self. Branch
and price methods can however not be directly implemented for two reasons. First, the method
requires a feasible starting solution such that the dual variables can be calculated. Second, the
number of drivers used to initialize the problem must be the exact minimum of drivers required
to carry out all tasks. As a starting point the number of drivers can advantageously be set to
the estimate of the RelaxedMIP model. The solution is not guaranteed to be feasible with rest
constraints and duties that violates them must be removed. The tasks carried out by the now
removed duties can be covered by introducing new variables similar to the one introduced in the
OutsourceMinCost. By setting the cost of ’outsourcing’ tasks high enough it can be ensured that
the schedule will cover all tasks by duties if possible. If some tasks are still outsourced after the
optimization ends the problem is not feasible with the given number of drivers and the problem
most be rerun until all tasks are carried out by drivers.
7.2
Other applications
The proposed approach can be generalized to work for any problem at which a set of activities
must be planned under some restrictions. The current procedure is suited for problems at which
the start and end time of the activities are ﬁxed, some activities cannot be followed by one another
and other activities can be followed only if some resource is used. As an example of such a prob-
lem is the planning of workers or machinery at a factory. Time constraints can be seen as a result
of chemical or mechanical processes that needs to be treated at speciﬁc times, while workers and
machinery will need time to be adjusted between two types of problems.
8
Conclusion
Vehicle routing and driver scheduling can be seen as a special kind of VRPTW where hours of
service regulations has been imposed. In the majority of the academic work the problem is solved
through heuristics and it was not until 2014 that an exact method was presented. The problem
is often studied under different types of regulations and conditions and the proposed methods is
therefore often compared to classic solution methods to the VRPTW. The problem is comparable
to the Driver Scheduling Problem which has been solved by a column generation approach in 1989.
This project studies a version the VRTDSP in which there is ﬁxed service intervals, nonuni-
form vehicle ﬂeet, multiple depots and a driving time resource at each node has been studied in
this project. The objective has been to ﬁrst minimize the number of drivers and then produce a
schedule with minimum driving time. The nodes correspond to tasks operated by the Danish
national logistic and fright company PostNord Danmark. The tasks characteristics and regulatory
Page 26 of 28
==PAGE:31==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
framework at PostNord means that the number of feasible duties is of a reasonable size and can be
computed exhaustively. Through testing of different approaches to the minimization of drivers it
was found that relaxing the rest constraint results in a number of drivers that is feasible when the
rest constraints is reintroduced. Once the estimated number of drivers is found the set of drivers
is limited and the objective is changed to minimize all driving not related to tasks. With a reduced
number of drivers and an objective function directly related to the duties the problem solves much
faster. This means that even though the estimated number of drivers is too low the model will ren-
der infeasible and more drivers can be added until feasible. The proposed method successfully
solves the problem for between 55 and 66 to optimality and with all possible duties. When con-
sidering instances with more than 150 drivers the problem only becomes solve-able within two
hours if the set of duties is limited.
The results of the modeling process can easily be turned into a readable schedule with related
statistics. When the optimization is based on all duties each driver spends on average 67.2 % of the
time carrying tasks while the remaining one third is spent on breaks, other work and positioning
between tasks. This value drops to 66.1 % and 63.1 % when the maximum allowed waiting time
between two tasks is limited to 4 and 2 hours respectively.
Page 27 of 28
==PAGE:32==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
Bibliography
[1] PostNord. https://www.postnord.dk/en/about-us/company-presentation. Accessed: 21-
01-2020.
[2] Asvin Goel and Stefan Irnich. An Exact Method for Vehicle Routing and Truck Driver Scheduling
Problems. Transportation Science, May 2014.
[3] Mayssa Koubâa; Souhail Dhouib; Daila Dhouib and Abderrahman El Mhamedi. Truck Driver
Scheduling Problem: Literature Review. IFAC (International Federation of Automatic Control),
2016.
[4] Asvin Goel. Truck Driver Scheduling in the European Union. Transportation Science, August
2010.
[5] A. L. Kok; E. W. Hans; J. M. J. Schutten; W. H. M. Zijm. A dynamic programming heuristic for
vehicle routing with time-dependent travel times and required breaks. Flexible Services and Manu-
facturing Journal, June 2010, V22-pp83-108.
[6] Martin Desrochers and François Soumis. A Column Generation Approach to the Urban Transit
Crew Scheduling Problem. Transportation Science, February 1989.
[7] Rita Portugal, Helena Lourenço, and José Paixão. Driver scheduling problem modelling. Public
Transport, 1:103–120, 11 2009.
[8] Dominique Feillet. A tutorial on column generation and branch-and-price for vehicle routing prob-
lems. Springer-Verlag, June 2010.
[9] M. Balinski and R. Quandt. On an integer program for a delivery problem. Operations Research,
12:300–304, 1964.
28
==PAGE:33==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
A
Appendix
A.1
Attributes of all activities
Column name
Description
DutyId
Unique identiﬁer for duties. Activities assigned to the same duty share DutyId.
DutyStart-/Endtime
Hours and minutes for start and end time of the duty at which the activity is assigned.
DutyTotalHours
Total duration of the duty measured in hours.
OperatingUnit
Three letter representation of one of the six operatingunits operating in Denmark.
WeekdayDuty
Day on which the duty starts.
TaskStart-/endtime
Hours and minutes for start and end time of the activity.
TaskTotalHour
Total duration of the activity measured in hours.
RouteType
If the activity is a route this column indicates the type.
TaskType
Indication of which activity is being carried out.
RouteId
If the activity is a route the identiﬁer is displayed in this column. Routes that are repeated
with the same costumers another day share identiﬁer.
WeekDayTaskRoute
Day on which the activity starts.
PlannedCapacity
If the activity is a route the required truck size is indicated. Routes with different
PlannedCapacity can not be combined at the same duty.
isExternal
Binary variable where 1 indicates that the activity is being outsourced.
DrivingTime
Total driving time of the activity. If the activity is not a route DrivingTime is an empty cell.
Start-/EndCity
City in which the acitivity start and ends.
PositionTask
Binary variable where 1 indicates that the activity is a route that is used to drive the
truck in position from the end of one route to the start of another.
Table 7: Description of attributes in the duty and activity list provided by PostNord.
A.2
Task Distribution
Overview of the number of tasks, both internal and external, for each of PostNords operating
units.
Operating unit
Total number of tasks
External tasks
ABT
476
36
HRT
687
5
ART
805
21
KJT
1100
533
FAT
1680
200
BRT
2434
1114
Table 8: Internal and external tasks per operating unit
29
==PAGE:34==
DTU Management Engineering
Duty Planning
A.2.1
Operating Unit ABT
Operating Unit ABT is active in the Central and Northern Jutland and handles 476 tasks from 21
locations. The distribution of tasks based on location, truck type and day can be seen in the plots
below.
(a) Number of tasks per weekday
(b) Number of tasks per truck type
Figure A.1: Distribution of tasks based on weekday and truck type for the operating unit ABT.
Figure A.2: Distribution of starting location amongst tasks at ABT.
30
