==PAGE:1==
Study of Thermonuclear
X-ray Bursts on the 
Neutron Star in
4U 1820-30 and the 
Presence of Heavy 
Element Ashes
Nanna Maria Kerlauge
[s173088]
Supervisor: Jérôme Chenevez
DTU Space
January 19 2020
==PAGE:2==
Til min søde far,
for altid at være en enorm støtte, selv da jeg droppede
ud af fysikstudiet for at tage p˚a landbrugsskole. Tak for
at inspirere mig til at gøre min interesse til en levevej.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This work concerns the study of nine thermonuclear X-ray bursts observed by
NICER from the source 4U 1820-30 in June 2019. The study is carried out
in multiple parts. Firstly, the burst recurrence time relative to the persistent
emission due to the accretion process is investigated. From this, the energy
release from the accretion process is compared to the energy released in the
bursts. The ratio of these suggest a pure helium donor. Further, a time-resolved
spectral analysis of the bursts is carried out. This analysis shows that all the
bursts exhibit photospheric radius expansion (PRE). The neutron star radius is
deduced from the blackbody normalization at the touchdown of the photosphere,
assuming a source distance of 8.4 kpc. This gives a neutron star radius of 9.02
km by averaging over the bursts. Further investigations of these time-resolved
spectra reveal the presence of two discrete spectral features.
These features
agree with the previous identiﬁcation by Strohmayer et al. (2019), though the
emission line at 1 keV appears as an absorption edge. The absorption line at
1.6 keV is followed during the PRE phase of the burst, where it appears to be
moving with the photosphere. From this, the gravitational redshift of the line
is deduced and thereby the compactness of the neutron star. This compactness
predicts a neutron star radius of 9.69 -1.15/+1.62 km, by adopting the neutron
star mass of 1.58 ± 0.06 M⊙found by G¨uver et al. (2010).
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Neutron Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Low Mass X-ray Binaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
4U 1820-30 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thermonuclear X-ray Bursts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Recurrence Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.2
Photospheric Radius Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Spectral States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
The Neutron Star Interior Composition Explorer [NICER] . . . .
10
2
June 2019 NICER Observations of 4U 1820-30
11
3
Methods
14
3.1
NICERDAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
XSPEC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Time-Resolved Spectral Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Discrete Spectral Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Recurrency Study
19
4.1
Modelling Recurrence Time from 2017 Data . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Applying the Model to 2019 Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Relation Between Persistent Flux, Burst Fluence and Reccurence
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Spectral Analysis in XSPEC
26
5.1
Preliminary Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Blackbody Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.1
Lumonosity, Radius and Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Discrete Spectral Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.1
Time Evolution of the Absorption Line
. . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Fitting Neutron Star Compactness
46
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Conclusion
51
References
53
List of Figures
56
List of Tables
58
==PAGE:6==
A Fitted Bursts
59
B Fitted Absorption Line
68
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Studying the high energy Universe gives us insight into the most extreme
physics of the Universe. Compact objects, such as neutron stars and black
holes, act as laboratories for physics which can not be reproduced on Earth.
When matter falls onto a compact object, via accretion from a companion
star, the loss of gravitational potential results in an emission of X-rays. These
X-rays can be observed by instruments on satellites orbiting the Earth, and
from this we can probe the environment near the compact object. Neutron
stars in X-ray binaries provide a unique opportunity for insight into the
physics of dense matter and strong gravity.
Neutron stars are the densest known objects in the Universe. A mass about
1.4 times the mass of the Sun is compressed to an object with a radius of
about 10 km. The atoms of the progenitor star have been compressed into a
ﬂuid consisting of degenerate neutrons and a few percent free electrons and
protons. At the core of the neutron star, where the density approaches
1015g/cm3, the behaviour of nuclear material is unknown.[21] Which
elementary particles exist under these conditions, and which properties they
exhibit, is not known well enough to constrain the equation of state. The
equation of state describes the relation between pressure and density in the
neutron star. By measuring the compactness of the neutron star, deﬁned as
the mass-to-radius ratio, the equation of state can be constrained.[24]
The high compactness of neutron stars provides an opportunity of studying
general relativity under extreme conditions. Even though neutron stars are not
very heavy (MNS ∼M⊙), they are very dense, and therefore we can study the
strong gravitational ﬁeld near the neutron star. General relativity has been
conﬁrmed with great precision in ﬁelds where GM/R ≪c2, but has not yet
been tested by direct observation in the strong ﬁelds near compact objects.[24]
A consequence of this strong gravitational ﬁeld is a signiﬁcant gravitational
redshift of the photons emitted from the surface of the neutron star.
Measuring this redshift can reveal the compactness of the neutron star.[24]
Further, neutron stars exhibit extreme magnetic ﬁelds of up to 1015 Gauss for
so-called magnetars, named for obvious reasons. This strong magnetic ﬁeld
results from the compression and concentration of the magnetic ﬁeld in the
progenitor star, due to the gravitational collapse in connection with the super
nova explosion in which the neutron star formed. Even though neutron stars
consist primarily of neutrons, the small amount of electrons and protons which
they contain are suﬃcient to sustain this magnetic ﬁeld. [21]
In this report, nine thermonuclear X-ray bursts observed by NICER from the
ultra-compact binary 4U 1820-30 in June 2019 will be analyzed using the
spectral ﬁtting tool xspec. A time-resolved spectral analysis will be carried
out for each of the bursts and some of the spectra will be examined for the
presence of discrete spectral features. Further, a recurrency study will be
carried out for a subset of these data.
Firstly, the necessary concepts will be introduced here and in section 3.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Neutron Stars
When a star runs out of fuel to sustain nuclear fusion, it can no longer
produce enough energy to withstand the gravitational pressure of its own
mass. The star then begins to collapse, starting at the core. The matter in the
star gets denser and denser as it collapses.[4]
There is however a limit to how dense the core of the star can get. A large
part of the space in and between atoms is occupied by electrons. The extent of
the electrons can be described by their wave function. This wave function is
conﬁned to a smaller and smaller region, as the star collapses. Pauli’s
exclusion principle however sets a limit to this conﬁnement, by preventing two
electrons from occupying the same quantum state in the same location. This
’force’, known as electron degeneracy pressure, is strong enough to stabilize a
collapsing star. The remnant is a cold and very small star, in the form of a
white dwarf.[4]
The remaining matter around the collapsed core will be pushed outwards.
This push generates a shock wave, which ejects the exterior matter. For heavy
stars (M > 8 M⊙) this process generates a very large amount of energy, which
is observed as a supernova.[4]
White dwarfs are stable up to the Chandrasekhar limit of around 1.44 M⊙,
beyond which the gravitational pressure overcomes the electron degeneracy
pressure. Under this enormous pressure, electrons can be pushed into protons,
without violating Pauli’s exclusion principle. Further, the weak interaction
will allow the protons and electrons to merge into neutrons, with the emission
of a neutrino. The resulting neutron takes up much less space than the bound
proton and electron. This allows the star to collapse even further, to smaller
radii and larger densities than for the white dwarf stage. This happens for
heavy stars (M > 8 M⊙).[4]
Pauli’s exclusion principle also applies to neutron stars. For neutron stars of
masses below ∼3M⊙the neutron degeneracy pressure keeps the neutron star
from collapsing further. If the mass is above this limit, the neutron star will
continue collapsing into a black hole.[4]
1.2
Low Mass X-ray Binaries
When bright cosmic X-ray sources were ﬁrst discovered in the 1960s, no
physical processes were known to be capable of generating the X-ray
luminosities observed. Further, the optical identiﬁcations of the early X-ray
sources Sco X-1 and Cyg X-2 puzzled theorists and observers, since these
bright X-ray sources were apparently asssociated with rather faint optical
objects. The speculation around the nature of the energy source in these
’stars’ centered around previously purely theoretical objects like white dwarfs,
neutron stars and black holes.[21]
In 1971 the Uhuru satellite discovered two sources which, observed over long
time intervals, showed Doppler shifts and X-ray eclipses. It was recognized
2
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: The donor star, M2, ﬁlls its Roche-lobe which overﬂows
into the potential well of the compact object in M1, since the poten-
tial of the inner Lagrange point L1 is lower than L3. Figure adapted
from ’Exploring the X-ray Universe’ by Seward & Charles.[21]
that these sources must be binary systems, consisting of an X-ray emitting
object and an optical companion. The short period observed indicated that
the two objects were close enough to be interacting. The source of X-ray
radiation from the system could then be explained by a release of a large
amount of gravitational potential energy from the mass transfer from the
optical companion, the donor star, onto a compact object.[21]
The donor star can transfer mass to the compact object in the form of a
strong stellar wind, if the donor star is of high mass. If it is of low mass, it can
only transfer a signiﬁcant amount of mass by Roche-lobe overﬂow. This is the
case in low mass X-ray binaries.
The Roche-lobe is the equipotential surface which includes the inner
Lagrangian point of the system, for each object. Roche-lobe overﬂow is the
transfer of mass through the inner Lagrangian point, from the donor star onto
the compact object. This happens if the donor star ﬁlls its Roche-lobe, which
can happen due to expansion in the late stages of stellar evolution. The
overﬂow is caused by the potential well of the donor star being overﬁlled by
the expansion of the star, and mass ﬂowing into the potential well of the
compact object, which is more massive but also much denser. This can be
illustrated with a one-dimensional plot of the gravitational potential of the
system, seen in ﬁg. 1.[21]
This type of mass transfer is only stable if the compact object is more massive
than the donor star. For neutron stars in low mass X-ray binaries, this means
that the donor star often will be less massive than the Sun, and will therefore
be optically faint. This means that the donor star can be undetectable, and
thereby diﬃcult to classify. Due to the angular momentum of the material
leaving the donor star, the material will not fall directly onto the compact
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2: Illustration of the low mass X-ray binary 4U 1820-30,
consisting of a neutron star and a white dwarf donor star.[3]
object, but will form an accretion disk around it. [21]
The energy release of the accretion process can be expressed in form of
luminosity. The following relation holds for the luminosity resulting from the
release of gravitational energy of the accreted material falling towards the
neutron star:
L = GM ˙M/R
(1)
where G is the universal gravitational constant, M is the mass of the neutron
star,
˙M is the rate of accretion and R is the radius of the neutron star.
The eﬃciency of the accretion process can be deduced from the energy release
of this process, as a fraction of the total energy stored in the in-falling matter
from E = mc2, in the following way:
L = η ˙Mc2
(2)
where η = GM/Rc2. This gives an eﬃciency of energy release from the
accretion process of ∼0.2. This compares to the eﬃciency of nuclear reactions
of 0.01 −0.001. The consequences of this will elaborated in section 1.3.1.[21]
1.2.1
4U 1820-30
The data utilized in this report were collected by NICER from the source 4U
1820-30. This source is situated in the globular cluster NGC 6624, which is
4
==PAGE:11==
located around 8 kpc from us in the galactic bulge. This source consists of a
neutron star as part of an ultra compact binary with an orbital period of 11.4
minutes. This implies a white dwarf companion with a mass of about 0.07
M⊙, meaning that the system is a low mass X-ray binary. The accreted
material from the white dwarf is believed to be either pure helium or hydrogen
poor. An illustration of the system can be seen in ﬁg. 2.[10]
Due to changes in the orbital period, the binary system is believed to be part
of a triple system. There are, however, other possible explanations for these
changes including non-conservative mass-transfer, mass-loss from the
companion star or spin-orbit coupling.[8]
The system exhibits an approximately 176 day accretion cycle, changing from
a high-soft state to a low-hard state. This means that the ﬂux in the soft
spectral band drops, and the ﬂux in the hard spectral band increases slightly,
while the overall ﬂux drops. In this low-hard state, thermonuclear bursts are
observed with recurrence times of approximately 2-4 hours. When the system
is not in this low-hard state, no bursts are observed.[5]
Based on spectroscopic data from multiple thermonuclear X-ray bursts, G¨uver
et al. (2010) estimated the mass of the neutron star in this system to be 1.58
± 0.06 M⊙and the radius to be 9.1 ± 0.4 km. This estimate was, however,
critized by Suleimanov et al. (2017b), claiming that their method was not
self-consistent. Suleimanov et al. (2017b) report a neutron star radius in the
range 10 - 12 km for a neutron star mass below 1.7 M⊙, and a range of 8 - 12
km for a 1.7 - 2.0 M⊙neutron star. Other works have also made eﬀorts
towards constraining the mass and radius of the neutron star in this system,
but none with an accuracy on the mass better than ± 0.35 M⊙(as of
Suleimanov et al. (2017b)). The radius is estimated with somewhat large
uncertainty from the spectroscopic data, since this estimate depends on the
distance to the source, which is not known to a very good precision. Most
recent works adopt distances from 7.6 ± 0.4 kpc to 8.4 ± 0.6 kpc.[23]
1.3
Thermonuclear X-ray Bursts
A thermonuclear X-ray burst, is an X-ray event with a time duration on the
scale of minutes and with an energy release of around 1039 ergs. The rise of
the ﬂux from an X-ray burst is very rapid, with a much slower decay.[21]
The X-ray spectrum of an X-ray burst is similar to that of a cooling
blackbody. A blackbody can be described by just two parameters; temperature
and radiating area. The observed X-ray ﬂux due to blackbody radiation
during an X-ray burst can be described using Stefan-Boltzmanns law:
L = 4πd2FX = 4πR2σT 4
eﬀ
(3)
where L is the luminosity, d is the distance to the source, R is the radius of
the blackbody sphere, σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant and Teﬀis the
eﬀective temperature. The eﬀective temperature is the apparent (measured)
5
==PAGE:12==
temperature, multiplied by a color correction factor. The color correction
factor is deduced from an atmosphere model of the neutron star. The radius
and apparent temperature can be modelled with a blackbody spectrum ﬁtted
to the burst spectrum. The distance to the source can be diﬃcult to
determine, and is often only known with poor certainty.[21]
From observations, it is clear that FX/T 4 is constant throughout the cooling
tail of the burst and is consistent with a radius of the blackbody sphere of
around 10 km, for sensible estimates of d. This is consistent with the expected
size of a neutron star, with the X-ray burst originating on its surface.[21]
Figure 3: Illustration of, on the left, the material build-up on the
surface of the neutron star, the resulting thermonuclear ﬂash, and
the start of a new build-up process. On the right, the emission from
the source, with a persistent ﬂux from the accretion process and a
sharp rise at the on-set of the burst.[21]
The mechanisms behind X-ray bursts depend on the accretion of material from
the donor star onto the neutron star. The in-fall of material via the accretion
6
==PAGE:13==
disk releases, as earlier mentioned, large amounts of gravitational potential
energy. This in-falling material then builds up on the surface of the neutron
star. The material consists of some fraction of hydrogen and helium,
depending on the composition of the donor star. The accreted hydrogen on
the surface of the neutron star will fuse to helium via the CNO cycle,
producing an underlying layer of helium.[21]
When the density and temperature in the helium layer reaches a critical point,
it will fuse into carbon via the triple alpha process. This process is unstable
and will therefore lead to a runaway reaction creating a thermonuclear ﬂash.
This is what we see as an X-ray burst, see ﬁg. 3.[21]
This critical point occurs at a temperature of ≈2 × 108K and a density of
≈105 −106 g cm−3. The ’one-zone’ condition for a thermal runaway is
satisﬁed when a thermal instability occurs at dϵ3α/dT > dϵcool/dT, where ϵ3α
is the energy production rate of helium fusing to carbon via the triple alpha
reaction, and ϵcool is the eﬀective local cooling rate.[9] The ’one-zone’ model is
a model for the neutron star, where the entire envelope is reduced to a single
zone, ignoring the eﬀects of mixing and from nuclear burning taking place
simultaneously at diﬀerent depths.[7]
In the thermonuclear ﬂash, heavy ashes are believed to be formed from helium
burning to heavier elements. These elements might imprint spectral signatures
in the bursts emission, and the identiﬁcation of these elements can give us
information about the burst burning processes. Further, these spectral
signatures might reveal a red-/blueshift, which can tell us about the
environment in which they originate.[11]
1.3.1
Recurrence Time
X-ray bursts are often observed to occur in succession with speciﬁc time
intervals in between. According to the theory of material build-up on the
neutron star surface, one would expect this recurrence time to be inversely
proportional to the rate of accretion of material onto the neutron star.[21]
A hydrogen atom falling in the potential well of a neutron star gains around
200 MeV of kinetic energy, which it releases as it falls towards the neutron star
via the accretion disk. A hydrogen atom taking part in the nuclear fusion
leading to the thermonuclear ﬂash, only releases about 1 MeV of energy. This
means that the accretion process releases ∼100 times more energy per atom
than the burst process. However, since the material is accreted over some
longer time interval, and all the burst energy is released over a very short time
interval, the burst can outshine the accretion process for a short period of
time.[21]
The steady energy release of the accreted material and the total energy release
of the burst are related with an α parameter, which indirectly describes the
composition of the accreted material. The total energy release from the
accretion process can be found from the bolometric ﬂux multiplied by the
recurrence time, and the total energy release in the burst can be found from
7
==PAGE:14==
the bolometric ﬂuence of the burst. To determine the α parameter, the
recurrence time must ﬁrst be determined. The relation is then:
α = fpers
Eburst
∆t
(4)
where fpers is the bolometric persistent ﬂux, Eburst is the bolometric burst
ﬂuence and ∆t is the recurrence time. A small α, below 50, indicates a fuel
composition of mainly hydrogen, and a large α, above 50 up to around 200,
indicates an increasing fraction of helium, due to the relative energy release of
the nuclear reactions occuring in the respective fuel environments.
The total nuclear energy release per nucleon in the burst can be described
with the relation 1.35 + 6.05 · X MeV/nucleon, where X is the hydrogen mass
fraction. This means that a larger fraction of hydrogen in the fuel leads to a
larger energy release in the burst. Since α is inversely proportional to the
burst energy release, a larger α indicates an decreasing fraction of hydrogen.[9]
1.3.2
Photospheric Radius Expansion
When material falls onto the neutron star, it encounters an outwards radiation
pressure. This pressure retards the material, though the eﬀect is usually small.
The dominant eﬀect is the scattering of photons oﬀmatter, which results in a
pressure on the in-falling material. This pressure is proportional to the ﬂux of
radiation from the star.[21]
If this pressure becomes larger than the gravitational potential of the neutron
star, the accretion of matter will stop. This happens at a luminosity of
LEdd = 4πGMmpc
σ0
(5)
where mp is the mass of a proton and σ0 is the Thomson cross section of an
electron. Here the protons and electrons are assumed to be electrostatically
bound. This luminosity is called the Eddington luminosity.[21]
Some bursts are so bright that they reach this Eddington luminosity. The
resulting huge radiation pressure can then lift the surface layers of the neutron
star. This process is referred to as photospheric radius expansion (PRE).
During the PRE, the eﬀective blackbody temperature drops, while the
blackbody radius expands. As the expanding photosphere cools, the expansion
stops, and the photosphere will fall back down on the neutron star, leading to
a new increase in temperature, before reaching the cooling tail.[21]
From this kind of X-ray bursts, the neutron star radius is assumed to
correspond to the radius measured at the point where the photosphere
’touches down’ on the neutron star surface, at the end of the PRE phase.
There are, however, some uncertainties related to this measure, which will
become clear in section 5.
8
==PAGE:15==
1.4
Spectral States
The accretion environment of the neutron star can vary in time. Some sources,
such as GS 1826-24, known as the ”clocked” burster, exhibit regular burst
activity. Other sources, such as 4U 1820-30, only exhibit burst activity when
they are in a certain spectral state. This spectral state depends on the state of
the accretion environment.
Figure 4: The soft spectral state, dominated by emissions from the
accretion process, and the hard spectral state, dominated by up-
scattering of soft photons from the neutron star by the hot corona.
[Own ﬁgure]
If the accretion disk extends all the way to the surface of the neutron star, the
accretion rate and the temperature on the neutron star surface is high. Due to
the high temperature, the accreted helium layer (alternatively accreted
hydrogen fused into helium) can undergo stable burning. This, together with
emissions from the accretion process, leads to the emission of a large amount
of soft photons, why the state is known as the high-soft spectral state.
If the accretion disk does not extend to the surface of the neutron star, a hot
electron ’corona’ with a temperature of ∼109 K will form around the neutron
star. This corona kicks the soft photons emitted from the neutron star to
higher energies, via inverse Compton scattering. This results in a low emission
of high energy photons, described as the low-hard spectral state. The total
emission is low, since the accretion rate and the temperature on the surface of
the neutron star is lower when the accretion disk does not extend to the
surface. In this case helium does not burn steadily, instead a build-up occurs
on the surface resulting in regular X-ray bursts, as described in section 1.3.[13]
9
==PAGE:16==
1.5
The Neutron Star Interior Composition Explorer
[NICER]
The Neutron star Interior Composition ExploreR, NICER, is an X-ray mission
designed for the investigation of neutron stars, with a prime goal of
constraining the neutron star equation of state. NICER was launched on a
Falcon 9 rocket on June 3 2017, for mounting on the International Space
Station (ISS), see ﬁg. 5.[18]
NICER’s X-ray Timing Instrument, XTI, consists of 56 X-ray concentrator
optics, designed to collect X-rays over an area of roughly 30 arcmin2, and
concentrate them on to a small silicon drift detector (SDD) for each optic.
Each of the optics consist of 24 nested gold-coated parabolic mirrors, with an
absolute alignment better than 57 arcseconds.[18]
The SDDs detects photons with an absolute timing precision of less than 300
ns, and a spectral resolution of 6 < E/∆E < 80 (≈80 eV at 1 keV) from 0.5
keV to 8 keV, with energy bin of 10 eV.[18]
NICER operates in a 0.2 - 12 keV band pass, which matches the typical
spectra of neutron stars as well as stars, supernova remnants, galaxy clusters,
etc.[18]
NICER typically observes 3-6 targets during an ISS orbit of 90 mins. Each
target is typically observed until it exceeds a speciﬁc treshold for angular
distance to bright Earth, Sun, Moon and ISS structures etc. The observation
window can further be shortened by the movement of solar panels in front of
the XTI. This gives NICER an eﬀective observing time of 80-90 %.[18]
Figure 5: NICER onboard the International Space Station.[17]
10
==PAGE:17==
2
June 2019 NICER Observations of 4U
1820-30
During June 2019 the source 4U 1820-30 was observed to be in its spectral
low-hard state, as observed by BAT (the Burst Alert Telescope on board the
Swift satellite) and MAXI (the Monitor of All-sky X-ray Image on the ISS),
see ﬁg. 6. The source is known to exhibit X-ray busts in this state, why this
triggered observations by NICER.
Nine bursts were detected in the period from June 7 to July 1 2019. Out of
these nine bursts, two were located in the same observation ID, namely obsID
2050300119. All the bursts are recorded in table 1.
Figure 6: 4U 1820-30 as observed by BAT and MAXI from April 27
to August 15 2019.
In table 1, the time stamp, duration and peak count rate of the bursts are
listed. In the last column the average pre-burst count rate over 100 s prior to
the burst is listed. Further, each burst has been ﬁtted with lcurve, which is
part of the ftool package, to return a ﬁtted peak count rate, burst time-scale
and pre-burst count rate. The following model was used,
C(t) = a + b · exp (−τ · t)
(6)
where a is the pre-burst count rate, b is the peak count rate and τ is the burst
time-scale.
The burst in obsID 2050300119a (the ﬁrst burst in obsID 2050300119) was
located at the end of an observation, when the source moved out of the view of
11
==PAGE:18==
Table 1: The nine bursts observed from 4U 1820-30 with NICER in
June 2019. *ﬁtted with lcurve.
obsID
Time [MJD]
Time [UT]
5 %
duration [s]
Peak count
rate [c/s]
Peak count
rate* [c/s]
τ* [s]
Pre-burst
count rate*
[c/s]
Pre-burst
count rate
(100 s) [c/s]
..04
58641.28948
06:56:51.5
11.4
26,180
18,255
2.15
1017
993
..08
58646.83375
20:00:35.9
11.8
20,920
18,374
2.39
623
611
..10
58648.32025
07:41:09.3
12.7
23,020
17,159
2.6
695
640
..15
58655.08544
02:03:01.9
14.2
26,970
21,479
2.22
1090
1034
..19a
58660.30661
07:21:31.4
8.2
27,340
22,437
1.52
-
960
..19b
58660.76489
18:21:26.3
12.4
28,390
22,632
2.21
1215
1183
..20
58661.77953
18:42:31.7
19.0
23,940
17,955
2.06
1268
1329
..22
58663.97778
23:27:59.9
12.4
26,910
22,816
2.17
1206
1169
..24
58665.58748
14:05:58.6
11.2
26,990
20,092
1.81
1098
1093
NICER. Therefore, the 5 % duration, which is the measure of how long the
burst ﬂux is above 5 % of the peak ﬂux, is shorter than for the remaining
bursts. This means that the pre-burst count rate could not be ﬁtted using
lcurve, which models the pre-burst count rate from the decay of the burst.
Note that the 5 % duration for the burst in obsID 2050300120 is signiﬁcantly
longer than for the remaining bursts. This is likely due to the higher pre-burst
count rate, meaning that the persistent ﬂux of the source is very high at this
point, but the burst peak count rate is not correspondingly high, why it takes
longer for the source to drop below 5 % of the peak count rate.
The ﬁtted peak count rates are systematically smaller than the recorded peak
count rates. This is probably due to the rebinning of the data, when ﬁtted in
lcurve.
Further observations between the observed bursts were carried out, with no
detection of bursts. Overall the observations were generally quite short, with
large time gaps. Therefore the recurrence time between bursts can not be
deduced from the observations. An eﬀort towards a solution to this problem is
carried out in section 4.
Studying the burst duration, peak count rate and burst timescale (τ) in table
1, the relative energy release in the bursts can be approximated. The burst in
obsID -19b reaches the highest peak count rate of 28 390 c/s, over a burst
duration of 12.4 seconds (though the actual burst duration might be slightly
shorter, as mentioned above). The burst time scale is around the average value
for the bursts. This indicates a relatively large energy release in this burst
compared to the remaining. For this burst the pre-burst count rate, from the
persistent emission, is 1183 c/s, the second highest value recorded. The
recurrence time of this burst is studied in section 4.
The lowest peak count rate of 20 920 c/s is reached for the burst in obsID -08,
with a moderate duration and a slightly higher value of τ than most of the
12
==PAGE:19==
remaining bursts, indicating a slightly shorter burst time scale. This indicates
that the total energy release in the burst is low relative to the remaining
bursts. For this burst, the pre-burst count level is 611 c/s, the lowest recorded.
The recurrence time for this burst is not known.
From this short analysis, the most energetic bursts seem to occur at high
persistent count rates, when the accretion rate is believed to be high. The
relation between the energy release in the burst relative to the energy release
in the persistent emission is, however, also dependent on the recurrence time
of the burst. This recurrence time is studied in section 4.
13
==PAGE:20==
3
Methods
Here the methods used for processing of the data in section 2 are presented.
These cover data reduction using nicerdas, spectral ﬁtting in xspec,
including time-resolved spectral analysis and discrete spectral features.
Further, the recurrency study presented in section 4 will be carried out using
standard numerical procedures in MatLab.
3.1
NICERDAS
The raw NICER data is reduced using nicerdas. nicerdas consists of a
number of tools for data reduction. To reduce the NICER data from section 2,
the nicerl2 script is used, which applies level 2 standard calibration and
ﬁltering. This script includes the subroutines nicercal, which apply NICER
calibrations, and nimaketime, which apply standard NICER time screening,
excluding observations in the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) region and
executing a number of tresholds for target tracking. Further, it includes
nicermergeclean, which clean and merge the data from the 7 Measurement
and Power Units (MPUs) on the XTI. The 56 SDDs on the XTI are divided
into 7 MPUs, numbered 0-6.[16]
The nicerl2 routine creates both clean and ’ufa’ event ﬁles. The clean event
ﬁles contain the completely ﬁltered and ’clean’ noise-free data. In these data
observations during passage of the SAA region are ﬁltered out. However, it is
often possible to observe bursts in the SAA region. If a burst occurs in the
SAA region, and is ﬁltered out in the clean data, the ’ufa’ data can be used.
This data is calibrated in the same way as the clean data, but is likely to
contain heavy noise from charged particles in the inner Van Allen belt.[16]
After the data has been cleaned and calibrated using nicerl2, time-ﬁltered
events, lightcurves and spectra can be extracted using xselect.[16]
3.2
XSPEC
xspec is a spectral ﬁtting tool for X-ray astronomy. It uses a modiﬁed
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm to minimize the ﬁt statistic and ﬁnd the
best-ﬁt values for the model parameters. For this algorithm, it is possible for
the ﬁtting process to get stuck in a local minimum, and thereby not ﬁnd the
global minimum. The algorithm is more likely to ﬁnd the true minimum if the
initial values for the model parameters are sensible for the data.[1]
When an X-ray instrument measures a spectra from a source, it does not
record a smooth spectrum, but rather a number of counts within the
instrument channels. To convert this photon count to a spectrum, an
instrument response is needed. This response describes the probability that a
photon of a speciﬁc energy will be detected in a certain channel. This does,
however, not result in a spectrum corresponding to the actual spectrum, since
the inversion needed to derive this tends to be non-unique and unstable.
14
==PAGE:21==
Therefore, a ’simple’ model for the actual spectrum must be set up, and this is
then ﬁtted to the recorded photon count using the instrument response. From
this, a ﬁt statistics is computed to evaluate the quality of the ﬁt. This
describes how likely it is that the model spectrum will result in the photon
count recorded in the instrument. The most common ﬁt statistics used is the
χ2.[1]
One should note that more than one model could possibly ﬁt the data
adequately. Therefore, it is also a matter of scientiﬁc judgement to decide on
an acceptable model. A number of model components available in xspec are
described below. [1]
3.2.1
Models
The xspec catalogue contains a large number of model components. A few
will be used for spectral analysis of the NICER data presented in section 2.
These will be introduced here.
BBODYRAD
As described in section 1.3, the emission from an X-ray burst can be modelled
as a blackbody radiator. xspec does this in the following way,
A(E) = K · 1.0344 × 10−3 E2 dE
exp (E/kT) −1
(7)
Where A is the surface area, K is the normalization, kT is the blackbody
temperature and E is the energy. From the normalization, the source radius
can be found, if the distance to the source is known,
K = R2
km
D2
10
(8)
Where D10 is the distance to the source in units of 10 kpc.[1]
COMPTT
The comptt model is an analytic model describing Comptonization of soft
photons in a hot plasma, including relativistic eﬀects. It takes 6 parameters,
being the redshift, soft photon temperature, plasma temperature, plasma
optical depth, geometry switch (disk, sphere) and a normalization
parameter.[1]
DISKBB
diskbb models a spectrum of an accretion disk consisting of multiple
blackbody components. It takes two parameters, the temperature at the inner
disk radius and a nomalization factor, consisting of an apparent inner disk
radius, the distance to the source and an inclination of the disk relative to the
observer.[1]
15
==PAGE:22==
POWERLAW
A simple photon power law, modelled in the following way,
A(E) = K E−a
(9)
where a is the photon index of the powerlaw and K is the nomalization in
photons/kev/cm2/s at 1 keV.[1]
TBABS
tbabs (Tuebingen-Boulder ISM absorption model) calculates the cross section
for X-ray absorption by the ISM (Interstellar medium). This is the sum of the
cross sections for X-ray absorption due to the gas-phase ISM, the grain-phase
ISM, and the molecules in the ISM. The model takes as parameter the
equivalent hydrogen column, NH, in units of 1022 atoms cm−2.[1]
EDGE
A multiplicative model consisting of an absorption edge given by,
M(E) =
(
1,
if E ≤Ec
exp [−D(E/Ec)−3],
if E ≥Ec
where Ec is the treshold energy and D is absorption depth at the threshold.[1]
GABS
An multiplicative model consisting of a gaussian absorption component given
by,
M(E) = exp (−(p3/(
√
2π p2) exp (−1
2((E −p1)/p2)2)))
(10)
where p1 is the line energy, p2 is the line width (σ) and p3 is the line depth. At
the line center, the optical depth is p3/p2/
√
2π.[1]
CFLUX
A convolution model to determine the ﬂux for one or more model components,
in a speciﬁed range. For example,
TBabs(cﬂux ∗bbodyrad + bbodyrad + diskbb + powerlaw)
(11)
returns the ﬂux for the ﬁrst blackbody component. cflux takes 3 parameters,
being the minimum and maximum energy over which the ﬂux is calculated,
and the log10 ﬂux in erg/cm2/s.[1]
16
==PAGE:23==
3.3
Time-Resolved Spectral Analysis
To investigate the evolution of temperature and radius of the neutron star
during the X-ray burst, to determine if there is evidence of PRE e.g., the burst
spectrum must be divided in appropriate time intervals. For each time
interval, a spectra is extracted. These time-resolved spectra can then be
analyzed in xspec, using an appropriate model. The shorter the time
intervals, the better the resolution of the evolution of the burst. The minimum
length of the time intervals are, however, limited by the amount of photons in
each spectrum, to obtain a fair signal-to-noise ratio.[12]
Apart from the burst spectra, a spectrum from the persistent ﬂux immediately
before, or alternatively after, the burst must be extracted. This extracted
spectrum must cover as long a time interval as possible, to achieve the best
signal-to-noise ratio. This time interval is limited by the length of the NICER
pointing, which is usually around 15-30 mins long. This spectrum is ﬁtted
with an appropriate model, and included in the modelling of the time-resolved
burst spectra mentioned above.[12]
NICERs band pass, extending down to 0.2 keV, makes it ideal for studying
strong PRE bursts, which move out of view of instruments operating in the
hard X-ray band when the photosphere is at its largest extend.[12]
3.3.1
Discrete Spectral Features
A hot topic of current research within neutron star observations is the eﬀort to
identify discrete spectral features in the spectra. This is a challenge due to the
rapid evolution of the burst, and the limited statistics in the time-resolved
spectra of short duration bursts. Recently, eﬀorts have been made to stack
multiple bursts from the same source with similar spectra, see Strohmayer et
al. (2019). This leads to better statistics, but requires that the conditions in
the stacked bursts are similar.[22]
The signiﬁcance of these discrete spectral features is, if they can be identiﬁed,
both the presence of heavy element ashes, and a possible gravitational redshift
of the feature may be determined. From the redshift, the compactness of the
neutron star can be deduced.[22]
If a line or edge is observed at a speciﬁc distance from the neutron star, at an
energy E, the redshift due to the gravitational potential of the neutron star,
can be deduced from the following relation,
1 + zgrav =
1
q
1 −2GM
c2R
(12)
where G is the universal gravitational constant, M is the mass of the neutron
star and R is the distance to the neutron star center.[22]
From this relation the rest energy, E0, of the spectral feature at energy E can
17
==PAGE:24==
be deduced from the following relation,
E =
E0
(z + 1)
(13)
where z is the total redshift of the line. Assuming that the gravitational
redshift dominates the shifting of the line, the rest energy can be estimated.
From the rest energy, the energy of the spectral feature at every distance from
the neutron star can be predicted by assuming a mass for the neutron star, or
vice versa. [22]
For PRE bursts, one would expect the spectral feature to move with either the
photosphere or the disk during the PRE phase. From time-resolved spectral
analysis of the burst, the spectral feature should be observed at diﬀerent
energies during the PRE phase of the burst. This diﬀerence in energy should
be signiﬁcant if the feature originates at the photosphere, where the eﬀect of
the gravitational redshift is much stronger than in the disk.[22]
If a line were to be observed at some distance from the neutron star, from
where the rest energy of the line could be determined, and again at the surface
of the neutron star, then the total redshift could be deduced. From this, the
compactness M/R can be found from equation 12. This can be done, since the
graviational redshift depends solely on this ratio. Therefore a speciﬁc
gravitational redshift can only emerge from a speciﬁc compactness.[22]
According to Strohmayer et al. (2019), uncertainties in identifying the location
of the origin of the line or edge and that both red- and blueshifts may be
present, means that, with current instrumentation, no strong claim can be
made regarding the identiﬁcation of a speciﬁc line from short duration
thermonuclear X-ray bursts. They do note, however, that ”if correlated
variations in the inferred photospheric radius and line energies with time could
be accurately tracked in individual bursts, then it might be possible to
independently determine the gravitational red-shift”.[22]
18
==PAGE:25==
4
Recurrency Study
As described in section 1.3, a fundamental mechanism in thermonuclear bursts
is the accretion of matter onto the neutron star between bursts. After a burst,
enough matter must be accreted onto the neutron star in order to ignite a new
burst. The time interval between bursts, the recurrence time, is believed to be
inversely proportional to the mean accretion rate between the bursts.
The accretion rate is expected to be proportional to the persistent ﬂux, since
the persistent emission originates from the accretion, as described in 1.2.
Therefore, it is possible to investigate the relation between the persistent ﬂux
and the recurrence time of bursts.
In this section, this relation will be investigated. Firstly, a model will be
constructed from NICER data from August 2017, in which two pairs of
consecutive bursts are present. Then, this model will be applied to data from
June 2019, where the observed bursts are not believed to be consecutive, but
the recurrence time for the second burst can be predicted from the model.
4.1
Modelling Recurrence Time from 2017 Data
From NICER observations of 4U 1820-30 in August 2017, we have two pairs of
bursts, which are believed to be consecutive. The interval between the bursts
in each pair, the recurrence time, is 2.17 and 2.78 hours respectively. Further,
there is a ﬁfth burst, which occurs 6.35 hours after the second burst of the
second burst pair.
The August 2017 observation covered 2 days with consecutive observations of
roughly 30 mins, divided by data gaps of roughly 60 mins. This constrains the
model of the recurrence time, since we know that no bursts occured in the
time covered by observations, but we can expect bursts in the data gaps from
the model.
The model builds on dividing the observing time in intervals from which the
mean ﬂux can be determined. The intervals are constructed by ﬁnding the
mean persistent ﬂux in an interval of 2.57 hours, and depending on this mean,
the interval is set to either 2.17, 2.57 or 2.78 hours. This somewhat rough
sorting will aﬀect the modelling.
A model is constructed, based on the recurrence time and persistent ﬂux
between each of the two burst pairs. This gives just two data points, which are
ﬁtted with a linear model. The ﬁt is tweaked to optimize the compliance with
the observed bursts. This ﬁt can be seen in ﬁg. 7.
For each of the intervals, the recurrence time is modelled from the mean
persistent ﬂux of that interval. These recurrence times as function of mean
persistent ﬂux are also plotted in ﬁg. 7. Appending these recurrence times for
each interval, gives a complete prediction of bursts in the data set.
This predicted succession of bursts can be plotted on top of the observation
time and the observed bursts. A signiﬁcant variable in the prediction of bursts,
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 7: Linear ﬁt to the two data points, being the recurrence time
as function of persistent ﬂux for the two burst pairs, with modeled
recurrence times for each calculated interval, marked with circles.
is the time oﬀset from the start of the observation. This can be determined so
that the predictions line up with the ﬁrst burst pair, or any other preference.
The results can be seen in ﬁg. 8. In the top panel, the count rate over the
observation time is plotted. Flat lines without ﬂuctuations represent data
gaps. In the second panel, the mean ﬂux has been calculated for 18 intervals
during the observation time. Note that the very last time interval is too short
to represent a burst interval, and therefore no mean ﬂux is calculated. In the
third panel, the modelled recurrence time for the mean ﬂux of each interval is
plotted. In the last panel, the predicted bursts based on the modelled
recurrence times are plotted with ’o’ on top of the observing time, and
observed bursts are marked with ’x’.
The uncertainty on the persistent ﬂux remains very close to 10 c/s for the
whole observation. This propagate to an uncertainty of ≈90 seconds on the
predicted recurrence time.
As can be seen, the ﬁrst four observed bursts match with the predicted bursts
fairly well. The ﬁrst burst of the ﬁrst burst pair is oﬀby 109 seconds, just
outside of the uncertainty of the model. The second burst of that pair is oﬀby
196 seconds. The ﬁrst burst of the second burst pair is oﬀby 415 seconds, or
approximately 7 minutes, and the second burst of that pair is oﬀby 3 seconds.
As mentioned, these relative oﬀsets between predicted and observed bursts
completely depend on the chosen time oﬀset at the start of the observation.
The recurrence time of the ﬁrst burst pair is predicted to be 7912 ± 90
seconds or 2.20 ± 0.025 hours, compared to the observed 2.17 hours. For the
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 8:
Predicted bursts from modelled recurrence time from
mean persistent ﬂux in varying intervals, with oﬀset 250 s.
second burst pair the predicted recurrence time is 10,434 ± 90 seconds or 2.90
± 0.025 hours, compared to the observed 2.78 hours.
Between the two burst pairs, three predicted bursts falls well within the data
gaps. Further three bursts seem to falls within the observations, however near
the end of the observation. It is possible that these bursts occur just after the
end of the observation.
The ﬁfth burst does not seem to ﬁt with this model. A possible explanation is,
that this burst reaches a signiﬁcantly higher ﬂuence than the ﬁrst four bursts.
The burst would therefore need more time to build up a larger amount of fuel
to generate a burst with this ﬂuence, compared to the preceding bursts.
One of the predicted bursts before the ﬁrst burst pair seem to fall within the
observing time. It is however located right at the start of an observation, why
it is possible that the burst occurred right before the observation.
The missing burst after burst 5 is not as signiﬁcant as the ones before the ﬁrst
burst pair, since the source is moving out of the low-hard state at this time,
and is therefore expected to stop bursting.
In conclusion, the ﬁrst four observed bursts and the respective recurrence time
of each burst pair could be modeled fairly well with a linear relation. The ﬁfth
21
==PAGE:28==
observed burst did not ﬁt well into this model. It should be noted that in this
model, an amount of subjectivity is introduced when deciding on ﬁt
parameters, burst intervals and oﬀset.
4.1.1
Applying the Model to 2019 Data
The model can be applied to the data obtained by NICER in June 2019,
assuming that the physical processes governing accretion and bursts are the
same. The data from obsID 2050300119 are chosen for this modelling, since it
is the only observation containing two bursts, though they are not believed to
be a pair of consecutive bursts.
As can be seen in the top panel of ﬁg. 9, not a lot of data are available during
this observation. Therefore, it is decided to calculate the mean ﬂux from an
interval between 962 s and 2 s before the peak for burst 1, and between 322 s
and 2 s before the peak for burst 2. These two mean ﬂuxes are then used to
model the recurrence time. The mean ﬂux and modelled recurrence time can
be seen in the second and third panel of ﬁg. 9 respectively.
Figure 9: Predicted recurrence time and bursts in the 2019 data,
using the model based on the 2017 data.
To model the predicted succession of bursts, it is determined that the best
compliance with the observed bursts is achieved by modelling the second
predicted burst with the recurrence time deduced from the mean ﬂux before
22
==PAGE:29==
burst 1, and modelling the remaining four predicted bursts from the mean ﬂux
before burst 2. The result can be seen in the bottom panel of ﬁg. 9.
As the ﬁrst modelled burst is set at the time of the ﬁrst burst, there of course
is a 100 % compliance between the model and the data. The prediction of the
second observed burst is oﬀby 414 seconds or 6.9 minutes. Further, the
remaining predicted bursts lie well within data gaps, which support the model.
The conclusion is, that the model ﬁts fairly well with the 2019 data, but it
should be noted that the predictions in the 2019 data are not very well
constrained due to the large data gaps, and the limited observation time.
The model could be applied to the full 2019 observation set, but due to the
very large data gaps between the observations containing only one burst each,
a very large amount of uncertainty would be invoked in the modelling, and any
correlation between predicted bursts and observed bursts might be incidental.
4.2
Relation Between Persistent Flux, Burst Fluence
and Reccurence Time
The persistent bolometric ﬂux, the burst bolometric ﬂuence and the recurrence
time are, as described in section 1.3.1, related by an α parameter.
The bolometric ﬂux can be determined from a spectrum using cflux on a
model ﬁtted to the spectrum in xspec. This can be done for both the
persistent and the burst spectra. For the burst spectra, the ﬂux is multiplied
by the time duration of each extracted spectrum, and added for all spectra.
Thereby the ﬂuence of the burst is obtained.
For the second burst in obsID 2050300119, the cflux model is applied to the
unabsorbed model for the persistent emission in the following way:
TBabs · cﬂux ∗(diskbb + powerlaw)
(14)
where the model ﬁts the persistent emission to a reduced χ2 of 1.09 for 861
degrees of freedom.
The persistent bolometrix ﬂux is then found to be
fpers ≈6.46 × 10−9 erg/cm2/s
in the energy band from 0.1 to 100 keV.
The burst ﬂuence is deduced by applying cflux to the ﬁrst blackbody of the
burst model, representing the neutron star, in each spectrum,
TBabs(cﬂux ∗bbodyrad + bbodyrad + diskbb + powerlaw)
(15)
where the model ﬁts the burst emission to a reduced χ2 of 0.99 to 1.37 for ≈
250 degrees of freedom.
23
==PAGE:30==
Multiplying the bolometric ﬂux of each spectrum by the time duration of that
spectrum, and adding all spectra, the burst ﬂuence is then found to be
Eb ≈2.68 × 10−7 erg/cm2
. The α parameter can then be found using equation 4,
α ≈6.46 × 10−9 erg/cm2/s · 9278 s
2.68 × 10−7 erg/cm2
= 224
(16)
where the recurrence time is calculated using the persistent count rate before
the burst, from the relation found in section 4.1,
∆t ≈−9.06 s2/c · 1625 c/s + 24000 s = 9278 s = 2.577 hours
leading to an α parameter of 224.
An α parameter of 224 indicates that the burst fuel is pure helium[9], which
agrees with prior knowledge of this source.
4.3
Discussion
The deduced α value of 224 from this recurrency study is a little higher than
expected. This could be due to the very limited data available for ﬁtting the
recurrence time for burst -19b. Further, uncertainties in the deduced ﬂux and
ﬂuence returned by xspec, and the quality of the ﬁtted model for both the
persistent emission and the burst emission, contribute to the uncertainty on
the deduced α parameter. This eﬀect is however expected to be small.
It should be noted that the model constructed for predicting the reccurence
time from count rate, builds on predictions from the relatively narrow band
width observed by NICER. When only considering the persistent emission in
this energy band, variations in the ’hardness’ of the persistent emission, at
which energy the emission peaks, will not be captured in the predicted
recurrence time. Therefore recurrence time can most ideally be predicted from
the bolometric persistent ﬂux.
Comparing the count rate and the bolometric persistent ﬂux before the bursts
in obsID 2050300119 gives, for the ﬁrst burst, a count rate of 1397 c/s and a
bolometric ﬂux of 5.62 ×10−9 ergs/cm2/s, and the second burst, a count rate
of 1625 c/s and a bolometric ﬂux of 6.46 ×10−9 ergs/cm2/s. Here the count
rate increases by a factor 1.16, for an increase in bolometric ﬂux of a factor
1.15. Including the uncertainties on these approximate numbers might lead to
a compliance between increase in the NICER band ﬂux and the bolometric
ﬂux. Therefore it seems reasonable to use the NICER band pass to predict
recurrence times.
A. Cumming (2003) report an α parameter of ≈120 for 4U 1820-30. From
this α, and an assumed loss of gravitational potential energy of ≈200 keV per
nucleon, the deduced nuclear energy release in the burst is ≈1.6 MeV per
24
==PAGE:31==
nucleon. This corresponds with helium burning to iron group elements (Cr,
Mn, Fe, Co, Ni). [5] For the α value found in section 4.2 this leads to an
energy release of ≈1 MeV per nucleon. The uncertainty on the recurrence
time used to deduce this α value should however be kept in mind.
Weinberg et al. (2006) state that in He bursts, where He initially burns to C
via the triple alpha process, successive α captures leads to the formation of
Mg, S and Ar. From this, a small amount of protons is built up. A runaway
eﬀect causes C to burn to heavy elements during the convective burning stage.
This eﬀect will always occur during He burning under the high temperature
conditions in which He burn to Mg or heavier elements.[25]
Further, A. Cumming (2003) reports an observed burst ﬂuence of 3.5 ×10−7
erg/cm2 slightly higher than the burst ﬂuence of 2.68 ×10−7 erg/cm2, found in
section 4.2. From this burst ﬂuence, he ﬁnds the burst energy to be 2.5 ×1039
erg, for a source distance of 7.6 kpc, and a corresponding mass of helium fuel
of 1.6 ×1021 g. The mass accretion rate is found to be 1.5 ×1017 g/s, implying
a recurrence time of just under 3 hours, which agrees fairly well with the
recurrence times deduced in section 4.1. Considering the slightly lower burst
ﬂuence found in section 4.2, implies a slightly shorter recurrence time, in
agreement with the results from 4.1. [5]
Lampe et al. (2015) investigate models for the recurrence time which build on
the recurrence time being related to the persistent emission by a powerlaw.
These models are, however, constructed for mixed He/H bursts, which exhibit
diﬀerent burst energetics than pure He bursts.[14]
25
==PAGE:32==
5
Spectral Analysis in XSPEC
The nine bursts presented in section 2 are analyzed in xspec. This is done
using time-resolved spectral analysis, as described in section 3.3. The
persistent emission prior to the burst is extracted for each of the nine bursts,
and ﬁtted using the models described below. Hereafter the time-resolved burst
spectra are ﬁtted, and the burst evolution is studied to search for evidence of
PRE. The radius at the touchdown point is noted for each burst. Further, the
neutron star luminosity and radius and the distance to the source is deduced
from the ﬁtted parameters.
Further, a search for discrete spectral features in the burst spectra is
conducted. This is done for a ’stacked’ spectrum, consisting of spectra from
multiple bursts which are added to create an artiﬁcial spectrum with a larger
signal-to-noise ratio. Further, the stacking of the spectra will enhance a
potential feature and dampen artiﬁcial features, since ’random’ apparent
features will average out and real features will add in the stacked spectrum.
Moreover, an attempt to identify the features from the stacked spectrum in a
spectrum from a single burst, is conducted. This feature is then attempted to
locate in a series of time-resolved spectra in part of the PRE phase of the
burst, to search for a potential red-/blueshift of the line energy.
5.1
Preliminary Analysis
First, the persistent emission prior to the burst is modelled. This is done in
two diﬀerent ways, by using a model consisting of a comptonization
component and a blackbody radiator, and a model consisting of a disk
blackbody component and a powerlaw, both absorbed by a Tuebingen-Boulder
ISM absorption component. This modelled persistent emission will be used as
a component in the modelling of the burst spectra.
To model the burst evolution, appropriate time bins must be chosen to create
a series of spectra for time-resolved spectral analysis. Using time bins
containing around 2000 counts each to create the spectra led to some trouble
in the convergence of the ﬁt from the initial ﬁtting parameters, due to the
limited statistics. Therefore it was chosen to use time bins containing around
5000 counts each, which led to a better convergence of the ﬁt.
The burst spectra can then be ﬁtted using diﬀerent radiation and absorption
components. As in Keek et al. (2018b), a model consisting of a blackbody
component and the modelled persistent emission multiplied by a variable
factor, absorbed by a Tuebingen-Boulder ISM absorption component,
TBabs(bbodyrad + constant(compTT + bbodyrad))
(17)
was applied to the full burst series. This will be referred to as model 1.
Here the ﬁrst blackbody component respresents the burst emission from the
photospheric surface of the neutron star, and the factor (constant) represents a
26
==PAGE:33==
scaling of the persistent emission, which is believed to increase during the
burst, due to reprocessing of the burst emission in the accretion disk. Here the
persistent emission is modelled with a compTT and a blackbody component.
The compTT component represents the inverse compton scattering of soft
photons by the electron corona, as described in section 1.4. The second
blackbody component represents thermal emissions from the accretion process
in the disk and on the neutron star.
A similar, but simpler, model for the persistent emission can be constructed
using a disk blackbody component and a powerlaw,
TBabs(bbodyrad + constant(diskbb + powerlaw))
(18)
which gives similar results as the previous model, but is less complex, which
can aid the ﬁt in converging. This model will be referred to as model 2. The
components represent the same processes as in model 1, but include fewer
parameters, as described in section 3.2.1. The compTT component from
model 1 can be approximated with a powerlaw. The diskbb component
models a spectrum of an accretion disk with multiple blackbody components.
If the signal-to-noise ratio is suﬃciently high, a more complicated model can
be applied to the burst spectra than the two above mentioned. This model
includes the same modeled persistent emission as in model 2, but further it
includes an additional blackbody component for the disk,
TBabs(bbodyrad + bbodyrad + diskbb + powerlaw)
(19)
. This will be referred to as model 3. Here the ﬁrst blackbody again represents
the burst emission from the photospheric surface of the neutron star, and the
second blackbody represents reprocessing of the burst emission in the
accretion disk. This is then added to the ﬁtted persistent emission, without a
multiplicative factor.
First, the burst spectra were modelled with model 1 and 2. This did not
consistently lead to a good ﬁt for the spectra near the peak. Therefore it was
determined to apply the third model to the spectra. This improved the ﬁt of
the spectra near the peak, but did as expected not lead to good ﬁts in the tail
spectra, where the signal-to-noise ratio is low.
The reduced χ2, for approximately 250 degrees of freedom, of each ﬁt for each
of the spectra in obsID 2050300104 can be seen in table 2. From this, the
transition from peak to tail was determined to be between spectra 10 and 11,
approximately 6.5 seconds after the peak onset.
In the tail of the burst, the total ﬂux approaches the persistent ﬂux.
Therefore, the bins containing 5000 counts contain primarily the persistent
ﬂux. If the tail spectra were to be modelled, larger time bins should be chosen,
to accumulate enough counts which are not from the persistent emission.
The burst in obsID 2050300104 was found to be fairly representative for the
nine bursts. Especially the shape of the spectra near the peak, which lead to
27
==PAGE:34==
Table 2: Reduced χ2 for ≈250 dof of each model, for 16 time-
resolved spectra of the burst in obsID 2050300104.
Spectrum
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
1
0.9871
0.9928
1.0125
2
1.0542
1.0732
1.0451
3
1.9531
2.2541
1.3696
4
1.1107
1.1010
1.1619
5
1.0595
1.0506
1.1179
6
1.0089
1.0031
1.1385
7
0.9931
0.9933
1.1100
8
1.1219
1.1222
1.2517
9
1.2144
1.2119
1.1868
10
0.9280
0.9249
0.9466
11
0.9532
0.9470
0.9258
12
0.8759
0.8683
0.8680
13
1.0524
1.0418
1.0990
14
0.96202
0.95167
-
15
0.94562
0.93188
-
16
0.78565
0.78394
-
very high χ2 for model 1 and 2, was also found in obsID 2050300108 and -10,
which were inspected during this prelminary analysis. From this it was
determined to use model 3 for the spectral analysis of all the bursts.
In this model, instead of modelling the persistent emission and including it in
the model, the persistent emission is be subtracted as background in each
spectrum, and model 3 can be reduced to,
TBabs(bdodyrad + bbodyrad)
(20)
where NH is set to the value ﬁtted to the persistent emission in each burst.
This model will be referred to as the modiﬁed model 3.
Note that the value of NH aﬀects the ﬁtted parameters, especially R2, and
setting it to another value leads to diﬀerent values for the remaining
parameters. One could be tempted to leave NH free to vary, but this leads to
very large variations of this parameter through the spectra of each burst.
However, for the bursts in obsID 2050300120 and -24, NH is set to 0.24 × 1022
cm−2, since the value from the persistent ﬁt is unexpectedly low compared to
the remaining bursts.
As it will be apparent in section 5.2, using this model leads to results very
similar to those for model 3 for most of the bursts. Moreover, for two of the
bursts (obsID 2050300120 and -24), it was not possible to create a good model
of the persistent emission. Using the model with the persistent emission
subtracted as background, lead to improved results for these two bursts.
28
==PAGE:35==
After the preliminary analysis, a new gain was applied to the data and an
updated auxiliary response function was available. The spectral analysis is
carried out using these for all obsID’s.
5.2
Blackbody Modelling
The ﬁtted parameters from the time-resolved spectral analysis of the burst in
obsID 2050300104 can be seen in ﬁg. 10 and 11. The parameters are the
blackbody temperature and blackbody radius, deduced from a source distance
of 8.4 kpc, for each of the two blackbody components. In panel 2 and 3 are the
temperature and radius for the ﬁrst blackbody, which represents the neutron
star, and in panel 4 and 5 the same is plotted for the second blackbody, which
represents the accretion disk. Further, the modelled bolometric ﬂux for the
ﬁrst blackbody and the reduced χ2, for ∼250 degrees of freedom, of the ﬁt is
plotted in panel 1 and 6 respectively.
It can be seen that the temperature and radius for both blackbodies follow an
evolution, which corresponds to the evolution of a photospheric radius
expansion described in section 1.3.2. In the ﬁrst spectrum, which is extracted
approximately from the rise of the burst, the temperature is already raised
above the pre-burst temperature for both the neutron star and the accretion
disk. The photospheric radius expansion of the neutron star evolves over the
ﬁrst three spectra, where the temperature drops and the radius expands, for
both the neutron star and the accretion disk. The radius expansion of the
accretion disk could be due to the strong radiation pressure from the neutron
star during the burst, pushing back the material in the accretion disk.
For this burst, the neutron star reaches a maximum photospheric radius of
about 200 km, and the accretion disk a ’radius’ (or distance) of almost 2000
km, before the radius expansion stops, and the photosphere starts to fall back
down. During this infall of the photosphere, the temperature starts to rise in
both the neutron star and the accretion disk, until the photosphere reaches its
original extent on the surface of the neutron star. From this point the radius
remains almost constant for the neutron star, though it seems to increase
slightly for the accretion disk. This could be due to the accretion disk settling
in a kind of equilibrium after the infall. Further, from this point, both the
neutron star and the accretion disk start to cool oﬀ. This cooling continues in
the cooling tail, which extends beyond the spectra modelled here.
As can be seen by comparing ﬁgure 10 and 11, using the modiﬁed model 3,
where the persistent emission is subtracted as background, leads to larger
error bars in the last modelled spectra of the bursts. This is when the total
emission is decreasing and the diﬀerence in the statistics between model 3 and
the modiﬁed model 3 becomes apparent, due to the subtracted persistent
emission. This is most evident in panel 4, where T2 is plotted.
As earlier mentioned, for the bursts in obsID 2050300120 and -24, the
persistent emission could not be modelled to a χ2 better than 1.7, for ∼850
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 10: The burst in obsID 2050300104 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 11: The burst in obsID 2050300104 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
30
==PAGE:37==
degrees of freedom, using the tbabs(diskbb+powerlaw) model. The main
result of this was a low NH, of 0.17 × 1022 cm−2 and 0.18 × 1022 cm−2
respectively, compared to the remaining bursts, which strongly aﬀects the
value of R2. Applying the modiﬁed model 3 and setting NH to 0.24 (which is
the average of the modelled NH for the remaining bursts, ranging between
0.22 and 0.29 ×1022 cm−2), lead to results for R2 similar to the remaining
bursts. The results from applying model 3 and the modiﬁed model 3 to the
burst in obsID -24 can be seen in ﬁg. 12 and 13 respectively.
Since applying the modiﬁed model 3 lead to results very similar to model 3 for
all remaning bursts, it should be fair to assume that the results from applying
the modiﬁed model 3 on obsID 2050300120 and -24 are credible.
Fits for the remaining bursts can be found in Appendix A. Note that for the
burst in obsID 2050300110, the modiﬁed model 3 was able to ﬁt an additional
spectra in the tail compared to the original model 3.
All the bursts exhibit photospheric expansion. The photosphere reaches a
maximum extent of approximately 200 to 300 km, and a peak temperature of
approximately 2 to 3 keV, with most bursts reaching a temperature around 2.5
keV. The bolometric ﬂux for the neutron star is approximately constant at 4
×10−8 ergs/cm2/s for the PRE phase after the ﬁrst spectrum, with somewhat
large deviations.
The accretion disk reaches a blackbody radius of approximately 1500 km for
most of the bursts. This radius can be interpreted as an average distance to
the neutron star for the disk. The disk reaches its maximum temperature of
approximately 0.25 keV a few seconds before the neutron star for most of the
bursts. The radius does, however, not seem to follow the same pattern, as it
reaches the original extent at approximately the same time as the neutron star
photosphere.
The blackbody radius of the neutron star at the touchdown point, where the
temperature peaks and the photosphere is believed to settle onto the neutron
star surface after the PRE, is listed in table 3 for all of the bursts. This radius
is deduced from the blackbody normalization according to the relation
presented in section 3.2.1, assuming a source distance of 8.4 kpc. The values
ﬁtted from model 3 and the modiﬁed model 3 corresponds fairly well for all of
the bursts. For burst -20 and -24 the radius ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3
is slightly higher than with model 3, though it still seems very low. For the
remaining bursts the values corresponds quite well.
For burst -22 the achieved radius is quite low compared to all the remaining
bursts. In this burst the touchdown point occurs much later (∼8 sek) than for
all remaining bursts (∼4-5 sek). This does not seem to be a ﬁtting problem,
since the burst follows the expected evolution for both the neutron star and
the accretion disk, however on a longer time-scale (∼factor 2). Moreover, the
photosphere reaches a lower maximum extent, of about 150 km, than the
remaining bursts (the same is evident for burst -20).
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 12: The burst in obsID 2050300124 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 13: The burst in obsID 2050300124 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
32
==PAGE:39==
Table 3: Photospheric radius of the neutron star ﬁtted at the touch-
down point, for each obsID.
obsID
Model 3
Modiﬁed model 3
-04
8.81 -0.71/+0.81 km
8.70 -0.71/+0.81 km
-08
8.90 -0.66/+0.73 km
8.88 -0.67/+0.73 km
-10
8.98 -0.60/+0.67 km
8.91 -0.60/+0.67 km
-15
8.86 -0.81/+0.93 km
8.85 -0.81/+0.94 km
-19a
9.43 -0.81/+0.93 km
9.44 -0.81/+0.93 km
-19b
9.12 -0.68/+0.76 km
9.13 -0.68/+0.76 km
-20
7.25 -0.72/+0.84 km
7.53 -0.74/+0.86 km
-22
6.29 -0.58/+0.65 km
6.29 -0.58/+0.65 km
-24
7.44 -0.72/+0.82 km
7.66 -0.72/+0.83 km
Calculating the average radius ﬁtted with model 3 from the bursts in obsID
-04, -08, -10, -15, -19a and -19b, gives a radius of 9.02 km. The values in table
3 provide a lower limit to the neutron star radius, since the accretion disk will
block some of the photons from the neutron star from our view, resulting in
the instrument receiving fewer photons, and xspec modelling this as a smaller
radiating area in the blackbody model. Therefore this estimate will also
represent a lower limit on the neutron star radius.
5.2.1
Lumonosity, Radius and Distance
The relation between the ﬂux, lumonosity and radius of a blackbody radiator
was described in section 1.3. From the parameters ﬁtted in section 5.2, an
estimated value for luminosity and radius of, and distance to, the neutron star
can be determined.
The luminosity can be determined from the bolometric ﬂux (ﬁtted with cflux
in xspec) and an assumed distance of 8.4 kpc from the following relation,
L = 4πd2Fobs
(21)
which gives a luminosity of 3.4 ×1038 erg/s, for a bolometric ﬂux of 4 ×10−8
and a distance of 8.4 kpc. Note that the distance is not known with a very
good accuracy.
Determining the luminosity from the ﬁtted radius and temperature at the
touchdown point, in the following way,
L = 4πR2σT 4
(22)
gives a luminosity of 4.10 ×1038 erg/s, for a radius of 9.02 km and a
temperature of 2.5 keV.
The largest source of uncertainty in this estimate is the ﬁtted blackbody
temperature. This is in fact a ’color’ temperature, which should be corrected
33
==PAGE:40==
with a color correction, obtained from a atmosphere model, to achieve the
eﬀective temperature of the neutron star. The eﬀective temperature will be
lower than the color temperature, leading to a lower luminosity.
The distance to the source can be deduced form the neutron star radius and
temperature at the touchdown point, and the bolometrix ﬂux ﬁtted in xspec,
in the following way,
d =
s
R2σT 4
Fobs
(23)
which gives a distance of 9.27 kpc, from a radius of 9.02 km, a temperature of
2.5 keV and a bolometric ﬂux of 4 ×10−8 ergs/cm2/s. This distance is a little
high compared to the adopted value of 8.4 kpc. This is again due to the color
correction to the temperature, which would give a smaller distance. Note that
the radius was deduced from the blackbody normalization by assuming a
source distance of 8.4 kpc.
The radius of the neutron star can be determined from the luminosity deduced
from the ﬁtted bolometric ﬂux above, and the temperature at the touchdown
point. This is done in the following way,
R =
r
L
4πσT 4
(24)
which gives a radius of 8.2 km, for a temperature of 2.5 keV. This estimate is a
little lower than expected. This is again due to the color correction to the
temperature, which would lead to a higher radius. Assuming a color correction
factor of 1.5 (Tcol = 1.5 Teﬀ), leads to an estimated radius of 10.1 km, which
seems more reasonable.
Assuming a pure He burst, with a luminosity of 2.9 × 1038 erg/s, we can
determine a neutron star radius from the temperature at the touchdown point
in the same way. This gives s radius of 7.60 km for a temperature of 2.5 keV,
which seems low. Assuming a color correction factor of 1.5, leads to an
estimated radius of 9.3 km. This corresponds well with the radius of 9.02 km
deduced from the averaging over the blackbody radii at the touchdown point
from table 3 (excluding the three smallest radii, see above).
From the He burst luminosity, the distance to the source can be determined
from the ﬁtted bolometric ﬂux from the neutron star in the following way,
d =
r
LHe
4πFobs
(25)
which gives a distance of 7.8 kpc. This estimate is a little smaller than the
adopted value of 8.4 kpc, but agrees with the wide range adopted in literature,
mentioned in section 1.2.1.
34
==PAGE:41==
5.3
Discrete Spectral Features
Modelling the bursts spectra with model 3 left signiﬁcant unmodelled residuals
in the spectrum near the peak, in most of the bursts (see Appendix A). The
most signiﬁcant deviation from the model, was a feature near 1 keV evident in
the peak spectrum of all the bursts. Further, in the peak spectrum of the
burst in obsID 2050300108, a feature was apparent near 1.6 keV. Extracting a
spectrum of 0.375 seconds from obsID 2050300108, starting at the peak of the
lightcurve, these features were possible to model using a gaussian for the
feature at 1 keV and a gaussian absorption model component, gabs, for the
feature at 1.6 keV.
Figure 14: The burst lightcurves from obsID 2050300104, -08 and
-15, aligned with respect to the peak (0.125 binning). Marked in
black, the start and stop time of the extracted peak spectra.
To further conﬁrm the existence of these features, equivalent spectra were
extracted from the bursts in obsID 2050300104 and -15. These bursts were
chosen, since they appeared to have a similar burst evolution, meaning
approximately the same rise time and similar structure in the light curve
during the decay, seen in ﬁg. 14. Further, when the peak spectra were
extracted, these were compared, and a feature near 1.6 keV appeared to be
present in all three spectra. To argue that this feature could originate from the
same process and at the same location/altitude in these three bursts, each
peak spectra was modelled separately with the modiﬁed model 3. The ﬁtted
parameters can be seen in table 4. For this ﬁt, NH was frozen to
0.24 × 1022 cm−2 for all three bursts, to better compare the parameters, since
NH strongly aﬀects the value of R2.
Comparing the parameters in table 4, T1 and R1 are quite similar for all three
bursts, and T2 and R2 are very similar for obsID 2050300108 and -15. The
slightly smaller R1 and T1 for obsID 2050300108, is probably related to the
lower peak ﬂux for this burst, compared to the others. This was attempted to
35
==PAGE:42==
Table 4:
Fitted parameters for the peak spectrum of obsID
2050300104, -08 and -15. (dof ∼300)
2050300104
2050300108
2050300115
NH [cm−2]
0.24 ×1022
0.24 ×1022
0.24 ×1022
T1 [keV ]
≈0.429
≈0.417
≈0.438
R1 [km]
≈276
≈251
≈265
T2 [keV ]
≈0.118
≈0.136
≈0.131
R2 [km]
≈2338
≈1690
≈1756
red χ2
1.113
1.296
1.307
counts
8504
6655
8582
compensate for, by shifting the extraction of the spectrum for obsID
2050300104 and -15 forward by 0.125 seconds, to obtain the same ﬂux level in
each peak spectrum. This did however not improve the further ﬁtting process,
though it did lead to quite similar results.
When the extracted peak spectra were stacked, the feature near 1.6 keV
became more apparent and wider, due to the small shift of the line in each
spectrum relative to the others. Though the feature was easily noticeable in
the spectrum, xspec was not able to model it with a gabs component,
without adding a second gabs component at 1.12 keV, near the gaussian
component at 1 keV. This line did not appear as an apparent absorption line
in the plot, but rather as a modiﬁcation of the gaussian component. Due to
this peculiar behaviour, it was decided to try to model the 1 keV feature with
an absorption edge, instead of a gaussian component representing an emission
line.
Exchanging the gaussian component at 1 keV with an edge component,
resulted in xspec being able to model the feature at 1.6 keV with an gabs
component, without the need for further model components. This lead to a
reduced χ2 of 1.03 for ∼550 degrees of freedom, for a model including an edge
near 1 keV and a gabs component near 1.6 keV. Comparing this to the model
including a gaussian component for the 1 keV feature and adding two gabs
components, lead to a reduced χ2 of 0.85 for ∼550 degrees of freedom. For
these ﬁts the persistent emission was modelled and included in the ﬁt,
according to model 3. Subtracting the persistent as background in the spectra
instead lead to a reduced χ2 of 1.03 and 0.86 for ∼550 degrees of freedom,
respectively.
Fitting the model including an edge and a gabs to the stacked spectrum, in
which the extracted spectra for obsID 2050300104 and -15 was shifted by 0.125
seconds, lead to a reduced χ2 of 1.14 for ∼550 degrees of freedom. For the
shifted and the ’non-shifted’ stacked spectrum, the absorption line ﬁtted using
the gabs model component, was found to be at 1.56 and 1.59 keV
respectively. The edge was found to be at 1.12 and 1.13 keV respectively.
In ﬁg. 15, the data and the ﬁtted model is plotted for the ’non-shifted’ data.
36
==PAGE:43==
(a) Fitted with model 3.
(b) Fitted with an edge at 1.13 +0.017/ −0.018 keV and an absorption
line at 1.59 +0.026/ −0.035 keV.
Figure 15: Fitting the spectral features of the stacked spectrum
consisting of burst -04, -08 and -15.
On the left, ﬁtted with model 3, and on the right, the model including both
the edge near 1 keV and the gaussian absorption component near 1.6 keV.
Note the improvement in the residuals (more accurately ∆χ2) when adding the
two discrete features. Still apparent in the residuals is an excess between 2 - 3
keV and near 0.5 keV. Some of this can be explained as unmodeled residuals
in the NICER response function, according to Strohmayer et al. (2019)[22].
Unlike in Strohmayer et al. (2019), no clear evidence was found for an
absorption line near 3 keV.
5.3.1
Time Evolution of the Absorption Line
Following the time evolution of the absorption line during the burst can give
us information about where the line originates. Several processes can aﬀect
the red-/blueshifting of the line, such as wind-induced blueshift[22] and
Doppler shift due to the rapid motion of the photosphere during the PRE
phase. If the line originates in the photosphere, the strongest source of redshift
of the line can be assumed to be the gravitational redshift due to the neutron
star. This redshift is dependent on the mass of the neutron star, and the
distance from the origin of the line to the neutron star center.
By choosing appropriate time intervals, it was possible to follow the time
evolution of the absorption line found in section 5.3 over part of the PRE
phase of the burst. This can be seen in ﬁg. 16.
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 16: Time evolution of the absorption line over part of the
PRE phase of the stacked spectra consisting of burst -04, -08 and
15.
From the line observed at 1.632 ±0.026 keV at a blackbody radius of 253.65
±26.92 km, we can infer the rest energy of the line from eq. 13,
E =
E0
(z + 1)
(26)
where E is the observed energy of the line, and E0 is the rest energy of that
line. The gravitational redshift can be found from eq. 12,
zgrav + 1 =
1
q
1 −2GM
c2R
(27)
. Assuming that the gravitational redshift is the dominant source of shifting of
the line at this point, the rest energy of the line can be found to be 1.646
+0.027 / -0.026 keV. From this rest energy, the energy of the line at every
distance from the neutron star can be determined, by assuming a mass for the
neutron star.
Using the relation for the energy of the line at every distance to the neutron
star from the rest energy of the line, the predicted line energy for the
blackbody radius (assuming that the line originates in the photosphere) can be
determined for each of these data points assuming a mass of the neutron star.
Into this calculation enters both the uncertainty on the blackbody radius, and
38
==PAGE:45==
the uncertainty on the rest energy of the line. The result can be seen in ﬁg. 17
for a neutron star of mass 1.4 M⊙, together with the observed line energies
ﬁtted with xspec, as function of blackbody radius.
Figure 17: On top: The predicted evolution of a line with rest
energy 1.646 +0.0265/-0.0263 keV, as function of blackbody radius
with MNS = 1.4 M⊙. Below: The observed line energy as function
of blackbody radius, both ﬁtted with xspec.
Figure 18: The predicted and observed evolution of a line with rest
energy 1.646 +0.027/-0.026 keV, with MNS = 1.4 M⊙, as function
of blackbody radius.
39
==PAGE:46==
The same is plotted in ﬁg. 18, on top of each other. The compliance between
the observed and predicted line energies vary solely with the mass of the
neutron star. Since the error bars are somewhat large, a range of masses from
approximately 0.5 to 1.65 M⊙fulﬁlls a criterium of the error bars overlapping
for all data points. The data points with the largest blackbody radius are
largely unaﬀected by the change in neutron star mass, due to the small change
in gravitational redshift at this distance (∼200 km), whereas the data point
with the smallest blackbody radius constrain the mass.
As will be apparent in section 6, this mass estimate is believed to be too small,
since the radius modelled with xspec is a lower limit to the actual radius of
the neutron star photosphere. A larger photospheric radius corresponding to
the same redshift, yields a higher neutron star mass.
The error bars of the data points are largely unaﬀected by the small
uncertainty on the blackbody radius, and are dominated by the uncertainty on
the rest energy of the line. This can be seen in ﬁg.19, where these two eﬀects
are plotted separately.
(a) Uncertainty due to blackbody radius.
(b) Uncertainty due to rest energy of the line.
Figure 19: Separating the eﬀects on the uncertainty of the predicted
line energy.
It was not possible to follow the evolution of the observed edge at 1.1 keV in
the same manner. It was however possible to model the edge in the second
and the ﬁfth extracted spectrum (see Appendix B). The edge was found to be
at 1.138 ± 0.017 keV and 1.144 ± 0.013 keV respectively. These energies fall
within their respective uncertainties, why the energy of the absorption edge
can be assumed to be constant during the PRE. This suggests that the edge
does not originate in the photosphere. It is however premature to conclude the
origin of the line from these two data points.
Plots of the ﬁtted spectra can be found in Appendix B.
40
==PAGE:47==
Single Burst Spectra
Since it was not possible to follow the evolution of the absorption line all the
way to the surface of the neutron star from the stacked spectrum, an eﬀort
was made to search for the absorption line in time-resolved spectra for burst
-04, -08 and -15 separately. This leads to a somewhat more uncertain
identiﬁcation of the line, since the stacked spectra provided us with an
averaging of the spectra resulting in damping of artiﬁcial random features and
an enhancement of the real discrete spectral features. However, having
conﬁrmed the existence and preliminary motion of the line from the stacked
spectra, the further motion of the line is expected to comply with this.
Considering burst -15 separately, and slightly altering the time intervals for
which the spectra are extracted, it is possible to follow the evolution of the
absorption line closer to the neutron star. The result can be seen in ﬁg. 20.
Note the diﬀerent scale on the line energy, compared to ﬁg. 16. In this case,
the line can be followed all the way down to a blackbody radius of 8.99 ±0.22
km, however with a gap from 2.375 to 2.875 s. In this gap, there seems to be a
small disruption in the data, which can also be seen in ﬁg 31. This leads to
xspec having diﬃculties determining the blackbody radius and the line energy
in this interval, why it has been excluded.
Figure 20: Time evolution of the absorption line over the decay of
the PRE phase of the burst in obsID 2050300115.
The observed line energies and blackbody radii have been plotted in ﬁg. 21
together with the predicted line energies for a neutron star mass of 1.45 M⊙.
41
==PAGE:48==
There is a very nice compliance between the observed and predicted line
energies at this neutron star mass. From this, the mass of the neutron star can
be constrained to 1.26 to 1.62 M⊙, for the error bars of the data and the
predicted value to be overlapping. Note again that this mass estimate is low,
as for the stacked spectra. The eﬀects of the uncertainty due to the blackbody
radius and the rest energy of the line can be seen in ﬁg. 22.
Figure 21: The predicted and observed evolution of a line with rest
energy 1.642 ± 0.024 keV, with MNS = 1.45M⊙, as function of
blackbody radius
(a) Uncertainty due to blackbody radius.
(b) Uncertainty due to rest energy of the line.
Figure 22: Separating the eﬀects on the uncertainty of the predicted
line energy.
42
==PAGE:49==
The data point at a blackbody radius of 8.99 ± 0.22 km is likely to be at the
surface of the neutron star. This data point is near the touchdown point ﬁtted
in section 5.2, seen in ﬁg. 31. The blackbody temperature at this point is 2.02
keV, which is slightly less than the temperature ﬁtted at the touchdown point
in section 5.2. At this radius the line is at an energy of 1.183 -0.036/+0.041
keV, which implies a redshift of 0.389 -0.066/+0.064 of the line (from
E0 = 1.643 ± 0.024 keV). From this redshift, a compactness of the neutron star
can be deduced, by assuming that the line originates from the surface of the
neutron star and that all of this observed redshift is due to graviational
redshift.
5.4
Discussion
All of the bursts ﬁtted in section 5.2 exhibited photospheric radius expansion,
giving an opportunity to measure the radius of the neutron star at the
touchdown point of the burst. This radius, ﬁtted with a blackbody model in
xspec, gave an average radius of 9.02 km for a source distance of 8.4 kpc, with
four out of the six averaged radii below this value. This value is, as mentioned,
assumed to be a lower limit, due to blocking of photons by the accretion disk.
The luminosity of the burst deduced from the approximate bolometric ﬂux in
the PRE phase of the burst, assuming a distance to the source of 8.4 kpc, was
found to be 3.4 ×1038 erg/s. This compared to the luminosity deduced from
the ﬁtted neutron star blackbody parameters of 4.10 ×1038 erg/s, without
considering a color correction. These luminosities can be compared to the
expected luminosity of a pure helium burst of 2.9 × 1038 erg/s. From the pure
helium burst luminosity, the distance was estimated to 7.8 kpc. This compares
to the deduced distance of 9.27 kpc from the spectral ﬁtting, without
considering a color correction.
The radius of the neutron star was estimated to be 8.2 km without a color
correction, and 10.1 km with a color correction factor of 1.5. Since this is
estimated from the ﬁtted bolometric ﬂux, this value should also be interpreted
as a lower limit on the neutron star radius.
Using a diﬀerent approach, and assuming a pure He burst with a luminosity of
2.9 ×1038 ergs/s, which should be reasonable for this source, gives a radius of
7.60 km. Applying a color correction factor of 1.5 gives a radius of 9.3 km.
This estimate still seems a little low, even though it removes the eﬀect of
blocking of photons by the accretion disk. This is probably due to the color
correction factor, which is adopted as an approximate value.
Using the He burst luminosity to deduce a source distance, gave a value of 7.8
kpc. This is a little lower than the adopted value of 8.4 kpc, but fall well
within the distances adopted in literature.
A completely diﬀerent approach to determining the neutron star radius is
identifying discrete spectral features, and especially the evolution of these. In
section 5.3 two spectral features, an edge and an absorption line, were
43
==PAGE:50==
identiﬁed in a stacked spectrum near the peak of the stacked bursts. It was
possible to follow the evolution of the absorption line over part of the PRE
phase of the burst, down to a photospheric radius of ∼27 km, in the stacked
spectrum. In an attempt to follow this absorption line closer to the neutron
star surface, the individual bursts from the stacked spectra were investigated.
From this, it was found that the absorption line could be followed all the way
to a blackbody radius of 8.99 ± 0.22 km in burst -15. The redshift of the
absorption line at this radius is 0.38 -0.066/+0.064. Assuming that this
redshift is exclusively due to the gravitional redshift from the neutron star, the
mass of the neutron star can be constrained from the ﬁtted blackbody radius
to be between 1.26 and 1.62 M⊙. This mass estimate is however expected to
be too low, since the ﬁtted blackbody radius is expected to be too low due to
the blocking of photons.
As mentioned, other eﬀects can inﬂuence the blue-/redshift of the absorption
line. These eﬀects include, but is not necessarily limited to, blueshift due to
burst driven winds[22] and Doppler shift due to the motion of the photosphere
during the PRE. This Doppler shift can be estimated to be ≈0.002 for a
movement of the atmosphere of 500 km/s, corresponding to the photosphere
extending to ≈250 km and falling back to the original extent in a time interval
of ≈1 second. The gravitational redshift of the line at the maximum extent of
the photosphere (≈250 km), is ≈1.009 for a neutron star mass of 1.58 M⊙.
Here the Doppler shift due to the movement of the photosphere could have a
contributing eﬀect, but since we are at the maximum extent, the photosphere
must be assumed to be at rest, before falling back down on the neutron star.
According to Weinberg et al. (2006a), in X-ray bursters which accrete
helium-rich fuel, such as 4U 1820-30, the radiation-driven wind will eject some
of the nuclear burning ashes, and ashes which remain bound to the neutron
star will be exposed at the photosphere. Further, they state that ”some of
these surface ashes are of high enough proton number Z that they are not fully
ionized.”[25] This supports the present ﬁnding of an absorption line which
appears to be originating in the photosphere. The deduced rest energy of the
absorption line, found to be 1.643 ± 0.024 keV, is likely to originate from
transitions in Fe XXIII or Mg XI, as was also suggested by Strohmayer et al.
(2019).[2]
Further, it is interesting to note that the edge at 1.1 keV found here, was
identiﬁed as an emission line (at ≈1 keV) in Strohmayer et al. (2019). Since
this paper was published, an updated .arf ﬁle (part of the instrument
response) was available and utilized here. It was however not possible to follow
this apparent edge during the PRE phase, why it is diﬃcult to determine
whether it originates from the neutron star photosphere, accretion disk or the
ejected wind.
The edge was found to be at 1.138 ± 0.017 keV and 1.144 ± 0.013 keV at two
diﬀerent time stamps. Including the interval where these uncertainties overlap,
the line should be expected to be between 1.131 - 1.155 keV, if the conditions
at these two times are the same. This line energy could be both red- and
44
==PAGE:51==
blueshifted, since we do not know the origin of the line. If we assume that the
edge is redshifted, it is likely to originate from the liberation of a L shell
electron in Cu at 1.096 keV, or a K shell electron in Na at 1.071 keV or Ni at
1.008 keV. If we assume that the line is (very) blueshifted, it could originate
from the liberation of a L shell electron in Zn at 1.196 keV (assuming that He
burns this far in the burst) or a K shell electron in Mg at 1.303 keV.[15]
If the identiﬁed absorption line is assumed to originate in the photosphere, and
the photosphere is assumed to settle on the neutron star surface at the ﬁtted
blackbody radius of 8.99 ± 0.22 km, then the redshift of the line can be used to
determine the compactness of the neutron star. This requires the assumption
that the gravitational redshift of the line far outdominates any other eﬀects of
blue-/redshifting, or alternatively, that these eﬀects cancel. The radius
deduced from the compactness and a given mass is then unaﬀected by the
problem with the blocking of photons by the accretion disk. This compactness
and the radii predicted from it, will be the subject of the coming section.
45
==PAGE:52==
6
Fitting Neutron Star Compactness
The graviational redshift on the surface of any object is dependent on the
compactness of the object according to eq. 12,
1 + zgrav =
1
q
1 −2GM
c2R
(28)
where G, the universal gravitational constant, and c, the speed of light, are
constant. If the gravitaional redshift is known, the compactness can thereby
be deduced.
If the line at 1.18 keV found in section 5.3.1 is believed to originate from the
photosphere, and the photosphere is believed to have settled on the surface of
the neutron star at the ’touchdown’ point, the compactness of the neutron star
can be deduced from the redshift of this line, assuming that the gravitational
redshift far outdominates any other eﬀect of red-/blueshifting of the line.
The compactness is found by determining the mass which leads to the best
compliance between predicted and measured line energies, for the data
modelled in section 5.3.1. This prediction is constructed both from an input
mass and from the measured photospheric radius. Even though this radius is
believed to be too small, the ratio for M/R still holds. Varying this ratio of
M/R, and ﬁnding the optimal, minimum and maximum value which ﬁts the
data, leads to a compactness of 0.163 +0.015/-0.018 M⊙/km. The radii
predicted from this for a number of typical neutron star masses can be seen in
ﬁg. 23.
Figure 23: Predicted radius as function of neutron star mass, from
a compactness of 0.163 +0.015/-0.018 M⊙/km.
46
==PAGE:53==
Assuming a neutron star mass of 1.58 M⊙, this compactness results in a radius
of 9.69 +1.21/-0.81 km. The plot in ﬁg. 21 is reproduced for this mass and
radius, to check if this compactness leads to reasonable results for the
remaining observed line energies, seen in ﬁg 24. Here the radius of the neutron
star has been assumed to be 9.69 km, which corresponds to a shift of the
observed radius of 1.077. Therefore all the distances (photospheric radii) have
been shifted by this amount. Note that the errors on the distances have been
neglected, and so the predicted line energies should have slightly larger error
bars if these were included (see ﬁg. 22 for the signiﬁcance of the error on the
photospheric radius).
Figure 24: Predicted line energies for a neutron star mass of 1.58
M⊙, and a shift in the measured distances (photospheric radii) of
1.077, corresponding to a compactness of 0.163 [M⊙/km] plotted in
black, with the observed line energies in red.
Since the factor by which the distances are shifted in ﬁg. 24 is small (1.077 for
MNS = 1.58 M⊙), and the gravitational redshift is small at large radii, the
data points at the largest distances are largely unaﬀected. The two datapoints
at the smallest distances are primarily aﬀacted by this shift. The shift in the
distance of the data point at the second smallest distance ﬁts well with the
observed line energy, as well as the data point at the smallest distance which
was used to make this prediction.
The mass of 1.58 M⊙is retrieved from G¨uver et al. (2010). Though the tight
constrain (± 0.06 M⊙) on the mass was criticized by Suleimanov et al.
(2017b), it is the only work supplying a mass constrain tight enough to
sensibly reduce a radius from the compactness. Including the uncertainty on
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 25: Plot over diﬀerent models for the neutron star equation
of state. On the left of the ﬁgure, in purple, the predicted radius
from a neutron star mass of 1.58 ±0.06 M⊙is plotted.[6]
this mass gives a predicted radius of 9.69 -1.15/+1.62 km (8.54 - 11.31 km)
from the compactness of 0.163 +0.015/-0.018. This mass/radius constrain is
plotted over a series of possible neutron star equation of states in ﬁg. 25.
These constrains allow for a number of possible equation of states, where the
most likely seems to be SQM2 (strange quark matter) or AP2
(multi-nucleonic), both at a neutron star radius of ≈10 km. Further, for
slightly larger radii, WFF1 and -3 are possible candidates, along with SLy4
and WFF2 at even larger radii. For radii smaller than 9.7 km, AP1 and
possibly SQM1 are candidates for the equation of state. For a description of
the diﬀerent equations of states in ﬁg. 25, see Lattimer & Prakash(2001).
In ﬁg. 26, the radius corresponding to a neutron star of mass 1.58 M⊙is
plotted as function of surface gravitational redshift. As can be seen, the
redshift is quite strongly dependent on the neutron star radius for smaller
radii, why it is likely that a certain redshift corresponds to a speciﬁc radius if
the radius is small. For larger radii, the redshift is less dependent on radius,
for a ﬁxed neutron star mass.
6.1
Discussion
To determine the compactness of the neutron star, the energy of a line at two
diﬀerent distances is needed, one at the surface of the neutron star and one at
another known distance. The greater this distance, the less accuracy on the
48
==PAGE:55==
Figure 26: Plot over radius as function of surface gravitational red-
shift for a neutron star of mass 1.58 M⊙.
distance is needed to make a fair estimate of the rest energy of the line
observed, since the gravitational redshift decreases rapidly with distance. For
the line at the neutron star surface the apparent distance to the center of the
neutron star, being the radius, should be known as accurately as possible.
This accuracy, and the accuracy on the line energy, determines how well the
compactness can be constrained.
As described above, the mass corresponding to the apparent radius returned
by xspec to ﬁt the redshift of the line, will give a ratio for the compactness.
Due to equation 12, this ratio is constant for a speciﬁc gravitational redshift of
the line. Therefore we can determine the radius of the neutron star for a given
mass, or vice versa.
The radius ﬁtted in xspec of 8.99 ± 0.22 km for the spectra at the touchdown
point corresponds well with the ﬁtted radii at the touchdown point for the
remaining bursts, seen in table 3. Therefore it is likely that this radius
represents the apparent radius of the neutron star, ﬁtted from the
spectroscopic data.
From this the corresponding mass to ﬁt the redshift of the line is found, to
determine the compactness of the neutron star. This compactness is found to
be 0.163 +0.015/-0.018 M⊙/km . From this compactness, the radius is
deduced, assuming the mass from G¨uver et al. (2010) of 1.58 ± 0.06 M⊙. This
gives a radius of 9.69 -1.15/+1.62 km (8.54 - 11.31 km).
G¨uver et al. (2010) constrain both the neutron star radius and mass from
spectroscopic data. From this they ﬁnd the mass adopted in this work of 1.58
± 0.06 M⊙and a radius of 9.1 ± 0.4 km. They ﬁnd this to be consistent with
SQM1 and ’A’, which likely corresponds to AP1 in ﬁg. 25, equation of state
49
==PAGE:56==
(see ﬁg. 7 in G¨uver et al. (2010)). As mentioned, this work was later criticized
for their method not being self-consistent.
¨Ozel et al. (2015) deduce a radius of approximately 8 to 14 km and a mass of
approximately 1.3 - 2.2 M⊙for 4U 1820-30, and ﬁnd that a range of equation
of states almost ’down’ (in radius) to SQM1, and ’up’ to and beyond MPA1 in
ﬁg. 25 comply with the modelled compactness (see ﬁg. 11 in the article).[20]
¨Ozel and Freire (2016) constrain the neutron star equation of state to be
’below’ AP4 (in black in ﬁg. 25), which provides a tighter constrain than
mentioned just above. Around 1.5 M⊙, their inferred equation of state
predicts radii between 9.9 - 11.2 km.[19]
The constrain supplied from the compactness deduced here, and the mass
apapted from G¨uver et al. (2010), agree well with these constrains. It seems
that SQM1, -2 and -3, AP1 and -2, WFF1, -2 and -3 and SLy4 are the
strongest candidates for the neutron star equation of state, based on this study.
NICERs has a spectral resolution of ≈0.08 keV at 1 keV, meaning that only
features with a width larger than this can be observed. The width of each
energy channel is 10 eV, meaning that the energy of an observed line or edge
cannot be constrained better than this. The uncertainty on line energy for the
two data points used to constrain the compactness (at Rmax and at
touchdown) is ± 0.024 keV and -0.036/+0.041 keV respectively. Achieving a
smaller uncertainty on these energies would lead to a more well constrained
compactness, and thereby a better constrain on the equation of state. This
could be achieved by the observation of an intermediate or long-duration
X-ray burst by NICER. These bursts remain at high count rates and at large
radii for a longer time duration, allowing for better statistics for data points at
diﬀerent radii.
50
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusion
This work was initiated to study the relation between the accretion of material
onto the neutron star and burst energetics. The burst energetics are
investigated by comparing the energy release due to the accretion of matter
and the energy released in the burst. These are related by an α parameter,
which indicates the nuclear processes taking place in the burst. These
processes likely include the fusion of helium to iron group elements. The
resulting heavy element ashes of the burst are expected to be detectable in the
burst spectra. The identiﬁcation of these elements can reveal the nuclear
processes taking place in the burst. Further, the compactness of the neutron
star can be deducted from the gravitational redshift of the spectral signatures
of these elements.
A fundamental mechanism in X-ray bursts is the accretion of matter from the
donor star. The burst energetics depend on the composition of this matter.
This composition is investigated by comparing the total energy release of the
persistent emission, which is due to the energy release of the accreted matter
falling in the gravitational potential well of the neutron star, to the energy
released in the burst.
The total energy release due to the accretion process is found from the
persistent emission and the burst recurrence time. Since this recurrence time
cannot be readily measured from the data, a model for the recurrence time is
constructed. This is done in section 4 for data from the same source from 2017
where consecutive bursts were observed, and this model is then applied to the
data presented in section 2. From this, the recurrence time for a speciﬁc burst
can be approximated, and the total energy release of the accretion process can
be determined. This energy release is found to be 6.16 × 10−5 erg/cm2 for the
burst in obsID -19b.
This energy release can then be compared to the energy released in the burst.
The total energy release of the burst in obsID -19b is 2.68 × 10−7 erg/cm2.
This gives an α parameter of 224.
The energy release due to the infall of material towards a neutron star with a
compactness of 0.163 M⊙/km, deduced in section 6, is ≈230 MeV. An alpha
parameter of ≈220 suggests an energy release per nucleon of ≈1 MeV during
the burst process. This is somewhat lower than the 1.6 MeV per nucleon
expected for helium burning to iron group elements. There is, however, a
rather large uncertainty related to the predicted recurrence time for this burst,
since it is modelled from a rather sparse data set.
In the burst, helium fuses into heavier elements. Which elements are created
in this process is not known with great certainty. Computer simulations of
pure helium bursts suggest the creation of heavy elements up to Z = 28. The
detection of these elements reveal details about the nuclear processes of
thermonuclear X-ray bursts.
The bursts analyzed in section 5.2 all show photospheric radius expansion.
51
==PAGE:58==
From the blackbody normalization at the touchdown point, where the
photosphere is believed to settle on the neutron star surface, the radius of the
neutron star is inferred. This is done by assuming a source distance of 8.4 kpc.
The average radius found for the bursts is then 9.02 km. The distance to the
source is, however, not known to a very good precision. Further, the ﬂux from
the neutron star can be partially blocked from our view by the accretion disk,
resulting in the blackbody radius being ﬁtted from a smaller emitting area
than the actual surface of the neutron star. This results in a smaller predicted
radius, than if the whole neutron star was visible.
The heavy element ashes predicted to be produced in the thermonuclear burst
are expected to imprint spectral signatures in the burst spectra. These ashes
are likely to be exposed at the photosphere. In the spectral analysis of the
bursts, an absorption edge was observed at 1.141 -0.02/+0.016 keV. Since the
location of the origin of this line could not be constrained, the identiﬁcation of
a corresponding element is uncertain. Further, an absorption line with a
deduced rest energy of 1.643 ± 0.024 keV was identiﬁed, assuming that the
only red-/blueshift of the line is due to gravitaional redshift. This rest energy
corresponds to transitions in Fe XXIII and Mg XI. This corresponds well with
the expected burning of helium to iron group elements.
It was possible to follow this absorption line during the decay of the PRE
phase of the burst, to what can be assumed to be the neutron star surface at a
blackbody radius of 8.99 ± 0.22 km. From the energy of the line at this
location, the total redshift of the line can be determined. The total redshift of
0.38 -0.066/+0.064 is assumed to be grossly dominated by the graviational
redshift. Due to this assumption, the compactness of the neutron star can be
deduced. This total graviational redshift yields a neutron star compactness of
0.163 +0.015/-0.018 M⊙/km.
To compare this compactness to proposed equation of states, a radius can be
deduced from an assumed mass. This mass is adopted from G¨uver et al.
(2010), who ﬁnd a neutron star mass of 1.58 ± 0.06 M⊙. This result was,
however, later criticized for its unrealistic tight constrain on the neutron star
mass. The resulting radius of 9.69 -1.15/+1.62 km predict a number of
possible equations of states, including multi-nucleonic and strange quark
matter equations of states. Until better mass estimates are available, this is
the most plausible constrain based on the deduced compactness.
This prediction corresponds well with the predicted equation of states by
G¨uver et al. (2010), ¨Ozel et al. (2015) and ¨Ozel and Freire (2016). When
future tight constrains on the neutron star mass or radius are available, these
can be used to constrain the equation of state from the compactness deduced
in this work.
Further, future observations by NICER of intermediate and long-duration
bursts could supply tighter constrains on the compactness from more precise
line identiﬁcations due to the increased statistics.
52
==PAGE:59==
References
[1] Keith Arnaud, Craig Gordon, and Ben Dorman. Xspec manual - users’
guide for version 12.10.1. Xspec Manual - Users’ Guide for version 12.10.1
by Keith Arnaud, Craig Gordon & Ben Dorman. HEARSARC, Astro-
physics Science Division, NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, MD 20771, Oct 2018.
[2] AtomDB.org.
Atomic Data for Astrophysicists.
http://atomdb.org/
Webguide/webguide.php. Online; accessed January 11 2020.
[3] Sudip Bhattacharyya. X-ray views of neutron star low-mass X-ray binaries.
Current Science, 97:804–820, 2009.
[4] Martin Bojowald.
The Universe: A View from Classical and Quantum
Gravity. Wiley-VCH, Dec 2012.
[5] Andrew Cumming.
Models of Type I X-Ray Bursts from 4U 1820-30.
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 595(2):1077–1085, Oct 2003.
[6] Paulo Freire.
Pulsar mass measurements and tests of general relativ-
ity. http://www3.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/staff/pfreire/NS_masses.html.
Online; accessed January 7 2020.
[7] Duncan K. Galloway and Laurens Keek.
Thermonuclear X-ray bursts.
arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:1712.06227, Dec 2017.
[8] Mark Gieles, Eduardo Balbinot, Rashid I. S. M. Yaaqib, Vincent H´enault-
Brunet, Alice Zocchi, Miklos Peuten, and Peter G. Jonker. Mass models
of NGC 6624 without an intermediate-mass black hole. Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 473(4):4832–4839, Feb 2018.
[9] A. J. Goodwin, D. K. Galloway, A. Heger, A. Cumming, and Z. John-
ston. A Bayesian approach to matching thermonuclear X-ray burst obser-
vations with models. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
490(2):2228–2240, Dec 2019.
[10] Tolga G¨uver, Patricia Wroblewski, Larry Camarota, and Feryal ¨Ozel. THE
MASS AND RADIUS OF THE NEUTRON STAR IN 4u 1820–30. The
Astrophysical Journal, 719(2):1807–1812, Aug 2010.
[11] J. J. M. in’t Zand and N. N. Weinberg. Evidence of heavy-element ashes in
thermonuclear X-ray bursts with photospheric superexpansion. Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 520:A81, Sep 2010.
[12] L. Keek, Z. Arzoumanian, D. Chakrabarty, Jerome Chenevez, K.C. Gen-
dreau, S. Guillot, T. ver, J. Homan, Gaurava Jaisawal, B. Lamarr, F.K.
Lamb, S. Mahmoodifar, C.B. Markwardt, T. Okajima, T.E. Strohmayer,
and Jean in ’t Zand. Nicer detection of strong photospheric expansion dur-
ing a thermonuclear x-ray burst from 4u 1820–30. Astrophysical Journal
Letters, 856:L37, Apr 2018.
53
==PAGE:60==
[13] Ulrich Kolb. Extreme Environment Astrophysics. Cambridge University
Press, Jun 2010.
[14] Nathanael Lampe, Alexander Heger, and Duncan K. Galloway. The In-
ﬂuence of Accretion Rate and Metallicity on Thermonuclear Bursts: Pre-
dictions from KEPLER Models. Astrophysical Journal Letters, 819(1):46,
Mar 2016.
[15] David R. Lide. Handbook of Chemistry & Physics 73rd Edition. CRC Press,
Jun 1992.
[16] NASA.
A
User’s
Guide
to
NICER
Data
Analysis.
https:
//heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/nicer/data_analysis/nicer_
analysis_guide.html. Online; accessed January 3 2020.
[17] NASA.
NICER:
Investigating
the
densest
known
objects
in
the
universe.
https://smd-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/science-red/
s3fs-public/atoms/files/nicer-factsheet-final.pdf.
Online; ac-
cessed November 21 2019.
[18] NASA. NICER mission guide. https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/
nicer/mission_guide/. Online; accessed November 21 2019.
[19] Feryal ¨Ozel and Paulo Freire. Masses, Radii, and the Equation of State of
Neutron Stars. Annual Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 54:401–
440, Sep 2016.
[20] Feryal ¨Ozel, Dimitrios Psaltis, Tolga G¨uver, Gordon Baym, Craig Heinke,
and Sebastien Guillot. The Dense Matter Equation of State from Neu-
tron Star Radius and Mass Measurements. Astrophysical Journal Letters,
820(1):28, Mar 2016.
[21] Frederick Seward and Philip Charles. Exploring the x-ray universe. Ex-
ploring the X-ray Universe by Frederick D. Seward and Philip A. Charles.
Cambridge University Press, 2010. ISBN: 9780521884839, Aug 2010.
[22] T.
E.
Strohmayer,
D.
Altamirano,
Z.
Arzoumanian,
P.
M.
Bult,
D. Chakrabarty, J. Chenevez, A. C. Fabian, K. C. Gendreau, S. Guil-
lot, J. J. M. in ’t Zand , G. K. Jaisawal, L. Keek, P. Kosec, R. M. Ludlam,
S. Mahmoodifar, Christian Malacaria, and J. M. Miller. NICER Discov-
ers Spectral Lines during Photospheric Radius Expansion Bursts from 4U
1820-30: Evidence for Burst-driven Winds. The Astrophysical Journal Let-
ters, 878(2):L27, Jun 2019.
[23] Valery F. Suleimanov, Jari J. E. Kajava, Sergey V. Molkov, Joonas N¨attil¨a,
Alexander A. Lutovinov, Klaus Werner, and Juri Poutanen. Basic param-
eters of the helium-accreting X-ray bursting neutron star in 4U 1820-30.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 472(4):3905–3913, Dec
2017.
54
==PAGE:61==
[24] M. van der Klis.
A review of rapid X-ray variability in X-ray binaries.
arXiv e-prints, pages astro–ph/0410551, Oct 2004.
[25] Nevin N. Weinberg, Lars Bildsten, and Hendrik Schatz.
Exposing the
Nuclear Burning Ashes of Radius Expansion Type I X-Ray Bursts. Astro-
physical Journal Letters, 639(2):1018–1032, Mar 2006.
55
==PAGE:62==
List of Figures
1
The donor star, M2, ﬁlls its Roche-lobe which overﬂows into the
potential well of the compact object in M1, since the potential
of the inner Lagrange point L1 is lower than L3. Figure adapted
from ’Exploring the X-ray Universe’ by Seward & Charles.[21] . .
3
2
Illustration of the low mass X-ray binary 4U 1820-30, consisting
of a neutron star and a white dwarf donor star.[3] . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Illustration of, on the left, the material build-up on the surface
of the neutron star, the resulting thermonuclear ﬂash, and the
start of a new build-up process. On the right, the emission from
the source, with a persistent ﬂux from the accretion process and
a sharp rise at the on-set of the burst.[21] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
The soft spectral state, dominated by emissions from the ac-
cretion process, and the hard spectral state, dominated by up-
scattering of soft photons from the neutron star by the hot corona.
[Own ﬁgure] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
NICER onboard the International Space Station.[17] . . . . . . .
10
6
4U 1820-30 as observed by BAT and MAXI from April 27 to
August 15 2019.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7
Linear ﬁt to the two data points, being the recurrence time as
function of persistent ﬂux for the two burst pairs, with modeled
recurrence times for each calculated interval, marked with circles.
20
8
Predicted bursts from modelled recurrence time from mean per-
sistent ﬂux in varying intervals, with oﬀset 250 s. . . . . . . . . .
21
9
Predicted recurrence time and bursts in the 2019 data, using the
model based on the 2017 data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
10
The burst in obsID 2050300104 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
30
11
The burst in obsID 2050300104 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
30
12
The burst in obsID 2050300124 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
32
13
The burst in obsID 2050300124 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
32
14
The burst lightcurves from obsID 2050300104, -08 and -15, aligned
with respect to the peak (0.125 binning). Marked in black, the
start and stop time of the extracted peak spectra.
. . . . . . . .
35
15
Fitting the spectral features of the stacked spectrum consisting
of burst -04, -08 and -15. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
16
Time evolution of the absorption line over part of the PRE phase
of the stacked spectra consisting of burst -04, -08 and 15.
. . . .
38
17
On top: The predicted evolution of a line with rest energy 1.646
+0.0265/-0.0263 keV, as function of blackbody radius with MNS =
1.4 M⊙. Below: The observed line energy as function of black-
body radius, both ﬁtted with xspec. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
18
The predicted and observed evolution of a line with rest energy
1.646 +0.027/-0.026 keV, with MNS = 1.4 M⊙, as function of
blackbody radius. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
56
==PAGE:63==
19
Separating the eﬀects on the uncertainty of the predicted line
energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
20
Time evolution of the absorption line over the decay of the PRE
phase of the burst in obsID 2050300115. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
21
The predicted and observed evolution of a line with rest energy
1.642 ± 0.024 keV, with MNS = 1.45M⊙, as function of black-
body radius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
22
Separating the eﬀects on the uncertainty of the predicted line
energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
23
Predicted radius as function of neutron star mass, from a com-
pactness of 0.163 +0.015/-0.018 M⊙/km.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
24
Predicted line energies for a neutron star mass of 1.58 M⊙, and a
shift in the measured distances (photospheric radii) of 1.077, cor-
responding to a compactness of 0.163 [M⊙/km] plotted in black,
with the observed line energies in red.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
25
Plot over diﬀerent models for the neutron star equation of state.
On the left of the ﬁgure, in purple, the predicted radius from a
neutron star mass of 1.58 ±0.06 M⊙is plotted.[6] . . . . . . . . .
48
26
Plot over radius as function of surface gravitational redshift for
a neutron star of mass 1.58 M⊙.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
27
The burst in obsID 2050300108 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
60
28
The burst in obsID 2050300108 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
60
29
The burst in obsID 2050300110 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
61
30
The burst in obsID 2050300110 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
61
31
The burst in obsID 2050300115 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
62
32
The burst in obsID 2050300115 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
62
33
The ﬁrst burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with model 3. . . . . .
63
34
The ﬁrst burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
35
The second burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with model 3. . . .
64
36
The second burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
37
The burst in obsID 2050300120 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
65
38
The burst in obsID 2050300120 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
65
39
The burst in obsID 2050300122 ﬁtted with model 3.
. . . . . . .
66
40
The burst in obsID 2050300122 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed model 3.
66
41
Spectra 1 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption line. . .
68
42
Spectra 2 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption line. . .
68
43
Spectra 3 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption line. . .
69
44
Spectra 4 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption line. . .
69
45
Spectra 5 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption line. . .
70
57
==PAGE:64==
List of Tables
1
The nine bursts observed from 4U 1820-30 with NICER in June
2019. *ﬁtted with lcurve.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Reduced χ2 for ≈250 dof of each model, for 16 time-resolved
spectra of the burst in obsID 2050300104. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Photospheric radius of the neutron star ﬁtted at the touchdown
point, for each obsID.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Fitted parameters for the peak spectrum of obsID 2050300104,
-08 and -15. (dof ∼300)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
58
==PAGE:65==
A
Fitted Bursts
The plots begin on the next page.
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 27: The burst in obsID 2050300108 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 28: The burst in obsID 2050300108 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure 29: The burst in obsID 2050300110 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 30: The burst in obsID 2050300110 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure 31: The burst in obsID 2050300115 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 32: The burst in obsID 2050300115 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
62
==PAGE:69==
Figure 33: The ﬁrst burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 34: The ﬁrst burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with the mod-
iﬁed model 3.
63
==PAGE:70==
Figure 35: The second burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with model
3.
Figure 36: The second burst in obsID 2050300119 ﬁtted with the
modiﬁed model 3.
64
==PAGE:71==
Figure 37: The burst in obsID 2050300120 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 38: The burst in obsID 2050300120 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
65
==PAGE:72==
Figure 39: The burst in obsID 2050300122 ﬁtted with model 3.
Figure 40: The burst in obsID 2050300122 ﬁtted with the modiﬁed
model 3.
66
==PAGE:73==
67
==PAGE:74==
B
Fitted Absorption Line
Figure 41: Spectra 1 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption
line.
Figure 42: Spectra 2 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption
line.
68
==PAGE:75==
Figure 43: Spectra 3 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption
line.
Figure 44: Spectra 4 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption
line.
69
==PAGE:76==
Figure 45: Spectra 5 of the time-resolved analysis for the absorption
line.
70
