==PAGE:1==
Partially autoregressive language
modelling and editing of discrete
sequences
Daniel Horvath
Kongens Lyngby 2020
Supervisor: Ole Winther, DTU Compute
Co-Supervisor: Alexander Rosenberg Johansen, DTU Compute
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis is concerned with the semi-autoregressive sequence generating and
editing methods, speciﬁcally the Levenshtein transformer and its adaptation
for the grammatical error correction task. It begins with the introduction of
the grammatical error correction task and the non and semi-autoregressive
sequence generation solutions that will be investigated further in later sections.
Then the architecture of the used neural networks are described, along with the
tokenization and metrics that this thesis relies on. It is followed by the description
of the used datasets and the generated pseudo-dataset. Benchmark tests are
then ran on the baseline neural models and the Levenshtein transformer with the
applied changes, and the results are then analyzed. The computational eﬃciency
of the Levenshtein transformer implemented in this thesis is also compared to
another popular framework’s implementation.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with semi-autoregressive sequence generation and editing, specif-
ically the Levenshtein transformer and its adaptation to the Grammatical Error
Correction task.
The thesis consists of an introduction, literature review over the diﬀerent non-
autoregressive sequence generation methods and grammatical error correction
solutions, methodology, a description of the used datasets and the experimental
setup, and lastly the results, discussion and conclusion. The appendix contains
the hyperparameters of the discussed networks, additional validation data of the
best performing network and a few samples of the decoding procedure.
Lyngby, 16-January-2020
Daniel Horvath
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Ole Winther and Alexander Johnasen
for coaching me throughout the thesis. I am very grateful for Alexander for
providing suggestions at every part of this thesis and for his feedbacks on the
investigated solutions. I also highly appreciate his eﬀort on creating a deep
learning community at the university.
And I give my thanks to the DTU
Computing Center for providing me access to the High Performance Cluster,
without which it would have been impossible to carry out this thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Grammatical error correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Notations and conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related works
4
2.1
Non-autoregressive neural machine translation networks . . . . .
4
2.2
Grammatical error correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Tokenization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Machine translation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Conditional autoregressive language modelling
. . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Masked language modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Scaled dot-product attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.3
Multi-head attention block
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.4
Decoder masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.5
Positional encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.6
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.7
Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.8
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.9
Optimizer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3.2.10 Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Copy-augmented transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Levenshtein transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.1
Basic operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.2
Sequence generation and reﬁnement
. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.3
Adapting the model for the GEC task . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4.4
Tokenization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.5
Generalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.1
BLEU score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.2
MaxMatch score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Data
31
4.1
Machine translation datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Grammatical error correction datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Manually corrected datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Synthetic dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Experimental setup
36
5.1
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.1
BLEU score calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.2
MaxMatch score calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Neural network framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Byte-Pair Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Results and discussion
40
6.1
Transformer and Levenshtein transformer implementation . . . .
40
6.1.1
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1.2
Levenshtein transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
GEC task results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2.1
Quantitative results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2.2
Qualitative results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusion
55
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Hyperparameters used in the neural network models
58
B Validation M2 scores of the Levenshtein t. with separate ﬁnal
layers
60
C Decoding samples of the Levenshtein transformer
62
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
D Project plan
64
D.1 Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
D.2 Original time plan and risk analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bibliography
68
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Grammatical error correction
The advent of artiﬁcial neural networks brought forth staggering achievements
on a wide range of tasks where conventional computer algorithms struggled to
reach or overcome a human level performance. One of the most successful and
heavily studied ﬁelds of neural networks is natural language processing (NLP),
and within that neural machine translation (MT). While statistical machine
translation (SMT) models have been present for a long time, the neural MT
models have since become the de facto standard [Wu et al., 2016].
However, neural network models have struggled to beat phrase-based SMT
models in a number of areas within the NLP ﬁeld, especially in those with
limited data [Junczys-Dowmunt et al., 2018].
Automated grammatical error
correction (GEC) has been an example of these up until very recently. GEC is a
task where given an input sentence that potentially has diﬀerent kind of errors,
such as grammatical, spelling, punctuation and word choice, the system predicts
a sentence that is free of these errors and has the meaning of the original one.
Given the similarities between machine translation and GEC, the state-of-the-art
neural MT networks have been adapted for the GEC task with good results
[Chollampatt and Ng, 2018], [Junczys-Dowmunt et al., 2018]. Recent GEC neu-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
ral networks outperform SMT systems, however, with a much smaller margin
compared to the diﬀerence in MT [Chollampatt and Ng, 2019]. Several sugges-
tions have been proposed in order to increase the performance of these systems,
many of which targeted three main diﬀerences between the GEC and MT task:
ﬁrstly, the low amount of training data for the GEC task compared to the large
amount of bilingual corpora available for MT. Secondly, the autoregressive nature
of most well performing MT models . And ﬁnally, while generally in MT the
input and output sentence resemble very little similarity, this is not the case
in the GEC task, where a large part of the input and output is exactly the
same. Multiple solutions have been proposed to all of these issues. The lack of
large training corpora has been addressed by generating large pseudo datasets
from monolingual data [Kiyono et al., 2019]. The autoregressive decoding has
been boosted by networks with iterative decoders that reﬁnes their own input
in multiple iterations[Awasthi et al., 2019]. And the signiﬁcant similarities be-
tween the input and output sentences have been exploited by incorporating copy
mechanisms [Zhao et al., 2019].
While the copy mechanism and the iterative decoding has brought signiﬁcant
improvements to the GEC models, they do not imitate the way humans correct
wrong sentences. The typical solution of a language teacher who corrects a
homework is not copying the the original sentence over and over, improving it in
every turn, but rather crossing out the faulty parts and writing the correction
over them. None of the existing GEC networks use this procedure, however, a
recently introduced MT network, the Levenshtein transformer [Gu et al., 2019b]
can mimic it by using two atomic operations: token deletion and token insertion.
By making edits on the original, faulty sentence with the Levenshtein transformer,
the GEC task is solved as a local sequence transduction problem rather than a
machine translation problem.
In this thesis I investigate the performance of this network for the GEC task
compared to a strong baseline and the current state-of-the-art neural network
model. First, I present solutions related to non-autoregressive decoding; other
works that addressed the previously mentioned issues regarding the GEC task;
and tokenization solutions. Then in the Methodology section I describe the
baseline models, the Levenshtein transformer and the changes that I apply
to adopt it to the GEC task, the tokenization solution that I chose and the
evaluation metrics that I use to compare the networks. Then in the Data section
I detail the datasets that I use and the pseudo dataset that I generate so I can
pretrain the networks on it. Next, the hardware setup and the chosen framework
and packages are described. Finally, I present the results of my own Levenshtein
transformer implementation and the GEC results. The thesis ends with the
conclusion, along with possible improvements presented in the future works
section and appendix.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Notations and conventions
3
1.2
Notations and conventions
Throughout this thesis I follow the notations and conventions described in this
section. Scalar valued variables will be denoted as lower cased letters, such as x.
Vectors will be deﬁned as capital letters, e.g X = x1, ..., xn and matrices will be
denoted with bold capital letters, such as T = Ri,j, where T is a matrix with i
rows and j columns, unless it is implied otherwise.
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Related works
There are two subjects that serve as the basis of this thesis, which are non-
autoregressive neural machine translation networks and diﬀerent solutions used
for the grammatical error correction task. While in this thesis these topics are
intertwined, the non-autoregressive neural networks have been a topic of interest
for much longer than their use in GEC task, therefore I describe remarkable
works for them separately. Tokenization is another question that I will present
in this section.
2.1
Non-autoregressive neural machine translation
networks
Autoregressive machine translation models have been the state-of-the-art neural
networks for the MT task. One of the earliest successes of neural MT was
achieved by [Sutskever et al., 2014] with their recurrent neural network (RNN).
These networks’ performance was boosted by added attention mechanisms in
many cases [Luong et al., 2015]. RNNs are inherently hard to parallelize thus are
computationally less eﬃcient and learning long term dependencies also proved
to be diﬃcult with these networks [Bengio et al., 1994].
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Non-autoregressive neural machine translation networks
5
This inspired other solutions such as the use of convolutional neural networks with
attention mechanisms [Gehring et al., 2017] and a popular architecture called
transformer introduced by [Vaswani et al., 2017]. The transformer architecture
is built up exclusively with feedforward networks with which it achieved state-of-
the-art performance. However, this network is also autoregressive. Autoregressive
neural networks are usually paired with the beam search algorithm for sequence
generation, which while performs well, cannot ensure to ﬁnd the most probable
sequence and is computationally expensive [Gu et al., 2016].
Therefore in recent years more and more research have been aimed at non-
autoregressive machine translation approaches. One of the most prominent
works is made by [Gu et al., 2016]. In their work they introduce a variant of
the transformer architecture, the Non-autoregressive transformer (NAT). The
NAT uses the original transformer’s encoder without any changes, however,
the decoder is a modiﬁed version of the original one.
It contains an extra
self-attention layer that is used to calculate the positional attention over the
positions of the decoder input sequence. Being a non-autoregressive model, the
decoder cannot be conditioned on its previous outputs, therefore the output
sequence’s length also needs to be modelled. Thus, a latent variable called
"fertility" is introduced, which is calculated from the encoder’s output for each
input tokens. This fertility is then used to determine the output sequence length
by determining how "fertile" each token is, how many tokens will be needed to
translate it: so tokens with 0 fertility are omitted and tokens with n fertility are
copied over to the decoder n times, which in eﬀect models the output length.
While the NAT achieves a 2-3x faster generation speed, its performance is around
10% lower than its autoregressive counterpart.
[Lee et al., 2019] extends the NAT architecture with iterative reﬁnement. Their
architecture consists of 3 blocks: an encoder that is identical to the original
transformers, a decoder from the NAT architecture and a second NAT decoder.
Their encoder and ﬁrst decoder works similarly as in the NAT architecture,
however, the second decoder is initialized with the 1st decoder’s outputs, thus it
is entirely monolingual: it has the same input and output language contrary to
the ﬁrst decoder. The output of the 2nd decoder is fed into itself, thus creating
a loop that iteratively reﬁnes the output sequence. Their solution improves the
NAT performance, but still underperforms the original transformer.
A diﬀerent approach is described by [Gu et al., 2019a]. They introduce a diﬀerent
decoding algorithm, the insertion-based decoding with inferred generation order
(InDIGO). This transformer-based architecture changes the original positional
encoder that provides information of the tokens’ absolute positions, and instead
uses relative positions. At every decoding step the decoder produces a token and
it’s position relative to the existing sequence, thus eﬀectively inserting a token
into the sequence at any position. While InDIGO is autoregressive, in contrast
==PAGE:16==
6
Related works
to the conventional autoregressive approach it generates the output tokens in an
arbitrary order, which served as a basis to the Levenshtein transformer.
2.2
Grammatical error correction
The high performance of neural networks on the machine translation task
calls for their application for the GEC task as well due to their similarity.
However, neural MT systems could only recently demonstrate better perfor-
mance than the phrase-based statistical MT systems which is in part due to
the lack of large annotated corpora which is a severe drawback of the GEC
task [Junczys-Dowmunt et al., 2018]. Since neural MT systems rely on large
translation corpora, applying the same training methods yields limited success.
Several methods have been investigated to overcome this issue.
[Junczys-Dowmunt et al., 2018] approach GEC as a low-resource MT task and
apply several techniques widely used for low-resource domains, such as dropping
out source words with a p = 0.2 probability, domain adaptation by oversampling
the NUCLE corpus, error adaptation by removing correct source-target sentence
pairs from the train set to match the error rate in the test dataset, the use of
tied source and target embeddings, ensembling multiple independently trained
model, scaling loss for edited words and pre-training the models on monolingual
data. After applying these techniques their transformer-based network achieved
state-of-the-art performance at the time.
A diﬀerent solution is introduced by [Awasthi et al., 2019]. Rather than predict-
ing the output sequence, they label each token to either be deleted, have one
or multiple token appended to it, be transformed into another token or to be
kept without changes. Once the edits are predicted and applied, they iteratively
reﬁne the sequence until convergence.
[Zhao et al., 2019] address the similarities between the source and target sen-
tences by incorporating a copy mechanism in the transformer architecture. Their
model served as a baseline in this thesis and therefore it is described in detail in
the Method section.
[Ge et al., 2018] use the convolutional sequence-to-sequence model introduced
by [Gehring et al., 2017] and train it backwards to generate synthetic sentences.
They measure the sentences’ ﬂuency score - a log-probability based metric
introduced by them - and they enrich the original annotated dataset with those
synthetic sentence pairs where the generated (backtranslated) sentence has a
lower ﬂuency score than the original correct sentence.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Tokenization
7
Another example for generating synthetic data is shown by [Kiyono et al., 2019].
They compare a number of synthetic data generation methods namely noising
the source sentences directly by masking out, deleting and inserting words with
given probability, regular backtranslation and backtranslation with noising the
output scores during beam search (described in detail in subsection 4.2.2). They
found that the best performing method was backtranslation with output score
noising. After generating a large synthetic corpus of around 70 million sentences
they reach the current state-of-the-art performance with the original transformer
network without any changes.
2.3
Tokenization
Tokenization has been a long standing question in NLP. Multiple diﬀerent
tokenization techniques have been investigated for natural language processing
neural networks. There are 3 main groups:
1. Word units
2. Subword units / word fragments
3. Characters, which is a special case of subword units
While character level tokenization has been less frequently used, they have a huge
advantage over other solutions: the required vocabulary is very small and out-
of-word tokens are not a serious issue. In their study [Cherry et al., 2019] have
shown that it can outperform all other commonly used tokenization techniques
- however, with a substantial computational cost, as the training time for 1
sentence in a 10 layer network was well below 1 ms with Byte-Pair Encoding
[Sennrich et al., 2015], while for the same network with character encoding it
took around 5 ms. Their experiments were carried out on a bidirectional LSTM
network with attention layers. Since the computational cost of the attention
mechanisms in the Transformer architecture are quadratic w.r.t the input length,
using this technique would likely signiﬁcantly increase both the training and test
time compared to other encoding techniques [Vaswani et al., 2017].
Word unit tokenization simply splits the input sentences by whitespaces. This
technique was used by earlier neural language processing models, such as
[Mikolov et al., 2013]. This encoding is prone to out-of-vocabulary issues with
names and since most language models operate with a ﬁxed vocabulary size
of 40k - 60k words, they generally performs poorer than other tokenization
techniques [Cherry et al., 2019].
==PAGE:18==
8
Related works
Other word fragmentation tokenization techniques aim to reduce the vocab-
ulary size by separating words into subwords. [Schuster and Nakajima, 2012]
introduced a method called WordPiece where the corpus is ﬁrst separated into
characters, then those character/subword pairs are merged that has the highest
likelihood when added to the model. SentencePiece [Kudo and Richardson, 2018]
also generates subword tokens based on multiple selectable algorithms, however,
it handles the preprocessing as well.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Machine translation
Machine translation is the process of predicting the probability distribution of
the vocabulary for each index of the output sequence Y = y1, ..., ym given the
input sequence X = x1, ..., xn. In other words, machine translation aims to
calculate P(Y |X).
Multiple training objectives have been investigated for language modeling, the
most widely studied of them is autoregressive language modelling. However,
due to some shortcomings of the autoregressive models other solutions have also
been explored. While the transformer implements a conditional autoregressive
training objective, the Levenshtein transformer is much closer to the masked
language modelling, thus I describe both below.
3.1.1
Conditional autoregressive language modelling
Autoregressive language models (ARLM) are one of the main types of language
models. They have been the state-of-the-art implementations of language models,
such as [Radford et al., 2018] and [Yang et al., 2019].
==PAGE:20==
10
Methodology
The objective of ARLMs is to predict the upcoming word of a sequence given
all or a subset of the preceding part of the sequence, which eﬀectively models
the joint probability distribution of the target words. This is in other words a
unidirectional, typically left-to-right word generation. Given the sequence X,
the probability of the output sentence can be factorized using the chain rule.
[Bengio et al., 2003]
P(Y ) =
T
Y
t=1
PΘ(yt|Y<t, X)
(3.1)
where PΘ is the probability function with parameters Θ implemented by the
neural network.
ARLMs have the advantage that the sequential prediction order ensures that
every word is dependent on the preceding words. However, for the same reason
autoregressive decoding is computationally expensive. At inference time the
model needs to ﬁnd the most probable target sequence [Sutskever et al., 2014].
˜X = arg maxX log PΘ(X|Y )
(3.2)
Since no known polynomial algorithm can solve Equation 3.2 [Lee et al., 2019],
other methods are used among which beam search is the most popular.
3.1.1.1
Beam search
Beam search is an eﬃcient algorithm for autoregressive sequence generation.
It generates multiple candidates iteratively, where every iteration the n most
probable candidates are carried over to the next iteration.
In theory, the
candidates are ranked by their probabilities, however, this could end up in a
numerical underﬂow especially for longer sequences. To avoid this, the natural
logarithm of the probabilities are used in practice and the score is then normalized
by the sequence length [Ng, 2018]. The number of candidates is controlled by
the beam size parameter. While increasing the beam size generally gives better
performance, using a too large beam size actually brings diminishing results
[Ng, 2018] and it comes with a signiﬁcant computational overhead [Cho, 2016].
In practice a beam size of 5-10 is used.
An alternative sequence generation algorithm is greedy decoding, which is
essentially a beam search with a beam size of 1.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Machine translation
11
3.1.2
Masked language modelling
Masked language modelling (MLM) was introduced by [Devlin et al., 2018] as a
new training method.
The MLM diﬀers from ARLM in a couple of key points. The input ˆX is a
corrupted version of the source sentence X. This corruption is done through
randomly masking a part of the source words. Another signiﬁcant diﬀerence is
that MLM’s are conditioned on the whole input sentence, while ARLM’s are
conditioned only on the tokens up to position t (the tokens to the left or right,
depending on the word generation direction).
The objective of MLM is to predict masked source words, thus it is not a
machine translation task, but a language modelling one. The objective function
is described by Equation 3.3:
log PΘ(X| ˆX) ≈
T
X
t=1
mt log PΘ(xt| ˆX)
(3.3)
where ˆX is the corrupted sequence, X is the original sequence and mt is an
indicator function:
mt =
(
1,
if xt is masked
0,
otherwise
(3.4)
This probability is only an approximation of the source sentence, as MLM’s
are based on the Independence Assumption, which comes from the fact that all
masked tokens are recovered separately ignoring the connection between them
[Yang et al., 2019].
Using this training objective has a trade oﬀcompared to ARLM: while the token
generation is conditioned on the whole input sequence, the input sequence in
this case will contain the mask tokens that are present only during training, and
no downstream tasks will use it. This eﬀect can be eased to some extent by
replacing some mask tokens with noise, which can lead to a better generalization.
[Devlin et al., 2018]
==PAGE:22==
12
Methodology
3.2
Transformer
Many current state-of-the-art neural networks that are used for natural lan-
guage processing tasks rely on the transformer architecture introduced by
[Vaswani et al., 2017].
Compared to well performing architectures based on
RNNs, the transformer does not rely on recurrence during training, which brings
several advantages.
3.2.1
Network architecture
The transformer (Figure 3.1) is an encoder-decoder architecture that is based
on self-attention calculations. These self-attention layers are used to calculate
attention scores between the input words.
Given an input sequence of token representation X = x1, x2, ..., xn the encoder
calculates a continuous representation Z = z1, z2, ..., zn, also referred to as the
encoder’s hidden state. This representation from the encoder is then used by
the decoder when the output tokens Y = y1, y2, ..., ym are generated.
Figure 3.1: The transformer architecture
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Transformer
13
The encoder is built up from N identical layers, where each layer contains a
multi-head attention block. Residual connection is applied to the output of
this multi-head attention block to help gradient ﬂow ([He et al., 2016]), and
then a layer-normalization is applied to make sure that the gradients do not
explode or vanish [Ba et al., 2016]. Then a double feedforward layer with ReLU
activation between them is the next step, where again residual connection with
layer normalization is added.
The decoder also uses N identical layers. These layers diﬀer from the encoder
layers as an extra multi-head attention block is added after the ﬁrst one, where
the keys and values come from the encoder.
3.2.2
Scaled dot-product attention
Figure 3.2: Scaled dot-product attention
The attention mechanism is implemented through scaled dot-product attention
blocks. It has 3 inputs, each of which are vectors packed into matrices: the
queries Q ∈Rb,dk, keys K ∈Rb,dk and values V ∈Rb,dv.
While it is not
compulsory, in the original implementation dv = dk and b is the number of input
sentences.
The scaled dot-product attention block computes equation Equation 3.5.
attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
Q K⊺
√dk

V
(3.5)
==PAGE:24==
14
Methodology
Here, Q K⊺is basically a similarity measurement between the queries and the
keys that gives a soft distribution, with which the values V should be taken into
account and
1
√dk is a scaling factor that ensures that that the attention term
does not grow to a large magnitude as that (paired with the softmax function)
could result in very small gradients [Vaswani et al., 2017].
3.2.3
Multi-head attention block
Figure 3.3: Multi-head attention block
Each multi-head attention block contains h identical scaled dot-product attention
heads. It is theorized that each attention head captures a diﬀerent type of relation
between the inputs. In order to make this easier, each attention head gets a
diﬀerent projection of the original Q, K and V matrices as inputs, as shown by
equation Equation 3.6.
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = concat(head1, head2, ..., headh)WO
where headi = attention(Q WQ
i , K WK
i , V WV
i )
(3.6)
where WQ
i
∈Rdmodel,dk, WK
i
∈Rdmodel,dk, WV
i
∈Rdmodel,dv and WK
i
∈
Rh dv,dmodel.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Transformer
15
The output dimensionality is h dv × dmodel. In order to lower the computational
cost, dv = dk = dmodel/h is chosen.
3.2.4
Decoder masking
During training time the decoder has access to the target tokens, which makes
the decoding process trivial, however, at inference time the decoder will have
access only to the preceding tokens for each token. To mimic this limitation
in training time, a mask is applied to the attention modules to mask out the
attention to all subsequent tokens.
3.2.5
Positional encoding
While RNN and CNN architectures inherently encapsulate the positional informa-
tion between the tokens, this is not the case with the transformer. To overcome
this issue absolute positional encodings are added to the token encodings, using
sine and cosine functions:
PE(pos,2i) = sin(
pos
100002i/dmodel )
PE(pos,2i+1) = sin(
pos
100002i/dmodel )
(3.7)
Where pos is the token’s absolute position in the sequence and i is the dimension.
Figure 3.4: The sinusoidal part of the positional encoding for diﬀerent dimen-
sions [Rush et al., 2018]
==PAGE:26==
16
Methodology
3.2.6
Regularization
In order to generalize the network better, dropout is applied to the attention
layers, the activations and the embedding layer. Furthermore, label smoothing
is also applied to the targets during loss calculation.
Label smoothing is a generalization technique introduced by [Szegedy et al., 2016].
With label smoothing, instead of calculating the loss against the real target
distribution q(y) = δy,i (where δy,i is a Dirac delta and i is the ground truth
label) we create a distribution that has a high conﬁdence for the correct word
and the other words get a lower smoothing value.
q′(y) = (1 −ϵ) ∗δy,i + ϵ u(y)
(3.8)
where ϵ is the label smoothing parameter and u(y) is a prior distribution. In
practice u(y) is chosen to be a uniform distribution, which simpliﬁes Equation 3.8.
q′(y) = (1 −ϵ) ∗δy,i + ϵ
ny
(3.9)
where ny is the number of labels, in this case the size of the vocabulary.
While label smoothing hurts perplexity (since it makes the model be less conﬁ-
dent), it improves regularization and BLEU score.
3.2.7
Normalization
As previously mentioned, layer normalization ([Ba et al., 2016]) is frequently
used throughout the network. During layer normalization the input of a layer
is normalized along each dimension by subtracting the dimension-wise average
and dividing with the square-root of the standard deviation.
µb = 1
f
b
X
i=1
xb,i
σ2
b = 1
f
b
X
i=1
(xb,i −µb)
˜xb,i = d xb,i −µb
p
σ2
b + ϵ
+ a
(3.10)
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Transformer
17
where X ∈Rb,f is the input matrix, b is the batch size, f is the feature
dimensionality and ϵ is a numerical stabilizer. The two parameters of the layer
normalization is the output standard deviation d and average a. In this case
d = 1 and a = 0 was used.
3.2.8
Loss function
The loss is calculated through the multinomial cross-entropy between the target
and predicted probability distribution.
cost(Y, Ytrue) = Y ⊺
true(−log(Y ))
(3.11)
Where Y is the predicted probability distribution and Ytrue is the target distri-
bution over the vocabulary. Given that the predictions are arranged as matrix Y
and the targets as matrix Ytrue the loss is calculated according to Equation 3.12.
L(Y, Ytrue) = 1
n
X
i=1..n
cost(Yi, Ytrue,i)
(3.12)
3.2.9
Optimizer
The transformer is trained with a robust optimizer called Adaptive moment
estimation (Adam) [Kingma and Ba, 2014]. Adam is based on two established op-
timization methods, the stochastic gradient descent with momentum introduced
by [Sutskever et al., 2013] and the RMSprop ([Hinton and Tieleman, 2012]).
Given the weights W, biases B and their respective gradients dW and dB
calculated from an arbitrary loss function with regards to the model parameters
Θ at step t the model parameters are updated according to Equation 3.13.
Wt = Wt−1 −α ∗
Vcorrected
t
q
Scorrected
t
+ ϵ
(3.13)
where Vt is given by Equation 3.14 and Scorrected
t
by Equation 3.15. ϵ is a
parameter that helps numerically stabilize the update for small Scorrected
t
values.
==PAGE:28==
18
Methodology
The biases are updated similarly with their respective gradient.
V corrected
t
= β1 ∗Vt−1 + (1 −β1)dW
1 −βt
1
(3.14)
Scorrected
t
= β2 ∗St−1 + (1 −β2)dW2
1 −βt
2
(3.15)
The purpose of both Equation 3.14 and 3.15 is to dampen the "ﬂuctuation"
of the optimization steps during training.
The nominators implement the
dampening through the exponentially weighted averaging of the gradients and
the denominators serve as initialization bias correction: since the t = 0 values
are initialized as 0 the ﬁrst few V and S values would be biased towards 0.
Since this eﬀect is signiﬁcant only at the ﬁrst few steps, it is often omitted in
implementations [Ng, 2017].
The usual parameters of the optimizer are β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.98, ϵ = 10−9 and α
that is set dynamically [Ng, 2017].
3.2.9.1
Learning rate scheduling
As the Adam optimizer is prone to get into local minimas during the initial period
of the training due to too large steps based on too few data ([Liu et al., 2019]),
an automatically adjusted learning rate is applied. This ensures a low initial
learning rate that grows large during a ﬁxed number of warmup steps, and then
starts decaying. It is implemented as an inverse square root scheduler shown in
Equation 3.16.
lr = d−0.5
model ∗min(s−0.5, s ∗warmup−1.5)
(3.16)
where lr is the learning rate, dmodel is the model size, s is the number of the
current learning step and warmup is the number of warmup steps. In the original
paper warmup = 4000 is used. The size of the models inﬂuence the required
warmup steps, hence the d−0.5
model automatic scale is applied [Vaswani et al., 2017].
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Copy-augmented transformer
19
3.2.10
Advantages
The transformer has a number of advantages compared to recurrent neural
networks. It always calculates the same number of steps regardless of the number
of input tokens, it directly models the attention between the words as opposed
to RNN networks, where the attention is usually calculated from the inner states
and accumulated.
The time complexity of the transformer is O(n2 d), while RNNs have O(n d2)
and CNNs have O(k n d2) time complexity, which means that it is less expensive
to increase the model size, but longer sentences will signiﬁcantly decrease the
speed of the network [Vaswani et al., 2017].
3.3
Copy-augmented transformer
The copy-augmented transformer [Zhao et al., 2019] is an extension of the original
transformer model. While the transformer usually has similar encoder and
decoder size, the copy-augmented transformer is asymmetric: it adds another
attention layer to the decoder. This extra attention layer is responsible for
directly copying tokens from the source sequence, which is frequently required
for the GEC task.
Generally, the transformer’s process can be described as:
H = encoder(Esrc(x1, ..., xn))
(3.17)
Oi = decoder(Etgt(Y<i H))
(3.18)
Pgen
i
(w) = softmax(Etgt(Oi))
(3.19)
where Esrc is the source word embedding layer, Etgt is the target word embed-
ding layer, H is the hidden state of the encoder and Pgen
i
(w) is the predicted
probability distribution for the ith word.
This workﬂow is extended with a copy mechanism that is described below. The
copy distribution is calculated according to Equation 3.20 and 3.21.
A = MultiHead(Q, K, V)
(3.20)
==PAGE:30==
20
Methodology
Pcopy
i
(w) = softmax(Ai)
(3.21)
The ﬁnal distribution is then calculated from the original and copy distribution.
Pi(w) = (1 −α) ∗Pgen
i
(w) + αi ∗Pcopy
i
(w)
(3.22)
where the balancing parameter αi is estimated using the normalized attention
distribution.
αi = sigmoid(W⊺X
(Ai V))
(3.23)
Where W ∈Rdmodel,1 is a feedforward layer.
Figure 3.5: The copy-augmented transformer’s architecture
This ﬁnal distribution is distorted towards tokens in the source sequence which
encourages predicting them and this copy mechanism is controlled by α.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Levenshtein transformer
21
3.4
Levenshtein transformer
The Levenshtein transformer [Gu et al., 2019b] is a partially autoregressive ar-
chitecture based on the transformer. Both the encoder and decoder are identical
to the transformer, however, the decoder output is used for multiple classiﬁers
and the training procedure is also replaced. The Levenshtein transformer uses 2
atomic operations: token deletion and token insertion.
When the decoder is given an empty sequence (namely a BOS and EOS token,
<bos> <eos>), then it falls back to sequence generation (purely token insertion),
but when the input is a non-empty sequence then it acts as a reﬁnement model.
3.4.1
Basic operations
The Levenshtein transformer uses the above mentioned 2 atomic actions to reﬁne
a sequence: token deletion and token insertion. The token insertion operation is
broken into 2 sub-steps: inserting placeholders and then a word is predicted for
each placeholders, thus the word prediction sub-step acts similarly to MLMs.
For each operation a policy/classiﬁer is trained. These policies are trained with
imitation learning using an expert/oracle policy. The expert policy πexp in
this case is derived from the Levenshtein distance [Levenshtein, 1966], which
generates the the optimal actions (targets) for each policy for each step. The
transition step is modelled as the sum of an insertion and a deletion step.
3.4.1.1
Token deletion policy
The token deletion operation is cast into a binary classiﬁcation objective, where
each token is predicted either to be kept (d = 1) or deleted (d = 0).
πdel(d|i, Y ∗) = softmax(Oi A⊺), i = 1, ..., n −1
(3.24)
Where d ∈{0, 1} is the deletion classiﬁer, O is the output of the decoder’s ﬁnal
attention block, Y ∗is the decoder’s input and A ∈Rdmodel,2. The BOS and EOS
tokens are not allowed be deleted to preserve the sequence boundaries, hence
their indexes i = 0 and i = n are omitted.
==PAGE:32==
22
Methodology
3.4.1.2
Placeholder insertion policy
The placeholder insertion operation basically predicts the number of tokens to
be to be inserted by predicting the number of placeholders that needs to be
added between each consecutive tokens. The number of tokens are predicted as
a categorical distribution, where the categories are 0, ..., kmax, the number of
placeholders. kmax is chosen to be 255.
πplh(p|i, Y ′) = softmax(concat(Oi, Oi+1) B⊺), i = 0, ..., n −1
(3.25)
Where p = {0, ..., kmax} is the placeholder number classiﬁer, Y ′ = E(Y ∗, D) is
the decoder input with the deletions applied and B ∈R2 dmodel,kmax+1.
Once the placeholder prediction is done, the predicted number of placeholders
are inserted between the words, marked by a special placeholder token.
3.4.1.3
Token prediction policy
Once the placeholders are inserted, they are replaced by a token prediction that
works similarly to MLMs.
πtok(t|i, Y ′′) = softmax(Oi C⊺), ∀i = < plh >
(3.26)
Where t ∈ν is the token classiﬁer, Y ′′ = E(Y ′, P) is the decoder input with the
deletions and placeholder insertions and C ∈Rdmodel,|ν|.
3.4.2
Sequence generation and reﬁnement
The sequence generation is done by sequentially combining the above described
operations: ﬁrst token deletion, then placeholder insertion and ﬁnally the token
predictor replaces the placeholders with tokens. The combined policy is shown
in Equation 3.27.
π(a|Y ) =
Y
di∈D
πdel(di|i, Y ∗) ∗
Y
pi∈P
πplh(pi|i, Y ′) ∗
Y
ti∈T
πtok(ti|i, Y ′′)
(3.27)
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Levenshtein transformer
23
Where D = d0, ..., dn is the deletion classiﬁer, P = p0, ..., pn−1 is the placeholder
classiﬁer and T = t1
0, tp0
0 ..., tpn−1
n−1 is the token classiﬁer. The combined policy
predicts action a ∈(D ∪P ∪T).
3.4.2.1
Translation task
For the machine translation task the ﬁrst input of the decoder is an empty
sequence (<bos>, <eos>). The output of the decoder is then used as the
decoder input in the next iteration, and at this point the model acts as a
reﬁnement model. The maximum number of iterations are ﬁxed, but the model
is also stopped if one of these criteria is met:
• The model get into an inﬁnite loop. This can happen when only the
previously inserted words are deleted.
• The output of the iteration is equal to the output of the previous iteration,
thus the model converged to a prediction
3.4.2.2
Training
The model is trained through imitation learning which resembles a sequence
reﬁnement task. Given the original source-target sentence pairs, the encoder
of the model is applied to the complete source sentence X and the decoder’s
input is the corrupted target sentence Y ∗. The corruption is done by removing
m tokens randomly:
m = round(n ∗s)
(3.28)
where n is the number of tokens in the target sentence without the <eos> and
<bos> tokens, and s = E[U(0, 1)] is sampled from a uniform distribution.
Given the corrupted Y ∗and the original target sentence Y , the training steps
are the following:
1. The insertion policy πins predicts the number of words to be inserted. The
target is generated by the expert policy πexp given Y ∗and Y .
2. Placeholders are inserted into Y ∗based on πexp, creating Y ′.
3. The token prediction policy πtok predicts a token for each placeholder. The
target is drawn from the original target sentence Y .
==PAGE:34==
24
Methodology
4. The placeholders in Y ′ are switched to the tokens predicted by πtok, thus
creating Y ′′
5. The deletion policy πdel predicts the deletion classiﬁers for Y ′′. The target
is generated by the expert policy πexp given Y ′′ and Y .
The data ﬂow is shown on Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: The data ﬂow during training
Thus the deletion objective is formally:
E
D∗∼π∗
X
d∗
i ∈D∗
log πdel
Θ (d∗
i |i, Ydel)
(3.29)
The placeholder insertion and token prediction objective is combined:
E
P ∗,T ∗∼π∗

X
p∗
i ∈P ∗
log πplh
Θ (p∗
i |i, Yplh) +
X
t∗
i ∈T ∗
log πtok
Θ (t∗
i |i, Y ′
plh)


(3.30)
And the overall learning objective is to maximize the sum of Equation 3.29 and
Equation 3.30 with regards to the model parameters Θ.
3.4.3
Adapting the model for the GEC task
I investigate four changes to the Levenshtein transformer in order to adopt it for
the GEC task.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Levenshtein transformer
25
Since most of the source sentence would need to be copied over to the target
sentence during GEC, the source sequence is fed into the decoder as well in the
ﬁrst step of the iterative process (instead of an empty sequence). This is possible
since GEC is a monolingual task and both the encoder and decoder operate on
the same language. Through this, the task is solved as local transduction rather
than machine translation.
In order to encourage the network to make more edits, a negative bias is added
to both the "0 placeholder insertion" score and to the "0 token deletion" score
at inference time. The "0 placeholder insertion" penalty was discussed by the
authors of the Levenshtein transformer, referring to it as EOS penalty. They
stated that using an EOS penalty of 1-3 could increase the translation quality.
Since token deletion and placeholder insertion is likely simpler than token
prediction, an early stopping is applied to the decoder layers: the token prediction
policy uses all t decoder layers, the placeholder insertion policy uses the ﬁrst p
layer and the token deletion the ﬁrst d layer, such that d =< p =< t. This change
aims to help some decoding layers to be more policy-focused while maintaining
the same model size. The early stopping method was also discussed by the
authors.
I try to achieve the same eﬀect by using a separate decoder layer for each policy
as the ﬁnal decoder layer. The disadvantage of this solution is the increased
model size. The training time and inference time, however, remains similar to
the original settings.
3.4.4
Tokenization
I chose Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) as the tokenization method which is widely
used for NLP tasks. This method was introduced by [Gage, 1994] as a data
compression technique, and more recently it was adapted for character sequences
by [Sennrich et al., 2015]. BPE creates word representations by merging subword
units for a given number of steps.
The ﬁrst step in the algorithm is to initialize the vocabulary with a character
vocabulary. The symbols of this vocabulary are used to represent each word as
a sequence of them. A special end-of-word character (e.g "·") is also appended
to each word to symbolize the end of the word: "material" -> "m a t e r i a l ·"
Once these steps are done, the algorithm starts to merge the most frequent
character pairs with a new symbol, which is obtained by concatenating said
symbol pair. Suppose that the most frequent symbol pair in the corpus is "m"
==PAGE:36==
26
Methodology
and "a", merging them together will replace each occurrences of this pair in the
corpus: "m a t e r i a l ·" -> "ma t e r i a l ·". This is done iteratively for a
speciﬁc number of steps, which is the only hyperparameter of this algorithm.
At the end, the vocabulary size will be the size of the starting character vocabulary
and the number of merge operations.
This method was shown to increase translation eﬃciency especially for rare
words, and has been widely used in NLP neural networks [Sennrich et al., 2015].
The BPE algorithm can be applied to the target and source corpus separately or
at the same time by concatenating the two corpora (joint BPE). When applied
separately, it has the advantage of building a more compact vocabulary where
each subword in the vocabulary has a higher chance of occurrence in the training
text. The latter provides a more consistent vocabulary since if the BPE algorithm
is applied separately, then it has a higher chance of segmenting the same word
diﬀerently in the source and target corpus [Sennrich et al., 2015]. As GEC is a
monolingual task, I use a joint vocabulary.
3.4.5
Generalization
A simple and eﬀective way of making the network learn more generalized trans-
lations and obtain a better understanding of words is applying BPE dropout
[Provilkov et al., 2019].
When BPE dropout is applied, during segmentation some subword merges are
randomly skipped making the algorithm behave stochastically which in turn has
been shown to increase the translation performance of neural networks especially
for smaller corpora as shown on Figure 3.7.
The only hyperparameter of BPE dropout is the probability p of dropped merges
(usually p = 0.1 is applied). If p is set to 0 then the original BPE algorithm
is applied and the algorithm behaves deterministically again. BPE dropout is
applied only for the training set and during validation, test and at inference the
original BPE segmentation is applied.
A disadvantage of this method is the increased sequence size. When a p = 0.1
dropout was applied to my training corpus, the sentence length increased on
average by 25%. This increases the training time of neural networks which is
even more prevalent for transformer architectures.
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Evaluation metrics
27
Figure 3.7: Translation
models
trained
with
diﬀerent
BPE
segmenta-
tions
on
random
subsets
of
the
WMT14
En-Fr
dataset
[Provilkov et al., 2019]
3.5
Evaluation metrics
Two main metrics have been used to compare the diﬀerent models: the BLEU
score introduced by [Papineni et al., 2001] and the F score based MaxMatch
(M2) scorer by [Dahlmeier and Ng, 2012]. Both of them operate on the ﬁnal
output of the models. As the MaxMatch scorer is relatively slow and requires
postprocessing, the BLEU score is used to pick the best candidate model, but
the ﬁnal evaluation is based on the M2 score.
3.5.1
BLEU score
The score produced by the Bilingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU) algorithm
has been widely used for evaluating translation models. The main idea behind
BLEU is somewhat similar to the calculation of unigram precision (P), which
is calculated by dividing the number of words in the hypothesis that also
occurs in the reference with the number of all words in the hypotheses. This
metric provides a very poor estimation of the translation quality, since machine
translation systems can over-generate reasonable words and achieve fairly high
score (e.g a hypothesis of "the the the the" for the reference sentence "the cat on
the mat"). Hence BLEU uses a modiﬁed n-gram precision.
The modiﬁed unigram precision is calculated by ﬁrst counting the number of
times a word in the hypothesis occurs in the reference and clipping each word
count with their maximum reference count. The clipped counts of words in
the hypothesis are then summed up. The modiﬁed unigram precision is gained
==PAGE:38==
28
Methodology
by dividing this number with the total number of words in the hypothesis. To
consider the word order as well, the same procedure can be applied to a batch of
consecutive n words, thus obtaining the modiﬁed n-gram precision.
The BLEU score is intended to measure a corpus, and not an individual sentence.
However, it still uses the sentence as the main block of the corpus. The n-gram
precision of a corpus is calculated by counting the clipped n-gram matches in
each sentence in the hypothesis, which are then summed up and divided by the
sum of all n-gram occurrences in each sentence (Equation 3.31).
pn =
P
H∈{Hypotheses}
P
n-gram ∈H countclip(n-gram)
P
H∈{Hypotheses}
P
n-gram ∈H count(n-gram)
(3.31)
Simply calculating the n-gram precisions has a signiﬁcant problem: shorter
sentences do not get penalized, thus e.g a candidate sentence "I ate" get maximal
score for a reference sentence of "I ate 3 apples yesterday". Thus a sentence
brevity penalty is introduced according to Equation 3.32.
BP =

1
if lh > lr
e1−lr/lc if lh <= lr
(3.32)
Where lr is the length of the reference and lh is the length of the hypothesis.
In practice, the BLEU score of a text block is calculated from the brevity penalty
and the weighted sum of the ﬁrst 4 n-grams, as shown in Equation 3.33.
BLEU = BP ∗exp
 N
X
n=1
wn ∗log(pn)
!
(3.33)
where BP is the sentence brevity, N = 4 is the number of n-grams, wn = 1
N is
the n-gram weight and pn is the nth n-gram precision.
3.5.2
MaxMatch score
The M2 score [Dahlmeier and Ng, 2012] is the the de facto evaluation metric
in GEC. It calculates an F score ([Van Rijsbergen, 1979]) between the system-
generated corrections of faulty sentences and the gold standard (reference)
corrections.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Evaluation metrics
29
Original
I have never had so many free time in my life than last year.
Hypothesis
I had never had so many free times in my life than last year.
Reference
I had never had so much free time in my life than last year.
Table 3.1: Examples for true positives (blue), false negatives (magenta) and
false positives (red)
As shown on Table 3.1, the changes made by the hypothesis are counted as:
1. True positives (TP), where an error was corrected
2. False negatives (FN), where an error was left in place
3. False positives (FP), where correct word was replaced with an incorrect
one. Replacing an incorrect word with another incorrect one is also counted
as FP
The Precision (P) and Recall (R) is then calculated according to Equation 3.34.
P =
TP
TP + FP
R =
TP
TP + FN
(3.34)
With P and R values the Fβ score can be calculated, where β is a parameter
that controls the weight of the P and R values.
Fβ = (1 + β2)
P ∗R
(β2 ∗P) + R
(3.35)
With β < 1 the F score weights towards precision, β > 1 towards recall. β = 1
gives the harmonic mean of them.
Applying the F score on the edits naively can contribute to underestimated
system performance in cases where the hypothesis and the reference groups the
changes diﬀerently, e.g an edit [has eating -> was eaten] can be also broken up
to [has -> was] and [eating -> eaten]([Bryant, 2019]). If the reference combines
them but the hypothesis does not, then the edit will not be counted as a TP even
though the output will be the same at the end. A similar case is the following
example: [has eating -> was eating] would count as a diﬀerent edit as [has ->
was] since the word "eating" was included in one of the edits but no in another
one.
==PAGE:40==
30
Methodology
The M2 scorer oﬀers to overcome this problem by extracting the edits with the
shortest distance between the hypothesis and source sentence, and the refer-
ence and source sentence using the Levenshtein alignment [Levenshtein, 1966].
Assume that a source sentence (with errors) is:
"This also means that as soon a person is made aware of his or her genetic
proﬁle , he or she concurently has a knowledge about others ."
And its gold standard (reference) is:
"This also means that as soon as person is made aware of his or her genetic
proﬁle , he or she concurrently has knowledge about others ."
The M2 scorer will extract edits from the reference shown in Table 3.2. The
hypothesis edits are extracted in a similar manner. Let G = g1, ..., gn be the set
of edits extracted from the gold standard and H = h1, .., hn be a set of edits
extracted from the system generated hypothesis.
Start
End
Replacement
Action
6
6
"as"
addition
21
22
"concurrently"
replacement
23
24
""
deletion
Table 3.2: A solution generated by the M2 algorithm
The P and R values are then calculated according to Equation 3.36. If multiple
references are available then the hypothesis’s score is computed against the
reference that it has the most matches with. Once P and R is calculated the Fβ
score is obtained according to Equation 3.35. For GEC evaluation the F0.5 score
is used.
P = H ∩G
H
R = H ∩G
G
(3.36)
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Data
Multiple datasets were used with the implemented networks. All datasets used
in this thesis are publicly available and curated.
4.1
Machine translation datasets
At the ﬁrst 3 months of this thesis the Levenshtein transformer code had not
been released yet, therefore it needed to be implemented. The implementation
had 2 larger steps: implementing the original transformer, and then building the
Levenshtein transformer on top of that.
The WMT 2014 EN-DE [Bojar et al., 2015] dataset was used to validate the
implementation of the Transformer since that model was oﬃcially evaluated on
this dataset. The WMT 14 EN-DE dataset consists of 4.5 million sentence pairs,
and contains both lower and upper cased words, numbers and special characters.
Due to time and resource restrictions the Levenshtein-transformer implementation
was validated on the Multi30k dataset [Elliott et al., 2016]. This dataset is
similar to the WMT 14 in that it also contains casings, numbers and special
characters. This dataset is made of image descriptions and their translations,
thus the sentences are grammatically simple.
==PAGE:42==
32
Data
Dataset
Number of sentences
WMT 14 EN-DE
c.a 4 500 000
Multi30k
31 014
Table 4.1: Machine translation dataset statistics
4.2
Grammatical error correction datasets
Several datasets were used for the GEC task evaluation. In this thesis the
model training and evaluation followed the "Unrestricted track" of the "Building
Educational Applications 2019 Shared Task: Grammatical Error Correction"
[Bryant et al., 2019] (BEA19) competition, thus it was trained on the oﬃcial
GEC dataset provided in the competition extended with any publicly available
arbitrary dataset and evaluated on the oﬃcial test dataset.
4.2.1
Manually corrected datasets
The BEA19 competition provided several datasets that contain sentences with
grammatical errors and their corrected counterparts. These are:
• The Lang-8 dataset published by [Tomoya Mizumoto and Matsumoto., 2011]
and [Toshikazu Tajiri and Matsumoto, 2012]. The Lang-8 dataset is as-
sembled from the incorrect sentences submitted to www.lang-8.com and
their community-provided corrections.
• The Cambridge ESOL First Certiﬁcate in English dataset (FCE) by
[Yannakoudakis et al., 2011].
It is a subset of the Cambridge Learner
Corpus that contains English learner’s sentences.
• The NUS Corpus of Learner English dataset (NUCLE) by [Dahlmeier, 2013].
It is made of 1400 university essays and their corrections made by profes-
sional English instructors
• The Write and Improve dataset (W&I) by [Bryant et al., 2019]. It is made
of English learners’ story and article submissions that were corrected and
annotated by professional annotators.
• The The Louvain Corpus of Native English Essays dataset (LOCNESS)
[Granger, 1998]. It is made up of native English speakers’ essays.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Grammatical error correction datasets
33
These datasets were normalized and ﬁltered for the BEA19 competition (BEA19
original). A signiﬁcant number of references (eg. in the bibliography part of
the essays) for each essay were also included in the NUCLE dataset. These
contain no errors, add much noise to the BPE vocabulary (for example parts
of the URLs have been extracted to the ﬁnal vocabulary) and have a structure
highly speciﬁc to the standard reference format (URLs, journal titles with
volume and pages, names of the authors), thus I removed them. Following the
preprocessing of models that achieved high scores (e.g [Zhao et al., 2019] and
[Kiyono et al., 2019]) all of the sentences without errors were also removed from
the training set (BEA19 ﬁltered), which reduced the size of the dataset to roughly
the half of the original.
The test dataset is a subset of the W&I + LOCNESS dataset assembled by
[Bryant et al., 2019].
Dataset
# sentences
Avg # words/s.
BEA19 original
1 135 228
12.1
BEA19 ﬁltered
568 965
15.1
One Billion Word Benchmark subset
1 400 000
25.4
W&I + LOCNESS test dataset
1 312
23.0
Table 4.2: Dataset statistics
4.2.2
Synthetic dataset
The amount of manually corrected resources for GEC is relatively low which
can cause the networks to overﬁt. Several methods were investigated in order
to incorporate synthetic data, among which the simplest and most wide-spread
solution is corrupting a ﬁxed % of the words by masking or deleting, replacing
them with another randomly chosen word or injecting characters into them to
imitate spelling errors.
Since these methods have limited resemblance to real-world grammatical errors,
in this work I rely on backtranslation networks for synthetic data generation
that were examined for error generation purposes in more recent studies by
[Kiyono et al., 2019] and has been shown to be superior to the corrupting tech-
nique mentioned previously.
I trained a backtranslation transformer model on the BEA19 original dataset,
where the network generates sentences with grammatical errors from the correct
sentences.
==PAGE:44==
34
Data
Following [Kiyono et al., 2019], in order to generate "better" grammatical errors
in the sentences, the beam search algorithm was modiﬁed. At each step the
scores are obtained for each hypothesis. These scores are modiﬁed according to
Equation 4.1.
S∗= S + α ∗N
(4.1)
where S ∈Rbeam,nsequence−length,nvocab is a matrix containing the original scores,
N ∈Rbeam,nsequence−length,nvocab is a noise matrix that has the same values as S
but the last dimension contains only noise drawn from a uniform distribution
U(0, 1), and α ∈R is a scaling factor for the noise, which is a new parameter
introduced to the algorithm. The new score S∗is then used to select the most
probable sequences. With α = 0 we obtain the original beam search algorithm.
The synthetic dataset was generated with the goal of obtaining a similar dataset
to the original one. I evaluated this quantitatively through measuring its BLUE
score. The α parameter was chosen to achieve a similar BLEU score between the
synthetic data and its original counterpart as the score is between the BEA19
faulty and correct dataset. This criteria was met with α = 6.
Similarly to [Zhao et al., 2019], the synthetic dataset is generated from a subset
of the One Billion Words benchmark dataset [Chelba et al., 2014]. This dataset
was created from the text available on the WMT11 website for language model
benchmarking purposes, mainly for statistical language models. It contains
around 1 billion words in around 35 million sentences. Due to computational
and time restrictions, only 1.4 million randomly chosen sentences are used in the
synthetic dataset.
The generated synthetic dataset has a BLEU score of 62.89 against the original
dataset. The BLEU score between the ﬁltered BEA19 faulty and correct datasets
is 63.47. The average sentence length ratio between the correct and faulty
sentences in the BEA19 dataset is 1.03, for the synthetic dataset this ratio is
1.02.
Table 4.3 shows a few samples from the synthetic dataset.
These samples
demonstrate both grammatical and spelling errors.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Grammatical error correction datasets
35
Correct
Singapore ’s jobless rate is still low compared with the US or Europe
.
Faulty
Singapore jobless rate still low compared with US or Europe .
Correct
Click here to watch Russian television coverage .
Faulty
Click here for watching Russian television coverage .
Correct
I had never had so much free time in my life .
Faulty
I have never had so many free time in my life .
Correct
That ’s because you ’ve just learned you ’re pregnant !
Faulty
That ’s because you ’ve just learn you ’re a pregnat !
Correct
Mr Brook said the man approached the couple as they pushed their
11-month-old daughter on the swing .
Faulty
MSR Brook said the man approached to the couple as they pushed
their 11-month-old daughter on the swing .
Correct
Just as we were wondering if it was too late to swim back to the
mainland , our luck changed .
Faulty
As it is very late to swim to the main land , as we were wondering
if it was late to swim back to the main land , our luck changed .
Table 4.3: Samples from the synthetic dataset
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5
Experimental setup
In this thesis I rely on multiple packages and frameworks as a basis of my model
implementation, data preprocessing and evaluation metrics. Several popular
packages are available for all of these tasks. In this section I present the ones
that I used and the reasons behind my choice.
5.1
Evaluation metrics
5.1.1
BLEU score calculation
The calculation of BLEU scores has been done in various ways that renders com-
parison between the reported scores of several papers less trustworthy [Post, 2018].
The scores can strongly vary based on the diﬀerent tokenization and normaliza-
tion schemes that are used during evaluation and these settings are often not
published or hard to ﬁnd. Other parameters that can strongly inﬂuence the
score are the number of references used; the computation of sentence brevity
when multiple references are given; and the maximum n-gram length and the
smoothing applied for 0-count n-grams. As high as 1.8 score diﬀerences were
detected in some cases [Post, 2018].
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Evaluation metrics
37
To ensure a fair measurement, I used a recent, widely popular BLEU imple-
mentation, the SacreBLEU1 package. This package was developed following
[Post, 2018], who proposes several regulations to the calculation of BLEU score
and creates a standard process for calculations. To avoid inﬂuencing the scores,
the SacreBLEU package requires the pipeline shown on Figure 5.1. The reference
must be fed in without any changes made to it, and the model prediction should
also be detokenized after it was generated and post-processed (if needed). Its
advantage over another very popular package, the Moses toolkit’s 2 (introduced
by [Koehn et al., 2007]) multi-bleu.perl script comes from the fact that Sacre-
BLEU has no parameters, only the hypothesis and the reference(s) needs to be
fed in and then it tokenizes the inputs itself. It uses ﬁxed parameters during
BLEU calculation.
Figure 5.1: The proposed pipeline for BLEU computation
5.1.2
MaxMatch score calculation
The Error Annotation Toolkit3 (ERRANT) was used to calculate the GEC scores.
ERRANT was an obvious choice as it was also used as the oﬃcial scorer by
the BEA19 competition, and the test dataset was also provided in its own .m2
1https://github.com/mjpost/sacreBLEU - v1.4 was used
2http://www.statmt.org/moses
3https://github.com/chrisjbryant/errant - v1.9 was used
==PAGE:48==
38
Experimental setup
format. Given the original and corrected sentence pairs the package automatically
extracts the edits. The package also covers the Fβ score calculation between the
gold-standard annotations and the model-generated annotations, and displays
the P and R values as well. By default it calculates the F0.5 score and I also use
this metrics to evaluate the models I used. Similarly to SacreBLEU, ERRANT
also takes in detokenized sentences as input during edit extraction.
5.2
Neural network framework
All neural network models were implemented using Pytorch [Paszke et al., 2019],
a popular framework for neural networks. The choice fell on Pytorch due to its
ease of use and my familiarity with it.
While I made my own implementation of both the transformer and the Leven-
shtein transformer4 purely with Pytorch, the GEC tasks were carried out with
the fairseq framework’s (made by [Ott et al., 2019]) models due to their superior
speed. I also implemented the changes I proposed to the Levenshtein transformer
to its fairseq implementation 5.
Fairseq is a sequence modelling toolkit based on Pytorch. While it uses many
built-in solutions from Pytorch, it also implements several custom solutions for
gaining speed, e.g a wrapper for handling models that are distributed on several
GPUs (in case the model is too large to ﬁt onto a single GPU), distributed training
or dataset binarization. With these improvements the fairseq neural networks
can achieve signiﬁcant speed-up compared to their counterparts implemented in
native Pytorch.
5.3
Byte-Pair Encoding
The BPE was done using the subword-nmt package 6. This package provides an
easy-to-use API and is widely used throughout the industry. The package itself
was created by Rico Sennrich, the author of the BPE paper [Sennrich et al., 2016].
4https://github.com/dhorvath19/levenshtein_transformer
5https://github.com/dhorvath19/fairseq
6https://github.com/rsennrich/subword-nmt
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Hardware
39
5.4
Hardware
All models were implemented/trained on the High Performance Cluster of the
Technical University of Denmark. It provides cloud computation and storage for
the models and datasets.
Two types of GPU nodes were used on the cluster as shown on Table 5.1.
Depending on availability the networks were trained on 2 or 4 GPUs. The
eﬀective batch size was always kept the same for the same model architectures,
e.g if only fewer GPUs were available, then the loss was calculated on every
training step, but the models’ weights and biases were only updated from the
combined loss of n steps rather than at each step.
The eﬀective batch size is the product of the number of GPUs, the individual
batch size on a single GPU and the update frequency, e.g. an eﬀective batch size
of 32000 can be achieved on 4 GPUs with an individual batch size of 8000 and
update frequency of 1, or with 2 GPUs with an individual batch size of 4000 and
update frequency set to 4. The former solution results in much shorter training
time, but the latter will produce the same results, have the same number of
updates over an epoch etc.
Name
Year
Archi-
tecture
CUDA
cap.
CUDA
cores
Clock
[MHz]
Mem
[GiB]
SP
peak
[GFlops]
DP
peak
[GFlops]
Peak
[GB/s]
Tesla
V100
2017
GV100
(Volta)
7.0
5120
1380
15.75
14131
7065
898
Tesla
V100-
SXM2
2018
GV100
(Volta)
7.0
5120
1530
31.72
15667
7833
898
Table 5.1: GPU nodes used on the DTU HPC
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6
Results and discussion
6.1
Transformer and Levenshtein transformer im-
plementation
In this section I compare my model implementations to the implementations
made by the fairseq team. The hyperparameters of the model pairs were set
to be the same in order to make them comparable. The fairseq Levenshtein
transformer was ran only on 2 GPUs, while the other models were ran on 4. This
does not aﬀect the comparison as the speed of each implementation (processed
tokens/sec) was measured on a single GPU.
6.1.1
Transformer
As shown on Figure 6.1 and 6.3, the CPU usage was minimal and the GPUs were
under heavy load in my implementation. The main GPU ran at around 80% and
the other GPUs were running a bit lower, at around 70%. The reason for the
higher computational load on the main GPU was the gradient calculation: at
the end of every batch, the losses were calculated on each GPU individually, but
the gradients were calculated by the main GPU alone. There were periodical
drops in the GPU performance which was caused by the validation loop not
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Transformer and Levenshtein transformer implementation
41
being optimized. The GPU memory usage was steady with minimal changes
throughout the training as shown on Figure 6.2.
Compared to the fairseq implementation, both my CPU and GPU utilization was
slightly lower. The fairseq transformer ran all GPUs on nearly their maximum
computational capacity. Despite the small diﬀerence between the GPU utilization
of the two implementations, my transformer processed signiﬁcantly less tokens
every second compared to the fairseq implementation as shown on Table 6.1.
The two implementations reached similar BLEU score, with mine performing
slightly worse.
Implementation
Dataset
Avg. tokens/sec on
a single GPU
(fp32/fp16)
BLEU
Fairseq
WMT14 EN-DE
42 000 / 56 000
26.4
Own
WMT14 EN-DE
15 000 / (N/A)
25.6
Table 6.1: Transformer implementation results
Figure 6.1: CPU usage of the transformer in my and the fairseq implementation
==PAGE:52==
42
Results and discussion
Figure 6.2: GPU memory usage of my transformer implementation
Figure 6.3: GPU usage of the transformer in my and the fairseq implementation
6.1.1.1
Main diﬀerences between the implementations
The reason of the fairseq implementation’s higher eﬃciency is threefold.
The fairseq implementation can utilize a new functionality in the Volta GPUs,
the mixed precision calculation (16 bit ﬂoating point calculation, fp16) which
increases training speed directly, and since it requires lower memory, larger
batches can be used, which can also increase the training speed. With this
setting turned on, the fairseq implementation’s advantage in speed over mine is
even more prevalent, with it being almost 4x faster. [Case and Carilli, 2018]
The fairseq framework also uses a custom data parallelization solution that relies
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Transformer and Levenshtein transformer implementation
43
on the NVIDIA APEX1 (A Pytorch EXtension) that makes it possible to use the
mixed precision calculation on Volta GPUs and provides further tools for eﬃcient
distributed training along with the NVIDIA Collective Communications Library2
(nccl) that provides primitives for highly eﬃcient communication between multiple
GPUs. [NVIDIA, 2018]
And lastly, the fairseq library binarizes the whole dataset as part of the prepro-
cessing, which happens at runtime in my implementation.
6.1.2
Levenshtein transformer
With my Levenshtein transformer implementation the computation was also
almost exclusively done on the GPUs, however, on a much lower rate, at around
40% as shown on Figure 6.6. This was likely caused by the dynamic target
generation for each policy and the dynamic data noising for each batch. Since
the extent of the noising was chosen randomly, the time required for it also
varied.
The fairseq Levenshtein transformer showed similar behavior. Its GPU usage
was, however, slightly higher. Despite the similarities in the hardware usage,
the fairseq model processed more than 3x more tokens every second than mine,
and with the fp16 setting it became almost 7 times faster as shown on Table 6.2.
Both implementations reaches similar BLEU score on the test dataset.
Figure 6.4: GPU memory usage of my Levenshtein transformer implementation
1https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex
2https://developer.nvidia.com/nccl
==PAGE:54==
44
Results and discussion
Figure 6.5: CPU usage of the Levenshtein transformer in my and in the fairseq
implementation
Figure 6.6: GPU usage of the Levenshtein transformer in my and in the fairseq
implementation
==PAGE:55==
6.2 GEC task results
45
Implementation
Dataset
Avg. tokens/sec on
a single GPU
(fp32/fp16)
BLEU
Fairseq
Multi30k EN-DE
16 000 / 31 000
22.2
Own
Multi30k EN-DE
4 500 / (N/A)
22.3
Table 6.2: Levenshtein transformer implementation results
6.1.2.1
Diﬀerences between the implementations
The diﬀerences are similar to those that were mentioned in subsubsection 6.1.1.1.
There is one additional diﬀerence to those, which comes from the the calculation
of the Levenshtein distance. My code relied on my python implementation of the
distance, but the fairseq team used an implementation written in c that likely
contributed to its speed advantage over my implementation.
6.2
GEC task results
In this section I describe the Levenshtein transformer’s performance for the
GEC task compared to the two baseline models, the transformer and the copy-
augmented transformer. I also present a few examples of the decoding process
to provide a qualitative analysis.
6.2.1
Quantitative results
I tested the Levenshtein transformer with four changes to it: initializing the
decoder with the source sequence instead of an empty sequence, adding "0
insertion" penalty (IP) and "0 deletion" penalty (DP) during inference, applying
early stopping where the policies rely on diﬀerent number of decoding layers and
lastly, assigning a separate ﬁnal layer to each policy.
6.2.1.1
Decoding from source and penalties
Contrary to my intuition, decoding from source shows a severe drop in M2 scores
compared to its counterpart. The high number of FN shows that the decoder
assigns high probabilities even to grammatical errors which leads to a drop in
==PAGE:56==
46
Results and discussion
the number of edits, and this consequently decreases the score, as shown on
Table 6.3.
Architecture
TP
FP
FN
P
R
M2
Levenshtein transformer, dec. empty,
IP=0 DP=0
679
785
1791
0.4638
0.2749
0.4078
Levenshtein transformer, dec. empty,
IP=0 DP=1.5
717
810
1760
0.4695
0.2895
0.4176
Levenshtein transformer, dec. source,
IP=0 DP=0
312
415
1927
0.4292
0.1393
0.3031
Levenshtein transformer, dec. source,
IP=1 DP=3.5
659
744
1743
0.4697
0.2744
0.4112
Table 6.3: GEC results measured by True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP),
False Negatives (FN), Precision (P), Recall (R) and M2 score
The heatmap on Figure 6.7 and 6.8 shows that the Levenshtein transformer’s
results are strongly dependent on the penalties.
The decoder initialized with an empty sequence gathers only moderate gains
from the penalties, with the maximal validation M2 score being achieved with
0 IP and 1.5 DP. A slight increase in the number of both TP and FP leaves
the precision almost the same as without penalties, while a slight decrease in
the number of FN increases the recall moderately. This suggest that the model
made slightly more edits.
On the other hand, the decoder initialized with the source sequence performs
substantially better with higher penalties compared to no penalties, reaching
its maximal M2 score at IP=1 and DP=3.5. A signiﬁcant drop in FN edits and
an increased number of FP and TP edits show that the model made more edits.
This especially improves the recall, while the precision also improves moderately.
While the penalties increase the performance of the network, they also increase
the number of iterations needed for the network to converge by up to 25% in
some cases, as shown on Table 6.4.
Decoding mode
Avg. nr.
of iterations
Decoding from scratch, no penalties
2.9
Decoding from scratch, IP=0 DP=1.5
3.1
Decoding from source, no penalties
2.4
Decoding from source, IP=1 DP=3.5
3.0
Table 6.4: The number of iterations needed for the Levenshtein transformer’s
ﬁnal prediction
==PAGE:57==
6.2 GEC task results
47
Figure 6.7: The validation M2 scores of the Levenshtein transformer w.r.t the
penalties when decoding from scratch
Figure 6.8: The validation M2 scores of the Levenshtein transformer w.r.t the
penalties when decoding from source
==PAGE:58==
48
Results and discussion
6.2.1.2
Early stopping and separate ﬁnal layer
Using diﬀerent number of decoder layers for deletion, placeholder insertion and
word prediction (early stopping) decreased the performance of the network
compared to using all decoder layers for all 3 policies as shown in Table 6.5. The
network made more FP and fewer TP edits which hurt both the precision and
recall.
Using separate ﬁnal layers did not change the M2 score signiﬁcantly. While it
reached slightly higher recall, it also achieved lower precision. This suggests that
the performance of the Levenshtein transformer is not capped by the fact that
the policies rely on the same attention layers.
Architecture
TP
FP
FN
P
R
M2
Levenshtein transformer, dec. empty
679
785
1791
0.4638
0.2749
0.4078
Lev. t., early stopping, dec. empty
692
1014
1795
0.4056
0.2782
0.3716
Lev. t., sep. ﬁnal layers, dec. empty
724
901
1766
0.4455
0.2908
0.4027
Levenshtein transformer, dec. source
312
415
1927
0.4292
0.1393
0.3031
Lev. t., early stopping, dec. source
219
604
1986
0.2661
0.0993
0.1992
Lev. t., sep. ﬁnal layers, dec. source
370
638
1913
0.3671
0.1621
0.293
Table 6.5: GEC results for the Levenshtein transformer with early-stopping
and separate ﬁnal layer
6.2.1.3
Combination of changes
With both penalties and separate ﬁnal layers applied the Levenshtein transformer
performs slightly better. Table 6.6 shows that the changes increase the perfor-
mance by around 5% when decoding from scratch. The penalties, however, closes
the gap between the two decoding modes by increasing the model’s performance
by almost 40% when decoding from source.
Architecture
TP
FP
FN
P
R
M2
Levenshtein t., dec. empty
679
785
1791
0.4638
0.2749
0.4078
+ penalties
717
810
1760
0.4695
0.2895
0.4176
+ separate ﬁnal layers
742
830
1751
0.472
0.2976
0.4225
Levenshtein t., dec. source
312
415
1927
0.4292
0.1393
0.3031
+ penalties
659
744
1743
0.4697
0.2744
0.4112
+ separate ﬁnal layers
662
709
1732
0.4829
0.2765
0.4202
Table 6.6: GEC results for the Levenshtein transformer with early-stopping
and separate ﬁnal layer
==PAGE:59==
6.2 GEC task results
49
6.2.1.4
Baselines
Table 6.7 shows the scores for the 2 baselines and the Levenshtein transformer’
best performing versions.
The copy-augmented transformer achieved the highest M2 score and the trans-
former followed closely. The copy-augmented transformer made the most changes
to the sentences. While it made the most FP edits, it also had the highest num-
ber of TP and lowest number of FN. It achieved the highest recall by far. The
transformer achieved the highest precision.
The Levenshtein transformer underperformed the baseline models in every setting.
It especially lagged behind with the recall score due to the low number of TP
and high number of FN edits.
Architecture
TP
FP
FN
P
R
M2
Copy-augmented transformer
1735
1768
690
0.4953
0.7155
0.5278
Transformer
938
706
1566
0.5706
0.3746
0.5165
Lev. t, sep. ﬁnal layers, penalties,
dec. empty
742
830
1751
0.472
0.2976
0.4225
Lev. t, sep. ﬁnal layers, penalties,
dec. source
662
709
1732
0.4829
0.2765
0.4202
Table 6.7: GEC results measured by True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP),
False Negatives (FN), Precision (P), Recall (R) and M2 score
6.2.2
Qualitative results
In this section I present a few samples that show decoding patterns that happened
frequently. All samples were produced with the Levenshtein transformer with
separate ﬁnal layers and penalties.
6.2.2.1
Decoding from scratch
Below I describe samples of the decoding process when it was initialized with an
empty sequence. The predictions made by the baselines are also included in the
tables for comparison.
Table 6.8 shows a regular decoding process that converged slowly but steadily. In
contrast, Table 6.9 shows that after the second iteration the decoder got into an
inﬁnite loop by inserting a new token and then removing it in the next iteration.
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and discussion
This phenomenon was likely encouraged by increasing the DP value, and it likely
also contributed to the increased average number of iterations.
Src
It started withthe invention of technology which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
Ref
It started invention of technology which has evolved tremendously
over the past few decades .
Copy-t.
It started invention of technology which has evolved tremendously
over the past few decades .
Transf.
It started with the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
Decoding iterations
1/D
1/PLH
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
1/T
It started with invention invention of which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
2/D
It started with invention invention of which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
2/PLH
It started <unk> <unk> invention of <unk> which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
2/T
It started with the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
3/D
It started with the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
3/PLH
It <unk> started with the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
3/T
It has started with the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
Table 6.8: Sample nr. 1 - Iterations of decoding from scratch and baselines
==PAGE:61==
6.2 GEC task results
51
Src
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the life
of other people .
Ref
It is a social obligation to be responsible for the lives of other people
.
Copy-t.
It is a social aft to be responsible for the lives of other people .
Transf.
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the life
of other people .
Decoding iterations
1/D
1/PLH
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
1/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for people of
other people .
2/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for people of
other people .
2/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for <unk> .
2/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others .
3/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others .
3/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others
<unk> .
3/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others ’s .
4/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others ’s.
4/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for <unk> .
4/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others .
5/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others .
5/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others
<unk> .
5/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others ’s .
6/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others ’s .
6/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for <unk> .
6/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others .
7/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others .
7/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others
<unk> .
7/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for others ’s .
Table 6.9: Sample nr. 2 - Iterations of decoding from scratch and baselines
6.2.2.2
Decoding from source sequence
When the decoder was initialized with the source sequence, the model showed
similar behavior as in the former case. At the example at Table 6.10 the model
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and discussion
converged slowly and at Table 6.11 it got into an inﬁnite loop again.
At Table 6.12 the deletion policy removed much of the original sentence so the
model acted as if it was decoding from scratch. While this happened relatively
rarely, it explains why this decoding mode’s required iteration number was more
sensitive to the increase of the DP value, as shown at Table 6.4 and also likely
contributed to the very similar scores of the two decoding modes.
In the example at Table 6.13 the network failed to correct the spelling mistake.
Generally, when the model was decoding from source, it was more likely to leave
words built up from multiple tokens untouched and spelling errors make up a
signiﬁcant part of such cases. The very same spelling error was corrected during
decoding from scratch.
Src
It started withthe invention of technology which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
Ref
It started invention of technology which has evolved tremendously
over the past few decades .
Decoding iterations
1/D
It started with@@ the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
1/PLH
<unk> <unk> <unk> the invention of technology which has
evolved <unk> over the past few decades .
1/T
It started with the invention of technology which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
2/D
It started with the invention of technology which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
2/PLH
It <unk> <unk> the invention of technology which has evolved
tremendously over the past few decades .
2/T
It started with the invention of technology which has evolved tremen-
dously over the past few decades .
Table 6.10: Sample nr. 1 - Iterations of decoding from source sequence
==PAGE:63==
6.2 GEC task results
53
Src
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the life of
other people .
Ref
It is a social obligation to be responsible for the lives of other people
.
Decoding iterations
1/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the life of
other people .
1/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the <unk>
of other people .
1/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the lives
of other people .
2/D
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the lives
of other people .
2/PLH
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the <unk>
of other people .
2/T
Admittedly , it is a social obligation to be responsible for the lives
of other people .
Table 6.11: Sample nr. 2 - Iterations of decoding from source sequence
Src
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorder and other
disorders .
Ref
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorder and other
disorders ?
Decoding iterations
1/D
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorder and other
disorders .
1/PLH
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> genetic <unk> and
other <unk> <unk>
1/T
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorders and other
disorders ?
2/D
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorders and other
disorders ?
2/PLH
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic <unk> and other
disorders <unk>
2/T
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorders and other
disorders ?
Table 6.12: Sample nr. 3 - Iterations of decoding from source sequence
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and discussion
Src
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beatiful
pictures taken by my ﬁrneds .
Ref
For myself , I long for some places after I see beautiful pictures
taken by my ﬁrneds .
1/D
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beatiful
pictures taken by my ﬁr@@ ne@@ ds .
1/PLH
<unk> myself , I <unk> <unk> to <unk> <unk> <unk> I
<unk> <unk> <unk> pictures <unk> by my <unk> <unk> ds .
1/T
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beautiful
pictures taken by my ﬁr@@ ne@@ ds .
2/D
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beatiful
pictures taken by my ﬁr@@ ne@@ ds .
2/PLH
<unk> myself , I <unk> <unk> to <unk> <unk> <unk> I
<unk> <unk> <unk> pictures <unk> by my <unk> ne@@ ds .
2/T
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beautiful
pictures taken by my ﬁr@@ ne@@ ds .
Table 6.13: Sample nr. 4 - Iterations of decoding from source sequence
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Autoregressive machine translation systems perform well on the Grammatical
Error Correction task. With the autoregressive decoding approach, however,
a large part of the original sequence needs to be copied over unchanged for
the GEC task which is not eﬃcient and does not resemble the error correction
process of humans.
As neural networks generally need a large amount of training data in order to
generalize well, the small annotated GEC corpora also poses a serious issue.
In this thesis I address the former issue by using a semi-autoregressive architecture,
the Levenshtein transformer. This architecture can edit only parts of the original
sequence instead of generating a new sequence from scratch which resembles the
workﬂow of the human error correction process well. The lack of large amount
of corpora is addressed by generating synthetic faulty sentences through a noisy
backtranslation system trained on the GEC corpora.
I adopt the Levenshtein transformer for the GEC task by investigating multiple
changes. In order for the policies to rely on more task-speciﬁc layers I apply
separate ﬁnal layers for each policy, which produces similar performance as the
original model. Applying early stopping so the policies use diﬀerent number of
decoding layers decreases the performance.
==PAGE:66==
56
Conclusion
As a large part of grammatical errors is predicted to have a high probability, I
introduce a "0 deletion" penalty (DP) to encourage the model to make more
edits. In several cases complete words are missing from the faulty sequence. To
address this issue, I apply a "0 insertion" penalty (IP) as well.
While applying both separate ﬁnal layers and penalties increases the Levenshtein
transformer’s scores, it still underperforms both baselines, the original transformer
architecture and the copy-augmented transformer. The Levenshtein transformer
achieves 0.42 M2 score both when its decoder is initialized with an empty
sequence consisting of only a BOS and EOS token and when it is initialized with
the original faulty sequence. The original transformer achieves 0.52 M2 score
and the current state-of-the-art GEC system, the copy-augmented transformer
remains the highest scoring network with 0.53 M2 score.
7.1
Future work
Even though the Levenshtein transformer did not perform as well as expected,
several diﬀerent solutions can be investigated to increase its performance.
During training, the decoder input is noised by removing a random number
of tokens. Similarly to the data denoising techniques like [Zhao et al., 2019], a
more diverse noising could be applied (eg. changing token order, changing and
removing existing tokens) that could increase the network’s generalization.
Another possible improvement could be pretraining the network’s decoder as
a language model without input noising and without encoder attention in
order to make it learn grammatical structures more eﬃciently, similarly to
[Zhao et al., 2019].
[Ather and Enerators, 2020] introduces a method similar to MLM. However,
instead of masking out certain words, they exchange them to other plausible
words drawn from a small generator network. This method could be used to
replace the current decoder input noising.
The Levenshtein transformer originally handles token transformation as the sum
of a token deletion and a token insertion. However, [Awasthi et al., 2019] shows
that implementing a transformation edit instead results in a signiﬁcant jump
in recall which suggests that the same could help elevating the Levenshtein
transformer’s performance.
The observation of the bad performance for correcting spelling errors (subsub-
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Future work
57
section 6.2.2.2) suggests that preprocessing the sentences with a static spelling
error correction system could also increase the performance of the Levenshtein
transformer especially when its decoder is initialized with the source sentence.
The Levenshtein transformer proved to be especially hard to train and to ﬁnd
the proper parameters for the Adam optimizer, which was paired with long
training time. [Liu et al., 2019] suggest a solution called the Rectiﬁed Adam (or
RAdam) that dynamically scales the momentum in order to tackle the warmup
tuning issue. The authors suggest that RAdam might improve the model training
moderately compared to Adam with warmup, which could be investigated for
the Levenshtein transformer as well.
==PAGE:68==
Appendix A
Hyperparameters used in
the neural network models
The large batch size was chosen in order to increase the performance as shown in
[Popel and Bojar, 2018]. The Levenshtein transformer with early stopping was
tested with the original "LevT base" parameter, with the deletion policy using
the ﬁrst 4 decoder layer, the insertion policy the ﬁrst 5 and the token predictor
all 6 layers.
Multiple diﬀerent training settings were tried, eg. diﬀerent number of warming
steps, maximal learning rate, batch size, optimizer, dropouts and network size.
The table below shows the best performing settings that are were also used for
producing the results that were discussed in chapter 6.
The backtranslatio transformern network was trained with the same hyperpa-
rameters as the transformer for the GEC task.
==PAGE:69==
59
Lev T base
Lev T sep.
ﬁn. layer
Transformer Copy-aug.
t.
E/D embed-
ding
dimen-
sion
1024
1024
1024
1024
E/D feedfor-
ward dimen-
sion
4096
4096
4096
4096
E/D layers
6/6
6/5
6/6
6/6
Copy
atten-
tion layers
N/A
N/A
N/A
1
Separate
ﬁnal layers
0
1
N/A
N/A
E/D
atten-
tion heads
16
16
16
16
Dropout
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
Attention
dropout
0
0
0
0.2
Activation
dropout
0
0
0
0.2
Optimizer
Adam
Adam
Adam
Adam
Betas
0.9, 0.98
0.9, 0.98
0.9, 0.98
0.9, 0.98
Eﬀective
batch size
128 000
128 000
128 000
128 000
Max.
learn-
ing rate
5 e-4
5 e-4
5 e-4
5 e-4
Warmup
steps
10 000
10 000
4 000
4 000
Table A.1: Hyperparameters used in this thesis
==PAGE:70==
Appendix B
Validation M2 scores of the
Levenshtein t. with
separate ﬁnal layers
Figure B.1 and B.2 shows the validation M2 scores for the Levenshtein transformer
with separate ﬁnal layers.
They show similar patterns to the Levenshtein
transformer without separate ﬁnal layers, which supports my hypothesis that
relying on the same decoding layers does not cap the performance.
==PAGE:71==
61
Figure B.1: The validation M2 scores of the Levenshtein transformer with
separate ﬁnal layers w.r.t the penalties when decoding from source
Figure B.2: The validation M2 scores of the Levenshtein transformer with
separate ﬁnal layers w.r.t the penalties when decoding from source
==PAGE:72==
Appendix C
Decoding samples of the
Levenshtein transformer
Below are more samples of the decoding process. Table C.1 shows an example
where the model successfully inserted the proper number of placeholders and the
tokens are predicted correctly as well. This type of decoding has been observed
in many cases which shows that while the model only estimates the joint token
probability instead of predicting it directly, it can still be successful without
multiple iterations.
Table C.2 shows a similar decoding pattern - however, this sentence contains 2
spelling errors. When the model decoded from scratch it successfully corrected
both, while when decoding from source the model could not correct the word
’ﬁrneds’. There were multiple cases of this phenomenon which suggests that
decoding from source could outperform decoding from scratch with a simple
spell checker.
==PAGE:73==
63
Src
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorder and other
disorders .
Ref
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorder and other
disorders ?
Copy-t.
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorder and other
disorders ?
Transf.
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorders and other
disorders ?
Decoding iterations
1/D
1/PLH
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
1/T
What is the basic diﬀerence between genetic disorders and other
disorders ?
Table C.1: Sample nr. 3 - Iterations of decoding from scratch and baselines
Src
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beatiful
pictures taken by my ﬁrneds .
Ref
For myself , I long for some places after I see beautiful pictures
taken by my ﬁrneds .
Copy-t.
For myself , I long for some places after I saw beautiful pictures
taken by my my .
Transf.
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beautiful
pictures taken by my friends .
Decoding iterations
1/D
1/PLH
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
<unk> <unk> <unk> <unk>
1/T
For myself , I am long to some places after I saw those beautiful
pictures taken by my friends .
Table C.2: Sample nr. 4 - Iterations of decoding from scratch and baselines
==PAGE:74==
Appendix D
Project plan
D.1
Project description
Partially autoregressive language modelling and editing of discrete sequences.
Language modelling is the task of calculating the probability of a sequence of
discrete tokens. Using this method, we can generate and, more recently, edit
sequences. We want to investigate the capability of this method to generate
and edit discrete sequences. This generation and editing will be dependent
on various conditions to produce sequences with speciﬁc properties, such as
text written with Shakespeare style. The goal is to implement the Levenshtein
Transformer and test it on simple Natural Language Processing tasks and de-
novo protein design. To achieve this, the ﬁrst step is to implement a baseline
model based on the original Levenshtein Transformer publication. This will
be followed by conditional language modelling of denoising natural language
processing sentences. If time allows, the student will implement denoising and
generation of protein sequences with various properties and functions.
==PAGE:75==
D.2 Original time plan and risk analysis
65
D.2
Original time plan and risk analysis
The planned stages of the project is shown on Table D.1.
Week 1-3: The risk is low since most of the time will be spent on familiarizing
with the literature of a few selected branches of deep learning.
This part went according to the plan
Week 4-5: Focusing on the chosen technological solutions should yield no risk.
Writing the project plan has some risk as it needs to be precise enough so that
the deadlines can be kept.
This part went according to the plan
Week 6-11: Higher risk, as the detail of the technical implementation of the
original Levenshtein Transformer paper is vague in some cases and the source
code is not provided. As the authors are using solutions that are unique to this
paper, only limited support can be gained from other papers if technical issues
emerge.
The transformer was implemented by week 9. It took much time to apply all
optimizing solutions that was included in the paper. Initially I calculated the
BLEU score wrongly, which lost me another week since I was trying to correct
the transformer implementation due to the low BLEU score, but the scorer was
buggy not the implementation. The Levenshtein transformer proved to be quite
hard to implement as well. I spent especially long time moving every computation
to the GPUs, and then it was still relatively slow.
Week 12-21: High risk, as the model will be used for a new task. This might
require implementing a new training procedure, which can be challenging. If
time allows, the model should be applied to denoising protein sequences as well,
which will likely require signiﬁcant changes to the training procedure and the
decoder of the model itself.
The fairseq Levenshtein transformer was released in November. Unfortunately
it did not run on the HPC, and I spent around 2 weeks debugging it before I
found the ﬁx. At the second half of November I was investigating how the LevT
performs with diﬀerent training settings on the original GEC dataset. I also
generated the pseudo dataset and used that for training as well.
Week 22-29: Low risk, the main risk here is that the deadlines are not kept and
so there will be less time to ﬁnish the writing.
==PAGE:76==
66
Project plan
As I was out of schedule I implemented the proposed changes in December while
simultaneously writing the thesis.
==PAGE:77==
D.2 Original time plan and risk analysis
67
Week
Activity
Risk
1 - 3 (1 Aug – 22 Aug)
General literature study. Getting famil-
iar with state-of-the-art Machine Trans-
lation and Language Models, Imitation
learning and their respective training
methods.
The goal should have been
identiﬁed by this point and a general idea
obtained about the technological solution
that will likely be incorporated. Close
contact with supervisors. The project
plan should be created by the end of the
3rd week.
1
4 - 5 (23 Aug – 8 Sep)
Focused literature study.
The chosen
technological solutions should be inves-
tigated thoroughly, and baseline solu-
tions and scores identiﬁed. The datasets
should be gathered, preferably the same
as what the baseline models work with.
2
6 - 11 (9 Sep – 22 Sep)
Implementation of the original model.
Since the source code of the Levenshtein
Transformer was not released, the model
should be built from ground up in order
to make sure that a correct and working
model is used in the coming weeks. I ex-
pect that this will take signiﬁcant time as
the paper is vague about certain aspects
of the model.
4
12 - 21 (23 Sep – 24 Nov)
Developing the altered version of the Lev-
enshtein Transformer for denoising text
such as correcting grammatical errors.
The model should be tested on the same
datasets as the baseline models and the
scores should be measured according to
the same metrics.
If time allows, the
model should be altered to denoise pro-
tein sequences, which will require new
sets of rules to be incorporated.
5
22 – 29 (25 Nov – 15 Jan)
Generating graphs and writing the re-
port.
2
Table D.1: Initial time plan for the project
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[Ather and Enerators, 2020] Ather, C. R. and Enerators, T. H. A. N. G. (2020).
Electra: Pre-Training Text Encoders As Discriminators Rather Than Genera-
tors. ICLR Submission, pages 1–14.
[Awasthi et al., 2019] Awasthi, A., Sarawagi, S., Goyal, R., Ghosh, S., and
Piratla, V. (2019). Parallel Iterative Edit Models for Local Sequence Trans-
duction. pages 4251–4261.
[Ba et al., 2016] Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. (2016). Layer Nor-
malization.
[Bengio et al., 2003] Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., Jauvin, C., Ca,
J. U., Kandola, J., Hofmann, T., Poggio, T., and Shawe-Taylor, J. (2003). A
Neural Probabilistic Language Model. Technical report.
[Bengio et al., 1994] Bengio, Y., Simard, P., and Frasconi, P. (1994). Learning
long-term dependencies with gradient descent is diﬃcult. IEEE transactions
on neural networks, 5(2):157–166.
[Bojar et al., 2015] Bojar, O., Buck, C., Federmann, C., Haddow, B., Koehn,
P., Leveling, J., Monz, C., Pecina, P., Post, M., Saint-Amand, H., Soricut,
R., Specia, L., and Tamchyna, A. (2015). Findings of the 2014 Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. pages 12–58.
[Bryant, 2019] Bryant, C. (2019).
Automatic annotation of error types for
grammatical error correction.
[Bryant et al., 2019] Bryant, C., Felice, M., Andersen, O. E., and Briscoe, T.
(2019). The BEA-2019 Shared Task on Grammatical Error Correction. Tech-
nical report.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[Case and Carilli, 2018] Case, C. and Carilli, M. (2018). NVIDIA Apex: Tools
for Easy Mixed-Precision Training in PyTorch.
[Chelba et al., 2014] Chelba, C., Mikolov, T., Schuster, M., Ge, Q., Brants,
T., Koehn, P., and Robinson, T. (2014). One billion word benchmark for
measuring progress in statistical language modeling. In Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
INTERSPEECH, pages 2635–2639.
[Cherry et al., 2019] Cherry, C., Foster, G., Bapna, A., Firat, O., and Macherey,
W. (2019). Revisiting Character-Based Neural Machine Translation with
Capacity and Compression. pages 4295–4305.
[Cho, 2016] Cho, K. (2016). Noisy Parallel Approximate Decoding for Condi-
tional Recurrent Language Model.
[Chollampatt and Ng, 2018] Chollampatt, S. and Ng, H. T. (2018). A Multi-
layer Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Neural Network for Grammatical Error
Correction.
[Chollampatt and Ng, 2019] Chollampatt, S. and Ng, H. T. (2019). Neural Qual-
ity Estimation of Grammatical Error Correction. pages 2528–2539. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[Dahlmeier, 2013] Dahlmeier, D. (2013). NUS Corpus of Learner English (NU-
CLE). Proceeding:22–31.
[Dahlmeier and Ng, 2012] Dahlmeier, D. and Ng, H. T. (2012). Better evaluation
for grammatical error correction. In NAACL HLT 2012 - 2012 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Proceedings of the Conference, pages 568–572.
[Devlin et al., 2018] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K.
(2018). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding.
[Elliott et al., 2016] Elliott, D., Frank, S., Sima’an, K., and Specia, L. (2016).
Multi30K: Multilingual English-German Image Descriptions. pages 70–74.
[Gage, 1994] Gage, P. (1994). A new algorithm for data compression. The C
Users Journal, 12(2):23–38.
[Ge et al., 2018] Ge, T., Wei, F., and Zhou, M. (2018). Reaching Human-level
Performance in Automatic Grammatical Error Correction: An Empirical
Study.
==PAGE:80==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Gehring et al., 2017] Gehring, J., Auli, M., Grangier, D., Yarats, D., and
Dauphin, Y. N. (2017). Convolutional sequence to sequence learning. In
34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, volume 3,
pages 2029–2042.
[Granger, 1998] Granger, S. (1998). The computer learner corpus: A versatile
new source of data for SLA research. In Learner English on Computer.
[Gu et al., 2019a] Gu, J., Liu, Q., and Cho, K. (2019a). Insertion-based Decoding
with automatically Inferred Generation Order.
[Gu et al., 2016] Gu, J., Lu, Z., Li, H., and Li, V. O. (2016). Incorporating
copying mechanism in sequence-to-sequence learning. In 54th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2016 - Long Papers,
volume 3, pages 1631–1640.
[Gu et al., 2019b] Gu, J., Wang, C., and Zhao, J. (2019b). Levenshtein Trans-
former.
[He et al., 2016] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual
learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, volume 2016-Decem,
pages 770–778.
[Hinton and Tieleman, 2012] Hinton, G. and Tieleman, T. (2012). Lecture 6.5
- RMSProp. Technical report, COURSERA: Neural Networks for Machine
Learning.
[Junczys-Dowmunt et al., 2018] Junczys-Dowmunt,
M.,
Grundkiewicz,
R.,
Guha, S., and Heaﬁeld, K. (2018). Approaching Neural Grammatical Er-
ror Correction as a Low-Resource Machine Translation Task. pages 595–606.
[Kingma and Ba, 2014] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A Method for
Stochastic Optimization.
[Kiyono et al., 2019] Kiyono, S., Suzuki, J., Mita, M., Mizumoto, T., and Inui, K.
(2019). An Empirical Study of Incorporating Pseudo Data into Grammatical
Error Correction. pages 1236–1242.
[Koehn et al., 2007] Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Fed-
erico, M., Bertoldi, N., and Cowan, B. (2007). Moses: Open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation. Prague: Proceedings of 45th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics Companion Volume Proceedings
of the Demo and Poster Sessions., (June):177–180.
[Kudo and Richardson, 2018] Kudo, T. and Richardson, J. (2018). Sentence-
Piece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer
for neural text processing. In EMNLP 2018 - Conference on Empirical Methods
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, Proceedings, pages
66–71. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Lee et al., 2019] Lee, J., Mansimov, E., and Cho, K. (2019). Deterministic
Non-Autoregressive Neural Sequence Modeling by Iterative Reﬁnement. pages
1173–1182. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).
[Levenshtein, 1966] Levenshtein, V. I. (1966). Binary codes capable of correcting
deletions, insertions, and reversals. In Soviet physics doklady, pages 707–710.
[Liu et al., 2019] Liu, L., Jiang, H., He, P., Chen, W., Liu, X., Gao, J., and Han,
J. (2019). On the Variance of the Adaptive Learning Rate and Beyond.
[Luong et al., 2015] Luong, M. T., Pham, H., and Manning, C. D. (2015). Eﬀec-
tive approaches to attention-based neural machine translation. In Conference
Proceedings - EMNLP 2015: Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 1412–1421.
[Mikolov et al., 2013] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013).
Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space. In 1st Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2013 - Workshop Track
Proceedings.
[Ng, 2017] Ng, A. (2017).
Adam optimization algorithm.
Technical report,
COURSERA: Improving Deep Neural Networks: Hyperparameter tuning,
Regularization and Optimization.
[Ng, 2018] Ng, A. (2018). Beam search. Technical report, COURSERA: Sequence
Models.
[NVIDIA, 2018] NVIDIA (2018). NVIDIA Collective Communications Library
(NCCL).
[Ott et al., 2019] Ott, M., Edunov, S., Baevski, A., Fan, A., Gross, S., Ng, N.,
Grangier, D., and Auli, M. (2019). fairseq: A Fast, Extensible Toolkit for
Sequence Modeling. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019: Demonstrations.
[Papineni et al., 2001] Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W.-J., and
Heights, Y. (2001). BLEU : a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine
Translation. Science, 22176:1–10.
[Paszke et al., 2019] Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J.,
Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A.,
Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S.,
Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. (2019). PyTorch: An Imperative
Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Wallach, H., Larochelle,
H., Beygelzimer, A., d’Alch e Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pages 8024–8035.
Curran Associates, Inc.
==PAGE:82==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Popel and Bojar, 2018] Popel, M. and Bojar, O. (2018).
Training Tips for
the Transformer Model. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics,
110(1):43–70.
[Post, 2018] Post, M. (2018). A Call for Clarity in Reporting {BLEU} Scores.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Belgium, Brussels.
[Provilkov et al., 2019] Provilkov, I., Emelianenko, D., and Voita, E. (2019).
BPE-Dropout: Simple and Eﬀective Subword Regularization.
[Radford et al., 2018] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., and
Sutskever, I. (2018). Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners.
[Rush et al., 2018] Rush, A. M., Nguyen, V., and Klein, G. (2018). The Anno-
tated Transformer.
[Schuster and Nakajima, 2012] Schuster, M. and Nakajima, K. (2012). Japanese
and Korean voice search. In ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings, pages 5149–5152.
[Sennrich et al., 2015] Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. (2015). Neural
Machine Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units.
[Sennrich et al., 2016] Sennrich, R., Haddow, B., and Birch, A. (2016). Neural
machine translation of rare words with subword units. In 54th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2016 - Long Papers,
volume 3, pages 1715–1725.
[Sutskever et al., 2013] Sutskever, I., Martens, J., Dahl, G., and Hinton, G.
(2013). On the importance of initialization and momentum in deep learning.
In 30th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013, number
PART 3, pages 2176–2184.
[Sutskever et al., 2014] Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. (2014). Sequence
to sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 4, pages 3104–3112.
[Szegedy et al., 2016] Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioﬀe, S., Shlens, J., and
Wojna, Z. (2016). Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, volume 2016-Decem, pages 2818–2826.
[Tomoya Mizumoto and Matsumoto., 2011] Tomoya Mizumoto, Mamoru Ko-
machi, M. N. and Matsumoto., Y. (2011). Mining Revision Log of Language
Learning SNS for Automated Japanese Error Correction of Second Language
Learners. 5th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(IJCNLP), pages 147–155.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[Toshikazu Tajiri and Matsumoto, 2012] Toshikazu Tajiri, M. K. and Mat-
sumoto, Y. (2012). Tense and Aspect Error Correction for ESL Learners
Using Global Context. 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Short Papers (oral), pages 198–202.
[Van Rijsbergen, 1979] Van Rijsbergen, C. J. (1979).
Information retrieval:
theory and practice. In Information retrieval: theory and practice, pages 1–14.
[Vaswani et al., 2017] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you
need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 2017-
Decem, pages 5999–6009.
[Wu et al., 2016] Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M.,
Macherey, W., Krikun, M., Cao, Y., Gao, Q., Macherey, K., Klingner, J.,
Shah, A., Johnson, M., Liu, X., Kaiser, L., Gouws, S., Kato, Y., Kudo, T.,
Kazawa, H., Stevens, K., Kurian, G., Patil, N., Wang, W., Young, C., Smith,
J., Riesa, J., Rudnick, A., Vinyals, O., Corrado, G., Hughes, M., and Dean,
J. (2016). Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap
between Human and Machine Translation.
[Yang et al., 2019] Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhutdinov,
R., and Le, Q. V. (2019). XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for
Language Understanding.
[Yannakoudakis et al., 2011] Yannakoudakis, H., Briscoe, T., and Medlock, B.
(2011). A New Dataset and Method for Automatically Grading ESOL Texts.
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
[Zhao et al., 2019] Zhao, W., Wang, L., Shen, K., Jia, R., and Liu, J. (2019).
Improving Grammatical Error Correction via Pre-Training a Copy-Augmented
Architecture with Unlabeled Data. pages 156–165.
