==PAGE:1==
Mapping the potential exploitation of oﬀshore wind power in
Norway
Petter Schwnaitz, Stefan Petrovic
Technical University of Denmark
Abstract
Green energy and sustainable energy production is on the rise to meet the intermittent
steps and climate goals of zero emission. However this goal is most desirable to achieve whilst
simultaneously having minimised capital costs for the green energy production. Whilst ﬂoat-
ing oﬀshore wind power is still in its early stages of development, sea-bed fastened structures
are the current solutions for most oﬀshore production farms. This study investigated the
relationship between costs and energy production using model designed by IEA Wind Task
26.
1. Introduction
The Norwegian Water Resource and Energy Directorate (NVE) published on 13.03.2019 a
report about the potential exploitation of onshore wind power in Norway. This was meant as
a tool for potential investors to be able to plan the expansion of new wind power utilisation.
Since Norway’s share of electric transportation was greatly increasing due to their low costs
it was pivotal for the country to sustain the increasing demand in power. As the country
has much social resistance when it comes to installing onshore wind power, taking the wind
turbines to sea might be the optimal solution for the country. Oﬀshore wind power has been
more costly than onshore, but it was also a much younger technology and capital expenditure
(CAPEX) and operational expenditure (OPEX) was trending downwards. Power prices in
Norway was very cheap and thus it was important to keep costs low should the project not
require governmental subsidiaries.
The project was limited to be within the Norwegian economic zone thus excluding Sval-
bard and Jan Mayen.
Three key components were deﬁned to be investigated for the proﬁtability of oﬀshore
wind power: length to shore, sea depth and wind speed. Length to shore and sea depth will
aﬀect CAPEX and OPEX of the wind turbines and wind speed will aﬀect revenue. Other
costs were a function of CAPEX and OPEX for calculating proﬁtability.
For many areas sea depth could be a lesser factor, but Norway has a steep sub sea
geography thus becoming an important factor for the investment.
There are two typical version of oﬀshore wind turbines, one was a sea-bed fastened struc-
ture and the a ﬂoating structure. Floating structures are emerging as the new technology
but also much more expensive than sea-bed fastened [cite some soruce], but the expenses of
Preprint submitted to Journal Name
19th January 2020
==PAGE:2==
both technologies are trending downwards [cite if previous source was lacking]. One of the
goals of this project was to map the possibilities for both types of wind turbines to get a
clear idea of the costs of both technologies. There are also more challenges when utilising
a ﬂoating structure [source needed], but oﬀers other advantages such as independence to
the structural characteristics on the sea-bed and that the structure can be assembled at a
desirable location and transported to the site.
Exclusions
Sensitivity (el. price, reduced CAPEX / OPEX, increased FLH,
2. Methodology
assumptions
Expenses were deﬁned based on available information anywhere possible. As oﬀshore
wind power was a relatively new technology and very underdeveloped in Norway there was
very little information about existing projects and projects under development. Today there
was only one oﬀshore wind turbine in Norway which was the prototype for Hywind wind
farm.
Norway’s Transmission System Operator (TSO), Statnett has their central and regional
power grid installed close to the coastline or the islands of the entire country so it was
assumed that cable length had only need to reach the coastline to be able to reach the grid
and that the power lines would support the generation from the farms, or that the existing
grid could be upgraded.
2.1. Wind speed when it matters
Storage of wind power was something that has yet to be eﬃciently developed so it was
pivotal for the production of power from wind to be simultaneous with consumption of
power. Not only for the utility of the producer and the consumer, but also for the TSO’s
task of maintaining grid stability. Newer wind turbines are produced with a Doubly-Fed
Induction Generator (DFIG) which protects the wind turbine from grid instability, but also
reduces its capacity for ancillary services to the TSO.
2.2. About the MERRA-2 wind data
The data acquired from the MERRA-2 dataset has measurements at 50 meters height,
but in many cases the set hub height lie at 80m. The baseline for the economic model lied
at 110m. To compensate for this diﬀerence, the vertical wind proﬁle was calculated using:
v(h) = vref ∗
ln h
z0
lnhref
z0
(1)
where Z0 = 0.0002 [1]. Further, the data from MERRA-2 was averaged each hour, but only
data from 04.30 to 23.30 local time. This was the period where base load was increased and
the most important window for power production because of the correlation between power
2
==PAGE:3==
demand and power prices. There are possibilities for the wind turbines to provide ancillary
services to the TSO in terms of power production during unproﬁtable periods. However the
contents of the contracts will vary and thus too obscure to ﬁt the general case and therefore
not included in the economical model.
The wind data was given in two directions, eastward and northward and was solved using
Pythagorean theorem for the real direction and speed.
Determining LCOE based on [2]
LCOE =
Pn
t=1
It + Mt + Ft
(1 + r)t
Pn
t=1
Et
(1 + r)t
(2)
2.3. Equation of wind power
The general equation for wind power:
P = 1
2ρACpV 3NgNb
(3)
2.4. Cases: The IEA 26 baseline model and other models
Key parameters for the baseline model made by ORE Catapult and IEA Wind Task 26
are presented in table 1.
The diﬀerent cases only show what was changed from the baseline model.
Table 1: Key parameters
Baseline model
Value
GCF [-]
0.576
NCF [-]
0.473
Number of turbines [-]
25
Onshore power cable [103 m]
0
Hub Height [m]
100
Power rating [MW]
8
Project lifetime [years]
25
Sea state downtime level
Medium
2.5. Sea state
Sea state dictate whether transit, installation and maintenance are possible for any oﬀ-
shore structure, deﬁned by the parameters signiﬁcant wave height, Hs and wave period, Tp.
The level of downtime related to the sea state was set to medium in the baseline model.
2.6. Inﬂation
Inﬂation from 1990 to 2018 was 2.21% Inf [3]. This was the chosen inﬂation rate for the
baseline model.
3
==PAGE:4==
2.7. The Rayleigh Distribution
Since only mean wind speed was known it was assumed that the wind proﬁle follow the
Rayleigh Distribution [4]. The probability density for the Rayleigh Distribution:
pdf(v) = v
σ2exp

−1
2
v
σ
2
(4)
The correlation between the average wind speed and Rayleigh pdf:
σ2 = 2
πv2
(5)
This way the probability density of the wind speed can be expressed as:
pdf(v) = π
2
v
v2exp

−π
4
v
v
2
,
v ϵ [0, ∞)
(6)
2.8. Capacity factor
GCF deﬁned as:
GCF =
AEPactual
AEPpotential
=
Pn
i=1 pd(vi) ∗Pi
Prated ∗8766
(7)
With leap-year taken into account. NCF deﬁned as:
NCF = GCF ∗A ∗(1 −Lwake) ∗(1 −Lel) ∗(1 −Lother)
(8)
2.9. The master equation
The mathematical complexity of the baseline model made it impractical to implement
to GIS without extensive use of resources. Thus CAPEX and OPEX to the corresponding
depths and distance to shore from 0m to 200m was used to ﬁt the curve. Depth was set
to zero when calculating CAPEX and OPEX change from distance to shore and vice versa.
The general best solution for the ﬁtted curve would be a polynomial curve with degree equal
to one less the number of input values used to calculate the ﬁtted curve . Standard deviation
between the ﬁtted curve and source values was used to ﬁnd the best polynomial.
The MERRA-2 Wind speed data acquired was monthly average values.
4
==PAGE:5==
3. Results
3.1. Key results
Figure 1: Lifetime costs associated with oﬀshore wind farm installations
5
==PAGE:6==
Figure 2: NPV AEP associated with oﬀshore wind farm installations
6
==PAGE:7==
Figure 3: LCOE associated with oﬀshore wind farm installations
Regardless of the high potential of wind power oﬀthe coast of Norway in ﬁg. 2, the
water depth is the driving factor as it assumed similarities to an exponential curve (ﬁg. 1).
3.2. Depth: Fitting the curve of CAPEX and OPEX
It turned out that OPEX did not change regardless of deep the turbine was installed in
the baseline model. The results suggest that OPEX of the foundation was non-existent for
the project lifetime.
7
==PAGE:8==
Two parameters are transit time and sea state which correlates to the distance.
Parameters that change OPEX when talking about O&M in between occurrence of error
to being ﬁxed and running again. Travel time will change that and distance to shore will
aﬀect travel time. Another element was the sea state wherein too rough sea state will make
it impossible to conduct maintenance.
The evolution of CAPEX when depth increases was similar to an exponential curve when
evaluating depth from surface level to 200 meter below and increments of 10m. The cor-
responding standard deviation, σ, to the model and the ﬁtted equation of 0.038 AC/kW or
2.46 ∗10−6 % for the 20th degree polynomial. Including depths below 200m led to the ﬁtted
curve lost its precision close to the surface. There was no need for the ﬁtted curve to measure
for depths below 200m as the break point for bottom ﬁxed and ﬂoating wind turbines lie
around 60m water depth.
Figure 4: Cap
3.3. Distance: Fitting the curve of CAPEX and OPEX
CAPEX increase as distance increase because of the additional transit and follows a
similar trend in increase in CAPEX for increasing depths when comparing the increments
of 10m depth to 10km distance. However, total costs had a much more linear evolution,
shown in ﬁgure 1. Using a multiple polynomial function to ﬁt the curve was still a large
improvement to a ﬁrst and second degree polynomial, even if the measure of error was
somewhat slim, shown in table 2.
3.4. Case 1: Onshore cable
Adding a distance from the shoreline to HVDC connection to the grid simply increases
CAPEX by 14.29 AC/kW ∗103m.
8
==PAGE:9==
1st degree
2nd degree
20th degree
σ
7.178
6.372
0.604
Table 2: Standard deviation of ﬁtting costs associated with increased distance to shore
3.5. Wind proﬁle correction
Wind speed at 110m hub height using eq. 1 gave a relatively minimal increase of 6.34%.
Compared to the power law wind proﬁle with another general factor α = 0.1 the diﬀerence
was signiﬁcant (8.20%) so there seem to be dissonance between the general values of the two
models. Looking at the sensitivity for the two factors, logarithmic wind proﬁle will have a
less volatile reaction to change in factor. Looking at [? ] which modelled a wind proﬁle over
the North Sea the results from the logarithmic model are similar to the one found in this
project. However there was a noticeable diﬀerence between the logarithmic wind proﬁle and
the mean of the measured wind wherein the measured wind was around 4% higher. This
suggests that the fetch required for 0 = 0.0002 was not met and that a higher roughness
could better represent the actual conditions in the North Sea.
3.6. Harsher sea state
The baseline model has a moderate approach to both sea state outside the coast of Nor-
way and also in its method of calculating downtime which was done by multiplying expected
percentage of downtime due to sea state with the time of the operation. However this as-
sumed that operations could commence and stop at any given moment, but it would be more
realistic to assume that it was not safe to conduct the operation during harsh sea state and
that it would be required to wait to the next possible moment wherein the whole operation
could be conducted without interruptions.
3.7. About the time frame of MERRA-2 wind data
An argument can be made for the fact that power will still be needed in the base load
period, but the decision to exclude that time period was made to remove the possibility of
a site where an unreasonable large share of power production takes place during the night.
3.8. About Rayleigh Distribution
As the Rayleigh Distribution was less complex than the Weibull Distribution [5] it was
also expected to have more errors because of it. However as the instantaneous wind speed
was not available the method represents in fairness how the wind looked like under Rayleigh
distribution.
9
==PAGE:10==
4. Conclusion
References
[1] W. M. Organization, Guide to Meteorological Instruments and Methods of Observation, 2018 ed., World
Meteorological Organiation, 7 bis, avenue de la Paix - P.O. Box 2300 - CH 1211 Geneva 2 - Switzerland,
2018.
[2] I.
R.
E.
Agency,
Wind
power,
RENEWABLE
ENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES:
COST
ANALYSIS
SERIES
Volume
1:
Power
Sector
(2012).
doi:https://www.irena.org/-
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2012/RET echnologiesCostAnalysis
−
WINDP OWER.pdf.Konsumprisindeksen, organization =′ statisticsnorway′, year =, ????
[3]
[4] R. N. Clark, Small Wind, 2014 ed., Academic Press, ???? doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385999-
0.00001-1.
[5] K. Matsuda, D. Kurosaki, D. Hayashi, K. Aoyama, A comparison of the weibull and rayleigh distributions for
estimating wind power potential., Wind Engineering 2 (1978) 156–164. doi:www.jstor.org/stable/43749115.
10
