==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
January 26, 2020
Master Thesis
Numerical and Experimental Analysis of
Collar Drawing.
Thesis Supervisors:
Chris Valentin Nielsen
Brian Nyvang Legarth
Tobias V. Bramminge
s134132
Master Thesis, Aug 2019-Jan 2020
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master’s thesis investigates the metal forming process collar drawing. Collar drawing perform
collars directly in the pipe material of a run pipe and produce quality collars for piping systems applied
in the food and pharmaceutical industry. The knowledge of the forming process is very limited,
which is the primary motivation for studying the process. The project aims to describe the collar
drawing process through a scientiﬁc study and to increase the knowledge on the forming process. The
investigation is based on experiments and a numerical model that in combination is used to provide
a thorough description of the process. The numerical model is developed using the FEM software,
I-form, that is a program specially developed to perform simulations for analysis of forming processes
containing geometric, contact and material non-linearities. The thesis utilizes a test rig that is designed
to perform the collar drawing process experimentally, while obtaining load and displacement data.
The experimental analysis is based on specimen performed on the test rig, using tested pipe material.
The numerical model is assessed to predict a quite accurate maximum force required to perform the
forming process and provide a good estimation on the resulting geometry of the formed collar. The
collar drawing process is compared to another collar forming process called T-Drill. A T-Drill formed
specimen is experimentally analysed and compared to the collar drawing specimen manufactured of
the same tested pipe material. The collar drawing specimen performs superior surface conditions
compared to the T-Drill specimen. Furthermore, a more uniform collar thickness is obtained with
collar drawing and minimum collar height two times larger than the T-Drill specimen. Finally an
attempt to improve the height and edge shape without fracture is performed, by studying the initial
hole geometry in the pipe material. The numerical model is utilized to study the impact of the change
and to determine an approximate strain in the collar, that leads to fracture. The improvement is
executed experimentally resulting in a successful collar height improvement of 21.4% and 80% for
two different pipe dimensions.
The compiled study should be considered as an academic description of the collar drawing process
and show how a ﬁnite element model is used to determine important process factors.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The thesis serves as the conclusion of the authors Master of Science program in the ﬁeld of Mechan-
ical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project is conducted under the
supervision of Assoc. Professors Brian Nyvang Legarth and Chris Valentin Nielsen and is a contin-
uation of previous work performed by the author under the same supervision. The project has been
executed in the period from August 2019 to January 2020.
The sincerest gratitude is to be expressed to Chris and Brian for inspirational education and super-
vision during the project and additionally for the interesting time spent discussing broad variation of
topics in the project.
A special expression of gratitude is to be directed to collar drawing specialist Jan Lauridsen from
Sven Lauridsen & Søn ApS for sharing his extensive experience and empirical knowledge on the col-
lar drawing process.
Great appreciation is to be expressed to Daniel Gutierrez Andersen, "Fisker" and the rest of Holmsskov
Rustfri Stainless Steel Company A/S for presentation and specimen manufacturing by the T-Drill
method.
A sincere thank you to Klaus Liltorp and Niels Steenfeldt Jensen for quick and efﬁcient assistance
and training in metrology and material testing disciplines at DTU respectively.
Thank you to Flemming Frengler and Jonas Minor Brandt representing Chr. Hansen A/S, for showing
interest in the project and providing insights on the industrial piping assessment.
Thank you to Tobias Boel Petersen from Chr. Hansen A/S for insights of contamination and cleaning
including an assessment of the produced specimen in the project.
My sincerest gratitude is ﬁnally directed towards my family and friends for limitless backup, compre-
hension and assistance throughout the project.
January 2020.
Kgs. Lyngby, Copenhagen.
Tobias Vode Bramminge
ii
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
CPU
Central Processing Unit
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
e.g.
Exampli Gratia, - "for example"
etc.
Et Cetera, - "and so forth"
EMA
European Medicines Agency
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FEM
Finite Element Method
GUI
Graﬁcal User Interface
i.e.
Id Est, - "in other words"
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Unit
Meaning
K
N·s/mm
Stiffness matrix
f
N
Force vector
v
mm/s
Velocity vector
A0
mm2
Initial cross sectional area
Ac
mm2
Specimen cross sectional area
B
-
Initial strain
C
MPa
Material constant
Cc
mm
Collar circumference
Cn
Z
Number of collars
F
N
Force
Fp
Mp
PGravitational force
Fp
N
Punch force
E
[GPa]
Youngs modulus
Etot
Z
Total number of elements
Fp
N
Punch force
K
-
Incompressibility constant
L
mm
Specimen length
L0
mm
Extensometer gauge length
Lf
mm
Specimen free length
Lg
mm
Clamp grip length
Np
Z
Node
Np∗
-
Project of node, Np
R
-
Normal anisotropy
Ra
µ m
Arithmetic mean roughness
Rm
MPa
Tensile strength
Sf
mm2
Contact interface
ST
mm2
Surface of traction
Ti
MPa
Surface traction
V
mm3
Volume
Wa
µ m
Arithmetic mean roughness
Wa,min
µ m
Minimum arithmetic mean roughness
c
-
Correctional factor
d
mm
Diameter
d0
mm
Run pipe diameter
d1
mm
Initial collar hole diameter
d2
mm
Internal collar diameter
d3
mm
Mid-thickness collar diameter
d4
mm
External collar diameter
di
mm
Initial collar hole diameter
do
mm
Output collar diameter
iv
==PAGE:7==
Symbol
Unit
Meaning
e
-
Nominal strain
f
-
Friction factor
g
m/s2
Gravitational acceleration
h
mm
Height
hc
mm
Collar height
hmin
mm
Minimum collar height
k
MPa
Shear ﬂow stress
l0
mm
Initial length
l1
mm
Initial length
lc
mm
Initial collar hole length
le
mm
Elliptic collar hole length
m
-
Friction factor
n
-
Strain hardening exponent
p
N/mm
Normal pressure
r
mm
radius
rc
mm
Initial collar hole radius
rd
mm
Die rounding radius
rp,o
mm
Die rounding radius
t0
mm
Initial thickness
t50
mm
Thickness 50 [mm] from origo
t80
mm
Thickness 80 [mm] from origo
t110
mm
Thickness 110 [mm] from origo
t±x
mm
Thickness in x-direction
t±y
mm
Thickness in y-direction
tmax
mm
Maximum thickness
tmin
mm
Minimum thickness
ui
mm/s
Surface velocity
ur
mm/s
Relative velocity
uz
mm
Drawing gap
vp
mm/s
Punch jog speed
w1
mm
Measured width
w2
mm
Measured width
w3
mm
Measured width
wc
mm
Initial collar hole width
we
mm
Elliptic collar hole width
wn
Z
Number of welds
ws
mm
Specimen width
xd
mm
Dial gauge displacement
v
==PAGE:8==
Symbol
Unit
Meaning
α
-
Contant area ratio
δc
-
Expansion ratio
ε
-
True strain
εeq
-
Equivalent strain
εeff,max
-
Maximum effective strain
εy,max
-
Maximum strain Y component
˙¯ε
-
Effective strain rate
˙εv
-
Volumetric strain rate
µ
-
Friction coefﬁcient
φ
◦
Angle
σ
MPa
True stress
σnom
MPa
Nominal stress
σeff,max
MPa
Maximum effective stress
σeq
MPa
Equivalent stress
σf
MPa
Flow stress
¯σ
MPa
Effective stress
τf
MPa
Friction shear stress
Θ
◦
Local instability angle
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Scope of Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Industrial Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Collar Drawing
5
2.1
General Process Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Collar Drawing Test Rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
T-Drill Collaring Method
10
4
Literature Study
12
4.1
Collar Drawing Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Finite Element Modelling and I-form
16
5.1
Non-linear FEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
I-form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6
Collar in a Plane Workpiece
21
6.1
Numerical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Material Characterization
25
7.1
Experimental Setup and method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.2
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.3
Numerical Test Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.4
Material characterization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
35
8.1
Experimental Method and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.2
Metrology Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8.3
Development of Numerical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.4
Updated Numerical Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.5
Results and Model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9
Collar drawing and T-Drill Comparison
61
10 Collar Height Improvement
64
10.1 Initial Hole Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
10.2 Numerical and Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
10.3 Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
11 Conclusion
69
12 Future studies
70
vii
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis - s134132
Contents
A Video Access and QR Guide
71
B
Test Rig Documents
72
B.1
Tool Part Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B.2
Operational Description of Test Rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
B.3
Technical Drawings of Collar Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B.4
Technical Drawings of Collar Specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.5
Test Rig Material Certiﬁcates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
B.6
Load Cell Speciﬁcation (50 kN TBE-922) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
B.7
Calibration Procedure and Equipment Certiﬁcate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C Literature Study
106
C.1
Commercial Article from 1983 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
D I-form
109
D.1 ANSYS to I-form (GiD) format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
D.2 Modelling with I-form and ANSYS mesh generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
E
Collar drawing in Plane Workpiece
114
F
Material Characterization
116
F.1
Extensometer Test Certiﬁcate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
F.2
Uniaxial Tensile Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
G Collar Drawing
117
G.1 Overview of Test Specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
G.2 Measurement Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
G.3 Metrology Proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
G.4 Numerical Collar Drawing Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
G.5 Compression Test of Cylinder - I-form simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
147
H Collar Height Improvement
148
I
Mandatory Project Plan
150
J
References
153
viii
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis - s134132
1. Introduction
1
Introduction
Pipe based constructions and plants almost exclusively require branches connecting a network of
pipes. This is inevitable whether considering strictly structural constructions as pipe based bicycle
frames or piping of process plants with internal ﬂuid ﬂow. The branches can be manufactured by
multiple methods and depending on ﬁnal use branches, each method have speciﬁc advantages and
disadvantages to consider. Process plants used for production in the food and pharmaceutical industry
is in general manufactured by many meters of interconnecting stainless steel pipes containing an
internal ﬂuid ﬂow.
When ﬂuid ﬂows need to be combined or divided, the most common pipe ﬁtting applied is a con-
ventional T-piece. A conventional T-piece is a manufactured ﬁtting with three connections. Most
commonly there are two connections in the main ﬂow direction, the run pipe, and one perpendicular
connection, i.e. the collar. If a ﬂuid ﬂow needs to be divided multiple times, a manifold is needed. A
manifold is a run pipe with a system of in- or outlets depending on the ﬂow direction. In Figure 1a one
of many columns in a industrial processing plant is shown, containing a large amount of manifolds
and collars. Figure 1b show a principal sketch of one of the manifolds in the process plant containing
two collars.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Collars in a practical context.(a)Industrial processing plant with multiple manifolds of the type
sketched in (b) with two collars.
A manifold can be manufactured by joining a series of T-pieces together by welding. However if
multiple collars are needed in a single run pipe, a high quantity of welds are required for the man-
ufacturing. The heat input during the welding process would furthermore increase the complexity
of keeping the pipes straight. A method to manufacture the collars is called collar drawing. The
collar drawing process perform the collars directly from the run pipe material, by forming the pipe
material into the desired dimension of the outlet collar. The collar drawing process and the tools to
manufacture such collars, are further described in section 2.
The most essential reason of utilizing collar drawing is the decreased amount of welds required to
manufacture the manifold and subsequent joining to the compiled plant. Figure 2 show sketch of
a three-collar manifold with a given spacing between the collars. Equation 1.1 is manufactured by
1
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis - s134132
1. Introduction
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Manufacturing of a 3 collar manifold by (a) welded T-pieces and (b) collar drawing.
welded T-pieces and Equation 1.2 by collar drawing. The manifold manufactured by welded T-pieces
requires six welds for manufacturing and ﬁve for subsequent joining to the branches. The collar
drawing method requires zero welds to manufacture and only one assembling weld by each outlet.
The relation between the total amount of welds required to manufacture and assemble a manifold
for a given number of collars for the two different methods are shown in the following equations.
Equation 1.1 and Equation 1.2 is for the T-piece method and the collar drawing method respectively.
The relation is visualized in the plot in Figure 3.
wn = Cn + 2
(1.1)
wn = 3 · Cn + 2
(1.2)
, where Cn is the number of collars/outlets and wn is the total amount of required welds for manufac-
turing and joining of the manifold .
Figure 3: Welds required for each method of manufacturing and joining manifolds of the type showed in
Figure 1b
Collar drawing has a good economic advantage as it reduces the production time of a process plant,
when multiple collars are needed. The production time is decreased as the required welding time is
reduced, which is an important parameter when determining the production cost of a process plant.
The reduction of welds additionally gain several advantages considering quality aspects of the result-
ing process plant. Collar drawing produces a good internal surface of the processed pipes implicitly
by reducing the amount of welds and additionally by the formed material on the internal surface of
the collar. This factor reduces the risk of contamination of the inside media of the process plants,
which is an important aspect in the food and pharmaceutical industry. If the surface conditions of a
manifold in a pharmaceutical process plant does not achieve the speciﬁed requirements, the manifold
is likely to be rejected from the customer on account of the manufacturer. Additionally, the reduction
2
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis - s134132
1. Introduction
of welds leads to a direct reduction of the corrosion potential of the pipes. As seen in Figure 3, the
amount of collars required in a plant, increase the efﬁciency regarding the total cost of the process
plant. A single collar in a run pipe manufactured by collar drawing is presented in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] Pipe with a 1:1 formed collar by collar drawing.
Another method of forming a collar directly in the material of the run pipe is called the T-Drill Col-
laring Method. T-Drill can be described as an incremental metal forming process developed by the
Finnish pipe fabrication solution supplier, T-Drill. The method possesses many of the same advan-
tages as collar drawing does and will be described further in section 3.
Collar drawing is an empirically developed method and the knowledge on the process is based on
experience from few skilled metal craftsmen. The method is not described in any apparent scientiﬁc
literature or practical handbooks. The process is neither found commonly known of in the Danish
industry. The method is however applied in the industry. The industry, and particularly the food and
pharmaceutical industry, has high requirements regarding documented manufacturing processes, use
of materials and internal surface conditions, making the lack of documentation of the collar drawing
process a potential concern.
Industrial process plant manufacturers estimate that less than ﬁve manufacturers in Denmark perform
collars by the collar drawing method, and that the T-Drill method is commonly applied worldwide.
The collar drawing method is alleged to perform better collars and to achieve better surface conditions
than the commercial T-Drill collaring method. Thus, the knowledge of the empirically developed
collar drawing method is to be increased by a scientiﬁc study and compared to the T-Drill collaring
method.
1.1
Problem Description
Pipe branching is inevitable in pipe-based process plants, which are said to be preferably manufac-
tured by collar drawing. Collar drawing is highly advantageous and is deemed to result in the best
conditions, which is key in the food and pharmaceutical industry. The method is however solely em-
pirically developed and no academic or scientiﬁc documentation is present on the process, which can
3
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis - s134132
1. Introduction
be a problem in the industry. This project is performed to increase the present documented knowledge
by a scientiﬁc investigation of the collar drawing process.
The main objective of this study is to investigate and analyse the metal forming process, collar draw-
ing. The process is investigated by experimental analysis based on a test rig, developed to obtain force
and displacement data during the execution of the process. The formed collar specimen is visually
inspected and quantitatively analysed by a metrology study. A numerical model of the process is
developed in the FEM program I-form, to be used for further analysis of the process. The numerical
model should be capable of determining the required force to execute the collar drawing process and
provide predictions of the resulting collar geometry.
The process is compared with the industrial, familiar, collar forming method, T-drill, as collar drawing
is deemed to manufacture collars of higher quality, but is less known of in the industry. Finally, the
collar height is attempted to be improved by the numerical and tested experimentally to investigate
the occurrence of fracture in the collar edge.
1.2
Scope of Project
The collar drawing process is to be academically investigated and reported to assess and validate the
metal forming process. The focus on the project will be carried out in scope of mechanical and process
oriented aspects. The study is also relevant in aspects of pharmaceutical process manufacturing,
biotechnology and similar studies. Thus brief information in these topics are provided by relevant
professional stakeholders from the industry, and is not further investigated in the project.
The project will not include extensive studies on internal ﬂuid dynamic or related ﬂow studies. The
project can only assess results of the collar specimen originating from the developed test rig and
the T-Drill T-110 machine- Therefore, no conclusions can be made on other equipment than what is
investigated in the project.
1.3
Industrial Application
As previously stated, the collar drawing and T-Drill method is already applied in the industry. How-
ever, the quality aspects of the resulting process plant is of highest importance in the food and phar-
maceutical industry. For the manufacturers, it is important to know the preferred manufacturing
processes in perspective of their customers. The application of the study is to provide manufacturers
with knowledge on the processes and to provide scientiﬁc literature as reference when documenting
the manufacturing process of the plant.
For process plant owners, it is important to know how their plants and equipment are manufactured to
assess the plant based on factual knowledge. The surface ﬁnish is of superior importance considering
food and pharmaceutical process plants. Insufﬁcient surface ﬁnish can result in contamination of the
produced products, implying both health and ﬁnancial risks. Thus, the project is relevant for both
manufacturers and owners of food and pharmaceutical process plants.
4
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis - s134132
2. Collar Drawing
2
Collar Drawing
The collar drawing process is practically described in the following section. This section also pro-
vides a description of the developed test rig, that is used to obtain data while performing the collars.
Subsequently, the compared process, T-Drill, is described in the last section. The process was initially
studied in previous brief projects, which is documented during earlier projects [1][2].
2.1
General Process Description
The collar drawing method is the process of manufacturing a collar directly in a run pipe. The collar
drawing method is rather simple, using a collar drawing ball attached to a press punch which is drawn
through a drawing die. The method consists of the following three main steps when performed in the
industry:
1. Hole milling or shearing.
2. Drawing
3. Planing/trimming
The three main steps are presented in by a sketch in Figure 5. The initial holing is most often milled
with a vertical milling machine, with dimensions determined by the run pipe diameter and the desired
collar diameter.
Figure 5: Schematic of the 3 main steps of the collar drawing process.
The collar drawing ball is placed inside the pipe and attached to a press punch. The ball is then drawn
through the milled hole and the drawing die. Finally, is the formed collar edge trimmed to obtain a
plane geometry, suitable for a butt weld.
This project mainly focuses on the drawing step and the result from the forming process. To perform
the actual drawing two tools are needed; the collar drawing ball and the drawing die. The collar
drawing ball is the die forming the collar with the force excited by the press punch. The drawing die
is a die with a internal cylindrical geometry and a rounded edge hole through the side. The drawing
die governs the rounding of the resulting collar e.g. how much of the pipe material is drawn through
the hole. When the collar drawing ball is drawn through the workpiece and drawing die, a collar is
formed in the run pipe. Relevant collar drawing dimensions, that are used throughout the project,
are presented in Figure 6. The initial hole milling geometry is investigated to develop a geometry
resulting in increased collar height and less wavy collar edge. The initial hole geometry of the work
piece, implies a wavy collar edge with "ears" that need to be planed for subsequent welding to be
possible. The ears are shown in the picture in Figure 4.
5
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis - s134132
2. Collar Drawing
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Dimensions for the (a) initial hole and (b) formed collar dimensions
The general process description is based on knowledge and the method developed by collar drawing
specialist, Jan Lauridsen from Sven Lauridsen & Søn ApS. As the process is empirically developed,
small differences of the general manufacturing procedure can occur, if applied elsewhere.
2.2
Collar Drawing Test Rig
This section provides a brief description of the test-rig developed for the study. The description
contains the scope of the test rig, essential tool part, the test specimen and the calibration method.
The test rig was developed and manufactured during a special course by the author in the Spring of
2018 at the Technical University of Denmark. A manual containing a thorough description on the use
of the equipment and a presentation of the development process was documented [2].
A video of a drawing process using the test rig is compiled as further documentation and visual
description of the process. The process has been documented by video and can be accessed by the
information in Figure 7. The video can be accessed through the QR code in Figure 7 or the hyperlink
found in the caption of the according ﬁgure. A guide of how to use the QR code can be found in
Appendix A.
Figure 7: QR Code for hard copy access to Collar Drawing process video by mobile device.
For QR guidance see Appendix A. The video can also be accessed by the following link:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0crT3wfVSiM&list=UUkrxJJP1jFlsD28s_yzPnMA.
The purpose of the test rig is to have a method to obtain experimental data while performing collar
drawing. The test rig consists of a ﬁve ton electric press and a collar drawing tool designed to perform
2 sizes of 1:1 collars, while load and displacement data is acquired during the process. The test rig is
located at DTU in the resistance welding laboratory, building 427 room 304a. Figure 8 shows pictures
of the electric press and the collar drawing tool mounted to the electric press.
The tool consists of a static part mounted to the press table and a moving part mounted to the press
punch. The tool has a total of 12 manufactured parts and a 50 [kN] load cell. Figure 81 shows the
6
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis - s134132
2. Collar Drawing
Figure 8: Full view of empty press (left) and press with inserted tool (right).
Figure 9: Collar tool with Ø76,1x2 setup.
(1) Top Mount Plate, (2) Top Mount Holder, (3) Centering Ring, (4) Collar Ball, (5) Die Top, (6) Inner Die
(Not used for Ø76,1x2 setup), (7) Die Side, (8) Die Bottom, (9) Distance Ring (Not shown due to isometric
view), (10) Centering Bottom Plate, (11) Load cell.
assembled tool, with a 1:1 76.1x2 mm setup. The moving part consists of part 1-4 and the static part
consists of part 5-11 in Figure 81. The moving part is mounted to the press punch and deliver the force
to the collar drawing ball during the drawing process. The static part is determining the bending radius
around the processed collar and retaining the pipe while linking the load from the press punch to be
measured by the load cell. A description of each tool part and its purpose is provided in subsection B.1
The most important parts in the collar drawing tool is the drawing die and the collar drawing ball, as
7
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis - s134132
2. Collar Drawing
Figure 10: Assembled Ø51x2 setup (left) and collar balls (right).
it is the governing parts of the collar geometry. The collar drawing ball is manufactured. The collar
drawing ball is manufactured of a material called AMALOY FH12. AMALOY FH12 is a bronze
tool material with competent properties when in close contact with stainless steel. The material is
deemed to have a very low impact on the stainless steel surfaces in forming processes and contain
preferable properties in processes as bending and deep drawing. Documentation of the AMALOY
FH12 material is provided in subsection B.5. The assembled collar drawing die construction and the
collar drawing balls are presented in Figure 82. Technical drawings for all tool parts can be found in
subsection B.3
Test Specimen
The test rig is designed to perform 1:1 collars in the dimensions: Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] and Ø51 x 2 [mm].
The term, 1:1 collar drawing, means that the resulting collar diameter is equal to the run pipe diameter.
This is the maximum ratio that can be performed due to the structural boundaries of the process. The
collar ratio is also chosen as it is the most critical ratio to perform, being prospect to the highest level
of deformation and potential thickness reduction.
Figure 11 show a sketch of the initial holing dimensions for the two pipe dimensions used in the
project.
Figure 11: Geometry and dimensions of initial milled hole for 1:1 collar drawing.
The initial hole geometry in the specimen, determines the output collar geometry. The dimensions
given in Figure 11 are empirically determined by the collaring specialist Jan Lauridsen. After the
holing process, the edges of the hole need to be deburred to reduce the risk of fracture in the collar
8
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis - s134132
2. Collar Drawing
or scratching the collar drawing ball, during the forming process. The hole should be positioned
away from any welded seams originating from the production of the pipe, to further reduce the risk of
fracture. In this project we consider annealed and pickled stainless steel of grade 1.4404/316L in the
given dimensions. These materials are used as they are preferred in food and pharmaceutical process
plants. A thickness of 2 [mm] was chosen to make thickness reduction and further studies involving
ironing an opportunity. Technical drawings of the specimen used in the project is provided in the
appendix subsection B.3. An operational description of the test rig is attached in subsection B.1.
However, it is recommended to watch the video video developed, by using the links in Figure 80a.
Test Rig Calibration
The data from the test rig is the foundation with which to validate the numerical model and to assess
the critical parameters of the process. The accuracy of the obtained data is accordingly crucial to the
study and needs to be veriﬁed. The calibration is performed with respect to the force measured by the
load cell and the displacement of the press piston, measured internally by a motor encoder in the press-
system. The calibration is summarized below in Table 15 and Table 16. The full calibration procedure
in attached in the subsection B.7 including certiﬁcates for the applied calibration equipment..
Test Rig Data, Gain = 660 and Offset = -25 [mV]
Displacement [mm]
Output [mV]
Output Load [kg]
Est. Load [kg]
Residual [%]
2.5
1441
935
928,7
0.7
3
2830
1852
1858.3
0.3
3.5
4242
2786
2788.2
0.08
4
5635
3700
3718.1
0.5
4.5
7051
4640
4648.1
0.2
Table 1: Test rig data after calibration with a Gain = 660 and a offset = -25 [mV].
The load cell and motor encoder is calibrated and tested to determine loads and displacements under
a tolerance of 1% in the entire force range of the rig. This is determined to be sufﬁciently accurate to
describe the collar drawing process.
9
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis - s134132
3. T-Drill Collaring Method
3
T-Drill Collaring Method
T-Drill Industries is a tube and pipe fabrication solution manufacturer, who have developed a machine
that performs collars using a method called T-Drill Collaring Method. The T-Drill Collaring method
was developed in the 1970’s and the process is a patented method of producing collars for branch
connections. The forming process of the T-Drill method is also referred to in general as paddle
forming. T-Drill Collaring Method is very similar to collar drawing and requires the three following
main processing steps.
1. Hole milling
2. Tee Forming
3. Planing/trimming
Initially an elliptic hole is milled into the pipe, to be used as a pilot hole. In the second step, the
collaring head is inserted into the interior of the pipe through the milled hole. The forming pins of the
collaring head are extended, forming a T-shaped drill. Now the collaring head starts to rotate while
the head is simultaneously being dragged up through the milled hole, forming the collar in the pipe.
The forming process is aided by lubrication. Finally the collar is trimmed to the desired height, also
deburring and planing the edges. The collar is now ﬁnished and prepared for a butt weld joint[3] . A
simple visualization of the ﬁrst two main steps are shown in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Principal sketch of the 2 ﬁrst main steps in Drill Collaring Method.
Picture from [4].
A T-Drill Collaring machine of the type T-110 is practically examined and specimen manufactured
on the machine is used in the project for comparison with the collar drawing method. The process
has been documented by video and can be accessed by the information in Figure 13. A brief guide on
how to use the QR code can be found in Appendix A.
As the three main steps suggest, is the T-Drill method very similar to the collar drawing method. The
T-Drill forming method also performs a collar directly in the run pipe. Thus as with collar drawing,
no expensive conventional T-pieces are needed and the amount of joints per collar is reduced from
three to one. Similar to the collar drawing method, T-Drill also improves internal ﬂow characteristics
and the reduction of welds implies a minimized risk of leakage or call-backs. T-Drill also states that
the process can be applied to any malleable material and that the process performs remarkably faster
through-put times in the manufacturing industry.
10
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis - s134132
3. T-Drill Collaring Method
Figure 13: QR Code for hard copy access to T Drill T-110 process video by mobile device.
For QR guidance see Appendix A. The video can also be accessed by the following link:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0UosSwrIPAM&list=UUkrxJJP1jFlsD28s_
yzPnMA&index=2.
The T-Drill machines are widely used in the industry. The process implies many advantages as stated
above, however the machine leads to further favourable circumstances. The T-Drill machine is de-
signed and constructed to perform all three main steps in the same machine. Thus, only one machine
is needed to perform collars in run pipes, and comes with a large set of tools for different dimensions.
Furthermore, the machine is provided with a descriptive handbook with dimensions and settings,
making the process practicable for any professional craftsman. Finally the T-drill method is approved
by many agencies, as documented on their website [5].
The forming process of the T-Drill collaring method does however imply a concern regarding the inte-
rior surface condition of the formed collar. The collaring head forms the collar by travelling upwards
through the pipe material, while rotating. This can roughly be equated to a resulting microscopic
internal thread in the collar. In the food and pharmaceutical industry, the internal surface condition
of a process plant is a critical measure. This is tested by a FDA or EMA required inspection and it
is unacceptable if the required speciﬁcations are not met. This is the root cause of why some process
plant owners prefer to have their plants manufactured by collar drawing over the T-Drill method.
This project compares the collar drawing method and the T-Drill collaring method in terms of surface
conditions and general geometry. Specimens from the collar drawing method are obtained by the de-
veloped test rig, described in subsection 2.2. The T-Drill specimen is obtained by the T-110 machine,
generously presented and operated by Holmskov Rustfri Stainless Steel Company A/S.
11
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis - s134132
4. Literature Study
4
Literature Study
Collar drawing is stated to be the preferred method of manufacturing branches for piping and process
plants. The collar drawing process is deemed to be mainly empirically developed and not scientiﬁcally
studied by academic methods. This served as initial motivation to carry out the project to provide
general knowledge on the forming process. Documentation of recommended dimensions, required
forces and limits, would be an advantageous possession for manufacturers, and information on the
general production process is of interest for all process plant owners.
A literature study is executed to investigate the present material developed on the process. This study
is summed up in the following section. The literature is primarily based on literature available in the
DTU library including their online library, ﬁndit.dk.
4.1
Collar Drawing Literature
The process of collar drawing and equivalent methods with small modiﬁcations, is, as other processes,
referred to by different terms. In this project, collar drawing is considered the process of forming
collars directly in a run pipe, in contrary to collars formed in plane sheets, referred to as plane collar
drawing. Collar drawing is also referred to as tee forming, tube branching, pull out collars or simply
collaring, based on the ﬁnding of the literature study.
The industrial awareness of the process is initially investigated by consulting manufacturers and plant
owners in the industry. The following ﬁndings are based on consultation with Danish Collar Drawing
specialist, Jan Lauritzen, process and quality engineers and consultants of plant owner companies
and process plant manufacturers. Only a few people are assumed to be aware of the collar drawing
process. The people most aware of the process are the plant manufacturers, such as welders and
other metal craftsmen. In Denmark very few people are capable of providing collars produced by
the collar drawing method, but many are aware of the utilization of T-Drill equipment. Concerns
have been raised in the industry as collars formed by T-Drill have been rejected due to insufﬁcient
surface conditions. Thus, an industrial distribution of knowledge on the collar drawing method might
be advantageous.
Forming of sheet metal driven by a punch force, is a very common discipline in both academia and
industry, and is also described in both practical textbooks and scientiﬁc literature. Processes relatively
similar to the collar drawing method are deep drawing and bending. The deep drawing process is in
many ways similar in comparison to collar drawing. However the deep drawing serves a different
purpose and is most often subject to plane sheet metal initially. Collar drawing implies a cylindrical
input geometry, which results in a different deformation process and tool than deep drawing. Thus,
the process should be analyzed separately.
Investigating the term collar drawing, results of collar in plane sheet metals was almost exclusively
found. Collar drawing in plane sheet metals are rather well investigated and documented with em-
phasis on collar height in different materials, expansion ratio and the inﬂuence of the punch shape.
Modern literature regarding plane collar drawing was found describing the process of increasing col-
lar heights by applying new materials or additional forming, joining mechanisms using collar drawing
or crack sensitivity etc. [6],[7],[8]. Many of the scientiﬁc articles found on plane collar drawing, were
performed with emphasis on the automotive industry. Collar drawing in pipes however require a dif-
12
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis - s134132
4. Literature Study
ferent tool and setup and the initial holing geometry is different than plane collar drawing. Plane
collar drawing can be assumed to be a rotational symmetric operation, which is not the case for collar
drawing in pipes. Thus the need for documentation on collar drawing is deemed to be relevant and
not directly comparable with the studies on plane collar drawing.
During the literature study, one modern article regarding collar drawing is found. The article reported
on a study on optimization of the collar edge by changing the initial hole geometry in the pipe[9].
No further modern documentation was found in articles or practical textbooks describing the process
of collar drawing. The collaring methods in pipes was however presented in technical magazines in
commercial articles from 1983 describing the processes and the associated beneﬁts, calling the pro-
cess Pull Out Collars [10][11]. In these magazines it was the German sheet metal forming machine
manufacturer, Eckold, and the pipe fabrication solution manufacturer, T-Drill, presenting their form-
ing methods. Eckold present a process almost identical with the one discussed in this project and
T-Drill as described in section 3. Eckold present their MAR mobilformer which they call a portable
punching and neck ﬂanging tool, which is almost identical with the collar drawing process. How-
ever no further information on the Eckold collar drawing method or machine is found. The article is
attached in Appendix C[10].
The articles described in the latter section was mostly a general presentation of the processes with
emphasis on selling machines for manufacturing the collars. The documentation in scope of this
project would be manufacturing terms and descriptions of the process in either practical technical
textbooks for manufacturers or academic research documentation.
To increase the ﬁeld of search, translations of the process were used in Danish and German. Collar
drawing translates to kravetræk in Danish and the words optræk or opkravning are used for the process
in the Danish industry.
These terms led to Danish literature from 1981 which is a book containing descriptions of basic ma-
terial properties, analysis of methods and a compilation of a variation of sheet forming processes
addressed to the Danish industry by Poul M. Kvist [12]. The book provides a short description on
plane collar drawing and brieﬂy mentions collar drawing in pipe material. This literature empha-
sises the importance of the geometry and execution of the initial hole. The initial hole determines
the attainable expansion ratio di/d0 where di is the internal collar diameter and d0 is the initial hole
diameter. This explanation is however directed towards plane sheet collars. The initial hole is de-
scribed to be executed using drilling or punching the hole by shearing. However burrs, small cracks
and irregular fractures from punching intensely decreases the attainable expansion ratio compared to
drilling. Figure 14a is a ﬁgure from the book, that shows the attainable expansion ratio dependent
on the manufacturing of the initial hole. The expansion ratio by a drilled initial hole is between 2-4
and a punched hole around 1.5, depending on the ratio between initial hole diameter and the plate
thickness. The geometry of the punch is signiﬁcant regarding the required punch force needed to
perform the collar, in which a cylindrical punch requires two times the force of a triangular shaped
punch. However, the shape of the punch has no impact on the attainable collar height.
The amount of available documentation regarding the collar drawing process increases signiﬁcantly
when translating the term into German. Collar drawing in German translation is Kragenziehen. The
German literature also primarily focuses on plane collar drawing, but collar drawing in pipes is men-
tioned. The German educational and practical textbook compilation regarding manufacturing pro-
cesses by Wilfried König, state similar conclusions as Kvist regarding collar drawing. [13]. Addi-
13
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis - s134132
4. Literature Study
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Figures from textbooks. (a) expansion ratio as function of the ratio between sheet thickness and
initial hole by drilling and shearing[12]. (b) Force displacement relation as result of punch shape[13].
tionally König provides a ﬁgure with force displacement plots as a result of the applied punch shapes.
The ﬁgure shown in Figure 14b, is based on plane collar drawing, but shows a force-displacement
curve with two local maximum forces.
König also refers to a relationship from another reference, that provides a rough estimate for the
punch forces needed to perform the collar drawing process with a rounded cylindrical punch. The
estimate for the required punch force, Fp is given in Equation 4.1:
Fp = Cc · t0 · Rm
(4.1)
where Cc is the circumference of the performed collar, t0 is the initial sheet thickness and Rm is the
tensile strength of the sheet material.
Both König and Kvist mention the same reference when considering collar drawing in pipes and
tubes. The reference is from Oehler and Kaiser’s book of guidelines regarding cutting, punching and
pulling tools[14]. Similarly this book also focuses on the process of drawing collars in plane sheet
metal and emphasises using the collars as mounting ﬂanges to be assembled by bolts or by cutting an
internal thread in the collar. They also present the process of performing a collar using a tool set with
a smaller drawing gap, than the initial thickness of the sheet material. This results in a decrease of
the thickness throughout the collar walls and an increase of the attainable collar height. The process
is equivalent to ironing, often used in combination with deep drawing to achieve a larger height to
diameter ratio. However, all books that featured collar drawing contain the same sketch originating
from Kaiser and Oehler, presented in Figure 15a. The ﬁgure shows the process of forming a collar in
a pipe, by a pre-punched hole process and utilization of a spherical die.
The collar drawing process in Figure 15a shows a punch with an angled edge, forcing the spherical
die through a pre-punched hole and a hole in the drawing die, supporting the exterior run pipe. The
method was developed over 60 years ago by the German bike manufacturing industry, for producing
crank housings and pipe connections in bike frames. Oehler and Kaiser present an equation deter-
mining the collar height, hc, developed by Timmerbeil and shown in Equation 4.2 with dimensions
according to the sketch in Figure 6.
hc = c · t0
(d2
4 −d2
1)
(d2
4 −d2
2)
(4.2)
14
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis - s134132
4. Literature Study
where, d are the diameters shown in Figure 6 where c is a correctional factor determined by the
relationship between the drawing gap, uz and the initial sheet thickness, t0 and the expansion ratio
d1/d2. The drawing gap can be found by uz = (d4 −d3)/2 and the correctional factor, c= 1.3, is
determined by the an expansion ratio, as shown in Figure 87 in Appendix C.
During the literature study a modern German metalforming textbook, although originating from 1996,
was found containing analytical calculations of plane collar drawing. The book is written by Dietrich
and Tschätsch and collar drawing is brieﬂy mentioned in the section of bending processes, to serve as
comparison to the chipless ﬂowdrilling method with purpose of thread appliance[15].
The book provides an analytical calculation for the required punch force, Fp, the initial hole diameter
d1 and the height of the resulting collar hc. The equation for the punch press and the initial hole
diameter are provided in Equation 4.3 and Equation 4.4[15].
Fp = 0.7 · t0 · d4 · δc · Rm
(4.3)
, where δc is an expansion ratio calculated as δc = d4−d1
d4 .
d1 = d3 −2(hc −0.43 · rd −0.72 · t0)
(4.4)
where d3 is the mid-thickness diameter of the collar, rd is the die rounding radius and hc is the collar
height as shown in Figure 6b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: Figures from textbooks. (a) collar drawing process by spherical die[14]. (b) Schematic of plane
collar drawing process.[15].
Literature Study Conclusion
The literature study also suggests that the amount of literature describing collar drawing is very lim-
ited. However some references were found featuring the process. The conclusion of the literature
study and the assumed advantages of the process suggest that the necessity of the performed project
and study is determined as relevant. Some of the ﬁndings from the literature study will be compared
to a brief study of a numerical model of plane collar drawing, in section 6.
15
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis - s134132
5. Finite Element Modelling and I-form
5
Finite Element Modelling and I-form
The in-house FEM computer program, I-form, have been utilized to develop nonlinear numerical
models for the processes investigated in the project. This section contains a simple description of the
software, the usage and the theory that support it. Finally, the modelling process is brieﬂy described.
The collar drawing process investigated in this project and other processes examined, is experimen-
tally performed at room temperature and under quasi-static constant displacement rate of the spherical
ball die. Inertial effects on the forming mechanism are assumed to be insigniﬁcant and dynamic ef-
fects in the deformation mechanics can be neglected. These conditions allow numerical modelling of
the processes to be performed with ﬁnite element modelling.
5.1
Non-linear FEM
The ﬁnite element method, FEM, and ﬁnite element analysis is a very used method of solving engi-
neering problems by treating physics expressed in partial differential equations. The analysis is used
to estimate the results of an entity being prospect to given circumstances. In this project FEM is
primarily used to estimate deformation, stress-strain conditions and force requirements as results of a
metal forming process.
The collar drawing process encounters a signiﬁcant change in geometry and the stress-strain relation
is non-linear are predicted not to behave in a linear manner. This implies that the analysis contains
geometric, contact, and material non-linearities, suggesting that the model should be nonlinear[16].
Non-linearity makes engineering problems more complicated as the equations describing the solution
must incorporate estimated conditions until the solution is known. The solution cannot be obtained
by one single step of analysis. The solution needs to be determined by several steps of obtaining a
tentative solution that is updated after each step, which is repeated until the updated solution reach a
speciﬁed level of error.
5.2
I-form
I-form is beneﬁcial considering a non-linear problem as a metal forming processes. In contrast to
many common commercial FEM computer programs, I-form is based on a rigid-plastic material
model. As an example ANSYS is based on a elastic-plastic material model. The plastic deforma-
tion and behaviour is of highest interest when modelling the collar drawing process and the elastic
behaviour is in general ignored. The rigid-plastic model neglects the elastic behaviour and assumes
the material of the workpiece to encounter plastic deformation at any displacement. As I-form does
not simulate he elastic to plastic transition of the material, it can perform the non-linear simulation
faster. ANSYS includes a very large and wide-spread variety of functions, making the setup process of
a metal forming model complex, whereas I-form is specially designed executing these tasks. I-form
consider a workpiece as the model encountering deformation and the tools as the model applying
force to the workpiece.
In this project, I-form 3, which is the 3D modelling version of I-form, is used. I-form also provides
a 2D modelling version. The geometry of the collar drawing method, does not allow the numerical
model to be reduced to a 2D model. Thus, all models in the project is modelled in 3D.
16
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis - s134132
5. Finite Element Modelling and I-form
Flow formulation
I-form is built upon a ﬁnite element ﬂow formulation based on Levy-Mises ﬂow rule. The ﬁnite ele-
ment ﬂow formulation is effective supporting computer programs solving non-linear FEM problems.
The velocities in the ﬂow formulation are the primary unknowns, and the stresses is directly related
to the strain rate by means of rigid-plastic/viscoplastic constitutive equations[17]. The foundation of
the ﬁnite element ﬂow formulation is stated in Equation 5.1:
Π =
Z
V
¯σ ˙¯εdV + 1
2K
Z
V
˙εv
2dV −
Z
ST
TiuidS +
Z
Sf
 Z |ur|
0
τfdur
!
dS
(5.1)
where, ¯σ denotes the effective stress, ˙¯ε is the effective strain rate, ˙εv is the volumetric strain rate, K is
a large positive constant enforcing the incompressibility constraint of the volume V , Ti and ui are the
surface tractions and velocities on the surface denoted by ST, respectively. If friction is present at the
contact interface, Sf, between the workpiece and tools the last term in Equation 5.1, where τf and ur
are the friction shear stress and the relative sliding velocity in the interface. The ﬂow formulation is
linearized to the following set of global system of equations, Equation 5.2:
Kv = f
(5.2)
where, K is a square stiffness matrix, v is a column vector of velocities and f is a column vector of
forces. Iterations over the linearized equation system will allow solution of the original non-linear
equation system.
Discretization
The workpiece is discretized by 8 node linear hexahedral elements providing three translational de-
grees of freedom in each node with translation in the x, y and z-direction for the velocity components
of plastic ﬂow. The tools or dies are treated as a rigid 3-node linear triangular surface elements. The
elements are sketched in Figure 16a and Figure 16b with their local nodal numbering stated.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: Elements used in I-form.
(a) 8-node linear hexahedral element for workpiece mesh. (b) 3-node linear triangular element for tool.
I-form provides options of mesh reﬁnement applied to the model. The mesh reﬁnement is locally
reﬁned in a speciﬁed volume by either one or two octrees. This feature is used in the project, creating
an advantageous mesh connection between the initial and reﬁned mesh. The reﬁnement create a
structured interface mesh between the initial and the reﬁnes mesh by trapezoidal linear elements,
linking the nodes effectively together. As an example, the feature allows a reﬁnement of two to six
layers of elements through the thickness of a plate, as shown in Figure 17.
17
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis - s134132
5. Finite Element Modelling and I-form
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: Visualization of the mesh reﬁnement in I-form. (a) Mesh with local reﬁnement and (b) original
mesh. .
Yield criterion
The forming process in scope can either be modelled by using von Mises or Hills quadratic yield
criterion in I-form. The von Mises yield criterion is valid for isotropic materials and Hills quadratic
yield criterion for anisotropic materials. The von Mises yield criterion is used throughout the project,
as the anisotropy of the pipe material is neglected.
Flow stress curves
I-form offers a variety of different ﬂow stress curves. The ﬂow stress curves include Ludwig-Hollomon,
Swift, Voce or a set of tabulated data that is used as regression model the numerical model. Sketches
of a few of the ﬂow stress curves are shown in Figure 18, if they are applied in a uniaxial stress-strain
relation.
(a) Ludwig-Hollomon.
(b) Swift.
(c) Tabulated data.
Figure 18: Examples of ﬂow stress curves available in I-form, represented by a uniaxial stress-strain relation.
The Ludwig-Hollomon and the Swift ﬂow stress curves are considered in the project and their cor-
responding mathematical model for the stress-strain curves are presented in Equation 5.3 and Equa-
18
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis - s134132
5. Finite Element Modelling and I-form
tion 5.4 respectively[18].
σf = Cεn
eq
(5.3)
σf = C(B + εeq)n
(5.4)
where, σf is the ﬂow stress, εeq is the equivalent strain, C is a material constant, n is the strain
hardening exponent and B is a material constant corresponding to initial strain compared to Ludwig-
Hollomon. The equivalent strain is determined as εeq = ln(A0/A1).
Contact
The nonlinear contact behaviour progressively changes the boundary conditions in the model as a
result of the interaction between the tool and the workpiece. I-form provides a contact algorithm for
both workpiece to tool contact and contact between workpiece and workpiece. The developed models
exclusively consider contact between tool and workpiece, thus workpiece to workpiece contact will
not be discussed further. The contact formulation is based on node-to-triangle contact, as presented
in Figure 19 where nodes in a hexahedral workpiece element is in contact with a triangular surface
element of the tool. Boundary nodes are analyzed by each element where the orthogonal projection
of the workpiece node to the plane deﬁned by the three nodes of the triangular surface element is
calculated[17].
Figure 19: Sketch of the contact between the hexahedral mesh and the triangular surface mesh of a ridgid
tool, by the node Np and its projection Np∗.
19
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis - s134132
5. Finite Element Modelling and I-form
Friction
I-form provides three commonly employed friction laws regarding the friction between the workpiece
and the tool. The friction models are sketched in Figure 20 and is referred to in I-form as Prandtl,
Coulomb and Wanheim-Bay.
Figure 20: Sketch of the shear friction force - normal pressure relation for the friction laws.
1 - Prandtl, 2 - Coulomb and 3 - Wanheim-Bay.
Equations for Prandtl, Coulomb and Wanheim-Bay is presented in Equation 5.5-Equation 5.7 respec-
tively.
τf = mk
(5.5)
τf = µp
(5.6)
τf = fαk
(5.7)
where, τf is the friction shear stress, f and m are fricton factors, k is the shear ﬂow stress, p is the
normal pressure, µ is the friction coefﬁcient and α is the ratio of the real contact area to the nominal
contact area.
The friction model Prandtl, also known as the law of constant friction, is the model applied in this
project. As Equation 5.5 shows, is Prandtl independent of the normal pressure, p, meaning that
constant friction is assumed as soon as contact is established. Constant friction might not be the best
representation of the friction in the process. The normal pressure is expected to be quite low in some
areas and moderate in others. Hence, not constant. Coulomb might present the friction between the
workpiece and the tool better, but neither Coulomb or Wanheim-Bay is fully integrated in I-form 3.
A short description on the practical use of I-form and mash generation in ANSYS is attached in the
appendix Appendix D. A MATLAB code was developed to convert the ANSYS mesh to an I-form
compatible mesh-ﬁle. The codes for workpiece mesh and tool mesh are also provided in Appendix D.
20
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis - s134132
6. Collar in a Plane Workpiece
6
Collar in a Plane Workpiece
Studying the literature describing the process of forming a collar in metals, was found documented for
plane sheets in both modern scientiﬁc articles and in practical textbooks. However the documentation
on collar drawing in pipe material, was very limited. The tools and the required setup for performing
collar drawing in pipes compared to plane sheets are quite different. A numerical model of a plane
collar drawing process developed to compare to collar drawing in pipes and to brieﬂy assess the
analytical calculations found in the literature study.
6.1
Numerical model
The development of the numerical model will only be described brieﬂy, as many of the same consid-
erations regarding convergence and simulation controls will be further described in section 8.
Assumptions
The numerical model is based on the following assumptions.
• Symmetric in the yz- and the zx-plane.
• The collar drawing tool is considered rotational symmetric.
• The material of the workpiece is considered rigid-plastic.
• The workpiece material is assumed isotropic.
• Tools are considered rigid.
• Uniform thickness of the initial workpiece.
• The contact between workpiece and collar drawing tool is assumed frictionless.
• Perfectly centered collar drawing ball.
Geometry, Mesh and Simulation Control
The model consist of a a plane sheet workpiece and tools by an accordingly plane matrix and a collar
drawing ball similar to the one used for pipes. The workpiece dimensions are made comparable to the
dimensions for the ø76.1 x 2 [mm] collar drawing model, with initial diameter based on the analytical
calcuations from Praxis der Umformtechnik [15], described in section 4. The simulation is decided
to perform a collar with a height of hc = 8 [mm]. Using the rounded die edge radius of the test rig,rd=
5 [mm], the initial hole diameter of the plane workpiece should be d1 = 61.28 [mm] according to
Equation 4.4.
The shape of the workpiece is generated as a disc, due to the simplicity of creating a smooth mesh
throughout the model. The matrix is a plane surface with a rounded edge of rd= 5 [mm] in the collar
hole equivalent to the test rig. The model utilize symmetry in the yz- and zx-plane. The model is
visualized in Figure 21.
A brief convergence study is performed on the element size and provided in Figure 22. The simulation
is based on a target of 400 iterations with a time increment of 0.2 [s]. The force displacement plot
21
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis - s134132
6. Collar in a Plane Workpiece
Figure 21: Plane collar drawing model with the chosen mesh and symmetry utilized.
show an instantaneous increase in force in all the simulations, occur becomes earlier in the process as
the total number of elements is increased.
Figure 22: Convergence study of total number of elements in numerical plane collar drawing model.
The sudden increase is investigated by the model with Etot = 6000 elements. The increase occurs from
simulation step 132 to 133, which can be seen by plots in Figure 88 in Appendix E. The effective
stress plot of the model at simulation step 132 and 133 are shown in Figure 23. The plot show no large
instantaneous increase in effective stress and the maximum stresses at step 132 and 133 are σeff,max
= 611 [MPa] and σeff,max = 612 [MPa], respectively.
The number of workpiece nodes in contact with the drawing ball is exactly the same at the two steps
and an intuitive examination of the process, does not suggest any reason for the force to suddenly
increase at this point. The sudden increase in force is neglected in the model, based on the inves-
tigation and is not examined further. The model is following the Swift ﬂow stress curve shown in
Equation 5.4, with the same material parameters applied in the ﬁnal collar drawing model. This is
further discussion in section 8. The convergence study and simulation controls will not be described
further, as the topics are treated in section 8, in context of the collar drawing model.
22
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis - s134132
6. Collar in a Plane Workpiece
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: Representation of effective stress plot from numerical model at simulation step (a) 132 and (b)
133. Original is provided in Appendix E.
6.2
Results
A numerical model of a plane collar drawing process, with a resulting Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] collar is
developed. The literature study found two equations to determine the required punch force of the
plane collar drawing process. Assuming a tensile strength of Rm = 600 [MPa], the required force is
estimated by Equation 4.1 and Equation 4.3 respectively:
Fp = Cc · t0 · Rm = 286 890 N
Fp = 0.7 · t0 · d4 · δc · Rm = 12 449 N
The estimated forces are very different and the rough calculation by [13] is more than 20 times larger
than the estimate from [15]. The prediction in the book by König, Equation 4.1, suggest that the
developed test rig is a very ineffective design as it provide a maximum punch force of 50 [kN] and
that collar drawing in pipes is assumed to demand higher load than plane sheets. Oehler and Kaiser
[14] predict a resulting collar height hc = 8.93 [mm] by utilizing Equation 4.2.
The force-displacement plot from the numerical model relative to the maximum force by Equation 4.3
is shown in Figure 24. The model predict an almost 15% higher maximum force compared to Equa-
tion 4.3, but is a lot closer than the force estimated by Equation 4.1.
The numerical model predict a collar height hc = 10.24 [mm]. Equation 4.4 was determined by
assigning a collar height hc = 8 [mm] and Equation 4.2 predicted a height based on the modelled
dimensions of hc = 8.93 [mm].
The effective stress distribution is represented in Figure 25 based on the effective stress plot from
I-form, attached in Appendix E. The plot show that the the stress distribution is very even throughout
the circumference, suggesting that the stress state is rotational symmetric. The model estimate a
maximum effective stress σeff,max = 741 [MPa].
The strain component in the Y direction of the formed collar is shown in Figure 26. The maximum
strain in the Y direction is εy,max = 0.21 and is to be compared with the ﬁnal numerical collar drawing
model.
A numerical model of plane collar drawing developed with dimensions corresponding to the pipe
specimen evaluated later in the project. The model is used to predict force required to execute the
23
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis - s134132
6. Collar in a Plane Workpiece
Figure 24: Numerical force displacement data of plane collar drawing and the analytical maximum force
determined by [15].
Figure 25: Effective stress distribution in plane collar drawing based on the numerical model.
Figure 26: Strain in the Y-direction for plane collar drawing based on the numerical model.
forming process and the resulting collar height, and is compared to analytical calculations found in
the literature study. The force and collar height estimated by Equation 4.3 and Equation 4.2 is both
around 15% smaller than the results from the numerical model. The results in this sections are to be
compared to the collar drawing model in section 8.
24
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
7
Material Characterization
The Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe material is tested to obtain experimental data which is to be applied in
the numerical collar drawing model. A uniaxial tensile test of the 76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe material is
performed to ﬁt a ﬂow stress curve and determine additional properties of the pipe material. Addi-
tionally the uniaxial tensile test is modelled using I-form, in order to gain knowledge on the inﬂuence
of the curvature when clamping the test specimen in the uniaxial test rig. Initially the experimental
setup of the test will be described, followed by a presentation of the experimental results. Finally the
numerical test is described and the ﬂow stress curve is determined.
7.1
Experimental Setup and method
The uniaxial tensile test is a common method used in material testing. The method is applied in
this project due to the simplicity when executing the test and efﬁcient utilization of pipe specimen
material. The test specimen is manufactured from one Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe specimen of certiﬁed
316L pipe material. Certiﬁcate provided in subsection B.5. The pipe specimen is manufactured by
making longitudinal cuts with a width of ws = 20 [mm] as shown in Figure 27. One single pipe
specimen was used, resulting in a total of ten uniaxial test specimen. Nine of these were applicable,
as one of the test specimens had a weld seam along the longitudinal direction, originating from the
initial pipe manufacturing. Prior to the execution of the tensile tests, the actual specimen width and
thickness was measured to be used for the results.
Figure 27: Manufacturing of uniaxial test specimen from Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe specimen.
The resulting test specimen for the uniaxial test is a curved specimen with a length and width of L =
240 and ws = 20 [mm] respectively, as sketched in Figure 28. The symbols in the ﬁgure are used and
explained in Equation 7.6.
Figure 28: Uniaxial test specimen from Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe specimen.
25
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
The uniaxial tensile test is executed using the test rig, TRESCA, which is a combination of a 15 ton
servo mechanic press with a screen for controlling the press settings and the data acquisition[19]. The
test specimen was ﬁxed in the press clamping grips in the press, shown in Figure 29a. For the uniaxial
tensile tests an extensometer was used to determine the longitudinal displacement. A certiﬁcate for
the extensometer is provided in subsection F.1. The press punch was moved by a constant velocity of
0.5 [mm/s] until fracture.
The specimen is not processed into a dog bone geometry to reduce the risk of unintentionally de-
forming the material and to safe manufacturing time. However this geometry increases the risk of
fracture occurring outside of the extensometer scope, making the data unusable. The curvature of the
specimen also introduces a risk of slip and initial deformation when using the clamping grips in the
press. The positioning of the test specimen in the test rig is shown in Figure 29a with grip length, Lg
and extensometer gauge length, L0 assigned.
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: Applied dimensions for the positioning of specimen in uniaxial tensile test (left) and picture from
test (right).
Dimensions stated in [mm].
Uniaxial tensile tests are described in the standard DS/ISO 6892-1:2019 [20]. The standard show
guidelines for uniaxial tensile testing of metallic material at room temperature incl. recommended
test specimen design. The specimen is allowed to be parallel sided as an alternative to the dog bone
geometry according to the standard. An original gauge length of L0 = 80 [mm] and a free length
between the grips of Lf = 140 [mm] are required. The gauge length is in this case deﬁned by the
extensometer length. The extensometer is also assumed to be outside of the initial deformation zone of
the clamping, by having a distance of two times the specimen width from the grips to the extensometer.
The design of the test specimen efﬁciently use the material and is as unaffected by manufacturing as
possible. However, the design still follows the guidelines of the standard DS/ISO 6892-1:2019.
26
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
7.2
Experimental Results
The uniaxial tensile tests were performed using all nine of the manufactured test specimens. The
parallel sided geometry of the test specimen including variation in width, resulted in instability and
fracture outside of the extensometer gauge length in four of the nine tests. Thus, the data from these
tests are unusable and the results will be based on the ﬁve successful tests. Figure 30 shows the
force displacement plots of the successful tests. Table 2 presents a summary of the tests by width and
thickness measurements. All test results are provided in subsection F.2.
Figure 30: Force displacement of successful uniaxial tensile tests.
Material Test No.
Width Measurements [mm]
Thickness measurement
[mm]
w1
w2
w3
t0
#2
20.16
19.93
19.67
1.92
#3
18.63
18.96
19.25
1.82
#5
19.04
19.14
19.20
1.91
#6
19.96
20.11
20.30
1.96
#9
20.33
20.57
20.93
1.93
Table 2: Summary of successful uniaxial tensile tests with useful data.
Figure 30 shows that the force displacement relationship of tests #2, #3 and #5 are very similar with
a maximum force encountered around 20 [kN] and occurrence of fracture at a displacement of 36-
37 [mm]. However, to qualitatively compare the results, the data need to be converted to stress and
strains, to account for differences in the cross sectional area of the test specimens.
The method of determining stresses, strains, and mechanical properties is presented in the following.
The experimental force-displacement data is to be calculated to stresses and strains, from which the
material will be characterised by material properties and a ﬂow stress curve.
27
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
The nominal stress and strain, σnom and e, is determined by Equation 7.1 and Equation 7.2[21]:
σnom = F
A0
(7.1)
e = l1 −l0
l0
= ∆l
l0
(7.2)
where, F is the applied force, A0 is the initial cross section of the specimen and l0 and l1 are the
initial and current length of the specimen. The nominal stresses and strain are applied in Hookes law,
describing the elastic region in the deformation process, stated in Equation 7.3[21].
σnom = Ee
(7.3)
where, E is Youngs modulus. Equation 7.3 is used to determine the Youngs modulus, that is applied
in I-form to perform elastic unloading of the numerical model. Apart from this, the elastic region is
not considered further.
The true stress, σ, and strain ,ε, are given by Equation 7.4 and Equation 7.5[21]:
σ = σnom(1 + e)
(7.4)
ε = ln l1
l0
(7.5)
The true stress-strain relationship provides more applicable information on the plastic deformation
considering the material test and the collar drawing process. The true stress and strain term is based
on the instantaneous cross sectional area. This is an signiﬁcant factor considering the change in area,
expected when stainless steel encounter strains in the plastic region.
The initial cross section of the specimen is determined by the area of a hollow circular section, stated
in Equation 7.6, according to Figure 28:
Ac = r2
p,0 · φ −(rp,0 −t0)2 · φ
(7.6)
where Ac is the cross sectional area, rp,0 is the outer radius of the pipe, t0 is the initial pipe thickness,
and φ is the angle from the center of the specimen width to the end of the specimen width.
The nominal and true stress-strain curve of the successful material test data is presented in Figure 31a
and Figure 31b respectively. The main goal of the material characterization is to determine the ma-
terial constant C, the strain hardening exponent n and the initial strain of the Ludwig-Hollomon and
the Swift ﬂow stress curves presented earlier in Equation 5.3 and Equation 5.4. For this ﬁt we also
consider the experimental true stress-strain relation.
28
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
(a)
(b)
Figure 31: (a) Nominal and (b) true stress-strain plot from experimental uniaxial tensile test.
7.3
Numerical Test Simulation
A numerical model is made to estimate the inﬂuence of the curvature of the test piece and earn
additional experience with the program I-form. The curvature of the test specimen was deemed to
be of negligible impact compared to a plane test specimen, once the tensile forces is applied. The
clamping of the test specimen, introduces initial deformation in a certain distance from the grips. The
extensometer gauge length should cover a undeformed zone, to obtain measurements unaffected by
the clamping. The numerical model is used to estimate the distance from which the specimen can be
assumed unaffected by the clamping. Additionally, is the ﬂow stress curves applied to the numerical
model, to compare with the experimental results.
Assumptions
The numerical model is based on the following assumptions:
• Symmetry in the xy- and yz-plane.
• The grip-tool is discretized by to plane surfaces and assumed rigid.
• Workpiece is assumed rigid-plastic.
• Workpiece is assumed to be of isotropic material.
• The workpiece is modelled with uniform thickness and width.
• The contact between workpiece and tools are assumed to follow constant friction law.
• The workpiece is perfectly positioned parallel to the longitudinal direction.
Modelling
The model consists of a test specimen and two dies representing the clamping grips. The test specimen
is created by subtracting a volume from a Ø76.1 x 2[mm] pipe and the dies are represented by two
surface planes. The model is utilizes symmetry in the xy- and yz-plane and is shown in Figure 33.
29
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
Mesh and convergence study
The test specimen is discretized to the workpiece by hexahedral elements and the dies are repre-
sented by triangular elements. The discretization of I-form is previously explained in section 5. A
convergence study of the number of elements in the model has been performed and the resultant force-
displacement plot is shown in Figure 32 and the CPU time used to run the simulation is presented in
Table 3.
Figure 32: Convergence study of element number for numerical material model.
No. of Elements
CPU Time [min]
576
22
960
30
1920
44
3840
89
7860
225
Table 3: Table of CPU time according to convergence study in Figure 32
The main use of the model is to determine the effected area on the initial clamping and to show the
simulated difference when applying the best ﬁtted ﬂow stress curves. At 3840 elements no difference
in the clamping effects is found and the deviation found in the resultant force-displacement plot is
deemed negligible, relative to the CPU time required and information gained by running simulations
with more elements.
The model by 3840 elements is chosen to be used in the model resulting in an element length of 2.5
[mm], and a width and height of 0.5 [mm]. The mesh and model is presented in Figure 33.
Simulation and control settings
The model simulates the initial clamping of the specimen and the actual tensile test. This requires
controlling the direction of the dies on multiple directions. One die was kept stationary during the
clamping process and was initially positioned in contact with the workpiece. The other die was
30
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
Figure 33: Numerical material model with chosen mesh and tools at ﬁrst increment and no deformation.
controlled to move at a constant speed of 5 [mm/s] towards the stationary die and workpiece in the
y-direction. The moving die makes contact with the workpiece and deforms the workpiece up against
the stationary die until the dies are separated by a distance of 2 [mm]. Subsequently both dies are
moved simultaneously in the x-direction as shown in Figure 33. A friction factor, m = 1, is applied to
both dies, constraining the workpiece in contact with the die surface. The friction factor of the dies
are m = 1, constraining the nodes in contact with workpiece. The simulation is based on 1000 steps
with a time increment of 0.001 [s].
7.4
Material characterization results
The Young’s modulus of the material is estimated based on Hooke’s law as seen in Equation 7.3. The
elastic modulus is determined by examining the nominal strain from 0-0.001 presented in Figure 34.
In this approximate region the material should show linear elastic behaviour. Inspection of the data in
this region, reveals that the obtained data is very unstable for many of the tests. Material test #5 shows
more linearity than the other measurements and is on average representative of the total material tests.
The Youngs modulus is determined, based on the data measured from 100-180 [MPa] of material test
#5, to be E = 237 [GPa].
The ﬂow stress curves by Ludwig-Hollomon and Swift stated in Equation 5.3 and Equation 5.4 are
compared to the experimental data to determine the best representation of the material. The ﬁt is
based on a parameter study, investigating the inﬂuence of the material parameters C, n and B on the
resultant stress-strain curves. The parameters resulting in the best ﬁt for the Ludwig-Hollomon and
Swift is stated in Equation 7.7 and Equation 7.8 respectively.
σf = 1275ϵ0.37
eq
(7.7)
σf = 1250(0.025 + ϵeq)0.37
(7.8)
Figure 35 shows the true stress-strain plot of the experimental materials tests compared to the best ﬁt
of the Ludwig-Hollomon and Swift ﬂow stress curves. Figure 35 shows that Swift in Equation 7.8 rep-
resents the experimental data well throughout the tensile test and Ludwig-Hollomon in Equation 7.7
deviates at low strains. Both ﬂow stress curves predict the stress-strain relation of the experimental
data well in the strain range 0.15-0.35.
31
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
Figure 34: Nominal stress-strain plot of the approximate elastic region of the tensile tests.
Figure 35: Best ﬁt of Ludwig-Hollomon and Swift ﬂow stress curves, compared to the experimental data.
The ﬂow stress curves are applied in the numerical model and the experimental data is plotted against
the numerical in a stress-strain curve in Figure 36. The numerical results show that Ludwig-Hollomon
estimates a stress-strain relation closer to the experimental data than Swift. However both simulations
predict some higher stresses than the experimental, and become similar as the strain is increased.
Both ﬂow stress curves show relatively good predictions according to the experimental data of the
uniaxial tensile test. Swift predicts a more accurate stress-strain relationship analytically, and Ludwig-
Hollomon provides better results when applied in the numerical model. The material characterization
is to be used in a numerical model, hence the Ludwig-Hollomon ﬂow stress curve is assumed to
provide more accurate results in the collar drawing model. However both ﬂow stress curves are to be
32
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
Figure 36: Comparison of true stress-strain curve of numerical and experiment data.
applied and assessed in the developed model, to investigate their inﬂuence on the model.
Figure 37 shows the strain results in the z-direction after the clamping process. The strain in the
z-direction showed the largest impact of the clamping. Thus, the distance to the unaffected area is
based on this measure. The model was developed with a grips length of 40 [mm], however the length
of the area affected by the clamping is presumably the same. The plot shows that the clamping has an
effect 20 [mm] away from the ends of the grips, which is equal to the width of the test specimen ws.
As the experiment was executed with a free length, Lf = 2ws from the grips to the extensometer, the
gauge length can be considered within an area unaffected by the clamping. Inspecting the edges at
the test specimen center, shown by the z-axis, small deviations in the Z-strain components are seen.
The strain in this location is considered small enough to consider it negligible and the specimen is
assumed uniform over the gauge length.
33
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis - s134132
7. Material Characterization
Figure 37: Plot of z-component true strain from I-form showing the largest impact from initial clamping.
34
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
8
Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
The scope of this section is to document the analysis the collar drawing method, based on experi-
mental methods and a numerical model. Initially is the experimental method and results presented
including a brief introduction to the metrology study. Then is the development process described,
with a study of the most important factors in focus. Subsequently is the initial study and the exper-
imental results combined to a ﬁnal numerical model of the collar drawing process. The numerical
model is assessed on its ability to predict correct geometry for the formed collar, while estimating the
force required to perform the process. The numerical model is used to analyse the process in addition
to the experimental results. Finally is the developed model discussed.
8.1
Experimental Method and Results
The experimental data during the process is obtained by utilizing the test rig described in subsec-
tion 2.2. The data from the experiments are exported from the press software from which the follow-
ing output data is extracted:
• Force measurement by load in [kg]
• Punch displacement by the motor position in [µ m]
The punch of the press is moved by a constant jog speed, vp and the punch is controlled by the
computer. A number of experiments was executed throughout the study and a full overview of the test
specimens is provided in Table 18 in subsection G.1. The experimental data used to compare with
the numerical model is based on two experimental runs, referred to by Reference #6 and #7 (or Exp.
Reference #6 and #7).
The small number of experimental runs, was a necessity due to a limit of available test specimen with
certiﬁed and tested material parameters. The resulting load-displacement data obtained from the two
experiments are presented in the plot of Figure 38a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 38: (a) Load and displacement data from collar drawing process of Reference #6 and #7.
(b) show a zoom of the maximum load data.
The plot in Figure 38a is a scatter plot and an inspection of the separate data points reveal that the
acquisition of load cell measurements is of higher resolution that the displacement. An example of
this is shown in Figure 38b, by the maximum load data obtained. This results in multiple force values
to the same value of displacement.
35
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
The load data is converted to force and is presented in Figure 39 together with Exp. Ref. #8 and #9.
Experimental ref. #8 is an experiment with another pipe material called Super Dairy, which will be
further evaluated in the metrology section. Experimental ref. #9 is the last run executed in the project
with lubricant oil applied to the collar drawing ball, to experimentally reduce friction. This is further
discussed in subsection 8.6.
Figure 39: Experimental force-displacement plot of Reference #6, #7, #8 and #9.
The maximum deviation in force measurement values to the same displacement value is 10 [kg]
which is deemed negligible, being around approximately 0.2% of the maximum load obtained. The
maximum experimental load obtained is 4697.5 [kg] and 4690.9 [kg] for Exp. Ref. #6 and #7,
respectively. Considering the general trend of the curves, very small differences are noticed. Both
experiments show a steep slope up to around 3 [mm] displacement and then slightly decreases until
maximum.
As the two experimental runs only deviate a negligible amount, additional experimental runs are
deemed to provide indifferent results. Thus, no further experimental data needs to be obtained for
comparison with the numerical model.
36
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
8.2
Metrology Study
A metrology study of the specimens have been performed to determine the geometry and surface con-
dition resulting from collar drawing and from a specimen produced by the T-Drill Collaring Method.
Initially the study is introduced and the measurement plan is presented. Subsequently the geometry
and surface results are presented respectively. Finally, is the results analyzed and compared.
Geometrical Study
The geometrical study is necessary to validate the numerical model, assessing the models geometric
reliability. The geometric measurements of main interest are the external collar diameter, collar thick-
ness and the height of the collar. The height can decrease the complexity of the subsequent welding,
as it is easier to perform a good weld, further away from the base to the run pipe. As stated in sec-
tion 1, is a complicated welding situation more likely to result in a failed weld. Thus, the impact of a
poorly formed collar can be very substantial.
The geometrical measurements are primarily measured using a coordinate measuring machine of type
CMM-001-ZEISS-PRISMO. The according measurement program CALYPSO was used to develop
a measurement model for the experimental pipe specimens. The measurements were obtained by a
three probe assembly.
Surface Study
The surface study investigates the impact of the utilized process on the processed surface at differ-
ent microscopic levels. Visual inspection and examination by hand suggest that the surface from a
collar manufactured by T-Drill is more uneven than that from collar drawing. To make a comparable
assessment of the two processes based on quantitative data, a roughness and waviness measurement
and analysis is performed.
The form and texture of a surface can be divided into three main categories. Roughness, waviness, and
Proﬁle, and in the following we will use roughness and waviness measurements of the manufactured
surfaces. Roughness is deﬁned as closely spaced, irregular deviations on a microscopic scale and is
described by height, width, and distance along the main surface. Waviness is a recurrent deviation
relative to a ﬂat surface and is described in terms of space between the crests and height between the
crest and valleys of the the waves. The waviness terms can also be referred to as waviness width and
height respectively.
The data is obtained by a Taylor-Hobson Surtronic 25 for all collar drawn specimen. Specimens with
curvature or uneven surfaces can be challenging to perform mechanical microscopic measurements
on because of small evaluation height range. The T-Drill measurements are thus performed by the
using a Taylor Hobson Form Talysurf series 2, with an appropriate evaluation height range. A collar
drawing specimen was measured by the same equipment for reference. Additionally, visual inspection
of the specimen was documented by utilizing a ZEISS Stemi SV6 Microscope with a digital camera
attached.
For each specimen a measurement is performed at a speciﬁed area on an unprocessed position in the
run pipe and at speciﬁed locations in the collar area. Surface conditions normal to the ﬂow direction
in the pipe is analysed, as this is the scenario with highest risk of particle and bacteria accumulation.
37
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Figure 40 below show the location of the performed measurements and the direction of measurements.
The measurement locations are marked when performed, to provide traceability of the measurements.
(a)
(b)
Figure 40: Measurement locations and direction for (a) collar and (b) run pipe.
Specimen of untested 316L pipe material is included in the surface study, to analyse the collar drawing
process, when subjected to different surface conditions. Three specimen is tested in the tested material
from section 7, two of an unspeciﬁed 316L steel pipe and one of the type Super Dairy. Super Dairy
is a pipe name for pipes with a very smooth surface and is ideal for high quality process plants often
used the diary industry.
38
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Metrology results
The manufactured specimen is initially analysed by a qualitative visual inspection of the formed
collars. A total of three specimens are manufactured in the tested Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe material of
which two are produced by collar drawing and one by the T-Drill method. Figure 41 show pictures of
these, inspecting the collars from the longitudinal direction of the run pipe. The red circles indicate
the area in the collar with the minimum collar height.
Figure 41: Collar height comparison and indication of local minimum height.
Collar drawing specimen #6 and#7 (left, middle) and T-Drill specimen #3 (right).
The ﬁgure shows that the collar drawing specimen is almost symmetrically formed along the longi-
tudinal direction, in contrast to the T-Drill specimen, as a distinct result of the initial holing process.
Specimens #6 and #7, manufactured by collar drawing, are in general very similar and have the max-
imum heights parallel to the longitudinal direction of the run pipe. The maximum heights of the
T-Drill specimen #3 is angled relative to the longitudinal direction of the run pipe, resulting in the
lowest collar height being angled accordingly. The maximum collar height for #3 is also estimated to
be higher on the left side of the run pipe according to Figure 41. The initial hole milling seems more
coarse in the T-Drill method based on the burrs on the collar edge.
A sketch and the according measured heights are presented in Figure 42.
The lowest heights measured is 7.0 [mm] and 2.7 [mm] for the collar drawing specimens and T-Drill
specimen respectively.
Specimen
hmin [mm]
Exp. Ref #6 (Collar drawing)
7
Exp. Ref #7 (Collar drawing)
7.2
Exp. Ref #3 (T-Drill)
2.7
Figure 42: Minimum collar height measurements shown in Figure 41 relative to the outer surface of the run
pipe.
The following measurements are based on a programmed measurement model, with a local Cartesian
coordinate system with origin in the center of the run pipe and the formed collar. The measurements
are used to determine diameters, thicknesses and roundness along the run pipe and the collar as shown
in Figure 43. All measurement protocols are summarized and attached in subsection G.2. Figure 44
show roundness plots of the collar drawing specimen #6 and the T-Drill specimen #3. The plot show
the deviations in roundness of the run pipe circumference at locations x = ± 110 [mm]. Both plots
39
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
indicate that the run pipe is affected and result in an elliptical shape. Comparing the scales, show that
the elliptical shape is more distinct as a result by T-Drill.
Figure 43: Coordinate system orientation for metrology studies.
(a)
(b)
Figure 44: Roundness plots of (a) #6 and (b)#3 at specimen ends (110 [mm] in x-axis according to Figure 43.)
The thickness in the circumference of the produced collars was measured at speciﬁed locations. Ta-
ble 5 shows the measurements for specimen #3, #6 and #7 according to Figure 45.
No.
t−x
t−x+y
t−x−y
t−y
t+y
t+x+y
t+x−y
t+x
t50
t80
t110
#6
1.541
1.561
1.538
1.590
1.569
1.548
1.545
1.510
1.823
1.850
1.864
#7
1.483
1.522
1.543
1.573
1.545
1.507
1.561
1.521
1.846
1.839
1.829
#3
1.602
0.697
1.550
0.717
0.869
1.604
0.737
1.488
1.843
1.835
1.843
Table 5: Table of measured thicknesses of collar drawing specimen #6 and #7 and T-Drill specimen #3.
All measurements are in [mm] and assigned according to Figure 45.
Figure 45: Sketch of thickness measurement point relative to the local coordinate system.
The unevenness of the T-Drill specimen was easily noticed by the visual inspection and further inves-
tigation by hand inspection also suggested a distinct difference of the processed surfaces. The visual
40
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
inspection is documented using combination of a microscope and a digital camera available in the
metrology lab of DTU. The design of the microscopic setup can not provide a scale on the photos
taken, as the magniﬁcation of the camera and the microscope get mixed up. To accommodate this
issue, a match with a width of 3 [mm] is used for scaling and the edge of the collar is kept in the
frame, to add a guide of the curvature. Figure 46 show the processed internal surface of the collar
produced by collar drawing and T-Drill.
(a)
(b)
Figure 46: Picture of the internal collar surface.
(a) Collar drawing specimen #6 and (b) T-Drill specimen #3, match head of width 3 [mm] for scaling.
Figure 47 shows a comparison of the transition area of where the pipe has been in contact with the
process tool. The line of transition is easily noticed in both specimens, but the surfaces on either
side of the collar drawing specimen look very similar. The T-Drill specimen shows a very distinct
difference indicating that the internal collar surface have been exposed to machining.
(a)
(b)
Figure 47: Picture of the internal collar surface at forming area transition.
(a) Collar drawing specimen #6 and (b) T-Drill specimen #3, match head of width 3 [mm] for scaling.
Table 6 shows the arithmetic mean values for the roughness and waviness in the collars and in the
run pipe of the measured specimen. The increase in waviness is large in all the specimens comparing
the unprocessed and the processed area. This is probably due to the directions by which the mea-
surements were obtained. Considering the undeformed original pipe, the unprocessed measurements
were performed in the longitudinal direction of the run pipe and the processed measurements along
the circumferential direction of the run pipe. These surface conditions in the two directions are pre-
sumably different as a result of the production process of the original pipe. Thus, this aspect should
be considered when comparing the results from the measurement locations. The practical assessment
is however not affected by this consideration, as industrial best practice and standards for pipe surface
41
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
No.#
Process
Pipe material
Unprocessed area
Collar area
Ra [µm]
Wa [µm]
Ra [µm]
Wa [µm]
#2
Collar Drawing
316 L (Unspec.)
4.466
1.435
4.045
9.498
#3
T-Drill
316 L Diary Cert.
0.853
0.629
1.627
32.788
#3b
T-Drill
316 L (Unspec.)
4.394
1.341
3.071
24.077
#6
Collar Drawing
316 L Diary Cert.
0.617
0.420
0.583
5.944
#7
Collar Drawing
316 L Diary Cert.
0.644
0.278
0.653
5.794
#8
Collar Drawing
316 L Super Diary
0.536
0.428
0.375
2.817
Table 6: Average roughness and waviness measurements at unprocessed area and collar area of test specimen.
assessments, require measurements to be measured normal to the ﬂow direction and/or the machining
direction.
The difference in average waviness between the unprocessed run pipe area and the collar area is
inevitably much larger for the T-Drill manufactured specimen. The average waviness for the T-Drill
collar, is more than 50 times larger than the waviness in the run pipe. The collar drawing specimen
of the same material is approximately 14 and 20 times larger for #6 and #7 respectively. Figure 48
shows a comparison of the waviness of a measurement obtained from #3 and #6. The measurements
are obtained by the Talysurf series 2 machine and show the waviness proﬁle of the measurements with
the lowest waviness depth measured from collar drawing and T-Drill. Specimen #6 is shown in the
top of Figure 48 and has a minimum waviness width of approximately Wa,min ≈12 [µm] in contrast
to the T-Drill specimen with a minimum waviness width of Wa,min ≈80 [µm]. All proﬁles obtained
can be found in the appendix (subsection G.3).
Figure 48: Waviness proﬁle with smallest waviness depth of collar drawing specimen #6 (top) and T-Drill
specimen #3 (bottom).
Test specimen #2 and #3b is also manufactured from the same unspeciﬁed 316L pipe material, and
show that the T-Drill specimen have an average waviness in the processed collar area almost 18 times
larger, than in the run pipe. The processed collar area of the collar drawing specimen in the same
42
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
material is only approximately 7 times larger, which is similar to the difference measured on the
super dairy pipe, %8.
The process suggest a more distinct impact on the roughness parameters of the formed collar. Almost
all of the specimens formed by collar drawing regardless of which material used, result in a reduction
of the mean roughness parameter Ra. This, with the only exception of exp. ref. #7 that shows a
very small increase in mean roughness. The T-Drill specimen show a relatively large increase, to an
arithmetic mean roughness Ra > 1.6 [µ m]. However for specimen #3b of unspeciﬁed 316L, the
roughness is reduced.
Inspecting the roughness proﬁles of the T-Drill specimen, clear indication of machining is found. In
Figure 49 is a representative roughness proﬁle of both specimens shown. The roughness proﬁle of
the collar drawing specimen only show irregular deviations throughout the evaluation length. The
T-Drill roughness proﬁle show recurrent deviations, with a maximum depth of approximately 10 [µ
m]. These recurrent deviations are a result of the T-Drill forming process, creating a very ﬁne thread,
throughout the formed collar.
Figure 49: Roughness proﬁle of collar drawing specimen #6 (top) and T-Drill specimen #3 (bottom).
For the specimen with an initially coarse surface, the T-Drill process caused the mean roughness
parameter Ra to decrease. The roughness proﬁle for #2 and #3b is presented in Figure 50. Figure 50a
shows irregular deviations with a very narrow width between each local peak. Figure 50b reveal the
same recurrent roughness proﬁle as seen in Figure 49. This suggests that T-Drill is smoothing the
surface of an initially coarse pipe, but leave recurrent machining trails in the processed surface.
All proﬁles obtained during the project can be found in subsection G.3.
43
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
(a)
(b)
Figure 50: Roughness proﬁle of (a) collar drawing specimen#2 and (b )T-Drill specimen #3b.
44
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
8.3
Development of Numerical Model
The project have contained a long development process, to create the ﬁnal numerical collar drawing
model. The development process is summarized in this section, where most important factors are
studied and the results from I-form is presented.
Assumptions
The numerical model is based on the following assumptions.
• Symmetric in the yz- and the zx-plane.
• The collar drawing tool is considered to be rotational symmetric.
• The material of the workpiece is considered to be rigid-plastic.
• The workpiece material is assumed to be isotropic.
• Tools are considered rigid.
• Uniform thickness of the initial pipe model workpiece.
• The contact between workpiece and collar drawing tool is assumed to be frictionless.
• The collar drawing ball is placed perfectly in the center of the test specimen hole.
Figure 51: Geometric presentation of numerical collar drawing model.
45
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Modelling
The numerical analysis is based on a model consisting of 3 geometric models; the workpiece pipe,
the collar drawing ball and the die matrix. The model is developed for dimensions, Ø51 x 2 [mm] and
Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] as those applicable in the experimental test rig. The analysis of collar drawing will
mainly be based on the 1:1 collar in the Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe material experimentally as numerically.
The pipe workpiece is modelled by deﬁning a half cylindrical shell and the initial hole is subtracted
from the cylinder by Boolean operations. The collar drawing ball is modelled by a rotational extrusion
of a half-circle to a sphere. Subsequently, the sphere is reduced by a spherical cap in the bottom and
further reduced to a spherical wedge. The wedge is extruded by 10◦on each side to prevent run-
away nodes at the boundary surfaces. The die matrix is modelled by a quarter cylindrical shell by the
die hole subtracted. Furthermore, a rounding of radius rd = 5 [mm] is applied to the internal edge
of the die, according to the manufactured die matrix (Technical drawing of the die matrix is found
in subsection B.3. A picture from I-form with the three geometrical models and mesh is shown in
Figure 51.
Mesh and convergence study
The level of discretion is governed by the size of the elements deﬁning the model. The size of the
elements are an important factor regarding the CPU time spend solving the ﬁnite element model and
the quality of the results. A reduction of each ﬁnite element size implicitly increase the total number
of elements in the model and the time required to run the simulation.
The tool models, the collar drawing ball and the die are, as stated in section 5, rigid and discretized
by 3-node triangular surface elements. Thus, only the surfaces in contact with the workpiece needs to
be meshed and imported to I-form. The test specimen is discretized by 8-node hexahedral elements.
The elements size of the tools in contact with the deformation area of the workpiece is found to have
a large impact on the resulting collar geometry. A general approximate element edge size of 1 [mm]
for the collar drawing ball and 0.4 [mm] at the die edge is found to be sufﬁcient, resulting in a smooth
collar geometry.
The total number of elements deﬁning the workpiece model has a very big impact on the CPU time
required to complete the simulation. Thus, a convergence of the total element number of the model
after mesh reﬁnement is executed based on resulting force displacement relation. The study is based
on a simulation with a collar drawing ball speed of 0.5 [m/s], a target of 120 increments and a simula-
tion time step increment of 1 [s] between each increment. The element size of the workpiece is varied
by initially assigning a speciﬁc element edge size in ANSYS. Subsequently, the I-form reﬁnement
tool is utilized and the mesh is locally reﬁned at the collar area by one octree. The mesh is locally
reﬁned by deﬁning a spherical volume of r = 50 [mm] in which the reﬁnement is applied. The number
of elements through the thickness is kept constant at two initial elements reﬁned to six in the reﬁned
region. The results from the convergence study is presented in Figure 52 and Table 7.
The convergence study of element size is based on a model with a Ludwig-Hollomon ﬂow stress curve
with material constant, C = 1200 [MPa] and a strain hardening exponent, n = 0.43 [-]. The point of
interest is to show the tendency when decreasing the element size in the model, and determining when
the element size is small enough to consider the difference in the force displacement plot negligible.
46
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Figure 52: Convergence of element size and number of the numerical collar drawing model.
Elem. Size
Initial [mm]
Total No. Elem.
Initial
Elem. size
Reﬁned [mm]
Total No. Elem.
Reﬁned
CPU Time
[min]
30
58
10
662
4
20
106
6.67
856
6
10
344
3.33
2916
21
6
984
2
8624
90
5
1376
1.67
11326
110
4
2128
1.33
17384
216
Table 7: Convergence Study of numerical collar drawing model.
The model is deemed to be sufﬁciently converged when the forces deviate less then 5% and the ﬁnal
collar geometry is similar to the experimental specimen.
The dashed black curves in Figure 52 represent a ±5 % deviation relative to the ﬁnest mesh created
applied to the model. The model with a reﬁned total of 8624 elements is within ±5 % throughout
the process with the exception of a small deviation around 10 [mm] displacement. The general trend
of the 8624 element model is yet very similar to the ﬁner mesh models, and is deemed sufﬁcient to
apply for further studies. This model has a maximum element edge size in the reﬁned zone of 2 [mm],
and is decreasing towards the collar edge. The additional information gained with the ﬁner mesh are
deemed negligible compared to the CPU time required.
The size of the time step increment is quite high in the convergence test, which will be investigated
further in the next section. A high time increment however, still results in almost 4 hours CPU time,
when the model is reﬁned to an element edge size in the collar region to 1.33 [mm]. All of the
simulations show irregular ﬂuctuations throughout the simulation, and is most signiﬁcant around the
maximum force.
47
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Simulation control
The simulation of the numerical model is controlled by a target number of increments and the simu-
lation step time between each increment. The inﬂuence of the simulation control settings are studied
in this section.
The resolution of the simulation has a great impact on the CPU time and in combination with a ﬁne
mesh, the simulation results in a very long CPU time. The simulation control test is executed by
keeping the velocity of the collar drawing ball constant at 0.5 [mm/s] equal to the experiments, while
decreasing the time steps from 1-0.05 [s].
Figure 53: Study on simulation time step increment of numerical collar drawing model.
Target No.
Time Step
Increment [s]
CPU Time
[min]
120
1
22
240
0.5
40
600
0.2
105
1200
0.1
254
2400
0.05
433
Table 8: Simulation control study of numerical collar drawing model in comparison with experimental data.
The time step increments, the target number required to execute the process and the resulting required
CPU time is shown in Table 8. Figure 53 show the resulting force-displacement plot from the study.
Decreasing the time step from 1-0.2 [s], the force excited by the collar drawing ball is increased
and becomes more representative to the experimental data. The obtained experimental data will be
introduced in subsection 8.1. However, decreasing the time step further to 0.1 and 0.05 [s] an addition
of force is introduced at the end of the process, which is deviating from the experimental trend.
The increase in force by the 0.2 [s] increment seems legitimate comparing to the forming process. As
the collar drawing ball moves upward through the pipe material, the material will eventually apply
compressive forces to the circumference of the ball. This effect seem to be further ampliﬁed by
48
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
reﬁning the simulation resolution of the model to 0.1 and 0.05 [s]. The models are investigated to
assess the validity of the increase in calculated forces in the last 20 [mm] of the displacement.
Figure 54: View of the yz-plane of the model time step increment = 0.2[s] at displacement 40, 50 and 60
[mm] (left to right).
Figure 55: View of the yz-plane of the model time step increment = 0.1[s] at displacement 40, 50 and 60
[mm] (left to right).
Figure 56: Straightness indication in the formed collar of experimental specimen #6.
Figure 54 and Figure 55 show the contact at displacement 40, 50 60 [mm] for model with time
increment 0.2 and 0.1 [s] relative to the plot in Figure 53 respectively. Figure 54 shows that at 40
[mm] the pipe material surrounds a band in the circumference of the collar drawing ball. At 50 [mm]
49
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
the formed collar pulls a little inwards as the collar drawing ball passes and results in a quite straight
collar. Figure 55 suggests that the collar drawing ball is more enclosed and the inwards pull is more
distinct compared to the other model. At 60 [mm] the model is shown to result in a curved outer
collar geometry. This is compared to the experimental specimen in Figure 56, which shows a very
straight collar, suggesting that the model with 0.2 [s] time step increments are more representative of
the process.
Analysis of the force-displacement relation in Figure 53 and the resulting geometry of the collar
conclude that the model with a target of 600 increments and a simulation time step of 0.2 [s] is more
representative compared to experiments. Thus, these simulation controls will be applied in the further
development of the model.
Material Selection
The Swift and Ludwig-Hollomon ﬂow stress curves determined in section 7 are applied in the numer-
ical model. Figure 57 shows the resulting force-displacement curves from the simulations. Ludwig-
Hollomon results in slightly higher forces after the peak, but in general no apparent differences are
detected between the two simulations. The maximum forces calculated are 39.63 [kN] and 39.85 [kN]
for Ludwig-Hollomon and Swift respectively. The Swift ﬂow stress curve is used for the ﬁnal model.
Figure 57: Best ﬁt of Swift and Ludwig-Hollomon ﬂow stress curves applied in model
50
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Friction
I-form provides the option to apply constant friction following Equation 5.5, between the tools and
the workpiece by a friction factor m on the tools. Initially the model was simulated free of friction
and in general the models have predicted too low forces compared to the experimental data. The
appliance of a friction factor m > 0, would intuitively suggest an increase in the force as the resistive
force of the friction would prevent the tool from sliding freely over the workpiece surface.
However a study applying friction factors from 0.1-0.5 resulted in a decrease of the force excited by
the collar drawing ball. The maximum force is decreased over 10% when applying a friction factor
m = 5, compared to a friction factor m = 0. After the maximum force is reached, the descent of the
force is found steeper when increasing the friction factor.
Figure 58: Inﬂuence of applied friction in the numerical model
From 40-60 [mm] displacement in Figure 58, the increase in friction factor increases the force simul-
taneously.
The inﬂuence of the friction factor is studied throughout this project, but a ﬁnal explanation of the
resulting decrease in force is missing. The friction is experimental and numerical tested and will be
described later in the report. All ﬁndings from this sections are used in the ﬁnal numerical model,
described in subsection 8.4, which will also be updated relative to the experimental study. The pa-
rameters studied in this section will be discussed in subsection 8.6. All simulations are run by either
a laptop or stationary computer with i7 processors and 8 logical processors(CPU threads).
51
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
8.4
Updated Numerical Model
All of the results from the model development and the experimental data is included in the model,
resulting in the ﬁnal numerical collar drawing model.
Geometry, mesh and simulation control
The geometry is updated according to the thickness and diameter measurements from the metrology
study. The updated dimensions in the numerical model are based on the average measurements at
the end of each run pipe specimen (e.g. thickness t±110 - Wall thickness X±110 in subsection G.2).
The initial thickness of the test specimen is t0 = 1.821 [mm]. The diameter of the test specimen
before deformation is d0 = 76.2 [mm]. The development of the model found that the mesh was
reﬁned sufﬁciently to above a total number of elements at Etot = 8624 elements. The simulation
control test determined that the best simulation control setting was at a target of 600 increments with
a simulation time step increment of 0.2 [s]. Hence a ﬁnal convergence study was executed using
these settings and the updated model geometry. The combination of high simulation resolution and
ﬁne mesh required extensive CPU time. The force displacement relation of the convergence study is
presented in Figure 59 including the CPU time used to run the simulations in Table 9. The plot in
Figure 59 show that the relation is very dependent on the elements despite the ﬁne mesh.
Figure 59: Convergence study of ﬁnal numerical model.
Etot
8624
15010
22930
CPU Time [hr]
7
14
32
Table 9: Convergence Study of numerical collar drawing model.
At Etot = 22930 elements, is the numerical maximum force is increased less than 5% relative to the
model with Etot = 15010 elements. The model with 22930 was used for the ﬁnal model and will be
discussed in subsection 8.6.
52
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
8.5
Results and Model validation
The numerical model is developed to simulate the process of 1:1 collar drawing in a Ø76.1 x 2 [mm]
stainless steel pipe. The results of the model are presented in this section.
The force displacement curve obtained from the model is presented in Figure 60 together with the
experimental data. In general does the numerical model predict steeper incline to the maximum force
and a more shallow decline. The maximum force measured by the experimental data is 46.1 [kN] and
the numerical model predict a maximum force of 45.0 [kN]. Thus the maximum force predict a 2.4%
smaller maximum force, than measured experimentally.
Figure 60: Numerical and experimental force displacement plots for the collar drawing process.
However the model predict larger deviations throughout the simulated process. Initially both the
numerical model and the experimental data show the steepest increase in force in the ﬁrst few mil-
limeters of displacement. The numerical model predict a steeper ascent in force during the 10 [mm]
displacement of the collar drawing ball. From 10 - 20 [mm] displacement the force rate decreases
until the maximum force is reached at approximately 20 [mm]. The experimental data show a more
consistent force rate increase, but reach maximum force only 0.3 [mm] after the numerical model.
After the maximum force, the forces drop consistently until around 45 [mm] displacement. This is
similar for the experimental and numerical data, except for a slightly different steeper slope experi-
mentally. Finally the numerical data show a large instantaneous increase in force, in contrary to the
experimental measurements.
The force displacement curves for the experimental data and the numerical model is used to determine
the work estimated in the process. The area under the force displacement curves are the work done
and can be found by integration. The area is found by approximate numerical integration and the work
is presented in Table 10: The table show that the numerical model predict a maximum difference of
6.31% less work done in the process compared to the experimental data.
The resultant workpiece of the numerical model was extracted and the collar dimensions was mea-
sured in the same locations as the experimental test specimen. The numerical model utilize symmetry
in the yz- and xz plane, thus only a quarter of the collar circumference is considered. The model
53
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Num. Model
Experiment #6
Experiment #7
Acc. Work
1302.8 [J]
1390.6 [J]
1377.9 [J]
Rel. Error
-
-6.31 %
-5.45 %
Table 10: Estimated work done based on experimental and numerical data.
included a ﬁnal unloading step, but the deviation in collar geometry only deviated 1/1000 [mm] in
comparison and is neglected in the results. The numerical and experimental results are presented in
Table 11.
d4
d2
t+y
t+x+y
t+x
hmin
Experimental #6
74.28
71.23
1.57
1.55
1.51
8.23
Experimental #7
74.27
71.24
1.55
1.51
1.52
7.73
Numerical
74.16
71.38
1.63
1.58
1.49
7.98
Max. relative error
-0.16 [%]
-0.21 [%]
5.16 [%]
4.64 [%]
-1.97 [%]
-3.04 [%]
Table 11: Numerical collar dimensions compared to experimental measurements.
Max. relative error of largest deviation to experimental dimension. All dimensions assigned in [mm].
The maximum relative error in Table 11 is based on the experimental dimensions, that deviate the
most from the numerical model. Table 11 shows that very small deviations below 1% are determined,
for the outer, d4, and inner ,d2, collar diameter. The thickness, t+y in the collar circumference with
tangent parallel to the run pipe, show the largest deviation in thickness of 5.16 %. The numerical
model predicts a slightly smaller collar height than experimentally measured by 3.04%.
The numerical model result in a ﬁnal maximum effective stress of σeff,max = 1218 [MPa] and the
effective stress distribution is presented in Figure 61. The stress variation is the formed collar is
very different in comparison to the plane collar drawing stresses in Figure 91. Additionally is the
maximum effective stress is the collar estimated to be much larger, based on the numerical model.
The numerical model results in a maximum effective strain and maximum strain in the Y-direction
of εeff,max = 0.93 and εeff,max = 0.82. Inspection of the strains suggest that any potential fracture
would occur at the collar side with the pipe material banded approximately 90 degrees. The strain
in the Y-direction is plotted in Figure 62. The original plots from I-form is attached in Appendix G
Figure 111-Figure 113.
The numerical model show moderate deviations during the process, compared to the experiments.
Especially the trend of the force displacement plot up to the maximum force is shown to predict
different force increments in the numerical model. However the model also shows similarities and a
good estimate on the maximum force and predicts quite accurate geometric dimensions of the collar.
54
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Figure 61: Effective stress plot of the formed collar by the numerical model.
Figure 62: Plot of the strain in the Y-direction from the numerical model.
55
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Forming Process Analysis
Figure 63: Stepwise process division for analysis.
Figure 64: Stepwise analysis of contact between collar drawing ball and workpiece with respect to Figure 63.
Contacts are shown from 1-8 at 2, 8, 12, 21, 35 and 49 [mm] displacement.
56
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
The numerical model will be used to analyse the collar drawing process based on the resultant force
displacement relation and inspection of the model. The numerical force-displacement plot is divided
in 6 sections and investigated. The force-displacement plot is divided in sections, where the plot sug-
gest that a change in the process occur and is shown in Figure 63. The collar drawing process can
be described by the contact development between the collar drawing ball and the pipe material. Fig-
ure 64 shows a presentation of the contact development with respect to the divided force displacement
plot in Figure 63. The representation is based on the numerical model, by observing the constraint
nodes between the collar ball and the workpiece.
The ﬁrst approximate 2 [mm] displacements in the plot show a steep increase in force development. In
this region the initial contact between the drawing ball and the inner pipe circumference is developed
in a line, starting from the edge of the initial hole to the middle of the drawing ball.
After the initial contact, step two shows an almost linear increase between the force and displacement
for the next approximately 8 [mm]. In this region the drawing ball gain contact to the run pipe forming
an increasingly blunt triangular shape. In step three, the force is almost constant for around 6 [mm].
The straight line in the milled initial hole is now in full contact and the surface area in contact is kept
constant during this step. In the three ﬁrst steps the primary deformation and contact is established to
the pipe material, that will result in the collar side with a tangent parallel to the run pipe.
At step four, contact with the rounding of the initial milled hole is developed and the collar drawing
ball is now deforming the full circumference of the initial milled hole. The triangular shaped contact
surface is now decreasing in height. The force in this area is at maximum due to the level of defor-
mation compared to the relatively small contact area on the inner side of the formed collar. This is
assessed as relatively high effective strain rates are present in a large area of the forming collar, in
comparison to the area in contact with the pipe material.
The force almost linearly decreasing from 22 to 48 [mm] displacement in which the contact area on
the inside collar is large relative to the level of deformation. Between step ﬁve and step six, the force
would be expected to drop until reaching a force, F = 0 [N], as both contact area and the level of
deformation are decreasing simultaneously. In the ﬁnal step, we notice a sudden increase in force,
which is unexpected and not obtained in the experimental results.
As the collar drawing ball moves upwards through the last millimeters of the formed collar, the contact
area decreases as well as the deformation rate. Deformation is still present until the formed collar has
reached an internal diameter equal to the diameter of the drawing ball. As the element size for the
collar drawing ball is smaller than the workpiece in the numerical model, the model will reach a
stage where the area in contact with the material is very small relative to affected area in the collar.
This could also explain the tendency of the force increasing in this region. As the simulation time
increment was decreased, see Figure 53, as even fewer elements would be in contact with the collar,
relative to the level of deformation.
The increase in force is not seen as distinct as the numerical model estimates it. However, a very
small decrease in the descending force is observed. This might suggest the same behaviour as the
numerical model predicts. In the actual drawing process, the formed collar would also encounter a
point where only a very limited area is in contact with the pipe material, but is still deformed.
The circumference of the collar is inspected by evaluating the strain components. The drawing pro-
cess is a failure if fracture occur in the circumference of the edge, as the collar would be unusable.
57
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
Investigating the strains in the circumference of the collar helps predicting where fracture in the collar
would occur. Figure 62 showed the strain in the Y-direction, which is assessed to be the most relevant
strain component when estimating the occurence of fracture.
8.6
Discussion
The numerical model and the experimental data of the collar drawing test are based on a number of
assumptions and parameters that should be included in the assessment of the analysis. Some of the
assumptions and factors that should be considered are discussed in this section:
Isotropic material and von Mises yield criterion
The model is based on von Mises yield criteria, implying that the material of the workpiece is assumed
to be isotropic. The experimental test specimen is a cold rolled, laser welded, stainless steel pipe,
which most presumably is not isotropic. Figure 65 shows a picture of the fractured test specimen
from the material characterization described in section 7.
Figure 65: Fracture of successful material tests #2, #3, #5, #6 and #9 (left to right).
Three of the specimens in the ﬁgure show that the fractures are almost fully perpendicular to the lon-
gitudinal direction. Specimens #3 and #9 show slightly more inclination. The zone with the fracture
is also called local instability, which can be related to the normal anisotropy, R, by Equation 8.1,
considering uniaxial tensions as shown in Figure 66.
tan2 Θ = 1 + R
R
(8.1)
where, Θ is the angle of the local instability with respect to the longitudinal direction of the spec-
imen. Normal anisotropy represents a mean value of the anisotropy of a material and for isotropic
Figure 66: Local instability in uniaxial tension
material R=1. Equation 8.1 shows that local instability for isotropic results in Θ = 54.7◦. The normal
anisotropy of the experimental specimen is determined, assuming that the curvature of the material
test specimen is negligible. The maximum Θ is found in material test specimen #2 by Θ = 73◦
58
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
resulting in a normal anisotropy, R = 0.10 using Equation 8.1. Normal anisotropy in sheet metals
is signiﬁcant regarding deep drawing ability in the deep drawing process. An increase in normal
anisotropy results in smaller stresses in the drawing direction of the material[18]. The numerical
model consistently predicts a lower force required to draw the collar, compared to the experimen-
tal data. This could be the inﬂuence of the normal anisotropy in the numerical model, being larger
assuming isotropy, than suggested by inspection of the fracture in the experimental test specimen.
Material Characterization - Flow Stress Curve
The ﬂow stress curves applied in the study is also based on the uniaxial tensile test in section 7.
A uniaxial tensile test is subject to diffuse instability and local instability, resulting in necking and
subsequent fracture. As a result, the stress-strain relation for the material is only tested for strains
up and until a maximum strain of 0.38. The numerical model estimate equivalent strain above 0.30
throughout the circumference of the collar edge as shown in Figure 67. Additionally, the maximum
strain component is found in the Y-direction, εy,max = 0.83, being over two times larger than the
strain experimentally measured in the uniaxial test. The material in the numerical model is hence
only based on a small range of the strains encountered in the area of interest. A different method of
material testing should be utilized to obtain data to properly ﬁt a ﬂow stress curve in the full strain
range of the process.
Figure 67: Effective strain plot showing εeq ≥0.30 in the collar from the numerical model.
Friction
The material used for the collar drawing ball, Amaloys FH12 (subsection B.5), is speciﬁcally chosen
due to its deemed ideal properties when in contact with stainless steel. The assumption of no friction
in the numerical model is however unlikely to be true. However the appliance of friction in the model,
showed unexpected inﬂuence on the model results. The appliance of friction by constant friction and a
friction factor, m, resulted in decreasing the force required to execute the process. This might suggest
that I-form had the friction assigned by a negative factor. This was however tested by simulating
59
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis - s134132
8. Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing
a simple compression test of a cylinder. The test however, showed barreling as the cylinder was
deformed, ensuring that the friction was numerically correct assigned. Pictures from the simulation
can be found in subsection G.5.
The use of contact friction law by a factor is also estimated to be a poor representation of the friction
encountered in the drawing process. Prandtl’s constant friction law is more accurate when consid-
ering processes with a rather high normal pressure, and applies constant friction instantaneously as
contact is developed. The Couloumb friction law might be more suiting for the process, as Couloumb
is dependent of the normal pressure in the process. The friction study in Figure 58 shows that the
friction has almost no inﬂuence until the maximum force is reached. This is presumed to be due to
the initial level of deformation encountered in step one to three in Figure 64, which is higher relative
to the sliding between the tool and workpiece surface. After the maximum force, the collar sides are
more vertical and the relative velocity between the drawing ball and the inside collar surface increases,
suggesting an increase on the impact of the friction factor. The behaviour would be expected to result
in an increase in the force of step 5 in Figure 63. The friction is attempted to be decreased experimen-
tally by applying oil lubrication to the collar drawing ball prior to running the simulation. However,
this had no apparent inﬂuence on the resulting force displacement plot. Thus, the assumption of no
friction in the process is presumably not correct, but not signiﬁcant based on the experimental data.
Mesh and simulation control
The ﬁnal numerical model is developed on experience by a large amount of simulations. Finite ele-
ments modelling in 3D often imply a need of many elements. Further non-linear geometric behaviour
of the deformation and a curved geometry increase the amount of needed elements to develop an
accurate model. Both element size and simulation control setting are shown to have a great inﬂuence
of the results of the simulation. The convergence study of the ﬁnal model could not ensure a fully
converged model at the chosen mesh. The mesh was attempted to be further reﬁned, but resulted in
the computer crashing when running the simulation. Thus, the chosen mesh in the ﬁnal numerical
model contains an uncertainty, but could not be further investigated by the computers utilized in the
project.
Experimental vs. Numerical Setup
The experimentally determined force-displacement relation of the process is the only quantitative data
that is obtained during the project. The test rig and the setup include a risk of the collar drawing ball
not being positioned in the exact middle of the initial hole of the test specimen. Additionally, any
initial deformation of the test specimen during the hole milling is not accounted for in the numerical
model.
60
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis - s134132
9. Collar drawing and T-Drill Comparison
9
Collar drawing and T-Drill Comparison
The metal forming processes T-Drill and Collar Drawing both perform collars directly in a run pipe.
Specimens produced by both processes have been analysed and investigated and the performance of
the methods are compared in this section.
Geometry
The resulting height of the collar is an important factor for the subsequent welding. The attainable
maximum collar height is dependent on the minimum height of the formed collar, as the collar edge
needs to be trimmed to obtain a plane edge. The T-Drill method performed a minimum collar height,
hmin = 2.7 [mm] where the smallest collar height of the collar drawing specimen is hmin = 7 [mm].
These measurements determine that the attainable collar height for collar drawing is over 2.5 times
larger than by T-Drill.
Another important factor of the resulting collar geometry is the thickness throughout the collar. A
smaller thickness in the collar geometry increase the risk of failure when welding the collar edge
and decreases the strength of the pipe. Collar drawing shows a very even distribution of material
with a maximum difference of 0.09 [mm] in through the circumference of the collar. The maximum
difference in thickness using collar drawing is measured in specimen #7 and has a maximum and
minimum thickness of tmax = 1.573 [mm] and tmin = 1.483 [mm]. The collar drawing specimen
encounters a maximum thickness reduction, relative to the undeformed run pipe of 19.67%. The
thickness variation is in contrast extensive inspecting the T-Drill manufactured collar. The maximum
difference in collar thickness is 0.91 [mm] with a measured maximum and minimum thickness of tmax
= 1.604 [mm] and tmin = 0.697 [mm]. The maximum thickness reduction, resulting from T-Drill, is
62.18 %.
All collar diameters measured are found to be smaller than the nominal size of the Ø76.1 x 2 [mm]
pipes. The collar drawing specimen shows a maximum relative error of approximate 3% relative to
the nominal diameter of 76.1 [mm]. The T-Drill however results in an outer diameter of the collar
closer to the nominal target diameter and only deviates by a relative error slightly above 1%.
Both processes show an impact on the exterior material of the run pipe. The roundness proﬁle from
the measurements at the run pipe reveal an elliptical shape of the cross section in both specimens as
seen in Figure 44. The collar drawing specimen shows a elliptical shape with the longer diameter
approximately parallel to the collar, where the longer diameter is perpendicular to the collar for the
T-Drill. The shape in the collar drawing specimen is presumed to be an effect of the drawing force
introducing tension on the collar side of the run pipe and compression of the lower, pulling the run
pipe ends down. The T-Drill collar is subject to a rotating and vertical force, making the run pipe
move in circles as the T-Drill rotates. This can be seen when observing the exterior run pipe ends and
the pipe clamps in the T-Drill video (Figure 13).
Surface Finish
The surface study revealed that the processes resulted in very different tendencies regarding the mea-
sured roughness. One measurement showed that the collar drawing specimen #7 showed in increase
of approximately 1% in the arithmetic mean roughness measure Ra. However the remaining three
roughness measurements showed that the process resulted in a more smooth surface by decreasing Ra
61
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis - s134132
9. Collar drawing and T-Drill Comparison
(a)
(b)
Figure 68: Forces and resultant movement of (a) collar drawing and (b) T-Drill.
up to 30% for the super dairy pipe, with an initially very smooth surface. The Ra measurement for
the T-Drill specimen was almost two times larger relative to the undeformed pipe surface.
Both forming processes showed an increasing impact of the waviness in the collar, relative to the
measurements in the run pipe. The maximum increase in Wa of the T-Drill and the collar drawing
was determined to be 50 and 20 times larger than the undeformed material, respectively.
Assessment
The manufactured collars are found to be dependent on the manufacturing method applied, in which
some is of great importance when applied in the industry. The ﬁndings of the project are assessed by
evaluating the results by comparison to requirements from industrial stakeholders.
In general the T-Drill method and technology is very efﬁcient as a weldable collar can be performed
using only one machine. The T-Drill machine is accompanied by a manual that instructs users on setup
dimension in a wide range of different run pipe dimensions. Thus, utilizing the T-Drill equipment
only requires a small amount of training prior to using the machine. The collar drawing method
requires several machines to create the initial hole, perform the drawing operation, and the subsequent
trimming of the collar edge. Additionally, literature is provided on the relation between initial hole
dimension and the output collar dimension. Thus, successful and efﬁcient collar drawing is ﬁrst
obtained after empirical experience is gained.
The resultant collars from collar drawing are very advantageous for subsequent use in process plants.
Quality requirements in food and pharmaceutical process plants are high and the plants are subject
to multiple inspections during and after manufacturing. During the manufacturing the larger collar
height obtained with collar drawing makes it easier to perform a successful penetrating weld. Usually
around 10% of all welds in a process plant are to be tested by a welding specialist before the plant is
accepted by the buyer. If the inspected welds are declined in the test, the weld is rejected and is to be
reconstructed by the expense of the manufacturer.
The diameter and thickness are usually not tested after manufacturing, but can result in failure during
welding. The pipe thickness could be signiﬁcant if the subsequent usage of the piping system is
subject to high pressure. In this case, the pipe thickness would be an important measure decreasing
the general strength of the pipe.
The internal surface ﬁnish of the formed collars are of great importance when used in process plants
in the food and pharmaceutical industry. A rough surface ﬁnish in process plants are more suitable for
62
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis - s134132
9. Collar drawing and T-Drill Comparison
sticking particles and growth of contamination. The risk of contaminating food and pharmaceutical
products are reduced by cleaning the internal pipe surfaces of the utilized production plant. The
cleaning process is based on 4 factors; time, temperature, chemical concentration and the internal ﬂow,
where often only time and chemical concentration are variable. The internal ﬂow can be inefﬁcient
removing particles if the roughness is large and valleys are present in the surface. Figure 69 shows
a schematic of the cleaning process, using a roughness proﬁle (Figure 97) from the T-Drill specimen
measurement. The blue dots in the valleys of Figure 69a represent E-coli bacteria with a radius of
0.5 [µ m] in approximate correct scale relative to the valley heights. A higher Ra increase the risk of
bacteria not being removed by the cleaning ﬂow.
(a)
(b)
Figure 69: Schematic roughness inﬂuence on process plant cleaning procedure.
(a) Roughness proﬁle with E-coli bacterias in valleys and (b) show the cleaning process factors.
The food industry often requires a Ra<0.8 [µm] for pipes and Ra<1.6 [µm] for formed pipes and
pipe ﬁttings. In these terms the collar produced by collar drawing could classify as a pipe, where the
T-Drill collar would be rejected even as a pipe ﬁtting.
The use of lubrication in the T-Drill process is an additional source increasing the risk to consider
when manufacturing collars, as the lubricant can be difﬁcult to remove from the processed collar
surface. This risk is not present for collar drawing as the process is executed without lubricant appli-
cation.
The collar drawing process contains many advantages over the T-Drill method investigated in the
project. The advantages however primarily apply in constructions with high requirements to surface
ﬁnish. If the collars are to be used in other ﬁelds of construction, the T-Drill could be more advanta-
geous as only one machine is required to perform the collar. The higher attainable collar height using
collar drawing, is however most often a great advantage in perspective of the future usage of the collar.
The project does however only consider one single specimen created by a speciﬁc T-Drill machine
solution. Thus, the conclusion of the assessment is not directed at the general T-Drill method, but is
only based on the experimental observations encountered at the speciﬁc specimen investigated.
63
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis - s134132
10. Collar Height Improvement
10
Collar Height Improvement
The collar drawing process is studied using a simple initial hole geometry, described in section 2.
This geometry is preferred in the manufacturing industry due to the simple manufacturing method.
This initial geometry results in a collar with ears on each side that needs to be trimmed to obtain
a plane collar edge, suitable for butt welding. Both collar drawing and the T-Drill method need
three main manufacturing steps when performing collars. A different hole geometry might result in
a plane collar edge immediately after the forming process, making the trimming process dispensable
and might reduce the manufacturing time of a collar. A brief study on the initial hole geometry and
the inﬂuence on the resulting shape of the collar edge is performed and is described in this section.
The numerical model is used to predict the resulting stress-strain state in the collar and the resulting
collar edge shape. A new hole geometry is experimentally tested and the improved hole geometry is
assessed.
10.1
Initial Hole Study
The hole geometry is studied by utilizing the developed numerical model. First is the inﬂuence of
the width, we, and length, le in the initial geometry is studied. Figure 70 shows how increasing and
decreasing the width and length of the initial geometry impact the resulting collar edge.
(a)
(b)
Figure 70
Figure 70 shows that decreasing both width and length of the initial hole geometry increase the total
collar height. The variation in width and height does however still result in a wavy collar edge. Thus,
more pipe material should be added in between, suggesting an elliptic shape rather than the initial
geometry. The hole geometry is then modelled by an ellipse deﬁned by the standard equation of a
ellipse with a center in the intersection of the ellipsis axis’ shown in Figure 71a. Equation 10.1 is
used to determine the points of the ellipse geometry with respect to Figure 71a, where le is the length
(major axis) and we is the width (minor axis) of the ellipse.
x2
(le/2)2 +
y2
(we/2)2 = 1
(10.1)
The elliptic shape is added to the numerical model and the results are provided in the next section.
64
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis - s134132
10. Collar Height Improvement
(a)
(b)
Figure 71: Geometry of (a) standard and (b) elliptic initial hole geometry.
10.2
Numerical and Experimental Results
Initially the dimensions of the standard geometry was applied to the model so that lc = le and wc =
we. The numerical model predicted an signiﬁcant decrease of the wavy ears and moved the minimum
collar height to the center of the collar relative to the run pipe as seen in Figure 72.
The collar height in the center of the collar, relative to the center of the run pipe, has actually not
changed, but is in the elliptic hole model, the location of the new minimum collar height.
(a)
(b)
Figure 72: Numerical resultant geometry of (a) standard and (b) elliptic initial hole geometry with equal
width and length.
The numerical model showed a maximum strain component in the Y-direction of εy,max = 1.17, which
is an increase of more than 20% relative to the εy,max obtained by the standard hole geometry. A
modiﬁed plot of the strain in the Y-direction is shown in Figure 73 and the original plot from I-form
is attached in Appendix H Figure 117. The numerical model however, showed that the force required
to perform the process would exceed 50 [kN], exceeding the upper force limit of the test rig. This
is shown later in comparison with the experimental results. The width and length of the ellipse were
increased by 10%, resulting in an εy,max smaller than the standard model, to determine if the elliptical
shape might result in fracture, despite the lower strains. Additionally, the numerical model with this
geometry predicts a force requirement within the range of the test rig.
Figure 73: Strain Y plot of 1:1 Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] collar with elliptic dimensions equal to the standard hole
geometry.
65
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis - s134132
10. Collar Height Improvement
To compensate for the force limit, the developed 1:1 numerical collar drawing model with a Ø51 x
2 [mm] was utilized. The shape from the numerical results are presented in Figure 74. The initial
elliptical hole was modelled by the standard dimensions, lc = 40 [mm] and wc = 16 [mm] and sub-
sequently decreased by 10% and 20%. The length to width ratio of the standard dimensions of the
Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] 1:1 collar is lc/wc = 3. The standard dimensions of the initial hole to perform a 1:1
collar in Ø51 x 2 [mm] pipes have a length to width ratio slightly smaller by lc/wc = 2.5. This resulted
in a more plane collar edge geometry as seen in Figure 74, compared to the Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] model in
Figure 72.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 74: Resultant collar height for elliptic initial hole by (a) standard dimensions, (b) standard dimensions
-10% and (c) standard dimensions -20%.
Figure 74 showed that decreasing the width and length of the ellipse resulted in an increase of the total
collar height as expected. Additionally, the increase introduced a small tip, being the new maximum
collar height at the point of the collar height minimum estimated in Figure 72b. The force requirement
and strain developed in the model, is also gradually increased with the increase in collar height. The
strain in the Y direction corresponding to Figure 74a to Figure 74c is shown in Figure 75. The original
plot from I-form is attached in Appendix H Figure 118-Figure 120.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 75: Strain Y plot of elliptic initial collar hole by (a) standard dimensions, (b) standard dimensions
-10% and (c) standard dimensions -20%.
The dimensions from the numerical model are performed experimentally and the experimental results
are provided in the following. The numerical and experimental force-displacement plots are shown in
Figure 76.
66
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis - s134132
10. Collar Height Improvement
(a)
(b)
Figure 76: Experimental and numerical force-displacement plot of (a) 76.1 x 2 [mm] and (b) with elliptical
initial holes.
The formed Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] collars are presented in Figure 77 and the corresponding measured min-
imum collar heights, hmin are shown in Table 12. The elliptic initial hole, with standard dimensions
(#10) show a more plane collar edge than the standard geometry. Additionally, is the minimum height
of the formed collar increased by 1.5 [mm]. The improved collar height has not resulted in fracture.
A close inspection of the internal collar edge suggests that local instability has occurred, as shown in
Figure 78. Thus, fracture is assumed to occur by a εy,max ≈1.17 for 1:1 collar drawing in Ø76.1 x 2
[mm] 316 L pipes with an initial elliptical hole geometry based on the numerical model. Fracture or
signs of instability is not observed in #11.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 77: Pictures of the formed collars by (a) standard initial hole geometry (#7) and elliptical hole
geometry by standard dimensions (#10) and standard dimensions +10% (#11) for(b) and (c) respectively.
Figure 78: Close inspection of #10 indicate initiation of local instability in the collar edge.
The formed Ø51 x 2 [mm] collars are presented in Figure 79 and the corresponding measured mini-
mum collar heights, hmin are shown in Table 13. The elliptic initial hole, with standard dimensions
67
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis - s134132
10. Collar Height Improvement
Standard hole (#6)
Elliptic Standard dim. (#10)
Elliptic dim. +10% (#11)
hmin [mm]
7
8.5
5.8
Table 12: Minimum collar heights for Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] specimen.
#20 shows a more plane collar edge than the standard geometry of test specimen #5. Additionally,
the minimum height of the formed collar is increased by 2.5 [mm]. Inspection of #20 show fracture
or indication initiated instability in the collar edge. Fracture has occurred in one collar edge of test
specimen #21 and at both collar edges of test specimen #22. The fracture limit is thus, assumed to
be within a range of 0.72 < εy,max < 1.01 for 1:1 collar drawing in Ø51 x 2[mm] 316L pipes with an
elliptic hole geometry, based on the numerical model.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 79: Pictures of the formed collars by (a) standard initial hole geometry (#5) and elliptical hole
geometry by standard dimensions (#20), standard dimensions -10% (#21) and standard dimensions -20%
(#22) for (b), (c) and (d) respectively.
Standard hole (#4)
Elliptic Standard dim. (#20)
Elliptic dim. -10% (#21)
Elliptic dim. -20% (#22)
hmin [mm]
2.5
4.5
6.3 (Fracture)
7.1 (Fracture)
Table 13: Minimum collar heights for Ø51 x 2 [mm] specimen.
10.3
Assessment
The attempt to increase the minimum collar height by an initial elliptic hole geometry is determined
to be successful and the numerical model was shown to predict quite precise force estimations. The
collar height was improved by 21.4% and 80% for Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] and Ø51 x 2 [mm] respectively,
relative to the standard initial geometry. The numerical model was able to predict the location of
fracture and the analysis has determined estimates on the level of strain leading to fracture in the
formed collar for two dimensions.
The elliptical initial shape required programming and utilization of a CNC milling machine. Com-
pared to the simple method of milling the standard geometry, the elliptic shape might be too inefﬁcient
to apply in the industry, as the standard geometry already provides high collars. If a semi-automated
machine solution performing the collar drawing method, similar to the T-Drill machine, the elliptical
shape might be appropriate to implement, if the trimming process step could be omitted. Instead of
milling, hole shearing or cutting might be an easy step to implement, rather than the need of com-
bining milling technology in a complete machine solution. The literature study however showed that
shearing would result in fracture sooner than milling, shown if Figure 14a[12].
If speciﬁcally high collars are needed in a pipe, elliptical initial holes should be utilized, but are
inefﬁcient if relatively high collars are sufﬁcient.
68
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis - s134132
11. Conclusion
11
Conclusion
The presented study investigate the collar drawing process by experimental methods and a numeri-
cal model developed in I-form. The numerical model provide estimates on maximum force required
within 3% for collar drawing in a Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] 316L pipe, compared to experimental data. Ex-
perimental measurements show that the numerical model predict accurate dimensions of the formed
collar by approximate deviations of 6% in thickness, 3% in collar height and <1% in collar diameters.
The numerical model is used to analyse the forming process and experimental measurements are used
to assess the quality of the resulting collars. The collar drawing method is compared to a specimen
from the industrial more familiar T-Drill Collaring method, and is assessed to provide higher collars,
more uniform thickness and a higher quality surface ﬁnish. The collar height is further improved
by investigating the inﬂuence of the initial hole geometry, resulting in a 80% higher collar. Collar
drawing possess competent results to be applied in the food and pharmaceutical industry and show
potential of decreasing the total cost of process plants. A literature study conﬁrmed that the collar
drawing method is not particularly familiar in the industry and that no academia was present on the
process.
By the conclusion of this thesis, the amount of scientiﬁc knowledge and academia of collar drawing is
increased and the process is assessed to be highly advantageous in process manifold manufacturing.
69
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis - s134132
12. Future studies
12
Future studies
The conclusion of the project leads to a series of relevant future studies related to the collar drawing
process. Some of the relevant studies is brieﬂy stated in the below bullet points.
• Experimental assessment on the inﬂuence of waviness in contamination of process plants.
• Development of an analytical model predicting the required force in the collar drawing process
to perform different dimensions of collars.
• Further comparison between T-drill and collar drawing process regarding the following topics:
– The inﬂuence of lubricant appliance.
– Corrosion as result of the forming process.
– Strength reduction of the uneven thickness reduction, tested by hydro-static burst test.
• Tribology and contact study of the collar drawing process by the applied collar drawing mate-
rial, AMALOY FH12.
• Investigation of alternative applicable methods to perform the initial hole in the run pipe, for
collar drawing.
• The inﬂuence of introducing ironing in the collar drawing process.
• Development of a semi-automatic collar drawing machine, similar to the T-Drill collaring
method.
70
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis - s134132
A. Video Access and QR Guide
Appendix
A
Video Access and QR Guide
The project contain video documentation of the forming processes, Collar drawing and T Drill.
The QR code is provided to enable access for hard-copy readers of the thesis by a mobile device. A
guide is provided below. The videos can be accessed by the following hyperlinks or the QR codes:
Hyperlinks
Collar Drawing video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0crT3wfVSiM&list=UUkrxJJP1jFlsD28s_yzPnMA
T Drill video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0UosSwrIPAM&list=UUkrxJJP1jFlsD28s_yzPnMA&
index=2
QR Code
The QR codes in Figure 80 link to the collar drawing process and T Drill respectively. Scan the QR
codes with your mobile device, to access the videos.
(a) Collar Drawing Process Video.
(b) T Drill Process Video.
Figure 80: QR code link to videos.
Your mobile device (tablet, phone or similar), need a camera to scan the QR code. If your device does
not have an QR scanning application one of following can be downloaded for free.
• iOS (App Store): Kaspersky QR Scanner.
• Android (Google Playstore): QR Code Reader and Scanner.
71
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
B
Test Rig Documents
B.1
Tool Part Description
Figure 81: Collar tool with Ø76,1x2 setup.
(1) Top Mount Plate, (2) Top Mount Holder, (3) Centering Ring, (4) Collar Ball, (5) Die Top, (6) Inner Die
(Not used for Ø76,1x2 setup), (7) Die Side, (8) Die Bottom, (9) Distance Ring (Not shown due to isometric
view), (10) Centering Bottom Plate, (11) Load cell.
A brief description of each part and it’s purpose is provided in the following.
Top Mount Plate (Pos. 1) The top mount plate is the interface between the punch of the press and
the part of the tool, operating the collar ball. The top plate is also positioning the collar ball to be
concentric to the ram and the rest of the press.
Top Mount Holder (Pos. 2) The top mount holder is the link connecting the ram and top mount plate
to the drawing-ball assembly. The holder is designed to easily mount the assembled drawing bolt and
ball part together with the centering ring.
Centering ring (Pos. 3) The tool has a centering for each setup dimension, ﬁtting a M16 bolt and a
M20 bolt. The centering ring ﬁts a countersunk in the top mount holder, ensuring the drawing-ball
assembly to be concentric in respect to the ram. The centering ring is placed on the bolt before at-
taching it to the collar ball and placed at the head of the bolt when attached to the rest of the dynamic
part.
Collar ball (Pos. 4) The setup consists of two collar balls, which is needed for the tool to provide two
72
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
different collar dimensions. The balls are both cut-off spheres, with an internal thread and a groove
on the plane side. The Ø76,1x2 collar ball has an internal standard M20 thread and the Ø51x2 a M16.
The collar balls are shown in Figure 82.
Figure 82: Assembled Ø51x2 setup (left) and collar balls (right).
Die Top (Pos. 5) The die top is the part sustaining the surroundings of the collar, then the ball is
drawn through the processed pipe. Thus, the die top is the top part of the static tool part. The die
top together with the Ø76,1x2 collar ball are the dominating parts, when performing 1:1 collars in a
Ø76.1 x 2 [mm] pipe. The circular hole in the middle of the die is rounded on the inside and is where
the collar ball passes through. The rest of the die supports the surrounding material of the pipe during
the process. The die top has an aiming line feature on each end, used when positioning the test pipe
in the tool.
Inner Tool (Pos. 6) The inner tool can be attached inside the die top for drawing a 1:1 collar in a
51x2 pipe. The inner tool is showed attached in Figure 82.
Die Side (Pos. 7) The main purpose of the die sides are to connect the die top to the die bottom and
the rest of the static tool.
Die Bottom (Pos. 8) The die bottom is the interface between the die and the load cell. These are
mounted together by a custom M30x2 bolt as standard for the chosen load cell. The assembled die is
shown in Figure 82.
Distance Ring (Pos. 9) The distance ring is applied to lift the die from the load-cell, leaving room
for the M8 bolt heads attaching the load cell to the centering plate.
Centering Plate Bottom (Pos. 10) The centering plate is the interfacing part of the static part of the
73
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
tool to the base of the press. As the name suggests, the centering plate bottom is keeping the load cell
and the rest of the static part concentric to the ram and the dynamic part.
Press, Load Cell and standard parts. The press used in the test-rig can deliver a force of 50 [kN]
and is monitored and controlled by an ampliﬁer and a computer. The stroke of the press is measured
to be 110 [mm] from top to bottom.. The press is also equipped with a safety frame, disabling the
press from running, when opened.
The test-rig contains an electric load-cell Model 922 from Erichssen, see subsection B.6 for technical
speciﬁcations. The load-cell is able to measure both tensile and pressure forces with a high accuracy
and the force is transmitted by a M30X2 thread in the center of the cell. The capacity of the load-cell
is dimensioned to the press and can measure up to 50 [kN].
For assembly of the tool a list of bolts are used. Bolts are also used as the drawing-link of the collar-
balls. The drawing bolts can either be a regular hexagon head bolt or a hexagonal socket head screw.
Furthermore a positioning tool is designed for the test-rig. This tool is 3D-printed and has the purpose
of positioning the collar ball inside the pipe, when the drawing-bolt is screwed in.
Technical drawings for all tool parts can be found in subsection B.3
B.2
Operational Description of Test Rig
When the tool is assembled as described in the prior section, the initial preparation of the test, is
insertion of the test specimen and collar ball. For this, the following parts are needed:
Parts to use:
• 1 x Test specimen.
• 1 x Collar ball (Ø51x2 or Ø76,1x2 dependent on the setup).
• 1 x Hexagon Head Bolt (M16x120 or M20x110).
• 1 x Centering ring (Ø16 or Ø20).
• Positioning tool can be used if necessary.
Starting the setup by ensuring that the edges of the test specimen are deburred and there are no dents
by the milled hole. A technical drawing of the test specimen is detailed description of the test speci-
men, regarding manufacturing, dimensioning etc. is found in Figure 2.2.
The collar ball is inserted in the test tube and the tube is then placed concentric into the die. The
drawing bolt with the respective centering ring attached is screwed into the thread of the ball through
the hole of the die. The positioning tool can be used to keep the collar ball in position. The bolt is
screwed into the ball until the bottom of the bolt is almost coincident with the plane part of the ball.
The bottom of the top mount holder is moved to approximately1 50 [mm] above the top of the die top.
The assembled drawing-bolt-ball part is then placed easily with the centering ring into the countersink
of the top mount holder.
1Approximately equivalent to the position showed on the computer as Motor encoder: 10.000µm
74
==PAGE:85==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
Figure 83: Guide to inserting test specimen with collar ball and attachment to top part of the tool.
Ensure that all parts including the testspecimen is placed correctly in the setup. As a guideline, the
setup is assembled correctly if the end of the test specimen is aligned with the end of the die and a line
can be drawn from the center of the punch, through the bolt and collar ball assembly, to the center of
the die top hole and centering plate bottom.
75
==PAGE:86==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
B.3
Technical Drawings of Collar Tool
76
==PAGE:87==
 35 
 10 
 40 
 60 
D
D
 R10,50 
 R30 
 21 
 17 
 47 
 47,50 
 10 
 35 
 31 
 R17,50 
4 x M8x25 THREAD
 8 
SECTION D-D
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
TOP MOUNT HOLDER
CONSTRUCTION
STEEL
B
1:1
QTY.:
1
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
77
==PAGE:88==
 
20,20 
 
34,50 
D
D
 4 
SECTION D-D
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CONSTRUCTION
STEEL
CENTERING RING
M20
2:1
QTY.:
1
C
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
78
==PAGE:89==
 
16,20 
 
34,50 
D
D
 4 
SECTION D-D
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CONSTRUCTION
STEEL
CENTERING RING 
M16
2:1
QTY.:
1
D
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
79
==PAGE:90==
 
71,80 
D
D
M20 THREAD THRU ALL
Ra  <0,1
 45 
 6 
 3 
SPHERICAL(BALL)-DIAMETER Ø71,8
 22 
 4 
SECTION D-D
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
AMALOY FH12
COLLAR BALL Ø76,1x2
1:1
QTY.:
1
E
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
80
==PAGE:91==
 
46,70 
F
F
M16 THREAD ALL THRU
Ra  <0,1
 30 
 6 
 3 
SPHERICAL(BALL)-DIAMETER Ø46,7
SECTION F-F
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
AMALOY FH12
COLLAR BALL Ø51x2
2:1
QTY.:
1
F
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
81
==PAGE:92==
 R56 
 R38,10 
CENTERING  MARK
FRONT +BACK
 
76,50 
 
13,20 
 30 
 90 
 150 
 210 
 97 
D
D
10 x Ø9
SECTION D-D
SCALE 1 : 3
R5
R5
 240 
 50 
G
G
 
9 
 
9 
 
9 
 9 
SECTION G-G
SCALE 2 : 3
R2
R2
2 x COUNTERSINKS FOR
COUNTERSUNK M8 
FLAT HEAD SCREWS
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
STAINLESS STEEL
(AISI 304L HOLLOW  BAR)
DIE TOP Ø76,1 x 2
1:3
QTY.:
2
G
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
82
==PAGE:93==
 R25,60 
 R38 
R2
R2
CENTERING MARK
FRONT + BACK
 32,10 
 240 
 
51,50 
2 x M8 THREAD THRU ALL
 30 
 210 
D
D
SECTION D-D
SCALE 1 : 3
R2
R2
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
STAINLESS STEEL
(AISI 304L HOLLOW BAR)
INNER TOOL Ø51 x 2
(IN Ø71,6 x 2 TOOL)
1:3
QTY.:
2
H
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
83
==PAGE:94==
 25 
 25 
7 x M8x20 THREAD
 94 
 15 
 60 
 120 
 180 
 30 
 90 
 150 
 210 
 240 
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CONSTRUCTION 
STEEL
DIE SIDE
1:2
2
I
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
QTY.:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
84
==PAGE:95==
 97 
 60 
 120 
 180 
 240 
 
32 
 
75 
 
8,4 
 112 
6 x Ø8,4 
THRU ALL HOLES
 15 
F
F
6 x COUNTERSINKS
FOR M8 COUNTERSUNK 
FLAT HEAD SCREW
 8 
SECTION F-F
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CONSTRUCTION 
STEEL
DIE BOTTOM
1:2
1
J
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
QTY.:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
85
==PAGE:96==
 
32 
 
70 
E
E
 12 
SECTION E-E
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CONSTRUCTION
STEEL
DISTANCE RING
1:1
1
K
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
QTY.:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
86
==PAGE:97==
 
130 
 
200 
 
110 
 
160 
F
F
4 x Ø11 THRU ALL HOLES
8 x M10 THREAD THRU ALL
 10 
G
SECTION F-F
 2 
 1 
 45° 
DETAIL G
SCALE 2 : 1
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CONSTRUCTION 
STEEL
CENTERING PLATE BOTTOM 50kN
1:2
QTY.:
1
L
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
87
==PAGE:98==
 45 
 35 
 46 
M30x2 THREAD
 53,12 
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
+45 2715 0222
CUSTOM M30x2 
HEX BOLT
STAINLESS STEEL
2:1
N/A
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
88
==PAGE:99==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
B.4
Technical Drawings of Collar Specimen
89
==PAGE:100==
 240 
 24 
 R8 
 R8 
 
51 
 2 
*
* HOLE  MILLED OR HOLED.
   VERY IMPORTANT! 
   EDGES ARE TO BE THROROUGHLY DEBURRED. 
   NO DENTS OR BURRS CAN BE PRESENT.
STANDARD 51x2 SPECIMEN 
FOR COLLAR DRAWING
TEST RIG 
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
N/A
N/A
1:2
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
90
==PAGE:101==
 240 
 R10 
 R10 
 40 
 
76,10 
 2 
*
* HOLE  MILLED OR HOLED.
   VERY IMPORTANT! 
   EDGES ARE TO BE THROROUGHLY DEBURRED. 
   NO DENTS OR BURRS CAN BE PRESENT.
STANDARD 76,1x2 SPECIMEN 
FOR COLLAR DRAWING
TEST RIG 
TOBIAS V. BRAMMINGE
N/A
N/A
1:2
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
TOLERANCES: +/- 0.2
DEBURR AND BREAK SHARP EDGES
MATERIAL:
TITLE:
POS. NO.:
A3
DRAWN BY:
SCALE:
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
91
==PAGE:102==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
B.5
Test Rig Material Certiﬁcates
92
==PAGE:103==
AMALOY FH12
AMALOY FH12 er ideelt materiale for dybtræksværktøjer. F. eks. dorne, trækringe,
tilholderring for dybtræk i rustfast stål. Materialet er umagnetisk, ridser ikke,
tillader snævre radier, længere træk/operation samt træk uden folie.
Friktionskoefficient mod stål er typisk 0,08.
Betegnelser
Cu
Fe
Mn
Al
Ni
Nominel (Wt.%)
Rest
6,0
1,25
11,75
2,25
Værdier
Strækgrænse
Rp 0,2
(N/mm2)
Brudgrænse
Rm
(N/mm2)
Forlængelse
A5
(%)
Hårdhed
(HV)
Ekstruderet
600-700
950-1050
2-6
300-330
Fysiske egenskaber:
E-modul
125,000
N/mm2
Vægtfylde
7,500
kg/dm3
Smeltepunkt
1050-1070
oC
Længde udvidelses koefficient
17 x 10-6
pr. oC
Varme ledningsevne
46
W / m. K
Elektrisk ledningsevne
4
% IACS
Elektrisk modstand
0.43
µ Ωm
Relativ magnetisk ledeevne
>2
Bearbejdnings index:
40
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
93
==PAGE:104==
Remarks:
A countersign was give up with script of TUV BAYERN SACHSEN dated 01/02/1994. he issuing of 3.1 certificates
ACCORDING TO TUV AD2000-MERKBLATT W0/TRD100; DIRECTIVE 2014/68/EU (PED) ; CHEMICAL COMPOSITION TO EN10088;
TUBES TO EN 10217-7 TC2; WELD FACTOR V=1.
happens in compliance to AD 2000 Merkblatt W2 paragraph 6.2.1 in accordance to TUV SUDDEUTSCHLAND.
Pages
Type
Inspection Certificate 3.1 EN 10204
Number
10518186907
Issued On
21/03/2018
Quality Control
Q.M.D./Q.M. S.Toscano
Plant Of Forlì
Delivery Nn
8305806498
Of
21/03/2018
Delivery note nr
2505001255
Customer
MARCEGAGLIA SPECIALTIES RAPP.F
FAELLEDVEJ 1
5000 ODENSE DK
Consignee
Rappr.Fisc.c/o Dacapo Stainles
Neptunvej 1
8600 Hårup-Silkeborg DK
WELDING PROCESS QUALIFICATION: ALL THE LASER WELDING PROCESS ARE QUALIFIED ACCORDING EUROPEAN PRESSURE EQUIPMENT DIRECTIVE PED 97/23/EC BY THE
NOTIFIED BODY N.1233 EUROPED WITH WELDING PROCEDURE QUALIFICATION WPQR N° PM0907A001 Registration no. 10M203 AND WPQR N° PM907A002 Registration no. 11M017.
STILL VALID UNDER PED 2014/68/EU PER ARTICLE 48 CLAUSE 3.
NON DESTRUCTIVE TESTS
EDDY CURRENT TEST FOR THE VERIFICATION OF HYDRAULIC LEAKTIGHTNESS ACCORDING TO EN ISO 10893-1:2011: CONFORM
EDDY CURRENT TEST FOR THE DETECTION OF IMPERFECTIONS ACCORDING TO EN ISO 10893-2:2011: CONFORM
ANTIMIXING TEST: CONFORM
VISUAL INSPECTION AND DIMENSIONAL CONTROLS: CONFORM
DESTRUCTIVE TESTS
DRIFT EXPANDING TEST ACCORDING TO EN ISO 8493:2005: CONFORM
FLATTENING TEST ACCORDING TO EN ISO 8492:2004: CONFORM
RING EXPANDING TEST ACCORDING TO EN ISO 8495:2004:  CONFORM
TENSILE TEST ACCORDING TO EN ISO 6892-1:2009
INTERGRANULAR CORROSION TEST ACCORDING TO EN ISO 3651-2:1998: CONFORM
MARCEGAGLIA SPECIALTIES FORLIMPOPOLI  PLANT SYSTEM CERTIFICATIONS QUALITY SYSTEM CERTIFIED ACCORDING TO EN 9001:2008 AND ISO\TS 16949:009 AND
ISO 3834-2:2005 AND A SAFETY SYSTEM CERTIFIED ACCORDING TO OHASAS 18001:2007 AND AN ENVIROMENTAL SYSTEM CERTIFIED ACCORDING TO ISO 14001:2004.
MARCEGAGLIA SPECIALTIES FORLIMPOPOLI  PRODUCT CERTIFICATIONS DVGW ACCORDING TO GW541 LASER AND TIG WELDED TUBES STAINLESS STEEL GRADE
1.4404 DIA FROM 15.00 TO 108.00MM AND GRADE 1.4521 FROM 15.00 TO 54.00MM.
TUV AD2000 W2\W10 AND PED ANNEX I, PARAGRAPH 4.3 LASER AND TIG WELDED TUBES STAINLESS STEEL GRADE 1.4301, 1.4306, 1.4307, 1.4401, 1.4404, 1.4541, 1.4571,
1.4435, 1.4436 THICKNESS FROM 0.80 TO 4.00MM AND DIAMETRS FROM 8.00 TO 283.00 MM. EHEDG FOR DAIRY TUBES TXT015. TIFQ - EUROPEAN DIRECTIVE 1935:2004
FOR DAIRY TUBES TXT003, TXT014, TXT015.
Marcegaglia
46040 via Bresciani 16-Gazoldo degli Ippoliti Mantova-Italy
Tel. +39 - 0376 685 1 Fax. +39 - 0376 685 600
www.marcegaglia.com
Stabilimento di Forlì:
via E.Mattei,20 47034 Forlimpopoli, Forlì-Cesena
tel+39.0543470111 fax+39.0543470105
THIS DOCUMENT WAS PRODUCED AUTOMATICALLY
AND IS VALID WITHOUT SIGNATURE
WE CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE MENTIONED
PRODUCTS COMPLAY WITH THE TERMS OF
ORDER CONTRACT AND THE STANDARDS
RECALLED IN THE PRESENT TEST
CERTIFICATE
Material
59005027
Description
TXT011 76,1x2x6000 TP316L LAS R
Order Nr
1581852026/80
Part Number
Client Order
39006650
Client Date
21/03/2018
Reworks
Test specification: AD2000-W2\W10 EN10217-7 TC2
Stainless steel grade: TP 316L 1.4404 X2CrNiMo17-12-2
Tolerances: ISO 1127 D3-T3
Delivery conditions
Marking
Welding process
LASER WELDING
Code: 0000082082
Item
Identification Nr
Heat
Quantity MTL
Quantity KG
Quantity PZZ
1
17RA004143
0450819
114
388
19
C
Si
Mn
P
S
N
Cr
Mo
Ni
Identification Nr
Chemical Type
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
16.5
2
10
0.03
1
2
0.045
0.015
0.11
18.5
2.5
13
17RA004143
RAW MATERIAL
.021
.320
1.060
.0310
.0010
.0430
16.790
2.0200
10.060
Rp 0.2
Rp 1.0
Rm
A5
Identification Nr
Type of mechanical test
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
(%)
190
225
490
40
690
17RA004143
TUBE
315
345
593
51.8
17RA004143
TUBE
315
344
591
53.3
18/18
C00002886DK
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
94
==PAGE:105==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
95
==PAGE:106==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
B.6
Load Cell Speciﬁcation (50 kN TBE-922)
96
==PAGE:107==
ERICHSEN GmbH & Co. KG
Am Iserbach 14  | 58675 Hemer  | Germany  | Tel. +49(0)2372-9683-0 | Fax +49(0)2372-6430 | www.erichsen.de  | info@erichsen.de
General
Electric load cells made by ERICHSEN reflect state of
the art sensor technology. At the same time they are
easy to use and capable of meeting a wide range of
customer requirements. The measuring procedure is
based on the elongation of high quality foil strain gauges.
Application
These force measuring devices are suitable for univer-
sal applications, namely wherever tensile and pressure
forces need to be measured with a high degree of
accuracy, e.g. in materials testing (Erichsen Tensile
Testing Machines UNIMAT® and UNIMAT® + UNICON-
TROL®), in reference measuring equipment and in
research and development. For industrial purposes
too, these force transducers are ideal in the fields of
automation, controlling press-in processes and in join-
ting technology.
An extensive accessories program is available. A
connection to the Measuring and Display Instruments
975 AP, 980 AP and PHYSIMETER 906 MC is also
possible by means of an adapter plug.
Technical Data 
Parameter:
2 mV/V
Accuracy acc. to  ISO 376 and
EN 10002-3:
Class 1
Reference temperature:
21 °C
Nominal temperature range:
-10/+50 °C
Storage temperature range:
-50/+80 °C
Bridge resistance:
700 Ω
Insulating resistance:
> 5 G Ω
Nominal range of 
supply voltage:
5 - 10 V
Breaking load related to nominal force:
> 200 %
Max. allowable dynamic load
(oscillation amplitude according to
DIN 50100) related to nominal force:              < 70 %
Protection class:
IP 67
Sensor material:
Special steel
Terminal connecting plan
Load Cells 922
Subject to technical modification.
TBE 922 - XI/2003
A
100
127
165
230
B
86
110 
138
185
C
35
35 
50
80
D
72
92 
108
147
E
32
47 
62
96
F
M20x1.5
M30x2
M42x3
M60x3
n x J
6xØ9
8xØ10,5
12xØ17
12xØ25
H
124
152 
190
254
K
7,5
7,5 
15
30
fn
kHz
2.3
2.3
4.8
3.8
5.8
5.7
7.3
9.8
18.2
Nominal
Force 
5 kN
10 kN
25 kN
50 kN
100 kN
200 kN
300 kN
500 kN
1000 kN
Dimensions in mm
Order Information
Order No.
0589.01.32
0589.02.32 
0589.10.32 
0589.04.32 
0589.05.32 
0589.06.32 
0589.07.32 
0589.08.32 
0589.09.32 
Product Description
Electric Load Cells 922
to measure tensile and pressure forces,
open cable ends, cable length
approx. 5m
922 -
5 kN
922 -
10 kN
922 -
25 kN
922 -
50 kN
922 -
100 kN
922 -
200 kN
922 -
300 kN
922 -
500 kN
922 - 1000 kN
rot
red
weiß
white
gelb
yellow
schwarz
black
blank
blanc
E+
A+
A-
E-
R1 R4
R2 R3
==PAGE:108==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
B.7
Calibration Procedure and Equipment Certiﬁcate
Load Cell Calibration
The following section describes the applied method of calibrating the measuring units of the test rig.
The goal of the calibration is to ﬁnd a gain value, resulting in a sufﬁciently low residual between
the tabulated data and the output from the load cell. The calibration equipment is provided by the
Technical University of Denmark. The calibration method is executed and tested with the tools and
load cell in compression. Thus the calibration results are based on the assumption that the equipment
yield the same results in tension and compression.
The load cell is calibrated by a mechanical force measurement dynamometric bridle with a analog
1/1000 dial gauge attached (Danish: Kraftmålebøjle med udveksling og mekanisk mikrometerur).
The according certiﬁcate is found in subsection B.7. A picture of load cell calibration setup is shown
in Figure 84.
Figure 84: Load cell calibration setup.
The calibration setup can simply and precisely be adjusted with respect to displacement, using the
1/1000 dial gauge. Therefore the data from the calibration certiﬁcate is used to predict easier mea-
surable dimensions. The tabulated data from the certiﬁcate is described in integers of the non stan-
dard unit Megapond, [Mp] to a corresponding displacement in decimal ﬁgures in millimeters, [mm].
Megapond, [Mp], or ton-force unit is a gravitational metric unit of force. The tabulated data is as-
sumed to be a linear relation, which is deemed valid from the plot in Figure 85. The ton-force as a
function of displacement is determined by linear regression of the data sets, to obtain load forces to
corresponding simple displacements.
Using the regression relation, the gravitational force corresponding to simple displacement values is
98
==PAGE:109==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
Figure 85: Linear regression relation of tabulated data from calibration certiﬁcate (subsection B.7.
found. The obtained linear model is:
Fg = 1.8605xd −3.7226
(B.1)
The test rig provides a load-output in kilogram [kg] implying that the tabulated force data should be
converted. 1 Megapond [Mp] is the equal to 1000 kilogram-force [kgf] and is the force exerted by
1 metric ton of mass in a standard gravitational ﬁeld. Using the gravitational acceleration, g = 9.81
[m/s2], the units can be converted as shown below.
1 [Mp] = 1000 [kgf] = 1000 [kg] · g = 1000 [kg] · g
g
= 1000 [kg]
(B.2)
In Table 14 calculated data is compared with the output data from the test rig, with a Gain = 667 and
a offset = -25 [mV].
Test Rig Data, Gain = 667 and Offset = -25 [mV]
Displacement [mm]
Output [mV]
Output Load [kg]
Est. Load [kg]
Residual [%]
2.5
1448
949
928,7
1.5
3
2851
1885
1858.3
1.8
3.5
4242
2812
2788.2
0.9
4
5634
3740
3718.1
1.1
4.5
7060
4692
4648.1
1.1
Table 14: Test rig data before calibration with a Gain = 667 and a offset = -25 [mV].
To acquire a better approximation of the gain with respect to the calibration equipment, the linear
regression is used to ﬁnd the relation between the measured output in [mV] and the estimated load
in [kg]. The slope of the linear relation determine a gain value that should result in lower residuals
compared to the calibration table. The new gain should be 660 and the calibrated data is shown in
Table 15.
99
==PAGE:110==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
Test Rig Data, Gain = 660 and Offset = -25 [mV]
Displacement [mm]
Output [mV]
Output Load [kg]
Est. Load [kg]
Residual [%]
2.5
1441
935
928,7
0.7
3
2830
1852
1858.3
0.3
3.5
4242
2786
2788.2
0.08
4
5635
3700
3718.1
0.5
4.5
7051
4640
4648.1
0.2
Table 15: Test rig data after calibration with a Gain = 660 and a offset = -25 [mV].
Thus the output from the load cell is calibrated to a tolerance of below 1% relative to the calibration
equipment. Speciﬁcations of the load cell can be found in the subsection B.6.
Displacement Veriﬁcation
The displacement of the piston s measured by an internal motor encoder, through the DAQ system.
The displacement measurements are tested at both small and at large distance.
The small distance is tested by a 1/1000 dial gauge and the large scale is tested by a 1/10 height gauge.
(a) 1/1000 dial gauge.
(b) Height gauge.
Figure 86: Displacement veriﬁcation setup for small and large distance.
The dial gauge is placed in contact with the piston and the test rig is set to home position (Motor
encoder = 0) and is then moved exactly 1 mm according to the dial gauge and compared to the motor
encoder value incrementally. The large distance is veriﬁed by positioning the piston in a known
height, moving the motor 50 mm and measuring the new height with the height gauge. The obtained
measurements and residuals are presented in Table 16.
100
==PAGE:111==
Master Thesis - s134132
B. Test Rig Documents
Small Distance Test (1 [mm] step)
Large Distance Test (50 [mm] step)
Dial Gauge
[µm]
Motor encoder
[µm]
Residual
[%]
Height gauge
[[mm]]
Motor encoder
[µm]
Residual
[%]
0
0
-
225 (0)
0
-
1
1023
-0.02
175 (50)
50000
-
2
2027
-0.01
3
3033
-0.01
4
4036
-0.01
Table 16: Displacement veriﬁcation of motor encoder at small and large distance.
101
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
==PAGE:116==
Master Thesis - s134132
C. Literature Study
C
Literature Study
Figure 87: Correctional factor, c, used to determine collar height in Equation 4.2 from [14].
C.1
Commercial Article from 1983
106
==PAGE:117==
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
Master Thesis - s134132
D. I-form
D
I-form
D.1
ANSYS to I-form (GiD) format
The following MATLAB-scripts are used to convert an ANSYS generated mesh to a I-form compati-
ble (GiD) mesh. The ﬁrst script is for workpiece mesh and the second in for tool mesh.
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%ANSYS TO IFORM ( GiD ) FORMAT 8 Node Hexahedrals −Workpiece Models
%Master
Thesis ,
C o l l a r
Drawing
%Tobias V.
Bramminge s134132
clc ,
c l e a r
a l l ,
c l o s e
a l l ;
%Loading ANSYS data
f i d = fopen ( 'FEM_MESH. txt ' )
; %OPEN ANSYS EXPORTED FILE
S = t e x t s c a n ( fid , '% s ' , ' d e l i m i t e r ' , ' \ n ' )
;
f c l o s e ( f i d )
;
S=S{1}
;
% Model
o f f s e t
D = 7 6 . 1 ;
%SPECIMEN RUN PIPE DIAMETER [mm]
OFFSET = 200−(D/ 2 ) ;
%OFFSET & CORRECTION OF IMPORT ERROR.
% Determining # nodes
and
elements
N_line = S {6};
N_cell = regexp ( N_line
, ' \ d * ' , ' Match ' , ' once ' ) ;
Nodes = s t r 2 d o u b l e ( N_cell ) ;
Nstr =
' Number of Nodes
in Mesh :
' ;
Nmsg = [ Nstr ,
N_cell ]
E_line = S {7};
E_ cell = regexp ( E_line
, ' \ d * ' , ' Match ' , ' once ' ) ;
Elements= s t r 2 d o u b l e ( E_cell ) ;
E s t r =
' Number of
Elements
in Mesh :
' ;
Emsg = [ Estr ,
E_cell ]
% D e l e t i n g ANSYS g e n e r a t e d
t e x t%S p l i t t i n g
S t r i n g
i n t o
Nodes and
Elements
S ( 1 : 1 0 , : )
=
[ ] ;
% S p l i t t i n g
S t r i n g
i n t o
Nodes and
Elements
SN = S ( 1 : Nodes , : )
SE = S ( Nodes +4: Nodes+3+ Elements , : )
% D e l e t i n g
redundant
data
out_N = c e ll 2 ma t ( c e l l f u n ( @str2num , s t r r e p (SN , ' , ' , '
' ) , ' un ' , 0 ) ) ;
109
==PAGE:120==
Master Thesis - s134132
D. I-form
out_N ( : , 2 : 3 )
=
[ ] ;
out_N ( : , 4 )
= out_N (: ,4) −OFFSET ;
out_E = c el l 2m a t ( c e l l f u n ( @str2num , s t r r e p (SE , ' , ' , '
' ) , ' un ' , 0 ) ) ;
out_E ( : , 1 : 1 0 )
=
[ ] ;
% C r e a t i n g GiD format
Header =
'MESH dimension 3 ElemType Hexahedra Nnode 8\ n ' ;
N s t a r t =
' Coordinates \ n ' ;
Nend =
' End Coordinates \ n ' ;
Space =
'
\ n ' ;
E s t a r t =
' Elements \ n
' ;
Eend =
' End Elements ' ;
% P r i n t
to
. msh
f i d 2 = fopen ( '9000 fem3 . hex . msh ' , ' a ' ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Header ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , N s t a r t ) ;
f o r
i i
= 1: s i z e ( out_N , 1 )
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , '% g \ t ' , out_N ( i i , : ) ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , ' \ n ' ) ;
end
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Nend ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Space ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , E s t a r t ) ;
f o r
i i i
= 1: s i z e ( out_E , 1 )
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , '% g \ t ' , out_E ( i i i , : ) ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , ' \ n ' ) ;
end
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Eend ) ;
f c l o s e ( f i d 2 ) ;
% End of
s c r i p t
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
110
==PAGE:121==
Master Thesis - s134132
D. I-form
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%ANSYS TO IFORM ( GiD ) FORMAT 3 Node
T r i a n g l e s −Tool Models
%Master
Thesis −C o l l a r
Drawing
%Tobias V.
Bramminge s134132
clc ,
c l e a r
a l l ,
c l o s e
a l l ;
% Loading ANSYS data
f i d = fopen ( 'ANSYS_MESH_BALL. txt ' ) ; %OPEN ANSYS EXPORTED FILE
S = t e x t s c a n ( fid , '% s ' , ' d e l i m i t e r ' , ' \ n ' )
;
f c l o s e ( f i d )
;
S=S{1}
;
% Model
o f f s e t
D = 7 6 . 1 ;
%SPECIMEN RUN PIPE DIAMETER [mm]
OFFSET = 200−(D/ 2 ) ;
%OFFSET & CORRECTION OF IMPORT ERROR.
% Determining # nodes
and
elements
N_line = S {6};
N_cell = regexp ( N_line
, ' \ d * ' , ' Match ' , ' once ' ) ;
Nodes = s t r 2 d o u b l e ( N_cell ) ;
Nstr =
' Number of Nodes
in Mesh :
' ;
Nmsg = [ Nstr ,
N_cell ]
E_line = S {7};
E_ cell = regexp ( E_line
, ' \ d * ' , ' Match ' , ' once ' ) ;
Elements= s t r 2 d o u b l e ( E_cell ) ;
E s t r =
' Number of
Elements
in Mesh :
' ;
Emsg = [ Estr ,
E_cell ]
% D e l e t i n g ANSYS g e n e r a t e d
t e x t%S p l i t t i n g
S t r i n g
i n t o
Nodes and
Elements
S ( 1 : 1 0 , : )
=
[ ] ;
% S p l i t t i n g
S t r i n g
i n t o
Nodes and
Elements
SN = S ( 1 : Nodes , : )
SE = S ( Nodes +4: Nodes+3+ Elements , : )
%D e l e t i n g
redundant
data
out_N = c e ll 2 ma t ( c e l l f u n ( @str2num , s t r r e p (SN , ' , ' , '
' ) , ' un ' , 0 ) ) ;
out_N ( : , 2 : 3 )
=
[ ] ;
out_N ( : , 4 )
= out_N (: ,4) −OFFSET ;
out_E = c el l 2m a t ( c e l l f u n ( @str2num , s t r r e p (SE , ' , ' , '
' ) , ' un ' , 0 ) ) ;
out_E ( : , 1 : 1 0 )
=
[ ] ;
% C r e a t i n g GiD format
111
==PAGE:122==
Master Thesis - s134132
D. I-form
Header =
'MESH dimension 3 ElemType
T r i a n g l e
Nnode 3\ n ' ;
N s t a r t =
' Coordinates \ n ' ;
Nend =
' End Coordinates \ n ' ;
Space =
'
\ n ' ;
E s t a r t =
' Elements \ n
' ;
Eend =
' End Elements ' ;
% P r i n t
to
. msh
f i d 2 = fopen ( ' die31 . t r i . msh ' , ' a ' ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Header ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , N s t a r t ) ;
f o r
i i
= 1: s i z e ( out_N , 1 )
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , '% g \ t ' , out_N ( i i , : ) ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , ' \ n ' ) ;
end
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Nend ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Space ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , E s t a r t ) ;
f o r
i i i
= 1: s i z e ( out_E , 1 )
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , '% g \ t ' , out_E ( i i i , : ) ) ;
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , ' \ n ' ) ;
end
f p r i n t f ( fid2 , Eend ) ;
f c l o s e ( f i d 2 ) ;
% End of
s c r i p t
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
112
==PAGE:123==
Master Thesis - s134132
D. I-form
D.2
Modelling with I-form and ANSYS mesh generation
The mesh for tools and workpieces throughout the project is created in the commercial FEM program
ANSYS (ANSYS 2019 APDL R2). The APDL scripting method facilitate generation and modiﬁ-
cation of model geometry and initial mesh generation. The hexahedral element mesh is generated
using the ANSYS element, SOLID185 and the triangular surface mesh uses the MESH200 element.
SOLID185 is an 8-node element used for structural 3D modelling and have three DOF at each node
with translation in the nodal x, y, and z directions. MESH200 is a special mesh-only element from
ANSYS, that provide nothing but mesh entities to the solution. The element can be used for several
operations, but in this project it is used for meshing of relevant areas by a 3-node triangular element.
The ANSYS elements are only used for mesh creation and determination of positioning of nodes and
elements and will not be treated further in the report.
When the desired geometry and mesh is created, the geomtery in terms of nodes and elements is
exported to an text-ﬁle using the ANSYS-command CDWRITE. The geometry is based on a list
of the nodes with their respective coordinates and elements with their nodal compilation. For the
hexahedral workpiece mesh, a speciﬁc sequence of the node numbering is required in I-form. The
node orientation is sketched in Figure 16a and the numbers refer to the required local node number
sequence for each hexahedral element.
I-form can import a structured mesh by STL or GiD format. Thus, the geometry text ﬁle from AN-
SYS is modiﬁed to a GiD format, that can be imported to I-form. The modiﬁcation is executed by
a code written in MATLAB. The code is provided in subsection D.1. I-form performs both pre-
processing and post-processing of the ﬁnite element model and analysis. By pre-processing in I-form
the user imports the workpiece and tool mesh including e.g. mesh reﬁnement. All models developed
are designed in 3D, but symmetry is utilized whenever found applicable. Symmetry is deﬁned by
geometrical constraining by specifying the planes of symmetry when importing the model mesh.
After the import further modelling parameters are chosen as simulation controls, material data, yield
criterion, contact simulation controls, mechanical and frictional data. The modelling parameters are
set by using the graphical user interface, GUI, making the indication of model parameters and simu-
lation settings very easy.
113
==PAGE:124==
Master Thesis - s134132
E. Collar drawing in Plane Workpiece
E
Collar drawing in Plane Workpiece
(a)
(b)
Figure 88: Instantaneous force increase at step 133 in numerical plane collar drawing model.
Figure 89: Effective stress at step 132 in numerical plane collar drawing model.
114
==PAGE:125==
Master Thesis - s134132
E. Collar drawing in Plane Workpiece
Figure 90: Effective stress at step 133 in numerical plane collar drawing model.
Figure 91: Effective stress at ﬁnal step in numerical plane collar drawing model.
Figure 92: Plot of strains in the Y-direction at ﬁnal step in numerical plane collar drawing model.
115
==PAGE:126==
Master Thesis - s134132
F. Material Characterization
F
Material Characterization
F.1
Extensometer Test Certiﬁcate
F.2
Uniaxial Tensile Test Results
116
==PAGE:127==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Figure 93: Force displacement of uniaxial tensile tests.
G
Collar Drawing
G.1
Overview of Test Specimen
117
==PAGE:128==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Material Test No.
Useful Data
[Yes/No]
Width Measurements [mm]
Thickness measurement
[mm]
Comment
w1
w2
w3
t0
#1
No
-
-
-
-
Slip of specimen and no initial measurements was done.
#2
Yes
20.16
19.93
19.67
1.92
#3
Yes
18.63
18.96
19.25
1.82
#4
No
21.19
21.14
20.80
1.84
Fracture outside extensometer length.
#5
Yes
19.04
19.14
19.20
1.91
#6
Yes
19.96
20.11
20.30
1.96
#7
No
20.29
19.79
19.17
1.85
Fracture outside extensometer length.
#8
No
18.33
18.85
19.13
1.84
Fracture outside extensometer length.
#9
Yes
20.33
20.57
20.93
1.93
Table 17: Summary of uniaxial tensile tests.
118
==PAGE:129==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Ref.
Run Pipe Dim.
Nominal [mm]
Pipe
Material
Process
Jog speed
[mm/s]
Tested Material
[Yes/No]
Comment
#1
Ø51 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe*
Collar Drawing
0.5
No
First run on test rig.
#2
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L (Unspeciﬁed)
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Test interrupted - Punch displacement limit reached.
Test completed on 2 steps.
#3
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
T-Drill
N/A
Yes
Comparable specimen manufactured by T-Drill T-110.
#3a
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L (Unspeciﬁed)
T-Drill
N/A
No
Specimen with T-drill initial hole.
#3b
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L (Unspeciﬁed)
T-Drill
N/A
No
Specimen with T-drill collar incl. planing.
#4
Ø51 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe*
T-Drill
N/A
No
Comparable specimen manufactured by T-Drill T-110.
#5
Ø51 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe*
Collar Drawing
2.5
No
Jog speed increased.
#6
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Data used for numerical model comparison.
#7
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Data used for numerical model comparison.
#8
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L - Super Diary Pipe
Collar Drawing
0.5
No
Material with a very low surface roughness.
#10
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Improved initial hole (Elliptic w. Standard dimensions)
#11
Ø76.1 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Improved initial hole (Elliptic 10% increase).
#20
Ø51 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Improved initial hole (Elliptic w. Standard dimensions).
#21
51 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Improved initial hole (Elliptic 10% decrease).
#22
51 x 2 mm
316L - Diary Pipe**
Collar Drawing
0.5
Yes
Improved initial hole (Elliptic 20% decrease).
Table 18: 1:1 test specimen obtained during the project.
** Material with certiﬁcate provided in subsection B.5.
119
==PAGE:130==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
G.2
Measurement Protocols
ZEISS CALYPSO measurement protocols are provided on the following pages in the order:
• Test specimen #6 (Collar Drawing - Tested Material).
• Test specimen #7 (Collar Drawing - Tested Material).
• Test specimen #8 (Collar Drawing - Super Diary).
• Test specimen #3 (T-Drill - Tested Material).
For more information of the specimen, see subsection G.1.
120
==PAGE:131==
ZEISS CALYPSO
6.6
68
No. measured values
31
No. values: red 
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Drawing number
Master
Department
Operator
212015
CMM No.
Text
Order number
Variant
Company
PRISMO_USS2
CMM Type
All Characteristics
Run
12/2/2019 6:04 PM
Time/Date
24
Part ident
Last 1 measurements
► Approval ≠ Blocked
00:10:58.0
Measurement Duration
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
Diameter Cylinder  Dir -X
72.1000
71.6505
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.4495
Diameter_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
0.4653
0.1145
-0.2069
0.2584
76.1000
76.4068
-0.5710
0.5710
0.3068
Diameter_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
0.2625
0.0543
-0.0894
0.1731
72.1000
72.2365
-0.5410
0.5410
0.1365
Diameter_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
0.6782
0.1592
-0.3561
0.3221
76.1000
76.1749
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0749
Diameter_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
0.2611
0.0580
-0.1484
0.1128
72.1000
72.4687
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3687
Diameter_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.4170
0.1039
-0.1940
0.2230
76.1000
76.1485
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0485
Diameter_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.3391
0.0971
-0.1812
0.1579
72.1000
72.4795
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3795
Diameter_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.6515
0.1851
-0.3289
0.3226
76.1000
76.1299
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0299
Diameter_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.5936
0.1744
-0.3066
0.2870
Diameter Cylinder Dir +X
72.1000
72.0814
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.0186
Diameter_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
0.7900
0.2359
-0.3941
0.3959
76.1000
76.4232
-0.5710
0.5710
0.3232
Diameter_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
0.3334
0.0994
-0.1994
0.1341
72.1000
72.1319
-0.5410
0.5410
0.0319
Diameter_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
0.7295
0.1997
-0.3551
0.3743
76.1000
76.2763
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1763
Diameter_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
0.3726
0.0814
-0.2029
0.1697
72.1000
72.4544
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3544
Diameter_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
0.4145
0.1018
-0.1856
0.2289
72.1000
72.4687
-0.5710
0.5710
0.3687
Diameter_O@80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.4170
0.1039
-0.1940
0.2230
72.1000
72.4685
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3685
Diameter_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.6489
0.1838
-0.3168
0.3320
76.1000
76.1022
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0022
Diameter_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.5442
0.1670
-0.2824
0.2617
Diameter Collar Dir +Z
72.1000
71.3714
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.7286
-0.1876
Diameter_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.3828
0.1403
-0.1667
0.2161
76.1000
74.5273
-0.5710
0.5710
-1.5727
-1.0017
Diameter_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
0.8453
0.1968
-0.3251
0.5202
72.1000
71.2338
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.8662
-0.3252
Diameter_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
0.4360
0.1641
-0.1774
0.2585
76.1000
74.2791
-0.5710
0.5710
-1.8209
-1.2499
Diameter_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
0.6481
0.2340
-0.3272
0.3209
72.1000
71.0931
-0.5410
0.5410
-1.0069
-0.4659
Diameter_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
0.4822
0.1736
-0.1981
0.2840
(6.6_06) StandardProtocol
Pipe Specimen #6
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
121
==PAGE:132==
Page 2 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
24
Part ident
12/2/2019 6:04 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
76.1000
74.0834
-0.5710
0.5710
-2.0166
-1.4456
Diameter_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
0.7483
0.2709
-0.3674
0.3809
Roundness Cylinder Dir -X
0.0000
0.4458
0.0000
0.5000
0.4458
Roundness_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
0.4458
0.1546
-0.2229
0.2229
0.0000
0.2499
0.0000
0.5000
0.2499
Roundness_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
0.2499
0.0760
-0.1250
0.1250
0.0000
0.5869
0.0000
0.5000
0.5869
0.0869
Roundness_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
0.5869
0.1772
-0.2935
0.2935
0.0000
0.2247
0.0000
0.5000
0.2247
Roundness_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
0.2247
0.0695
-0.1124
0.1124
0.0000
0.3779
0.0000
0.5000
0.3779
Roundness_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.3779
0.1100
-0.1890
0.1890
0.0000
0.2971
0.0000
0.5000
0.2971
Roundness_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.2971
0.1004
-0.1485
0.1485
0.0000
0.5857
0.0000
0.5000
0.5857
0.0857
Roundness_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.5857
0.1970
-0.2929
0.2929
0.0000
0.5281
0.0000
0.5000
0.5281
0.0281
Roundness_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.5281
0.1802
-0.2641
0.2641
Roundness Cylinder Dir +X
0.0000
0.7583
0.0000
0.5000
0.7583
0.2583
Roundness_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
0.7583
0.2551
-0.3791
0.3791
0.0000
0.3283
0.0000
0.5000
0.3283
Roundness_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
0.3283
0.1059
-0.1641
0.1641
0.0000
0.6734
0.0000
0.5000
0.6734
0.1734
Roundness_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
0.6734
0.2280
-0.3367
0.3367
0.0000
0.3249
0.0000
0.5000
0.3249
Roundness_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
0.3249
0.0963
-0.1625
0.1625
0.0000
0.3797
0.0000
0.5000
0.3797
Roundness_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
0.3797
0.1087
-0.1898
0.1898
0.0000
0.2851
0.0000
0.5000
0.2851
Roundness_O@80x
Circle_Outer_@80x
0.2851
0.0926
-0.1426
0.1426
0.0000
0.5806
0.0000
0.5000
0.5806
0.0806
Roundness_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.5806
0.1961
-0.2903
0.2903
0.0000
0.4982
0.0000
0.5000
0.4982
Roundness_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.4982
0.1710
-0.2491
0.2491
Roundsness Collar Dir +Z
0.0000
0.9196
0.0000
0.5000
0.9196
0.4196
Roundness_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
0.9196
0.2400
-0.4598
0.4598
0.0000
0.3752
0.0000
0.5000
0.3752
Roundness_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.3752
0.1430
-0.1876
0.1876
0.0000
0.6353
0.0000
0.5000
0.6353
0.1353
Roundness_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
0.6353
0.2352
-0.3177
0.3177
0.0000
0.4321
0.0000
0.5000
0.4321
Roundness_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
0.4321
0.1693
-0.2160
0.2160
0.0000
0.7427
0.0000
0.5000
0.7427
0.2427
Roundness_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
0.7427
0.2726
-0.3714
0.3714
0.0000
0.4855
0.0000
0.5000
0.4855
Roundness_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
0.4855
0.1786
-0.2428
0.2428
Thickness Top -X
2.0000
1.8227
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1773
Wall thickness X-110 Top
Point Inner X-110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8504
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1496
Wall thickness X-80 Top
Point Inner X-80
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
122
==PAGE:133==
Page 3 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
24
Part ident
12/2/2019 6:04 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
2.0000
1.8644
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1356
Wall thickness X-50 Top
Point Inner X-50
0.0000
2.0000
1.9635
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.0365
Wall thickness X-42 Top
Point Inner X-42
0.0000
Thickness Top +X
2.0000
1.8084
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1916
Wall thickness X+110
Point Inner X+110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8441
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1559
Wall thickness X+80
Point Inner X+80
0.0000
2.0000
1.8606
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1394
Wall thickness X+50
Point Inner X+50
0.0000
2.0000
2.0757
-0.2000
0.2000
0.0757
Wall thickness X+42
Point Inner X+42
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +X
2.0000
2.4234
-0.2000
0.2000
0.4234
0.2234
Wall thickness +Z42 +X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.5095
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4905
-0.2905
Wall thickness +Z43 +X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.4013
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.5987
-0.3987
Wall thickness +Z44 +X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -X
2.0000
2.7131
-0.2000
0.2000
0.7131
0.5131
Wall thickness +Z42 -X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.5413
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4587
-0.2587
Wall thickness +Z43 -X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.4172
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.5828
-0.3828
Wall thickness +Z44 -X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir -X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +Y
2.0000
1.5698
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4302
-0.2302
Wall thickness +Z42 +Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5692
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4308
-0.2308
Wall thickness +Z43 +Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5761
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4239
-0.2239
Wall thickness +Z44 +Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -Y
2.0000
1.5849
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4151
-0.2151
Wall thickness +Z42 -Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5899
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4101
-0.2101
Wall thickness +Z43 -Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5970
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4030
-0.2030
Wall thickness +Z44 -Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir-Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z XY
1.9997
1.5475
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4522
-0.2522
Wall thickness +Z42 +X+Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X+Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5451
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4549
-0.2549
Wall thickness +Z42 +X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5378
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4622
-0.2622
Wall thickness +Z42 -X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5611
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4389
-0.2389
Wall thickness +Z42 -X+Y2
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X+Y
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
123
==PAGE:134==
ZEISS CALYPSO
6.6
68
No. measured values
36
No. values: red 
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Drawing number
Master
Department
Operator
212015
CMM No.
Text
Order number
Variant
Company
PRISMO_USS2
CMM Type
All Characteristics
Run
12/2/2019 5:45 PM
Time/Date
23
Part ident
Last 1 measurements
► Approval ≠ Blocked
00:12:10.0
Measurement Duration
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
Diameter Cylinder  Dir -X
72.1000
71.7938
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.3062
Diameter_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
0.2816
0.0714
-0.1159
0.1657
76.1000
76.0538
-0.5710
0.5710
-0.0462
Diameter_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
0.3002
0.0663
-0.1344
0.1658
72.1000
72.3444
-0.5410
0.5410
0.2444
Diameter_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
0.5476
0.1503
-0.3043
0.2433
76.1000
76.1608
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0608
Diameter_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
0.3270
0.0953
-0.1872
0.1397
72.1000
72.4715
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3715
Diameter_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.5382
0.1768
-0.2827
0.2554
76.1000
76.1584
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0584
Diameter_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.5294
0.1689
-0.2780
0.2514
72.1000
72.4650
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3650
Diameter_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.7850
0.2684
-0.4058
0.3792
76.1000
76.1413
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0413
Diameter_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.7852
0.2612
-0.3999
0.3853
Diameter Cylinder Dir +X
72.1000
72.1335
-0.5410
0.5410
0.0335
Diameter_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
0.8520
0.1930
-0.4087
0.4433
76.1000
75.9997
-0.5710
0.5710
-0.1003
Diameter_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
0.6879
0.2076
-0.3921
0.2959
72.1000
72.1880
-0.5410
0.5410
0.0880
Diameter_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
0.7303
0.1711
-0.3764
0.3540
76.1000
76.4011
-0.5710
0.5710
0.3011
Diameter_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
0.7736
0.2171
-0.3312
0.4424
72.1000
72.4727
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3727
Diameter_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
0.5158
0.1701
-0.2710
0.2448
72.1000
72.4715
-0.5710
0.5710
0.3715
Diameter_O@80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.5382
0.1768
-0.2827
0.2554
72.1000
72.4734
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3734
Diameter_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.7346
0.2573
-0.3950
0.3396
76.1000
76.1372
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0372
Diameter_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.7249
0.2460
-0.3794
0.3455
Diameter Collar Dir +Z
72.1000
71.3789
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.7211
-0.1801
Diameter_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.3794
0.1332
-0.1533
0.2261
76.1000
74.5118
-0.5710
0.5710
-1.5882
-1.0172
Diameter_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
0.4955
0.1768
-0.2715
0.2241
72.1000
71.2436
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.8564
-0.3154
Diameter_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
0.4478
0.1570
-0.1778
0.2700
76.1000
74.2730
-0.5710
0.5710
-1.8270
-1.2560
Diameter_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
0.5868
0.2175
-0.2758
0.3110
72.1000
71.1029
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.9971
-0.4561
Diameter_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
0.4961
0.1687
-0.1980
0.2981
(6.6_06) StandardProtocol
Pipe Specimen #7
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
124
==PAGE:135==
Page 2 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
23
Part ident
12/2/2019 5:45 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
76.1000
74.0812
-0.5710
0.5710
-2.0188
-1.4478
Diameter_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
0.6810
0.2552
-0.3118
0.3692
Roundness Cylinder Dir -X
0.0000
0.2927
0.0000
0.5000
0.2927
Roundness_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
0.2927
0.0873
-0.1463
0.1463
0.0000
0.2863
0.0000
0.5000
0.2863
Roundness_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
0.2863
0.0873
-0.1432
0.1432
0.0000
0.5314
0.0000
0.5000
0.5314
0.0314
Roundness_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
0.5314
0.1524
-0.2657
0.2657
0.0000
0.3016
0.0000
0.5000
0.3016
Roundness_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
0.3016
0.0997
-0.1508
0.1508
0.0000
0.5096
0.0000
0.5000
0.5096
0.0096
Roundness_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.5096
0.1824
-0.2548
0.2548
0.0000
0.4888
0.0000
0.5000
0.4888
Roundness_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.4888
0.1737
-0.2444
0.2444
0.0000
0.7628
0.0000
0.5000
0.7628
0.2628
Roundness_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.7628
0.2703
-0.3814
0.3814
0.0000
0.7432
0.0000
0.5000
0.7432
0.2432
Roundness_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.7432
0.2630
-0.3716
0.3716
Roundness Cylinder Dir +X
0.0000
0.7411
0.0000
0.5000
0.7411
0.2411
Roundness_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
0.7411
0.2280
-0.3706
0.3706
0.0000
0.6717
0.0000
0.5000
0.6717
0.1717
Roundness_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
0.6717
0.2218
-0.3358
0.3358
0.0000
0.6352
0.0000
0.5000
0.6352
0.1352
Roundness_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
0.6352
0.1933
-0.3176
0.3176
0.0000
0.6836
0.0000
0.5000
0.6836
0.1836
Roundness_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
0.6836
0.2257
-0.3418
0.3418
0.0000
0.4771
0.0000
0.5000
0.4771
Roundness_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
0.4771
0.1767
-0.2386
0.2386
0.0000
0.4503
0.0000
0.5000
0.4503
Roundness_O@80x
Circle_Outer_@80x
0.4503
0.1658
-0.2252
0.2252
0.0000
0.7183
0.0000
0.5000
0.7183
0.2183
Roundness_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.7183
0.2612
-0.3592
0.3592
0.0000
0.6938
0.0000
0.5000
0.6938
0.1938
Roundness_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.6938
0.2497
-0.3469
0.3469
Roundsness Collar Dir +Z
0.0000
0.4870
0.0000
0.5000
0.4870
Roundness_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
0.4870
0.1814
-0.2435
0.2435
0.0000
0.3668
0.0000
0.5000
0.3668
Roundness_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.3668
0.1363
-0.1834
0.1834
0.0000
0.5819
0.0000
0.5000
0.5819
0.0819
Roundness_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
0.5819
0.2186
-0.2910
0.2910
0.0000
0.4337
0.0000
0.5000
0.4337
Roundness_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
0.4337
0.1616
-0.2168
0.2168
0.0000
0.6945
0.0000
0.5000
0.6945
0.1945
Roundness_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
0.6945
0.2566
-0.3473
0.3473
0.0000
0.4882
0.0000
0.5000
0.4882
Roundness_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
0.4882
0.1734
-0.2441
0.2441
Thickness Top -X
2.0000
1.8287
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1713
Wall thickness X-110 Top
Point Inner X-110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8393
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1607
Wall thickness X-80 Top
Point Inner X-80
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
125
==PAGE:136==
Page 3 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
23
Part ident
12/2/2019 5:45 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
2.0000
1.8456
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1544
Wall thickness X-50 Top
Point Inner X-50
0.0000
2.0000
2.0023
-0.2000
0.2000
0.0023
Wall thickness X-42 Top
Point Inner X-42
0.0000
Thickness Top +X
2.0000
1.8234
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1766
Wall thickness X+110
Point Inner X+110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8342
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1658
Wall thickness X+80
Point Inner X+80
0.0000
2.0000
2.3690
-0.2000
0.2000
0.3690
0.1690
Wall thickness X+50
Point Inner X+50
0.0000
2.0000
2.2677
-0.2000
0.2000
0.2677
0.0677
Wall thickness X+42
Point Inner X+42
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +X
2.0000
2.6864
-0.2000
0.2000
0.6864
0.4864
Wall thickness +Z42 +X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.5205
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4795
-0.2795
Wall thickness +Z43 +X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.3813
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.6187
-0.4187
Wall thickness +Z44 +X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -X
2.0000
2.5028
-0.2000
0.2000
0.5028
0.3028
Wall thickness +Z42 -X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.4830
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.5170
-0.3170
Wall thickness +Z43 -X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.3714
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.6286
-0.4286
Wall thickness +Z44 -X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir -X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +Y
2.0000
1.5515
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4485
-0.2485
Wall thickness +Z42 +Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5448
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4552
-0.2552
Wall thickness +Z43 +Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5527
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4473
-0.2473
Wall thickness +Z44 +Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -Y
2.0000
1.5739
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4261
-0.2261
Wall thickness +Z42 -Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5730
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4270
-0.2270
Wall thickness +Z43 -Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5755
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4245
-0.2245
Wall thickness +Z44 -Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir-Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z XY
1.9997
1.5069
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4928
-0.2928
Wall thickness +Z42 +X+Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X+Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5613
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4387
-0.2387
Wall thickness +Z42 +X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5432
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4568
-0.2568
Wall thickness +Z42 -X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5222
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4778
-0.2778
Wall thickness +Z42 -X+Y2
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X+Y
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
126
==PAGE:137==
ZEISS CALYPSO
6.6
68
No. measured values
30
No. values: red 
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Drawing number
Master
Department
Operator
212015
CMM No.
Text
Order number
Variant
Company
PRISMO_USS2
CMM Type
All Characteristics
Run
12/2/2019 5:18 PM
Time/Date
22
Part ident
Last 1 measurements
► Approval ≠ Blocked
00:10:58.0
Measurement Duration
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
Diameter Cylinder  Dir -X
72.1000
72.1472
-0.5410
0.5410
0.0472
Diameter_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
0.3557
0.0818
-0.1458
0.2099
76.1000
76.2183
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1183
Diameter_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
0.3473
0.0696
-0.1322
0.2151
72.1000
72.4750
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3750
Diameter_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
0.3938
0.0970
-0.2364
0.1574
76.1000
76.2282
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1282
Diameter_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
0.1759
0.0494
-0.0850
0.0908
72.1000
72.5823
-0.5410
0.5410
0.4823
Diameter_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.3537
0.1070
-0.1862
0.1675
76.1000
76.2359
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1359
Diameter_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.3267
0.1022
-0.1662
0.1605
72.1000
72.6001
-0.5410
0.5410
0.5001
Diameter_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.5762
0.1828
-0.2726
0.3036
76.1000
76.2203
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1203
Diameter_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.5295
0.1716
-0.2475
0.2820
Diameter Cylinder Dir +X
72.1000
72.3450
-0.5410
0.5410
0.2450
Diameter_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
0.5445
0.1579
-0.2563
0.2882
76.1000
76.2534
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1534
Diameter_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
0.4632
0.1342
-0.2711
0.1921
72.1000
72.3858
-0.5410
0.5410
0.2858
Diameter_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
0.4565
0.1283
-0.2113
0.2452
76.1000
76.3653
-0.5710
0.5710
0.2653
Diameter_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
0.4695
0.0983
-0.2435
0.2260
72.1000
72.5545
-0.5410
0.5410
0.4545
Diameter_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
0.2543
0.0701
-0.1361
0.1182
72.1000
72.5823
-0.5710
0.5710
0.4823
Diameter_O@80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.3537
0.1070
-0.1862
0.1675
72.1000
72.5803
-0.5410
0.5410
0.4803
Diameter_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.4514
0.1295
-0.2062
0.2452
76.1000
76.1968
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0968
Diameter_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.3917
0.1157
-0.1750
0.2167
Diameter Collar Dir +Z
72.1000
71.4014
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.6986
-0.1576
Diameter_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.3216
0.1134
-0.1329
0.1887
76.1000
74.5313
-0.5710
0.5710
-1.5687
-0.9977
Diameter_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
0.8939
0.1767
-0.2650
0.6289
72.1000
71.2687
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.8313
-0.2903
Diameter_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
0.3872
0.1383
-0.1550
0.2322
76.1000
74.2800
-0.5710
0.5710
-1.8200
-1.2490
Diameter_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
0.5463
0.2095
-0.2617
0.2846
72.1000
71.1284
-0.5410
0.5410
-0.9716
-0.4306
Diameter_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
0.4512
0.1517
-0.1884
0.2628
(6.6_06) StandardProtocol
Pipe Specimen #8
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
127
==PAGE:138==
Page 2 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
22
Part ident
12/2/2019 5:18 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
76.1000
74.0851
-0.5710
0.5710
-2.0149
-1.4439
Diameter_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
0.6532
0.2483
-0.3049
0.3482
Roundness Cylinder Dir -X
0.0000
0.3251
0.0000
0.5000
0.3251
Roundness_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
0.3251
0.1067
-0.1626
0.1626
0.0000
0.3230
0.0000
0.5000
0.3230
Roundness_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
0.3230
0.1068
-0.1615
0.1615
0.0000
0.3724
0.0000
0.5000
0.3724
Roundness_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
0.3724
0.1049
-0.1862
0.1862
0.0000
0.1638
0.0000
0.5000
0.1638
Roundness_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
0.1638
0.0501
-0.0819
0.0819
0.0000
0.3437
0.0000
0.5000
0.3437
Roundness_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.3437
0.1085
-0.1718
0.1718
0.0000
0.3120
0.0000
0.5000
0.3120
Roundness_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.3120
0.1033
-0.1560
0.1560
0.0000
0.5448
0.0000
0.5000
0.5448
0.0448
Roundness_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.5448
0.1845
-0.2724
0.2724
0.0000
0.4996
0.0000
0.5000
0.4996
Roundness_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.4996
0.1732
-0.2498
0.2498
Roundness Cylinder Dir +X
0.0000
0.5577
0.0000
0.5000
0.5577
0.0577
Roundness_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
0.5577
0.1649
-0.2788
0.2788
0.0000
0.4283
0.0000
0.5000
0.4283
Roundness_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
0.4283
0.1480
-0.2142
0.2142
0.0000
0.4508
0.0000
0.5000
0.4508
Roundness_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
0.4508
0.1409
-0.2254
0.2254
0.0000
0.3999
0.0000
0.5000
0.3999
Roundness_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
0.3999
0.1389
-0.1999
0.1999
0.0000
0.2292
0.0000
0.5000
0.2292
Roundness_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
0.2292
0.0733
-0.1146
0.1146
0.0000
0.1902
0.0000
0.5000
0.1902
Roundness_O@80x
Circle_Outer_@80x
0.1902
0.0644
-0.0951
0.0951
0.0000
0.4046
0.0000
0.5000
0.4046
Roundness_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.4046
0.1336
-0.2023
0.2023
0.0000
0.3502
0.0000
0.5000
0.3502
Roundness_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.3502
0.1194
-0.1751
0.1751
Roundsness Collar Dir +Z
0.0000
0.9746
0.0000
0.5000
0.9746
0.4746
Roundness_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
0.9746
0.2819
-0.4873
0.4873
0.0000
0.3110
0.0000
0.5000
0.3110
Roundness_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.3110
0.1158
-0.1555
0.1555
0.0000
0.5389
0.0000
0.5000
0.5389
0.0389
Roundness_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
0.5389
0.2107
-0.2695
0.2695
0.0000
0.3776
0.0000
0.5000
0.3776
Roundness_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
0.3776
0.1422
-0.1888
0.1888
0.0000
0.6490
0.0000
0.5000
0.6490
0.1490
Roundness_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
0.6490
0.2503
-0.3245
0.3245
0.0000
0.4434
0.0000
0.5000
0.4434
Roundness_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
0.4434
0.1551
-0.2217
0.2217
Thickness Top -X
2.0000
1.7789
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.2211
-0.0211
Wall thickness X-110 Top
Point Inner X-110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8088
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1912
Wall thickness X-80 Top
Point Inner X-80
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
128
==PAGE:139==
Page 3 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
22
Part ident
12/2/2019 5:18 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
2.0000
1.8238
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1762
Wall thickness X-50 Top
Point Inner X-50
0.0000
2.0000
1.9886
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.0114
Wall thickness X-42 Top
Point Inner X-42
0.0000
Thickness Top +X
2.0000
1.7760
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.2240
-0.0240
Wall thickness X+110
Point Inner X+110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8051
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1949
Wall thickness X+80
Point Inner X+80
0.0000
2.0000
2.2008
-0.2000
0.2000
0.2008
0.0008
Wall thickness X+50
Point Inner X+50
0.0000
2.0000
2.0597
-0.2000
0.2000
0.0597
Wall thickness X+42
Point Inner X+42
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +X
2.0000
2.5501
-0.2000
0.2000
0.5501
0.3501
Wall thickness +Z42 +X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.4667
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.5333
-0.3333
Wall thickness +Z43 +X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.3402
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.6598
-0.4598
Wall thickness +Z44 +X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -X
2.0000
2.5994
-0.2000
0.2000
0.5994
0.3994
Wall thickness +Z42 -X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.4973
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.5027
-0.3027
Wall thickness +Z43 -X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.3772
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.6228
-0.4228
Wall thickness +Z44 -X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir -X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +Y
2.0000
1.5679
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4321
-0.2321
Wall thickness +Z42 +Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5654
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4346
-0.2346
Wall thickness +Z43 +Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5681
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4319
-0.2319
Wall thickness +Z44 +Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -Y
2.0000
1.5586
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4414
-0.2414
Wall thickness +Z42 -Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5593
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4407
-0.2407
Wall thickness +Z43 -Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5621
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4379
-0.2379
Wall thickness +Z44 -Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir-Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z XY
1.9997
1.5373
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4624
-0.2624
Wall thickness +Z42 +X+Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X+Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5261
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4739
-0.2739
Wall thickness +Z42 +X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5272
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4728
-0.2728
Wall thickness +Z42 -X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5430
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4570
-0.2570
Wall thickness +Z42 -X+Y2
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X+Y
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
129
==PAGE:140==
ZEISS CALYPSO
6.6
68
No. measured values
47
No. values: red 
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Drawing number
Master
Department
Operator
212015
CMM No.
Text
Order number
Variant
Company
PRISMO_USS2
CMM Type
All Characteristics
Run
12/2/2019 6:59 PM
Time/Date
25
Part ident
Last 1 measurements
► Approval ≠ Blocked
00:11:12.0
Measurement Duration
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
Diameter Cylinder  Dir -X
72.1000
73.3353
-0.5410
0.5410
1.2353
0.6943
Diameter_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
1.0309
0.2724
-0.4727
0.5583
76.1000
77.3051
-0.5710
0.5710
1.2051
0.6341
Diameter_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
1.4269
0.3940
-0.7993
0.6276
72.1000
72.2957
-0.5410
0.5410
0.1957
Diameter_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
1.3068
0.3410
-0.7770
0.5298
76.1000
76.2321
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1321
Diameter_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
1.6555
0.4059
-1.0179
0.6375
72.1000
72.4679
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3679
Diameter_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.6817
0.2396
-0.3591
0.3226
76.1000
76.1601
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0601
Diameter_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.6886
0.2362
-0.3703
0.3183
72.1000
72.4398
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3398
Diameter_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.7275
0.1983
-0.3820
0.3456
76.1000
76.1147
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0147
Diameter_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.7135
0.1938
-0.3678
0.3457
Diameter Cylinder Dir +X
72.1000
72.4568
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3568
Diameter_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
1.7501
0.4678
-1.0756
0.6745
76.1000
77.5067
-0.5710
0.5710
1.4067
0.8357
Diameter_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
1.2614
0.3794
-0.7906
0.4708
72.1000
72.4288
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3288
Diameter_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
1.8105
0.4860
-1.1355
0.6750
76.1000
76.2994
-0.5710
0.5710
0.1994
Diameter_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
1.7731
0.4211
-1.1408
0.6323
72.1000
72.4616
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3616
Diameter_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
1.2299
0.3523
-0.7498
0.4801
72.1000
72.4679
-0.5710
0.5710
0.3679
Diameter_O@80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.6817
0.2396
-0.3591
0.3226
72.1000
72.4641
-0.5410
0.5410
0.3641
Diameter_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.9792
0.2909
-0.5750
0.4042
76.1000
76.1234
-0.5710
0.5710
0.0234
Diameter_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.9875
0.2940
-0.5835
0.4039
Diameter Collar Dir +Z
72.1000
73.4134
-0.5410
0.5410
1.3134
0.7724
Diameter_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.4853
0.1468
-0.2501
0.2352
76.1000
75.9613
-0.5710
0.5710
-0.1387
Diameter_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
1.1285
0.3166
-0.6502
0.4783
72.1000
73.6139
-0.5410
0.5410
1.5139
0.9729
Diameter_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
1.1630
0.2702
-0.3347
0.8284
76.1000
75.6296
-0.5710
0.5710
-0.4704
Diameter_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
1.4185
0.3618
-0.8826
0.5360
72.1000
74.0223
-0.5410
0.5410
1.9223
1.3813
Diameter_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
2.3679
0.4572
-0.4094
1.9585
(6.6_06) StandardProtocol
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
130
==PAGE:141==
Page 2 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
25
Part ident
12/2/2019 6:59 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
76.1000
75.2537
-0.5710
0.5710
-0.8463
-0.2753
Diameter_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
2.2138
0.4286
-1.5770
0.6368
Roundness Cylinder Dir -X
0.0000
1.0040
0.0000
0.5000
1.0040
0.5040
Roundness_I@-42x
Circle_Inner_@-42x
1.0040
0.3165
-0.5020
0.5020
0.0000
1.2311
0.0000
0.5000
1.2311
0.7311
Roundness_O@-42x
Circle_Outer_@-42x
1.2311
0.4344
-0.6156
0.6156
0.0000
1.1671
0.0000
0.5000
1.1671
0.6671
Roundness_I@-50x
Circle_Inner_@-50x
1.1671
0.3684
-0.5835
0.5835
0.0000
1.3572
0.0000
0.5000
1.3572
0.8572
Roundness_O@-50x
Circle_Outer_@-50x
1.3572
0.4633
-0.6786
0.6786
0.0000
0.6661
0.0000
0.5000
0.6661
0.1661
Roundness_I@-80x
Circle_Inner_@-80x
0.6661
0.2410
-0.3330
0.3330
0.0000
0.6653
0.0000
0.5000
0.6653
0.1653
Roundness_O@-80x
Circle_Outer_@-80x
0.6653
0.2380
-0.3327
0.3327
0.0000
0.6437
0.0000
0.5000
0.6437
0.1437
Roundness_I@-110x
Circle_Inner_@-110x
0.6437
0.2161
-0.3219
0.3219
0.0000
0.6298
0.0000
0.5000
0.6298
0.1298
Roundness_O@-110x
Circle_Outer_@-110x
0.6298
0.2203
-0.3149
0.3149
Roundness Cylinder Dir +X
0.0000
1.5640
0.0000
0.5000
1.5640
1.0640
Roundness_I@42x
Circle_Inner_@42x
1.5640
0.5440
-0.7820
0.7820
0.0000
1.2575
0.0000
0.5000
1.2575
0.7575
Roundness_O@42x
Circle_Outer_@42x
1.2575
0.4174
-0.6288
0.6288
0.0000
1.5976
0.0000
0.5000
1.5976
1.0976
Roundness_I@50x
Circle_Inner_@50x
1.5976
0.5663
-0.7988
0.7988
0.0000
1.4641
0.0000
0.5000
1.4641
0.9641
Roundness_O@50x
Circle_Outer_@50x
1.4641
0.5198
-0.7320
0.7320
0.0000
1.0892
0.0000
0.5000
1.0892
0.5892
Roundness_I@80x
Circle_Inner_@80x
1.0892
0.3784
-0.5446
0.5446
0.0000
1.1060
0.0000
0.5000
1.1060
0.6060
Roundness_O@80x
Circle_Outer_@80x
1.1060
0.3834
-0.5530
0.5530
0.0000
0.8949
0.0000
0.5000
0.8949
0.3949
Roundness_I@110x
Circle_Inner_@110x
0.8949
0.3060
-0.4475
0.4475
0.0000
0.8914
0.0000
0.5000
0.8914
0.3914
Roundness_O@110x
Circle_Outer_@110x
0.8914
0.3097
-0.4457
0.4457
Roundsness Collar Dir +Z
0.0000
1.2122
0.0000
0.5000
1.2122
0.7122
Roundness_O@42z
CircleCollar_Outer@42z
1.2122
0.3311
-0.6061
0.6061
0.0000
0.4975
0.0000
0.5000
0.4975
Roundness_I@42z
CircleCollar_Inner@42z
0.4975
0.1473
-0.2487
0.2487
0.0000
1.3378
0.0000
0.5000
1.3378
0.8378
Roundness_O@43z
CircleCollar_Outer@43z
1.3378
0.3903
-0.6689
0.6689
0.0000
1.1551
0.0000
0.5000
1.1551
0.6551
Roundness_I@43z
CircleCollar_Inner@43z
1.1551
0.3866
-0.5776
0.5776
0.0000
1.9414
0.0000
0.5000
1.9414
1.4414
Roundness_O@44z
CircleCollar_Outer@44z
1.9414
0.5559
-0.9707
0.9707
0.0000
2.1671
0.0000
0.5000
2.1671
1.6671
Roundness_I@44z
CircleCollar_Inner@44z
2.1671
0.8599
-1.0835
1.0835
Thickness Top -X
2.0000
1.8252
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1748
Wall thickness X-110 Top
Point Inner X-110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8354
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1646
Wall thickness X-80 Top
Point Inner X-80
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
131
==PAGE:142==
Page 3 of 3
ZEISS CALYPSO 
6.6
T-collar pipe1
Part name
Master
Operator
25
Part ident
12/2/2019 6:59 PM
Time/Date
Order number
Name
Nominal value
Measured value
+/-
Deviation
+Tol
-Tol
Feature
Form
Sigma
Min
Max
2.0000
1.8425
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1575
Wall thickness X-50 Top
Point Inner X-50
0.0000
2.0000
4.3955
-0.2000
0.2000
2.3955
2.1955
Wall thickness X-42 Top
Point Inner X-42
0.0000
Thickness Top +X
2.0000
1.8176
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1824
Wall thickness X+110
Point Inner X+110
0.0000
2.0000
1.8267
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.1733
Wall thickness X+80
Point Inner X+80
0.0000
2.0000
2.2879
-0.2000
0.2000
0.2879
0.0879
Wall thickness X+50
Point Inner X+50
0.0000
2.0000
4.6544
-0.2000
0.2000
2.6544
2.4544
Wall thickness X+42
Point Inner X+42
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +X
2.0000
1.5508
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4492
-0.2492
Wall thickness +Z42 +X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
1.4875
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.5125
-0.3125
Wall thickness +Z43 +X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +X
0.0000
2.0000
0.9938
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.0062
-0.8062
Wall thickness +Z44 +X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -X
2.0000
1.6169
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.3831
-0.1831
Wall thickness +Z42 -X
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.6016
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.3984
-0.1984
Wall thickness +Z43 -X
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -X
0.0000
2.0000
1.3754
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.6246
-0.4246
Wall thickness +Z44 -X
Point Outer Z+44 Dir -X
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z +Y
2.0000
1.0805
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.9195
-0.7195
Wall thickness +Z42 +Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
0.8688
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.1312
-0.9312
Wall thickness +Z43 +Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir +Y
0.0000
2.0000
0.3598
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.6402
-1.4402
Wall thickness +Z44 +Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir +Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z -Y
2.0000
1.1113
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.8887
-0.6887
Wall thickness +Z42 -Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
0.7157
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.2843
-1.0843
Wall thickness +Z43 -Y
Point Outer Z+43 Dir -Y
0.0000
2.0000
0.0354
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.9646
-1.7646
Wall thickness +Z44 -Y
Point Outer Z+44 Dir-Y
0.0000
Thickness Collar +Z XY
1.9997
1.6037
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.3960
-0.1960
Wall thickness +Z42 +X+Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X+Y
0.0000
2.0000
0.7370
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.2630
-1.0630
Wall thickness +Z42 +X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir +X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
1.5487
-0.2000
0.2000
-0.4513
-0.2513
Wall thickness +Z42 -X-Y
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X-Y
0.0000
2.0000
0.6970
-0.2000
0.2000
-1.3030
-1.1030
Wall thickness +Z42 -X+Y2
Point Outer Z+42 Dir -X+Y
0.0000
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
132
==PAGE:143==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
G.3
Metrology Proﬁles
SPIP Reports - TH Surtronic 25 Proﬁles
133
==PAGE:144==
 
 
 12/11/19 13:14:31 
 
 
User: s134132 
Report 2019-12-11 13-14-30.doc 
 
Created by: The Scanning Probe Image Processor, SPIP 6.7.7 
1 / 1 
Roughness Analysis Report for a Collection of Profiles  
 
 
 
Profile (#6_collar0002 #3.asc) 
 
Material ratio curve (Abbott curve)  
 
 
 
ISO 4287 
ID 
Ra 
[µm] 
Rq 
[µm] 
Rz 
[µm] 
Rt 
[µm] 
Rsm 
[µm] 
Wa 
[µm] 
Wq 
[µm] 
Wz 
[µm] 
Wt 
[µm] 
Wsm 
[µm] 
#6_collar0000 #1.asc 
0.766 
0.965 4.502 
6.943 449.017 
15.509 
18.864 
25.448 
80.797 0.000 
#6_collar0001 #2.asc 
0.455 
0.588 3.675 
4.882 241.323 
2.917 
3.404 
4.546 
12.868 0.000 
#6_collar0002 #3.asc 
0.496 
0.625 3.822 
5.617 240.535 
1.615 
1.913 
2.694 
7.209 0.000 
#6_collar0003 #4.asc 
0.856 
1.037 4.212 
5.425 397.515 
26.991 
32.160 
42.924 129.105 0.000 
#6_collar0004 #5.asc 
0.527 
0.668 3.987 
4.709 252.017 
1.807 
2.368 
3.330 
11.621 0.000 
Minimum 
0.455 
0.588 3.675 
4.709 240.535 
1.615 
1.913 
2.694 
7.209 0.000 
Maximum 
0.856 
1.037 4.502 
6.943 449.017 
26.991 
32.160 
42.924 129.105 0.000 
Mean 
0.620 
0.777 4.040 
5.515 316.081 
9.768 
11.742 
15.788 
48.320 0.000 
Std. Dev. 
0.179 
0.209 0.327 
0.881 
99.629 
11.251 
13.432 
17.907 
54.486 0.000 
Std. Dev. % 
28.869 26.874 8.086 15.979 
31.520 115.189 114.391 113.421 112.760 
 
 
Analysis setup: 
Form removal:  
Line 
Noise filter cut-off, ls:  8 µm 
ISO 4287:  
Cut-off wavelength, lc:  2.5 mm 
Number of cut-offs:  
5 
Evaluation length:  
12.5 mm 
 
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
134
==PAGE:145==
 
 
 12/11/19 13:14:31 
 
 
User: s134132 
Report 2019-12-11 13-14-30.doc 
 
Created by: The Scanning Probe Image Processor, SPIP 6.7.7 
1 / 1 
Roughness Analysis Report for a Collection of Profiles  
 
 
 
Profile (#6_collar0002 #3.asc) 
 
Material ratio curve (Abbott curve)  
 
 
 
ISO 4287 
ID 
Ra 
[µm] 
Rq 
[µm] 
Rz 
[µm] 
Rt 
[µm] 
Rsm 
[µm] 
Wa 
[µm] 
Wq 
[µm] 
Wz 
[µm] 
Wt 
[µm] 
Wsm 
[µm] 
#6_collar0000 #1.asc 
0.766 
0.965 4.502 
6.943 449.017 
15.509 
18.864 
25.448 
80.797 0.000 
#6_collar0001 #2.asc 
0.455 
0.588 3.675 
4.882 241.323 
2.917 
3.404 
4.546 
12.868 0.000 
#6_collar0002 #3.asc 
0.496 
0.625 3.822 
5.617 240.535 
1.615 
1.913 
2.694 
7.209 0.000 
#6_collar0003 #4.asc 
0.856 
1.037 4.212 
5.425 397.515 
26.991 
32.160 
42.924 129.105 0.000 
#6_collar0004 #5.asc 
0.527 
0.668 3.987 
4.709 252.017 
1.807 
2.368 
3.330 
11.621 0.000 
Minimum 
0.455 
0.588 3.675 
4.709 240.535 
1.615 
1.913 
2.694 
7.209 0.000 
Maximum 
0.856 
1.037 4.502 
6.943 449.017 
26.991 
32.160 
42.924 129.105 0.000 
Mean 
0.620 
0.777 4.040 
5.515 316.081 
9.768 
11.742 
15.788 
48.320 0.000 
Std. Dev. 
0.179 
0.209 0.327 
0.881 
99.629 
11.251 
13.432 
17.907 
54.486 0.000 
Std. Dev. % 
28.869 26.874 8.086 15.979 
31.520 115.189 114.391 113.421 112.760 
 
 
Analysis setup: 
Form removal:  
Line 
Noise filter cut-off, ls:  8 µm 
ISO 4287:  
Cut-off wavelength, lc:  2.5 mm 
Number of cut-offs:  
5 
Evaluation length:  
12.5 mm 
 
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
135
==PAGE:146==
 
 
 12/11/19 13:20:47 
 
 
User: s134132 
Report 2019-12-11 13-20-46.doc 
 
Created by: The Scanning Probe Image Processor, SPIP 6.7.7 
1 / 1 
Roughness Analysis Report for a Collection of Profiles  
 
 
 
Profile (#7_unprocessed0003 #4.asc) 
 
Material ratio curve (Abbott curve)  
 
 
 
ISO 4287 
ID 
Ra 
[µm] 
Rq 
[µm] 
Rz 
[µm] 
Rt 
[µm] 
Rsm 
[µm] 
Wa 
[µm] 
Wq 
[µm] 
Wz 
[µm] 
Wt 
[µm] 
Wsm 
[µm] 
#7_unprocessed0000 #1.asc 0.674 
0.859 5.068 
7.542 226.637 
0.318 
0.407 
0.922 
1.867 3365.592 
#7_unprocessed0001 #2.asc 0.603 
0.787 5.038 
6.537 259.357 
0.158 
0.199 
0.427 
0.844 2809.664 
#7_unprocessed0002 #3.asc 0.667 
0.843 4.646 
5.272 212.383 
0.194 
0.253 
0.599 
1.183 
0.000 
#7_unprocessed0003 #4.asc 0.564 
0.718 4.597 
5.464 262.654 
0.268 
0.326 
0.649 
1.283 2948.828 
#7_unprocessed0004 #5.asc 0.714 
0.958 5.015 
7.565 271.777 
0.453 
0.640 
1.228 
2.709 
0.000 
Minimum 
0.564 
0.718 4.597 
5.272 212.383 
0.158 
0.199 
0.427 
0.844 
0.000 
Maximum 
0.714 
0.958 5.068 
7.565 271.777 
0.453 
0.640 
1.228 
2.709 3365.592 
Mean 
0.644 
0.833 4.873 
6.476 246.561 
0.278 
0.365 
0.765 
1.577 1824.817 
Std. Dev. 
0.060 
0.089 0.231 
1.095 
25.611 
0.116 
0.173 
0.314 
0.732 1678.334 
Std. Dev. % 
9.343 10.682 4.735 16.915 
10.387 41.757 47.312 41.025 46.411 
91.973 
 
Analysis setup: 
Form removal:  
Line 
Noise filter cut-off, ls:  8 µm 
ISO 4287:  
Cut-off wavelength, lc:  2.5 mm 
Number of cut-offs:  
5 
Evaluation length:  
12.5 mm 
 
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
136
==PAGE:147==
 
 
 12/11/19 13:21:56 
 
 
User: s134132 
Report 2019-12-11 12-17-55.doc 
 
Created by: The Scanning Probe Image Processor, SPIP 6.7.7 
1 / 1 
Roughness Analysis Report for a Collection of Profiles  
 
 
 
Profile (#7_collar10000.bcrf) 
 
Material ratio curve (Abbott curve)  
 
 
 
ISO 4287 
ID 
Ra 
[µm] 
Rq 
[µm] 
Rz 
[µm] 
Rt 
[µm] 
Rsm 
[µm] 
Wa 
[µm] 
Wq 
[µm] 
Wz 
[µm] 
Wt 
[µm] 
Wsm 
[µm] 
#7_collar10000.bcrf 
0.818 
1.015 
4.877 
6.722 407.001 
16.835 
20.255 
26.922 
86.279 0.000 
#7_collar10001.bcrf 
0.553 
0.698 
3.845 
5.137 250.120 
4.072 
4.980 
6.664 
21.324 0.000 
#7_collar10002.bcrf 
0.590 
0.789 
4.036 
5.655 270.464 
0.895 
1.149 
1.813 
5.304 0.000 
#7_collar10003.bcrf 
0.618 
0.772 
4.053 
5.297 222.424 
3.327 
4.200 
6.412 
20.107 0.000 
#7_collar10004.bcrf 
0.687 
0.912 
4.911 
6.948 253.900 
3.842 
4.826 
7.039 
21.516 0.000 
Minimum 
0.553 
0.698 
3.845 
5.137 222.424 
0.895 
1.149 
1.813 
5.304 0.000 
Maximum 
0.818 
1.015 
4.911 
6.948 407.001 
16.835 
20.255 
26.922 
86.279 0.000 
Mean 
0.653 
0.837 
4.344 
5.952 280.782 
5.794 
7.082 
9.770 
30.906 0.000 
Std. Dev. 
0.104 
0.126 
0.508 
0.832 
72.640 
6.300 
7.526 
9.822 
31.695 0.000 
Std. Dev. % 
15.989 15.013 11.700 13.975 
25.871 108.733 106.263 100.532 102.552 
 
 
Analysis setup: 
Form removal:  
Line 
Noise filter cut-off, ls:  8 µm 
ISO 4287:  
Cut-off wavelength, lc:  2.5 mm 
Number of cut-offs:  
5 
Evaluation length:  
12.5 mm 
 
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
137
==PAGE:148==
 
 
 12/11/19 13:23:27 
 
 
User: s134132 
Report 2019-12-11 13-23-26.doc 
 
Created by: The Scanning Probe Image Processor, SPIP 6.7.7 
1 / 1 
Roughness Analysis Report for a Collection of Profiles  
 
 
 
Profile (#8_Unprocessed0003.bcrf) 
 
Material ratio curve (Abbott curve)  
 
 
 
ISO 4287 
ID 
Ra 
[µm] 
Rq 
[µm] 
Rz 
[µm] 
Rt 
[µm] 
Rsm 
[µm] 
Wa 
[µm] 
Wq 
[µm] 
Wz 
[µm] 
Wt 
[µm] 
Wsm 
[µm] 
#8_Unprocessed0000.bcrf 
0.578 
0.860 
4.316 
7.394 297.862 
0.311 
0.421 
1.066 
2.836 5048.058 
#8_Unprocessed0001.bcrf 
0.386 
0.566 
3.156 
5.249 506.325 
0.671 
0.814 
1.777 
3.187 5673.127 
#8_Unprocessed0002.bcrf 
0.720 
1.146 
5.446 
9.430 455.313 
0.681 
0.893 
2.064 
4.101 
0.000 
#8_Unprocessed0003.bcrf 
0.579 
0.746 
4.583 
5.193 369.238 
0.243 
0.305 
0.648 
1.318 8520.265 
#8_Unprocessed0004.bcrf 
0.415 
0.550 
4.039 
4.712 280.131 
0.235 
0.276 
0.507 
1.030 
0.000 
Minimum 
0.386 
0.550 
3.156 
4.712 280.131 
0.235 
0.276 
0.507 
1.030 
0.000 
Maximum 
0.720 
1.146 
5.446 
9.430 506.325 
0.681 
0.893 
2.064 
4.101 8520.265 
Mean 
0.536 
0.774 
4.308 
6.396 381.774 
0.428 
0.542 
1.212 
2.495 3848.290 
Std. Dev. 
0.137 
0.245 
0.832 
1.988 
98.044 
0.228 
0.291 
0.686 
1.295 3748.850 
Std. Dev. % 
25.487 31.692 19.321 31.079 
25.681 53.206 53.775 56.551 51.907 
97.416 
 
Analysis setup: 
Form removal:  
Line 
Noise filter cut-off, ls:  8 µm 
ISO 4287:  
Cut-off wavelength, lc:  2.5 mm 
Number of cut-offs:  
5 
Evaluation length:  
12.5 mm 
 
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
138
==PAGE:149==
 
 
 12/11/19 13:22:08 
 
 
User: s134132 
Report 2019-12-11 13-22-08.doc 
 
Created by: The Scanning Probe Image Processor, SPIP 6.7.7 
1 / 1 
Roughness Analysis Report for a Collection of Profiles  
 
 
 
Profile (#8_collar0002.bcrf) 
 
Material ratio curve (Abbott curve)  
 
 
 
ISO 4287 
ID 
Ra 
[µm] 
Rq 
[µm] 
Rz 
[µm] 
Rt 
[µm] 
Rsm 
[µm] 
Wa 
[µm] 
Wq 
[µm] 
Wz 
[µm] 
Wt 
[µm] 
Wsm 
[µm] 
#8_collar0000.bcrf 
0.416 
0.535 
3.319 
5.054 334.339 
4.392 
5.796 
8.225 29.440 0.000 
#8_collar0001.bcrf 
0.510 
0.680 
4.778 
9.052 332.025 
6.355 
7.864 11.085 33.992 0.000 
#8_collar0002.bcrf 
0.352 
0.450 
2.797 
4.125 245.122 
0.884 
1.168 
1.534 
5.798 0.000 
#8_collar0003.bcrf 
0.412 
0.526 
3.191 
3.985 246.428 
2.898 
3.584 
4.925 16.538 0.000 
#8_collar0004.bcrf 
0.378 
0.488 
2.966 
3.546 229.044 
1.992 
2.471 
3.316 11.264 0.000 
#8_collar0005.bcrf 
0.185 
0.875 
4.051 19.019 
0.000 
0.381 
0.651 
1.346 
5.521 0.000 
Minimum 
0.185 
0.450 
2.797 
3.546 
0.000 
0.381 
0.651 
1.346 
5.521 0.000 
Maximum 
0.510 
0.875 
4.778 19.019 334.339 
6.355 
7.864 11.085 33.992 0.000 
Mean 
0.375 
0.592 
3.517 
7.463 231.160 
2.817 
3.589 
5.072 17.092 0.000 
Std. Dev. 
0.108 
0.159 
0.754 
6.008 122.219 
2.252 
2.789 
3.889 12.115 0.000 
Std. Dev. % 
28.698 26.881 21.441 80.492 
52.872 79.939 77.705 76.672 70.878 
 
 
Analysis setup: 
Form removal:  
Line 
Noise filter cut-off, ls:  8 µm 
ISO 4287:  
Cut-off wavelength, lc:  2.5 mm 
Number of cut-offs:  
5 
Evaluation length:  
12.5 mm 
 
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
139
==PAGE:150==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Taylor Hobson Form Talysurf 2 Proﬁles - Exp. Ref. #3
Figure 94: TalySurf Calibration Proﬁle.
Figure 95: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 96: TalySurf Waviness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
140
==PAGE:151==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Figure 97: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 98: TalySurf Waviness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 99: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
141
==PAGE:152==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Figure 100: TalySurf Waviness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 101: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 102: TalySurf Waviness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
142
==PAGE:153==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Figure 103: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 104: TalySurf Waviness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
Figure 105: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #3.
143
==PAGE:154==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Taylor Hobson Form Talysurf 2 Proﬁles - Exp. Ref. #6
Figure 106: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #6.
Figure 107: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #6.
Figure 108: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #6.
G.4
Numerical Collar Drawing Model
144
==PAGE:155==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
Figure 109: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #6.
Figure 110: TalySurf Roughness Proﬁle of Exp. Ref. #6.
145
==PAGE:156==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
I-form plots
Figure 111: Effective stress plot in ﬁnal step of collar drawing simulation.
Figure 112: Plot of strain in the Y-direction in the ﬁnal step of collar drawing simulation.
Figure 113: Effective strain plot in ﬁnal step of collar drawing simulation.
146
==PAGE:157==
Master Thesis - s134132
G. Collar Drawing
G.5
Compression Test of Cylinder - I-form simulation
Figure 114: Compression Test - Initial Step - No deformation.
Figure 115: Compression Test - Second Step - Deformation and barreling initiated.
Figure 116: Compression Test - Third Step - Deformation and extensive barreling developed.
147
==PAGE:158==
Master Thesis - s134132
H. Collar Height Improvement
H
Collar Height Improvement
Figure 117: Strain Y plot from I-form of numerical model (Ø<76.1 x 2 [mm]), with elliptic hole dimensions
equal to standard dimensions.
Figure 118: Strain Y plot from I-form of numerical model (Ø51 x 2 [mm]), with elliptic hole dimensions
equal to standard dimensions.
148
==PAGE:159==
Master Thesis - s134132
H. Collar Height Improvement
Figure 119: Strain Y plot from I-form of numerical model (Ø51 x 2 [mm]), with elliptic hole dimensions
equal to standard dimensions -10%.
Figure 120: Strain Y plot from I-form of numerical model (Ø51 x 2 [mm]), with elliptic hole dimensions
equal to standard dimensions -20%.
149
==PAGE:160==
Master Thesis - s134132
I. Mandatory Project Plan
I
Mandatory Project Plan
150
==PAGE:161==
Project plan - Master’s thesis
Numerical and experimental analysis of collar drawing.
Tobias Vode Brammminge, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Supervisors:
Brian Nyvang Legarth, Department of Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Chris Valentin Nielsen, Department of Mechanical Engineering, DTU.
January 24, 2020
Abstract—This study investigate the metal forming process,
Collar Drawing, to understand signiﬁcant process parameters
and mechanical properties when subjected to stainless steel
pipes. The study aims to obtain relevant knowledge choose
optimum conditions for manufactured pipes used in the food
and pharmaceutical industry. The investigation is based on
the ball-collaring method and assessed in comparison with the
commercial T-drill method. The study is based on numerical
and experimental models and subsequently analysed by through
different methods.
1. INTRODUCTION
P
IPE BRANCHING is inevitable in all pipe-based process
plants and often up to a hundred connections are required
in one single industrial process unit. Several methods to
perform the connective part of the pipe branches have been
used through the years, but today the preferred method is
Collar Drawing. The Collar Drawing process have major
beneﬁts regarding manufacture, economy and quality when
constructing pipe based plants.
2. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
C
OLLAR DRAWING is general term used when perform-
ing a collar. The general process is a a drawing process
using a punch and a drawing die to form a closed collar
from a hole. For sheet metal the process is well-documented
both academically and in the industry in terms of standard
documents. Applying collar drawing to a pipe, the method
and tool for the process is changed, due to the closed surface
of the pipe. As before mentioned these are often needed in
large quantities, implying that an efﬁcient method to make
collars is needed. Processes used to manufacture material,
ﬁttings and components to the pharmaceutical industry needs
to be assured in terms of quality through documents and good
manufacturing practice. The ball collar drawing process is a
method that result in a good quality collar, suitable for process
plants used in the food and pharmaceutical industry. This
method possess advantages compared to other methods, but is
not widely acknowledged in the industry. Relevant academic
literature is of low quantity and theoretical quality, and most
recent documents are found to be over 25 years old [1][2].
3. PROBLEM STATEMENT
C
OLLAR DRAWING by the use of ball result in the
highest quality collars to be used in the pharmaceutical
industry. The process is academically studied and documented
to emphasise the preference of the method.
4. PRELIMINARY TABLE OF CONTENTS
P
LANNING of the project is dependent on the difﬁculty of
the initial steps of the project. Thus 5) and 6) is secondary
to the general scope of the study.
1) Introduction
a) Problem description
b) Scope of project
c) Process description and Test rig
2) Theory and literature
3) Experimental analysis
a) Experimental Material Data
b) Experimental Collar Drawing
4) Numerical analysis
a) Model and Mesh
b) Results
5) Process optimization
6) Tribologic study
7) Conclusion
a) Comparison of results
b) Industrial appliance
The project progress have been tracked in the project plan.
The ﬁnal project plan with planned dates and the actual dates
are attached on the next page.
5. TIME PLAN
I
NITIAL planning of the project is presented in the Gantt
chart on the next page.
REFERENCES
[1] Oehler and Kaiser, Schitt-, Stanz- und Ziehwerkzeuge, p. 277 Springer-
Verlag, Germany, 1993.
[2] Machinery and Production Engineering (Article) , PULL OUT COLLARS
SIMPLIFY ’T’ JOINTS, pp. 22-23 Volume 141, Issue 3637, 1983.
1
Master Thesis - s134132
I. Mandatory Project Plan
151
==PAGE:162==
2
Master Thesis - s134132
I. Mandatory Project Plan
152
==PAGE:163==
Master Thesis - s134132
J. References
J
References
[1] Aksel Kuhlmann & Tobias Vode Bramminge. Styrkeanalyser af delkomponenter i et vandbe-
handlingsanlæg. DTU Bachelor Thesis, 2017.
[2] Tobias Vode Bramminge. Development of Collar Drawing Test Rig. DTU - Individual Course,
2018.
[3] T-Drill Industries Inc. Tee forming - t-drill collaring method - butt weld joint, 2019.
[4] Rörmontage i Nyköping AB. T-rör/t-drilling.
[5] T-Drill Industries Inc. Approvals - collaring approvals, 2019.
[6] S. Kovacs, T. Beier, and S. Woestmann. Optimized cutting and forming parameters for a robust
collar drawing process for hot-rolled complex-phase steels. Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, 896(1):012105, 2017.
[7] Arne Mann and Peter Groche. Joint mechanisms of the collar-connection-element. International
Journal of Materials, Mechanics and Manufacturing, 6(3):229–32, 229–232, 2018.
[8] T. Gläsner, M. Schneider, M. Troitzsch, and S. Westhäuser. Considering the edge-crack sensi-
tivity of a hot-rolled steel in forming simulation. Iop Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering, 159(1):012029, 2016.
[9] Gang Cheng, Shiao Zhang, Xiuqing Ma, Yunjiang Li, Guoqun Zhao, Qiang Cheng, Zhonglei
Wang, and Teng He. Numerical simulation and experimental study on parameter optimization
of cold ﬂanging process of pipe tee.
Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on
Electromechanical Control Technology and Transportation, 41:362–367, 2015.
[10] Pull out collars simplify ’t’ joints. Machinery and Production Engineering, 141(3637):22–23,
1983.
[11] Form branch outlets, reduce pipe fab costs. Welding Design and Fabrication, 56(10):41–43,
1983.
[12] P.M. Kvist. Pladeforarbejdning. Teknisk forlag„ 1981.
[13] W. König. Fertigungsverfahren. - 5: Blechumformung. VDI-Verlag„ 1990.
[14] Fritz Kaiser and Gerhard Oehler. Schnitt-, Stanz- und Ziehwerkzeuge : mit 66 Berechnungs-
beispielen. Springer, 1993.
[15] Heinz Tschätsch and Jochen Dietrich. Praxis der Umformtechnik : Umform- und Zerteilver-
fahren, Werkzeuge, Maschinen ; mit 122 Tabellen. Springer Vieweg, 2013.
[16] Robert Davis Cook. Finite element modeling for stress analysis. Wiley, 1995.
[17] Chris Valentin Nielsen, Wengi Zhang, Luis Alves, Niels Bay, and Paulo F. Martins. Modeling of
Thermo-Electro-Mechanical Manufacturing Processes with Applications in Metal Forming and
Resistance Welding. Springer, 2012.
[18] latest edition modiﬁed by Chris Valentin Nielsen Niels Bay. Compendia for 41730 Industrial
Forming of metals. DTU, Lyngby.
[19] KSH. 15 ton presser - brugsanvisning. Instituttet for Produktudvikling (IPU), 2019.
[20] Metallic materials – tensile testing – part 1: Method of test at room temperature, 2019.
[21] Leo Alting and Geoffrey Boothroyd. Manufacturing engineering processes, volume 40. Dekker,
1994.
153
