==PAGE:1==
Species identiﬁcation from metagenomics data
by use of marker gene sets
Master of Science in Engineering, Bioinformatics & Systems biology
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
Trine Zachariasen
Student ID: s144501
January 27, 2020
Supervisors:
Henrik Bjørn Nielsen, Clinical Microbiomics
Anders Østergaard Petersen, Clinical Microbiomics
Thomas Nordahl, DTU
Specialization:
Metagenomics & microbiome
==PAGE:2==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Abstract
Metagenomics is the study of genetic material obtained from microbial communities by iso-
lating the DNA directly from the sample. In order to make sense of the information in the
DNA, methods for analyzing and proﬁling the microbes present in the samples is needed.
Proﬁling communities can be carried out by quantifying the genes uniquely associated with
each species, but also found in every member of that species, referred to as signature genes.
These genes are used as phylogenetic marker genes that are speciﬁc for the species, which
enables detection and abundance estimation of the species. Identifying the optimal signature
genes is crucial in order to ensure detection conﬁdence and reliable abundance estimates.
The signature genes are identiﬁed by binning genes according to co-abundance, base com-
position and co-assembly across a large number of samples. For each species the 100 most
co-abundant genes were selected as the original signature gene set.
The signature gene sets were evaluated and optimized by the use of 767 shotgun sequenced
samples. The distribution of reads within each sample is expected to approximate a negative
binomial distribution. A negative binomial rank-based model was implemented to identify
the best phylogenetic marker genes. The performance of the reﬁned signature gene set was
found to provide a signiﬁcant improvement when compared to the genes originally included
in the signature gene set. A separate public dataset of 38 samples was used to validate the
model. The coverage of the reﬁned signature genes was found to follow the expected coverage
signiﬁcantly better than the original signature genes.
The reﬁned signature gene sets are approximating the expected distribution more precisely
than the initial set, i.e. it will allow more precise taxonomic identiﬁcation of metagenomic
samples.
==PAGE:3==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Preface & Acknowledgements
This master’s thesis is made as part of the MSc in Bioinformatics & Systems Biology at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It is a product of 32 1/2 ECTS points and was
conducted at Clinical Microbiomics A/S (Denmark) in Fall 2019.
The data originate from a private client at Clinical Microbiomics, for which reason no data
will be uploaded for this thesis.
Through the work with this project several persons have supported me. I would like to thank
my supervisors Anders Ø. Petersen and H.Bjørn Nielsen (and Aron Eklund) who have dedi-
cated their time to guide and support me throughout the process and always giving relevant
inputs and encouragement. I would also thank my supervisor from DTU Thomas Nordahl
for setting up the framework of the project. A special thanks to Clinical Microbiomics for
welcoming me and especially the student-oﬃce workers, who were always cheering for me.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Shotgun sequencing & data characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
The negative binomial distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Application to the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Sequencing bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Outliers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Method
8
2.1
Creation of metagenomic species (MGS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Data description and processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Model formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Expected number of detected signature genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Model implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Removal of corrupt read counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Results & analysis
14
3.1
The initial signature gene set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Taxonomy aﬀecting the gene set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Reﬁning the signature gene set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Identifying the optimal gene set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
GC-content & gene length bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Performance of the reﬁned signature gene set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Outliers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Application to independent dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.1
Data description and processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.2
Validation of model on independent data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Discussion
26
4.1
Limitations of the rank based Negative Binomial model . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Sequencing bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Outliers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Taxonomic diversity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Zero-inﬂated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
Validating the model on independent data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.7
Perspectives and future use of the signature gene set
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Conclusion
31
References
33
==PAGE:5==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
1
Introduction
Metagenomics is the study of microbial communities by sequencing DNA isolated from their
environment. Hence this technique does not rely on culturing and therefore circumvents the
issues associated with that method, making proﬁling of microbial communities more complete
and less biased.
Microbial environments often display a large variability between sites and at diﬀerent time
points. Biological diversity arises due to microbial adaptation to environmental properties,
such as pH, salinity [22], temperature and co-existence with other organisms and vira. As
most bacteria are diﬃcult to isolate and culture, a large portion of the DNA fragments orig-
inate from bacteria that have no reference sequences. While some microbial genomes have
been assembled from metagenomics (MAGs) this is still challenged by community complex-
ity and fails to reliably detect and quantify low-abundant species. Alternatively, microbial
communities can be proﬁled quantifying genes that were binned across a large number of
samples by a combination of co-abundance, base composition and co-assembly [6, 11, 22].
More speciﬁcally species can be detected by mapping sequence-reads to signature genes that
are speciﬁc for the species, also known as marker genes. The abundances of species are quan-
tiﬁed by counting the number of reads mapping to the signature genes of the species and
comparing the number of reads mapped to the diﬀerent species in the sample [1, 15]. If the
signature genes are truly speciﬁc for the species, they facilitate quantiﬁcation even at a very
low abundance.
A large pool of metagenomic samples is used to identify signature genes among the genes that
are clustered into metagenomic species (MGS) by e.g. Canopy clustering, a method developed
by Nielsen et al. [11]. An MGS is thus a collection of genes belonging to a biological entity
and the signature gene set is deﬁned as a subset of these genes with the highest intra-species
abundance correlation. Typically, a strong relationship is observed between the number of
reads mapped to the MGS and the number of detected signature genes within each sample.
However, for some MGSs there is part of the signature gene set which is rarely detected despite
high coverage of the remaining genes, i.e. when the species is present at high abundance.
This could indicate that some of the genes originally included in the signature gene set are
not invariable parts of the core genome, but part of the variable genome, i.e. the pangenome
and thus not present in all samples [22]. Only strains containing these accessory genes will
be able to reach the expected coverage of the signature genes.
A diﬀerent type of problem occurs if the signature genes are not entirely unique to the species.
In those cases, the gene may potentially lead to false positive detection. i.e. if the reads map
to the wrong species. This however is likely to result in disproportionate coverage across the
Page 1 of 33
==PAGE:6==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
signature gene set, allowing for detection of false signals.
The number of reads that map to a signature gene ranges from zero to thousands. The
mapped counts can be modelled by a Poisson distribution. However, the count varies more
than the theoretical Poisson distribution predicts (i.e. the variance equal the mean) resulting
in overdispersion with a variance greater than the mean [7]. Therefore, we instead use a
negative binomial (NB) model, that can account for overdispersion [25]. The model facilitates
identiﬁcation of better signature genes, which again improves the accuracy of the species
abundance estimates and increases detection conﬁdence.
The aim of the project
This project aims to implement a rank-based negative binomial (NB) model to reﬁne and im-
prove the signature gene sets for each MGS, leading to better and more precise quantiﬁcation
and detection of species.
The goal is to remove genes that do not ﬁt the expected model and replace them with genes
that ﬁt better. The performance of the signature gene set is measured by comparing the
detected number of signature genes to the expected signal. We investigate why some genes
are more suited to be part of the signature gene set. The performance of the optimized
signature gene set will be veriﬁed using an independent dataset.
Page 2 of 33
==PAGE:7==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
1.1
Shotgun sequencing & data characteristics
Metagenomic samples can be analyzed by whole-metagenome shotgun sequencing, where
short reads are produced by random sampling of DNA from the microbial environment.
Shotgun sequencing yields the highest taxonomic and functional resolution, since no data
needs to be ﬁltered out in advance [2].
Reads generated during sequencing can be regarded as the result of a random selection of
DNA from the total pool of DNA available. These reads are typically mapped against a
reference genome or a non-redundant gene catalogue creating counts of the genomic traits
described therein, which then can be used for abundance estimations [22]. The counts can be
approximated as a series of independent and identically distributed Bernoulli trials, where
reads are randomly generated from a pool of DNA. The counts are non-negative integers and
have no intrinsic upper limit.
Both the Poisson and negative binomial (NB) distributions are discrete probability distribu-
tions which approximate the data. The Poisson distribution includes a single parameter λ,
from which the other traits of the distribution is given, which describes both the mean and the
variance of the distribution, disallowing independent variation of these two traits. The NB
model includes an additional parameter, leaving more ﬂexibility for modelling the variance [8].
Figure 1: Read count distribution of one sam-
ple in Bacteroides vulgatus. The total number
of reads mapped to the signature genes is 571.
The estimated distribution of Poisson and nega-
tive binomial have been ﬁtted.
In Figure 1 the estimated distributions of Poisson
and NB are shown as lines along with the read
count distribution for a sample in Bacteroides
vulgatus. It is seen, that the NB distribution ac-
commodates more variance than the Poisson by
having heavier tails, making it ﬁt the data better
and is thus more suitable for ﬁtting the data.
If we consider all samples that contain one of
the 20 most abundant MGSs, the same pattern
is seen. The count distribution that we observe
display overdispersion E(y) < V ar(y) (Figure 2).
The per sample mean-variance ratio is displayed
for the 20 most abundant MGS for each sam-
ple, along with the estimated mean-variance rela-
tionship of the Poisson and NB model, calculated
with the R-package "edgeR" (v.3.28.0) [18]. All
counts are are increased by 1 in order to allow log
transformation of samples without a given MGS.
Page 3 of 33
==PAGE:8==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
It can be seen that the estimated Poisson mean equals the variance. The NB model allows
more ﬂexibility regarding the variance-mean relationship and is therefore more appropriate
for ﬁtting the data (Figure 2).
Figure 2: The gene-wise means are plotted against their variance in each sample for the 20 most abundant
MGSs. The metrics are calculated from the normalized read counts, where the count 1 is added to all data
points. The Poisson and NB estimates of the mean-variance relationship is displayed by a black and a blue
line respectively. The negative binomial dispersion parameter is estimated using the R-package "edgeR" [18].
1.2
The negative binomial distribution
The expected read count of gene i in the j’th sample is denoted yij and are assumed to follow
a negative binomial distribution, where µj is the average number of counts per gene and σj
is the sample speciﬁc dispersion parameter.
yij ∼NB(µj, σj)
The expected read count can be described as
E(yij) = µj = λijNj
where λij is the proportion of reads mapped to gene i in the j’th sample and Nj is the total
number of reads mapped to sample j, thus µj depends on the sequencing depth as well as the
Page 4 of 33
==PAGE:9==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
abundance of the species in the sample. Count λij and total read count Nj for sample j, is
assumed to follow a Poisson distribution, with the conditional expectation E(yij|λij) = λijNj
entailing the conditional variance var(yij|λij) = λijNj. This is the variation, which can be
explained by λij, represented by the variation in the sequencing technology. This represents
the variation across the genes as a result of the sequencing technology, e.g. random selection
of reads and sequencing bias.
Additional variance is observed in the data, this variance is not explained by λij and Nj and
occurs due to biological variation. Additional variance of λij across the genes is seen and
is assumed to be formed so that the coeﬃcient of variation (CV) is constant between the
samples [7], leading to
CV = var(yij)
1
2
µj
var(yij) = CV 2µ2
j = σjµ2
j
where σj is CV 2, which accounts for the overdispersion. The total or unconditional variance
can be found by adding the explained and unexplained variance, as an application of the law
of total variance [23]
var(yij) = µj + σjµ2
j
thus displaying a quadratic relationship between the mean and the variance. For σj = 0 the
distribution coincides with the Poisson distribution with equal mean and variance.
1.2.1
Application to the data
For each sample, the discrete read count distribution is modelled by the NB distribution using
the R-package "VCD" (v.1.4.4) [16], yielding the expected counts yij. Pearson residuals rij
are calculated for each read count by comparing the expected counts yij against the observed
read count xij as
rij = xij −yij
√yij
.
The Pearson residual can be interpreted as standard deviations from the raw residual - the
diﬀerence in expected and observed values [19].
For high read counts, the expected distribution will cover a wide range, thus leading to a low
expected frequency of each speciﬁc amount of counts, resulting in disproportionately large
residuals. As a result, the residuals will have a larger variance. To overcome this a rank-based
NB model is applied, to reduce the complexity of the residuals. For each sample, k = 100
Page 5 of 33
==PAGE:10==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
signature genes are ranked according to their ﬁt to the NB estimate, avoiding the extreme
values seen in case of very high counts. The genes with the lowest residuals (best ﬁt) are
assigned the lowest rank. In case of genes being tied (multiple genes with the same count) the
ranks are averaged. The ranks of the observed residuals are used for the gene selection rather
than the actual observed residuals, yielding estimates less aﬀected by variances resulting from
high read counts [17].
1.3
Sequencing bias
Ideally the sequencing reads would be uniformly distributed across the genome, leading to
an even coverage, however sequencing bias leads to a skewness in region coverage, resulting
in some regions being sequenced deeper than others [5]. This bias will have an impact on
the gene counts, aﬀecting the abundance and the detection conﬁdence of the MGS. The
sequencing distribution are aﬀected by measures such as GC-content or length of the gene
[1, 3]. Errors can occur due to technical shortcomings, e.g base calling limitations such as
phasing and pre-phasing [13]. Sequencing errors is aﬀected by special patterns or motifs in
the sequence such as palindromes or inverted repeats [5], for which the number of errors
increase. Presence of similar sequences, such as paralogs or pseudogenes can lead to over-
covered regions [10].
Reads generated by Illumina sequencing are known to have lower coverage in the case of
extreme GC-contents [5]. The low coverage appears mainly due to systematic errors occurring
during the PCR ampliﬁcation.
The bias is notable at GC-contents below 12% or above
65%[3].
The number of possible reads mapping to a gene is dependent on the length of the gene, even
after the counts are normalized according to gene length [20]. Reads will need to map to the
gene with a certain minimum number of bases, meaning that the proportion of bases, which
are not able to be mapped within short genes is larger than for longer genes, i.e. fewer reads
will map shorter genes compared to longer genes (after gene length normalization). This
especially leads to problems when comparing across gene sets with great diﬀerences in mean
gene length.
With regards to this project, we will only investigate the eﬀect of GC-content and gene length
given the time-constraints of the project.
1.4
Outliers
For outlier detection, Tukey’s method is employed [21]. Observations found outside of three
times the inter-quartile range (IQR) are labeled as outliers.
The IQR is deﬁned as the
Page 6 of 33
==PAGE:11==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
distance between the ﬁrst and the third quartile, measuring the spread of the middle 50%
of the observations. Speciﬁcally observations which lie outside the range Q1 −(3 · IQR)
and Q3 + (3 · IQR) are considered outliers [21] and will be ignored for the purposes of the
remainder of the thesis.
For samples with many of the same count, e.g. a sample with few reads mapping and thus a
high occurrence of zeros, the IQR will be close to zero, which will lead to an inﬂated number
of outliers. Zero-inﬂated data is very common within metagenomics research and will need to
be dealt with for the purposes of this method. An ad hoc solution to this problem has been
implemented, where gene counts considered as outliers also needs to have a high Pearson
residual.
Page 7 of 33
==PAGE:12==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
2
Method
2.1
Creation of metagenomic species (MGS)
The human gut MGSs used in this project are created from a large collection of >2300
metagenomic human stool samples. A non-redundant gene catalogue is created, from which
the genes are clustered across the samples according to co-abundance, co-assembly and base
composition, thus creating the gene clusters that constitutes the MGSs.
The method is
part of the initial steps for the canopy clustering approach developed by Nielsen et al. [11].
The genes are sorted according to co-abundance with the genes with highest intra-species
abundance correlation as the ﬁrst genes within the MGS. An MGS is thus a collection of
unique genes belonging to a biological entity and the signature gene set is deﬁned as a subset
of these genes with the highest intra-species abundance correlation.
A total of 1273 MGSs is identiﬁed with the number of clustered genes ranging from 418 to
18,395.
2.2
Data description and processing
The dataset consists of 767 shotgun sequenced stool samples collected in the Nordic coun-
tries. The DNA was sequenced using 2 × 150bp paired-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq
platform. The reads were ﬁltered based on quality by KneadData (v.0-6-1) [12]. Leading and
trailing bases with a Phred score below 20 (i.e. >99% accuracy) and adapter sequences were
discarded. Trimmed reads shorter than 100bp, host reads and duplicate reads were removed.
The reads were mapped to the non-redundant gene catalogue (Section 2.1). The reads were
considered mapped if the alignment were above 100bp and had ≥95% identity and had a
mapping quality score above 20 (i.e. >99% accuracy). Read pairs in which the reads mapped
to diﬀerent MGSs or if both reads did not map an MGSs were discarded. Leaving an average
of 17.5M reads per sample.
For each MGS, an m × n gene count matrix X is constructed by m genes and n samples.
X =


x11
x12
x13
. . .
x1n
x21
x22
x23
. . .
x2n
...
...
...
...
...
xm1
xm2
xm3
. . .
xmn


The count of the i’th gene in the j’th sample is denoted by xij. The genes are ordered accord-
ing to co-abundance, with the most abundant gene in the ﬁrst row. The set of read counts
Page 8 of 33
==PAGE:13==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
of the k signature genes is denoted by K whereby {xij}i∈K denotes the k rows corresponding
to the signature genes. The counts are normalized according to gene length and multiplied
by 103 to avoid small numbers.
An MGS is considered detected if reads map to 3 or more signature genes. 1190 out of 1273
MGSs were detected, with the total number of reads mapped ranging from 3 reads to 11
million (before normalization). The samples mapped to 245 MGSs on average.
2.3
Model formulation
2.3.1
Expected number of detected signature genes
A strong relationship is observed between the number of reads that map to the MGS and
the number of detected signature genes. Assuming that each read has an equal chance of
mapping to each signature gene and that the mapping process of each read is independent
of the previous reads, the probability P0 of a gene not being detected can be described by
P0 =
G −1
G
N
where G is the number of signature genes and N is the total number of reads that map the
MGS in the sample. E.g. if the gene set that consists of 100 signature genes and only one
read maps to the MGS, the probability of a gene not being detected will be described by
P0 = (100−1
100 )1 = 0.99.
The probability of a signature gene being detected P1 can thus be described as 1 = P1 +
P0 ⇐⇒P1 = 1 −P0. The signal or the expected number of detected signature genes within
the sample sj can be expressed as
sj = (1 −P0)G =
 
1 −(G −1)
G
Nj!
G,
j = 1, 2, .., n.
(1)
2.3.2
Model implementation
The workﬂow from raw gene counts to a reﬁned signature gene set is shown in Figure 3.
1. To enable comparison of the genes, they are normalized according to gene
length. The raw gene counts and the metadata of the MGSs are processed to normalize
the read counts and construct the read count matrix X.
2. Measure of ﬁt of the initial signature gene set. As a measure of ﬁt of the initial
signature gene set, the mean squared error (MSE) between the original and expected
Page 9 of 33
==PAGE:14==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Figure 3: Pipeline of the ﬂow of data from raw count data to reﬁned signature gene set. The arrows indicate
the direction of information ﬂow. The speciﬁc steps in the pipeline are shown by red numbers, which are
described in further detail below. The illustrations are made from simulated data.
coverage of the signature genes is calculated (this is referred to as the initial MSE)
The detected number of signature genes {xij}i∈K > 0, are plotted against the expected
distribution sj (Equation 1).
3. NB models are ﬁtted to the signature genes. The NB model is ﬁtted to each
sample, to identify suitable signature genes. The counts within each sample are ﬁtted to
a NB distribution and each read count, {xij}i∈K is assigned a Pearson residual {pij}i∈K,
which is transformed to a rank value {rij}i∈K. The best gene is assigned the lowest
Page 10 of 33
==PAGE:15==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
rank.
4. The ranks of the original signature set are collected A 100×n rank-based matrix
R1, is constructed and ﬁlled with the ranks {rij}i∈K.
5. Average ﬁt of the signature genes across samples. The ﬁt of the genes across
the samples is identiﬁed by averaging their ranks. For each signature gene, the mean
rank across the samples is computed from R1 as µi = 1
n
Pn
j=1 rij. The blue line on the
plot indicates the mean average rank of 501
2.
6. Selecting the best signature genes. Keeping only the most suited genes as part
of the signature gene set. If the mean rank is above a certain threshold, the gene is
considered unsuitable and is discarded from the signature gene set, leaving a smaller
intermediate gene count matrix, Z, with a gene set Kint consisting of kint genes. The
optimal threshold for each MGS is found by an iterative process described in more
detail in section 3.2.1. If fewer than 10 genes are left in Kint, the MGS is considered
poorly deﬁned and is not used for further analysis.
If the initial 100 genes have a
suﬃcient mean rank, the original gene set will be kept as the signature genes.
7. NB models are ﬁtted based on the best signature genes. Based on the inter-
mediate gene set Kint a new NB model is ﬁtted for each sample in order to model only
the suitable part of the original signature genes.
8. Potential genes to replace the discarded signature genes. New genes, that
are potentially replacing the discarded signature genes are collected. As potential new
signature genes, the 100th to 500th most abundant genes is selected in the read count
matrix. If an MGS contains m < 500 genes the number of genes m is used instead.
9. The potential replacement genes are ﬁtted to the NB model of the best
signature genes. To identify the genes which is most suitable for the signature gene
set, the potential replacement genes are ﬁtted to the NB model based on the best
signature genes. The potential replacement genes are mapped to the NB distribution
created by genes Kint in step 6 and given residual values according to their ﬁt to the
model.
10. The ranks of the potential genes to replace signature genes are collected. A
Rank matrix R2, is created with the residuals from gene 100 to 500 or m.
11. Average ﬁt of the potential replacement genes across samples. Identifying the
ﬁt of the potential replacement genes across the samples by averaging their ranks.
12. Selecting the most suitable genes to replace the discarded signature genes.
Page 11 of 33
==PAGE:16==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Based on the mean rank across the samples, the best suited genes are selected and
incorporated into the signature gene set.
The remaining (100 −kint) genes with the lowest mean rank and the largest co-
abundance in R2 is selected to replace the discarded signature genes, resulting in a
complete gene set of 100 genes. The genes are sorted according to the score 0.975·µj +
0.025·i, where i denotes the gene number (since the genes in the count matrix are sorted
according to co-abundance), selecting the (100 −kint) genes with the lowest score. The
ﬁt of the new gene set is compared to the expected distribution by calculating the MSE
(this is referred to as the reﬁned MSE).
13. The new signature gene set is rerun through the pipeline.
If the reﬁned
signature gene set has improved performance (decreased MSE) the signature gene set
will be replaced with the reﬁned set. To examine whether the reﬁned gene set can be
improved further, the NB model is ﬁtted to the reﬁned gene set, enabling detection of
genes that performs well with the reﬁned gene set. An iterative process is initiated,
where the steps 2-10 are repeated until the MSE does not decrease any further, thus
converges towards the best possible gene set. If the MSE increases after an iteration,
the previous gene set will be kept as the reﬁned signature gene set.
This workﬂow will reﬁne the signature gene set k and yield a new revised signature gene
set that performs better or equal to the initial signature gene set when compared with the
expected distribution of signature genes sj (Equation 1). In some cases however, certain
genes will perform poorly in a smaller number of samples. To overcome this problem, the
workﬂow is performed again with an alteration in steps 5 and 10. Instead of taking the
mean of the rank-based matrices, the mean of the 95 percentile of the genes is found, thus
identifying and replacing genes which performs poorly in 5% of the samples.
2.3.3
Removal of corrupt read counts
The reﬁned signature gene set will in some cases contain reads count xij with an extreme
count, which can be seen as an outlier as described in Section 1.4. The workﬂow to identify
and remove these unreliable read counts are displayed in ﬁgure 4.
1. The reﬁned signature gene set are assigned Pearson residuals according to
ﬁt to NB models.
The counts of the reﬁned signature gene set {xij}i∈K, are ﬁtted to the NB distribution
and assigned a Pearson residual {pij}i∈K, yielding a residual matrix P.
2. Outlying read counts are set to zero.
For each sample j, the IQR is found and untrusted reads are detected and discarded if
Page 12 of 33
==PAGE:17==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Figure 4: Pipeline of the ﬂow of data for sorting out untrustworthy read counts. The arrows indicate the
direction of the information ﬂow. The speciﬁc steps in the pipeline are shown with red numbers, which are
described in further detail below.
xij ̸∈[Q1 −(3 · IQR), Q3 + (3 · IQR)] and {pij}i∈K > 2500.
3. NB models are ﬁtted to the updated read counts.
The untrusted reads are removed from the read count matrix. The updated read counts
are compared to the expected distribution sj (Equation 1). The MSE is calculated (this
is referred to as the ﬁnal MSE).
Page 13 of 33
==PAGE:18==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
3
Results & analysis
The signature gene sets of the MGSs were analysed and reﬁned using a metagenomic dataset
consisting of 767 shotgun sequenced fecal samples (section 2.2). For each MGS the signature
gene set will ﬁt the observed detection diﬀerently due to diﬀerences in the genetic variability
within the species, ranging from species exhibiting a high genomic diversity to species with a
large set of conserved core genes (i.e. low variance). The three MGSs Bacteroides vulgatus,
Merdimonas faecis and Roseburia faecis have been selected as examples, for which the results
will be displayed and described in further detail throughout the results section. These were
selected due to their high occurrence in the dataset and the fact that their genes exhibit
diﬀerent types of distributions, showing the eﬀect of the workﬂow on diﬀerent groups types
of distributions, as described below.
3.1
The initial signature gene set
The original signature set is selected as the 100 most co-abundant genes found within each
MGS. The distribution of detected signature genes along with the number of mapped reads
within each sample is compared to the expected signal (equation 1) for the initial signature
gene set by calculating the MSE (section 2.3.2, step 2). The MSE across the MGSs has a
high variation, with the average 33.62 ± 170.60 (± s.d.), indicating that the performance of
the initial signature gene sets varies considerably between the MGSs.
A
B
C
Figure 5: The detected signature genes as a function of the number of mapped reads within each sample.
The dataset consists of 767 samples which are indicated in blue. The expected number of signature genes
mapped in a sample are indicated by the grey line. The distribution are shown for three MGSs, Bacteroides
vulgatus, Merdimonas faecis and Roseburia faecis.
To visualize the relationship, the distributions of the three MGS Bacteroides vulgatus, Merdi-
monas faecis and Roseburia faecis are displayed along with the expected signal (Figure 5).
Page 14 of 33
==PAGE:19==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
The samples are generally seen to follow the distribution given in equation 1. For Bacteroides
vulgatus (Figure 5A) the distribution splits into two groups, one that follows the expected
signal fairly well and a group that ﬂattens out at around 65 detected signature genes, even at
sequencing depths where one would expect to ﬁnd many more, indicating an initial gene set
that was not found in all members of the species, indicating possible strain-diﬀerences within
Bacteroides vulgatus. Bacteroides vulgatus is the most abundant MGS with an average of
14,734 reads mapping for each sample. The distribution for Merdimonas faecis (Figure 5B)
is seen to follow the expected signal well, however a single sample is seen to deviate, with
around 30 reads mapping to fewer genes than expected. The samples are generally seen to
contain fewer mapped reads, with an average of 109 reads mapping per sample. The observed
and expected signal for Roseburia faecis (Figure 5C) is seen to roughly follow the expected,
but the observed distribution levels out around 95 genes.
In the search for a more suitable signature gene set it is relevant to identify the cause of the
deviation from expected behavior. The next section will go into depth with the signature
gene set of Bacteroides vulgatus to uncover the variation between the samples.
3.1.1
Taxonomy aﬀecting the gene set
The split distribution of Bacteroides vulgatus (Figure 5A) is seen as a result of undetected
signature genes even at high read counts.
The counts of each gene in each sample are
examined using a heatmap (Figure 6). A constant set of genes are not detected in a subset
of the samples. This set of absent is not completely ordered according to co-abundance.
Figure 6: Heatmap of the counts of each gene (rows) within each of the 767 samples (columns). The genes
are sorted according to co-abundance using canopy-based clustering. Coloring goes from no counts (black)
to high counts (yellow).
Page 15 of 33
==PAGE:20==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
32 of the signature genes are not detected in 176 of the samples, even at high sequencing
depths. The evolutionary events leading to the gene loss can be explained either by the species
dividing into two subspecies, whereafter one subspecies acquires all the genes in question or
by loss of genes, possibly in the form of a gene cassette since fewer evolutionary gene loss
events would be required.
The possible origins of this divergence is investigated with BLASTN. A fasta-ﬁle containing
the sequences of the 32 genes that do not occur in 176 of the samples are used to search for
species containing similar sequences [4]. For all 32 genes 2 signiﬁcant hits are found, Bac-
teroides vulgatus strain VIC01 and Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC 8482, with a query coverage
ranging from 95-100%, percent identity in the range of 98.31-100% and e-values which are
all rounded to 0. The location of the genes on the two hits are found to be spread across
the genomes (Figure 7), however there are some clusters, where the genes are placed closely
together on the genomes indicating that the genes could have been lost as a consequence of
fewer evolutionary events.
Figure 7: The placement of the 32 genes, indicated by circles, on the two reference genomes Bacteroides
vulgatus strain VIC01 and Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC 8482. The x-axis is the length of the reference genome
in bp.
3.2
Reﬁning the signature gene set
3.2.1
Identifying the optimal gene set
The rank-based NB model is implemented for all MGSs, ranking the initial signature genes
based on their performance. The matrix R1 contains the ranks (section 2.3.2, step 3 & 4),
where the best gene is assigned the lowest rank. The mean rank of each gene is calculated
across the samples to get a metric of how well the gene ﬁts the NB model across the samples.
The range of the mean ranks depend on how well the genes ﬁt the NB model (Figure 3). If
all genes follow the NB model fairly well, the range will be smaller (Figure 8B) than for a
Page 16 of 33
==PAGE:21==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
gene set, where some genes do not ﬁt the NB model (Figure 8A & C). The range of the mean
ranks is seen to be smaller for Merdimonas faecis (Figure 8B), which is in concordance with
the signature genes of the MGS following the expected signal closely (Figure 5B).
A
B
C
Figure 8: The mean rank of the 100 initial signature genes displayed for Bacteroides vulgatus, Merdimonas
faecis and Roseburia faecis. The genes are ordered according to co-abundance. The blue line indicates the
mean of the mean ranks (50.5).
If a gene has a mean rank below a given threshold, the gene will be removed from the
signature gene set. An iterative process is implemented, where threshold values between
35-60 is tested, leading to smaller intermediate gene sets (section 2.3.2, step 6). The best
possible gene set is found for each threshold by repeating the steps in the next paragraph for
each intermediate gene set.
The NB model is ﬁtted to the intermediate gene set (section 2.3.2, step 7), thus only ﬁtting
the genes that have passed the threshold. From the original count matrix, gene 100-500 are
selected and ﬁt to the NB model. The genes are ranked according to their ﬁt to the NB
model creating a rank matrix R2. New genes are selected to replace the discarded signature
genes, resulting in a complete gene set of 100 genes. The selection is based on the score given
in section 2.3.2, step 12. The new signature gene set is ﬁtted to the expected signal and the
MSE is calculated. If the MSE is lower than the MSE of the initial signature gene set, the new
signature gene set is kept. The new reﬁned signature gene set is then run through the same
process as the initial gene set until the gene set can not be improved further (section 2.3.2,
step 13). This leads to multiple iterations, where the gene set will gradually approach the
best possible set (Figure 9). For Bacteroides vulgatus the initial signature gene set (Figure
9 Left) is seen to deviate to a large extend from the expected distribution due to a split
distribution. After one iteration, the same pattern is seen amongst the samples (Figure 9
Middle), however the samples have approached expected distribution. The distribution of
Page 17 of 33
==PAGE:22==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
the samples approximate the expected distribution after 4 iterations (Figure 9 Right).
Figure 9: The distribution of detected signature genes as a function of mapped reads for diﬀerent iterations
(0, 1 & 4) of Bacteroides vulgatus. The ﬁgure to the left displays the distribution of the initial signature gene
set, the middle ﬁgure after one iteration and the ﬁgure to the right display the distribution after 4 iterations.
The process of optimizing the intermediate signature gene set is done for all threshold values,
resulting in an optimized gene set for all thresholds. The gene set which results in the lowest
MSE is selected as the reﬁned signature gene set. For Bacteroides vulgatus the best possible
gene set is found after 4 iterations (Figure 9 right) at the threshold value 52.
This reﬁned signature gene set is then evaluated based on the ranks of the 95-percentile
instead of the mean to identify genes, which performs poorly in only 5% of the samples. The
threshold values between 90-98 is used. The gene set with the lowest MSE is kept and deﬁned
as the reﬁned signature gene set.
The genes display a large variation in the performance according to the NB model (Figure
8). This variation could arise from sequencing errors due to GC% or gene length (section
1.3).
3.2.2
GC-content & gene length bias
To examine if there is any inﬂuence of GC-content and length on the mean rank of the
genes, the two MGSs (with species resolution) with the highest and lowest average GC%
Flavonifractor plautii and Romboutsia timonensis are examined (Figure 10 bottom row). As
well as the two MGSs (with species resolution) with the shortest and the longest genes on
average, Coprobacter secundus and Eisenbergiella tayi (Figure 10 top row).
The mean ranks of the initial signature gene set is displayed as a function of GC-content
Page 18 of 33
==PAGE:23==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Figure 10: The mean rank of the 100 initial signature genes is displayed as a function of gene length (top
row) or GC-content (bottom row). The blue line indicates the linear ﬁt between mean rank of the gene and
the gene length or GC-content, and the grey area indicates the 95% conﬁdence intervals.
or gene length. The distribution of the mean ranks seems to be scattered across both GC%
and gene length with no clear trend (Figure 10). The relationship is tested using a linear
model, which is indicated in ﬁgure 10 with a blue line with its corresponding 95% conﬁdence
interval. The results are summarized in Table 1, where the last column contains the p-value
of the linear ﬁt between length or GC% and the mean rank.
The p-value indicates the
probability of the linear relationship between the mean rank and the GC-content or gene
length is diﬀerent from 0. With p-values above 0.05, the mean ranks of the genes cannot
be proved to be signiﬁcantly dependent on either GC-content or gene length, even in the
extremes of GC-content and gene length, which is supported by the conﬁdence intervals
(Figure 10).
Table 1: MGS with the corresponding attribute of interest (average gene length or average GC%). The
p-value of the linear ﬁt of the mean ranks as a function of the attribute is given.
Length
GC%
p-value
Coprobacter secundus
1920
-
0.991
Eisenbergiella tayi
603
-
0.258
Flavonifractor plautii
-
67.2
0.97
Romboutsia timonensis
-
26.2
0.116
Page 19 of 33
==PAGE:24==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
3.3
Performance of the reﬁned signature gene set
The distribution of detected signature genes as a function of mapped reads of the reﬁned
signature gene set is compared to the expected signal (equation 1) by calculating the MSE
for all MGSs. Both the mean and the standard deviation have decreased to 10.68 ± 49.23,
indicating the gene sets are better at taxonomic identiﬁcation. The distribution of detected
A
B
C
Figure 11: The detected signature genes from the reﬁned signature gene set as a function of the number
of mapped reads within each sample.
The 767 samples are indicated in blue.
The expected number of
signature genes mapped in a sample are indicated by the grey line. The distribution are shown for three
MGSs, Bacteroides vulgatus, Merdimonas faecis and Roseburia faecis.
signature genes and their corresponding number of reads mapped for Bacteroides vulgatus,
Merdimonas faecis and Roseburia faecis is seen to follow the expected signal more accurately
(Figure 11). Compared to Figure 5 it is clear that the reﬁned signature gene set covers
more core genes for Bacteroides vulgatus and Roseburia faecis, since the majority of samples
detect roughly the expected number of signature genes. The same distribution is seen for
Merdimonas faecis as no genes have been replaced from the original signature gene set. For
Bacteroides vulgatus two samples are seen to deviate extra from the expected signal (Figure
11A). Interestingly these two samples originated from the same individual. For Merdimonas
faecis one sample is still seen to deviate further from the expected signal (Figure 11B).
The change in MSE from the initial signature gene set to the reﬁned gene set is visualised
by a contour plot (Figure 12). The data is normalized by taking the logs of the MSE and
dividing by the maximum MSE of the initial signature gene set, yielding a range for which
the lowest number belongs to the MGS with the lowest MSE. All MGSs are placed below
the diagonal, indicating an improvement or an equal MSE for the reﬁned signature gene
set. A paired Wilcoxon test is used to compare the diﬀerence in MSE, yielding a p-value of
2.2 × 10−16, supporting the claim that the reﬁned signature gene set leads to a lower sample
Page 20 of 33
==PAGE:25==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Figure 12: Contour plot displaying the normalized MSE of the initial signature gene set versus the normalised
MSE of the reﬁned gene set. Each point indicate an MGS. The red line indicates the diagonal.
mean of the MSE and thus more precise taxonomic identiﬁcation. 325 MGSs out of 1273
MGSs have the same MSE for the initial and reﬁned signature gene set. 948 MGSs had a
decrease in MSE.
3.4
Outliers
The genes which are deviating more than 3×IQR from Q1 or Q3, following Turkey’s method
[21] and have a high Pearson residual above 2500 are considered outliers. The deviation
between expected and observed number of detected signature genes are displayed for Merdi-
monas faecis. A single outlier is detected in the sample which is seen to deviate the most
(Figure 13 left). The sample containing the outlying read count is indicated in red. The
outlying gene count in the sample is set to 0, where after the MSE is recalculated (Figure 13
right). The outlier sample is seen to follow the expected distribution more closely.
The outlier genes are removed from the MGSs by altering the count matrices setting the
outlying counts to 0.
The variation between the MGSs have decreased further, with an
average of 8.27 ± 26.83. Outliers are found in 125 out of 1273 MGS. The number of outliers
range from 1 to 262, with only 34 MGSs with 10 or more outliers. The MGSs with >10
outliers should be examined further to assess their credibility as metagenomic species.
Page 21 of 33
==PAGE:26==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Figure 13: The observed and expected number of detected signature genes from the reﬁned signature gene
set as a function of the number of mapped reads within each sample for Merdimonas faecis. The samples
with no outliers are indicated in blue, the sample containing the outlying gene is indicated in red.
For Bacteroides vulgatus, Merdimonas faecis and Roseburia faecis 24, 1 and 0 outlying read
counts are found respectively (Figure 14). For Merdimonas faecis the outlying sample have
been removed and all samples are seen to follow the expected signal closely (Figure 14B). For
Bacteroides vulgatus especially one sample is still seen to deviate from the expected signal
(Figure 14A). This is likely due to the sample containing a large number of reads, setting the
outlying genes to zero will thus result in a disproportionate low number of detected signature
genes.
To summarize the results for the three MGSs Bacteroides vulgatus, Merdimonas faecis and
Roseburia faecis, the MSE of the initial signature gene set, the reﬁned signature gene set and
the reﬁned signature gene set with outliers removed ("Final") is seen in table 2.
Table 2: The MSE of the expected and observed number of detected signature genes for the initial signature
gene set, the reﬁned signature gene set and the reﬁned signature gene set with outliers removed (Final).
Initial
Reﬁned
Final
Bacteroides vulgatus
283.71
15.75
8.33
Merdimonas faecis
3.11
3.11
2.24
Roseburia faecis
30.4
2.17
2.18
The initial signature gene sets have been optimized, so it ﬁts the expected distribution of
detected signature genes as a function of mapped reads more precisely. However the results
are from the same dataset from which the model have been trained. In the following section,
Page 22 of 33
==PAGE:27==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
A
B
C
Figure 14: The detected signature genes from the reﬁned signature gene set as a function of the number of
mapped reads within each sample. The 767 samples are indicated in blue. The expected number of signature
genes mapped in a sample are indicated by the grey line. The distribution are shown for Bacteroides vulgatus,
Merdimonas faecis and Roseburia faecis.
the initial and the reﬁned signature gene set will be tested on a public dataset for cross
validation.
3.5
Application to independent dataset
3.5.1
Data description and processing
The signature gene set is evaluated using a separate dataset sequenced by Rampelli et al.
[14] and collected by L.Schnorr et al.
[9], studying the diﬀerences in the microbiome of
Italians and Hadza hunter-gatherers from Tanzania. The dataset is publicly available through
ExperimentHub [2]. A total of 38 subjects were recruited, thereof 11 from Italy and 27 from
Tanzania. The stool samples have been shotgun sequenced with the Illumina GAIIx platform
yielding 2×100bp paired-end reads, resulting in an average of 11.8M reads per sample [14].
The raw reads were processed in the same manner as in section 2.2. Except for discarding
trimmed reads shorter than 100bp, the threshold was set to 90bp, due to the reads being
shorter. A total of 938 out of 1273 MGSs were detected. The samples mapped 246 MGSs on
average.
3.5.2
Validation of model on independent data
As a baseline the public data were ﬁtted using the initial signature gene set, to examine the
compliance with the expected signal. The average MSE across the MGSs were 8.85 ± 36.88.
Page 23 of 33
==PAGE:28==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
Figure 15: Contour plot displaying the normalized MSE of the initial signature gene set versus the normalised
MSE of the reﬁned gene set when using the public data. Each point indicate an MGS. The red line indicates
the diagonal.
The samples are mapped to the reﬁned signature gene set for which the MSE to the expected
signal is found to have an average of 7.16 ± 32.44. This indicates that the reﬁned signature
gene set is better at estimating taxonomic quantiﬁcation, which is veriﬁed using a paired
Wilcoxon test. The comparison results in an average MSE reduction of 1.69 with p-value of
1.69 × 10−11, conﬁrming that an improvement in MSE can be achieved by using the reﬁned
signature gene set. Out of the 1273 MGSs 938 were detected. 416 MGSs had an MSE that
decreased, 268 had an MSE that increased and 254 did not have a change in MSE. Of the
268 MGSs that had an increase in MSE when using the reﬁned signature gene set, 144 of the
MGSs still ended up with a MSE below 1.
The change in MSE is visualised by a contour plot (Figure 15). The data is normalized by
taking the log of the MSE and dividing it by the maximum MSE of the initial signature
gene set, yielding a range for which the lowest number belongs to the MGS with the lowest
MSE. The MGSs is scattered on both sides of the diagonal indicating that some MGSs have
improved and others have worsened.
In summary, the rank based NB model have improved the precision of the detection of
signature genes both for the dependent dataset which the model have been trained on as
Page 24 of 33
==PAGE:29==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
well as on the public dataset for which the model was implemented. However there are still
MGSs for which the gene set do not follow the expected distribution, and where the model
implemented in this study have not been able to optimize the gene set suﬃciently.
Page 25 of 33
==PAGE:30==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
4
Discussion
4.1
Limitations of the rank based Negative Binomial model
Modelling the distribution of metagenomic read count data has previously been proven to
be diﬃcult due to the complex nature of the data including overdispersion and zero-inﬂation
[25]. Diﬀerent variants of the NB model have successfully been used to approximate the
read count distribution of RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data e.g. by edgeR [8] and DESeq2
[7]. However these methods have had ambiguous results when used on metagenomic data.
The structure of RNA-seq data are similar to that of metagenomic count data, however the
variance of the data is diﬀerent. In RNA-seq analysis the variance arise due to diﬀerence
in expression patterns between genes, whereas in metagenomic analysis it arise primarily
due to the sampling of DNA from the total pool of DNA available (which is aﬀected by
species abundance), but are also inﬂuenced by biological variation [22].
The NB model
implemented in this project assumes a quadratic relationship between the variance and the
mean, comparable to the model implemented in edgeR [8].
The results of the study is highly aﬀected by the underlying assumptions of the statistical
model, for which reason the simple NB model will fall short, due to the variability of the
data, leading to residuals that vary widely in scale. To overcome this problem, the genes are
ranked according to their ﬁt to the model. When ranking the genes it is possible to evaluate
the results of the model by order instead of using the absolute values, thus making the model
more robust [17]. In other words, even though the model does not ﬁt the data perfectly, it is
possible to approximate a distribution and get useful results, when ranking the genes.
4.2
Sequencing bias
The rank-based NB model yields a large variation in the mean ranks of the genes (Figure
8). It was examined whether the variability between the genes could arise due to extreme
GC-content or due to the length of the genes (Figure 10), since a bias in coverage is known
to occur at these extremes [3, 20]. However no signiﬁcant relation between the features and
the performance of the genes were found, when testing the relationship with a linear model.
Aird et al.
found that the GC-content aﬀects the coverage below 12% and above 65%
[3].
The MGS with the lowest GC-content is Romboutsia timonensis with 26.2%, which
is considerably higher than 12%, which could explain why no signiﬁcant relationship is seen.
For Flavonifractor plautii, which have a GC-content of 67.2% the non-signiﬁcant relationship
remains unsolved. According to Oshlack et al. [20] the coverage should increase with gene
length, i.e. long genes will have a higher coverage, however this trend is also not supported
Page 26 of 33
==PAGE:31==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
by the data. The GC-content and gene lengths can thus not explain why some genes are
more suited to be part of the signature gene set.
4.3
Outliers
The rank-based model was implemented to enable comparisons between samples having a
wide range of residuals. The spread of residuals arise due to variance seen in the data not
explained by the model, but is also aﬀected by outlier read counts. Outlying observations will
bias the model estimates, skewing the ﬁt of the genes. The ranking of the genes will keep the
same order of the genes within a sample, and make the comparison between samples more
meaningful. Ranking will make the model less sensitive to outliers and thus more robust [7].
Outliers are identiﬁed following Turkey’s method [21] and the counts are set to zero. Ideally
these genes should be removed from the NB model, however due to the time limitations of this
project, this was not implemented. Especially in the case of multiple outlying counts within
a sample with a high total read count, setting the counts to zero will aﬀect the coverage of
the signature genes considerably and thus decrease the concordance to the expected coverage
of the signature genes, as seen for Bacteroides vulgatus (Figure 14A).
We are interested in removing outlying reads, so the distribution of detected signature genes
follow the expected as close as possible. This will enable reliable detection of the MGS when
used on new samples.
4.4
Taxonomic diversity
The MGSs are created by binning genes across a large number of samples based on co-
abundance, base composition and co-assembly, by the method developed by Nielsen et al.
[11].
The 100 genes with the highest intra-species abundance correlation constitutes the
initial signature gene set. Since these genes are most often present within the species, they
are most likely part of the invariable core genome found in the majority of the strains [22].
However for some species, the population of a subspecies will be over-represented, which
allows pangenome genes to be part of the signature gene set. These accessory genes will only
be present in a subset of the samples containing the subspecies. This is what we assume to
be the reason of split distributions, like the one seen for Bacteroides vulgatus (Figure 5A).
A constant set of 32 genes is not detected within the subset of 176 samples that levels out
around 65 detected signature genes (Figure 6), indicating a subdivision of the species. Since
the 32 genes are present within the majority of the samples (574 samples), the genes are
included in the signature gene set even though they are suspected to be part of the variable
genome (pangenome).
Page 27 of 33
==PAGE:32==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
If the genes are placed sequentially on the genome, only a single evolutionary event could
lead to the loss or gain of all the accessory genes. However results from BLASTN reveal that
the 32 genes are scattered around the reference genomes (Figure 7), suggesting that multiple
evolutionary events lead to the subdivision. Additional studies should be carried out in order
to determine the phylogenetic relation between the samples with the 32 missing signature
genes and the remainder of the samples.
To optimize the signature gene set, the accessory genes are replaced with invariable core
genes, making the samples approach the expected coverage of the signature genes.
This
entails the loss of subspecies resolution, as seen for Bacteroides vulgatus (Figure 11A). To
facilitate the detection of subspecies, further studies should seek to investigate the possibility
of separating the MGS into two metagenomic entities, one covering the species and one for
the subspecies. This would alleviate the problem of having split distributions.
Another approach would simply be to select a smaller subset subset of genes as the signature
set, thus only selecting the genes present in the majority of the samples, which are most
likely part of the core genome. The signature gene set have been chosen to be a subset of 100
genes, however this number has been chosen semi-randomly. The number of signature genes
have to be suﬃcient in order to detect species present at low abundance, hence the more
signature genes the higher probability of a sequence-read mapping to one of them. However
the number should be low enough for all species to include the number of unique core genes.
The optimal number of signature genes thus depends on the genomic variability of the species
as well as the expected frequency and abundance of which it is found within the samples.
The number is not necessarily optimal, thus more exploration should be done to verify the
optimal number of signature genes. This number will most likely vary between the MGSs.
4.5
Zero-inﬂated data
In the absence of read counts it is not possible to reliably select suitable signature genes for
the MGS due to the fragmented nature of metagenomic count data [15]. If the MGS is rarely
detected across the samples and often found in low abundance, samples that detects the
MGS will predominantly contain zero-inﬂated data due to few or none genes being detected.
This causes problems, since the NB model is known to ﬁt data less well when there are many
zeros [24]. The rank based NB model will rank all genes with zero-counts equal and will rank
all genes with mapped reads worse, resulting in detected genes having a higher rank and are
thus considered as the most unsuited genes. If the MGS is present in low abundance in all
samples, the optimization procedure results in a gene set consisting of genes, that are not
detected in any of the samples. If the MGS is only present in low abundance within some
of the samples, the model will utilize the information from the higher abundance samples to
Page 28 of 33
==PAGE:33==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
optimize the signature gene set. If the signature genes are truly speciﬁc for the species, they
facilitate quantiﬁcation even at a very low abundance.
The RNA-seq methods edgeR [8] and DESeq2 [7] deals with low counts by discarding genes
with counts below 5 to 7 reads, since these genes are not of interest in an expression analysis.
This approach results in a high number of reads being discarded. In a metagenomic analysis
it is not optimal to discard genes with low counts, since this is most likely due to the species
being present in a low abundance. In this project an MGS was considered detected if 3 or more
signature genes were detected, allowing MGSs with a total read count of 3. It is therefore
crucial to select the correct genes, to enable reliable detection even at low abundance.
The signature gene sets of low abundant MGSs should be evaluated with samples containing
the MGS in a higher abundance, to verify that the reﬁned gene sets are appropriate for
quantiﬁcation of the species.
4.6
Validating the model on independent data
To validate the performance of the model, an independent dataset of 38 public shotgun
sequenced samples were processed according to the same procedure as the training data and
a read count matrix were constructed. As a measure of performance, the MSE between the
expected and observed coverage of the signature genes were found. The initial signature gene
set was used as a baseline and was compared to the performance of the reﬁned signature
gene set. A signiﬁcant decrease in MSE from the initial to the reﬁned signature gene set was
found by a paired Wilcoxon test. However only 416 out of 938 MGSs had a decrease in MSE
and 268 MGSs had an increase. Further evaluation of the model with additional samples
should be done in order to conﬁrm these results.
In metagenomics, the data are aﬀected by the experimental design, the sample handling and
the diﬀerences in sequencing technologies. A diﬀerence is e.g that the training data were
sequenced by 2 × 150bp paired-end on an Illumina HiSeq platform, whereas the public data
are sequenced on a Illumina GAIIx platform with 2×100bp paired-end reads. These factors
could have had an inﬂuence on the performance of the signature gene sets, it would therefore
be relevant to evaluate the model on samples treated according to the same protocol as the
training data.
4.7
Perspectives and future use of the signature gene set
The model facilitates identiﬁcation of better signature genes, leading to a signiﬁcantly better
ﬁt to the expected model, thus improving the accuracy of the species abundance estimates
and increases detection conﬁdence.
Page 29 of 33
==PAGE:34==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
While the signature gene set has a better ﬁt to the expected distribution by the method
described in this thesis, there is a number of MGSs for which the signature gene set has
remained unchanged and with a low concordance to the expected distribution, i.e. where
the signature genes are not reliable for detection and abundance estimations of the MGS. It
would be interesting to examine, whether the taxonomy aﬀects the reliability of the signature
gene set. Genomic variability can be explained by taxonomy, since some species will have a
higher variation between strains, making the selection a signature gene set consisting of core
genes diﬃcult. Taxonomy can also be used for determining the frequency of a species, since
some genera are more represented in the samples than others. If a species is rare and thus
found in low abundance it will also be challenging to select a suitable signature gene set.
Future studies should be pursued to investigate the change in abundance estimations for
the original and the reﬁned signature gene sets. The abundance of species is quantiﬁed by
counting the number of reads mapping to the signature genes of the species and comparing
the number of reads mapped to the diﬀerent species in the sample. Thus for MGSs where
a large proportion of the signature genes have been replaced, the abundance might diﬀer
considerably, e.g. for Bacteroides vulgatus, where a subset of the samples did not cover 32
of the original signature genes (Figure 5A). The replacement of these 32 genes (Figure 11A)
will most likely aﬀect the abundance of Bacteroides vulgatus in that particular subset.
Page 30 of 33
==PAGE:35==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
5
Conclusion
We succeeded in implementing a negative binomial rank-based model, which on average
reﬁnes and improves the signature gene sets for the MGSs, enabling better and more precise
quantiﬁcation and detection of species present within a microbial community. However for a
subset of MGSs the model was not able to optimize the gene sets, e.g. due to low abundance
(zero-inﬂated data) or due to the MGS containing a high number of outlying read counts.
The variability of the genes was explored in terms of GC-content and gene lengths, however
no signiﬁcant relation was found.
The performance of the reﬁned signature gene set was validated using an independent dataset,
and found to signiﬁcantly decrease the diﬀerence in the observed and expected coverage of
the signature genes.
In order to enhance the performance of the model future work should be conducted to examine
the eﬀect of implementing a zero-inﬂated NB model, where the excess zeros are dealt with
separately. Furthermore it would be relevant to implement a method to calculate conﬁdence
score of true detection of species, to reﬂect the conﬁdence we have in the signature gene set.
Page 31 of 33
==PAGE:36==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
References
[1]
“A Model-Based Approach for Species Abundance Quantiﬁcation Based on Shotgun
Metagenomic Data”. In: Statistics in Biosciences 9.1 (2017), pp. 13–27. issn: 1867-1772.
[2]
“Accessible, curated metagenomic data through ExperimentHub”. In: Nature Methods
14.11 (2017), pp. 1023–1024. issn: 1548-7105, 1548-7091.
[3]
“Analyzing and minimizing PCR ampliﬁcation bias in Illumina sequencing libraries”.
In: Genome Biology 12.2 (2011), R18. issn: 1474-760x.
[4]
“Basic local alignment search tool”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 215.3 (1990),
pp. 403–410. issn: 0022-2836.
[5]
“Characterizing and measuring bias in sequence data”. In: Genome Biology 14.5 (2013),
R51. issn: 1474-760X.
[6]
“Comparative metagenomics of microbial communities”. In: Science 308.5721 (2005),
pp. 554–557. issn: 1095-9203.
[7]
“Diﬀerential Expression Analysis of Complex RNA-seq Experiments Using edgeR”. In:
Statistical Analysis of Next Generation Sequencing Data (2014). Ed. by Nettleton Dan
Datta Somnath, pp. 51–74.
[8]
“Diﬀerential expression analysis for sequence count data”. In: Nature Precedings (2010),
pp. 1–1. issn: 1756-0357.
[9]
“Gut microbiome of the Hadza hunter-gatherers”. In: Nature Communications (2014).
issn: 1682–1693.
[10]
“High-quality DNA sequence capture of 524 disease candidate genes”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108.16 (2011),
pp. 6549–6554. issn: 1091-6490.
[11]
“Identiﬁcation and assembly of genomes and genetic elements in complex metage-
nomic samples without using reference genomes”. In: Nature Biotechnology 32.8 (2014),
pp. 822–828. issn: 1546-1696.
[12]
KneadData. 2017. url: https://bitbucket.org/biobakery/kneaddata. (accessed:
01.17.2020).
[13]
Christian Ledergerber and Christophe Dessimoz. “Base-calling for next-generation se-
quencing platforms”. In: Brief Bioinformatics 12.5 (2011), pp. 489–497. issn: 1477-
4054.
[14]
“Metagenome Sequencing of the Hadza Hunter-Gatherer Gut Microbiota”. In: Current
Biology 25.13 (2015), pp. 1682–1693. issn: 1879-0445.
[15]
“Metagenomic species proﬁling using universal phylogenetic marker genes”. In: Nature
Methods 10.12 (2013), pp. 1196–1199. issn: 1548-7105.
[16]
David Meyer, Achim Zeileis, and Kurt Hornik. vcd: Visualizing Categorical Data. R
package version 1.4-4. 2017.
[17]
“Rank regression: an alternative regression approach for data with outliers”. In: Shang-
hai Archives of Psychiatry 26.5 (2014), pp. 310–316. issn: 1002-0829.
Page 32 of 33
==PAGE:37==
DTU, Fall 2019
Species identiﬁcation by use of marker gene sets
[18]
Mark D. Robinson, Davis J. McCarthy, and Gordon K. Smyth. “edgeR: a Bioconduc-
tor package for diﬀerential expression analysis of digital gene expression data”. In:
Bioinformatics 26.1 (2010), pp. 139–140. issn: 1367-4811.
[19]
“The strucplot framework: Visualizing multi-way contingency tables with vcd”. In:
Journal of Statistical Software 17.3 (2006), pp. 1–48. issn: 1548-7660.
[20]
“Transcript length bias in RNA-seq data confounds systems biology”. In: Biology Direct
4.1 (2009), p. 14. issn: 1745-6150.
[21]
John W. Tukey. Exploratory data analysis. Addison-Wesley, 1977, XVI, 688 S. (un-
known). isbn: 0201076160.
[22]
“Variability in Metagenomic Count Data and Its Inﬂuence on the Identiﬁcation of
Diﬀerentially Abundant Genes”. In: Journal of Computational Biology 24.4 (2017),
pp. 311–326. issn: 1557-8666.
[23]
Neil A. Weiss, Paul T. Holmes, and Michael. Hardy. A course in probability. Pearson
Addison Wesley, 2006, 742 s. : isbn: 032118954x.
[24]
Sophie Weiss et al. “Normalization and microbial diﬀerential abundance strategies de-
pend upon data characteristics”. In: Microbiome 5.1 (2017), p. 27. issn: 2049-2618.
[25]
“Bayesian hierarchical negative binomial models for multivariable analyses with appli-
cations to human microbiome count data”. In: Plos One 14.8 (2019). Ed. by Erwin G.
Zoetendal. issn: 1932-6203.
Page 33 of 33
