==PAGE:1==
 
 
Development of ICP-OES
method for assay of
proteins and peptides
Camilla Vingborg Toft
;
==PAGE:2==
H. Lundbeck A/S
Department of Analytical Development and Method Transfer
Ottiliavej 9,
2500 Valby, Denmark
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemistry
Kemitorvet, building 207,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Submitted in fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science
in
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
at
The Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors
Professor, Günther H.L. Peters
Lead Specialist, Jesper Tungelund Larsen
Specialist, Danny Mollerup Sørensen
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The increase in protein-based drugs in recent years have resulted in a demand for a sim-
ple, accurate and precise method of quantifying proteins in pharmaceutical production.
This study proposes a novel inductively coupled plasma - optical emission spectrometry
(ICP-OES) method to quantify proteins by determining the sulfur content. Compared
to current methods, the ICP-OES method will have no protein-based reference material
and the same test procedure will be applied to multiple proteins.
ICP-OES is an analytical method used to identify and quantify elements. By exposing
the sample to extreme temperatures of 6000-7000°K the elements are excited, and the
emission patterns are collected by a spectrometer to determine the intensity.
The results of this study indicate that ICP-OES can be used to determine the con-
centration of proteins and peptides by measuring the sulfur intensity at 281.972 nm.
The method was tested on the peptide glutathione (GSH) and the three proteins: beta-
lactoglobulin (β-lg), bovine serum albumin (BSA) and Inﬂiximab. Internal standardiza-
tion was performed with indium.
The following parameters were identiﬁed to inﬂuence the analysis: analyte size, sample
preparation, ion impurities, and choice of internal standard. The highest level of accuracy
was achieved by chemically decomposing the sample with nitric acid before measuring on
ICP-OES which increased the recovery up to 19%. When compared to ultraviolet (UV)
spectroscopy at 280 nm the two methods yielded similar results. Further development of
this method is required to establish accuracy and repeatability.
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resumé
I det seneste årti har der været en markant stigning i protein-baserede lægemidler, hvilket
har resulteret i et behov for en simpel, nøjagtig og præcis metode til kvantiﬁcering af
proteiner i farmaceutisk produktion. Dette studie foreslår en helt ny inductively coupled
plasma - optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) metode til at kvantiﬁcere proteiner
ved bestemmelse af svovlindholdet. Sammenlignet med nuværende metoder vil ICP-OES-
metoden ikke have protein baseret referencemateriale, og den samme metode vil kunne
anvendes til forskellige proteiner.
ICP-OES er en analytisk metode der bruges til at identiﬁcere og kvantiﬁcere grundstof-
fer. Prøven udsættes for ekstreme temperaturer på 6000-7000°K hvorved grundstoﬀerne
exciteres, derefter bliver emissionen opsamlet af spektrofotometer for at bestemme inten-
siteten af signalet.
Resultaterne indikerer at ICP-OES kan anvendes til at bestemme koncentrationen af
proteiner og peptider ved at bestemme intensiteten af svovl signalet ved 281.972 nm.
Metoden er testet med peptidet glutathion (GSH) og de tre proteiner: beta-lactoglobulin
(β-lg), bovine serum albumin (BSA) og Inﬂiximab. Intern standardisering blev udført
med indium.
Følgende parametre blev identiﬁceret til have indﬂydelse på metoden: størrelse af an-
alyten, prøveforberedelse, utilsigtet ion indhold og valg af intern standard. De højeste
nøjagtigheder for ICP-OES-metoden blev opnået ved at måle på en prøve kemisk ned-
brudt med salpetersyre.
Destruktion af prøven resulterede i en op til 19% stigning i
genﬁnding af indhold. Sammenligning med ultraviolet (UV) spektroskopi gav sammen-
lignelige resultater for de to metoder. Yderligere udvikling af metoden er påkrævet for
at etablere nøjagtighed og præcision.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Analytical Development and Method
Transfern at H. Lundbeck, Valby in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science degree in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering. The work has been carried
out from September 2019 to January 2020 with the assigned workload of 30 ECTS credits.
This thesis was handed in on March 26th, 2020
Supervisors
DTU, Professor, Günther H.L. Peters
Department of Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark
Lundbeck, Lead Specialist, Jesper Tungelund Larsen
Lundbeck, Specialist, Danny Mollerup Sørensen
Department of Analytical Development and Method Transfer at H. Lundbeck A/S
Examiner
KU, Associate Professor, Stefan Stürup
Department of Pharmacy at Copenhagen University
Kongens Lyngby, January 26th 2020
Camilla Vingborg Toft
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
I would ﬁrst like to thank my supervisor Günther H. L. Peters from DTU for giving me
the opportunity to write my master thesis in collaboration with Lundbeck and for good
counseling ensuring the project stayed on track.
Also a special thanks to my two Lundbeck supervisors Jesper Tungelund and Danny
Sørensen from the department of analytical development and method transfer who have
provided tremendous support throughout the whole project. Their oﬃce was always open
whenever I had questions about my research or writing. They consistently allowed this
paper to be my own work but steered me in the right direction whenever they thought I
needed it.
I would also like to thank the technical staﬀfrom the ICP laboratory for providing expert
knowledge whenever problems or questions arose in regards to the ICP-OES instrument,
and for being willing to restructure their days in order to accommodate my needs.
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Abbreviations
AAA
Amino Acid Analysis
AAS
Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
API
Active Pharmceutical Ingredient
BCA
Bicinchoninic acid
BSA
Bovine Serum Albumin
c/s
Counts per second
CCD
Charge Coupled Devices
CRM
Certiﬁed Reference Material
CTD
Charge-Transfer Devices
Cys
Cysteine
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
EIE
Easily Ionised Elements
ELISA
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Sssay
GSH
Elutathione
GSSG
Glutathione disulﬁde
HPLC
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
ICH
International Council for Harmonisation
ICP-OES
Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectrometry
LOD
Limit of Detection
LOQ
limit of quantiﬁcation
mAb
monoclonal Antibody
Met
Methionine
MS
Mass Spectrometry
MW
Molecular weight
PBS
Phosphate buﬀer
PDB
Protein Data Base
Ph. Eur.
European Pharmacopoeia
pI
Isoelectric point
ppm
Part per Million
R2
Correlation coeﬃcient
RCC
Residual Carbon Content
ix
==PAGE:14==
RF
Radio Frequency
rpm
Rounds per Minute
SD
Standard Deviation
Trp
Tryptophan
Tyr
Tyrosine
USP
United States pharmacopeia
UV
Ultraviolet
VSC
Volatile Sulfur Compound
β-lg
Beta-lactoglobulin
ε
Extinction coeﬃcient
x
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
13
2
Scientiﬁc background
16
2.1
ICP-OES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.1
Instrumentation and Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.1.3
Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.1.4
Internal standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.1.5
Acid destruction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2
Sulfur
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.3
Protein and Peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.1
Stability and Solubility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.3.2
Regulation and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.3
Glutathione . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3.4
Beta-lactoglobulin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Aim of study
33
4
Experimental
34
4.1
Reagents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Internal standard correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Standard curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.3
Standard addition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.4
Spike and Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.5
Sulfur ratio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.6
Percent content (w/w) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
xi
==PAGE:16==
CONTENTS
4.3.7
UV-spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.8
Comparing slopes of linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results and Discussion
39
5.1
Initial method parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Operating conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.2
Emission lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3
Standard working concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Matrix eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.1
Destruction of GSH and β-lg using heat block . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.2
Destruction of β-lg using heat block and microwave . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.3
Exploring matrix eﬀect in diﬀerent solvents
. . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.4
Internal standard screening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.5
Reference proteins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2.6
Summary of matrix eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3.1
Linearity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3.2
Repeatability and Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3.3
Limit of quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3.4
Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
Further development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.5
General discussion of method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
67
7
Perspective
68
Bibliography
69
A Section of conditions experiment
I
B Spectral Interference Sulfur
II
xii
==PAGE:17==
1
|
Introduction
Over the last decade, biopharmaceuticals have increasingly become a bigger part of the
pharmaceutical industry. From 2015 to 2018 biopharmaceuticals represented 47% of the
newly released drugs in the United States. Looking to the future the development does
not seem to be slowing down. In July 2018 around 40% of the 6,000 drugs in clinical
development were biopharmaceuticals, indicating that the release of biopharmaceuticals
in the coming years will increase even further. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) represent
the biggest segment of the biopharmaceutical market. Since the ﬁrst mAb was released
in 1986 the growth has been increasing rapidly and today they represent 53% of all new
biopharmaceuticals released [1, 2].
With the increased production of biopharmaceuticals in the pharmaceutical industry,
the demand for robust, accurate and precise methods for quantifying protein is growing.
Much research is focused on quantifying proteins in clinical and pre-clinical research.
Where drug candidates are found in complicated biological matrices such as plasma,
serum and urine. Here ligand binding assays like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) are the golden standard [3, 4]. These methods are extremely valuable regarding
drug development. However, there is also a demand for a simple and highly accurate
method better suited for quantifying proteins in pharmaceutical production. Quantify-
ing proteins from pharmaceutical production has a diﬀerent set of requirements than the
methods used in drug development. The proteins tested in pharmaceutical production
are of high purity and are very well-deﬁned, and often found in simple aqueous matrices.
An analytical method designed specially to perform quantitative assays of proteins from
active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) production is therefore in demand. Furthermore,
such method should ideally also be easily transferable from one protein to another. With
the increase in biopharmaceuticals, more pharmaceutical companies now have multiple
protein-based drugs in their portfolio or pipeline. Making an analytical method, that
can quantify diﬀerent high purity proteins without any alterations to the test procedure
would be an attractive solution.
Today, the simplest method to quantify protein in simple matrices of a known sample
composition, is to measure the UV-absorbance at 280 nm. Tyrosine (Tyr) and trypto-
phan (Trp) have a strong UV-absorption at 280 nm due to their aromatic components.
The concentration of a protein sample can then be calculated from Beer’s law when the
extinction coeﬃcient (ε) is known. One of the weaknesses of this method is that the
quality of the result is highly dependent on the accuracy of ε. As it is not only speciﬁc to
each protein but it is also aﬀected by the solvent, conformational changes and oxidative
13
==PAGE:18==
INTRODUCTION
state. To obtain a reliable ε it should be determined experimentally with the use of a
protein certiﬁed reference material (CRM) under the same conditions as the sample [5,
6, 7].
As an alternative to the direct detection of UV-absorbance, several colorimetric methods
have been developed utilizing peptide bonds’ ability to reduce copper ions. These meth-
ods include the Biuret, Lowry and Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) methods. The reaction can
be detected directly from the colorimetric change caused by the reduction of the copper
ions as in Biuret, or indirectly by adding a second reactant that also causes a colorimetric
change as is the case in Lowry and BCA. These methods have a low limit of detection
(LOD), especially Lowry which has a working range of down to one part per million
(ppm). They also have the advantage of not requiring large and expensive analytical
instruments as only a spectrometer is needed to measure the absorbance. One of the
disadvantages of using cooper ion-based quantiﬁcation is the need for protein CRM. To
quantify the protein a standard curve made from the CRM, as the absorbance is speciﬁc
to each protein [5, 8].
A method that circumvents the problem of protein CRM, and where the test procedure
applies to multiple diﬀerent proteins is amino acid analysis (AAA). In this analytical
method, the peptide bonds of the protein are hydrolyzed into free amino acids. On a
chromatography column, the amino acids are then separated and detected. By comparing
the results to amino acid standards, the protein can be quantiﬁed. The critical step for
AAA is the hydrolysis. The method assumes complete hydrolysis of the protein into free
amino acids. However, if only partial hydrolysis occurs, it would greatly inﬂuence the
integrity of the result. AAA is a robust method for quantiﬁcation of high purity proteins
without the use of protein CRM. On the other hand, it has a complicated test procedure,
with a vast amount of reference material in the form of the 20 amino acids. Also, is very
dependent on complete hydrolysis of the protein, for a reliable result [5, 9].
This study will explore the possibility of using ICP-OES to quantify high purity protein
samples by determining the total sulfur content. ICP-OES is an analytical method where
the sample is introduced to argon plasma that reaches temperatures of around 6400°K.
When the molecules reach the plasma, they are reduced into single atoms and ions. Then
due to the extreme temperatures, the atoms and ions are excited to a higher energy level.
As the atoms and ions decay back into their ground state, they emit electromagnetic
radiation referred to as emission. The emission proﬁle from each element has a distinct
pattern and can be detected and identiﬁed by a spectrometer. ICP-OES is most com-
monly used for trace element analysis, and have an especially low limit of detection for
metals [10].
14
==PAGE:19==
INTRODUCTION
The concept is that most proteins will contain at least one of the sulfur bearing amino
acids methionine (Met) or cysteine (Cys) and because of this it will be possible to use
sulfur as a means of quantifying proteins with ICP-OES. The goal is to develop a standard-
ized ICP-OES method that can be applied to multiple diﬀerent proteins. The method will
be designed to quantify proteins of high purity with known molecular weight and amino
acid sequence. Even though ICP-OES sample preparation often include acid destruction
of the sample, the goal is to establish a method where the protein is simply dissolved in
an aqueous solution and measured on the ICP-OES. As the protein will be destroyed in
the plasma neither the oxidative state or conformation of the protein should inﬂuence the
result, which should give it a distinct advantage over UV-spectroscopy. A limited amount
of research has been conducted on using ICP-OES for the quantiﬁcation of proteins. A
study by L. Rastogi et al used ICP-OES to successfully quantify GSH by measuring sulfur
and suggested that this procedure could be used to characterize and validate CRM of
GSH [11]. Another study used ICP-OES to quantify DNA by measuring the phosphate
content. This study concluded that even though the ICP-OES method provided high
accuracy and low uncertainties, the sample size needed for ICP-OES was too large when
working with DNA [12].
Using ICP-OES for a novel assay for proteins and peptides have several distinct advan-
tages over current methods. ICP-OES is a simple analytical method with low limits of
quantiﬁcation, high accuracy and precision. The reference material for the method will
be sulfur in water. This means it can be produced with extremely high accuracy and is
not sensitive to the choice of e.g. solvent in contrast to the protein-based reference ma-
terial used for most current methods. Also, the sulfur reference material can in principle
be used for any sulfur-containing protein as it is not speciﬁc to the protein of choice.
Furthermore, since the protein or peptide will be destroyed in the plasma before analysis,
this method should not be sensitive to conformational changes to the analyte, as is the
case for both UV-spectroscopy and the colorimetric methods.
15
==PAGE:20==
2
|
Scientiﬁc background
2.1
ICP-OES
ICP-OES is an atomic emission spectrometry technique that is used to detect and de-
termine concentrations of the given elements in a sample. The general principle is to
decompose the sample by exposing it to intense heat and then use the distinct emission
patterns caused by excitation to detect and quantify elements with the use of a spec-
trometer.
ICP stands for inductively coupled plasma and refers to the heat source used to decom-
pose and excite the atoms and ions in a sample. The plasma is produced from an argon
gas that is exposed to inductive coupling from a radio frequency (RF) generator and
loading coil. Inductive coupling causes the argon gas to dissociate into argon atom, ion
and electrons (Section 2.1.1). The plasma produced has extreme temperatures at around
6000-7000°K in the area of detection. The high temperatures are what enable ICP-OES
to elicit its emission response. In the plasma, the sample undergoes desolvation, vapor-
ization, atomization, ionization and then excitation (Figure 2.1).
OES stands for optical emission spectrometry and describes the method of detection for
the elements. In contrast to atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) where the quantiﬁ-
cation is determined by the amount of light absorbed by a given element at a speciﬁc
wavelength, OES detects the emission released from the excited elements as they decay
back to the ground state (Section 2.1.1) [10].
Using emission patterns to detect elements have been utilized since the late 19th century.
However, the ICP-OES method was not developed until 1964 where Stanley Greenﬁeld
ﬁrst published a paper establishing the use of argon plasma to excite elements and using
emission as a method of detection. ICP-OES became commercially available in the 1970s.
AAS is another popular method for the detection and quantiﬁcation of elements, but op-
erating conditions must be customized to each element limiting this analytical method
to single element analysis. With the invention of ICP-OES multi-element analysis was
made possible and in combination with the extremely LOD down to 0.1 ppm, ICP-OES
has become the most popular choice when it comes to element analysis [13, 10, 14].
ICP-OES has a wide range of applications, due to its ability to measure multiple elements
at the same time. Furthermore, a variety of sample types can be analyzed making this
analytical method very versatile. It is used in many diﬀerent ﬁelds ranging from metal-
16
==PAGE:21==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Transition from solution to excitation
The transformation the solution undergoes in the plasma to produce the emission signal. The solution
represents the aerosol droplets that are injected into the plasma via the nebulizer and spray chamber.
The wavy arrows represent the photons emitted from the excited atom/ion as they decay back into their
ground energy level.
lurgy to geology [10]. In the pharmaceutical industry, ICP-OES is primarily used for the
determination of elemental impurities in drugs, excipients and reagents. Impurities can
be toxic or may cause degradation of the drug substance. For these reasons, it is very
important to determine the content of these unwanted impurities [15]. Another example
of application could be the determination of boron content in water for the production
of ceramic turbines blades. Here even contamination in the range of 1 ppm could com-
promise the integrity of the product [10, 16].
Even though, ICP-OES is a widely used analytical technique it is usually used for trace
element analysis. When performing trace element analysis, the requirement will usually
be to have a concentration below a certain limit. This study explores the potential of
using ICP-OES for a quantitative assay of proteins by determining the sulfur content.
2.1.1
Instrumentation and Characteristics
The major components of an ICP-OES instrument are a pump, nebulizer, spray chamber,
RF generator, torch, focusing optics, spectrometer and detector connected to a computer
with speciﬁc software for data analysis (Figure 2.2). Diﬀerent ICP-OES instruments will
show small variation as to how the instrument works but the general principle of ICP-OES
remains the same. This section will focus on how the instrument used for the experiments
work. The assumption is that the method developed will be easily transferable to any
modern ICP-OES instrument.
17
==PAGE:22==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
A
B
D
C
E
F
H
I
G
Figure 2.2: Instrumental overview of ICP-OES
(A) aqueous sample. (B) Argon gas. (C) Peristalic pump. (D) Concentric nebulizer and spray chamber.
(E) ICP torch. (F) RF generator and loading coil. (G) Focusing optics for axial view. (H) Spectrometer
and CCD detector. (G) ICP-OES software.
Sample introduction
The sample is introduced to the ICP-OES via the nebulizer and spray chamber (Fig-
ure 2.2D). The purpose of the nebulizer is to transform the sample from an aqueous
solution into aerosol, which is a system of small liquid particles dispersed in a gas. The
process of creating aerosol is called nebulization and can be evoked by exposing the liquid
to high-pressure argon gas ﬂow, as is the case for a concentric nebulizer. Nebulization
or spray eﬃciency is one of the critical parameters of ICP-OES. Even small changes
in density, viscosity or surface tension can result in a change in the droplet size of the
aerosol. A change in the size of the droplets can alter the desolvation time, leading to
changes in emission intensity. Because of this choice of solvent or concentration of the
analyte can greatly inﬂuence the result from ICP-OES. The eﬀect of solvent and analyte
concentration can be limited with the use of an internal standard (Section 2.1.4). The
ideal nebulization would ensure that all the sample is introduced to the plasma and that
this would elicit a stable desolvation leading to a reproducible emission response.
Even though a concentric nebulizer naturally creates an inﬂux of solution into the neb-
ulizer, a pump is often utilized to control the ﬂow rate which eliminates the possible
18
==PAGE:23==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
variation in inﬂux created from solution characteristics. A peristaltic pump is generally
used as this type of pump does not exhibit any risk of contamination as it is never in
contact with the actual sample.
After nebulization, the aerosol is transported via the spray chamber to the torch (Fig-
ure 2.2E). The purpose of the spray chamber is to remove all droplets, that are not of the
appropriate size and ensure a steady ﬂow for injection into the plasma. Usually, spray
chambers are designed only to let droplets smaller than 10 µm in diameter pass onto the
plasma. For a concentric nebulizer, more than 95% of the aerosol does not meet that
requirement and is led directly to waste [10].
Torch
 A
 B
 C
D
Figure 2.3: ICP torch
A cross section of ICP torch with the three argon
gas ﬂows: plasma (A), auxillary (B) and nebulizer
(C) carrying the sample aerosol. The loading coil
(D) connected to the RF generator.
(Figure adapted from [10])
The ICP torch consists of three tubes in-
side one another which are referred to as
the injector tube, inner and outer chamber.
The torch has three diﬀerent argon gas en-
try points, and the ﬂow from each of these
are referred to as plasma (Figure 2.3A),
auxiliary (Figure 2.3B) and nebulizer ﬂow
(Figure 2.3C). To the outer chamber, the
plasma ﬂow is introduced.
The torch is
designed so the gas spirals around on the
outside of the inner chamber, keeping the
torch from overheating and is the source of
argon for ICP discharge (Section 2.1.1). To
the inner chamber, the auxiliary ﬂow is in-
troduced to make the sample introduction
easier and reduce carbon formation on the
torch. The nebulizer ﬂow is introduced via
the injector tube in the inner chamber and carries the sample aerosol from the spray
chamber. At the top of the torch, the loading coil is wrapped around the outer chamber.
The coil is connected to an RF generator that used for the creation of inductive coupling
in ICP discharge (Section 2.1.1). The function of the coil is to transfer the RF power to
the plasma. The usual RF power for ICP is between 0.7 to 1.5 kW [10].
ICP discharge
ICP discharge refers to the process of producing argon plasma from argon gas. Plasma
is one of the four states of matter and is characterized by being an ionized gas with
conducting properties. Plasma consists of free electrons and ions and has a net charge of
19
==PAGE:24==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
zero. Because of the electrons ability to move freely, the plasma becomes a conducting
material [10, 17].
In ICP the plasma is created via inductive coupling, which refers to the use of RF Power
and a loading coil to produce high energy electrons. The discharge starts with the gener-
ation of an electric and magnetic ﬁeld at the top of the torch, created from an oscillating
current across the loading coil. The oscillating current is produced by applying RF power
from the RF generator to the loading coil (Figure 2.4A). As argon gas whirls around the
inner chamber of the torch, a spark is applied to the gas (Figure 2.4B). The spark causes
some electrons to be freed from the argon atoms creating ions. Due to the magnetic
ﬁeld, the speed of the free electrons is accelerated, causing them to collide with other
atoms freeing more electrons. This chain reaction continues until the gas is completely
dissociated into plasma consisting of argon ions and electrons (Figure 2.4C). To sustain
the plasma, RF power must be applied continuously. When nebulizer ﬂow is applied, it
punches a hole in the part of the plasma closest to the inner chamber. This creating a
toroidal shaped at the base of the plasma that allows the nebulizer ﬂow to transport the
sample to the center of the plasma (Figure 2.4D). Where the extreme temperatures of
around 6800 K cause the aerosol to transform from solution to excited atoms and ions
[10].
A
C
B
D
Figure 2.4: ICP discharge
The process of ICP discharge. (A) The RF power is applied to the loading coil generating and electric
and magnetic ﬁelds. (B) Argon gas spiral around the inner chamber of the torch and a spark is added
to free electrons from atoms. (C) The magnetic ﬁeld creates high energy electrons, which collide with
other argon atoms creating more free electrons and argon ions until the gas is transformed into plasma.
(D) The nebulizer ﬂow punches a hole in the lower part of the plasma delivering the sample aerosol to
the center of the plasma, to generate excitation.
(Figure adapted from [10])
20
==PAGE:25==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
Production of emission
When an atom is exposed to the intense heat from the ICP, it is excited to a higher
energy level.
When excitation occurs, the absorbed energy promotes electrons to be
moved from their ground state to a higher energy state or in other words the electrons
change position to an orbital further away from the nucleus. The energy absorbed by
the atom is equivalent to the energy required to promote the electron to a higher energy
level. This energy is referred to as excitation energy. An electron can be promoted to
several diﬀerent higher energy levels depending on the energy the atom is exposed to. If
the energy is high enough the electron will dissociate from the atom creating an ion. Like
the atom, an ion also has the ability to be excited to a higher energy level (Figure 2.1).
The energy required to transform the atom into an ion is speciﬁc to each element and
is referred to as ionization potential. The atoms or ions are unstable in their excited
form and will eventually decay back into the ground state, meaning that the electrons
will transition back into their original orbital. When this occurs, the absorbed energy is
released in the form of electromagnetic radiation known as a photon. This phenomenon is
named emission. The wavelength of the photon can be derived from the energy diﬀerence
between the two energy levels with a modiﬁcation of Planck’s equation (Equation 2.1).
E = hυ = hc/λ
(2.1)
Where,
E = Energi diﬀerence between two energy levels
h = Planck’s constant
υ = frequency of radiation
c = speed of light
λ = wavelength of photon
The emission proﬁle for each element is distinct as they all have a characteristic set of
energy levels. Meaning that an element can be identiﬁed by measuring the wavelength of
the photons. This principle is what enables ICP-OES to preform element analysis.
Collection and Detection of emission
Emission is collected with focusing optics such as concave mirrors or convex lenses that
guides the image or light from the plasma onto spectrophotometric measurement. The
emission can be collected either from the top of the plasma, which is referred to as axial
view (Figure 2.2G) or from the side of the plasma referred to as radial view. Axial view
has the advantage of achieving higher LOD’s than radial view. This is attributed to the
longer viewing path, as the sample travels through the plasma. The longer viewing path
also results in increased sensitivity. However, axial view has a higher risk of spectral
and matrix-induced interference (Section 2.1.3). For these reasons radial view is often
21
==PAGE:26==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
used for complex matrices to limit matrix-induced interference and axial view is used for
simple matrices. [14, 18].
After collection, by focusing optics the emission is transported to the spectrometer. The
purpose of the spectrometer is to disperse the light from the plasma, containing numerous
wavelengths (polychromatic), into light of a single wavelength (monochromatic). Sepa-
ration of wavelengths is typically achieved with diﬀraction grating, which is the physical
dispersion of the diﬀerent wavelengths using a grating plane. The grating plane is a
surface with closely spaced lines edged into it, where each line is covered with a mirror.
When the light hits the surface it is reﬂected in an angle dependent on the wavelength
and space between the lines (Figure 2.5) [10, 14].
Figure 2.5: Diﬀraction grating
The ﬁgure illustrates how polychromatic light as it hits the grating planed is dispersed into monochro-
matic light at an angle dependent of the wavelength (λ).
(Figure adapted from [10])
Conventional diﬀraction grating uses a single grating plane to disperse the light from the
plasma. Echelle grating combines two diﬀraction devices a grating plane and another
method of dispersion, such as a prism. The two diﬀraction devices are position perpen-
dicular to each other. The grating plane used in echelle grating is more coarsely ruled
than grating planes in conventional diﬀraction grating. Usually, grating planes have a line
density of 600-4200 lines per millimeter to obtain complete separation of the wavelengths.
In echelle grating, the density is often around 70 lines per millimeter. This means that
after the light hits the echelle grating plane the wavelengths are only coarsely dispersed.
To ensure the complete dispersion the light it is guided the second diﬀraction device.
Here the light is completely dispersed into a two-dimensional echelle pattern. The echelle
pattern is then projected onto the exit plane. Only the emission lines chosen for analysis
can pass the exit plane and onto the detector. Echelle grating generally has a higher
resolution than conventional diﬀraction grating, which means it has a better separation
of wavelength close to each other. Echelle grating also allows for the use of advanced
array detectors. [10, 14].
22
==PAGE:27==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
The purpose of the detector is to measure the intensity of the chosen emission lines.
Today’s detectors are usually charge-transfer devices (CTD) based on the light sensitive
properties of solid-state silicon (Si). When the solid silicone is exposed to light from the
visible to ultraviolet range the Si-Si bonds absorb the light releasing an electron. The
freed electrons then generate a current equivalent to the amount of light absorbed by the
structure. An example of a detector based on this technology is charge-coupled devices
(CCD). After detection, the intensities are collected for signal processing by a computer.
The use of CTD detectors has made it possible to accomplish easy post processing of the
intensity signal, such as background correction [10].
2.1.2
Methodology
One of the advantages of ICP-OES is the simplicity with which an analysis can be per-
formed when compared to example high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Where choosing the right mobile and column is critical for a successful analysis. The
simplicity of ICP-OES comes from amongst others the relatively low risk of interference
and that all analytes have already been predeﬁned in the form of the elements. However,
when developing a new ICP-OES method following items should always be taken into
consideration: Selection of the emission line, choice of operating conditions, method of
sample preparation and possible interference’s [10].
Every emission line has a linear range pending on the intensity of the signal at that
wavelength. It is therefore important to choose a wavelength that is compatible with
the analyte concentration. Wavelength selection concerning interference will be further
discussed in Section 2.1.3. Regarding operating conditions, the standard settings from
the manufacturer are usually applicable to most methods. However, depending on the
requirements for the method, intensity might be greatly improved by customizing the
operating conditions to the speciﬁc element of interest.
Before starting the actual analysis, the method of sample preparation needs to be de-
termined. The simplest preparation is to directly dissolve the analyte in the solvent of
choice. However, some analytes might require acid destruction before detection due to
low solubility or high risk of interference (Section 2.1.5). The concentration of the ele-
ment of interest is determined by calibrating the instrument with reference standards of
known concentrations, typically with the use of a standard curve. After the calibration,
the samples are ready to be measured on the ICP-OES. The intensities are then trans-
ferred to a computer and ready for data analysis (Figure 2.6). The process of ICP-OES
analysis is easily automated due to its simplicity and once the samples are prepared and
the method loaded to the instrument, the analysis needs minimal supervision [10].
23
==PAGE:28==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
Element of interest
Select
emission
lines
Determine
operating
conditions
Sample and stan-
dard preparation
Calibration and
standard curve
Run samples
Data analysis
Figure 2.6: ICP-OES methodology ﬂowchart
Flowchart illustrating of the typical steps included in a typical ICP-OES methodology
2.1.3
Interference
One of the common sources of errors in analytical work is interference. When working
with analytical chemistry interference is deﬁned as anything that causes the signal from
the analyte to be diﬀerent from the signal of a standard of equal concentration. ICP-OES
has the advantage of having minimal sources of interference. As an example, chemical in-
terference is often problematic in AAS. Chemical interference is when a component from
the matrix causes an alteration in the vaporization of the element of interest, resulting in
a changed signal response. This type of interference is usually not observed in ICP-OES
due to the high temperature of the plasma [10].
24
==PAGE:29==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
Spectral interference is the main type of interference found in ICP-OES, caused by the
spectral overlap of emission lines. This is usually a result of the polychromator’s inability
to completely disperse the light into a single wavelength and instead measuring a small
range of wavelengths. If two wavelengths are close to each other, the signal might overlap
and cause an increase in the measured intensity of the analyte. As each element often
have multiple emissions lines, spectral interference can often be avoided by choosing a dif-
ferent line. Spectral interference should always be considered when choosing the emission
lines for analysis. However, spectral interference has been reduced with the development
of high-resolution detectors such as CDD and background correction software [10, 18].
Even though chemical interference is very limited in ICP-OES, interference from the
matrix should be evaluated. In some cases, where there is a diﬀerence in the physical
properties of the sample and standard solution interference may occur. This type of in-
terference is referred to as physical interference and is typically caused by a diﬀerence in
density or viscosity. Physical interference causes spray eﬃciency to change, which alters
the signal intensity. This type of interference can usually be corrected with the use of
internal standardization (Section 2.1.4).
Another type of interference that can occur from components in the matrix, is interference
caused by easily ionized elements (EIE). These elements have low ionization potential
meaning that they ionize at lower temperatures than other elements. EIE’s can cause a
suppression or enhancement of the analyte intensity depending on the element of interest.
Sodium and potassium are examples of EIE’s.
A way of correcting for any kind of
matrix-based interference is to use matrix matching. This means using the same matrix
components in standard as in the samples to the extent it is possible. In cases where
matrix matching is not possible or does not correct for the interference standard addition
can be applied. In standard addition, the samples and standards are mixed in the same
solution. This ensures that the sample and standard are exposed to the same conditions
and possible inﬂuences from the matrix [10, 18, 19].
2.1.4
Internal standard
The use of an internal standard is a well-known principle to improve the precision of an
analytical method. The principle is that the internal standard is present in all samples
and standards at the same concentration. The internal standard is then used to adjust
the analyte response based on the relative change to the internal standard response. The
goal is that this will adjust for any variations not caused by an actual diﬀerence in analyte
concentration, thereby improving precision and repeatability [20].
25
==PAGE:30==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
Depending on the eﬀect wanted to adjust for, the requirements for the internal standard
can be very diﬀerent. In ICP-OES the primary purpose of the internal standard is to
correct for potential matrix-induced signal variations, drift, and minor dilution deviations.
For these purposes, the internal standard does not need to have similar physical and
chemical properties to the analyte. However, to detect the listed variations both the
choice of element and emission line is critical and should ideally meet with the following
requirements:
• Not to occur naturally in the sample or standards
• Respond similarly to variations in plasma properties as the analyte
• Not have reactions with neither solvent nor analyte
• Have similar excitation energy to the analyte
Internal standardization is based on the consensus that an equal amount of internal stan-
dard is present in every sample. If any detectable amount of internal standard is already
present in the form of impurities the result would be compromised. It is therefore com-
mon to choose element with low natural abundance as internal standards in ICP-OES, to
decrease the risk of impurities. Even though most elements react similarly to changes in
plasma properties, the choice of the emission line is not irrelevant. An ionic emission line
may not react the same way to changes in the plasma as an emission line of atomic origin.
For this reason, should the analyte and internal standard emission lines have the same
origin. It is also important that the internal standard does not react with anything in the
solution to form an insoluble compound. As this would change the concentration of the
internal standard in the sample. Furthermore, insoluble compounds could result in large
variations in the internal standard response if such particles were to enter the plasma.
Lastly, similar excitation energies have been stated to be one of the main prerequisites
for choosing a good internal standard in ICP-OES [10, 20, 21].
2.1.5
Acid destruction
Acid destruction is a common method of sample preparation in any analytical work and
is especially common in ICP-OES sample preparation. The acid decomposes the matrix
into simple chemical forms, and thereby reducing potential interference. Nitric acid is
the most commonly used acid for destruction and due to its oxidative properties, it is
especially well suited for destroying organic samples. The reaction for the complete de-
struction of a protein sample with nitric acid is shown below [22, 10].
Protein (aq)
HNO3
−−−→
heat
CO2 (g) + NO (g) + SO4
–2 (aq) + H2O (l)
26
==PAGE:31==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
Acid digestion is often combined with heat to increase the reactivity of the acid. Heat
can be applied in either open or closed vessels. Using open vessels on e.g. a heat block
is the simplest way to perform acid destruction. However, using open vessel limits the
maximum digestion temperature to the boiling point of the acid, in the case of nitric acid
this is 122°C. For protein samples of high concentration, the oxidizing power of nitric
acid have proven not to be enough to result in complete destruction, at atmospheric
pressure. To increase the eﬃciency of the destruction a closed vessel method such as
microwave can be chosen. The microwave allows for higher pressure and temperature
increasing reactivity of the acid.
The closed vessels also have the distinct advantage
of avoiding loss of possible volatile compounds. To achieve accurate and reproducible
results the destruction needs to be complete. Besides inaccurate incomplete destruction
can also result in interference caused by partly decomposed compounds. To determine
if destruction has been completed residual carbon content (RCC) can be determined. In
the case of complete destruction, all the carbon will have evaporated as carbon dioxide.
This means that a RCC of zero will indicate complete destruction [22].
2.2
Sulfur
Sulfur is the 16th element and belongs to group 16 in the periodic table. These elements
are referred to as chalcogens and include selenium and tellurium. Oxygen is the main
element in group 16 and does have similar chemical behavior to sulfur. However, due
to the oxygens higher electronegative properties, it has a higher tendency to form ionic
bonds, whereas sulfur will usually favor covalent bonding [23].
Sulfur has eight oxidation states ranging from S(-II) to S(VI). One of the key character-
istics of sulfur is its ability to form strong disulﬁde bonds (S-S) in 2-8 ring formations
this ability is found in both S(-II) and S(0). The sulﬁde ion (S(-II)) is also found in the
compounds hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S), thiols (R-S-H) and thioethers (R-S-R’). In aqueous
solutions sulfur will usually be found as S(VI), and together oxygen form the divalent ion
SO4
2– called sulfate [23, 24, 25].
HS
OH
O
NH2
S
OH
O
NH2
Cysteine
Methionine
Figure 2.7: Structure of the two sulfur bearing amino acids cysteine and methionine. The
amino acids are shown on free from, and not bound in the polypetide chain.
27
==PAGE:32==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
In proteins, sulfur is found the two amino acids methionine and cysteine. Sulfur is bound
as a thioether in methionine and as a thiol in cysteine (Figure 2.7). Both amino acids
contain S(-II). Through oxidation thiols can form disulﬁde bonds (Figure 2.8), and these
have a major inﬂuence on the three dimensional structure of a protein (Section 2.3). [26].
R S
R
S
R SH
R
HS
Oxidation
Reduction
+
2 H+
2 e-
+
Figure 2.8: The reaction shows how thiols can from disulﬁde bonds with other thiols under
oxidative conditions.
The sulfur bound in methionine and cysteine can result in the formation of volatile sulfur
compounds (VSC) which amongst others include (H2S). VSCs are usually produced by
bacteria in the gut or by intercellular biological pathways. However, exposing the proteins
to acid conditions can lead to the production of free (H2S). [26].
2.3
Protein and Peptides
Proteins can have many diﬀerent functions such as catalysts, transporters, and immune
protectors. The many diﬀerent functions and their crucial part in biological processes have
made proteins especially interesting as drug candidates. This is a possible explanation for
the rapid growth of the biopharmaceutical market in recent years. The three-dimensional
structure of a protein is what gives it its biological function. The structure of proteins
can be subdivided into the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures.
Figure 2.9: The four levels of a protein structure
The primary structure is the polypeptide chain containing the amino acid sequence. The secondary
structure with α-helix and β-sheets. The tertiary structure of complete assembly of the polypeptide
chain. The potential qauternary forming a protein complex of multiple polypeptide chains.
The primary structure refers to the amino acid sequence of the protein also called the
polypeptide chain and is what determines the three-dimensional structure of a protein.
28
==PAGE:33==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
The secondary structure refers to the formation of structures such as α-helices and β-
sheets. These formations are formed by the hydrogen bonding between the amino acids
in the polypeptide chain.
The tertiary structure of a protein is the assembly of the whole polypeptide chain into
one ﬁnal structure. This structure is especially inﬂuenced by the hydrophobic and hy-
drophilic properties of the protein.
The quaternary structure is the assembly of multiple polypeptide chains to form one
protein complex. Not all proteins have a quaternary structure.
Even though most of the three-dimensional structure of the protein is constructed from
non-covalent bonding between the amino acids, cross-linkage of the polypeptide chain
also has a large inﬂuence on the structure and stability of the protein. Most cross-linkage
occurs when two cysteines form a disulﬁde bond. An example illustrating the importance
of disulﬁde bonds is the structure of the protein class called mAbs. The 44 disulﬁde
bonds found in immunoglobulin G mAbs are instrumental in obtaining the characteristic
"Y-shape" that gives them their immunological eﬀect. In contrast to proteins, peptides
have a short polypeptide chain (< 50 residues) an usually only exhibit primary structure
[27, 28].
2.3.1
Stability and Solubility
In analytical work the stability and solubility of the analyte is an important factor, this
is especially true when working with proteins. One of the factors that enable proteins to
perform their biological eﬀect is their ability to change conformation, as a response to
small changes in the surrounding environment. However, this exact ability is also what
makes protein stability and solubility particularly complex [29]. This section will explore
physical protein stability and solubility in aqueous solutions.
Proteins can be deﬁned as being either in a native state or denatured state. On native
state the three-dimensional structure of the protein is intact and the hydrophobic areas
of the structure are internalized to increases stability. In the denatured state, the three-
dimensional structure is partial or completely broken, and the hydrophobic areas of the
protein are exposed resulting in a decreased solubility and that can lead to protein aggre-
gation. Usually the thermodynamic stability of the native state is only marginally higher
than the stability of the denatured state. Meaning that even small changes to external
variables such as pH, temperature and salt concentration can cause the shift from native
to denatured state [29, 30].
29
==PAGE:34==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
The thermodynamic stability of the protein is dependent on temperature. As a result, the
protein will typically favor the denatured state when then the temperature is increased
to over 50°C. This usually leads to irreversible denaturation of the protein, as a product
of aggregation.
PH also has a strong inﬂuence on the stability of the protein. Often a protein only has
a narrow range of pH at which that protein is on the native form. Most proteins will be
stable around a natural pH. The isoelectric point (pI) describes the pH of which the net
charge of the molecule is zero. A protein is typically the most stable around pI. As the
pH of a solution is changed away from the pI the protein will net charge will typically
also change. Alterations to the net charge can both increase and decrease the stability
of the protein. An increase in charge could increase the repulsive interactions between
the protein molecules in the solution, inhibiting aggregation. However, an increase in net
charge can also increase repulsive interaction intermolecularly destabilizing the protein.
This means that how a protein reacts to changes in pH is not necessarily trivial and is
speciﬁc for each protein.
How ion concentration aﬀects the stability of the protein is a result of multiple mecha-
nisms. The ions can bind to the protein causing either stabilization or destabilization.
In the same way, as with pH, ions can modulate the repulsive interaction in the pro-
tein. Ions can bind to charged site chains or directly to the peptide bond. Depending on
whether the ions have a higher aﬃnity for binding to the native or the denatured form,
will determine if the eﬀect is stabilizing or destabilizing [29, 30].
Proteins are surface-active which means they will concentrate around the air to water
interface in an aqueous solution. The surface tension forces can disturb the stability
of the protein causing interface-induced aggregation. To stabilize the protein solution
nonionic surfactants are often added to the sample matrix. Surfactants are amphiphilic
molecules meaning that they have both hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties. Due
to the amphiphilic nature, the surfactant will also be concentrated around the water
to air interface. Surfactant increases stability by both decreasing surface tension and
replacing the protein at the interface forcing it into the solution. Polysorbate 80 is the
most common surfactant used to stabilize protein soltions. [30, 27].
2.3.2
Regulation and Requirements
The pharmaceutical industry is highly regulated by good manufacturing practice (GMP)
guidelines and more speciﬁc criteria described in the pharmacopeias. However, the re-
quirements for biopharmaceuticals are generally more ﬂexible than the regulations found
30
==PAGE:35==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
for small molecule drugs. The international conference on harmonization (ICH) Q6B
writes the following in regards to speciﬁcations for quantiﬁcation of drug substances of
biological origin: "The quantity of the drug substance, usually based on protein content
(mass), should be determined using an appropriate assay. The quantity determination
may be independent of a reference standard or material" [31]. For more speciﬁc criteria
the Q6B guideline refers to the monographs or chapters for individual drugs or meth-
ods. A general pharmacopeia monograph contains a set of very speciﬁc instructions for
each quality test. Furthermore, a numerical acceptance criterion is speciﬁed to determine
whether the test is passed or failed. However, for the biopharmaceutical, it is slightly
diﬀerent.
In the 2000s the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.) began developing the ﬁrst mono-
graphs for biopharmaceuticals. Due to the complexity and heterogeneity of the drugs, it
was decided to integrate more ﬂexibility into the new monographs [32]. This ﬂexibility is
e.g. reﬂected in the content requirements for the macromolecules drug substances such
as Inﬂiximab and Etanercept (>900 residues), here the requirement is as follows: "as
approved by the competent authority"[33, 34]. Some of the smaller biopharmaceutical (<
200 residues) do have more speciﬁc acceptance criteria for content. For the two drug
substances Filgrastim and Somatropin (174 and 191 residues), the requirements are con-
tent between 90-110% [35, 36]. This leaves for a large margin of error when compared
to the requirement of a small molecule drug such as paracetamol (151 g/mol) which has
a requirement of between 99-101% [37]. The ﬂexibility is also reﬂected in the analytical
methods used for carrying out the assay, the prescribed method may be replaced by any
suitable method, as long as the process is validated. To ensure some form of standard-
ized procedure, pharmacopeia reference standards are highly utilized and often required
in assays for proteins. The reference standards are often highly puriﬁed samples of the
protein of interest [32, 36].
2.3.3
Glutathione
GSH is a tripeptide made by the three amino acids glycine, cysteine and glutamic acid.
It is found in both plants, bacteria and animals and is one most abundant antioxidant
molecules in biological processes. When oxidized GSH may form a dimer with itself by
the formation of a disulﬁde bond, this form is called glutathione disulﬁde (GSSG). Both
GSH and GSSG are freely soluble in water. The acid dissociation constants for GSH are
SH: 9.2, NH+
3 : 8.66, COOH: 3.53, COOH: 2.12 [38].
N
H
H
N
NH2
O
SH
O
HO
O
OH
O
Figure 2.10: The structure of glutathione. MW 0.307 kDa
31
==PAGE:36==
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
2.3.4
Beta-lactoglobulin
Bovine β-lg is the major protein component in cows milk with a concentration of 3
g/L. The protein has 162 residues and is a member of the lipocalin protein superfamily
characterized by an eight stranded beta-barrel structure (Figure 2.11). β-lg have three
subtypes called A, B and C, where A and B are the two most dominant. The diﬀerences
in the amino acid sequence between three subtypes are shown in Table 2.1. All three
subtypes have the same number of sulfur-bearing amino acids ﬁve cysteines and four
methionines. The cysteines are situated so that β-lg has two disulﬁde bridges at Cys66-
Cys160 and Cys106-Cys119 and one free thiol Cys121 [39, 40].
Table 2.1: Describes the diﬀerences in amino acid sequence of the three subtypes A, B and
C of β-lg. The number represent the residue number. Ala: Alanine, Asp: Aspartic acid, Gln:
Glutamine, Gly; Glycine, His: Histidine, Val: Valine.
A
Gln59
Asp64
Val118
B
Gln59
Gly64
Ala118
C
His59
Gly64
Ala118
Due to the diﬀerence in the amino acid sequence, the three subtypes due have some
diﬀerent properties regarding stability and self-association. At pH 7 the stability of the
three subtypes is C ≫B > A. Also, all subtypes form dimers but under acidic conditions
subtype A will assemble into octamers. Signiﬁcantly increasing the size of the protein.
However, comparing the monomer structure of β-lg A and B, show that they are very
similar in structure [39].
Figure 2.11: The structure of β-Lactoglobulin based on PDB ID: 1CJ5. MW 18.4 kDa
32
==PAGE:37==
3
|
Aim of study
This study aims to develop a quantitative assay for proteins and peptides of diﬀerent
sizes by determining the sulfur content with ICP-OES. This study will explore initial
test parameters such as operating conditions and selection of emission lines suitable for
measuring sulfur in proteins and peptides.
Furthermore, to investigate the need for
chemical decomposition by acid destruction, and determine how variables such as the
size of the analyte inﬂuence the method. The objective is to test the method on a range
of protein and peptide sizes ranging from the small tripeptide GSH (0.3 kDa) to a large
mAbs (∼150 kDa). Another objective is to determine a suitable internal standard, that
might be instrumental in creating a robust method that applies to multiple proteins.
33
==PAGE:38==
4
|
Experimental
4.1
Reagents
Aligent Wavelength calibration solution for ICP-OES and MP-AES. Sulfur standard for
ICP TraceCERT® (lot nr. BCBV3561) 1000 ± 3 mg/L. For internal standard Indium
standard for ICP TraceCERT® (lot nr. BCBV5848) 999 ± 2 mg/L. Germanium stan-
dard for ICP TraceCERT® (lot nr. BCBW6734) 1005 ± 2 mg/L. Iridium standard for
ICP (lot nr. S131211006) 998 ± 6 mg/L. Yttrium standard for ICP (lot nr. S190412027)
1003 ± 4 mg/L.
L-Glutathione reduced powder obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (lot nr. SLBW3322) HPLC
99.9%. Beta-Lactoglobulin from bovine milk lyophilized powder Sigma-Aldrich (lot nr.
SLBX4747) PAGE 100% containing both A and B form. Pierce™Bovine Serum Albumin
Standard in 0.9% NaCl obtained from Thermo Scientiﬁc™(lot nr. UG288323) 2.00 ±
0.03 mg/mL. Inﬂiximab certiﬁed reference standard from Ph. Eur. (Batch 1) containing
approximately 89 mg.
HCl 0.1M was produced from Hydrochloric acid fuming 37% EMPROVE® and diluted
with water from Millipore water puriﬁcation system. Nitric acid 65% Suprapur®. Phos-
phate buﬀer (PBS) 0.01M was produced from dissolving potassium dihydrogen phosphate
crystline EMPROVE® and di-Potassium hydrogen phosphate anhydrous EMPROVE®
in water from Millipore water puriﬁcation system to a pH of 7.1.
4.2
Instrumentation
The used ICP-OES instruments is an Aligent 5110 Vertical Dual View ICP-OES with
a VistaChip II CCD detector (Range of 167 to 785 nm) and connected Aligent SPS 4
autosampler. For sample introduction a concentric nebulizer combined with a cyclonic
spray chamber was used. All measurements were viewed in axial mode. Data was collected
by ICP Expert CRF software. Before each experiment the instrument was calibrated
with Aligent wavelength calibration solution for ICP-OES and MP-AES. For the UV
measurement an Aligent Cary 60 UV-Vis was utilized (190 to 1100 nm) with a 1.5 nm
resolution.
34
==PAGE:39==
EXPERIMENTAL
4.3
Methods
4.3.1
Internal standard correction
All ICP-OES results have been correct with an internal standard (IS) ratio unless oth-
erwise speciﬁed. For each ICP-OES measurement an intensity (I) for both sulfur and
internal standard.
The internal standard ratio was calculated by determining the change in intensity com-
pared to ﬁrst measured sample (Equation 4.1) in the sample set. The ﬁrst measured
sample is usually a sulfur standard.
ISratio =
I(IS)sample
I(IS)1st sample
(4.1)
The sulfur intensity is corrected with internal standardization by dividing the measured
intensity of sulfur with the internal standard ratio (Equation 4.2).
I(S)corr = I(S)
ISratio
(4.2)
4.3.2
Standard curve
To use a standard curve is one of the most common way to determine concentrations in
analytical chemistry and was used for all ICP-OES experiments unless otherwise indi-
cated. Standards were prepared from the sulfur ICP standard made from SO4 in H2O. In
the initial experiments standard curves was produced with ﬁve levels and three replicates.
After linearity was conﬁrmed the standard curves was changed to three levels and one
replication. Linear regression is used to determine the relationship between intensity and
sulfur concentration. The sulfur intensity (I) from the sample can thereby be translated
to a concentration by the standard curve regression line (Equation 4.3).
c(S) = Intercept −I(S)corr
slope
(4.3)
4.3.3
Standard addition
Standard addition is a way of determining matrix eﬀect in analytical methods. Sulfur
standard is added directly to sample matrix to create a sulfur standard in the sample.
This ensure that the sulfur standard is exposed to the exact same conditions as the ana-
lyte.
35
==PAGE:40==
EXPERIMENTAL
In this study standard addition is performed with three concentrations. One blank so-
lution containing only sample and two with diﬀerent concentrations of sulfur standard
added to the samples. All solutions are diluted to contain the same amount of sample.
The concentration of the sample is then determined by plotting the concentration of the
sulfur standards on the x-axis and the measured intensity of sulfur on the Y-axis. Lin-
ear regression is preformed to determine slope and intercept. The concentration of the
analyte is then calculated as absolute value of the intercept with the x-axis (Equation
4.4).
c(S)analyte =
slope
intercept
(4.4)
4.3.4
Spike and Recovery
The spike and recovery method is similar to standard addition. But in contrast to stan-
dard addition the concentration is determined via a standard curve. The sample solution
is spiked with a sulfur standard to obtain a known sulfur standard concentration and
compared to an unspiked sample.
To determine whether the sulfur from the standard in the sample give a response equal to
the same amount of sulfur in the calibration sulfur standards spike recovery is calculated
as described in Equation 4.5. Spike recovery gives an indication of whether the sulfur in
sample can be determined by comparing to the sulfur in the calibration standards.
Spike recovery =
c(S)spiked −c(S)unspiked
c(S)std
(4.5)
To calculate the concentration of the analyte in the spiked sample, the known sulfur
standard concentration is subtracted from the spiked sample concentration (Equation
4.6).
c(S)analyte = c(S)spiked −c(S)std
(4.6)
4.3.5
Sulfur ratio
The sulfur ratio describes the relationship between the molecular weight (MW) of the
analyte and the MW of sulfur times the number of sulfur (n) in the analyte (Equation
4.7).
Sratio = nsulfur × MWsulfur
MWanalyte
(4.7)
36
==PAGE:41==
EXPERIMENTAL
The molecular weight (MW) of the analyte is derived from the molecular formula. In
cases where the molecular formula is unknown it is estimated from the amino acid se-
quence. The amino acid sequences are imported from research collaboratory for structural
bioinformatics protein data bank (PDB). Table 4.1 contain information about the tested
peptide and proteins including the sulfur ratio and molecular weight.
Table 4.1: Structural data of analytes
Contains structural data of the peptide and proteins used in the experiments. The reference shows the
source used to obtain the molecular formula and amino acid sequence for the given analyte.
* For β-lg the MW and Sratio is and average of the A and B form
Analyte
Residues
MW [kDa]
No Sulfur
Sratio
Ref
GSH
3
0.307
1
0.104
[38]
β-lg*
162
18.4
9
0.0157
[40]
BSA
853
66.5
39
0.0188
[41]
Inﬂiximab
1328
146
44
0.00973
[33]
4.3.6
Percent content (w/w)
Percent content (w/w) also referred to as recovery will be the main measure of accuracy
throughout the study. The content is determined by comparing the result from ICP-OES
to the weighted amount of the analyte (4.8).
% Content (w/w) = wICP−OES
wweighed
(4.8)
wICP−OES = c(S)ICP−OES × dilution factor
Sratio × Vstock solution
(4.9)
For BSA which is prediluted by the manufacture concentrations are compared instead of
the weight.
4.3.7
UV-spectrometry
Absorbance from UV-spectrometry can be used to determine concentration via Beer’s
law, when the extinction coeﬃcient (ε) is known, as L = 1 cm (Equation 4.10).
At
280 nm the three amino acids tryptophan, tyrosine and cysteine absorb light at 280 nm
making it possible to use this wavelength to for quantifying proteins.
Aλ = εcL
(4.10)
37
==PAGE:42==
EXPERIMENTAL
The extinction coeﬃcient can be expressed both as molar ε and as percent ε determined
from 1% concentration solutions. The relationship between the two are shown in Equation
4.11.
εmolar × 10 = ε1% × MW
(4.11)
According to United States pharmacopeia (USP) the molar ε at 280 nm can be estimated
by calculation, in situations where it has not been determined experimentally [42]. Equa-
tion 4.12 shows the formula for calculating molar ε proteins in under native conditions.
ε280 nm = nTrp × 5500 + nTyr × 1490 + nCys × 125
(4.12)
4.3.8
Comparing slopes of linear regression
Comparing the slopes of two linear regression lines is critical for determining matrix eﬀect
in an analytical method. The null hypothesis is that the slopes are equal.
H0 : β1 = β2
H1 : β1 ̸= β2
The statistical test is described in Equation 4.13.
t =
|β1 −β2|
q
s2
β1 + s2
β2
∼T(n1 + n2 −4)
(4.13)
Where,
β = Slope
s = Standard error of slope
n = Number of measurement
T = Degrees of freedom
If the null hypothesis is true then.
β1 −β2 ∼N(0, sβ1 −sβ2)
The p-value is determined by preforming a two tailed Student t-distribution with t and
the degrees of freedom.
38
==PAGE:43==
5
|
Results and Discussion
The results and discussion chapter describe the process of developing an analytical method
for quantifying proteins with ICP-OES by determining the sulfur content. Because this
chapter describes a development process each section will be structured so that there is
an introduction to the experiment, and then a review and discussion of the results. The
accuracy of the quantiﬁcation will be determined by the % content (w/w) and the goal
is to achieve 100% recovery. The precision will usually be determined by the standard
deviation (SD).
5.1
Initial method parameters
The ﬁrst step in experimental work was to determine initial parameters such as operating
conditions, wavelength and linear range. The goal was to determine optimal operating
conditions when working with sulfur and determine which wavelength and concentration
were the most suitable for measuring sulfur in proteins. In these initial experiments the
solvent, sample preparation and internal standard and was the same for all experiments
(Table 5.1).
Table 5.1: Conditions used for determining initial method parameters
Conditions
Constants
Solvent
0.1M HCl
Sample preparation
In solution
Calibration method
Calibration curve
Internal standard
Indium
Internal standard concentration
1 ppm
The solvent was chosen to be 0.1M HCl and is a solvent commonly used for ICP-OES.
Even though 0.1M HCl might not be the ﬁrst choice when it comes to dissolving proteins
and peptides, it was chosen for the initial experiment as the eﬀect buﬀers in the ICP was
unknown.
The internal standard was initially chosen to be indium, as it has previously been used
for sulfur determination in canola seed [43], and have a suitable atomic line at 325.609
39
==PAGE:44==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
nm. The intensity of the chosen emission line for indium is about 10 times higher than
the intensity for sulfur. For this reason, a low concentration of 1 ppm was chosen for the
internal standard concentration.
5.1.1
Operating conditions
Initial operating conditions were based on sulfur determination found in the literature
(RF power: 1.2 kW, Plasma Flow: L·min−1, Auxillary ﬂow: L·min−1, Nebulizer ﬂow: 0.8
L/min, Read time: 0.8 s, Pump rate: 15 rpm) and will be referred to as start operating
conditions. It was chosen to further investigate how the three conditions: RF power,
plasma ﬂow and auxiliary ﬂow aﬀected the intensity of the sulfur signal. RF power was
chosen as it was expected to aﬀect the plasma eﬃciency and thereby increasing the ability
to excite the sulfur atoms. The plasma ﬂow was chosen for testing as it was suspected
to also play in role in plasma eﬃciency. When looking at other ICP-OES methods of
non-metals a wide range of auxiliary ﬂow rates was used 0.5-1.5 L·min−1 [12, 44]. Fur-
thermore, Boss et al. stated that "it [auxiliary ﬂow] may also improve performance with
aqueous samples as well " [10]. Because of this, it was chosen to investigate how auxiliary
ﬂow aﬀected the intensity of sulfur. The range for the operating conditions tested was
derived from other ICP-OES methods of non-metals (Table 5.2).
Table 5.2: Operating conditions settings found in literature [12, 44] of sulfur and phosphor
ICP-OES methods and settings tested in the experiment.
Conditions
Unit
In littrature
Experiments
RF power
kW
1.2-1.5
1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5
Plasma ﬂow
L·min−1
15
10, 12, 15, 17
Auxiliary ﬂow
L·min−1
0.5-1.5
0.3, 0.7, 1.0, 1.5
The experiment was conducted on a 5 ppm sulfur standard and a 5 ppm sulfur GSH
sample. The solution intensity was measured continuously whilst changing the operating
conditions one at the time keeping the rest at start conditions. The intensity was mea-
sured at the three sulfur emission lines 180.669, 181.972, 182.562 nm. However, general
agreement in intensity change was observed for all three wavelengths and because of this,
it was chosen only to report the data from 181.972 nm. The choice of report emission
line will be further discussed in section 5.1.2.
When changing the setting of RF power and plasma ﬂow the intensity response quickly
stabilized after around 2 seconds. However, this was not the case when adjusting the
40
==PAGE:45==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
auxiliary ﬂow. When lowering the auxiliary ﬂow, a peak appeared right after changing
the setting and then the intensity slowly kept decreasing.
This phenomenon became
more distinct as the auxiliary ﬂow was decreased further (Appendix A). The intensities
reported in Figure 5.1 are the intensity measured when the response was the most stable .
1.600
2.000
2.400
2.800
3.200
3.600
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Intensity [c/s]
[kW]
RF power
1.600
2.000
2.400
2.800
3.200
3.600
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
[L/min]
Auxiliary flow
1.600
2.000
2.400
2.800
3.200
3.600
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
[L/min]
Plasma flow
S std
GSH
Figure 5.1: The three graphs show how changing the setting of a single operating condition aﬀects
the intensity of the sulfur signal at 281.972 nm, while maintaining other operating conditions at start
conditions. The results are obtained from measuring on a 5 ppm sulfur standard and a 5 ppm sulfur
glutathione (GSH) sample in 0.1M HCl. (n=1)
The results show that out of the three tested operating conditions RF power had the
greatest inﬂuence on the intensity of sulfur. On average, a 0.1 kW increase in RF power
resulted in a 17% increase in the intensity. The auxiliary ﬂow had the opposite eﬀect
where an increase in the auxiliary ﬂow resulted in a decrease in intensity. Plasma ﬂow
decreased the intensity if the setting was lower than 15 L·min−1. However, when the
plasma ﬂow was increased above 15 L·min−1 no change in intensity was observed (Fig-
ure 5.1).
Combining the operating conditions RF power 1.5 kW and auxiliary ﬂow 0.7 L·min−1 on
the GSH sample yielded the highest measured sulfur intensity of 3500 counts per second
(c/s). Compared to the intensity of the sample with RF power 1.5 kW and auxiliary ﬂow
1.5 L·min−1, the change resulted in a 8% increase. As previously observed changing the
auxiliary ﬂow meant that it took a longer time for the response to stabilize.
It was then chosen to compare two standard curves measured with auxiliary ﬂow 0.7 and
1.5 L·min−1. Both standard curves were measured with the RF power of 1.5 kW. The
standard used for the standard curves had ﬁve concentrations: 0.5, 9, 17.5, 26, 34.5 ppm
sulfur. The results from the linear regression of the two standard curves are shown in
Table 5.3.
41
==PAGE:46==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 5.3: The table shows the linear regression result from two standard curves measured
with auxiliary ﬂow (AUX) at 0.7 and 1.5 L·min−1. The remaining operation conditions were
kept at start conditions except for RF power which was set to 1.5 kW. The standards used for
the standard curve are 0.5, 9, 17.5, 26, 34.5 ppm sulfur in 0.1M HCl.
AUX 0.7
AUX 1.5
Slope
707.1
638.3
SE
1.5
0.6
R2
1.000
1.000
Intercept
23.6
8.7
SE
31.7
13.2
Sum of squares
62,883
10,885
The results show both standard curves show a linear correlation between the sulfur con-
centration and the intensity at 281.972 nm. With the two diﬀerent settings the stan-
dard curves are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p-value=0.000). As expected auxiliary ﬂow at 0.7
L·min−1 resulted in a higher slope than at 1.5 L·min−1. However, using 0.7 L·min−1 also
resulted in higher standard errors and a larger sum of squares indicating lower precision.
For this reason, it was decided to use 1.5 L·min−1 in auxiliary ﬂow setting. Since the ad-
vantage of an 8% increase in intensity would not out weight the potential risk of decreased
precision. As a result, only the RF power has been changed from 1.2 to 1.5 kW compared
to the start operating conditions. This means that for the remaining experiments the
operating conditions shown in Table 5.4 will be used.
Table 5.4: The operating conditions used in the experiments to preform ICP-OES measure-
ments on sulfur. Rmp: rounds per minute, s: seconds.
Operating conditions
RF Power
1.5
kW
Plasma ﬂow
15
L·min−1
Auxiliary ﬂow
1.5
L·min−1
Nebulizer ﬂow
0.8
L·min−1
Read time
0.8
s
Pump rate
15
rmp
Replicates
5
5.1.2
Emission lines
Choosing the right emission lines is a critical parameter for an ICP-OES method. The
three emission lines most commonly used for sulfur are 180.669, 181.972 and 182.562 nm
42
==PAGE:47==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
which all have origin from atomic sulfur [44, 45]. Previously data had been collected from
all three emission lines. However, it was decided to select one emission line, that would
be used for all remaining data analysis.
Results from the operating condition experiments showed that 181.972 nm has the highest
intensity of around 3000 c/s for a 5 ppm sulfur standard solution and thereafter 180.669
nm at 950 c/s and 182.562 nm at 550 c/s. The higher intensity results of 281.972 nm could
indicate that this emission line has a lower limit of quantiﬁcation (LOQ) than for the
other emission lines. This was also indicated when 181.972 nm gave the most consistent
recoveries when determining % content (w/w) across a concentration range from 0.3-30
ppm sulfur in GSH samples (Figure 5.2). The 181.972 nm emission line also the best
signal-to-noise ratio of around 20:1 at the low concentration of approximately 0.3 ppm
sulfur in the GSH sample. 180.669 nm also showed an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio
above 10:1. 182.562 nm showed a 3 times lower ratio than 180.669 nm indicating that
quantitative measurements at 0.3 ppm sulfur might not be suitable for this wavelength
(Figure 5.3).
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.3
1
5
15
30
% Content (w/w)
~ S Concentration [ppm]
S 180.669 nm
S 181.972 nm
S 182.562 nm
Figure 5.2: % content (w/w) of glutathione (GSH) samples dissolved in 0.1M HCl across a range
of sample concentrations. ∼S concentration represent the approximate sulfur concentration based on
weight of GSH and sulfur ratio. % content (w/w) is determined by comparing the result from ICP-OES
to the weighted amount of the GSH. (n=3)
Figure 5.3: Emission signals for the three sulfur emission lines 180.669 nm (left), 181.972 nm (middle)
and 182.562 nm (right) from an approximately 0.3 ppm sulfur GSH sample in 0.1M HCl. The solid
blue line is the intensity signal. The blue dotted line is the background correction performed by the
ICP-OES software. The red line marks the center of the peak, the top of the peak is where the intensity
measurement is taken.
43
==PAGE:48==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
When investigating possible inferences for the three emission lines (Appendix B), emis-
sion line 180.669 nm showed a possible interference with silicon (Si), which could prove
problematic working when working with glass and quartz material as its main component
is SiO2 [46].For these reasons, the most important one being the high intensity, emission
181.972 nm was chosen to be the main emission line and all data reported will be from
this wavelength unless otherwise speciﬁed.
5.1.3
Standard working concentration
To standardize the experiments, it was decided to choose a target concentration of sulfur
for the samples. It was decided to determine whether 5 ppm could be used as target
concentration. At 5 ppm the amount of analyte is relatively small, but still in a range
were weighing of the sample with high accuracy is possible. Furthermore, 5 ppm was well
above the LOD of 0.3 ppm sulfur speciﬁed in other ICP-OES methods for sulfur.
The ICH Q2 guideline for the validation of analytical procedures states that for an assay
of a drug substance test for linearity should cover the range of 80 to 120 percent of the
test concentration [47]. However, because ICP-OES typically has a wide linear range, it
was decided to include a wider range of concentrations in the experiments. To determine
linearity near LOD 0.3 ppm sulfur was chosen as the lowest concentration for the experi-
ment. The highest concentration was chosen to be 30 ppm sulfur since Boss et al. states
that the most accurate quantiﬁcation is achieved when measuring 100 times greater than
the LOD [10].
Since, the concentrations of the samples are deﬁned by the concentration of sulfur, the
concentration of the proteins and peptides will depend on their sulfur ratio (Section 4.3.5.
To demonstrate a 48 ppm GSH concentration would be equivalent to a 5 ppm sulfur con-
centration. At the same time, a β-lg concentration of 318 ppm would be equivalent to 5
ppm sulfur concentration. To determine if the protein and peptide concentration would
inﬂuence the linearity the experiment was performed on both for sulfur standards, GSH
and β-lg. The experiment should also indicate whether the size of the analyte aﬀects the
response from sulfur.
The ICH Q2 states that a minimum of ﬁve concentrations should be used to establish
linearity. For the GSH linearity was determined with the concentrations 0.3, 1, 5, 15
and 30 ppm sulfur. To limit the amount of β-lg used, it was decided not to include the
30 ppm sulfur concentration in the experiment. Instead, a 10 ppm sulfur concentration
was added to meet the requirements of ﬁve concentrations. The sulfur standards were
produced in the concentrations 0.5, 9, 17.5, 26 and 34 ppm.
44
==PAGE:49==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results show that all three analytes have a linear correlation between the concen-
tration of sulfur and the intensity in the tested range with a correlation coeﬃcient (R2)
≥0.999 (Figure 5.4). As 5 ppm is within the linear range, it is suitable as the target
concentration of sulfur.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0
10
20
30
40
Intensity [c/s]
S Concentration [ppm]
GSH
β-lg
S std
S standard
GSH
β-lg
Slope
648.1
621.6
573.7
Intercept
-62.6
6.1
14.3
R2
1.000
1.000
0.999
Sum of squares
910,357,119
785,446,205
150,864,319
P-value*
0.000
0.000
Figure 5.4: Linear regression plot illustrating the relationship between the sulfur concentration and
the signal intensity for sulfur at 181.972 nm for sulfur standard (S std), glutathione (GSH) and beta-
lactoglobulin (β-lg) dissolved in 0.1M HCl. The table show the results of from the linear regression.
(n=3). * The p-value is the result of the statistical test of assuming equal slopes between the regression
line for GSH and β-lg up against slope of the S std.
As previously mentioned, it has been suggested that the most accurate results can be
obtained from 30 ppm sulfur concentrations or higher. Looking at the % content results
obtained from the linearity experiment suggests something diﬀerent (Figure 5.5). Com-
paring the results with a one-way ANOVA showed that for GSH there was a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the ﬁve levels (p-value=0.000, F=20, f crit=3.3). However, looking
only at the three concentrations 5, 15 and 30 ppm there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence be-
tween the results (p-value=0.932, F=0.72, f crit=5.1). This suggests that a higher level of
accuracy is not achieved by choosing a higher concentration since there was no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the results obtained from the 5 ppm sulfur concentration compared
to the 30 ppm sulfur concentration. For β-lg, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
the % content results across any of the measured concentrations (p-value=0.92, F=0.21, f
crit=3.5). This suggests that a concentration lower than 5 ppm might also give accurate
results.
45
==PAGE:50==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.3
1
5
10
15
30
% Content (w/w)
~ S Concentration [ppm]
GSH
β-lg
Figure 5.5: % content (w/w) for glutathione (GSH) and beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg), across a range of
sulfur concentrations. Samples are dissolved in 0.1M HCl. ∼S concentration represent the approximate
sulfur concentration based on weight of analyte and sulfur ratio. % content (w/w) is determined by
comparing the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount of the analyte.(n=3)
The linear range experiment also showed that neither GSH nor β-lg have a regression
parallel to that of the sulfur standard (p-values=0.000)(Figure 5.4). This indicates that
matrix eﬀect occurs, when assuming that GSH and β-lg are a 100% pure. The matrix
eﬀect causes the signal of sulfur in GSH to β-lg to be diﬀerent from the signal of the sulfur
from sulfur standards of an equal concentration. In this case, matrix eﬀect refers to any
inference not related to spectral interference. When looking at the regression lines, it is
observed that the larger the molecule the smaller the slope. β-lg has the smallest slope
with a 11% lower slope than the sulfur standard curve. Which could indicate that as the
molecule increases in size and sulfur ratio decreases the matrix eﬀect increases. The same
trend is observed when looking at the % content results were β-lg continuously gives a
lower recovery than GSH (Figure 5.5).
There can be many diﬀerent causes for this observed matrix eﬀect. However, that the
slope seems to be dependent on the size and sulfur ratio of the protein could indicate that
the matrix eﬀect might be caused by the plasmas inability to excite all sulfur atoms in
larger molecules. Another explanation could be that the high concentration of the protein
causes physical changes to the solution resulting in lower spray eﬃciency (Section 2.1.3).
Investigation of the source of this matrix eﬀect will be the main focus of the remaining
experiments.
5.2
Matrix eﬀect
The linear range experiment indicated that an increase in the size of the protein caused
an increase in the matrix eﬀect. This could suggest the need for destruction of the sample
before measuring the sulfur content on ICP-OES. When destroying the sample with acid
46
==PAGE:51==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
destruction, the protein or peptide is decomposed to carbon dioxide (CO2), nitric oxide
(NO), sulfate (SO2−
4 ) and water (Section 2.1.5). With complete acid destruction, all the
sulfur will be reduced to sulfate which will eliminate the potential matrix eﬀect caused
by the sulfur being bound in the protein.
The sulfur standards are produced from sulfuric acid (H2SO4) in water, meaning that
sulfur will be found as sulfate in the standards [48]. This means that after acid destruc-
tion sulfur will be on the same oxidative state in both the sample and standards, which
also result in a decreased matrix eﬀect.
5.2.1
Destruction of GSH and β-lg using heat block
Comparing the results from destroyed samples against the results from samples dissolved
directly in 0.1M HCl should give a better understanding of the observed matrix eﬀect
and will determine whether the matrix eﬀect is originated from the sulfur being bound
the protein.
The acid destruction was carried out using a heat block. 10 mL of concentrated nitric acid
(65%) was added to 2 mL of an approximately 150 ppm sulfur sample solution (GSH: 3
mg, β-lg: 19 mg) and put on the heat block for an hour at 90°C. After the destruction the
samples were diluted with 0.1M HCl into ﬁve concentrations containing approximately
0.5, 2, 3.5, 5, 6.5 ppm sulfur (Figure 5.6). The same concentrations were prepared with
samples directly dissolved in 0.1M HCl. The sulfur standards were also prepared in 0.1M
HCl.
Figure 5.6: Schematic overview of how the destroyed samples were diluted after acid destruction on
heat block with 0.1M HCl.
The results for the 5 ppm sulfur samples are shown in Figure 5.7. The results for GSH
shows that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the destroyed and the dissolved sam-
ples (p-values=0.027) and that the non-destroyed samples give a 2.6% larger result than
the destroyed. The fact that the destroyed sample gives a lower result than the dissolved
samples is unexpected and could indicate that destruction is not necessary. A possible
47
==PAGE:52==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
GSH
β-lg
% Content (w/w)
Dissolved
Destroyed
Figure 5.7: % content (w/w) for glutathione (GSH) and beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg) comparing 5 ppm
sulfur samples with the two sample preparation methods: Dissolved in 0.1M HCl, and destroyed on heat
block with 65% HNO3 and diluted to 27% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. % content (w/w) is determined by
comparing the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount of the analyte. (n=3)
explanation for the destroyed samples giving a lower recovery could be that some sulfur
was lost during the destruction. The destruction was carried out on a heat block with
lids that are not airtight. If any VSCs have been produced, they will have evaporated
from the sample reducing the sulfur concentration. Hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) is a VSC,
which can be produced when thiols are treated with acid. This means there is a chance
that VSCs may have been produced during the destruction (Section 2.2).
The β-lg results show no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two methods of sample prepa-
ration (p-value = 0.27) but due to the large SD of the 53% for the destroyed samples the
validity of this result can be put into question. The large SD could be a result of un-
completed destruction of the β-lg. If the destruction is incomplete there might partially
decomposed pieces the protein that has formed insoluble aggregates. If such aggregates
enter the plasma they may elicit an unrepresentatively high response compared to the
true concentration of sulfur in the solution. This could be an explanation for the high
SD found in the destruction results for β-lg. Looking at how the internal standard ratio
progresses throughout the experiment (Figure 5.8 top) might suggest an alternative ex-
planation, for the large SD.
The internal standard ratios for the dissolved samples show little variation for both the
sulfur standards and GSH samples (Figure 5.8 top). However, as the concentration of
the β-lg samples in 0.1M HCl increases, large variations in the internal standard ratio
is observed with ratios up to 1.33. The internal standard is not part of the protein and
should neither interact with the protein. This suggests that something else besides pos-
sible protein particles is causing large variability. An explanation could be that as the
48
==PAGE:53==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0.5
2
3.5
5
6.5
0.5
2
3.5
5
6.5
0.5
2
3.5
5
6.5
Internal std ratio
~ S Concentration [ppm]
Dissolved
Destroyed
GSH
β-lg
S std
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0.5
2
3.5
5
6.5
0.5
2
3.5
5
6.5
S Concentration [ppm]
~ S Concentration [ppm]
Dissolved
Destroyed
GSH
β-lg
Figure 5.8: Both grahps compare the two sample preparation methods: dissolved in 0.1M HCl, and
destroyed on heat block with 65% HNO3 and diluted with 0.1M HCl. Top: The progress of the internal
standard ratio throughout the experiment. Bottom: Sulfur concentration calculated from the standard
curve. ∼S concentration represent the approximate sulfur concentration based on weight of analyte and
sulfur ratio. (n=3)
concentration of β-lg increases, the changes in physical properties of the solution due to
the high protein concentration aﬀect the spray intensity in such a manner that the signal
for indium increases sporadically.
The internal standard progress for the destroyed samples shows that as the concentration
of GSH and β-lg increases the internal standard ratio decreases (Figure 5.8 top). The
destroyed samples are diluted after the destruction. This means that an increase in the
sulfur concentration also means an increase in the nitric acid concentration (Figure 5.6).
These results indicate than an increase in the nitric acid concentration decrease the signal
of indium. This could very likely be caused by the change in viscosity, due to the higher
density of 65% nitric acid compared to water [22].
A higher viscosity ﬂuid will likely decrease the spray eﬃciency and thereby decreasing
the speed of which the sample is transported to the plasma generating a lower response.
A solution for this could be using the same matrix for both samples and standards so
they contain the same concentration of nitric acid, known as matrix matching (Section
2.1.3). However, when comparing the sulfur concentrations of the dissolved to the de-
structed samples of GSH, the results show that the two curves almost perfectly overlap
(Figure 5.8 bottom). This indicates that the internal standard was able to correct for the
49
==PAGE:54==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
matrix eﬀect caused by viscosity change caused by nitric acid. For β-lg it is diﬃcult to
conclude if the internal correction is valid due to the large variations.
To summarize the results showed that for GSH acid destruction did not increase the %
content result which could indicate that destruction might not be necessary for GSH.
That the dissolved samples give a higher recovery than the destroyed samples, raised the
concern of whether VSC was developed during the destruction. Regarding β-lg the high
SD from the destroyed samples made the results inconclusive. Looking at the internal
standard, it seemingly was able to correct for the decreased spray eﬃciency caused by
the addition nitric acid. For this reason, it was decided not to use matrix matching for
the next experiment.
5.2.2
Destruction of β-lg using heat block and microwave
Since the result from β-lg was inconclusive, it was decided to do a second set of experi-
ments on acid destruction of β-lg. The acid destruction would be performed both on the
heat block and in a microwave. Including the microwave in the experiment was chosen to
address two potential concerns. First comparing the destruction in the microwave against
destruction on the heat block would test if any VSC was developed during destruction.
The closed vessels from the microwave will prevent any VSC from evaporating. Secondly,
concerns had been raised as to whether the destruction of β-lg had been completed under
the previous conditions in Section 5.2.1. The microwave digestion exposes the analyte
to more extreme conditions of high temperatures and high pressure compared to the
heat block. These new conditions could ensure complete decomposition of the protein.
Furthermore, the ratio of concentrated nitric acid to analyte was increased by 2-fold, to
ensure complete destruction.
For both destruction methods, 5 mL of concentrated nitric acid (65%) was added to 1 mL
of an approximately 75 ppm sulfur sample solution (4.75 mg of β-lg). The temperature on
the heat block was increased to 100°C and was run for an hour. The microwave digestion
was run at max power (1300 W) for 30 min and reached a temperature of 200°C and a
pressure of 80 bar. All samples were thereafter diluted with 0.1M HCl to a concentration
of 5 ppm sulfur. The sulfur standards and the directly diluted samples were produced
using only 0.1M HCl. Standard addition was performed on the samples destroyed on the
heat block to determine the remaining matrix eﬀect after destruction. The results from
the experiment are found in Figure 5.9.
The results show that by changing the conditions for the heat block destruction, the
SD was reduced to 0.75%. This indicates that by changing the conditions from 90 to
50
==PAGE:55==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
β-Lg
% Content (w/w)
Dissolved
Microwave
Heat block
Heat block
(std addition)
Figure 5.9: % content of 5 ppm sulfur beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg) samples comparing the three sam-
ple preparation methods: dissolved in 0.1M HCl, and destroyed on heat block and in microwave with
65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. Standard addition was performed with three
concentration levels to determine the concentration of the sample. % content (w/w) is determined by
comparing the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount of the β-lg. (n=3)
100°C and increasing the acid to analyte ratio by 2-fold, the destruction resulted in a
homogeneous solution. This suggests that with the new conditions the destruction on
heat block was completed. The same was the case for the microwave destruction that
had a SD of 0.57%. When comparing the heat block result to the microwaves result there
was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two (p-value=0.023). The purpose of using the
microwave was also to investigate whether any VSCs were produced during destruction.
That the microwave results gave a lower recovery than the heat block indicates that no
VSCs were produced. The small diﬀerence between the two destruction methods is likely
to be a result of the loss of sample during the transfer from the microwave destruction
vessels. It was therefore concluded that there was no gain from using the microwave
method over the heat block.
The dissolved samples gave a 12% higher recovery than the destroyed samples without
standard addition. To determine what caused this diﬀerence standard (Std) addition was
performed on the heat block samples. The procedure used for standard (Std) addition is
described in Section 4.3.3. The use of standard addition increased the recovery to 93%
and no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found between the dissolved samples and heat block
samples (p-value=0.147).
Comparing the slope of the standard addition to the slope of the standard curve showed
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in slope of 13 % (p-value<0.000) (Figure 5.10). That standard
addition signiﬁcantly altered the recovery of the destroyed samples combined with the
fact that the standard addition and standard curve was not parallel, suggest that the
matrix eﬀect is still present after the samples have been destroyed. This means that the
matrix eﬀect cannot solely be attributed to sulfur being bound in the protein. However,
51
==PAGE:56==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
it is not possible to completely reject that some matrix eﬀect is caused by the sulfur be-
ing bound as thiols in the protein, and for this reason, acid destruction might be necessary.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
0
5
10
15
Intensity [c/s]
S Concentration [ppm]
Std curve
Std addition
S std curve
Std addition
Slope
637
566
Intercept
-2.209
2603
R2
1.000
1.000
Figure 5.10: Linear regression plot illustrating the relationship between the sulfur concentration and
the signal intensity for sulfur at 181.972 nm. Comparing the calibration methods standard (Std) curve
made from sulfur standards in 0.1M HCl and standard (Std) addition made on beta-lactoglobulin samples
destroyed on heat block with 65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. The table show the
results of from the linear regression. (n=3)
Previous experiments showed that changing the concentration of nitric acid in the sam-
ple greatly inﬂuenced the intensity of the sulfur signal, but that the internal standard
was able to correct for these changes. For this reason, it was chosen not to use matrix-
matched standards (Section 5.2.1). However, as a matrix eﬀect is still observed after
the destruction of the samples, this decision is put into question. The remain matrix
eﬀect from the destroyed samples might be caused by the internal standard inability to
completely correct for these changes caused by nitric acid, and it was therefore decided
to us matrix-matched standards for the remaining experiments.
5.2.3
Exploring matrix eﬀect in diﬀerent solvents
Matrix eﬀect has been observed in both 0.1M HCl and destroyed samples. This experi-
ment will explore whether the matrix eﬀect found in 0.1M HCl is similar to the matrix
eﬀect found in destroyed samples when using matrix-matched standards. Matrix eﬀect
will be determined with standard addition on β-lg samples.
52
==PAGE:57==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
β-lg samples were prepared using the same procedure as described in (5.2.2). Destruction
was carried out only on the heat block. It was chosen also to include 0.01M PBS as a
solvent since it is commonly used for dissolving proteins. The relatively low concentration
of PBS was chosen to ensure a low ion load in the solution. PBS was produced to have a
pH value of 7. All three preparations (HCl, PBS and destruction) had standards that were
matched with the solvent composition of the sample. Standard addition was performed
on all samples in the procedure is described in Section 4.3.3. To reduce the workload,
the experiment was performed with duplication. Consequently, no meaningful statistical
tests can be performed on the results, and therefore conclusions should be drawn with
caution. The results from the experiment are shown in Figure 5.11.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.1M HCl
(dissolved)
0.01M PBS
(dissolved)
HNO3
(destroyed)
% Content (w/w) 
Std curve
Std addtion
Figure 5.11:
% content of 5 ppm sulfur beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg) samples with the three sample
preparation methods: dissolved in 0.1M HCl and 0.01M phosphate buﬀer (PBS) and destroyed on heat
block with 65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. Comparing the results obtained from
standard (Std) curve with standard (std) addition.% content (w/w) is determined by comparing the
result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount of the β-lg. (n=2)
The results show that standard addition increased the result for all three solvents. For
HCl standard addition resulted in a 6% increase in recovery, and for PBS and HNO3
the recovery was increased with 13% and 11% respectively. This suggests that matrix
eﬀect occurs in all three solvents. The standards are matrix-matched which means that
the observed matrix eﬀect probably is not related to the solvent. Since any eﬀect that
the solvent might have on the sulfur intensity should be the same in both standards and
samples. The fact that standard addition increases the recovery PBS and HNO3 recovery
close to equally could indicate that matrix eﬀect from the two solvents have the same
origin.
That matrix eﬀect is observed in the destroyed samples is unexpected. The standards
and samples should after the destruction be close to identical since they both have the
same concentration of nitric acid and sulfur is in the solution as sulfate. The remain-
ing products from the acid destruction: carbon dioxide and nitric oxide are gasses and
should therefore not aﬀect the result. The fact that the matrix eﬀect is observed in the
53
==PAGE:58==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
destroyed samples could indicate something besides pure protein is present in the protein
sample. These impurities could likely be ions leftover from the production or puriﬁcation
of the protein. If ions such as K and Na are present in the solution they might cause a
suppression of the emission signal, due to the EIE eﬀect (Section 2.1.3). Looking at the
recovery of β-lg in PBS using the standard curve, also indicates that the K ions from PBS
might aﬀect the result. Since the recovery of PBS was 5% lower than for the samples
dissolved in 0.1M HCl. This could suggest that the ions from the PBS might not aﬀect
the sulfur standards and the protein samples in the same way.
An experiment was performed to investigate how EIE aﬀects the intensity of the sulfur
signal. Six β-lg samples containing 5 ppm sulfur and one 5 ppm sulfur standard was
prepared in 0.01M PBS. The solutions were produced without internal standard. After
measuring the intensity, potassium chloride (KCl) was added to the samples and standard
so a 0.1M KCl was obtained. The intensity was then measured again.
The result showed that by increasing the concentration of K the intensity of sulfur de-
creased with 8.7% (SD:1%) in the β-lg samples. Similarly, the intensity of the sulfur
standard was decreased with 8.1% leading to the conclusion, that although the concen-
tration of K decreases the intensity of sulfur, the protein samples and the standard are
equally aﬀected. However, if ion impurities are present in the protein, they would only
aﬀect the protein samples. If this is the case it could explain the matrix eﬀect observed
in all three solvents.
The results from the KCl experiment were obtained from samples without internal stan-
dardization.
For this reason, it was chosen to investigate how the internal standard
aﬀected the results from Figure 5.11. In Figure 5.12 the results from the experiment is
shown together with the results without internal standardization.
Using internal standardization does not seem to change the results of the standard addi-
tion results. This is expected as the sulfur standard and protein sample are in the same
solution when using standard addition and therefore is exposed to the same conditions,
which should make the internal standard redundant.
Looking at the standard curve results with and without internal standard shows that
only the dissolved sampled are aﬀected by the internal standard.
Not using internal
standardization increased the result for HCl and PBS with 6% and 5% respectively. This
means that the indium is correcting for something in the dissolved samples. If the native
β-lg causes changes to the physical properties of the solution, so the intensity of sulfur
is increased, then the correction from indium is valid. However, indium could also react
diﬀerently to changes in ion composition and physical properties of the solutions than
54
==PAGE:59==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.1M HCl
(dissolved)
0.01M PBS
(dissolved)
HNO3
(destroyed)
% Content (w/w) 
Std curve
Std curve*
Std addtion
Std additon*
Figure 5.12:
% content of 5 ppm sulfur beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg) samples with the three sample
preparation methods: dissolved in 0.1M HCl and 0.01M phosphate buﬀer (PBS) and destroyed on heat
block with 65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. Comparing the results obtained from
standard (Std) curve with standard (Std) addition with and without(*) internal standard. % content
(w/w) is determined by comparing the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount of the β-lg. (n=2)
sulfur, causing indium to “overcorrect” the response. To make sure that the latter is not
the case, it was decided to do a screening of internal standards to validate the corrections
from the internal standard.
5.2.4
Internal standard screening
An experiment was conducted to determine whether indium is a suitable internal stan-
dard. It was decided to test three other internal standards alongside with indium. These
were germanium (Ge), yttrium (Y), iridium (Ir) (Table 5.5).
Table 5.5: Describes the internal standards used for the experiment. The origin of the emission line
is shown under Ion, where I indicated atomic origin and II indicates ionic origin.
Element
Ion
Emission line
Literature
Ref
Indium
I
325.609 nm
Sulfur determination in canola seeds
[43]
Germanium
I
209.426 nm
Phosphorus determination to quantify DNA
[12]
Yttrium
I
407.736 nm
Sulfur determination in crude oil
[49]
Iridium
I
254.397 nm
All the emission lines chosen for the three internal standards are atomic in origin to
match the sulfur emission line at 181.972 nm. Germanium was chosen because of its low
excitation energy, which has been identiﬁed as one of the important criteria for choosing
an internal standard (Section 2.1.4). Moreover, germanium has been successfully used
as an internal standard to quantify DNA via phosphor determination [12]. Yttrium and
Iridium are commonly used as internal standards in ICP-OES. Even though yttrium have
the highest excitation energy out of the four chosen internal standards, it has previously
been successfully used to determine the sulfur content in crude oil [49].
55
==PAGE:60==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To compare how the diﬀerent internal standards inﬂuenced the results, an experiment
similar to that described in Section 5.2.3 was conducted. With the only diﬀerences being
that germanium, yttrium and iridium was added to all solution at a 1 ppm concentration
and standard addition was replaced with spike and recovery (Section 4.3.4).
0.1M HCl 
(dissolved)
0.01M PBS 
(dissolved)
HNO3 
(destroyed)
1.11
1.05
1.03
± 0.03
± 0.03
± 0.01
1.14
1.02
1.02
 ± 0.04
 ± 0.01
 ± 0.00
1.11
0.86
1.00
 ± 0.03
 ± 0.01
 ± 0.02
1.09
1.01
1.04
 ± 0.03
 ± 0.01
 ± 0.00
In
Ge
Y
Ir
Figure 5.13: The results are given as spike recoveries for 5 ppm beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg) samples with
the two sample preparation methods: 0.01M phosphate buﬀer (PBS) and destroyed on heat block with
65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. The matrix compares the results from using the
three internal standards indium (In), germanium (Ge) and iridium (Ir). The color illustrates how close
the spike recovery is to 1. The further away from 1 the result is the more intense the color becomes. Red
> 1 < Blue. Standard deviation is speciﬁed as ±. Spike recovery describes whether the sulfur standard
response is equal in both standards and sample. (n=3)
High spike recoveries were obtained from the samples of β-lg dissolved in 0.1M HCl (Fig-
ure 5.13). The average spike recovery for the HCl samples is 1.11 meaning the sulfur
standard signal is measured to be 11% higher than the actual sulfur standard concen-
tration. In other words, something in the sample solution is causing the sulfur intensity
to increase, compared to the sulfur in the standard solutions. This suggests that 0.1M
HCl should not be used as a solvent as the standard curve cannot be used to quantify
the amount of sulfur in the protein samples. For that reason, the validity of the results
obtained from previous experiments can be questioned, as they might have given unrep-
resentatively high recoveries. For the PBS samples where yttrium was used as an internal
standard a low spike recovery of 0.86 was obtained.
Looking at the calibration curve for yttrium show a low R2 of 0.986 and a slope steeper
than for the other internal standards. The steep slope is a result of a 0.92 internal ratio
of the one of standards in the calibration curve resulting in a high corrected intensity
56
==PAGE:61==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
of that sulfur standard. Since the validity of the results for both the HCl samples and
PBS with yttrium can be questioned the results from these samples have been excluded
in Figure 5.14.
The remaining samples show acceptable spike recoveries between 0-5%. However, indium
has both higher spike recoveries and higher SD compared to germanium and iridium.
Suggesting that germanium or iridium might be better choices of an internal standard
for this method.
Std curve
Spike
Std curve
Spike
83%
93%
87%
93%
 ± 0.8%
 ± 6.0%
 ± 0.2%
 ± 2.8%
80%
84%
86%
90%
 ± 0.2%
 ± 3.1%
 ± 0.6%
 ± 0.9%
80%
81%
88%
95%
 ± 0.4%
 ± 1.4%
 ± 0.4%
 ± 1.1%
Ir
Ge
In
0.01M PBS           
(dissolved)
HNO3              
(destroyed)
*
*
Figure 5.14: The results are given as % content of 5 ppm beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg) samples with the
two sample preparation methods: 0.01M phosphate buﬀer (PBS) and destroyed on heat block with 65%
HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl. The matrix compares the two methods of determining
sample concentration; standard curve (Std curve) and spike and recovery (Spike).
The matrix also
compares the results from using the three internal standards indium (In), germanium (Ge) and iridium
(Ir). The color illustrates how close the % content is to 100%. The further away from a 100% the result
is the more intense the blue color becomes. Standard deviation is speciﬁed as ±. % content (w/w) is
determined by comparing the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount of the (β-lg). (n=3). *The
results that are the most aﬀected by the choice of internal standard.
The % content results from the experiment are shown in Figure 5.14. The concentration
of the samples are determined with the two methods: spike and recovery and standard
curve. In PBS, only with indium as an internal standard does the two methods yield
a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent recovery (p-value=0.043). For the destroyed samples there is a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between for all three internal standards.
In general, these results illustrate how much inﬂuence the internal standard has on the
results, even when measuring the same sample only changing the internal standard the
results vary with as much as 12% (* in Figure 5.14). Illustrating that choosing the right
internal standard is a critical parameter for this method.
57
==PAGE:62==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To summarize indium had high spike recoveries and high SD when compared to germa-
nium and iridium. Moreover, indium showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between using the
standard curve and spike and recovery in both PBS and HNO3, which also was observed
for neither germanium nor iridium. It is therefore concluded that indium might not be
the internal standard best suited for quantifying proteins on ICP-OES and that germa-
nium and iridium look like more promising candidates. The high spike recoveries could
indicate that indium does not react the same way to changes in the solution as sulfur, as
suggested in Section 5.2.3. This means indium "overcorrection" could be the explanation
as to why the % content increased the internal standard was not used in Figure 5.11.
The results also show that in general, when the samples are destroyed there is an increase
in the recovery, compared to the PBS samples. The same thing was observed for in the
previously in 5.2.3. This indicates that the protein samples need to be destroyed before
measuring on ICP-OES. Moreover, the previous experiments showing that samples dis-
solved in 0.1M HCl have had a % content equal to or higher than the destroyed samples
(Figure 5.11), can be questioned due to the high spike recoveries found in 0.1M HCl.
5.2.5
Reference proteins
Most of the experiments were carried using only β-lg as the model protein. It was decided
to test the method with two additional proteins: BSA (66,5 kDa) and the mAb Inﬂix-
imab (146 KDa). This would determine if the results from the β-lg experiments could
be replicated in other proteins and thereby validating the results. Moreover, it would
prove that the method applies to multiple proteins. BSA is commonly used as reference
material for protein quantiﬁcation. It was decided to use a BSA certiﬁed UV reference
solution with a concentration of 2 mg/mL dissolved in 0.9% NaCl for the experiment.
Today most biopharmaceuticals are mAbs. For this reason, it would be interesting to
investigate whether this method could be applied to the mAbs Inﬂiximab despite the
large molecular weight. The Inﬂiximab used for the experiment is a Ph. Eur. reference
standard. GSH was also included in the experiment to investigate how the peptide re-
acted to the new conditions used for the method. It was decided to still use indium for
the experiment to make the results comparable to the previously obtained results.
The experiment was performed as described in Section 5.2.4. Measuring on 5 ppm sulfur
concentrations of the three analytes (GSH: 48 ppm, BSA: 265 ppm, Inﬂiximab: 512 ppm).
With only indium used as the internal standard. It was decided not to dissolve Inﬂix-
imab in 0.1M HCl as there was a risk of the mAb denaturing in the acidic environment.
The Inﬂiximab standard came as a lyophilized pellet, with the speciﬁed content of 89 mg
protein. The concentration of Inﬂiximab in the pellet was determined by weighing the
58
==PAGE:63==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
total weight of the pellet and was estimated to be 19%. Based on package insert from the
Inﬂiximab based drug Remicade, the other constituents of the pellet could be sucrose,
polysorbate 80, sodium phosphate, monobasic and disodium phosphate dihydrate [50].
The spike recoveries for BSA in 0.1M HCl determined to 0.90. In compliance with the
previous results, the spike recovery for a protein sample in 0.1M HCl deviated with 10%.
For this reason, the results from BSA in 0.1M HCl are excluded. However, when look-
ing at GSH in 0.1 HCl, the spike recovery was acceptable at 0.98. GSH is a peptide and
it is likely peptides and proteins do not react the same way to being dissolved in 0.1M HCl.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
GSH
β-lg
BSA
Infliximab
% Content (w/w)
0.1M HCl
(dissolved)
0.01M PBS
(dissolved)
HNO3
(destroyed)
Figure 5.15:
% content of 5 ppm sulfur samples of the four analytes: glutathione (GSH), beta-
lactoglobulin (β-lg), bovine serum albumin (BSA) and Inﬂiximab. Comparing the three sample prepa-
ration methods: dissolved in 0.1M HCl and 0.01M phosphate buﬀer (PBS) and destroyed on heat block
with 65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl.% content (w/w) is determined by comparing
the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount or declared concentration of the analyte.(n=3)
In Figure 5.15 the % content results determined by standard curve are shown together
with the β-lg standard curve results with indium as internal standard from Figure 5.14.
Looking at the GSH results the recovery in PBS is 22% lower than the results obtained
from 0.1M HCl. An explanation could be that at pH 7 GSH is an ampholyte, meaning
it can react both as a base and as an acid, whereas it is on acid form in 0.1M HCl. This
diﬀerence could cause changes to the physical properties of GSH in an aqueous solution,
which could result in a reduction of the sulfur signal. That GSH seemingly reacts diﬀer-
ently to being dissolved in PBS and HCl compared to the proteins, could suggest that a
method compatible with proteins might not be compatible with peptides.
The three proteins show all show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the destroyed and dis-
solved samples. The destruction resulted in increased recovery of 4.9, 7.2 and 19 percent
for β-lg, BSA and Inﬂiximab respectively. This could indicate that as a protein increases
in size the beneﬁt of destruction increases. This supports the theory that matrix eﬀect
arises from the plasma’s inability to excite all sulfurs, and that as the size of the protein
increases so does the matrix eﬀect.
59
==PAGE:64==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Besides the diﬀerence in the size of the three proteins, their sample matrices also contain
diﬀerent matrix components, despite being dissolved in the same solvent. The β-lg sam-
ples should be pure protein in solvent. However, previous results have suggested that ion
impurities might be present in the β-lg. The BSA standard is dissolved in 0.9% NaCl
resulting in the diluted samples having a concentration 0.1% NaCl. The Inﬂiximab sam-
ples contain an approximate 4 ppm concentration of excipients from the lyophilized pellet.
Previous experiments have raised some concerns regarding how ions such as sodium and
potassium might reduce the response from sulfur. Which could be on the reasons why
none of the proteins achieve a 100% recovery.
Another explanation could be that 100% recovery is not achievable, because the calcu-
lated protein concentration based on weight and dilution might not be 100% accurate.
This could be caused by impurities in the protein samples or dilution uncertainties, and
at least for Inﬂiximab the concentration calculated based on weight is more an estimate
than a reliable value.
5.2.6
Summary of matrix eﬀect
To summarize, the matrix eﬀect observed seems to be of a complex origin, with multiple
sources contributing. Three factors were identiﬁed to inﬂuence the matrix eﬀect: The size
of the analyte, the concentration ion-based matrix component, and the choice of internal
standard.
To decompose the protein with acid destruction before measuring on ICP-OES has given
the most accurate results and seems to decrease the matrix eﬀect.
Furthermore, the
results also indicate that as the protein increase in size the beneﬁt of acid destruction
increases, which further solidiﬁes the need for acid destruction.
The ion composition of the matrix also seems to aﬀect the matrix eﬀect. It was shown
that increasing the concentration of potassium in a sample decreased the sulfur signal.
This is most likely caused by the EIE eﬀect which is associated with ions like potassium
and sodium. This means that ion impurities in the protein will have a great inﬂuence on
the result of the analysis.
The internal standard screening experiment showed the choice of internal standard is a
critical parameter of the method that greatly inﬂuences the result. It also indicated that
indium might not be the best choice of internal standard due to high spike recoveries and
high SD when compared to germanium or iridium.
60
==PAGE:65==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results also showed diﬀerent sample preparations might be necessary depending on
whether the analyte is a peptide or protein. This was concluded when 0.1M HCl seemed
to be a solvent well suited for determining the concentration of GSH but poorly suited
to determine concentrations of BSA and β-lg due to large deviations in spike recovery.
5.3
Validation
This next section will discuss the validation of the developed ICP-OES method. Accord-
ing to Ph. Eur. validation of an ICP-OES method should include establishing linearity,
determining measurements are preformed above LOQ, precision in the form of repeata-
bility and lastly accuracy [9].
5.3.1
Linearity
Linearity was indicated early on in Section 5.1.3 for sulfur standards, GSH and β-lg in
0.1M HCl. In the experiment described in Section 5.2.3 linearity of the sulfur standard
was evaluated for all three solvents (0.1M HCl, 0.01M PBS and 22% HNO3) used in the
experimental work in the concentration range of 0.5 to 8.5 ppm sulfur(Table 5.6). All
three solvents showed a linear correlation between the sulfur concentration and inten-
sity at 281.972 nm with R2 > 0.99. Furthermore, the residuals were evenly distributed
throughout the levels with p-values ≥0.05 indicating heteroscedasticity. This strongly
indicates linearity however Ph. Eur. requires 5 replications of each standard to establish
linearity, this described experiment was performed with 3 replicates.
Table 5.6: The result from the linear regression of the relationship between the sulfur concentration
and the signal intensity for sulfur at 181.972 nm for sulfur standard in 0.1M HCl, 0.01M PBS and 22%
HNO3 diluted with 0.1M HCl. Determined with the ﬁve concentrations 0.5, 2.5, 4.5, 6.5, 8.5 ppm. (n=3)
0.1M HCl
0.01M PBS
22% HNO3
Slope
687.40
691.31
587.13
Intercept
14.97
0.95
6.81
R2
1.00
1.00
1.00
Sum of squares
56,703,045
57,348,982
41,366,769
P-value for
heteroscedasticity of residuals
0.11
0.29
0.05
5.3.2
Repeatability and Robustness
No actual study of repeatability was performed. However, low standard deviations were
generally obtained throughout the experiments indicating a high level of precision. De-
spite that the result also showed that method was very sensitive to changes in the analytic
procedure. This meant that changes in solvent, calibration method and choice of internal
61
==PAGE:66==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
standard greatly aﬀected the results. This has resulted in diﬃculties recreating results
obtained from previous experiments, indicating a low level of repeatability and robustness
for this method.
5.3.3
Limit of quantiﬁcation
LOQ has not been established for this method. However, the lowest concentration of
sulfur measured was 0.3 ppm measured in Section 5.1.2. Looking at the emission signal
for 181.972 nm shows the signal-to-noise ratio is approximately 20:1 (Figure 5.3). Which
is well above the recommended ratio of 10:1. This demonstrates that all measurements
are taken well above LOQ, which is the requirement from Ph. Eur.
5.3.4
Accuracy
Ph.
Eur.
states that accuracy can be determined by recovery also referred to as %
content (w/w). The recovery results for β-lg have varied between 80-100% in the diﬀerent
experiments depending on the use of solvent, sample preparation and choice of internal
standard.
Ph.
Eur.
requires a recovery of 90-110% for an ICP-OES method to be
assumed valid. The general assumption throughout the experiments has been that the
closer the % content was to 100% the better the accuracy. This assumption is only valid
if the weighed sample is 100% pure and does not contain any impurities.
UV-spectroscopy as reference method
As an alternative way of determining accuracy UV-spectroscopy at 280 nm was chosen
as a reference method to determine the concentration of β-lg, BSA and Inﬂiximab (Ta-
ble 5.7). The ε for BSA and Inﬂiximab was speciﬁed by the manufacture [51, 33]. For
β-lg ε was calculated theoretically using the USP monograph describing protein determi-
nation under native conditions [42]. To compare, the theoretical ε was also calculated for
BSA and Inﬂiximab. This showed a diﬀerence of 3 and 2 percent respectively, between
the theoretical and the ε speciﬁed by the manufacturer. Because of the relatively small
diﬀerence, it was deemed reasonable to use the theoretical ε for β-lg in the experiments.
Table 5.7:
Lists of the three analytes beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg), bovine serum albumin (BSA) and
Inﬂiximab used for the UV-spectroscopy at 280 nm. Together with the extinction coeﬃcient (ε1%) both
theoretical (T) and the one provided by the manufacturer (R). * The extinction coeﬃcient used in
Figure 5.16. Cys: Cysteine, Trp: Tryptophan, Tyr: Tyrosine.
Analyte
MW [kDa]
Cys
Trp
Tyr
ε1%R
ε1%T
β-lg
18.4
5
2
5
-
10.4*
BSA
66.5
35
2
20
6.6*
6.8
Inﬂiximab
146
32
24
48
14.5*
14.2
62
==PAGE:67==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The samples for UV-spectroscopy were prepared as in Section 5.2.5 with the three pro-
teins β-lg, BSA and Inﬂiximab in 0.01M PBS. For the blank solution 0.01M PBS was
used. In Figure 5.16 the UV results are compared to the recoveries found in Figure 5.15.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
β-lg
BSA
Infliximab
% Content (w/w)
UV 280 nm
(0.01M PBS)
ICP-OES
(0.01M PBS)
ICP-OES
(HNO3)
Figure 5.16:
% content of 5 ppm sulfur samples of the four analytes: Beta-lactoglobulin (β-lg),
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and Inﬂiximab. Comparing the three methods: 0.01M phosphate buﬀer
(PBS) samples measured with ICP-OES and with UV-spectroscopy 280 nm, and destroyed on heat block
with 65% HNO3 and diluted to 22% HNO3 with 0.1M HCl measured on ICP-OES.% content (w/w) is
determined by comparing the result from ICP-OES to the weighted amount or declared concentration of
the analyte. (n=3)
All the UV measurements resulted in recoveries lower than 100%. The UV recovery for
β-lg was lower than both recoveries found with the ICP-OES method. The β-lg ε was
determined theoretically, for this reason alone the validity of the result could be ques-
tioned. Furthermore, the β-lg used for the experiment is a mixture of the two subtypes A
and B. The diﬀerence between subtype A and B (Section 2.3.4) could cause them to have
diﬀerent ε, and thereby making the accuracy of the theoretical ε even more questionable.
This diﬀerence between subtype A and B probably has not aﬀected the ICP-OES results
as the diﬀerence in sulfur ratio between the two subtypes is only 0.4%. For BSA the
UV recovery was 93% which is very close to the 92% recovery obtained from the samples
dissolved in 0.01M PBS on ICP-OES. As BSA is a UV reference standard it was expected
that the % content would be very close to 100%. That recovery is 93% could indicate a
margin of error of around 7% for the UV-spectroscopy method. For Inﬂiximab the UV
result gave a recovery between the result obtained from the dissolved and the destroyed
ICP-OES samples. Because the results from the UV experiments were inconsistent, it was
concluded that using the UV-spectroscopy method did not give a better indication of the
accuracy of the ICP-OES method. However, the UV results do give recoveries relatively
close to the results achieved from the ICP-OES. Based on this it could be argued that the
ICP-OES method is at least as good as the UV-spectroscopy method, which is a highly
utilized method for quantifying proteins of high purity.
63
==PAGE:68==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
According to ICH Q2 accuracy can be inferred when precision, linearity and speciﬁcity
have been conﬁrmed. Linearity already has been indicated and speciﬁcity is not within
the scope of this method since this analytical method is developed to quantify proteins
with already well-deﬁned composition and impurities. Therefor to establish precision in
form of repeatability for the developed ICP-OES method would be a way to also establish
accuracy.
5.4
Further development
The previous section has shown that further development is necessary to achieve a valid
method for quantifying proteins with ICP-OES. The further development of the method
should focus on establishing repeatability and robustness. An explanation for the high
variability observed could be caused by a lack of understanding of the origin of the matrix
eﬀect. It is therefore suggested to further explore the sources identiﬁed to cause matrix
eﬀect and possible ways to limit their inﬂuence on the analysis. This might include,
further investigation of how changes in ion impurities aﬀect the analysis. A way to cor-
recting for the eﬀect of ion impurities could be saturating the samples with ions, which
would result in an insensitivity to small changes in ion concentration.
Moreover, determining an internal standard better suited for the method than indium
is suggested. This might include further exploring germanium and iridium as internal
standards. Ideally, the internal standard should be able to correct for small changes in
ion composition in the sample to increase the robustness of the analytical method.
Another explanation for the high variability could be unstable and heterogeneous protein
solutions. It could be investigated how the addition of a surfactant such as polysorbate
80 aﬀects the analysis. The addition of a surfactant might reduce the surface tension
of the protein solution and thereby decrease the variability in spray eﬃciency (Section
2.3.2). Furthermore, the use of a surfactant might eliminate denaturing of the protein
caused by high surface tension, thereby ensuring a more homogeneous protein solution.
A more homogeneous solution could result in decreased variability.
The best results have been obtained by destroying the protein samples before measuring
the sulfur intensity. For this reason, future research could be focused around destroyed
sampled. This would also eliminate some of the potential sources of the matrix eﬀect,
and concerns about protein stability and solubility. Even though, the results indicated
that the destruction of the protein sample of β-lg was complete. Some research should
be conducted conﬁrming the complete destruction of the protein samples. It is not un-
common that HNO3 at atmospheric pressure results in incomplete destruction of high
concentration protein samples (Section 2.1.5). To indicate complete destruction the RCC
64
==PAGE:69==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
could be determined. Another approach could be to perform prolonged destruction in
the microwave to investigate whether this increased the sulfur response.
The method currently developed has a sample volume of around 4 mL, which is rela-
tively high when compared to methods such as HPLC. This means that with a sample
concentration of 5 ppm sulfur 1.3 mg β-lg (sulfur ratio: 0.0157) is used for each sam-
ple. Reducing the sample quantity used per analysis would greatly increase the utility
of the proposed method. The initial concentration study showed that it was possible to
measure the concentration of GSH at a 0.3 ppm sulfur concentration with a reasonable
signal-to-noise ratio. This could indicate that a lower concentration than 5 ppm sulfur
could be used to determine the concentration of proteins. Moreover, optimization regard-
ing sample volume could also be explored. With a concentric nebulizer that was used for
the experiments only around 5% of the sample, volume reaches the plasma (2.1.1). The
use of more eﬃcient nebulizer systems such as ultra-sonic nebulizers would reduce the
sample volume [10], and thereby analyte quantity.
5.5
General discussion of method
In the case where an accurate, precise and robust method for determination of sulfur
in proteins with ICP-OES is developed, some reﬂections regarding the accuracy of the
obtained protein concentration should be considered. The accuracy of the protein con-
centration obtained is entirely dependent on the accuracy of stoichiometric data obtained
from protein.
One of the limitations of this method is that the protein of interest needs to be well
deﬁned. To determine an accurate molecular weight both the amino acid sequence and
structural information needs to be known. The argument has been that as the method is
designed for quantiﬁcation in API production the molecular weight of the protein would
be known.
However, most current protein quantiﬁcation methods are based speciﬁc properties of the
protein itself such as its the ability to reduce cobber as in Lowry or the absorption at 280
nm, for these methods the molecular weight of the protein is not necessary. Moreover,
because of the complexity and naturally heterogeneity of biopharmaceuticals, there is in-
creased ﬂexibility regarding the requirements set for production by Ph. Eur. This means
that in some cases the dosage of biopharmaceuticals can be determined by potency rather
than quantity [33, 32].
65
==PAGE:70==
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For these reasons it can be questioned whether reliable methods for determining protein
molecular weights are available and certainly whether they are common practice in bio-
pharmaceutical production today. However, it can be argued that the possible inaccuracy
derived from assumptions regarding molecular weight, might not be greater than the in-
accuracy possibly derived from the assumptions made about the ε in UV-spectroscopy.
Limited research has so far been conducted on using ICP-OES for quantifying peptides
and proteins. However, recent developments in mass spectrometry (MS) have made it
possible to determine ion concentrations such as sulfur with MS. This development has
resulted in an increased research in using ICP-MS to quantify proteins based on the
sulfur concentration [52]. Bianga et al proposed a method very similar to the ICP-OES
method proposed in the study. However as MS was used for detection instead of OES,
the quantiﬁcation was achieved by using a sulfur isotope as reference material. The study
showed high recoveries of around 100 ± 2% and relative SD > 1% for BSA. Furthermore,
the study also showed a low sensitivity to matrix eﬀect. All samples were destroyed with
acid destruction before analysis [53]. The Bianga et al study showed excellent results
for using ICP-MS for the quantitative determination of proteins by determining sulfur
content. This could indicate that ICP-MS might be better suited than ICP-OES for
this purpose. However, with some further development ICP-OES might produce results
similar to those found with ICP-MS. In that case, ICP-OES has the advantages of being
less expensive and having simpler development and operating procedures than ICP-MS
[54].
66
==PAGE:71==
6
|
Conclusion
This study has shown that ICP-OES could be used to cover the increasing demand for a
simple and precise method of quantifying protein in a growing biopharmaceutical market.
The results prove that it is possible to determine the concentration of proteins and pep-
tides of high purity and well-deﬁned structures, by determining the sulfur content with
ICP-OES.
When establishing initial method parameters, the emission line at 181.972 nm was cho-
sen as it had the highest intensity and best quantitative results at low concentrations.
Regarding operating conditions, RF power had the greatest inﬂuence on the intensity
of sulfur. Also, auxiliary ﬂow inﬂuenced the sulfur intensity. However, increasing the
intensity via altering the auxiliary ﬂow came at the expense of lower precision.
During the development of the method, sample preparation, size of the analyte, the quan-
tity of EIE in the matrix and choice of internal standard were identiﬁed as parameters
that inﬂuenced the result of the analysis. Decomposing the analyte with acid destruction
before analysis resulted in the highest level of accuracy. Furthermore, the results showed
that the eﬀect of acid destruction is increased together with the size of the analyte. This
led to the conclusion that as the size of the analyte increases the plasma’s ability to
excite all sulfur atoms decreases. The results also showed that an increase of EIE in the
matrix resulted in a decrease of the sulfur intensity. As a result, ion impurities from the
production and puriﬁcation of proteins could greatly inﬂuence the result of the analy-
sis. Indium was used as an internal standard. However, indium might not be a suitable
internal standard for this method, as results indicated that indium and sulfur do not
react similarly in the plasma to changes in matrix composition. It was suggested that
germanium and iridium might be more suitable internal standards for this method.
Even though the developed ICP-OES method shows great promise, it has shown chal-
lenges regarding robustness, repeatably and accuracy. However, comparing the ICP-OES
method to UV-spectroscopy at 280 nm showed that the ICP-OES results were at least as
accurate as the results obtained from UV-spectroscopy. Furthermore, the highest level of
accuracy was obtained from destroyed protein sample on ICP-OES.
Future research should focus on establishing precision and robustness of the method, and
obtaining a better understanding on how the diﬀerent parameters of the method aﬀect
the analyses.
67
==PAGE:72==
7
|
Perspective
The method developed in this study has been proposed to be used for the quantiﬁcation
of biopharmaceuticals from API production in the pharmaceutical industry. However,
this method might also be relevant for other applications, where determining the ratio
between sulfur and another element is of intrest. Examples of this could be structural
information regarding disulﬁde bonds or binding constants for metalloproteins.
Xu et al report the use of a highly selective selenium reagent that labels free thiols with
selenium [55]. With this reagent, it would be possible with a protein of known amino acid
sequence to determine the sulfur to selenium ratio with the ICP-OES method proposed in
this study. Assuming a complete reaction with all thiol, the sulfur to selenium ratio could
then be translated into the number of free thiols and the number of disulﬁde bonds in a
protein. As previously mentioned (Section 2.3), disulﬁde bonds have a big impact on the
structure of the protein, and this information could as an example indicate whether the
protein on the native or denatured state. In cases where disulﬁde information is known,
the selenium to sulfur ratio might also indicate which free thiols are available for reactions.
Another example of an application could be determining binding contains for metal-
binding protein. Investigating how the metal to protein ratio changes over time with
ICP-OES could be used to determine the binding constant for the selected protein.
Both proposed applications have the advantage of being a ratio. Meaning that if the
number of sulfurs of each protein is known changes in the molecular weight should not
aﬀect the results.
68
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Walsh, Gary. “Biopharmaceutical benchmarks 2018”. In: Nature Biotechnology 36.12 (2018), pp. 1136–
1145.
[2]
Liu, Justin K.H. “The history of monoclonal antibody development - Progress, remaining chal-
lenges and future innovations”. In: Annals of Medicine and Surgery 3.4 (2014), pp. 113–116.
[3]
Bronsema, Kees J., Bischoﬀ, Rainer, and Van de Merbel, Nico C. “Internal standards in the
quantitative determination of protein biopharmaceuticals using liquid chromatography coupled to
mass spectrometry”. In: Journal of Chromatography B 893-894 (2012), pp. 1–14.
[4]
Sabbagh, Bassel et al. “Clinical applications of MS-based protein quantiﬁcation”. In: Proteomics
- Clinical Applications 10.4 (2016), pp. 323–345.
[5]
Chang, Sam K.C. and Zhang, Yan. “Protein Analysis”. In: Food analysis. Ed. by Nielsen, S. Suzanne.
5th ed. Springer, 2017. Chap. 18, pp. 315–331.
[6]
Gill, Stanley C. and Hippel, Peter H. von. “Calculation of protein extinction coeﬃcients from
amino acid sequence data”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 182.2 (1989), pp. 319–326.
[7]
Pace, C. Nick et al. “How to measure and predict the molar absorption coeﬃcient of a protein”.
In: Protein Science 4.11 (1995), pp. 2411–2423.
[8]
Council of Europe. “2.5.33. Total Protein”. In: European Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council of Europe,
2019, pp. 172–175.
[9]
Council of Europe. “2.2.56. Amino Acid Analysis”. In: European Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council of
Europe, 2019, pp. 4691–4697.
[10]
Boss, Charles B and Fredeen, Kenneth J. Concepts, Instrumentation, and Techniques in Induc-
tively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry. 2nd ed. Perkin Elmer, 1997.
[11]
Rastogi, L., Dash, K., and Arunachalam, J. “Accurate quantitation standards of glutathione via
traceable sulfur measurement by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry and
ion chromatography”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 3.3 (2013), pp. 180–186.
[12]
Holden, Marcia J. et al. “Traceable phosphorus measurements by ICP-OES and HPLC for the
quantitation of DNA”. In: Analytical Chemistry 79.4 (2007), pp. 1536–1541.
[13]
Greenﬁeld, S. et al. “High-pressure plasmas as spectroscopic emission sources”. In: Journal of
Analytical Atomic Spectrometry 4.7 (1989), pp. 559–560.
[14]
Hou, Xiandeng and Jones, Bradly T. “Inductively Coupled Plasma/Optical Emission Spectroscopy”.
In: Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry (2000), pp. 9468–9485.
[15]
Støving, Celina et al. “Development and validation of an ICP-OES method for quantitation of
elemental impurities in tablets according to coming US pharmacopeia chapters”. In: Journal of
Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis 84.2013 (2013), pp. 209–214.
[16]
Weston, K. C. and Hilligoss, D. R. “Determination of total sulphur in gasoline by ICP-OES”. In:
Atomic Spectroscopy 22.1 (2001), pp. 244–249.
[17]
Kamenetskii, D. A. Frank. “Plasma - The Fourth State of Matter”. In: Plasma: The Fourth State
of Matter. 1st ed. Plenum Press, 1972, pp. 1–8.
69
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[18]
Council of Europe. “2.2.57. Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry”. In: Eu-
ropean Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council of Europe, 2019.
[19]
Stauﬀer, Mark T. “The Many Faces of Calibration and Validation in Analytical Methodology in
the Present Day”. In: Calibration and Validation of Analytical Methods - A Sampling of Current
Approaches. InTech, 2018. Chap. Introducto.
[20]
Grotti, Marco, Magi, Emanuele, and Leardi, Riccardo. “Selection of internal standards in induc-
tively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry by principal component analysis”. In: Journal
of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry 18.3 (2003), pp. 274–281.
[21]
Zachariadis, G. A. and Vogiatzis, C. “An overview of the use of yttrium for internal standardization
in inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry”. In: Applied Spectroscopy Reviews
45.3 (2010), pp. 220–239.
[22]
Henryk Matusiewicz. “Wet digestion methods”. In: Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry (2003),
pp. 193–233.
[23]
Rickard, David. “Sulfur Chemistry in Aqueous Solutions”. In: Developments in Sedimentology.
Vol. 65. Elsevier, 2012. Chap. 2, pp. 31–83.
[24]
Pjevac, Petra. “Co-existence and niche diﬀerentiation of sulfur oxidizing bacteria in marine envi-
ronments”. PhD thesis. Univeristy of Bremen, 2014.
[25]
Cecil, R. and Mcphee, J. R. “The Sulfur Chemistry of Proteins”. In: Advances in Protein Chemistry
14.C (1959), pp. 255–389.
[26]
Tangerman, Albert. “Measurement and biological signiﬁcance of the volatile sulfur compounds
hydrogen sulﬁde, methanethiol and dimethyl sulﬁde in various biological matrices”. In: Journal of
Chromatography B 877.28 (2009), pp. 3366–3377.
[27]
Le Basle, Yoann et al. “Physicochemical Stability of Monoclonal Antibodies: A Review”. In: Jour-
nal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 109 (2019), pp. 169–190.
[28]
Berg, Jeremny M., Tymoczko, John L., and Stryer, Lubert. “Protein composition and structure”.
In: Biochemistry. 7th ed. 2012. Chap. 2, pp. 25–65.
[29]
Pace, C. Nick et al. “Protein structure, stability and solubility in water and other solvents”. In:
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 359.1448 (2004), pp. 1225–
1235.
[30]
Chi, Eva Y. et al. “Physical stability of proteins in aqueous solution: Mechanism and driving forces
in nonnative protein aggregation”. In: Pharmaceutical Research 20.9 (2003), pp. 1325–1336.
[31]
ICH Expert Working Group. “ICH Guideline Q6B”. In: Speciﬁcations: Test Procedures and Ac-
ceptance Critreia for Biotechnological/Biological Products 4 (1999).
[32]
European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines (EDQM). [Accessed on 15-nov-2019]. Biother-
apeutics. url: https://www.edqm.eu/en/biotherapeutics#Flexibility%20in%20the%20Ph.
%20Eur.%20monographs.
[33]
Council of Europe. “01/2019:2928 Inﬂiximab concentrated solution”. In: European Pharmacopoeia.
9.6. Council of Europe, 2019.
[34]
Council of Europe. “01/2019:2895 Etanercept”. In: European Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council of Eu-
rope, 2019.
[35]
Council of Europe. “07/2019:2848 Filgrastim injection”. In: European Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council
of Europe, 2019.
70
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36]
Council of Europe. “01/2008:0951 Somatropin”. In: European Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council of Eu-
rope, 2019.
[37]
Council of Europe. “04/2018:0049 Paracetamol”. In: European Pharmacopoeia. 9.6. Council of
Europe, 2019.
[38]
Wonisch, Willibald and Schaur, Rudolf J. “Chemistry of Glutathione”. In: Signiﬁcance of Glu-
tathione to Plant Adaptation to the Environment. Ed. by Grill, D. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2001. Chap. 2, pp. 13–26.
[39]
Qin, Bin Y. et al. “Functional implications of structural diﬀerences between variants A and B of
bovine β-lactoglobulin”. In: Protein Science 8.1 (Dec. 2008), pp. 75–83.
[40]
Kuwata, K. et al. “Solution structure and dynamics of bovine beta-lactoglobulin A.” In: Protein
Sci. 8 (1999), pp. 2541–2545. doi: 10.2210/PDB1CJ5/PDB.
[41]
Majorek, Karolina A. et al. “Structural and immunologic characterization of bovine, horse, and
rabbit serum albumins”. In: Molecular Immunology 52.3-4 (Oct. 2012), pp. 174–182. doi: 10.
2210/pdb3V03/pdb.
[42]
United States Pharmacopeial Convention. “(507) Protein determination procedure”. In: The United
States pharmacopeia. 9.6. Council of Europe, 2019.
[43]
Sheng, Li. “Determination of Sulfur in Canola Seed by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emis-
sion Spectroscopy ( ICP-OES )”. In: The Association of Analytical Communities National Meeting.
Chicago, IL, 2013.
[44]
Young, Carl G. “An Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer for the Detection
of Nonmetals in the Vacuum Ultraviolet”. PhD thesis. Wake Forest University graduate school of
Arts and Sciences, 2011.
[45]
Sansonetti, J. E. and Martin, W. C. “Handbook of basic atomic spectroscopic data”. In: Journal
of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 34.4 (2005), pp. 1559–2259.
[46]
Mysen, Bjorn and Richet, Pascal. “Chapter 5 Silica-A deceitful simplicity”. In: Developments in
Geochemistry. Vol. 10. C. Elsevier, 2005, pp. 131–168.
[47]
ICH Expert Working Group. “ICH Guideline Q2(R1)”. In: Validation of analytical procedures:
Text and methodology 4 (2011).
[48]
Sigma-Aldrich. [Accessed on 22-jan-2020]. Sulfur Standard for ICP. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.
com/catalog/product/sial/18021?lang=en&region=DK.
[49]
Pereira, Leticia S.F. et al. “Determination of halogens and sulfur in pitch from crude oil by
plasma-based techniques after microwave-induced combustion”. In: Journal of Analytical Atomic
Spectrometry 30.8 (2015), pp. 1822–1827.
[50]
Dansk Lægemiddel Information. [Accessed on 13-jan-2020]. Remicade Abacus Medicine A/S, pul-
ver til konc. til infusionsvæske 100 mg. url: http://www.indlaegssedler.dk/indlaegssedler/
indlaegsseddel/4735.
[51]
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. [Accessed on 13-jan-2020]. Extinction Coeﬃcients. url: https : / /
assets.thermofisher.com/TFS- Assets/LSG/Application- Notes/TR0006- Extinction-
coefficients.pdf.
[52]
Cid-Barrio, Laura et al. “Advances in absolute protein quantiﬁcation and quantitative protein
mapping using ICP-MS”. In: Trends in Analytical Chemistry 104 (2018), pp. 148–159.
[53]
Bianga, Juliusz et al. “Absolute Quantiﬁcation of Proteins and Peptides by ICP-MS”. In: Spec-
troscopy 31.11 (2016), pp. 25–30.
71
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[54]
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. [Accessed on 20-jan-2020]. Comparison of ICP-OES and ICP-MS for
Trace Element Analysis. url: https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/industrial/
environmental/environmental- learning- center/contaminant- analysis- information/
metal-analysis/comparison-icp-oes-icp-ms-trace-element-analysis.html.
[55]
Xu, Kehua et al. “Study of highly selective and eﬃcient thiol derivatization using selenium reagents
by mass spectrometry”. In: Analytical Chemistry 82.16 (2010), pp. 6926–6932.
72
==PAGE:77==
A
|
Section of conditions experiment
 
 
 
RF 1.3 kW 
RF 1.4 kW 
AUX 1.0 L min-1 
AUX 0.7 L min-1 
AUX 0.3 L min-1 
I
==PAGE:78==
B
|
Spectral Interference Sulfur
 
II
