==PAGE:1==
A new parameterization method for calibration
of a hydrodynamic simulation model informed
by CryoSat-2 radar altimetry - A case study of
the Songhua River
Master Thesis by Silja Westphal Christensen
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
DTU Enviroment
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 116
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Title:
A new parameterization method for calibration of a hydrodynamic simulation model
informed by CryoSat-2 radar altimetry - A case study of the Songhua River
Author:
Silja Westphal Christensen (s144149)
Supervisors:
Peter Bauer-Gottwein, DTU Environment
Liguang Jiang, DTU Environment
Henrik Madsen, DHI
This master thesis of 30 ECTS points was prepared in the period August 26th 2019 to January 26th 2020 at
the department of Environmental Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Earth and Space Physics and Engineering.
January 26, 2020
Silja Westphal Christensen (s144149)
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Reliable hydrodynamic models that can represent physical river systems and accurately
predict water levels along entire river stretches are crucial in operational flood forecasting.
In this work 1-dimensional, spatially distributed hydrodynamic models of the Songhua
River will be calibrated using CryoSat-2 altimetry. The calibration is highly non-linear
inverse problem, which will be regularized and solved with an optimization approach.
After testing different algorithms, a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm with Broyden up-
dates of the Jacobian was chosen due to its robustness and computational speed. Three
methods of parameterizing a hydrodynamic model have been studied including: 1) River
bed resistance is calibrated using well-known cross sectional geometry obtained from
in-situ surveying. 2) River bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries are cal-
ibrated when no bathymetric data is available. 3) Flow area and conveyance curves as
functions of water level are calibrated, without assuming any specific river bed geometry.
The simplest calibration problem occurs when the river bathymetry is well known.
Synthetic studies showed that a line-search of the single regularization parameter lead
to a bed resistance model close to the synthetic truth, which could predict water levels
with an accuracy corresponding to the synthetic data noise level. If river bathymetry
is not available synthetic studies showed that calibrations of a hydrodynamic model
using simple cross sectional geometry approximations did not perform well. Large mod-
elization errors introduced by the cross sectional approximations could to a high extend
be compensated for by the bed resistance model. The calibrated models could predict
water levels well, but significant ambiguity between bed resistance and cross sectional
geometry resulted in calibrated parameters that were far from the synthetic truth. In
a real world scenario it would not be reasonable to extrapolate an unphysical model
to forecast future water levels. Motivated by this issue a new calibration method has
been developed. The traditional parameterization of a hydrodynamic model uses infor-
mation about bed resistance and cross sectional geometries to compute flow area and
conveyance. With the new approach flow area and conveyance as functions of flow depth
are calibrated directly, assuming they can be parameterized with power law models. It
is a complicated optimization problem with many free parameters, and a consistent cal-
ibration framework has yet to be established. However, synthetic and real world results
show the potential of the new method. Calibrated models could represent the true phys-
ical river system, and model predictions of water levels were generally accurate. These
properties are essential for operational forecasting and flood risk analysis, which makes
hydrodynamic models parameterized and calibrated with the new flow area-conveyance
method attractive, if surveyed cross sections are not available.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
List of symbols
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Data and materials
5
2.1
Satellite altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Validation data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
River boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
River bathymetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
The hydrodynamic model
13
3.1
Distributed river routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Parameterization of the hydrodynamic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
MIKE HYDRO River implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Calibration method
29
4.1
Regularized least squares inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Optimization algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Synthetic study
47
5.1
Algorithm comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Calibration of bed resistance using well-known cross sectional geometries
54
5.3
Calibration of bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries . . . .
57
5.4
Calibration of flow area and conveyance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6
Calibration with real data
75
6.1
Calibration of bed resistance using cross sections measured in-situ . . . .
75
6.2
Calibration of flow area and conveyance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
==PAGE:7==
Contents
iii
7
Conclusions
91
References
95
A Model statistics
99
B Update schemes for the Levenberg-Marquardt dampening parameter 101
C Supplementary synthetic studies
103
C.1 Effect of regularization method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
C.2 Effects of noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D Supplementary figures
109
D.1 Gauging station cross sections through time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
D.2 Power law fits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
D.3 Comparing LM implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
D.4 Occam vs. Levenberg-Marquardt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
==PAGE:8==
List of symbols
Hydrodynamics symbols
x: Chainage [m]
t: Time [s]
A: Flow cross sectional area [m2]
Q: Discharge [m3/s]
ρ: Water density [kg/m3]
q: Lateral inflow per unit length [m2/s]
v: Cross sectional average flow velocity [m/s]
vl: Local flow velocity that may vary over a cross section [m/s]
vx,in: Lateral inflow velocity in the channel flow direction [m/s]
β: Momentum correction factor
z: Bed elevation datum [m]
So: Bed slope [-]
g: Gravitational acceleration [m/s2]
w: Flow depth [m]
h: Water level above mean sea level [m amsl]
SF: Friction slope [-]
K: Conveyance [m3/s]
n: Manning’s number [s/m1/3]
Rh: Hydraulic radius [m]
R∗: Resistance radius [m]
Pw: Wetted perimeter [m]
B: Cross sectional width at water surface [m]
b: Storage width [m]
==PAGE:9==
List of symbols
v
Calibration symbols
f:
Forward function.
d:
Observation vector.
x:
Model parameters.
M:
Number of observations.
N:
Number of model parameters.
ϕ:
Objective function.
φ:
Objective function on stacked vector form.
r:
Residual vector.
g:
Gradient vector.
H:
Hessian matrix.
J:
Jacobian matrix.
B:
Broyden approximation of the jacobian.
L:
Roughness matrix.
α:
Regularization parameter.
λ:
Levenberg-Marquardt dampening parameter.
ρ:
Improvement ratio.
∆x:
Step between iterates.
δx:
Finite difference step.
relstep:
Relative finite difference step size.
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
River flow is a key component of the water cycle. Rivers collect runoff and baseflow,
contribute to evaporation fluxes, and feed into the oceans. In an anthropogenic per-
spective rivers have huge impact on their surrounding communities. Many cities were
originally built near rivers due to the plentiful resources they provide, but these cities
will often also face flooding. While flooding can be essential for ecosystems and agricul-
tural purposes, it can also cause devastating damage to housing and infrastructure. For
all of these reasons understanding and predicting river flow is an important area of study.
River flow can be described mathematically by so-called hydrodynamic models. They
allow water levels and discharge to be computed continuously in time and space based on
information about channel bathymetry, bed resistance, and forcings given by a rainfall-
runoff model. Accurate water level predictions along the entire river are crucial in a flood
risk analysis context because they control over-bank spills and inundation. Exploiting
CryoSat-2 radar altimetry, this thesis concerns parameterization and calibration of a
1-dimensional hydrodynamic model of the Songhua river, such that accurate and spa-
tially distributed water levels can be predicted given some hydrological forcing of the
river. A new parameterization approach will be introduced and it will be shown why it
is attractive compared to traditional methods.
Calibration of hydrodynamic models using satellite altimetry have been the subject
of several published studies. Domeneghetti et al. (2014, 2015) calibrate bed resistance in
3 sub-reaches of the Po River based on ENVISAT and ERS-2 altimetry data and in-situ
measured cross sectional geometry. They show that altimetry obtained water levels are
suitable for calibration of hydrodynamic models. Very similarly Schneider et al. (2018)
use the Po river as a case study and calibrate bed resistance with in-situ measured cross
sections. They use CryoSat-2 data instead, however, and utilize its high spatial resolu-
tion to calibrate the bed resistance every 10 km along the river stretch. They conclude
that the finer representation of bed resistance allows a better model fit, but at the cost
of higher uncertainty of the model parameters.
In many cases cross sectional geometries are not available. Domeneghetti (2016) and
De Paiva et al. (2013) approximate cross sectional geometries based on digital eleva-
tion models (DEM) and geomorphologic relationships. With the approximated cross
sectional geometries they calibrate uniform bed resistance based on satellite altimetry
equivalently to the case where the cross sectional geometry has been measured.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Several studies calibrate bed resistance and cross sectional geometry simultaneously.
This approach requires an appropriate parameterization representing an approximate
cross sectional geometry. It should be kept in mind that complex geometries are de-
scribed by several parameters which complicates the calibration procedure due to am-
biguity. A simple rectangular geometry is popular and implemented by for instance
Biancamaria et al. (2009), Durand et al. (2016), Getirana et al. (2013), Jiang et al.
(2019), Wood et al. (2016), and Yoon et al. (2012). Ambiguity prohibits calibration of
bed resistance, flow depth and channel width simultaneously. Biancamaria et al. (2009)
and Jiang et al. (2019) eliminate channel width from the calibration by estimating it
with Landsat imagery. Durand et al. (2016) and Yoon et al. (2012) calibrate channel
geometry based on synthetic Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT) observa-
tions, from which the channel width can be observed. Getirana et al. (2013) calibrate
all parameters simultaneously, and ambiguity is clearly seen in the optimum parameters
given the synthetic truth even if the model predicts water levels well. Wood et al. (2016)
take a different approach and calibrate the bed resistance and channel bankfull depth
in a 2D hydrodynamic model assume a scaling relationship between channel depth and
width. Other simple geometries have also been used to parameterize cross sections such
as triangular (Jiang et al. 2019; Schneider et al. 2017) and trapezoidal (Liu et al. 2015).
Liu et al. (2015) also address the issue of model ambiguity and argue that channel ge-
ometry parameters constrained by measurements would be helpful.
In this work a hydrodynamic simulation model of the Songhua river with spatially
varying parameters will be calibrated against water level data derived from CryoSat-2
radar altimetry. As summerized above most published work concerning calibration of hy-
drodynamic model, calibrate bed resistance in the river and use cross sectional geometry
that is either measured in-situ or included in the calibration under a simple parameter-
ization. In this work an alternative parameterization approach will be presented where
flow area and conveyance are calibrated without any assumptions regarding river bed
geometry. This method allows high accuracy water level predictions, also under over-
bank spill conditions. Furthermore the new method is mostly free from model ambiguity,
which means it can be trusted to represent physical reality to a large extent. Traditional
methods of parameterizing a calibrating and hydrodynamic model will be investigated
for comparison. The main focus points in this work are
• Developing an improved method of parameterizing a hydrodynamic model.
• Investigating the role of model ambiguity when calibrating with simple approxi-
mated cross sectional geometries.
• Optimizing the calibration process in terms of computational speed.
The Songhua river is used as the case study for this work, and a river stretch of 433
km between Harbin and Jiamusi is chosen. On this river stretch 12 catchments con-
tribute with runoff. Figure 1.1 shows the Songhua river network between Harbin and
Jiamusi. The Songhua river is the third largest river in China with respect to discharge.
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.1: The Songhua river system from Harbin to Jiamusi. Source: Jiang et al.
(2019).
In the winter the river is frozen (Nov-Mar), in the spring the river is driven by snow
melt and rainfall (April-May), and in the summer the river is driven mainly by rainfall
(June-September). A high flow is expected in the spring due to snow melt, and in the
summer high flows can be induced by heavy rainfalls in the monsoon season.
The Songhua river case is chosen for different reasons. Firstly cross sectional data
measured in-situ has recently been made available by DHI China, opening the possibil-
ity of studying effects of estimated cross sections. Secondly the Songhua river is ideal
because water level data from CryoSat-2 is accurate and abundant in this area. Satellite
altimetry for monitoring river water levels is proven most successful when 1) the river
is at least a few hundred meters wide, such that the radar footprint does not include
too much of the surrounding area contaminating the waveforms, 2) the river is in the
East-West bound direction ensuring many crossings of the satellite ground track with
the river, and 3) the river is not located in mountainous terrain because this causes ma-
jor tracking issues if the range window is adapted in closed-loop form as on CryoSat-2
(Jiang et al. 2017a). The river stretch of the Songhua used in this work is wide (on a
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
scale of a few hundred meters to one kilometer), and is mainly oriented in the East-West
direction. Jiang et al. (2017a) shows that the CryoSat-2 data quality over the Songhua
river is very good, making it ideal for calibration of a hydrodynamic model.
The calibration central for this work will be performed by posing a non-linear least
squares problem, and the solution will be stabilized with regularization. Due to the non-
linear nature of the problem, its solution will be found using an iterative optimization
approach. In this work two different optimization algorithms, Levenberg-Marquardt and
Occam’s inversion, will be implemented and tested. Furthemore Broyden updates of the
Jacobian between iterations will be implemented reducing the computation time by a
factor between 2 to 10. This makes comprehensive investigations of the regularization
method and degree feasible, which ultimately improves the calibration method.
During the experimental phase of this work synthetic CryoSat-2 data is used in
order to illustrate whether or not different calibration procedures can recreate the true
parameters used to create the synthetic dataset. The findings of the synthetic study
will be applied in order to obtain the best calibrated hydrodyanamic model using real
CryoSat-2 data. In the synthetic work three different parameterization approaches are
investigated.
1. Spatially varying Manning’s numbers are calibrated using well-known cross sec-
tional geometry obtained from in-situ surveying.
2. Spatially varying Manning’s numbers and simple cross sectional geometries are
calibrated when no bathymetric data is available.
3. Flow area and conveyance curves as functions of water level are calibrated at
several points along the river, assuming the curves can be modeled as power law
relationships, without assuming any specific river bed geometry.
Very good water level predictions can be produced if the cross sectional geometry is
well known from in-situ surveying. This approach is particularly attractive because it
leaves the smallest amount of parameters to be calibrated, which significantly simpli-
fies the calibration process. In many cases, however, cross sectional geometry is not
available. Methods 2 and 3 have equivalent potentials of producing small residuals be-
tween water level observations and predictions. However, using method 2, the calibrated
model parameters can not be trusted to represent physical reality because of significant
model ambiguity between bed resistance and cross sectional geometry. The flow area-
conveyance method is not ambiguous and in that sense significantly outperforms the
simple cross sectional geometry method. This in an important result in an operational
flood forecasting perspective, where accurate water levels can only be expected if the
hydrodynamic model represents the physical reality of the river.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Data and materials
In order to set up and calibrate a hydrodynamic simulation model several data and
model inputs are required. In this chapter the data is introduced, which includes 1) water
levels from satellite altimetry used to calibrate the hydrodynamic model, 2) water levels
measured at in-situ gauging station used for independent validation of the calibrated
hydrodynamic model, 3) river bathymetry used by the MIKE HYDRO 1D engine to solve
the Saint-Venant equations, and 4) a rainfall-runoff model used as boundary conditions
for the river system.
2.1
Satellite altimetry
A hydrodynamic simulation model of the Songhua river stretch between Harbin and
Jiamusi will in this work be calibrated against water levels observed using satellite radar
altimetry. The water level observations over the Songhua river, which are used in this
work and shown in figure 2.1, are the same as used in Jiang et al. (2019), and they are
derived from CryoSat-2 altimetry data. The dataset consists of water levels referenced
to the EGM2008 geoid model (Pavlis et al. 2012) and each data point has an associ-
ated time stamp, chainage and standard deviation. The dataset covers the time period
2010-2014 and data points from cold months (Nov-Mar) are excluded because the river
is likely frozen.
Figure 2.1: CryoSat-2 water level observations over the Songhua river in the time
period 2010-2014. The data is referenced to the EGM2008 geoid model.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Data and materials
CryoSat-2 altimetry data requires several processing steps before a water level dataset
over the Songhua river is ready. Jiang et al. (2017b) provides a full description of the
processing steps between the CryoSat-2 European Space Agency L1b baseline C product
and the final data product used here (water level, standard deviation, chainage, and time
stamp). A crossing between the CryoSat-2 ground track and the Songhua river usually
contains several altimetry observation points. That means an observation in the final
data product is derived from all processed altimetry data from one crossing. Water level,
chainage and time stamp are thus averages of a crossing, and the standard deviation
represents the along track water level variation of the crossing.
Satellite altimetry was originally developed to monitor water levels in the oceans,
but it is increasingly used to also observe inland waters. Using satellite altimetry for
water level observations has several advantages compared to the more traditional in-situ
observations. In-situ monitoring of water levels requires gauging stations, which are nor-
mally placed on a point scale with low density, and many remote or inaccessible areas
are completely ungauged. Furthermore the gauging stations are usually controlled on a
national basis, which means data sharing and even varying or unknown reference levels
become issues (Biancamaria et al. 2011). Satellite altimetry overcomes these issues by
having global coverage, high spatial resolution, and datasets that are consistent1 and
often timely and freely available. For more details regarding the concepts of radar al-
timetry and applications in hydrology see for instance Jiang et al. (2017a).
Most altimetry missions have so-called repeat orbits, meaning their ground tracks
repeat themselves every 10 to 35 days. This pattern ensures high temporal resolution in
the data, but the trade-off is a relatively low spatial resolution with inter-track distances
of at least 80 km at the equator. CryoSat-2 distinguishes itself by having a geodetic
ground track. This means that its repeat time is long (369 days), but in return the spatial
resolution is very high (7.5 km at the equator). Jiang et al. (2019) shows that high spatial
resolution of water level observations are much more important than temporal resolution,
when calibrating a hydrodynamic model with spatially varying bed resistance. This is
consistent with the model parameters being spatially distributed but time invariant. An
equivalent hydrodynamic model will be used in this work making CryoSat-2’s ground
track pattern ideal for the purpose of calibration.
1Consistent within a mission. Systematic biases do exist between altimetry missions (Jiang et al.
2019), but this is not relevant for this work, since only one altimetry mission is used for the water level
observations.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Validation data
7
2.2
Validation data
A hydrodynamic model of the Songhua River, calibrated using satellite altimetry data,
should be validated against independent data. In this work water level time series mea-
sured in-situ at four different gauging stations will be used as the validation dataset
(figure 2.2). The stations are located at Harbin, Tonghe, Yilan, and Jiamusi, and their
time series cover years 2007-2014, except Tonghe, which covers 2010-2014. The data is
collected from the Hydrological yearbook issued by the Ministry of Water Resources of
China (MWR 2014).
The reference levels for all four datasets are unknown, and might even vary between
them, but it will be assumed that the reference levels are invariant in time. Therefore a
constant offset between the calibrated model predictions and the in-situ validation data
is allowed, and they will be compared with respect to relative water levels, rather than
absolute.
In section 2.1 it was argued that the hydrodynamic river model can not predict water
levels for a frozen river, and accordingly only water levels from warm months in the year
are used for calibration.
The same argumentation is applicable when validating the
model predictions against in-situ data, and therefore comparison will only be carried
out for warm months.
Figure 2.2: Water level time series measured in-situ at 4 gauging stations. Used as
independent validation data.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Data and materials
2.3
River boundary conditions
The upstream boundary condition is given by a discharge time series observed in-situ at
the Harbin gauging station. A rainfall-runoff model is used as the lateral boundary condi-
tion in the hydrodynamic model, where it provides runoff time series from tributaries on
the modeled river stretch between Harbin and Jiamusi. In this work the rainfall-runoff
model calibrated in Jiang et al. (2019) is used, and it covers the time period 2007-2014.
The Xianjiang (XAJ) hydrologic model forms the framework for the rainfall-runoff model
with an added snow module. 19 hydrologic model parameters are calibrated against ob-
served discharge in three gauged tributaries. Using the calibrated parameters runoff in
both gauged and ungauged tributaries is computed as time series, and they are used
as an input to the hydrodynamic model. See Zhao (1992) for details about application
of the XAJ model, and see Jiang et al. (2019) for details about the calibration procedure.
2.4
River bathymetry
For this work, cross sectional geometries surveyed on the Songhua River in 1999 has
been made available by DHI China. Figure 2.3 shows an example of a cross section.
Implementing the data in this work poses challenges because the cross sections do
not have geographical coordinates associated with the data points, only a chainage point
per cross section on a river network defined by DHI China. In this work the river net-
work defined by Jiang et al. (2019) will be used, which means the cross section chainages
must be projected from the DHI China setup. Furthermore the reference level for the
elevations in the cross section profiles are unknown, and it is unknown whether each
cross section is surveyed with the left or right bank as the horizontal zero. To optimize
data quality each cross section was examined before it was selected and included in the
dataset. Figure 2.4 shows the DHI China river network, and the full original set of cross
sections. It also shows the new river network used here, indicating how the cross sections
have been projected, and which cross sections are included in the final dataset. Note
Figure 2.3: Example of a cross sectional profile surveyed in-situ at the Songhua river.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 River bathymetry
9
Figure 2.4: Cross sections transferred from DHI China river network to the centerline used in this work defined as in Jiang
et al. (2019).
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Data and materials
that the orientation of the cross sections are not defined by geographical data, but by
MIKE HYDRO River, which positions a cross section such that its deepest point is at
the centerline, and such that the cross section is perpendicular to the centerline.
Cross section selection and projection process:
1. The cross sections are positioned on the DHI China centerline according to their
chainage points, and so they are perpendicular to the centerline and the deepest
point is on the centerline.
2. The DHI China centerline and cross sections are visualized along with the center-
line used in this work using QGIS software. Along some parts of the river, different
channels have been chosen for the centerline. If a cross section was surveyed here,
but is not long enough to enclose both channels, it will be deleted. An example is
shown in figure 2.5.
3. The cross sections are projected to chainages along the centerline used in this work.
If a cross section intersects with the new centerline, the chainage of the intersection
point is assigned to the cross section. Else, the shortest distance between any point
on the cross section and the new centerline is found, and the associated chainage
is assigned to the cross section. An example of this is shown in figure 2.6.
4. The cross sections are positioned on the new centerline in the same manner as
described in step 1.
5. Consistency among the cross sections is checked by plotting chainage versus the
deepest points. Cross sections that are not consistent are deleted. See figure 2.7.
6. Surface elevation data from the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) 1
arc-second resolution dataset is extracted along the cross sections. (USGS EROS
Archive 2000)
7. Each cross section is plotted and compared with the SRTM data. If there are
significant discrepancies the cross section is deleted.
For instance if the cross
section indicate more or less channels than the DEM. See an example in figure 2.8.
There is no way to determine if the cross sections are surveyed from the left or right
bank, and there is evidence that it is not done consistently in the dataset. This became
apparent when comparing the 1999 cross sections near the Tonghe, Yilan, and Jiamusi
gauging stations to more recent surveys only available for these stations(figures 2.9, D.1,
and D.2).
The recent surveys have defined left and right banks, and when plotting
them along with the 1999 cross sections it was clear that the 1999 surveys of the Yilan
and Jiamusi cross sections where measured from the right bank, but the Tonghe cross
section was measured from the left bank. However, the cross sections are used in a 1D
problem where the flow area, wetting perimeter, and storage width are invariant w.r.t.
flow direction, so swapping the left and right banks will not have an impact on the results.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 River bathymetry
11
Figure 2.5: Example of cross sections
of a channel different from the new cen-
terline (chainages 273910 m, 280960 m,
and 283910 m). These are excluded from
the dataset used for calibration.
Figure 2.6: Example of original cross
sections that do not cross the new center-
line (chainages 572930 m and 578250 m).
It is seen here how they are projected to
the new centerline.
Figure 2.7: Consistency of the deepest point in all cross sections. Outliers are removed.
Figure 2.8: This cross section illustrates discrepancies between a surveyed cross section
and the STRM elevation at its position. It is seen that the two profiles disagree on both
the number and positions of channels. Note also the hills on the right river bank that
are not apparent in the surveyed data. This is seen in many cross sections.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Data and materials
Including cross sectional data ensures that the calibration of the river model is fairly
simple, since the only unknown parameters to be modeled are the roughness coefficients.
However it is important to note that the surveyed cross sections can introduce mod-
elization error if the data is a poor representation of reality. In this work modelization
errors might arise because the hydrodynamic river model is calibrated based on satellite
altimetry data and hydrologic forcings from 2007-2014, while the cross sections where
surveyed in 1999.
Cross section surveys at the Tonghe gauging station have been taken with regular
intervals and are plotted in figure 2.9, and it is seen that the river bed changes over
time. This clearly indicate that cross section surveys taken in 1999 are probably not
an accurate physical representation when modelling water levels after 2007. However,
the general shape of the cross section does not change significantly, so the 1999 cross
sections most likely still produce reasonable results. Similar plots can be seen for the
Yilan and Jiamusi gauging stations in appendix D.1.
Another possible source of modelization error from the cross sections is that the
exact geographical locations of the surveys are unknown. When plotting surveyed cross
sections along with their corresponding STRM elevation profiles significant discrepancies
were seen in the topography near the river for a large number of cross sections. The
STRM data indicate large hills very near the right bank of the river, but these are absent
in most of the surveyed cross sections (see for example figure 2.8). This strongly indicate
that the geographical locations of the cross sections do not coincide with MIKE HYDRO
River’s positioning. No satisfactory explanation for this inconsistency has been found,
so it must be kept in mind that if a cross section is not surveyed perpendicularly to the
river centerline, the flow area might be inaccurate and this will migrate into the results
as a modelization error.
Figure 2.9: Cross sections surveyed at Tonghe gauging station. The x-coordinates of
the 1999 has a different reference point than the rest, so it is manually translated to fit.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
The hydrodynamic model
Hydrodynamic models mathematically describe river flow and can generally be catego-
rized as lumped or distributed. Lumped hydrodynamic models solve the hydrograph for
a given point as a function of time. Distributed models are more complex and describe
river flow as a function of both space and time by solving a set of coupled partial dif-
ferential equations, the Saint-Venant equations. The Saint-Venant equations must be
solved numerically, and in this work MIKE HYDRO River software will be used for this
purpose.
This chapter will describe the physical background leading to the mathematical hy-
drodynamic river model. In order to solve the Saint-Venant equations cross sectional
information is required. Two approaches will be presented, the traditional approach, in
which cross sectional geometry is defined in profiles, and a new approach where flow area
and conveyance are parameterized as power law models at each cross section. Finally
the implementation in MIKE HYDRO River is specified.
3.1
Distributed river routing
Distributed river routing in 1D can be described mathematically by the Saint-Venant
equations; the continuity equation which states conservation of mass, and the momentum
equation which states Newton’s second law. Below, the derivation of the Saint-Venant
equations will be outlined based on Bauer-Gottwein (2019) and Chow et al. (1988). The
following assumptions form the basis for deriving the Saint-Venant equations
1. Flow is one-dimensional and the spatial coordinate (chainage) is along the river
center line.
2. Water level is horizontal perpendicular to the longitudinal axis, and there is no
acceleration of water in this direction.
3. Water is incompressible and homogeneous, such that there are no variations in
water density.
4. The river bed is constant in time and its bottom slope is small.
5. Flow varies gradually along the channel. This ensures hydrostatic pressure such
that vertical acceleration can be neglected.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 The hydrodynamic model
6. Bed resistance coefficients for steady uniform turbulent flow are applicable.
7. The cross sectional geometry varies slowly along the river.
3.1.1
The continuity equation
The continuity equation ensures conservation of mass, which means mass can not be
created or lost within a control volume, only moved (see illustration in figure 3.1). Thus
the change of water storage on a reach ∆x is equal to the inflow minus outflow of water on
that reach. The inflow is the sum of discharge and lateral inflow defined by the systems
boundary conditions. The outflow is the sum of discharge and the changes in discharge
over the reach. Since the water density is assumed constant, water volume conservation
must follow from mass conservation. Mathematically this can all be expressed
Storage change = Inflow −Outflow
Storage change = ∂A
∂t ∆x
Inflow = Q + q∆x
Outflow = Q + ∂Q
∂x ∆x
⇒∂A
∂t + ∂Q
∂x −q = 0
(3.1)
where Q is discharge, A is flow area, t is time, x is chainage, and q is lateral inflow.
3.1.2
The momentum equation
The momentum equation is based on Newton’s second law and states that the sum of
all forces on a control volume must be equal to the change in momentum. The change
q
A
q
q
q
Q + ∂Q
∂x Δx
Q
Δx
q
q
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the continuity equation and associated the control volume.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Distributed river routing
15
in momentum can be separated into two sources; the net flux of momentum across the
control surface (c.s.), and the time rate of change of the momentum stored in the control
volume (c.v.). The momentum equation can be expressed
X
F =
ZZ
c.s.
vρv · dA + d
dt
ZZZ
c.v.
ρvdV
(3.2)
where F are forces acting in the control volume, v is flow velocity, ρ is water density,
and V is the volume of the control volume.
The net flux of momentum across the control surface can be expressed
ZZ
c.s.
vρv · dA = ρ
 ∂
∂x
 βQ2
A
!
dx −βqvx,indx
!
(3.3)
where vx,in is lateral inflow velocity in the channel flow direction, and β is a momentum
correction factor that accounts for non-uniform distribution of flow velocity in a cross
section
β =
1
v2A
ZZ
v2
l dA
(3.4)
where v is the cross sectional average flow velocity and vl the local flow velocity, which
may vary over the cross section.
The change of momentum stored in the control volume can be expressed
d
dt
ZZZ
c.v.
ρvdV = ρ∂Q
∂t dx
(3.5)
The forces acting on the control volume are gravity, hydrostatic pressure and friction
from the river bed. Friction due to wind shear is small and will be neglected, and forces
due to eddy losses will be neglected because slowly varying cross sectional geometry is
assumed. An outline of the control volume and the forces acting on it is presented in
figure 3.2.
Gravity will exert a force on the control volume parallel to the river bed. The force
is expressed using Newton’s second law and assuming that the bed slope is small so
sin(α) ≈tan(α) = dz
dx = −So:
FG = ρAdxSog
(3.6)
where So is the bed slope and g is the gravitational acceleration.
The force due to pressure can be seperated into three sources; pressure from the
river banks, and hydrostatic pressure from the upstream and downstream sides of the
control volume.
The pressure forces from the river banks will be neglected because
slowly varying cross sectional geometry is assumed. The majority of the upstream and
==PAGE:26==
16
3 The hydrodynamic model
FG
FF
FP
w
v
Inflow
Outflow
α
dz
dx
dw
g
x
Figure 3.2: Outline of the dimensions and forces acting on a control volume in the
river. Green represent gravity effects, purple represent effects from hydrostatic pressure
(light purple cancel), and orange represent friction effects and the resulting water velocity
profile. Figure based on illustrations from Bauer-Gottwein (2019).
downstream hydrostatic pressure cancel each other (see figure 3.2).
This means the
total pressure force is hydrostatic and exclusively due to variations in flow depth. On
a control volume the flow depth variation is dw = ∂w
∂x dx. Hydrostatic pressure can be
expressed P = ρgy, where y is the distance below the surface of the water, here the flow
depth variation. The force due to pressure, P, is FP = PA, and thus
FP = −ρg∂w
∂x dxA
(3.7)
The final force exerted on a control volume is due to friction from the river bed. This
force will here be defined using the friction slope SF, i.e. the bed slope where friction
and gravity exactly cancel each other.
FF = −ρAdxSFg
(3.8)
Collecting all the terms given above, the momentum equation in its conservation
form is given:
1
A
∂Q
∂t + 1
A
∂
∂x
 βQ2
A
!
−βqvx,in + g∂w
∂x −g (So −SF) = 0
(3.9)
3.1.3
Additional information
The continuity and momentum equations constitute two equations with 5 unknowns,
namely discharge, flow depth, flow cross-sectional area, bed slope, and friction slope.
Additional information is needed in order to solve the system for discharge and flow
depth. Below two different approaches are presented:
Bed resistance and cross sectional geometry
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Distributed river routing
17
Traditionally the missing information is supplied by defining: 1) the datum z(x), which
gives the bed slope, 2) the cross sectional geometry, which fully characterizes flow area
A = A(w) and hydraulic or resistance radius R = R(w), and 3) the bed resistance (fx
Manning’s number) that is used in an empirical formulation of the friction slope such
as Manning’s equation
SF = n2Q2
A2R4/3
h
(3.10)
where n is Manning’s number and R can represent either the hydraulic radius Rh or the
resistance radius R∗. The resistance radius concept was introduced by Engelund (1966),
and DHI (2017) implements it as an alternative to the more traditional hydraulic radius.
The resistance radius has the property that it eliminates the effect of the flow bank zones
on the resistance coefficient.
Rh = A
Pw
R∗=
 1
A
Z B
0 w3/2db
!2
(3.11)−(3.12)
where Pw is the wetted perimeter, b is the storage width at some level of the cross section,
and B is the cross sectional width at the water surface. In figure 3.3 the cross sectional
geometry and the definitions of related parameters are shown.
Flow area and conveyance
Data providing cross sectional geometry is not readily available for rivers in many parts
of the world. Therefore cross sections are often approximated by simple geometries that
can be parameterized with a minimum of free parameters, fx rectangular, triangular, or
double rectangular (section 3.2.2). These simple geometries introduce unnecessary mod-
elization error. When calibrating parameters defining simple cross sectional geometries
along with the Manning numbers, it is seen that the Manning numbers do not only rep-
resent the bed resistance, but also take a role of compensating for poorly approximated
B
w
z
q
q
Pw
A
x
Left bank
Right bank
h
dA
dw
b
Figure 3.3: Cross sectional geometry and definitions of the related parameters. Note
that the cross sectional area A includes all area marked in any blue. Figure based on
Bauer-Gottwein (2019) and Chow et al. (1988).
==PAGE:28==
18
3 The hydrodynamic model
cross sectional geometry. This will be explored further in section 5.3.
Motivated by the issues described above an alternative approach of supplying the
missing information to the Saint-Venant equations has been developed. Using Manning’s
equation the friction slope can be expressed by discharge and conveyance
SF = Q(w)2
K(w)2
(3.13)
where K(w) = 1
nA(w)R(w)2/3. Inserting this into the momentum equation it is seen that
z(x), A(w), and K(w) constitute the additional pieces of information needed to solve
the Saint-Venant equations for discharge and flow depth. The Saint-Venant equations
are now expressed
∂A
∂t + ∂Q
∂x −q = 0
(3.14)
1
A
∂Q
∂t + 1
A
∂
∂x
 βQ2
A
!
−βqvx,in + g∂w
∂x −g
 
So −Q2
K2
!
= 0
(3.15)
Flow area and conveyance curves as functions of flow depth are generally not available
from measured data, so they should be parameterized with a minimum number of free
parameters. In section 3.2.3 such a parameterization method is introduced.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Parameterization of the hydrodynamic model
19
3.2
Parameterization of the hydrodynamic
model
In this work the river stretch in question will be discretized such that hydrodynamic
model parameters can vary along chainage. Three versions of the hydrodynamic model
will be implemented and calibrated including a new parameterizaztion method
1. Spatially varying Manning’s numbers are calibrated using well-known cross sec-
tional geometry obtained from in-situ measurements.
2. Spatially varying Manning’s numbers and simple cross sectional geometries are
calibrated.
3. Flow area and conveyance curves as functions of water level are calibrated at
several points along the river.
3.2.1
Bed resistance
Many studies calibrate bed resistance as spatially invariant (Biancamaria et al. 2009;
De Paiva et al. 2013; Getirana et al. 2013; Wood et al. 2016; Yoon et al. 2012). These
studies base their calibrations on altimetry missions with repeat orbits ensuring high
temporal resolution, but poor spatial resolution. The uniform parameter approach is a
simplification of the physical reality and will most likely lead to modelization errors in
predicted water levels. Jiang et al. (2019), Schneider et al. (2018), and Yoon et al. (2012)
on the other hand use CryoSat-2 observations or synthetic data mimicking the upcoming
SWOT mission. These satellites have ground tracks with high spatial resolution which
open the possibility of accurately calibrated spatially varying model parameters. Jiang
et al. (2019) clearly show the strength of altimetry observations with high spatial res-
olution by comparing calibrations of a spatially distributed hydrodynamic model using
several different altimetry missions.
In this work the bed resistance will be calibrated as a spatially distributed parameter
along the river. Furthermore the bed resistance will be represented by the logarithm of
Manning’s number. The log-transform eliminates the possibility of calibration iterations
with negative numbers that are unphysical, and will make the MIKE HYDRO River
simulation crash.
3.2.2
Cross sectional geometry
If surveyed cross sections are not available they can be parameterized by simple geome-
tries and included in the calibration. Also here a spatially varying parameterization
is chosen such that cross sectional geometry is calibrated at several points along the
river. In this work two types of simple approximated cross sectional geometries will be
==PAGE:30==
20
3 The hydrodynamic model
B
Bbf
Bfp
wbf
z
z
Bankfull 
stage
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Simple cross sectional geometries. a) Rectangular, fully characterized by
datum and width. b) Double rectangular, fully characterized by datum, bankfull depth,
bankfull width, and flood plain width.
applied; rectangular and double rectangular. Figure 3.4 shows the geometries and the
characterizing free parameters. In the double rectangular cross section, note that the
lateral position of the main channel in the flood plain can be chosen arbitrarily since it
does not affect the flow area, wetting perimeter or storage width, which essentially are
the parameters derived from the cross sectional geometry. It is important to keep in
mind that using approximate cross sectional geometries introduces modelization error
in the hydrodynamic model. This will be discussed further in section 5.3.
Jiang et al. (2019) models the cross sectional geometries as rectangular, and shows
that model ambiguity does not allow simultaneous calibration of channel width, datum
and roughness coefficient. The results of Getirana et al. (2013) and Liu et al. (2015) also
both indicate ambiguity when calibrating bed resistance and cross sectional geometry
simultaneously. Instead the channel width can approximated based on Landsat satel-
lite images, such that only datums and roughness coefficients are left to be calibrated.
Based on this it can also be assumed that model ambiguity does not allow simultaneous
calibration of all characterizing parameters for the double rectangular approximation.
Therefore some of the parameters should be defined in another way. For instance the
bankfull and flood plain widths might be estimated from LandSat imagery and/or ap-
propriate readily available DEM’s (digital elevation model).
3.2.3
Flow area and conveyance curves
Flow area and conveyance curves as functions of flow depth can be parameterized with
power law models. The model should be allowed to vary with chainage, so a number of
equally spaced calibration points are defined along the river stretch. In order to convert
flow depth to water level a datum for each calibration point should furthermore be de-
fined or included as model parameters.
Power law models have been used to parameterize river characteristics in the litera-
ture previously. Leopold and Maddock (1953) introduces power law models to param-
eterize mean depth, width, mean velocity, and suspended sediment load as functions
of discharge for a cross section. More recently Moody and Troutman (2002) used these
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Parameterization of the hydrodynamic model
21
relationships to investigate the spatial variability of water surface width and mean depth
along several rivers with a wide range of discharge, and Andreadis et al. (2013) used the
relationships to create a world wide database of river bankfull depths and widths. Du-
rand et al. (2016) used the relationships to derive discharge from observed river widths
using synthetic SWOT observations.
Power law channels is a cross sectional model which states that in the main channel
flow depth and storage width have a power law relationship (b = p1hp2, where (p1, p2) are
parameters). Petersen-Øverleir (2005) reviews the applications of power law channels
and power law stage-discharge rating curves (Q = p1hp2). He concludes that the rela-
tionships are valid for many cross sectional shapes, but they fail in strongly asymmetric
channels and in compound channels (fx double rectangular channels or channels with
significant flood plains).
Garbrecht (1990) argues that hydraulic parameters (flow area, wetted perimeter, and
conveyance) can be expressed as simple power relationships with flow depth in the main
channel. If a significant flood plain exists he also argues that discontinuities in the hy-
draulic parameters arise at the flow bank. He suggests fitting separate power law models
to the hydraulic parameters below and above the flow bank. Strelkoff and Clemmens
(2000) and Vatankhah (2018) argue that estimating the wetted perimeter as a function
of flow depth for power law channels is not straight forward. They both give compli-
cated analytical expressions of the wetted perimeter, which are controlled by the power
law channel parameters (p1, p2). The conveyance is a function of flow area and wetted
perimeter, so if the wetted perimeter can not be expressed by a simple power model, it
indicates that the conveyance do not follow a power law model either.
In this work a new method of parameterizing a hydrodynamic model is proposed.
Flow area and conveyance will be expressed using simple power law models, and the
discontinuity at the flow bank will be neglected. Furthermore it will be assumed that
the complicated wetted perimeter does not affect the conveyance significantly. The power
law models are expressed in the log-log space, where the relationships are linear
log10(A(w)) = γ + δ log10(w)
(3.16)
log10(C(w)) = η + µ log10(w)
(3.17)
The power law models have been fitted to flow area and conveyance curves from
70 real cross sections measured on the Songhua river (see appendix D.2 for graphs of
all fits). The conveyance of the real cross sections was calculated based on arbitrarily
chosen Manning numbers, since it is just a scaling factor of the conveyance. The fit-
ting is performed in a loglog-space to emphasize the power law nature of the curves.
Figure 3.5(a) shows by RMSE how well the flow area and conveyance curves for each
real cross section can be fitted by power law models. Figure 3.5(b) shows the fitting
parameters and that they do not necessarily vary smoothly with chainage. Figure 3.6
shows an example of a real cross section and how well a power law model fits its flow
==PAGE:32==
22
3 The hydrodynamic model
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: Fitting power law models to flow area and conveyance curves derived from
real cross sectional data from the Songhua river, where n = 0.03 s/m1/3. (a) RMSE
(root-mean-square error). (b) Power law parameters.
area and conveyance curves. The example clearly shows a discontinuity at the flow bank
(log10(7 m) ≈0.85), as predicted by Garbrecht (1990). For simplicity in the calibration
work, the discontinuity is neglected and the resulting modelization error is accepted.
It has been tested how well the power law models perform in a hydrodynamic simula-
tion compared to real cross sections. The fitted parameters γ, δ, η, and µ shown in figure
3.5(b) are used to model flow area and conveyance curves, and these are used as input
to a hydrodynamic simulation. The simulation with modeled flow area and conveyance
is compared to a simulation using the real cross sections, and Manning’s number is kept
unchanged between the two simulations. Figure 3.9(a) shows the results for n = 0.03
s/m1/3 as an example and has RMSE = 0.35 m.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Parameterization of the hydrodynamic model
23
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: Example showing the best power law fit of the flow area and conveyance
curve for one cross section. Note that the RMSE and fitting parameters of the example
are marked by red in figure 3.5. (a) Best fit of flow area and conveyance curves. (b)
Real cross sectional geometry.
Figure 3.7: Conveyance curve depending on Manning’s number. Solid lines represent
the true conveyance curve, punctured lines are the best power law model fit.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 The hydrodynamic model
Testing with several n it is seen that the power law model introduces a modelization
error of the water levels of approximately 0.24-0.4 m. The variation is due to the fact
that Manning’s number scale the conveyance curve, seen as a translation on the log-scale
(illustration in figure 3.7). Using the power law conveyance models produce exactly the
same water level predictions independent of the choice of n. The real conveyance curves
produce slightly different water level predictions because the bankfull discontinuity oc-
cur at different conveyance values. This effect is seen as varying modelization error,
depending in the choice of n.
Figure 3.5(b) indicates a linear relationship between the flow area curve and the
conveyance curve such that
η = s1 + s2γ
(3.18)
µ = s3 + s4δ
(3.19)
where s1−4 are constant over the entire river stretch. This means the spatially varying
η and µ can be excluded as model parameters, and be replaced by the constant values
s1−4. In figure 3.8 γ vs. η and δ vs. µ are plotted in several situations including different
rivers, the Songhua in China and the Po in Italy (data from Schneider et al. (2018)),
and including variations in the choice of Manning’s number. The linear relationships
are clear and it is seen that s2−4 seems to be nearly independent of river and Manning’s
number. By simple linear regression s2−4 are found to be
s2 ≈1
s3 ≈0.94
s4 ≈0.75
(3.20)
Only s1 varies strongly with river and Manning’s number. This means when calibrating
the hydrodynamic model, the linear parameter s1 should be included as a model param-
eter, and s2−4 can either be fixed to the values given above, or they can be included as
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: Linear relationships between (a) γ and η, (b) δ and µ.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Parameterization of the hydrodynamic model
25
model parameters where only small variations from the fixed values are allowed.
The linear relationships assume that the hydraulic radius is also linear. This is not
the case in reality causing a spread in figure 3.8 which is larger for the Po than for the
Songhua. As the Songhua is the case central for this work, it is tested if the spread in
the linear relationships has a significant impact. s1 is determined for the Songhua river
and n = 0.03 s/m1/3 by simple linear regression. η and µ are then estimated from s1−4
and the fitted γ and δ. Hydrodynamic simulations are run for two sets of parameters;
(γfit, δfit, ηfit, µfit) and (γfit, δfit, ηlin.est., µlin.est.). Figure 3.9 shows the results and
it is seen that the two sets of parameters produce very similar water levels with RMSE
of 0.07 m between them. Furthermore the RMSE’s to the simulation with real cross
sections are 0.35 m and 0.37 m respectively.
Based on the investigations outlined above, it can be concluded that the flow area
curve as a function of flow depth can be parameterized as a power law model, and that
the model parameters vary with chainage and not in a smooth manner. The conveyance
curve is linearly dependent on the flow area curve. This dependency does not vary with
chainage, and all but one parameter in the linear relationships are independent of river
and Manning’s number. The parameterization can in short be expressed
log10(A(x, w)) = γ(x) + δ(x) log10(w)
log10(K(x, w)) = η + µ log10(w)
(3.21)
η = 0.75 + 0.94γ(x)
µ = s1 + 1δ(x)
where the parameters to be calibrated are γ and δ for each chosen calibration chainage,
and s1 which is a single parameter constant for the entire river stretch.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.9: Comparisons of water levels due to real cross sections, best fits of flow
area and conveyance, and best fit of flow area and conveyance estimated from its linear
relationship with the flow area. n = 0.03 s/m1/3.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 The hydrodynamic model
3.3
MIKE HYDRO River implementation
MIKE HYDRO River software is used to solve the Saint-Venant equations in this work.
The reader is referred to DHI (2017) for a full description of the MIKE 1D computational
engine. Here the simulation framework will be described.
3.3.1
Simulation specifications
The simulation specifications control the size of times steps and the spatial solution grid
of the simulation. The computational efficiency of the numerical simulation is highly
dependent on the choice of time step. The time step size represents a trade-off between
computational speed and temporal resolution. Furthermore time steps that are too large
might cause numerical instabilities in simulation parts where large changes occur. After
testing several time step sizes 30 minutes is chosen as the standard and is used unless
otherwise stated.
The MIKE 1D engine solves the Saint-Venant equations implicitly on a spatial so-
lution grid using a so called double sweep algorithm (details in DHI (2017, Appendix
A.2)). The solution grid is defined along the chainage with altering h-grid points (water
level) and q-grid points (discharge). The q-grid points are always positioned halfway
between two h-grid points. The h-grid points are positioned at cross section locations,
or at equidistant locations between cross sections, if the distance between two cross sec-
tions are larger than a user specified value, which is set to 10 km in this work.
3.3.2
Simulation inputs
The hydrodynamic simulation will be based on several inputs. These include a defini-
tion of the river network, cross section profiles and their locations along chainage, bed
resistance parameters defined at points along the chainage, and boundary conditions for
the system.
In this work the river network is a stretch of the main branch of the Songhua river
between Harbin and Jiamusi. The centerline of the main branch was drawn in Jiang
et al. (2019) based on the Global Surface Water Explorer web-mapping tool (Pekel et al.
2016), and chainage 0 km is defined at Harbin. Cross sections are defined along the river
stretch, and section 2.4 gives a detailed description of this.
Bed resistance is defined with equidistant spacing along the river stretch. Different
choices of intervals have been used in this work, but intervals generally are between
10-20 km. Manning’s number is used as the bed resistance parameter.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 MIKE HYDRO River implementation
27
Lateral boundary conditions for the system are defined by the rainfall-runoff model
described in section 2.3. The tributary boundaries are all given as discharge, where some
are point sources and some are distributed sources. Observed discharge is used as the
upstream boundary condition. 12 tributaries are defined along the river stretch. The
downstream boundary condition is defined by a rating curve that defines discharge as a
function of water level. The rating curve can be computed using Manning’s formula that
expresses discharge if the cross sectional geometry, bed slope and Manning’s number are
given at the boundary and uniform flow is assumed (SF = So)
Q(h) = A(h) · R(h)2/3 ·
q
So · 1
n
(3.22)
where So is the bed slope at the boundary, which will be computed by a linear regression
of the 5 last datums of the river stretch. n is Manning’s number at the boundary. A(h)
is the flow area as a function of water level, and R(h) is the resistance radius or hydraulic
radius as a function of water level. If cross sections surveyed in-situ are used, A(h) and
R(h) are invariant during the calibration, so they can be defined once based on processed
cross sectional data from MIKE HYDRO River. For cross sections approximated by
simple geometric shapes, A(h) and R(h) are simple to compute based on the parameters
characterizing the geometry. If the flow area-conveyance method is applied, Manning’s
formula can be expressed
Q(h) = K(h)
q
So
(3.23)
and the calibrated conveyance on the boundary can be used to compute the downstream
boundary rating curve.
3.3.3
Processed data table
The MIKE 1D engine bases its calculations on the processed data tables associated with
each defined cross section. The processed data tables contain water level, flow area,
storage width, hydraulic radius, and relative resistance number. Usually the processed
data tables are calculated automatically by the MIKE 1D engine based on the defined
cross sectional geometries, but it can also be defined manually.
If the flow area and conveyance are calibrated directly, these curves and the cali-
brated datum can be used to compute the processed data table. First the flow area and
conveyance for a set of discretized flow depths are computed based on the power law
model parameters. This directly leads to the processed flow area, and the water levels
are easily computed by adding the calibrated datum to the discretized flow depths. The
storage width can also simply be computed as b = dA/dw where dw and dA are the flow
depth and flow area increments as defined previously in figure 3.3.
Note that the conveyance is not included in the processed data table, the engine
computes conveyance from hydraulic radius, flow area and bed resistance. This means
==PAGE:38==
28
3 The hydrodynamic model
the calibrated conveyance must be separated back into its components using:
K(w) = A(w)R(w)2/3
n
(3.24)
Manning’s number and the hydraulic radius are unknown in this situation, which makes
the separation impossible. Therefore Manning’s number is set to an arbitrary number
within feasible values, and it is kept constant throughout the calibration. Then the
hydraulic radius can be found based on equation (3.24). This approach ensures that
conveyance is given correctly to the engine, but there is a scaling error on the hydraulic
radius.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Calibration method
The calibration problem central for this thesis can essentially be expressed as an inverse
problem as defined below. It will be solved using an optimization approach.
Consider a simple vector function f : RN →RM that maps from a model space to a
data space, and where M ≥N. Given model parameters x ∈RN it is often simple to
solve the forward problem:
d = f(x),
d ∈RM
(4.1)
The hydrodynamic simulation will be considered the forward function f, and it takes
several inputs including hydrological forcing from a rainfall-runoff model, and informa-
tion about the hydrodynamics such as cross sectional geometry and bed resistance, or
cross sectional flow area and conveyance. In this work the rainfall-runoff model is always
given and will not be considered a part of x. Depending on whether cross sectional data
is available and on how the model is parameterized the hydrodynamic model parameter
vector x can contain one or more of the following: bed resistance, datum, cross sectional
geometry, flow area, and conveyance (see section 4.3.1 for further details). The output
of the hydrodynamic simulation is water level and discharge, but only water level is used
and contained in the observation vector d for the purpose of this work.
The inverse problem of finding model parameters x given the forward function f
and observed data d, is more complicated.
Essential issues often encountered when
attempting to solve inverse problems are solution existence, solution uniqueness, and
instability (Aster et al. 2013, Chapter 1).
1. Existence. In many cases there are no model solutions that exactly fit the data.
This might be due to f only being an approximate mathematical model of a sys-
tem’s physics, and/or due to the data containing noise.
2. Uniqueness. Several solutions might fit the data equally well. Even in the case of
infinite exact data points, more than one solution might exist.
3. Instability. Many solutions to inverse problems are extremely unstable with respect
to small changes in the data. That means even a little data noise can lead to model
solutions very different from the true model. These types of problems are often
referred to as being ill-posed.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Calibration method
This chapter deals with the background and implementation of the calibration frame-
work, which involves solving an inverse problem. Least squares inversion will be de-
scribed generally along with how to stabilize the solution using regularization.
Two
different optimization algorithms that can be used to solve the least squares problem
will be presented. Then the inverse problem to be solved in this work will be formulated
and implementation challenges described. Finally methods to evaluate the quality of
the solution model will be presented.
4.1
Regularized least squares inversion
A widely used method of solving inverse problems is the least squares approach.
If
the observation errors are independent, normally distributed, and the problem is scaled
so that the data standard deviations σ are equal, the maximum likelihood principle
dictates that the most likely model can be found by minimizing the residuals between
observations and model predictions, i.e. minimizing an objective function ϕ
min
x ϕ(x) = min
x ||r(x)||2
2
(4.2)
where the residuals are given r(x) = f(x) −d, and where the data contain errors so
d = dtrue + ϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, σ).
A local minimizer x∗is defined by the following conditions (Madsen et al. 2004)
1. Necessary condition: If x∗is a local minimizer then the gradient g(x∗) is zero.
2. Sufficient condition: If the gradient is zero, and the Hessian H(x∗) is positive
definite, then x∗is a local minimizer.
where the gradient and the Hessian defined:
g(x) ≡∇ϕ(x)
⇒gi(x) =
" ∂ϕ
∂xi
(x)
#
,
i ∈1...N
(4.3)
H(x) ≡∇2ϕ(x)
⇒Hi,j(x) =
" ∂2ϕ
∂xi∂xj
(x)
#
,
i, j ∈1...N
(4.4)
If the objective function is convex the local minimizer is also the global minimizer.
In case of a non-convex objective function several minima might exist, and the model
solution depends entirely on the chosen minimization algorithm and its starting point.
The simple least squares problem puts no constraints on the behavior of the model
parameters. If a problem is ill-posed and has non-unique solutions, this will often lead
to unphysical and rapidly oscillating models. As a consequence of this, many ill-posed
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Regularized least squares inversion
31
inverse problems are stabilized by regularization. In this work Tikhonov type regulariza-
tion (Tikhonov and Arsenin 1977, Chapter 2) will be applied to the calibration problem.
Tikhonov type regularization can be formulated
min
x ϕ(x) = min
x
n
(||r(x)||2
2 + α2||Lx||2
2
o
(4.5)
where α2 is a regularization parameter that controls the weighting of the regularization,
and L is a roughness matrix that describes relations between the model parameters x.
When an inverse problem is regularized the objective is no longer to just minimize
the residuals, but also to minimize some measure of the model complexity given by the
roughness matrix. Essentially a-priori information about the system to be calibrated is
introduced.
4.1.1
Regularization types
The roughness matrix influences what model characteristics the regularization promotes.
Here the general behavior of different regularization types are summarized. For a de-
tailed study of how different regularization types affect the calibration problem in this
work the reader is referred to appendix C.1 .
The roughness matrix can in principle be any matrix that introduces a-priori infor-
mation to the inverse problem. Here three common types of roughness matrices are
presented. They are commonly known as 0th, 1st and 2nd order regularization and the
roughness matrices will be denoted L(0), L(1), and L(2) respectively (Aster et al. 2013).
L(0) =


1
1
...
1
1


L(1) =


−1
1
−1
1
...
...
−1
1
−1
1


L(2) =


1
−2
1
1
−2
1
...
...
...
1
−2
1
1
−2
1


For 0th order regularization the roughness matrix is a simple diagonal matrix. This type
of regularization promotes a model where every parameter is minimized, i.e. if α2 →∞
the entire model will be zero.
1st order regularization uses a roughness matrix that is proportional to a finite difference
approximation of the first derivative of the model. This means the gradient of the model
is minimized, and if α2 →∞all model parameters will be equal, but not necessarily
zero as for 0th order regularization.
For 2nd order regularization the roughness matrix is proportional to the second deriva-
tive of the model. This type of regularization promotes a smooth model in the sense
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Calibration method
that abrupt changes in the gradient of the model are penalized. When α2 →∞the
model will take the shape of a line with constant slope.
4.1.2
Tuning the regularization parameter
The least squares term and the regularization term in the objective function can not
be minimized simultaneously. The regularization parameter α2 controls the trade-off
between minimizing the residuals and minimizing the measure of model complexity in-
troduced with the regularization. If α2 is too small ”over-fitting” of the data might occur,
such that data noise have major influence on the optimum model. On the other hand,
if α2 is too large, the data fit will become poor and the a-priori information introduced
by the regularization will dominate the optimum model. Therefore a crucial part of
regularized inversion is choosing an appropriate regularization parameter. Two ways to
go about this problem are presented here.
4.1.2.1
The discrepancy principle
The simplest and probably most inherently correct method of choosing α2 is the discrep-
ancy principle, which states that the regularization parameter should be chosen such that
the distribution of residuals is equivalent to the noise distribution of the data. Unfortu-
nately the discrepancy principle can often not be applied to real-world problems because
1) the data noise distribution is not always known, and 2) the residuals often do not
just represent data noise, but also modelization error, i.e. errors in the parametrization
and/or mathematical representation of the physical system. Therefore the discrepency
principle can only be applied if the noise distribution of the data is well-known and the
modelization error can be quantified in some way.
4.1.2.2
The L-curve
The L-curve method analyzes the trade-off between minimizing the residuals and mini-
mizing the chosen model measure. A range of α2 is tested and for each α2 the two terms
of the objective function are computed, and plotted against each other. If plotted on a
log-scale the resulting curve will usually take an ”L” shape, and is thus referred to as the
L-curve. Figure 4.1 shows an example of an L-curve. α2 is chosen where the curvature
of the L-curve is at its maximum, because here the trade-off between data misfit and
the chosen model measure is optimal. It should be noted, that the L-curve method does
not apply well to all inverse problems.
A simple way to compute the curvature of the L-curve is by the so-called Menger
curvature (Menger 1930). Let x, y, and z be three distinct points in Rn, where a unique
circle that passes through all three points can be drawn. The Menger curvature is defined
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Regularized least squares inversion
33
Figure 4.1: Example of L-curve. Note that in real-world problems the L-shape might
not be as distinct. Source: Finlay (2018).
as
c(x, y, z) = 1
R =
4A
|x −y||y −z||x −z|
(4.6)
where R is the radius of the unique circle through x, y, and z, and A is the area of the
triangle spanned by x, y, and z.
The curvature of each point Lk in the L-curve is computed as c(Lk−1, Lk, Lk+1). This
means the end points are undefined, and is set to be zero. Note that if three points are
collinear a circle can not be drawn and the curvature is also zero.
The L-curve method was developed for problems with a single regularization term
such that a 1D line search of the α2 is involved. It is possible to expand the method
to multiple regularization terms, but this leads to a higher dimensional search of the α2
parameter, which increases the computational expenses significantly. See for instance
Belge et al. (2002) for more information on the multidimensional L-hypersurface and
how to locate its generalized corner.
4.1.2.3
Line search strategy
The α2 regularization parameter can chosen by the discrepency principle or the L-curve,
but for both methods a range of α2 are tested. In order to limit computation time a
simple line search strategy has been developed with the intent of searching a wide range
with low resolution and increasing the resolution near the optimal α2. The strategy will
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Calibration method
be lined out based on the L-curve method, but it can easily be related to the discrepancy
principle method.
Level 0: First the order of magnitude is found by testing a range of logarithmically
spaced α2. The L-curve is computed and the search is continued in the vicinity of
the α2 with the maximum curvature, denote it α2
0.
Level 1: The first significant figure of α2 is found by testing linearly spaced α2 in a
range from [0.1α2
0; 10α2
0]. The L-curve is computed and the search is continued in
the vicinity of the α2 with the maximum curvature, denote it α2
1.
Level 2: The second significant figure of α2 is found by testing linearly spaced α2 in a
range from [α2
1 −O(α2
1); α2
1 + O(α2
1)], where O() denotes the order of magnitude.
The L-curve is computed and the search is continued in the vicinity of the α2 with
the maximum curvature, denote it α2
2.
The line search can be continued until the desired number of significant figures is ob-
tained.
4.2
Optimization algorithms
The least squares problem considered in this thesis is non-linear, which means it must
be solved iteratively by an optimization approach. Below two widely used optimization
algorithms are presented.
Both methods will be implemented and compared.
It is
important to keep in mind that the methods are designed for convex problems. If they
are applied to non-convex problems they will converge to a local minimum, depending
on the starting model.
4.2.1
The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm
The Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm is a popular choice of optimization algorithm
because of its relatively fast but very robust convergence to a local minimum. These prop-
erties of the convergence is obtained by interpolating between two optimization methods;
Steepest-descent which has slow but very robust convergence, and Gauss-Newton which
potentially converges rapidly, but is uncertain when far away from the minimum (Aster
et al. 2013).
The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm solves a least squares problem by minimizing
the objective function. Here the algorithm is presented for the general case, where the
objective function is the 2-norm the residuals squared as given in equation (4.2). Note
that the algorithm is also valid for the regularized objective function given in equation
(4.5), if the problem is posed in the right way (see section 4.3.1). For more information
on the derivation of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm see for example Aster et al.
(2013, chapter 9.3), Hansen et al. (2013, chapter 9.3) and Nocedal and J.Wright (2006,
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Optimization algorithms
35
chapter 10.3).
The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm is an iterative process that steps its way toward
a minimum solution of
min
∆xk
n
||J(xk)∆xk + r(xk)||2
2 + λk||∆xk||2
2
o
(4.7)
where λk is the LM dampening parameter, the step between iterates is ∆xk = x −xk,
and the Jacobian J(x) is defined as in section 4.2.3.
In each iterate a step is proposed and the algorithm evaluates if it is a good step
before it is accepted. The Levenberg-Marquardt step is defined
∆xk =

J(xk)TJ(xk) + λkI
−1 J(xk)Tr(xk)
(4.8)
Note that the terms in (4.8) represent the Hessian and the gradient of the objective
function.
g(x) = J(x)Tr(x)
(4.9)
H(x) = J(x)TJ(x) +
m
X
i=1
ri(x)∇2ri(x)
(4.10)
≈J(x)TJ(x)
(when the residuals are small)
The step proposed using (4.8) is evaluated by the improvement ratio of the objective
function which is computed in every iteration
ρk =
ϕ(xk) −ϕ(xk+1)
1
2∆xT
k (J(xk)Tr(xk) −λk∆xT
k )
(4.11)
where the numerator is the actual reduction of the objective function and the denomina-
tor is the predicted reduction. The step is only taken if it is in a descent direction, i.e.
ρk > 0.
The LM dampening parameter λ controls the interpolation between the Gauss-
Newton and steepest-descent methods, and it influences both the direction and the size
of the step ∆xk. When λ = 0 the algorithm takes a Gauss-Newton step with efficient
convergence, and when λ →∞the algorithm takes a small step in the steepest descent
direction. λ also represent a correction term to the Hessian approximation in equation
(4.8).
The correction should be chosen so that

J(xk)TJ(xk) + λkI

is positive defi-
nite (Hansen et al. 2013). This ensures that the step is in a descent direction, and that
the second sufficient condition for a local minimizer is met when convergence is obtained.
λ is updated in every iteration based on the improvement ratio given above, with
the goal of stabilizing the convergence and ensuring descent direction. There are several
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Calibration method
approaches to the update scheme, but the basic idea is the same. Increase λ when the
step is unsuccessful in order to more closely resemble a steepest descent step. If the
step is successful λ can stay the same, or it can be decreased in order to move toward a
Gauss-Newton step. As the algorithm iterates towards the optimum solution, λ should
gradually decrease to get Gauss-Newton like steps and more rapid convergence. Details
about specific update schemes used in different implementations of the LM algorithm
are given in appendix B.
The LM iteration scheme is continued until convergence or some other stopping cri-
teria is fulfilled. The first necessary condition for a local minimum is used to assess
convergence, e.i. the gradient of the objective function must be below some tolerance.
A step size criteria can also help indicate convergence. Furthermore additional stopping
criteria are usually implemented in case there is not convergence. This could be a max-
imum number of iterations or of function evaluations.
Algorithm 1 Levenberg-Marquardt
Given a differentiable objective function and an initial model x0:
1. Evaluate the Jacobian
2. Compute the step size ∆x according to equation (4.8)
3. Compute the improvement ratio ρk according to (4.11)
4. Take a step xk+1 = xk + ∆x if ρk > 0
5. Update the dampening parameter λk
6. Check for convergence
Iterate until convergence, where g(x) ≈0 and the step size is small.
4.2.2
Occam’s inversion
Occam’s inversion was introduced by Constable et al. (1987). The algorithm is grounded
in one of the fundamental tenets of modern science, namely that the simplest explanation
is often the best explanation. The 14th century philosopher William of Occam phrased
it: ”it is in vain to do with more what can be done with fewer”; a principle that is often
referred to as Occam’s Razor (Russell 1946). Constable et al. (1987) designed Occam’s
inversion so that the complexity of the model is minimized under the constraint that
the model predictions must fit the data. Mathematically this can be expressed
min
x ||Lx||2
2
subject to
||d −f(x)||2 ≤δtarget
(4.12)
where δtarget = σd
√
M is a target misfit inferred from the discrepancy principle, σd is
the data noise standard deviation, and M is the number of data points.
Note that
the thought process is essentially the reverse of the traditional regularized least squares
approach, where the data misfit is minimized under the constraint that some measure
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Optimization algorithms
37
of model complexity should be small.
The optimization problem can be formulated in a least squares form such that the
objective function is
ϕ(x) = ||r(x)||2
2
(4.13)
and the regularization is included when computing the next step
⇒xk+1 =

J(xk)TJ(xk) + α2LTL
−1 J(xk)ˆd(xk)
(4.14)
where
ˆd(xk) = d −f(xk) + J(xk)xk
xk+1 = xk + ∆xk
(4.15)
The regularization parameter α2 is updated in every iteration. Constable et al. (1987)
suggest to update α2 according to the discrepancy principle as indicated by the problem
formulation in equation (4.12). This is done by solving for a range of α2 and choosing
the largest value that keeps χ2 = ||d −f(x)||2
2 below the target misfit δ2. If no α2 lives
up to this, α2 is chosen so that χ2 is minimized.
As discussed previously it is not always feasible to apply the discrepancy principle
due to unknown data noise and unknown modelization error. Farquharson and Olden-
burg (2004) instead suggest to implement the L-curve method in order to update α2 in
Occam’s inversion. So, in every iteration the next step equation is solved for a range of
α2, and the solution that lies on the corner of the L-curve is chosen as the best solution
and proceeded with.
Farquharson and Oldenburg (2004) review automatic techniques of choosing the reg-
ularization parameter α2. They claim that there is a risk of choosing an α2 value that is
too low in early iterations, so the data is over-fitted. This introduces excessive structure
in the model at an early stage, which might take a significant amount of iterations to
remove again. They suggest to instead update α2 by a dampened scheme to stabilize
the convergence
α2
k = max(cα2
k−1, α∗)
(4.16)
where 0.01 ≤c ≤0.5 is a dampening constant, and α∗is the choice of regularization
parameter based on discrepancy or the L-curve. This dampening ensures that α2 is
never reduced more than some chosen percentage per iteration, and hopefully stabilizes
convergence.
Like for the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm the iterations are continued until con-
vergence or some other stopping criteria is fulfilled. If α2 is updated according to the
discrepancy principle convergence is said to be obtained if the misfit of the model pre-
dictions and the target misfit are nearly equal, and if the step size between iterations
are below some level. If the L-curve is used to update α2 the misfit can not be used as a
convergence criteria because the target level is unknown. Instead the algorithm will be
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Calibration method
predefined to run a reasonable number of iterations, and convergence will be evaluated
by investigating misfit and step size as functions of iteration number. If the misfit and
step size curves flatten out convergence is said to be obtained, and the solution will
be found as the average of the final iterations that have converged. Finally stopping
criteria in the form of maximum number of iterations and maximum number of function
evaluations should be implemented.
The Occam algorithm has been implemented in MatLab as a part of this work, using
the L-curve method and a dampening scheme to chose α2, and using Broyden updates
to compute the Jacobian (see section 4.2.3).
Algorithm 2 Occam’s inversion
Given a differentiable objective function and an initial model x0:
1. Evaluate the Jacobian
2. Evaluate ˆd(x) according to equation (4.15)
3. Calculate the next step according to equation (4.14) for a range of α2
4. Choose the next step of the model such that its corresponding α2 is at the corner
of the L-curve
5. Dampening according to equation (4.16)
6. Check for convergence if α2 is chosen by discrepency.
Iterate until the solution converges, or until some other convergence criteria is fulfilled.
4.2.3
Estimating the Jacobian
The Jacobian of an objective function is given
J(x) = ϕ′(x) =


∂ϕ1(x)
∂x1
. . .
∂ϕ1(x)
∂xN
...
...
...
∂ϕM(x)
∂x1
. . .
∂ϕM(x)
∂xN


(4.17)
In many cases ϕ(x) is not an analytic function, and there is thus no analytic expres-
sion of the Jacobian. The simplest way to compute the Jacobian, is then by numerical
differentiation. The finite difference approximation of the Jacobian is
∂ϕi
∂xj
(x) ≃ϕi(x + δxej) −ϕi(x)
δx
(4.18)
where i = 1..M, j = 1..N, δx is an appropriately small number, and ej is the unit
vector in the jth coordinate direction. Here the finite difference step size will be defined
relatively to each model parameter as δx = relstep|xj|, where relstep is a parameter to
be adjusted.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Optimization algorithms
39
Computing the finite difference approximation of the Jacobian requires N + 1 func-
tion evaluations. If there are many model parameters, and the Jacobian is recomputed
in every iteration of the optimization, the Jacobian approximation will stand for the ma-
jority of function evaluations. If ϕ(x) additionally is slow to evaluate, the computation
time of the optimization algorithm will become unreasonably long.
Instead of computing the finite difference approximation of the Jacobian in every
iteration of an optimization algorithm, Broyden’s Rank One Updates of the Jacobian
are introduced as suggested by for instance Madsen et al. (2004) and Transtrum and
Sethna (2012). Let B be the current approximation of the Jacobian. Linearizing the
objective function by Taylor expansion around xk gives the next iterate
ϕ(xk + ∆x) ≃ϕ(xk) + Bk∆x
(4.19)
The first condition of the Broyden updates is that the linearization must hold for the
step ∆x = xk−1 −xk.
⇒ϕ(xk−1) ≃ϕ(xk) + Bk(xk−1 −xk)
(4.20)
This provides M equations in the N · M unknown elements of Bk+1. Broyden (1965)
suggested the remaining equations to be given by the condition
Bk−1v = Bkv
for all
v⊥(xk−1 −xk)
(4.21)
The conditions given in equations (4.20) and (4.21) are met when the Broyden update
of the Jacobian is given
Bk = Bk−1 + u∆xT
(4.22)
where
∆x = xk−1 −xk
u =
1
∆xT∆x (ϕ(xk) −ϕ(xk−1) −Bk−1∆x)
After some iterations there is a risk that the Broyden approximation of the Jacobian
become poor. There are multiple ways of handling this issue. The simplest way is to re-
compute the finite difference approximation of the Jacobian with some frequency in the
iterations. This approach is for instance taken in the Levenberg-Marquardt implemen-
tation by Dentler (2015). Here the Jacobian is recomputed by finite differences in every
2N iterations, or when the LM dampening parameter λ reaches a maximum tolerance.
The Immoptibox toolbox (Nielsen 2010) implements Broyden updates as described
by Madsen et al. (2004).
In every iteration the Broyden update of the Jacobian is
supplemented by a cyclic, coordinate-wise series of finite difference updates. Let ∆x
be the current step, and j be the coordinate number associated with the current itera-
tion. If the angle between ∆x and ej is large then the Broyden approximation is poor
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Calibration method
and a finite difference approximation is computed for the jth column of the Jacobian.
Mathematically the angle condition can be expressed
cos θ =
|∆xTej|
||∆x||2||ej||2
< γ
⇒|∆xj| < γ||∆x||2
(4.23)
where γ = 0.8 is a good choice according to Madsen et al. (2004), and j is updated
cyclically in every iteration as
j =
mod (j, N) + 1
(4.24)
With this approach the Jacobian estimation requires a maximum of 2 function evalua-
tions after the first iteration. This type of Broyden updates is also used in the Occam
algorithm written and implemented in this work.
Algorithm 3 Cyclic coordinate-wise Broyden updates
Given the step between the current and the previous iteration, and with j initialized as
j = 0 in the first iteration:
1. Update j according to equation (4.24)
2. If the angle condition in equation (4.23) is true, compute a finite difference update
of the jth column of the Jacobian. Compute the update according equation (4.18),
but where xk = xk−1 + δ|xk−1,j|ej
3. Compute the regular Broyden update according equation (4.22), where xk = xk−1+
∆x
Use the approximated Jacobian to compute the next step.
4.3
Implementation
Implementation of the calibration framework poses three primary challenges: 1) posing
the objective function in the form of a simple least squares problem so it can be solved
using a LM or Occam algorithm, 2) evaluating the forward function which involves set-
ting up, running, and reading results of MIKE HYDRO River simulations using MatLab
as an interface, 3) interpolating the results of the forward function to the observed data
points in order to compute the residuals in the objective function.
4.3.1
Posing the objective function
When calibrating Manning numbers in the Songhua river the general form of the objec-
tive function used in this work can be expressed
φ1(x) = ||r(x)+offset||2
2+α0||offset||2
2+α2
1||L1 log(n)||2
2+α2
2||L2z||2
2+α2
3||L3wbf||2
2 (4.25)
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Implementation
41
where x =
h
offset,
log(n),
z,
wbf
iT and L are roughness matrices chosen based on
a-priori knowledge. An offset is introduced between the water level data and the model
simulation because they do not have the same reference level. The Manning’s numbers n
quantify bed resistance. If the cross sections are approximated by rectangluar geometry
the width of the river is fixed due to model ambiguity as described in section 2.4, but
the datums of the river bed z are included in the calibration and regularization. If the
cross sections are approximated with the double rectangular geometry, both z and the
bankfull depth wbf are included in the calibration and regularization.
If the hydrodynamic model is parameterized by datum, flow area, and conveyance,
under the assumption that a linear relationship exists between flow area and conveyance
the objective function can be expressed
φ2(x) =||r(x) + offset||2
2 + α0||offset||2
2 + α2
1||L1z||2
2
+ α2
2||L2¯γ||2
2 + α2
3||L3¯δ||2
2 + α2
4||s1||2
2 + α2
5||L5s2−4||2
2
(4.26)
where ¯γ and ¯δ are vectors containing power law model parameters describing the flow
area curves for each cross section, s1−4 are linear parameters relating the conveyance to
area, and x =
h
offset,
z,
¯γ,
¯δ,
s1,
s2−4
iT.
The optimization algorithms used in this work are implemented for a simple unreg-
ularized least squares problem. The regularized problem can be posed in the form of a
simple least squares by stacking vectors. Consider
ϕ1(x) =




r(x) + offset
α0offset
α1L1 log(n)
α2L2z
α3L3wbf




2
2
(4.27)
It is easy to show that φ1(x) = ϕ1(x), and it is clear to see that the objective function
is now posed equivalently to a simple least squares problem.
Now consider the objective function for calibrating the hydrodynamic model param-
eterized by datum, flow area and conveyance. Below it is expressed in its stacked vector
form.
ϕ2(x) =




r(x) + offset
α0offset
α1L1z
α2L2¯γ
α3L2¯δ
α4s1
α5L5s2−4




2
2
(4.28)
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Calibration method
When posing the objective function as described above, the Jacobian is an (M +
N) × N matrix, where the first M rows of the Jacobian are completely independent of
the regularization. The last N rows can be constructed according to finite differences.
This property is extremely useful when doing a line search of α. The last N rows are:


α1L1
...
αkLk


4.3.2
Evaluating the forward function
The forward function in this work can be evaluated by running a hydrodynamic sim-
ulation with MIKE HYDRO River software.
The framework for the hydrodynamic
simulation can be setup using MIKE HYDRO River’s interface, as described in section
3.3. The optimization algorithm is implemented in MatLab, so the forward function,
i.e. the MIKE HYDRO River simulation, must be able to be controlled from MatLab’s
interface. Using C# programs it is possible to work with the MIKE 1D engine through
its .NET API. Refer to DHI (n.d.)’s GitHub for MIKE 1D for examples and documenta-
tion. The C# programs can be called from MatLab creating the link between MatLab
and MIKE HYDRO River. The forward function evaluation is done in three steps, 1)
editing the simulation setup, 2) running the simulation, and 3) reading the result files.
4.3.2.1
Editing
Bed resistance
The bed resistance is updated in every iteration of the optimization, and this must be
transferred to the hydrodynamic simulation. The simulation setup is given in a .mhydro
file that can be read as a normal text file, which makes it simple to edit from MatLab.
The bed resistance values are given in the .mhydro file, so they can easily be found and
replaced by the updated values from the optimization.
Rating curve boundary condition
The downstream boundary condition of the hydrodynamic model is given as a rating
curve, and must be updated in every iteration. The rating curve can be computed as
described in section 3.3.2, and it is given as a table of discharge and water levels in
the .mhydro file. As mentioned before this can be read and edited as a text file, which
makes it simple to update the simulation framework with the downstream boundary
rating curve.
Simple cross section approximations
If the cross sectional geometry is not given by data, but is modeled as rectangular or
double rectangular in the calibration, the characterizing parameters of the cross sec-
tions must be updated in every iteration of the optimization. Recall that in this work
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Implementation
43
river widths are not included in the calibration (see section 3.2.2). Cross sectional ge-
ometry is given in .xns11 files, which can not be read directly by a text editor. C#
programs are used in order to access and edit the cross sections according to the up-
dated characterizing parameters (Rectangular: XSCal_1D_SDK.exe. Double rectangular:
XSCal_1D_SDK_dr.exe). The .mhydro file should also be updated with the path to the
new .xns11 file with the updated cross sections.
Processed data
The MIKE 1D engine bases its simulation on the processed data table which is stored
in .xns11 files. The processed data is usually calculated automatically by the MIKE
1D engine based on cross sectional geometry, but it can also be edited manually. When
calibrating the flow area and conveyance curves directly the processed data table should
be updated based on these as described in section 3.3.3. For this purpose a C# pro-
gram EditProcessedData.exe has been written, that updates the processed data table
manually and ignores the cross sectional geometry.
4.3.2.2
Running
When the simulation setup has been updated the .mhydro file can be run by calling the
MIKE 1D execution file DHI.Mike1D.Application.exe.
4.3.2.3
Reading
MIKE HYDRO River saves the simulation results to a .res1d file, which can not be
read by a text editor. Instead the results are imported to MatLab using a C# program
res1d2mat.exe.
4.3.3
Computing the residuals
The water level observations and the water level simulations are not given for match-
ing chainages and times. Therefore the simulation must be interpolated to match the
observations in order to compute the residuals. For this, a simple linear interpolation
approach is taken.
The hydrodynamic simulation by MIKE HYDRO River outputs a water level time
series, for each h-node with a resolution of 1 day. The temporal resolution can be altered,
but one day matches the temporal accuracy that the altimetry dataset is given with.
For each observation point every simulation result for the same day is picked out,
which leaves a water level profile of the river for that observation day. The simulated
water level is then linearly interpolated to the observation chainage using the two nearest
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Calibration method
Figure 4.2: Illustration of procedure to interpolate the water level simulations to an
observation point.
Left:
pick the simulated water level profile corresponding to the
observation day.
Right: Linearly interpolate the simulated water level profile on the
observation day to the observation chainage.
h-nodes in the water level profile. The interpolation procedure is illustrated in figure
4.2.
4.4
Model evaluation
The quality of solution models will be evaluated as described below including; residual
analysis, validation against independent data, and sensitivity analysis.
Furthermore
model statistics will be considered. Statistics relevant for this work are summarized in
appendix A.
4.4.1
Residual analysis
The optimization algorithms presented above assume that the data noise is independent,
normally distributed, and have equal standard deviations. Analyzing the residuals be-
tween water level observations and water level predictions from the optimum river model
can give insight to whether this assumption is reasonable. If the residuals are normally
distributed it is a good indication, that the data noise is in fact also normally distributed
and with equal standard deviations. A histogram or a normal probability plot will reveal
if the residuals are normally distributed.
If the residuals are not normally distributed it can be due to a number of things. A
skew distribution might indicate that the data noise is not independent or that mod-
elization error has migrated into the residuals. The independence of observations can
also be examined by plotting the model predictions versus the residuals. If no trends
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Model evaluation
45
seem to be present, it is a good indication that the data noise is independent. If trends
are apparent it indicates correlated data noise or modelization error.
Finally the residuals will reveal under- or over-fitting if the noise level of calibration
data is known. If the standard deviation of the residuals is smaller than the data noise
level it is a clear indication of over-fitting, and large standard deviation of the residuals
indicate under-fitting. A good model should produce residuals with a standard deviation
near the data noise level.
4.4.2
Validation against independent data
A very simple, yet very powerful way of evaluating the quality of a model solution, is by
assessing its ability to predict independent data. In section 2.2 four data sets containing
in-situ water level observations from gauging stations were presented, and this data is
not used in the model calibration, i.e. it is independent. Model predictions can be com-
puted for corresponding spatial and temporal coordinates, and the predictions should
be similar to the independent dataset. Recall that the reference level of the in-situ data
is unknown, so only relative differences in water level between observations and model
predictions will be evaluated. Note that independent data can always be obtained by
excluding observations from the calibration data.
4.4.3
Model sensitivity
The Jacobian represents the local sensitivity of the model because it describes what
happens to the data predictions under small pertubations of the individual model pa-
rameters. Visualizing the Jacobian is a simple and straightforward method to get insight
into what data constrain each model parameter.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Synthetic study
The purpose of this synthetic study is to conduct experiments in a controlled envi-
ronment and allow results to be compared with a synthetic truth. This chapter will
investigate the performance of different types of algorithms, and different types of pa-
rameterizations of the hydrodynamic model. Supplementary synthetic studies of effects
of regularization and effects of data noise have been performed and documented in ap-
pendix C.
A synthetic dataset can be created by solving the forward problem for a set of chosen
model parameters referred to as the synthetic truth. The forward problem is the MIKE
HYDRO River hydrodynamic simulation, and the input parameters are cross sections
measured in-situ (section 2.4), and smoothly varying Manning’s numbers defined every
10 km (see figure 5.1(a)). The simulation output is interpolated to CryoSat-2 obser-
vation points and times. Normally distributed noise with a standard deviation of 0.2
m is added1, an offset of 1 m is added representing the unknown reference level in the
real situation, and the resulting synthetic water levels are shown in figure 5.1(b). Using
the synthetic water levels three different inverse problems will be solved; 1) calibrating
bed resistance assuming well-known cross sectional geometry, 2) calibrating bed resis-
tance and simple approximated cross sectional geometries, 3) calibrating flow area and
conveyance as functions of flow depth.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Synthetic dataset. (a) Manning’s numbers. (b) Water levels including
offset = 1 and noise N(0, 0.2 m).
1This value is rather optimistic if representing CryoSat-2 data noise, but appendix C.2.1 shows that
the calibration method is also good for a higher noise level of 0.6 m.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Synthetic study
5.1
Algorithm comparison
In this section performance of different calibration algorithms are compared. Conse-
quently, analysis of the results will focus on computational speed and the algorithms’
ability recover the synthetic truth. For analysis of calibration results in a hydrology
perspective refer to sections 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4.
It will be assumed that the cross sections of the river are well known, which means
only the bed resistance and offset parameters are left to be calibrated, i.e. x = [offset, log 10(n)]T.
This is the simplest and computationally fastest calibration encountered in this work.
Therefore this specific scenario is used as the basis for evaluating performance of differ-
ent algorithms. Firstly, three implementations of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm
will be tested, with the purpose of investigating the effects of Broyden updates of the
Jacobian and the effects of the update scheme for the LM damping parameter. Sec-
ondly, Occam’s inversion and the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm will be compared.
Both algorithms will use Broyden updates of the Jacobian and choose the regularization
parameter α based on an L-curve. In order to make a fair comparison of the different
calibration algorithms, they have all been tested on the same foundation:
Forward function:
Implemented as described in section 3.3, using measured cross sec-
tions, and Manning’s numbers defined every 10 km.
Objective function:
φ(x) = ||r(x) + offset||2
2 + α2
1||L1 log(n)||2
2
Regularization:
It will be assumed that Manning’s number varies smoothly with chainage
in the sense that 2nd order Tikhonov regularization is appropriate (see appendix
C.1 for justification). For the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm an L-curve analysis
indicate the best regularization parameter α = 7, which will be used in section
5.1.1. The offset parameter is not regularized.
Starting guess:
offset = 0 m and all n = 0.02 s/m1/3.
Convergence criteria:
Step size ||xk −xk−1||2 < 10−4.2
Relative finite difference step size:
relstep = 10−4.
5.1.1
Different implementations of
Levenberg-Marquardt
Three different implementations of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm have been tested
in this work: 1) MatLab’s own implementation in the lsqnonlin() function, 2) a freely
available implementation by Dentler (2015), and 3) the smarquardt() implementation
freely available with the immoptibox toolbox (Nielsen 2010). The three implementations
2Any other possible convergence criteria have never been met during this work, even when set
extremely loosely, and is therefore left out.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Algorithm comparison
49
will from here be referred to as lsqnonlin, Dentler, and immopti respectively.
Table 5.1 compares the algorithms in terms of number of iterations, number of func-
tion evaluations, RMSE of predicted the water levels, and the 2-norm of differences
between the optimum model and synthetic truth. Figure 5.2 shows the calibrated bed
resistances along with the synthetic truth. The calibrated offset was 0.94 m in all cases.
It is seen that the calibrated models in all cases are close to the synthetic truth, and
that they are nearly identical. Figure 5.3 shows that the fits between synthetic and
predicted water levels are good for all algorithms with RMSEs close to the synthetic
data noise level. Appendix D.3 contains plots of the residuals indicating that they are
independent, normally distributed, and have no systematic errors. Considering these
standard procedures of model evaluation, one algorithm can not be preferred over the
others.
For this work, the most relevant differences between the implementations are found
in their method of estimating the Jacobian between iterations. Lsqnonlin estimates the
Jacobian by finite differences in every iteration costing N +1 function evaluations where
N is the number of model parameters.
Dentler and immopti estimate the Jacobian
by finite differences in the first iteration, but use Broyden updates hereafter costing 1
function evaluation per iteration plus corrections. Dentler performs corrections of the
Broyden updates by doing a full finite difference estimation of the Jacobian every 2N
iterations, or when the LM parameter reaches a maximum limit. Immopti performs
Algorithm
No. iterations
No. function evaluation
RMSE
||xtrue −xopt||2
lsqnonlin
6
338
0.20 m
0.13
immopti
6
58
0.19 m
0.13
Dentler
11
57
0.19 m
0.13
Table 5.1: Comparison of Levenberg-Marquardt algorithms.
Figure 5.2: Optimum of the calibrated models. See appendix D.3 for separate plots
with 95 % confidence intervals.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Synthetic study
Figure 5.3: Synthetic and predicted water levels.
Figure 5.4: Jacobians sorted after chainage. Note that only the first M rows of the
Jacobian are shown here and in all following plots of Jacobians.
corrections of the Broyden updates in cyclic, coordinate-wise series of finite differences
as described in section 4.2.3. Limitation of function evaluations is an important task,
considering the calibration problem central for this work, which has a large number of
model parameters and a forward function that is relatively slow to evaluate. Comparing
the number of function evaluations given in table 5.1, the power of Broyden updates
is extremely clear. The effect is difficult to quantify generally, because it depends on
several things like number of model parameters, starting guess of the model, and rate
of convergence. Lsqnonlin has the advantage, that it has a parallel computing option,
reducing computation time. However, even with parallel computing, the computation
time of the calibration can be reduced by a factor between 2 and 10, by using Broyden
updates of the Jacobian. The Jacobians are shown in figure 5.4, in order to compare
the finite differences approach and the Broyden updates. It is seen that they are very
similar although not identical, but this does not seem to have a significant impact on
the final results. Further analysis and interpretation of the Jacobian is taken up in later
sections.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Algorithm comparison
51
Another difference between the Levenberg-Marquardt implementations is the update
schemes of the LM dampening parameter λ, which controls the interpolation between
a Gauss-Newton and a steepest-descent step, and thus controls the rate and stability
of convergence.
Using an appropriate scheme limits the number of iterations before
sufficient convergence, thus limiting the computation time. The update schemes for the
different algorithms are given in appendix B, and the resulting number of iterations
used by the algorithms are stated in table 5.1. It is seen that the Dentler algorithm uses
more iterations than the other algorithms, indicating that the update scheme of the LM
parameter is not ideal.
Based on the results and arguments above, it is clearly an advantage to use a
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm with Broyden updates for the purpose of this work.
In terms of number of function evaluations, data fit, and optimum model the immopti
and Dentler algorithms perform equally well. However, the immopti algorithm has a
feature, where the user can supply the initial Jacobian, which can be calculated by fi-
nite differences. This functionality will become useful, when doing a line search of the
regularization parameter, because the initial Jacobian can be reused in every calibration
for the line search. Utilizing this, the initial Jacobian only has to be computed once,
saving N function evaluations per calibration, which can be significant. Considering the
examples given in table 5.1, the Jacobian calculation takes up 45 function evaluations,
leaving only 16 function evaluations for the actual calibration in the immopti implemen-
tation. Since the Dentler implementation does not have this functionality, the immopti
implementation will from this point on be used as the standard Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm.
5.1.2
Levenberg-Marquardt vs. Occam
When calibrating the hydrodynamic model, a reasonable level of regularization must
be found as described in section 4.1.2. The exact data noise for the real CryoSat-2
observations is unknown, so the same is assumed for the synthetic case. With unknown
data noise the regularization parameter α can not be chosen based on the discrepency
principle. Instead α is determined by applying the L-curve method with a line search of
level 1, i.e. finding the best α with one significant figure.
For Occam’s inversion the line search of α is integrated in the optimization algo-
rithm. This means an L-curve and its corner is computed in every iteration, and the
optimization only has to be run once. The main challenge with the Occam algorithm
is specifying a reasonable convergence criteria. Instead the algorithm is run for 20 iter-
ations, convergence is inspected afterwards, and the final model is chosen as the mean
of all converged solutions. Figure 5.8 represents convergence of the Occam algorithm in
the form of step size between iterations. It is seen that the solution converges after very
few iterations, and the average of the last 15 iterations is used as the solution model.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Synthetic study
Figure 5.5: L-curves ranging α = 10−2 to α = 104. Circles mark the corner, and the
grey line mark the synthetic noise level. For Occam it is the L-curve of the last iteration.
Figure 5.6: Optimum of the calibrated parameters including 95% confidence intervals.
The black line is the synthetic truth. Note that the confidence intervals are not comparable,
because the Jacobian used in the Occam algorithm does not contain the regularization,
but the Jacobian used in LM does.
Figure 5.7: Synthetic and predicted water levels.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Algorithm comparison
53
Figure 5.8: Convergence of the Occam algorithm measured by step size between itera-
tions.
Algorithm
No. function evaluation
RMSE
||xtrue −xopt||2
Occam
587
0.19
0.15
Levenberg-Marquardt
1266
0.19
0.13
Table 5.2: Comparison of the Occam and Levenberg-Marquardt algorithms including a
line search to determine the best regularization parameter α.
The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm does not have an integrated line search of α.
Instead the algorithm is run several times for different α in order to perform the line
search. Afterwards the L-curve can be computed, and the model at its corner is chosen
as the solution model. Recall that the initial Jacobian of the Levenberg-Marquardt al-
gorithm can be reused saving N function evaluations per step in the line search.
The results of the Occam and Levenberg-Marquardt algorithms are shown for com-
parison in figures 5.5-5.7 and in table 5.2. It is seen that both algorithms perform nearly
equally well in fitting the data and reproducing the synthetic truth of the model param-
eters. Residual distributions and the Jacobians are also nearly identical and can be seen
in appendix D.4. It should be noted that the 95 % confidence intervals for the two algo-
rithms are not comparable. For the LM algorithm the confidence intervals are computed
based on a Jacobian where the regularization is included in the last rows as αL. In the
Occam algorithm the regularization is not represented in the Jacobian and the confi-
dence intervals are thus much larger. If the influence of regularization is removed from
the LM confidence intervals, they are nearly identical to the Occam confidence intervals.
Table 5.2 reveals that the Occam algorithm uses a much smaller amount of func-
tion evaluations than the Levenberg-Marquardt method. This is a significant benefit,
especially considering the Occam algorithm has been run way past convergence. If a rea-
sonable convergence criteria could be defined, the Occam algorithm clearly outperforms
the Levenberg-Marquardt.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Synthetic study
The conclusions above were made for a calibration problem with just one regular-
ization parameter. If two or more regularization parameters are used in the objective
function, the line search of α no longer applies as discussed briefly in section 4.1.2.2.
Therefore the Occam algorithm, in its current form, can not be used in situation with
multiple regularization terms. The Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm can solve calibra-
tion problems with any number of regularization terms. However, as for the Occam
algorithm, a line search of α can no longer be performed, and the multiple regulariza-
tion parameters must be chosen somewhat arbitrarily with a trial and error approach.
A natural next step regarding the calibration procedure would be to investigate and
implement search strategies for multiple regularization parameters. A good strategy
should investigate several combinations of regularization parameters, and search the
multidimensional parameter space in an optimal way, such that the number of function
evaluations can be kept at a reasonable level.
5.2
Calibration of bed resistance using
well-known cross sectional geometries
In this section a hydrodynamic model parameterized with cross sections and bed resis-
tance is calibrated. The cross sectional geometries are well known, so the parameters to
be calibrated are equidistant Manning’s numbers along the river, and a constant offset
between water level observations and model predictions. The calibration setup can be
described:
Algorithm:
Occam’s algorithm, with Broyden updates and level 1 line search of α using
the L-curve method.
Forward function:
Implemented as described in section 3.3, using measured cross sec-
tions, and Manning’s numbers defined every 10 km.
Objective function:
φ(x) = ||r(x) + offset||2
2 + α2
1||L1 log(n)||2
2
Free parameters:
Spatially distributed log10(n), and a constant offset between obser-
vations and model predictions.
Regularization:
It will be assumed that Manning’s number varies smoothly with chainage
in the sense that 2nd order Tikhonov regularization is appropriate (see appendix
C.1 for justification). The offset parameter is not regularized.
Starting guess:
offset = 0 m and all n = 0.02 s/m1/3. Other starting guesses were
tested and gave the same results.
Relative finite difference step size:
relstep = 10−4.
Only one regularization parameter is used, and therefore the Occam algorithm is
ideal. The disadvantage is the confidence intervals, that do not represent the regular-
ization. However, these confidence intervals do give insight regarding how well the data
constrains the model by itself. The calibration presented here is identical to the Occam
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Calibration of bed resistance using well-known cross sectional geometries
55
Figure 5.9: Optimum model including
95% confidence intervals.
Figure 5.10: Synthetic and predicted
water levels. RMSE = 0.19 m.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.11:
Residual visualization for a calibration of n using well-known cross
sections and synthetic data.
(a) Model predictions vs.
synthetic water levels.
(b)
Histogram of residuals with a normal distribution fit. (c) Model predictions vs. residuals.
calibration in section 5.1.2. The calibration results are shown in figures 5.9-5.11. Note
that for the reader’s convenience, some figures are repeated in sections 5.1.2 and 5.2.
Figures 5.9 and 5.10 indicate a successful calibration. The synthetic water levels are
predicted with RMSE = 0.19 m, and the optimum model captures the synthetic truth
well. This includes the offset with optimum value and 95 % confidence interval 0.93±0.14
m compared to the synthetic truth of 1 m. The residuals are visualized in three ways in
figure 5.11. Figure 5.11(a) and 5.11(c) indicate that the residuals are independent, and
figure 5.11(b) shows that the residuals are nearly normally distributed. The distribution
of the residuals often reflects the distribution of data noise, which indeed was normal,
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Synthetic study
independent, and with noise level 0.2 m (similar to the RMSE).
Analyzing the Jacobian shown in figure 5.12(a) gives information about the sensitiv-
ity of the model parameters. When sorting the Jacobian after chainage, a very defined
diagonal structure is seen, indicating that each model parameter is sensitive to water
levels observed in its upstream vicinity. If one bed resistance parameter is increased,
sensitive water levels will also increase. Some parts of the Jacobian diagonal is more
well defined than others, for instance the first ∼150 km river stretch is smeared in the
upstream direction, and the final ∼100 km river stretch has a very narrow diagonal.
The degree of smearing is related to the river bed slope, which is plotted along with the
Jacobian. In flat parts of the river the water levels are sensitive much further upstream
than in steep parts of the river, which is in compliance with expectations from hydrology
theory.
The 95% confidence intervals of the model parameters are shown in figure 5.9 and
they are a direct consequence of the Jacobian. Recall that these confidence intervals do
not include the regularization, and therefore they are very large. Notice the relatively
wide confidence intervals in the first 150 km and the narrow confidence interval in the last
100 km, and the correspondence to smearing in the Jacobian. A spike in the confidence
interval occurs around 300 km. This spike is most likely not due to the slope of the river
bed, but rather due to a data gap in that area (see figure 5.10). This effect illustrates the
importance of spatially distributed water level observations, and reinforces the value of
the CryoSat-2 dataset for the purpose of calibrating a spatially distributed hydrodynamic
model.
Figure 5.12:
Jacobian for a calibration of n using well-known cross sections and
synthetic data. The black curve represents the river bed (values not given on y-axis).
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Calibration of bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries
57
5.3
Calibration of bed resistance and simple
cross sectional geometries
In this section, it will be assumed that the cross sectional geometry is unknown, and it
will instead be included as model parameters to be calibrated along with the spatially dis-
tributed Manning’s numbers. Two simple geometry parameterizations are implemented,
a rectangular and a double rectangular channel (see section 3.2.2). It will furthermore
be assumed that channel and floodplain widths can be derived from satellite imagery,
or in the synthetic case, from the synthetic truth obtained directly from the in-situ
cross sectional data. Each type of model parameter will be regularized separately. That
means several regularization parameters α must be chosen, and a line search is thus not
possible. Instead the α values are chosen by trial and error. The calibration framework
can be described:
Algorithm:
Levenberg-Marquardt with Broyden updates, immoptibox implementation.
Forward function:
Implemented as described in section 3.3. Manning’s numbers and
cross sectional geometry are calibrated at 23 equidistant points along the river
(interval ∼20 km).
Objective function:
φ1(x) = ||r(x)+offset||2
2 +α2
0offset+α2
1||L1 log(n)||2
2 +α2
2||L2dz||2
2 +α2
3||L3dwbf||2
2
Free parameters:
Spatially distributed log10(n), spatially distributed dz that are varia-
tions from a datum base line zbase seen in figure 5.13, and a constant offset between
observations and model predictions. For double rectangular geometry also spatially
Figure 5.13: Datum base line for the synthetic dataset. The datum model parameters
are calibrated as variations from the shown base line. Each point in the base line is
determined as the minimum water level observed in its vicinity minus 2 meters. Vicinity
is by trial and error defined as 1/6 of the distance to the two neighboring points on the
base line.
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Synthetic study
distributed dwbf that are variations from a bankfull level base line wbf = 5. Cal-
ibrating differences instead of absolute values scale the model parameters such
that they are similar in size, resulting in a more well-posed inverse problem, that
is more stable in its solution.
Regularization:
It will be assumed that Manning’s number varies smoothly with chainage
in the sense that 2nd order Tikhonov regularization is appropriate (α1 = 5). dz
is allowed to vary from a base line and is regularized with 0th order Tikhonov
regularization, such that the solution is dampened and can not vary to extreme
values (α2 = 0.5 for rectangular and α2 = 0.1 for double rectangular). The off-
set parameter is also dampened with 0th order Tikhonov regularization (α0 = 5).
dwbf is not regularized, and is allowed to vary freely, so α3 = 0.
Starting guess:
offset = 0.5 m, all n = 0.02 s/m1/3, all dz = −1 m, and all dwbf = −1
m. The calibration is not sensitive to changes in the starting guesses of offset, n,
or dz, but very sensitive to changes in the starting guess of dwbf.
Convergence criteria:
Step size ||xk −xk−1||2 < 10−4.
Relative finite difference step size:
relstep = 10−4.
5.3.1
Rectangular channel geometry
The optimum spatially varying model parameters found using a rectangular cross sec-
tional geometry are shown in figure 5.14, and the calibrated offset and its 95 % confidence
interval is 0.15 ± 0.14 m. The optimum datum parameters are consistently higher than
the synthetic truth, which is expected. Consider the difference in geometry between a
rectangular channel, and a more naturally shaped channel, which often become more
Figure 5.14: Calibrated model parameters using rectangular cross section approxima-
tions and synthetic data. 95 % confidence intervals are shaded.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Calibration of bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries
59
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.15: Jacobians related to each model parameter for a calibration of n and
rectangular cross sections and synthetic data. (a) Bed resistance. (b) Datum.
narrow with depth. The two channel shapes must convey the same amount of water in
order to fit the water level data, which means their flow areas must be similar, assuming
a channel that is much wider than deep. The rectangular channel has a much larger area
per flow depth ratio than a natural channel, which consequently means that the rect-
angular channel does not have to be as deep in order to convey the same amount of water.
The optimum of the bed resistance parameters do not capture the synthetic truth
well.
This is a result of ambiguity between the model parameters.
Recall that the
synthetic and optimum conveyance must be equal in order to fit the synthetic observed
water levels. The conveyance is dependent on both channel geometry and bed resistance,
which means if one parameter is poorly estimated, it can be somewhat compensated for
by the other parameter. Because of the modelization error introduced by the cross sec-
tional approximations, the parameter n does not only represent the bed resistance, but
also takes on the role as compensating for poorly approximated cross sections.
The Jacobians related to each spatially distributed parameter are shown in figure
5.15. As for the calibration with well-known cross sections, diagonal structures are seen
in the Jacobians meaning model parameters are sensitive to water level observations in
their vicinity. Again smears are seen in the Jacobians, which are related to the river
bed slope. In the Jacobian representing the datum a new feature is seen, where the
downstream parameters affect the downstream water levels negatively. This effect is
due to how the downstream boundary condition rating curve is computed. The bed
slope used in the downstream rating curve is computed based on the last 5 calibrated
datums, which corresponds to what is seen in the Jacobian.
Water level predictions from the calibrated model are shown in figure 5.16, and resid-
uals are shown in figure 5.17. The RMSE between predictions and synthetic observations
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Synthetic study
Figure 5.16: Synthetic and predicted water levels for a calibration using rectangular
cross section approximations.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.17: Residual visualization for a calibration of n and rectangular cross sections
and synthetic data. (a) Model predictions vs. synthetic water levels. (b) Histogram of
residuals with a normal distribution fit. (c) Model predictions vs. residuals with no trend,
indicating independent residuals.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Calibration of bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries
61
is 0.34 m, compared to the synthetic noise level of 0.2 m. The water levels are predicted
to a reasonable degree, despite the optimum model being a poor representation of the
synthetic truth. The difference between RMSE and the synthetic noise level is asso-
ciated with modelization error, which is also indicated in the residual distribution. A
tail is seen in residual histogram indicating modelization error or that data noise is not
normally distributed. Since this is synthetic data, and it is known that the data noise
is normally distributed, the tail must be due to modelization error.
In figure 5.18(a) flow depths are shown, computed as water level minus calibrated
river bed datum. Figure 5.18(b) shows the histogram of flow depths and a tail is seen,
which will be considered high flow depths. If the fit between predicted and synthetic
observed water levels are computed for regular flow depths and high flow depths sepa-
rately, it is seen that the high flow depths are significantly worse fitted than the regular
flows.
RMSE = 0.34 m
RMSEhigh = 0.81 m
RMSEregular = 0.28 m
This difference can be explained by the choice of cross sectional geometry approximation,
because a rectangular channel shape does not allow over-bank spills. In the event of over-
bank spill the flow areas of the real cross sections rapidly increase with flow depth. This
feature is not included in the approximated geometry, which means in order to match
the real flow area, the water levels in the calibrated model must increase rapidly. This
effect is clearly seen in figures 5.16 and 5.18(a) where the outliers representing high flow
conditions are consistently overestimated by the calibrated model.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.18: Simulated flow depths using rectangular cross sections and synthetic data
(a). Computed as simulated water levels minus calibrated datum. High flow depths are
defined as w > 6 based on the distribution of flow depths (b).
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Synthetic study
5.3.2
Double rectangular channel geometry
Above, it was seen that approximating the channel geometry with a rectangle causes
issues, because it can not represent over-bank spills. Therefore a double rectangular
geometry, that represents both the channel and the flood plain, is implemented and
calibrated.
Figure 5.19: Synthetic and predicted water levels for a calibration using double rect-
angular cross section approximations.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.20:
Residual visualization for a calibration of n and double rectangular
cross sections and synthetic data. (a) Model predictions vs. synthetic water levels. (b)
Histogram of residuals with a normal distribution fit. (c) Model predictions vs. residuals
with no trend, indicating independent residuals.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Calibration of bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries
63
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.21: Simulated flow depths using double rectangular cross sections and syn-
thetic data (a). Computed as simulated water levels minus calibrated datum. High flow
levels are defined as w > 6 based on the distribution of flow depths (b).
Figures 5.19 and 5.20 show the predicted water levels and the distribution of residuals.
Despite the optimum model being far from the synthetic truth, the water level predic-
tions are reasonable with an RMSE of 0.37 m, and the distribution of residuals is closer
to normal, than was seen for the rectangular cross section approximation. Again the
low and high flows are studied separately in figure 5.21, and the fits between predicted
and synthetic observed water levels are
RMSE = 0.37 m
RMSEhigh = 0.40 m
RMSElow = 0.36 m
Including the opportunity for over-bank spills in the cross sectional geometry has
vastly improved the models ability to predict high water levels, and there is no longer a
significant distinction between the fits of high and low water levels.
Figure 5.22 shows the optimum of spatially distributed parameters, and the opti-
mum offset is 0.05 m. Note that the parameters do not have confidence intervals. They
could not be calculated because JTJ is singular caused by a few of the bankfull stage
parameters being completely insensitive to the data.
The double rectangular geometry is an approximation to the true cross sections, and
the deviations between the optimum model and the synthetic truth can be explained in
the same way as for the rectangular geometry, i.e. modelization error of the cross sec-
tional geometries can be somewhat compensated for by the bed resistance due to model
ambiguity. A synthetic truth is not shown for the bankfull depths, but true values are
approximately 8-16 m. The optimum bankfull depths are impossible to calibrate using
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Synthetic study
Figure 5.22: Calibrated model parameters using double rectangular cross section ap-
proximations and synthetic data. 95 % confidence intervals could not be computed due
to the Jacobian being singular.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.23: Jacobians related to each model parameter using double rectangular cross
sections and synthetic data. (a) Bed resistance. (b) Datum. (c) Bankfull depth.
this dataset, because there is not enough data to inform that part of the model. In order
to accurately calibrate the bankfull depths, several observations of water level around
the bankfull stage are needed at all calibration points along the river. Studying the
dataset indicates that there are very few high flow events informing the bankfull model
parameters, and it can thus not be expected to obtain a good model.
The Jacobians representing each model parameter are shown in figure 5.23. Generally
they tell the same story as cases seen previously, but they seem to contain a much
higher degree of off-diagonal noise. This noise has not been accounted for, but it is
suspected to be related to numerical issues in the forward problem when solving the
Saint-Venant equations. Adjusting the time step size in the forward problem or the
parameter perturbation step size when computing the Jacobian with finite differences
might help reduce the noise.
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
65
5.4
Calibration of flow area and conveyance
In this calibration, no specific cross sectional geometry will be assumed, instead the flow
area and conveyance as functions of flow depth are calibrated directly. The framework
can be described:
Algorithm:
Levenberg-Marquardt with Broyden updates, immoptibox implementation.
Forward function:
Implemented as described in section 3.3, but with time steps of 20
minutes. The flow area and conveyance are calibrated at 23 equidistant points
along the river (interval ∼20 km).
Objective function:
φ(x) = ||r(x) + offset||2
2 + α2
0||offset||2
2 + α2
1||L1dz||2
2 + α2
2||L2¯γ||2
2 + α2
3||L3¯δ||2
2 + α2
4||s1||2
2
Free parameters:
Spatially distributed γ and δ defining power law models in loglog
space which represent flow area curves, spatially distributed dz that are variations
from a datum base line zbase seen in figure 5.13, s1 which partly describes the linear
relationship between flow area and conveyance, and an offset between synthetic
observations and model predictions.
Fixated parameters:
Parameters s2−4, given in section 3.2.3, which describe the linear
relationship between flow area and conveyance.
Regularization:
γ, δ, and dz are all dampened by 0th order Tikhonov regularization
with α1,2,3 = 0.1. s1 and the offset are allowed to move freely and are not regular-
ized, α0,4 = 0.
Starting guess:
s1 = 2, offset = 1, all γ = 2, all δ = 2.5, and all dz = −1.
Convergence criteria:
Step size ||xk −xk−1||2 < 10−4.
Relative finite difference step size:
relstep = 10−3.
The calibration setup using the flow area-conveyance method is very difficult to bal-
ance. Firstly the optimum model seems to be very sensitive to the choice of starting
model and the choice of initial LM damping parameter. Figure 5.24 shows the γ and δ
optimum models from calibrations with 3 similar starting models. The optimum models
are different, but all can predict the synthetic water levels to a similar degree. This in-
dicate a strongly non-convex model space, and that the inverse problem has non-unique
solutions. The second issue arises when choosing regularization type. No physical a-
priori information can be applied to γ, δ, or dz and represented in the regularization.
Furthermore, there are several regularization terms, and thus several regularization pa-
rameters to be determined. In the current calibration framework a consistent search
of the multidimensional regularization parameter space is not possible. Excluding the
regularization altogether is not an option either, because that results in over-fitted water
levels, and a model that is wildly oscillating and unphysical. In the end, a simple 0th
order Tikhonov regularization was used, which dampens the model, and regularization
parameters were chosen by trial and error. As a consequence the results presented here
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Synthetic study
Figure 5.24: Optimum models from 3 calibrations with different starting models.
Blue: RMSE = 0.24 m. s1 = 2, offset = 1, γ = 2, δ = 2.5, dz = −1.
Orange: RMSE = 0.23 m. s1 = 2, offset = 1, γ = 2, δ = 1.5, dz = −1.
Yellow: RMSE = 0.27 m. s1 = 2, offset = 1, γ = 2, δ = 2.5, dz = 1
Figure 5.25: Synthetic and predicted water levels for a calibration of flow area and
conveyance.
are not necessarily the best the calibration can perform.
Figure 5.25 shows the synthetic observations and the model predictions of water
level, and figure 5.26 shows the residuals. The residuals appear independent and close
to normally distributed. The water level fit has RMSE = 0.24 m, which is close to the
data noise level of 0.2 m. Figure 5.27 shows that high flow events are not consistently
over- or underestimated. The RMSE of the high flows is slightly higher than for regular
flow depths, but this is not necessarily significant, because the statistic is computed
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
67
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.26:
Residual visualization for a calibration of flow area and conveyance
using synthetic data. (a) Model predictions vs. synthetic water levels. (b) Histogram
of residuals with a normal distribution fit. (c) Model predictions vs. residuals with no
trend, indicating independent residuals.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.27: Simulated flow depths when calibrating flow area and conveyance using
synthetic data. (a). Computed as simulated water levels minus calibrated datum. High
flow levels are defined as w > 6 based on the distribution of flow depths (b).
based on just a few high flows.
RMSE = 0.24 m
RMSElow = 0.22 m
RMSEhigh = 0.34 m
Figure 5.28 shows the Jacobians associated with γ, δ, and datum. The expected
diagonal structure is seen, indicating that increasing γ or δ in one location will decrease
water levels in the upstream vicinity, and increasing the datum will increase water levels.
There is also an off-diagonal noise signal in the Jacobians. The source of the noise is
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Synthetic study
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.28: Jacobians related to spatially distributed model parameters in the calibra-
tion of flow area and conveyance using synthetic data. (a) γ. (b) δ. (c) Datum.
Figure 5.29: Calibrated model values and 95 % confidence intervals of γ, δ, and datum,
when calibrating flow area and conveyance using synthetic data.
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
69
discretization of the flow area and conveyance curves as functions of flow depth. When
flow area and conveyance are fed to the MIKE 1D engine, they are given in a processed
data table and not as continuous curves. That means flow area and conveyance asso-
ciated with flow depths between defined points are interpolated and thus errors arise.
Using even smaller increments of the flow area and conveyance curves might reduce the
noise, but that is not considered necessary here.
The solution model and its 95% confidence intervals consists of offset = −1.16±0.41
m, s1 = 1.75 ± 0.11, the optimum γ, δ, and datum are shown in figure 5.25, and the
optimum flow area and conveyance curves are shown in figures 5.30 and 5.31. The da-
tum parameters affect several parts of the hydrodynamic model and calibration. The
estimated datum base line represent the shape of the river bed along chainage, and the
calibrated offset value works as an adjustment of the absolute value. The bed slope
drives the gravitational force on the water, which means relative errors in the estimated
datum have an impact here.
In figures 5.30 and 5.31 it is seen that the optimum flow area and conveyance curves
generally are close to the synthetic truth. It is also seen that the conveyance curves
generally are closer to the synthetic truth than the flow area curves, indicating that
the conveyance has a larger impact on the hydrodynamic simulation. Errors between
the calibrated flow area and conveyance curves and the synthetic truth can roughly
be categorized as translation error or slope error associated with γ and δ respectively.
Translation errors in conveyance occur at chainages where there are large differences
between the absolute values of the estimated river bed datum and the synthetic truth
(fx in the most upstream). Slope errors in the conveyance occur at chainages where the
estimated bed slopes deviate from the truth (fx at 278 km and 378 km). The datum is
not very sensitive to the data and does not change much from its starting value. The
errors described above indicate that there is some ambiguity between the datum and γ
and δ. In some cases it is seen, that the flow area curve fits well, but the conveyance
does not (or oppositely). These types of errors are associated with fixating a linear rela-
tionship between flow area and conveyance, and they must be expected considering the
initial study of real cross sectional geometries, where a spread in the linear relationship
was seen.
Figures 5.30 and 5.31 also show the flow area and conveyance curves from the cal-
ibration where simple rectangular cross sectional shapes were assumed, and it is seen
that they are consistently far from the synthetic truth. Considering that flow area and
conveyance are used directly when solving the Saint-Venant equations, figures 5.30 and
5.31 clearly indicate that calibrating flow area and conveyance directly is a much more
reliable method in terms of capturing the synthetic truth, i.e. representing physical
reality in a real-world scenario.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Synthetic study
Figure 5.30: Calibrated flow area curves (red), flow area curves using a rectangular channel geometry (purple), and the
nearest synthetic truth flow area curves upstream (blue) and downstream (green).
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
71
Figure 5.31: Calibrated conveyance curves (red), conveyance curves using a rectangular channel geometry (purple), and
the nearest synthetic truth conveyance curves upstream (blue) and downstream (green).
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Synthetic study
5.5
Summary
Based on the investigations of different calibration algorithms, it can be concluded that
an algorithm implemented with Broyden updates of the Jacobian is superior. The com-
putational time is reduced by a factor of 2 to 10 compared to finite differences updates
of the Jacobian. The faster computational time is crucial and makes is feasible to test
multiple regularization parameters, which can ultimately give a better calibration result.
In the synthetic study the Occam algorithm outperformed the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm in a calibration including a line search of one regularization parameter. How-
ever, the Occam algorithm has several limitations. 1) It can only be applied to problems
using a single regularization parameter. 2) There must be a consistent way of evaluating
the models from each regularization parameter in the line search, such as the discrepancy
principle or an L-curve. 3) It is difficult to choose a good convergence criteria. Espe-
cially the first two points limit the number of problems for which the Occam algorithm
is suitable. Because of its much broader application potential, the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm is chosen for calibration with real world data.
Working in a synthetic framework has given insight regarding the effects of modeliza-
tion error and model ambiguity. Modelization error was first completely eliminated by
using well-known cross sectional geometries. Without the disturbance of modelization
error, the calibrated Manning’s numbers were able to capture the synthetic truth and
predict the synthetic observed water levels to a degree that matched the synthetic noise
level.
Modelization error was introduced by approximating cross sectional geometries with
simple shapes, rectangular and double rectangular. The rectangular cross sections did
not allow over-bank spills, meaning that water levels were vastly overestimated under
flood conditions. This issue was solved by including a flood plain in the double rectangu-
lar geometry. Generally, both methods were able to predict the majority of the synthetic
observed water levels to a reasonable degree, but modelization error and model ambigu-
ity resulted in calibrated models that could not capture the synthetic truth. In a real
world scenario, this means the calibrated model can not be trusted to represent the true
physical system.
A new method of parameterizing a hydrodynamic model has been implemented and
tested. Instead of assuming a specific cross sectional geometry, from which flow area and
conveyance are computed, the flow area and conveyance were calibrated directly as func-
tions of flow depth by parameterizing them with power law models. The new method is
not fully developed and there are still challenges to be overcome. Before the method can
be used with confidence, a consistent regularization approach must be formed, and the
optimum model should not be dependent on the starting guess (see section 6.2 for further
discussion). However, the synthetic study showed promising results. The synthetic water
==PAGE:83==
5.5 Summary
73
levels could be fitted with RMSE = 0.24 m. The main result was showing that the new
method has the potential of producing optimum models that are close to the synthetic
truth, i.e. models that can be trusted to represent the physical truth in a real world case.
It could be argued that accurate water level predictions are of primary interest and
finding the true model parameters secondary. From that point of view the double rect-
angular cross section approach and the flow area-conveyance approach are comparable.
In the perspective of forecasting future water levels, this argument does not necessarily
hold. Recall that inverse problems are often unstable in the sense that small changes
in the data can significantly alter the solution model (which is also shown in appendix
C.2.2). It can thus not be expected that a nonphysical model can be extrapolated to
forecast future water levels accurately.
This argumentation emphasizes the value of
the new parameterization approach, which produces model parameters much closer to
the synthetic truth than traditional approaches, when surveyed cross sections are not
available.
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6
Calibration with real data
In this chapter the findings of the synthetic study are applied in a real world scenario.
Here CryoSat-2 altimetry with unknown data noise is used, which covers the period
2010-2014. The data was presented in section 2.1 and will be used to calibrate two
hydrodynamic models that are parameterized in different ways. In the first case in-situ
measurements of cross sectional geometry are used in the hydrodynamic model, such
that spatially varying bed resistance is the parameter to be calibrated. In the second
case no specific cross sectional geometry is assumed. Instead flow area and conveyance
curves are calibrated directly at spatially distributed positions along the river.
6.1
Calibration of bed resistance using cross
sections measured in-situ
The geometries of 70 cross sections along the river stretch between Harbin and Jiamusi
were surveyed in-situ in 1999. This data will be included in a hydrodynamic simulation
model such that the remaining parameters to be calibrated are spatially varying bed
resistance and a constant offset between model predictions and altimetry observations.
The calibration setup can be described:
Algorithm:
Levenberg-Marquardt with Broyden updates (immoptibox implementation),
and level 1 line search of α.
Forward function:
Implemented as described in section 3.3, using measured cross sec-
tions, and Manning’s numbers defined every 10 km.
Objective function:
φ(x) = ||r(x) + offset||2
2 + α2
1||L1 log(n)||2
2
Free parameters:
Spatially distributed log10(n), and a constant offset between obser-
vations and model predictions.
Regularization:
It will be assumed that Manning’s number varies smoothly with chainage
in the sense that 2nd order Tikhonov regularization is appropriate (see appendix
C.1 for justification). The offset parameter is not regularized.
Starting guess:
offset = 0 m and all n = 0.02 s/m1/3.
Convergence criteria:
Step size ||xk −xk−1||2 < 10−4.
Relative finite difference step size:
relstep = 10−4.
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Calibration with real data
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.1: Line search of the regularization parameter α. α = 100 is marked with red
in all plots. (a) L-curve from α = 20 to α = 900. (b) RMSE between model predictions
and altimetry observations of water level. (c) Bed resistance models.
In order to determine a good level of regularization, a line search of the regularization
parameter α was performed. Figure 6.1(a) shows that the line search did not produce
a defined corner in an L-curve, so this approch can not be used to choose an ideal α.
A more manual approach was taken in order to find the balance between structure in
the model and data fit. Figure 6.1(b) shows the RMSE as a function of α, and figure
6.1(c) shows models related to several α. The very steep increase in RMSE is interpreted
as models that overfit the data, which is also indicated by oscillating structures in the
models. The model associated with α = 100 is chosen because it has a low RMSE, but
does not show any oscillations in the model.
The results of the calibration can be seen in figures 6.2 to 6.6. Figure 6.2 shows
the calibrated bed resistance model, and the offset with 95 % confidence interval is
calibrated to be 2.1 ± 0.8 m. The bed resistance varies from n = 0.050 s/m1/3 in the
upstream, to n = 0.011 s/m1/3 in the central river stretch, and to n = 0.024 s/m1/3 in
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Calibration of bed resistance using cross sections measured in-situ
77
Figure 6.2: Optimum of the spatially distributed log10(n) with 95 % confidence intervals
when calibrating using surveyed cross sections and real data.
Figure 6.3: Jacobian sorted after chainage for a calibration of n using well-known
cross sections and real world data.
the downstream. 0.011 s/m1/3 is low for natural rivers, but the other values are within
the norm (Chow 1959). Further interpretation will follow. The Jacobian can be seen in
figure 6.3. It has the expected diagonal shape, and the most downstream ∼150 km has
the least amount of smear and has the highest values, as seen for the synthetic case.
Figure 6.4 shows the predicted and observed water levels and the river bed datum
corresponding to the deepest point in each surveyed cross section. The water level fit
is quantified with RMSE = 1.55 m. Three features stand out: 1) Around chainage =
75 km a sudden drop in observed water levels are seen. The model predictions do not
capture this feature and make a more smooth transition. 2) The river has very deep
flow depths in its most upstream part. 3) The model has issues predicting observations
related to high flow levels, especially in the downstream. The analysis will return to
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Calibration with real data
Figure 6.4: Observed and predicted water levels for a calibration using cross sections
measured in-situ and real world altimetry data.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.5: Residual visualization for a calibration of n using well-known cross sections
and real altimetry data. (a) Model predictions vs. observed water levels. (b) Histogram
of residuals with a normal distribution fit. (c) Model predictions vs. residuals.
these important points.
The residuals can be seen in figure 6.5, and they do not appear independent or nor-
mally distributed. The residual distribution has a tail showing that a group of water
level observations are much higher than the associated model predictions. Looking at
the water levels in figure 6.4 and residual independency in figure 6.5(c), it is seen that
these residuals mainly occur at the water level drop around 75 km, and at high flood
events in the downstream, which means they are not independent.
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Calibration of bed resistance using cross sections measured in-situ
79
Figure 6.6:
Validation against in-situ observations, when calibrating bed resistance
using surveyed cross sections.
The fits are quantified by RMSE: Harbin = 1.28 m,
Tonghe = 0.42 m, Yilan = 0.39 m, Jiamusi = 0.34 m.
==PAGE:90==
80
6 Calibration with real data
The calibrated model is validated against independent data form 4 gauging stations
in figure 6.6. The model predicts water levels with RMSE:
RMSE(Harbin) = 1.28 m
RMSE(Tonghe) = 0.42 m
RMSE(Yilan) = 0.39 m
RMSE(Jiamusi) = 0.34 m
The left part of figure 6.6 shows water level time series, where the fits are good for Yi-
lan and Jiamusi, and spikes are not consistently over- or underestimated by the model.
This is confirmed by the associated residual distributions, seen in the right part of the
figure. The residual distribution for Tonghe shows a trend, where high flows tend to be
underestimated and low flows overestimated. Recall that the Tonghe station is located
at a chainage where the model changes a lot depending on the regularization (see figure
6.1(c)). If the regularization is not ideal, this will have a large effect on the predicted
water levels at the Tonghe station. At Harbin gauging station, the model produces very
poor water level predictions, indicating severe issues in the most upstream section of the
river. Validating against independent data has shown that the model is good in some,
but not all, parts of the river.
The observed water levels had high flow events in the downstream that could not
be predicted by the calibrated model. No certain explanation for this has been identi-
fied, but the outliers are located by a big city, Jiamusi, where human interference could
have altered the river bed since it was measured in 1999. Cross sectional surveys at the
Jiamusi gauging station from the altimetry data period (figure D.2) do indeed show a
different geometry than used in the calibration, which could be a source of modelization
error. The newest surveys of the Jiamusi cross section show a river bed with a higher
bankfull stage, which means higher water levels can occur. It is also possible that the
observed high flow depths in the downstream are simple data errors caused by disturbing
signals in the radar waveforms.
The very low calibrated Manning’s numbers near Tonghe are not expected to accu-
rately represent physical reality. Figure 6.6 indicates errors in the model near Tonghe
because the in-situ water levels are poorly fitted, and figure 6.1 indicates that other
choices of regularization parameter would not have resulted in extremely low Manning’s
numbers near Tonghe. A different choice of regularization parameter can help fit the
Tonghe in-situ observations better, but tests have shown that the cost is worse fits at
some of the other gauging stations. The Manning’s numbers are probably low in this
area in physical reality, but the model most likely exaggerates the minimum. One ex-
planation might be that the Manning’s numbers do not vary as smoothly over the river
stretch as assumed, but instead could have jumps that the current calibration setup does
not allow. Another explanation could be errors in the surveyed cross sectional geome-
tries. In the synthetic study it was seen that faulty cross sections have a large impact
on the Manning’s numbers, because ambiguity allow them to compensate by deviating
from their true values.
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
81
Errors in water level predictions occur around 75 km due to an unmodeled dam. The
Songhua river was dammed up in 2007 just East of Harbin, creating the Dadingzishan
reservoir in the upstream part of the river stretch modeled here (Zhou and Xuefei 2012).
The in-situ observations of water level at Harbin (figure 6.6(top,left)) clearly show the
gradual filling of the reservoir in the years 2007-2009. The dam explains the observations
in the upstream, where large flow depths are indicated, a very constant water level is
seen in both altimetry and in-situ observations, and the sudden drop in water level that
occurs around chainage 75 km. Because the dam is not included in the hydrodynamic
model, it constitutes a major source of modelization error in the upstream. The model
compensates with high bed resistance (n ≈0.050 s/m1/3) in the upstream restraining the
flow and increasing the water levels. This shows once more, that the Manning’s numbers
do not only represent the bed resistance, but can take on the role of compensating for
modelization errors.
6.2
Calibration of flow area and conveyance
Algorithm:
Levenberg-Marquardt with Broyden updates, immoptibox implementation.
Forward function:
Implemented as described in section 3.3, but with time steps of 10
minutes. The flow area and conveyance are calibrated at 23 equidistant points
along the river (interval ∼20 km).
Objective function:
φ(x) = ||r(x) + offset||2
2 + α2
0||offset||2
2 + α2
1||L1dz||2
2 + α2
2||L2¯γ||2
2
+ α2
3||L3¯δ||2
2 + α2
4||s1||2
2 + α2
5||L5s2−4||2
2
Free parameters:
Spatially distributed γ and δ defining power law models in loglog
space which represent flow area curves, parameters s1−4 describing a linear re-
lationship between flow area and conveyance, spatially distributed dz that are
variations from a datum base line zbase seen in figure 6.10, and a constant offset
between observations and model predictions.
Regularization:
Studies of real cross sections showed that γ and δ do not vary smoothly
with chainage, and are therefore dampened with 0th order Tikhonov regularization
using α2 = 0.1 and α3 = 0.1. s2−3 are allowed to vary, but are regularized strongly
(α5 = 50) to be similar to the values found in section 3.2.3. dz is allowed to vary
from a base line and is regularized with 0th order Tikhonov regularization, such
that the solution is dampened and can not vary to extreme values (α1 = 0.1). s1
and the offset are allowed to move freely, and are not regularized (α0,4 = 0).
Starting guess:
s1−4 = [2, 1, 0.75, 0.95], offset = 1, all γ = 2, all δ = 1.5, and all
dz = −1. The optimum model is very sensitive to the choice of starting guess.
Relative finite difference step size:
relstep = 10−3.
==PAGE:92==
82
6 Calibration with real data
The results of the calibration of flow area and conveyance using real altimetry data
are presented in figures 6.7 to 6.13. Like for the synthetic study it is difficult to balance
all the calibration parameters, and the results are thus not necessarily the best that the
method can perform.
Figure 6.7 shows the altimetry observed water levels and predictions from the cali-
brated model, and the RMSE is 1.31 m. From the results, it is not possible to evaluate
whether the data has been under-fitted, over-fitted, or fitted to an appropriate degree.
In general the water level predictions are good, but errors in high flow predictions are
seen in the downstream, equivalent to the errors seen when calibrating bed resistance
and using in-situ cross sections.
This indicate data errors rather than modelization
error, since the two methods use completely different parameterizations. Furthermore
prediction errors are seen just upstream from the unmodeled dam, but notice that the
water levels downstream of the dam are fitted well. The model can compensate for the
unmodeled dam to some degree.
If the river’s profile as function of time is studied, unphysical behavior is seen for
very high water levels, as indicated in figure 6.9. The source of the errors causing the
unphysical dips in water level has not yet been identified, but explanations might be:
1) Modelization error because the cross section can not be sufficiently represented by a
power law model. 2) The model is not constrained sufficiently by the data. 3) Abrupt
changes in bathymetry occur in the 20 km upstream that one calibration point represents,
so it chooses to fit the majority of water levels, which will be low. 4) Underestimated
water levels are often due to overestimated δ, which might be a result of errors in the
Figure 6.7:
Observed and predicted water levels for a calibration of flow area and
conveyance.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
83
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.8: Residual visualization for a calibration of flow area and conveyance using
real altimetry data. (a) Model predictions vs. observed water levels. (b) Histogram of
residuals with a normal distribution fit. (c) Model predictions vs. residuals.
    0.0
50000.0
100000.0
150000.0
200000.0
250000.0
300000.0
350000.0
400000.0
[m]
1:0
70.0
75.0
80.0
85.0
90.0
95.0
100.0
105.0
110.0
115.0
120.0
[meter]
   Water level - 14-6-2012 08:00:00    
main  0 - 437271
0
19876
39752
59628
79504
99380
119256
139132
159008
178884
198760
218636
238511
258387
278263
298139
318015
337891
357767
377643
397519
417395
437271
Figure 6.9: River profile. The blue filled area mark the current water levels, the green
line mark the minimum and the red line mark the maximum during the simulation period.
==PAGE:94==
84
6 Calibration with real data
bed slope model. In future work this should be investigated further, and it could be
considered to implement a smoothness regularization on the river profile. This might
help constrain the model space and make the calibration less dependent on the starting
guess of the model.
The calibrated model parameters and 95 % confidence intervals for γ, δ, and datum
can be seen in figure 6.10. The remaining parameters were calibrated to be
s1 = 2.01 ± 1.2 m
s2 = 1.00 ± 0.06 m
s3 = 0.77 ± 0.06 m
s4 = 0.98 ± 0.06 m
offset = 1.3 ± 6.7 m
The 95 % confidence intervals are very wide as a result of a vague regularization. Fur-
thermore the model parameters have converged to values not far from their respective
starting guesses, presumably due to an extremely non-convex model space. Additional
tests showed that different sets of starting guesses also converged to solutions close to
their starting values, but not necessarily to good solutions that could predict the water
levels. As a consequence a good starting guess for the model must be chosen in order for
the model to converge to a reasonable solution. It is likely that a better regularization
will alter the model space, such that the starting guess is less significant. If this is not
the case, global optimization algorithms should be considered, such that the solution
model is not as dependent on the starting guess.
The Jacobians related to each of the spatially distributed model parameters can be
seen in figure 6.11. They have the expected diagonal structure, and some off-diagonal
noise is seen. As discussed previously the noise is related to the discretization of the
flow area and conveyance curves. The noise is not of insignificant magnitude, as it was
Figure 6.10: Optimum of the spatially distributed model parameters when calibrating
using the flow area and conveyance parameterization and real altimetry data. Blue marks
model parameters with 95 % confidence intervals. Orange marks the optimum γ and δ
parameters, but without the confidence intervals. Yellow mark the datum base line.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
85
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.11: Jacobians related to spatially distributed model parameters in the calibra-
tion of flow area and conveyance using real altimetry data. (a) γ. (b) δ. (c) Datum.
the case for the synthetic study. However, the diagonal signal is clearly dominant, and
the results are good, so the noise is accepted. In future work, a lower noise signal would
increase the credibility of the results.
Based on the in-situ surveyed cross sections expected flow area curves have been com-
puted and plotted along with the calibrated flow area curves in figure 6.12. Expected
conveyance curves could not be computed, because the bed resistance is unknown, so
the calibrated conveyance curves will not be plotted due to the absence of reference.
The calibrated slopes of the flow area curves, δ, are generally smaller than for the in-
situ surveyed cross sections. This discrepancy is not expected to be due to ambiguity,
because synthetic studies indicated that δ mostly is ambiguous in the sense that it com-
pensates for errors in bed slope, and it is not expected that the bed slope is wrong in
the majority of the river. Additional calibrations confirmed this by showing that models
with slopes closer to the in-situ flow area curves can not predict low and high water
depths. Physically a high δ indicate a wide channel perhaps with a large flood plain,
==PAGE:96==
86
6 Calibration with real data
Figure 6.12: Calibrated flow area curves (red), and the nearest flow area curves from surveyed cross sections upstream
(blue) and downstream (green).
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Calibration of flow area and conveyance
87
Figure 6.13: Validation against in-situ observations, using the flow area-conveyance
calibration method. The fits are quantified by RMSE: Harbin = 0.83 m, Tonghe = 0.33
m, Yilan = 0.43 m, Jiamusi = 1.00 m.
==PAGE:98==
88
6 Calibration with real data
and a low δ indicate a narrow channel. If the results of the calibration can be trusted,
this means that the river channel has undergone changes since it was surveyed in 1999.
A part of the explanation might be installation of more dykes along the river stretch
which would prevent the river from spilling to the flood plain, and higher water levels
would be seen in main channel. Asian Development Bank (2011) for instance report a
larger construction project along the Songhua from 2003-2009 including improvement of
existing dykes and establishment of new ones. It seems unlikely, however, that this can
constitute the entire explanation.
The model has been validated against independent water level observations at 4
gauging stations. Figure 6.13 shows the observed and predicted water levels, and it is
seen that all 4 time series can be predicted to a very high degree and with residuals that
appear independent. The fits are quantified:
RMSE(Harbin) = 0.38 m
RMSE(Tonghe) = 0.30 m
RMSE(Yilan) = 0.43 m
RMSE(Jiamusi) = 0.38 m
Note that the RMSE for Harbin is only based on data from 2009-2014, because it can not
be expected that the model can predict the rising water levels after the establishment
of the dam.
In conclusion it has been possible to calibrate flow area and conveyance such that the
optimum model could produce accurate water level predictions. This shows the potential
of the method, but there are still several challenges to be overcome before the method
can be applied confidently. These include: 1) A more consistent regularization scheme
must be found to avoid under- or over-fitting. 2) The optimum model must be less
dependent on the starting model, either by better regularization or by implementing
a global optimization algorithm. 3) Noise in the Jacobians should be decreased. 4)
The non-physical behavior of the river profile during very high water levels should be
investigated further and eliminated.
6.3
Summary
Using real altimetry data it has been possible to calibrate hydrodynamic models using
two approaches. In both cases altimetry observed water levels and independent in-situ
validation water levels could be predicted to a satisfactory degree. However, several chal-
lenges regarding non-convex model space, regularization, and modelization error were
encountered.
When calibrating bed resistance using in-situ surveyed cross sections, it was seen that
a line search of the regularization parameter produced an inconclusive L-curve. The issue
was overcome by analyzing the line search with a more manual approach, where balance
==PAGE:99==
6.3 Summary
89
between low RMSE and elimination of oscillations in the model was achieved. The reg-
ularization was performed under an assumption of smooth variations of bed resistance
along the river stretch, although there is no actual evidence supporting this claim. If
the real bed resistance does not vary smoothly, the 2nd order Tikhonov regularization
will prevent the model from converging to the true solution.
Setting up the calibration problem using the flow area-conveyance method brought
many challenges. The optimum solution is strongly dependent on starting guess indi-
cating a non-convex model space. Furthermore, the type of regularization could not
be chosen based on any physical a-priori knowledge. Therefore simple dampening was
implemented by 0th order Tikhonov regularization. There were moreover several model
parameters to be regularized, each with their own regularization parameters. A line
search could thus not be performed and the regularization parameters had to be chosen
using a trial and error approach, only evaluated based on how well model predictions
fit the data. This approach is not ideal, and there is not guarantee that the data is
not over- or under-fitted. In future work the calibration should be performed in a more
consistent framework.
Significant modelization error was present in both calibrations, because there is an
unmodeled dam around chainage 75 km. The effect of the unmodeled dam was promi-
nent when calibrating bed resistance. The bed resistance in the upstream was high in
order to restrain the water and compensate for the unmodeled dam. Furthermore, the
drop in water level seen in the altimetry observations could not be predicted by the
model, and a much smoother transition was seen. Using the flow area-conveyance ap-
proach the water levels in the vicinity of the dam were predicted slightly better.
Despite challenges, calibration of hydrodynamic models using real altimetry data
showed reasonable results. The two models were validated against independent water
levels measured in-situ at 4 gauging stations. The model where bed resistance was cali-
brated predicted the water levels with RMSE(Harbin) = 1.28 m, RMSE(Tonghe) = 0.42
m, RMSE(Yilan) = 0.39 m, and RMSE(Jiamusi) = 0.34 m, and the model where flow
area and conveyance were calibrated predicted the water levels with RMSE(Harbin) =
0.38 m, RMSE(Tonghe) = 0.30 m, RMSE(Yilan) = 0.43 m, and RMSE(Jiamusi) = 0.38
m. The flow area-conveyance method’s ability to predict independent observations is a
very promising result, but the credibility of the method can not yet be fully established
due to noise in the Jacobian, strong dependency of the starting guess of the model, and
unphysical behavior of the river profile for very high water levels. If these challenges can
be solved, the flow area-conveyance method could be a very attractive approach when
calibrating hydrodynamic models, where surveyed cross sections are not available.
==PAGE:100==
90
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
The main result of this thesis was presenting a new method of parameterizing and cali-
brating a hydrodynamic model without assuming any specific cross sectional geometry.
The value of the new parameterization method was emphasized by comparing it to more
traditional methods where simple cross sectional geometries were assumed.
A hydrodynamic model is mathematically described by the Saint-Venant equations
and traditionally they are solved for water level and discharge using information about
cross sectional geometries and bed resistance. CryoSat-2 altimetry provide spatially dis-
tributed water level data, which can be exploited to inform a hydrodynamic model and
calibrate spatially distributed bed resistance and simple cross sectional geometries. In
the hydrodynamic simulation, bed resistance and cross sectional geometries are solely
used for the purpose of computing flow area and conveyance as functions of water level.
That means if the flow area and conveyance are calibrated directly, no assumptions
about cross sectional geometry are necessary, which is the driving idea behind the new
parameterization approach.
A preliminary study of different optimization algorithms was performed in order to
create the best possible calibration framework. The results showed that Broyden up-
dates of the Jacobian can be implemented in order to decrease the number of function
evaluations resulting in computational time being decreased by a factor between 2 and
10. This approach makes a search of the regularization parameter space feasible, such
that good values can be chosen. If the problem just has a single regularization parameter,
a line-search can be implemented, and the regularization parameter can be chosen in a
consistent way according to for instance an L-curve. A consistent method of searching a
multidimensional calibration parameter space and choosing the best values has not been
implemented in this work, but the fast calibration algorithm utilizing Broyden updates
brings opportunity for more combinations of regularization parameters to be tested in
a trial and error manner.
The simplest calibration problem encountered in this work uses cross sections that
have been surveyed in-situ, such that the only parameters left to be calibrated are spa-
tially distributed bed resistance. Using regularization promoting smoothness, synthetic
studies showed that it was possible to predict water levels to the degree of the data
noise, and that the calibrated bed resistance was close to the synthetic truth. When
calibrating against real world altimetry observations of water level, however, issues were
encountered.
A dam in the upstream part of the river was not included in the hy-
==PAGE:102==
92
7 Conclusions
drodynamic model, causing significant modelization error. The sudden drop in water
level by the dam was smoothed in the model predictions, and in order to fit the high
water levels of the upstream reservoir the calibration compensated with very high bed
resistance. Despite some issues, the calibration using real altimetry observations was
generally successful, and model predictions of water levels were consistent with the in-
dependent validation dataset (RMSE’s 34 cm to 42 cm) except in the upstream due to
the significant modelization error (RMSE = 1.28 m).
In many real world problems, information about cross sectional geometry is not avail-
able, either due to poor data sharing, inaccessible areas, or simply because such surveys
are expensive and inconvenient. The traditional approach to overcome this challenge is
to assume a simple geometry characterized by a minimum of free parameters and cali-
brate those. Synthetic studies using this approach showed it was possible to fit water
levels to a satisfactory degree, despite several issues. The first issue seen regarded high
flood events that were consistently overestimated if a rectangular shape was assumed,
because over-bank spills were not possible. Implementing a double rectangular cross sec-
tion solved this issue. However, there was not enough data to constrain the calibration
of the bankfull stage parameter. But most importantly, the synthetic studies revealed
significant ambiguity between the model parameters, meaning that the bed resistance
parameters did not only represent bed resistance, but also took on the role of compen-
sating for poorly estimated cross sectional geometries. As a consequence the calibrated
models can not be trusted to represent physical reality, and can thus not be trusted to
produce reliable water levels for operational flood forecasting.
The ambiguity issues between bed resistance and cross sectional geometries have mo-
tivated the development of a new parameterization method. Flow area and conveyance
as functions of flow depth can be calibrated directly, because they can be parameter-
ized as power law relationships. A synthetic study of the new parameterization method
showed promising results. Water levels, including high flood events, were predicted sat-
isfactorily with RMSE = 0.24 m compared to the synthetic data noise level of 0.2 m.
Furthermore, it was seen that the flow area and conveyance curves were close to the
synthetic truth, indicating that calibrated models can be trusted to represent physical
reality to a much higher extent than when using approximated cross sectional geometries.
Implementing the new method with real world data was also successful to some de-
gree. Residuals had RMSE = 1.31 m and good agreement between model predictions
and validation data was seen with RMSEs between 30 and 43 cm. However, the new
parameterization method still has challenges to be overcome regarding regularization
and optimization in a non-convex model space. The next steps toward a finished cali-
bration framework should include determining a consistent regularization procedure and
testing global optimization algorithms. Despite some unsolved challenges, this work has
shown the potential of the flow area-conveyance parameterization method by synthetic
studies and calibration with real altimetry data. The work has been focused on a sin-
gle case study of the Songhua river. To validate the method a much larger statistic is
==PAGE:103==
7 Conclusions
93
needed, and future work should therefore include studies similar to this for several rivers.
Global monitoring of inland waters with satellite altimetry was a significant break-
through in hydrology research, because having an available and timely global dataset,
independent of national boundaries and inaccessible or dangerous areas, paved the way
for operational forecasting systems (Jiang et al. 2017b). Furthermore the high spatial
resolution of CryoSat-2 opened up the possibility of calibrating spatially distributed hy-
drodynamic models. However, unavailable or non-existent surveys of river bathymetry
has been a limiting factor in hydrodynamics.
Steps to overcome this issue has pre-
viously been taken by implementing and calibrating simple cross sectional geometries.
This work showed that simultaneous calibration of bed resistance and simple cross sec-
tional shapes leads to severe model ambiguity, which cause the calibrated models to be
unrepresentative of physical reality, thus limiting their credibility for water level forecast-
ing. Motivated by these issues a new method of parameterizing a hydrodynamic model
was developed, where flow area and conveyance are calibrated directly, independent of
any specific assumptions about cross sectional geometry. The new method is not yet
fully developed, but testing in a synthetic environment and using real altimetry data
from the Songhua river showed promising results. Combining satellite altimetry and the
new flow area-conveyance parameteriztion, where no specific cross sectional geometry is
assumed, allows calibration of a spatially distributed hydrodynamic model that can pre-
dict water levels and represent physical reality in an accurate manner, which is crucial
in for operational forecasting and flood risk analysis.
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
References
Andreadis, K. M., Schumann, G. J.-P., & Pavelsky, T. (2013). A simple global river
bankfull width and depth database. Water Resources Research.
Asian Development Bank. (2011). People’s republic of china: Songhua river flood man-
agement sector project. Asien Development Bank.
Aster, R. C., Borchers, B., & Thurber, C. H. (2013). Parameter estimation and inverse
problems (2nd edition). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-385048-5.00001-X
Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2019). River routing – 12320 lecture notes. Technical University of
Denmark.
Belge, M., Kilmer, M. E., & Miller, E. L. (2002). Efficient determination of multiple
regularization parameters in a generalized l-curve framework. Inverse Problems,
18(4), 1161–1183. doi:10.1088/0266-5611/18/4/314
Biancamaria, S., Bates, P. D., Boone, A., & Mognard, N. M. (2009). Large-scale coupled
hydrologic and hydraulic modelling of the ob river in siberia. Journal of Hydrology,
379(1-2), 136–150. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2009.09.054
Biancamaria, S., Hossain, F., & Lettenmaier, D. P. (2011). Forecasting transboundary
river water elevations from space. Geophysical Research Letters, 38(11), L11401.
doi:10.1029/2011gl047290
Broyden, C. G. (1965). A class of methods for solving nonlinear simultaneous equations.
Mathematics of Computation, 19(92), 577–593. doi:128.84.234.43
Chow, V. T. (1959). Open channel hydraulics. McGraw-Hill.
Chow, V. T., Maidment, D. R., & Mays, L. W. (1988). Applied hydrology. McGraw-Hill.
Constable, S. C., Parker, R. L., & Constable, C. G. (1987). Occam’s inversion: A practi-
cal algorithm for generating smooth models from electromagnetic sounding data.
Geophysics, 52(3), 289–300. doi:10.1190/1.1442303
De Paiva, R. C. D., Buarque, D. C., Collischonn, W., Bonnet, M. P., Frappart, F.,
Calmant, S., & Bulhões Mendes, C. A. (2013). Large-scale hydrologic and hydro-
dynamic modeling of the amazon river basin. Water Resources Research, 49(3),
1226–1243.
==PAGE:106==
96
References
Dentler, A. (2015). Levenberg-marquardt toolbox for matlab. Retrieved from https :
//se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/53449-levenberg-marquardt-
toolbox
DHI. (n.d.). DHI GitHub for MIKE 1D. Retrieved December 18, 2019, from https :
//github.com/DHI/Mike1D-SDK-examples
DHI. (2017). Mike 1d - reference manual. Copenhagen. Retrieved from http://manuals.
mikepoweredbydhi.help/2017/Water_Resources/MIKE_1D_reference.pdf
Domeneghetti, A. (2016). On the use of srtm and altimetry data for flood modeling
in data-sparse regions. Water Resources Research, 52(4), 2901–2918. doi:10.1002/
2015wr017967
Domeneghetti, A., Castellarin, A., Tarpanelli, A., & Moramarco, T. (2015). Investigat-
ing the uncertainty of satellite altimetry products for hydrodynamic modelling.
Hydrological Processes, 29(23), 4908–4918. doi:10.1002/hyp.10507
Domeneghetti, A., Tarpanelli, A., Brocca, L., Barbetta, S., Moramarco, T., Castellarin,
A., & Brath, A. (2014). The use of remote sensing-derived water surface data
for hydraulic model calibration. Remote Sensing of Environment, 149, 130–141.
doi:10.1016/j.rse.2014.04.007
Durand, M., Gleason, C. J., Garambois, P. A., Bjerklie, D., Smith, L. C., Roux, H., …
Vilmin, L. (2016). An intercomparison of remote sensing river discharge estimation
algorithms from measurements of river height, width, and slope. Water Resources
Research, 52(6), 4527–4549. doi:10.1002/2015wr018434
Engelund, F. (1966). Hydraulic resistance of alluvial streams. American Society of Civil
Engineers – Proceedings, 92, 315–326.
Farquharson, C. G., & Oldenburg, D. (2004). A comparison of automatic techniques for
estimating the regularization parameter in non-linear inverse problems. Geophysi-
cal Journal International, 156(3), 411–425. doi:10.1111/j.1365-246X.2004.02190.x
Finlay, C. (2018). Lecture notes for 30760 - inverse problems in earth and space physics.
Course material, DTU, Kgs. Lyngby.
Garbrecht, J. (1990). Analytical representation of cross-section hydraulic-properties.
Journal of Hydrology, 119(1-4), 43–56. doi:10.1016/0022-1694(90)90033-T
Getirana, A. C., Boone, A., Yamazaki, D., & Mognard, N. (2013). Automatic parameter-
ization of a flow routing scheme driven by radar altimetry data : Evaluation in the
amazon basin. Water Resources Research, 49(1), 614–629. doi:10.1002/wrcr.20077
Hansen, P. C., Pereyra, V., & Scherer, G. (2013). Least squares data fitting with appli-
cations, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Jiang, L., Madsen, H., & Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2019). Simultaneous calibration of multiple
hydrodynamic model parameters using satellite altimetry observations of water
==PAGE:107==
References
97
surface elevation in the songhua river. Remote Sensing of Environment, 225, 229–
247. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2019.03.014
Jiang, L., Nielsen, K., Andersen, O. B., & Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2017a). Cryosat-2 radar
altimetry for monitoring freshwater resources of china. Remote Sensing of Envi-
ronment, 200, 125–139. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2017.08.015
Jiang, L., Schneider, R., Andersen, O. B., & Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2017b). Cryosat-2
altimetry applications over rivers and lakes. Water, 9(3). doi:10.3390/w9030211
Leopold, L. B., & Maddock, T. (1953). The hydraulic geometry of stream channels and
some physiographic implications. US Geological Survey Professional Papers, 252.
doi:10.3133/pp252
Liu, G., Schwartz, F. W., Tseng, K. H., & Shum, C. K. (2015). Discharge and water-
depth estimates for ungauged rivers: Combining hydrologic, hydraulic, and inverse
modeling with stage and water-area measurements from satellites. Water Resources
Research, 51(8), 6017–6035. doi:10.1002/2015wr016971
Madsen, K., Nielsen, H. B., & Tingleff, O. (2004). Methods for non-linear least squares
problems (2nd ed.) Retrieved from http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/
publication_details.php?id=3215
Menger, K. (1930). Untersuchungen über allgemeine metrik. Mathematische Annalen,
103(1), 466–501. doi:10.1007/BF01455705
Moody, J. A., & Troutman, B. M. (2002). Characterization of the spatial variability of
channel morphology. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 27(12), 1251–1266.
doi:10.1002/esp.403
MWR. (2014). China water statistical yearbook. Beijing: China Water Power Press.
Nielsen, H. B. (2010). Immoptibox: A matlab toolbox for optimization and data fitting.
Version 2.2. Retrieved from http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/projects/immoptibox/
Nocedal, J., & J.Wright, S. (2006). Numerical optimization (2nd edition) (T. V. Mikosch,
S. M. Robinson, & S. I. Resnick, Eds.). Springer.
Pavlis, N. K., Holmes, S. A., Kenyon, S. C., & Factor, J. K. (2012). The development and
evaluation of the earth gravitational model 2008 (egm2008). Journal of Geophysical
Research: Solid Earth, 117(4). doi:10.1029/2011JB008916
Pekel, J. F., Cottam, A., Gorelick, N., & Belward, A. S. (2016). High-resolution mapping
of global surface water and its long-term changes. Nature, 540(7633), 418–422.
doi:10.1038/nature20584
Petersen-Øverleir, A. (2005). A hydraulics perspective on the power-law stage-discharge
rating curve. Norges vassdrags- og energidirektorat.
Russell, B. (1946). History of western philosophy. Book 2: Catholic Philosophy, Part 2:
The Schoolmen, Chapter 14: Franciscan Schoolmen. doi:10.2307/2181652
==PAGE:108==
98
References
Schneider, R., Godiksen, P. N., Villadsen, H., Madsen, H., & Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2017).
Application of cryosat-2 altimetry data for river analysis and modelling. Hydrology
and Earth System Sciences, 21(2), 751–764. doi:10.5194/hess-21-751-2017
Schneider, R., Tarpanelli, A., Nielsen, K., Madsen, H., & Bauer-Gottwein, P. (2018).
Evaluation of multi-mode cryosat-2 altimetry data over the po river against in
situ data and a hydrodynamic model. Advances in Water Resources, 112, 17–26.
doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2017.11.027
Strelkoff, T. S., & Clemmens, A. J. (2000). Approximating wetted perimeter in power-
law cross section. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, 126(2), 98–109.
doi:10.1061/(asce)0733-9437(2000)126:2(98)
Tikhonov, A. N., & Arsenin, V. Y. (1977). Solutions of ill-posed problems (F. John,
Trans.). Scripta Series in Mathematics. Washington D.C.: V. H. Wonston & Sons.
Transtrum, M. K., & Sethna, J. P. (2012). Improvements to the levenberg-marquardt
algorithm for nonlinear least-squares minimization. arXiv.
USGS EROS Archive. (2000). Shuttle radar topography mission (strm). SRTM 1 Arc-
Second Global dataset. doi:/10.5066/F7PR7TFT
Vatankhah, A. R. (2018). Normal depth and wetted perimeter in general power-law
channels. Flow Measurement and Instrumentation, 64, 234–241. doi:10.1016/j.
flowmeasinst.2018.11.003
Wood, M., Hostache, R., Neal, J., Wagener, T., Giustarini, L., Chini, M., … Bates, P.
(2016). Calibration of channel depth and friction parameters in the lisflood-fp
hydraulic model using medium resolution sar data. Hydrology and Earth System
Sciences Discussions, 2016, 1–24. doi:10.5194/hess-2015-511
Yoon, Y., Durand, M., Merry, C. J., Clark, E. A., Andreadis, K. M., & Alsdorf, D. E.
(2012). Estimating river bathymetry from data assimilation of synthetic swot mea-
surements. Journal of Hydrology, 464-465, 363–375. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2012.07.
028
Zhao, R.-J. (1992). The xinanjiang model applied in china. Journal of Hydrology, 135,
371–381. doi:10.1016/0022-1694(92)90096-E
Zhou, R., & Xuefei, T. (2012). Dadingzishan reservoir – will it have a happy future ?
Retrieved January 19, 2020, from http://www.transrivers.org/2012/570/
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX A
Model statistics
RMSE
Root-mean-square-error (RMSE) quantify the fit between observations and predictions.
RMSE =
s
||r(x∗)||2
2
M
(A.1)
Covariance
The covariance matrix of the optimum model parameters x will be used to compute 95
% confidence intervals of the model parameters. If the residuals are small the covariance
of a non-linear problem may be estimated using the Jacobian
Cov(x) ≈σ2
d(J(x)TJ(x))−1
(A.2)
where σd is the standard deviation of the data errors and can be estimated
σd =
s
||r(x)||2
2
M −N
(A.3)
Confidence of model parameters
From the covariance matrix the 95 % confidence interval of the model parameters can
be computed
xi ± σx,itM−N(a/2)
(A.4)
where σx,i =
q
Cov(x)ii are the standard deviations of the model parameters, tM−N is
the student t-distribution of degree M −N, and a = 0.05 is defined by the 100(1 −a)%
confidence interval.
==PAGE:110==
100
A Model statistics
Confidence of model predictions
The 95 % confidence interval of the model predictions at data points is given
f(x) ± σftM−N(a/2)
(A.5)
where σf is the standard deviation of the model predictions which can be approximated
σf =
q
∇f(x)TCov(x)∇f(x)
(A.6)
Note that the gradient of the forward function is equal to the gradient of the objective
function, when the objective is to minimize the residuals. Therefore the gradient is given
∇f(x∗) = J(x∗)Tr(x∗).
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX B
Update schemes for the
Levenberg-Marquardt
dampening parameter
Update schemes of the Levenberg-Marquardt dampening parameter are outlined for
different implementations:
lsqnonlin:
MatLab’s own documentation describes the update scheme:
if ρk > 0 then
λk+1 := λk/10
else
λk+1 := λk · 10
end if
Dentler:
By inspecting the algorithm source code a complicated update scheme with many excep-
tions is seen, but in general it can be outlined:
if ρk > 0 then
λk+1 := max(λk/FactDamping, MinDamping)
else
if λk = MaxDamping then
λk+1 = InitDamping
else
λk+1 := min(λk · FactDamping2, MaxDamping)
end if
end if
where parameters can be adjusted by the user, but default values are FactDamping= 10,
MaxDamping= 107, MinDamping= 10−7, and InitDamping= 10−2.
==PAGE:112==
102
B Update schemes for the Levenberg-Marquardt dampening parameter
immoptibox:
The update scheme is given in Madsen et al. (2004):
if ρk > 0 then
λk+1 := λk · max
h
1
3, 1 −(2ρk −1)3i
;
νk+1 := 2
else
λk+1 := λk · νk;
νk+1 := 2νk
end if
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX C
Supplementary synthetic
studies
The simplest possible calibration framework is implemented for the following supplemen-
tary synthetic studies. The detailed framework is described in section 5.1, but in short:
Cross sections are well known, and bed resistance is calibrated using synthetic data.
All calibrations are performed with the immoptibox implementation of the Levenberg-
Marquardt algorithm.
C.1
Effect of regularization method
In this appendix the effects of four different types of regularization are studied; Tikhonov
regularization of degrees 0, 1, and 2 (explained in section 4.1.1), and a regularization
where the 1-norm of the model complexity is minimized, i.e.
min
x ϕ(x) = min
x
n
(||r(x)||2
2 + α2||Lx||2
1
o
(C.1)
Equations for implementing the 1-norm regularization are given below in section C.1.1.
All results in this section have been found by performing a line search of α and
solution models at the corner are used. The residuals between the synthetic truth and
the model predictions were independent and normally distributed in all cases, and the
respective RMSE’s can be seen in table C.1.
Synthetic data
Regularization type
RMSE
||xtrue −xopt||2
Offset
Sine
L2(0)
0.18 m
0.76
0.73 ± 0.14 m
Sine
L2(1)
0.19 m
0.21
0.90 ± 0.14 m
Sine
L2(2)
0.19 m
0.13
0.94 ± 0.14 m
Block
L1(1)
0.25 m
1.14
0.46 ± 0.18 m
Block
L2(2)
0.22 m
1.45
0.41 ± 0.15 m
Table C.1:
Comparing calibrations with different regularization and synthetic data
types.
==PAGE:114==
104
C Supplementary synthetic studies
Figure C.1: Optimum of the calibrated models with 95 % confidence intervals. Com-
parison of Tikhonov regularization degree.
Figure C.2: Optimum of the calibrated models with 95 % confidence intervals. Com-
paring regularization types for block shape model.
Three degrees of Tikhonov regularization (L2(0), L2(1), and L2(2)) were used to
calibrate synthetic data given smooth variations of bed resistance. Table C.1 and figure
C.1 show the results. All three methods fit the synthetic data with an RMSE close to
the data noise level of 0.2 m. The difference between the regularization methods are
found in their optimum models. The L2(1) and L2(2) regularizations produce smooth
models while the L2(0) regularized model is much more scattered. In table C.1 it is
quantified how close the optimum models are to the synthetic truth, and it is seen that
the L2(2) regularization is the best choice, if it can be assumed that the true model
varies smoothly with chainage.
Now consider a situation where the bed resistance can not be assumed to vary
smoothly with chainage. Jumps in bed resistance can occur due to sudden changes in
==PAGE:115==
C.1 Effect of regularization method
105
landscape or man made interference. Here it is tested whether jumps in bed resistance
can be captured in a calibrated model. Two types of regularization are implemented;
2nd order Tikhonov L2(2), and a 1st degree 1-norm L1(1). Preliminary studies showed
that L2(2) regularization performed better than the other degrees of Tikhonov regular-
ization, which are not shown here. The L1(1) regularization promotes model parameters
that are constant with chainage, but jumps are not penalized as strongly compared to
when the 2-norm is minimized, i.e. Tikhonov regularization. Comparison of the results
from the two methods can be seen in table C.1 and figure C.2. Both methods produce
reasonable water level predictions that are close to the data noise level of 0.2 m, but
the L2(2) perform slightly better in that sense. The optimum models, however, show
the effects of the regularization types. The L1(1) regularization clearly reproduce the
constant bed resistance better than the L2(2) regularization, which oscillates. However,
the results also show that it is generally difficult to calibrate a model to reproduce block
shaped bed resistance.
C.1.1
Equations for implementing 1-norm regularization
In order to implement the 1-norm on relevant parameters, the objective function should
be posed on the form:
ϕ(x)|p=1 =


"
r(x) + bias
α
√
Lx
#

2
2
(C.2)
The Jacobian can be reused in a line search of α because the last N rows of the
Jacobian can be derived from finite differences:


α1L1
√
|x01|+relstep|x01|−√
|x01|
relstep|x01|
...
αkLk
√
|x0k|+relstep|x0k|−√
|x0k|
relstep|x0k|


where x0k is the starting guess of a model parameter and relstep is a relative step size.
==PAGE:116==
106
C Supplementary synthetic studies
C.2
Effects of noise
C.2.1
Higher noise levels
The synthetic study has been carried out for data with a noise level of 0.2 m. It is
expected that altimetry data has a higher noise level, so the performance of a calibration
using synthetic data with normally distributed noise of standard deviation 0.6 m has
been tested. A line search of the regularization parameter was performed, and the model
at the L-curve corner was chosen. The synthetic water levels were fitted with RMSE
= 0.63 m. The results in figures C.3 show that the optimum model does not capture
the synthetic truth to the same degree, as when synthetic data with noise level 0.2 m
was used. However, the optimum model does capture the general shape, and the water
levels are predicted to the noise level.
(a)
(b)
Figure C.3:
Calibration results using synthetic data with noise level 0.6 m.
(a)
Optimum model. (b) Predicted and synthetic water levels.
==PAGE:117==
C.2 Effects of noise
107
C.2.2
Solution instability
In the early stages of this work a good example of solution instability occurred by chance.
A synthetic dataset was created and normally distributed noise of standard deviation
0.2 m was added. When using the synthetic data in a calibration the optimum model
was very far from the synthetic truth.
Even if the synthetic truth was used as the
starting guess in the calibration, the optimum converged to the same wrong solution.
That indicates it was not due to starting in an inconvenient place of a non-convex model
space, or due to the principle of inverse problems having non-unique solutions. A second
dataset was created, using the exact same synthetic truth, and adding equivalent random
data noise, that was normally distributed and with standard deviation 0.2 m. Using
this dataset the calibration converged to an optimum solution close to the synthetic
truth. Studying the residuals and the jacobians did not indicate any differences between
the two calibrations. In the end, it must be concluded that the principle of inverse
problems being unstable with respect to small changes in the data is the explanation.
This example shows that even very small differences in data noise can have a huge impact
on the optimum solution, also if regularization is implemented. This must always be
kept in mind, when solving real world inverse problems.
Figure C.4: Two very different optimum models using the same synthetic truth but
two sets of equivalent data noise.
==PAGE:118==
108
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX D
Supplementary figures
D.1
Gauging station cross sections through
time
Figure D.1: Cross sections of the river bed surveyed at Yilan gauging station. Note
that the x-coordinates of the 1999 cross section is measured from a different reference
point than the rest, so it is manually translated to fit.
Figure D.2: Cross sections of the river bed surveyed at Jiamusi gauging station. Note
that the x-coordinates of the 1999 cross section is measured from a different reference
point than the rest, so it is manually translated to fit.
==PAGE:120==
110
D Supplementary figures
D.2
Power law fits
Figure D.3: Flow area [m2] as a function of flow depth [m] on a loglog scale for 70 measured cross sectional
profiles in the Songhua river. Measurements are plotted with red, the best fitting power law model is plotted with
blue.
==PAGE:121==
D.2 Power law fits
111
Figure D.4: Conveyance [m3/s] as a function of flow depth [m] on a loglog scale for 70 measured cross sectional profiles
in the Songhua river and with assumed bed resistance n = 0.03 s/m1/3. Measurements are plotted with red, the best fitting
power law model is plotted with blue.
==PAGE:122==
112
D Supplementary figures
D.3
Comparing LM implementations
Figure D.5: Optimum of the calibrated models with 95% confidence intervals.
Figure D.6: Histograms of residuals. They are close to normally distributed.
Figure D.7: Residuals vs. water level predictions. No trends indicate independency.
==PAGE:123==
D.4 Occam vs. Levenberg-Marquardt
113
D.4
Occam vs. Levenberg-Marquardt
Figure D.8: Histograms of residuals. The black curve is a normal distribution fit.
Figure D.9: Final iteration Jacobians sorted after chainage.
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
==PAGE:126==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.env.dtu.dk
