==PAGE:1==
Cascaded Mid-infrared
Supercontinuum Lasers
Rasmus Eilkær Hansen
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics
Ørsteds Plads, bygning 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate and optimise cascaded mid-infrared
supercontinuum lasers, targeting a spectrum extending as far as possible into
infrared, with a high average power in the wavelength range over 5.5µm. This
will be done using a sophisticated numerical model called the Generalised Non-
Linear Schrödinger Equation (GNLSE). The cascade consists of ﬁve individual
ﬁbres, each deﬁned by their own optical properties, tailored for the speciﬁc po-
sition in the cascade. The ﬁrst two steps in the cascade provide in-ampliﬁer
supercontinuum generation, in an Erbium/Ytterbium doped silica ﬁbre, and
a Thulium doped silica ﬁbre, respectively. The next ﬁber is a ZBLAN ﬁber,
which has similar optical properties to silica, but with the ability to eﬀectively
guide light at wavelengths up to 4.5µm. The last two ﬁbres are made of the
chalcogenide glasses As2S3, and As2Se3, deﬁned by their high nonlinearity, and
ability to guide light far into the mid-infrared. The optical properties are; eﬀec-
tive refractive index, eﬀective area, Raman response, loss, gain, and nonlinear
refractive index. All of the optical properties serve as input parameters to the
numerical model. The ability to give quantitatively - or even qualitatively, cor-
rect results, or recommendations on design parameters for a ﬁbre cascade is
limited by the validity of the input parameters. Therefore, a large part of this
thesis is dedicated to how to obtain these correctly, whether it is experimentally,
numerically, or using analytical results.
Results of the ﬁrst 3 ﬁbres are compared to experimentally obtained spectra,
from the same ﬁbre setup.
This allows veriﬁcation of the numerical results.
Furthermore, it allows direct recommendations on how to continue the existing
ﬁbre cascade.
The simulations have shown that the main broadening processes in the chalco-
genide ﬁbres are self phase modulation in As2S3, followed by Raman induced
==PAGE:4==
ii
continuous red-shifting, from a temporally broad spectrum in As2Se3. The ﬁ-
nal obtained spectrum extends to 11.85µm, with 14.6mW of average power at
wavelengths above 5.5µm.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
The thesis deals with mid-infrared supercontinuum generation. It serves as my
Masters project according to the requirements of a Master’s degree in Physics
and Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work
was carried out between 26. of August 2019 and 26. of January 2020. The work
presented in the thesis was carried out by me, except when otherwise indicated,
and the thesis was written exclusively by myself.
The thesis was carried out under the guidance and help of my three supervisors:
Ole Bang, Christian Rosenberg Petersen, and Mikkel Jensen.
Lyngby, 26-January-2020
Rasmus Eilkær Hansen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Mikkel, Christian, and Ole for all the
guidance through the project. I look forward to three more years in the group.
Thank you to Simon, Mark, Asbjørn and my lovely parents, Inger and Ole, for
reading through this manuscript. It has been tremendously helpful in the last
weeks of the project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
EDS Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy. 22–24, 40
EYDF Erbium-Ytterbium Doped Fiber. xiii, xiv, 2, 5, 15–17, 20, 22, 23, 25,
36, 38, 39, 46–48, 51, 66, 69, 70
FEM Finite Element. 34, 78
FFT Fast Fourier Transform. 13, 65
FM Fundamental Mode. 27–29, 34
GNLSE Generalised Non-Linear Schrödinger Equation. i, 4, 5, 7, 11, 13, 65,
71
HOM Higher Order Mode. 27, 28, 34, 51, 67
IR Infrared. 1–4, 16, 32, 38, 49, 51, 56, 57, 60, 67, 69, 70
LHS Left-Hand Side. 9, 17, 25, 27–29, 66
MI Modulational Instability. 20, 23, 46, 48, 70
MPD Mode Proﬁle Dispersion. x, 10
NA Numerical Aperture. 20, 22, 54
NLSE Non-Linear Schrödinger Equation. ix, 46, 54, 55
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of abbreviations
OCT Optical Coherence Tomography. 4
OPD Optical Path Diﬀerence. 25, 27, 28
OPPMN One Photon Per Mode Noise. 20, 46, 48, 70
OSA Optical Spectrum Analyser. 25, 27, 28, 45
OWB Optical Wave Breaking. 54–58
PCF Photonic Crystal Fiber. 1, 38
PML Perfectly Matched Layer. 77, 78
PSD Power Spectral Density. 16, 45, 46, 48–52, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62
RHS Right-Hand Side. 17, 25, 27–29, 66, 73
RIN Relative Intensity Noise. xiv, 19, 20, 45, 46, 62, 63, 69, 70
RR Repetition Rate. 20, 45
SDOM Standard Deviation Of the Mean. 62, 70
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope. 22–24, 40
SMC Single Mode Cutoﬀ. 20
SPM Self Phase Modulation. 34, 35, 51, 54–59, 67–69, 71
SRS Stimulated Raman Scattering. 58
XPM Cross Phase Modulation. 59
ZDW Zero Dispersion Wavelength. 21, 25, 32, 34, 51, 52, 54, 55, 57, 59, 60,
67–69
==PAGE:11==
List of Symbols
a - Fiber radius
A - Field envelope in NLSE
Aeﬀ- Eﬀective area
˜
Am - The envelope of the ﬁeld of mode m
c - Speed of light
dt - temporal resolution
dΩ- spectral resolution
D - Fiber dispersion
˜Em - The total electric ﬁeld of mode m
Em - The electric ﬁeld solution to the transverse electromagnetic problem for
mode m
bEm - Normalised electric ﬁeld solution to the transverse electromagnetic problem
for mode m
F[...] = F{...} - Fourier transform
F−1[...] = F−1{...} - Inverse Fourier transform
fR - Fractional Raman response
g - Gain curve
gR - Raman Gain curve
˜Gm - Phase shifted ﬁeld envelope of mode m, that is simulated
Hm - The magnetic ﬁeld solution to the transverse electromagnetic problem for
mode m
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Symbols
b
Hm - Normalised magnetic ﬁeld solution to the transverse electromagnetic prob-
lem for mode m
hR - Raman response function
ℏ- Reduced Planck constant
I - Intensity of light
Jm - mth order Bessel function
K - Correction factor introduced to treat Mode Proﬁle Dispersion
Km - mth order modiﬁed Bessel function of the second kind
L - Length of ﬁber
ncl - Cladding refractive index
nco - Core refractive index
neff - Eﬀective refractive index
n2 - Nonlinear refractive index
N - Normalisation factor introduced to the transverse ﬁeld solutions.
NA - Numerical Aperture
Nt - Number of points in time grid
Nph - Number of photons
Na - Number of relaxed ions
Ne - Number of excited ions
P0 - Input peak power
Pavg - Average power
PF - Factor treating the polarisation of pump and signal light in a Raman
response calculation from a Raman gain measurement.
P - Cauchy principal value
RR - Repetition Rate
TFWHM - Pulse Full Width Half Maximum, measured in power
vG - Group velocity
V - Normalised frequency parameter, indicating the number of modes in an
optical ﬁber
Wt - Width of time array
WΩ- Width of frequency array
α - Linear loss coeﬃcient
bβ = β - The propagation constant
bβl = βl - lth derivative of the propagation constant with respect to Ω
==PAGE:13==
xi
bβeff ≡ˆβ −ˆβ1|Ω=Ωp(Ω−Ω0)−ˆβ0|Ω=Ω0 - Eﬀective propagation constant, deﬁned
to simplify the equations in chapter 2.
γ =
n2Ω
cAeff - Nonlinear strength parameter
δ = k0
q
n2
eff −n2
cl
ϵ0 - Vacuum permittivity
ϵr - Relative permittivity
η - Coupling eﬃciency
κ = k0
q
n2co −n2
eff
λ - Wavelength of light
µ0 - Vacuum Permeability
σ - Chapter 2: Scattering cross section in gain ﬁbers - Chapter 3: Pulse width
τ1,2 - Time constants in the Raman response parametrisation
φ = (bβ −bβ1|Ω=ΩpΩ)z - Phase shift in the simulated ﬁeld envelope, introduced
by choosing a moving frame of reference
φ0 = (Ω0 bβ1|Ω=Ωp−bβ0|Ω=Ωp)z - Constant phase shift applied to the ﬁeld envelope
φrand - Random phase array, for the vacuum noise seed
χ(3) - Strength of the third order nonlinear interaction
ψ - Scalar transverse ﬁeld
ωp - Pump frequency in Raman gain measurement
Ω- Physical angular frequency
Ωp - Pump angular frequency
Ω0 - Center of calculation domain angular frequency
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of Symbols
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of abbreviations
vii
List of Symbols
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
7
2.1
Propagation equation and simpliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Numerical solver and grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Fibre ampliﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Input parameters for propagation equation
19
3.1
Input pulse and noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Eﬀective index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Material indices, and scalar analytical approach - EYDF
and Si:Tm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Measuring dispersion - ZBLAN and As2S3 . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
ZBLAN dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.4
Comparison of various approaches to obtain the dispersion
- As2S3 and As2Se3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Eﬀective area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Analytical treatment - EYDF, Si:Tm and ZBLAN
. . . .
36
==PAGE:16==
xiv
CONTENTS
3.3.2
Chalcogenides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
Fibre attenuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4.1
Analytical parametrisation - EYDF and Si:Tm . . . . . .
38
3.4.2
ZBLAN and chalcogenides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5
Raman response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5.1
EYDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5.2
Si:Tm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5.3
ZBLAN and chalcogenides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Results
45
4.1
Simulated and experimental results of the ﬁrst three ﬁbres . . . .
46
4.1.1
EYDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.2
Si:Tm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.3
ZBLAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Coupling eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3.1
As2S3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3.2
As2Se3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.3
Noise calculation on the ﬁnal spectrum
. . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Discussion
65
5.1
Importance of the SeH loss peak on the continuous red-shift ob-
served in As2Se3 ﬁbre
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2
Lack of continuous red-shift in As2S3 ﬁbre . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3
Cause of the constant RIN in As2Se3 ﬁbre . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Conclusion
71
A Raman time response from Raman gain measurement
73
B COMSOL implementation
77
B.1
COMSOL with MATLAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Since supercontinuum generation was ﬁrst observed in glasses in 1970 [1, 2] the
ﬁeld of supercontinuum generation has been under rapid development. A su-
percontinuum is commonly deﬁned by a spectrum of light, spanning more than
an octave.
Currently, supercontinuum generation has been observed in a myriad of materi-
als, each with diﬀerent properties which allow tailoring for speciﬁc applications.
With the invention of the optical ﬁbre, and later the Photonic Crystal Fiber
(PCF) [3] a large new parameter space was introduced to speciﬁcally engineer
the dispersion, nonlinearity and loss properties [1, 4]. Since then supercontin-
uum lasers have found many commercial applications, especially in the visible,
and near-Infrared region, with the development of sources spearheaded by the
Danish company NKT Photonics.
The focus of this thesis is mid-Infrared (IR) supercontinuum generation specif-
ically targeting the organic ﬁngerprint spectrum above 5.5µm. The spectrum
above 5.5µm was chosen as Ole Bang in private conversations with medical doc-
tors has learned that this region is of interest for tissue imaging.
Supercontinuum laser light is a promising candidate for many applications in
the mid-IR regime. Currently, the options are either a thermal source, which
is limited by a very low brightness in all directions, although at a low cost,
or a synchrotron source, which oﬀers a much higher brightness but at a very
high construction- and running cost. A supercontinuum source could provide
a reasonably priced, table-top, turn-key, coherent source, from a ﬁbre output,
==PAGE:18==
2
Introduction
1.55µm
2.3µm
EYDF
2.8µm
Si:Tm
2.8µm
PM1950
4.5µm
ZBLAN
7µm
As2S3
13µm
As2Se3
Figure 1.1: The ﬁbre cascade being considered. The properties of each ﬁbre
piece help push the spectrum of the input pulse at 1.56 µm further
into IR. Si:Tm is a Thulium-doped silica ﬁbre. The relative lengths
in this ﬁgure are not to scale. The numbers indicate the IR spectral
edge at the given point in the cascade.
which makes it easily integrable. Potentially, a supercontinuum source will also
provide a higher brightness than even a synchrotron source [5]. On the websites
of the manufacturers of mid-IR supercontinuum laser sources, (Thorlabs, Novae,
Leukos, NKT Photonics, NP Photonics, NORBLIS), no mid-IR sources extend-
ing further than 5.5µm are currently advertised, except a, not yet available,
NORBLIS source [6], extending to 10µm. The currently available commercial
sources going to the highest wavelength are based on ZBLAN or InF3 [7] and
the spectra extend up to their loss edges at approximately 4.5µm and 5µm, re-
spectively. Extensive numerical work has been done on modelling ZBLAN ﬁbres
[8, 9, 10]. In this work the analysis is extended to propagation in chalcogenide
glasses, characterised by their high nonlinearity and ability to guide light far
into the mid-IR, using the obtained ZBLAN spectrum as input. Chalcogenide
glasses are a group of glasses containing any group 16 element (chalcogen) ex-
cept Oxygen. Speciﬁcally, As2S3, and As2Se3 are used in this work, and will be
referred to as the chalcogenides in the remaining thesis.
Experimentally, spectra extending further than 13µm, thus covering a large part
of the molecular ﬁngerprint region, have been obtained [11]. In another study a
spectrum extending to 11.4µm with an average power of 139mW was obtained
[12]. Chalcogenide supercontinuum generation has also been investigated nu-
merically [13], so the novelty of this thesis is simulating it as a cascade. In
ﬁgure 1.1 the considered ﬁbre cascade is shown. Each piece of ﬁbre shown has
its own speciﬁc purpose:
• Erbium-Ytterbium Doped Fiber (EYDF): The purpose of this ﬁbre
is in-ampliﬁer supercontinuum generation. The gain band in Erbium is
used to amplify the input pulse at 1560nm, where the purpose of the
Ytterbium is increasing the eﬃciency of the gain [14]. As shown in ﬁgure
1.1 the spectrum in this ﬁbre can potentially extend all the way to the IR
loss edge of silica at 2300nm
• Thulium doped silica (Si:TM): Similarly, to the EYDF the purpose of
this ﬁbre is in-ampliﬁer supercontinuum generation. Tm has a loss band
around the input pump, and gain bands at around 1900nm and 2300nm.
==PAGE:19==
3
The high wavelength gain bands help push the spectrum further than
the silica loss edge. The absorption band helps reduce the power at low
wavelengths. Reduction of the low wavelength power is of interest, as it
can lead to degradation in the later ﬁbres.
• PM1950: This ﬁbre is used as a mode adaptor in the coupling between
the Tm-doped silica ﬁbre and ZBLAN. As this ﬁbre is passive, and rather
short (around 20cm), it is assumed that it does not change the spectral
properties of the light, and it is therefore not included in the simulations.
• ZBLAN: ZBLAN is an abbreviation of its constituents (ZrF4-BaF2-LaF3-
AlF3-NaF). In the ZBLAN ﬁbre the spectrum is extended further into the
mid-IR, using similar optical properties to silica, except for the loss edge
at 4.5µm.
• As2S3: With a loss edge at approximately 6.7µm, and nonlinearity two
orders of magnitude higher than silica, As2S3 facilitates extending the
spectrum far into the mid-IR with a very short piece of ﬁbre. The main
reason why this ﬁbre is included instead of just using As2Se3, is because
it has much better power handling capabilities [15].
• As2Se3: The loss edge lies at approximately 12µm with a nonlinearity
even bigger than As2S3. The bandwidth of the spectrum is potentially
doubled in this ﬁbre.
Although supercontinuum laser sources achieving a spectrum further than 13µm
using only As2Se3 have been achieved [11, 16], a cascade is still preferable. The
low wavelength loss edge of the chalcogenides is well into the near-IR. Further-
more, the dispersion in the chalcogenides is very high for low wavelengths, which
leads to ineﬃcient spectral broadening due to temporal broadening. Thus, if the
As2Se3 ﬁber was to be pumped directily, the input laser must be in mid-IR. Mid-
IR laser sources are expensive, whereas near-IR solid-state and semiconductor
lasers can be much cheaper [5].
For the setup which is considered in this thesis, most parameters are set for
all ﬁbres. However, the length of ZBLAN, As2S3 and As2Se3 will be optimised
numerically, with the purpose of extending the spectrum as far as possible, as
well as maximising the power over 5.5µm.
The framework is able to test many diﬀerent ﬁbre designs by changing the in-
put parameters, this includes tapering, micro structured ﬁbres, and diﬀerent
materials. Furthermore, the optimum lengths of the ﬁbres can be more easily
determined numerically than experimentally, as the spectrum can be investi-
gated in a single simulation, at any propagation length. Being able to optimise
within this rather large parameter space numerically, is a powerful tool, as ob-
taining similar results experimentally is extremely time costly, especially since
ZBLAN and the chalcogenides are not as easy to work with as silica. It is equally
==PAGE:20==
4
Introduction
as important to note that the chalcogenides are very expensive, so that length
optimisation of these is a costly aﬀair.
Numerical investigations are performed with the Generalised Non-Linear Schrödinger
Equation (GNLSE), developed and implemented by Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm
[17]. If the optimisation is successful an improved mid-IR supercontinuum source
would be beneﬁcial for many applications, such as multispectral tissue imaging
[18], dental imaging [19], photoacoustic imaging [20], and Optical Coherence
Tomography (OCT) [21].
Throughout this work a state-of the art model is used to optimise a promising
existing system, as such no new theory is developed. A large bulk of the work
has been ﬁnding input parameters for the GNLSE. These parameters include
gain curves for the ﬁrst two ﬁbres, loss curves, eﬀective index curves, eﬀective
area curves, and Raman spectra. Special care has been taken in ﬁnding these
parameters, so that the simulations are as reliable as possible. Whether they
have been found in the literature, in the lab, numerically, analytically, or mul-
tiple of the above, an extensive description of how it is done has been provided,
in the hope that it can be reproduced easily by anyone facing a similar task.
The careful attainment and introduction of the input parameters are necessities
in the pursuit of attaining the purpose of this thesis, which is understanding
the underlying dynamics of supercontinuum generation in a ﬁbre cascade, and
determine suitable ﬁbre parameters to push the limits of spectral broadness and
mid-IR average power.
1.1
Outline
In Chapter 2 the GNLSE is introduced, described and reduced to a simpliﬁed
form. The purpose of writing out the reduction is threefold:
• It requires a description of the various terms, so that the physical meaning
of everything is described during the reduction.
• It puts emphasis on how the problem treated in this thesis diﬀers from
other pulse propagation problems.
• It reduces a very abstract equation, to one that is slightly less abstract,
so that any discussion later in the thesis is easier to relate to the model.
The solver and the grids are brieﬂy described.
Finally, gain ﬁbres and the
gain models are introduced, and their implementation is described. The theory
introduced in this chapter is suﬃcient background to read chapter 3.
Later
in the thesis further theory is introduced, when necessary for the analysis or
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Outline
5
discussion.
In chapter 3, a detailed description of the input parameters for the GNLSE is
given as well as how they have been obtained. In section 3.1 the input pulse,
and input noise are described. In section 3.2, the eﬀective index is given, which
is found using several approaches. Finally, the eﬀective areas, loss curves, and
the Raman response function are given in sections 3.3 to 3.5, respectively.
In chapter 4, the results are shown.
First the outputs of the ﬁrst 3 ﬁbres;
EYDF, Tm-doped silica ﬁbre, and ZBLAN are shown, described and discussed.
Finally, the main task of this work is described: The obtainable output spectra
of the chalcogenides, the ﬁbre length dependencies of the output spectra, and
the underlying important physics in the spectral broadening processes.
In chapter 5, the validity and consequences of the obtained results are discussed,
followed by an outlook.
Finally, the work is concluded in chapter 6.
==PAGE:22==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter the necessary theory, to run the simulations, and to understand
the origin and eﬀect of the input parameters, that will be obtained in chapter 3,
is presented. This chapter is by no means an exhaustive presentation of all the
fascinating nonlinear phenomena, it is instead preferred to present and discuss
the various phenomena as they appear in the simulated results in chapter 4.
2.1
Propagation equation and simpliﬁcation
The approach of this section is to present the general propagation equation
(GNLSE) derived and developed by Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm [17], and then
immediately simplify it to a scalar propagation equation of a pulse in an un-
tapered ﬁbre. The model has already been discussed and utilised in Rasmus
Dybbro Engelsholm’s PhD project, and in several papers [17, 22, 4]. As an ex-
tensive development has been given elsewhere, the introduction and description
in this thesis is done in a top-down approach.
The implemented equation from [17] is ﬁrst presented. The equation will then
be described term by term, along with a description of how these terms change
in a single-mode, scalar, untapered ﬁbre. Therefore, the reader should be ad-
vised that there might be a gap of a few pages between the introduction and
==PAGE:24==
8
Theory
description of some parameters.
The deﬁnition of the Fourier transform in this thesis is the same as in [17], and
is given by
˜f(Ω) = F{f(t)} =
Z ∞
−∞
f(t) exp(−iΩt)dt
f(t) = F−1{ ˜f(Ω)} = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
˜f(Ω) exp(iΩt)dΩ
(2.1)
Where Ωis the physical frequency. The total ﬁeld of mode m is assumed to be
of the form
˜Em(Ω, x, y, z) = ˜
Am(Ω, z)Em(Ω, x, y, z) exp(iφm(Ω, z))
(2.2)
A tilde denotes that the variable is in the frequency domain. ˜
Am is the ﬁeld en-
velope that is simulated. A phase shift is applied to the envelope, ˜
Am(Ω, z), such
that ˜Gm(Ω, z) = ˜
Am(Ω, z) exp(i(φm(Ω, z) + φ0(Ω, z))) to simplify the propaga-
tion equation. This leads to a propagation equation of the envelope ˜Gm of mode
m taken directly from equation (4.11) in the PhD thesis by Rasmus Dybbro En-
gelsholm [17]
∂
∂z
h
[exp(iφm(Ω, z) + iφ0(z))]∗˜Gm(Ω, z)
i
= 3
4iΩε0
4 [exp(iφm(Ω, z) + iφ0(z))]∗Km(Ω, z)
X
n,p,q
Z Z h
bE∗
m(Ω0, x, y, z) · bEn(Ω0, x, y, z) bE∗
p(Ω0, x, y, z) · bEq(Ω0, x, y, z)
i
dxdy
F
(
F−1h
˜Gn(Ω, z)Kn(Ω, z)
i
F−1
"
˜χ(3)
mnpq(Ω)
F

F−1h
˜Gp(Ω, z)Kp(Ω, z)
i∗
F−1h
˜Gq(Ω, z)Kq(Ω, z)
i
(Ω)
#)
(2.3)
There is no diﬀerence between the curly brackets, and square brackets around
the arguments of the Fourier transforms, both are used as an attempt to increase
the readability. In this thesis all simulations are done on a single scalar mode.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Propagation equation and simpliﬁcation
9
Eﬀectively, this corresponds to treating only one term in the sum, leading to.
∂
∂z
h
[exp(iφ(Ω, z) + iφ0(z))]∗˜G(Ω, z)
i
= 3
4iΩε0
4 [exp(iφ(Ω, z) + iφ0(z))]∗K(Ω, z)
Z Z h
bE∗(Ω0, x, y, z) · bE(Ω0, x, y, z) bE∗(Ω0, x, y, z) · bE(Ω0, x, y, z)
i
dxdy
F
(
F−1h
˜G(Ω, z)K(Ω, z)
i
F−1
"
˜χ(3)(Ω)
F

F−1h
˜G(Ω, z)K(Ω, z)
i∗
F−1h
˜G(Ω, z)K(Ω, z)
i
(Ω)
#)
(2.4)
The treatment of the phases, φ and φ0, will not be done similarly to Rasmus
Dybbro Engelsholm’s implementation, as it can be done much simpler in the
single-mode case. I have modiﬁed the code, such that the propagation is treated
in a co-moving frame of reference relative to the input pulse. In the moving
frame of reference φ is given by
φ(Ω, Ωp, z) =
Z z
0
ˆβ(z′) −ˆβ1(z′)|Ω=ΩpΩdz′
(2.5)
Where the subscript on ˆβl refers to the lth derivative of the propagation con-
stant, ˆβ, with respect to Ω. Subtracting the ﬁrst derivative of the propagation
constant, ˆβ1(z) at the pump frequency Ωp, ensures that the pump is station-
ary in the time grid. Due to Gauge invariance φ0(z) can be chosen to be any
constant, leaving the physics unchanged. It is chosen to be
φ0(Ω0, Ωp, z) =
Z z
0
Ω0 ˆβ1(z′)|Ω=Ωp −ˆβ0|Ω=Ω0(z′)dz′
(2.6)
Where Ω0 is the centre of the frequency domain.
As the ﬁbre geometry is
z-invariant it can be safely assumed that ˆβ is a constant in z. Thus, the expo-
nential on the LHS of the propagation equation can be written as
exp (iφ(Ω, Ωp, z) + iφ0(Ω0, Ωp, z)) = exp

i

ˆβ −ˆβ1|Ω=Ωp(Ω−Ω0) −ˆβ0|Ω=Ω0

z

≡exp

iˆβeff(Ω, Ωp, Ω0)z

(2.7)
Where ˆβeff(Ω, Ωp, Ω0) ≡ˆβ−ˆβ1|Ω=Ωp(Ω−Ω0)−ˆβ0|Ω=Ω0, was deﬁned to simplify
the ﬁnal equations. The transverse modes are normalised by the cycle averaged
ﬂux of the Poynting vector in the z-direction, so that the unit of
 ˜G(Ω, z)

2
=
==PAGE:26==
10
Theory
 ˜
A(Ω, z)

2
is Ws2.
This means the absolute square of the pulse in the time
domain is the power. The normalisation is written as bE(Ω0, x, y, z) = E(Ω0,x,y,z)
N(Ω0,z)
and b
H(Ω0, x, y, z) = H(Ω0,x,y,z)
N(Ω0,z)
, with
N(Ω0, z) =
 R R
[H∗(Ω0, x, y, z) × E(Ω0, x, y, z) −E∗(Ω0, x, y, z) × H(Ω0, x, y, z)] · ˆzdxdy
1/2
2
(2.8)
This form of the overlap integral is chosen as the integral can safely be evalu-
ated at any given frequency without worrying about the overlap with all other
frequencies present (Mode Proﬁle Dispersion (MPD) can be disregarded when
doing the overlap integrals). The price for this, as discussed in [17, 23] is the
introduction of the function K(Ω, z). This way of handling MPD also has the ad-
vantage that the photon number is a conserved quantity, when loss is neglected,
deﬁned by
Nphotons =
Z neff
 ˜
A(Ω, z)

2
Ω
dΩ
(2.9)
Having a conserved quantity is a huge advantage in the implementation as it
allows testing the code. K(Ω, z) treats MPD from a frequency, and z-dependent
mode proﬁle. As the ﬁbre geometry is unchanged during propagation in this
work the z-dependence can be ignored
K(Ω, z) = K(Ω)
=
"
R R bE∗(Ω, x, y) · bE(Ω, x, y) bE∗(Ω, x, y) · bE(Ω, x, y)dxdy
R R bE∗(Ω0, x, y) · bE(Ω0, x, y) bE∗(Ω0, x, y) · bE(Ω0, x, y)dxdy
# 1
4
(2.10)
One of the main assumptions in the derivation of the propagation equation is
that the transverse mode satisﬁes Maxwell’s equations for any frequency, when
disregarding the nonlinear polarisation. Therefore, the envelope ( ˜
A(Ω, z)) is a
constant, when solving the transverse problem. Thus, the transverse ﬁelds can
be expressed as
˜E(Ω, x, y, z) =


|Ex(Ω)|
|Ey(Ω)|
0

exp

i(Ωt −ˆβz)

˜H(Ω, x, y, z) =


|Hx(Ω)|
|Hy(Ω)|
0

exp

i(Ωt −ˆβz)

(2.11)
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Propagation equation and simpliﬁcation
11
Utilising that the ﬁelds are only in the transverse direction in the scalar approx-
imation. From the linear Maxwell equations
˜H = i∇× ˜E
µ0Ω
=
ˆβ
µ0Ω


|Ey(Ω)|
−|Ex(Ω)|
0

exp

i(Ωt −ˆβz)

(2.12)
Which means the normalisation in (2.8) gives
N(Ω, z) =
 Z Z
ˆβ
2µ0Ω|E(Ω, x, y)|2dxdy
!1/2
(2.13)
With ˆβ = neff Ω
c
, where neff is the eﬀective index. The total overlap integral is
Z Z  bE(Ω, x, y)

4
dxdy =
R R
|E(Ω, x, y)|4dxdy
N(Ω, z)4
= 4µ2
0c2
n2
eff
R R
|E(Ω, x, y)|4dxdy
R R
|E(Ω, x, y)|2dxdy
2 ≡
4µ2
0c2
n2
effAeﬀ(Ω)
(2.14)
With the above considerations K(Ω) simpliﬁes somewhat
K(Ω) =
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4
(2.15)
Inserting the reduced form of the overlap integral and K(Ω) back into the prop-
agation equation (2.3)
∂
∂z
h
exp

iˆβeff(Ω, Ωp, Ω0)z
∗˜G(Ω, z)
i
= i
3Ωµ0
4n2
effAeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4
exp

iˆβeff(Ω, Ωp, Ω0)z
∗
F
(
F−1
"
˜G(Ω, z)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4 #
F−1
"
˜χ(3)(Ω)
F
"
F−1
"
˜G(Ω, z)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4 #∗
F−1
"
˜G(Ω, z)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4 ##
(Ω)
#)
(2.16)
This is the propagation equation that is used in this project. However, after
deﬁning the susceptibility, an additional approximation can be applied to illus-
trate the resemblance of the GNLSE provided by Agrawal [24]. The scalar third
order susceptibility can be parametrised as
χ(3)
xxxx(t) = χ [(1 −fR)δ(t) + fR(t)hR(t)] ≡χR(t)
(2.17)
==PAGE:28==
12
Theory
Where the ﬁrst term is the instantaneous Kerr response, the second term is the
delayed Raman response, fR is the fractional Raman response, and χ is the
strength of the total response. The third order susceptibility is related to the
commonly quoted nonlinear refractive index by
n2 = 3
4
Re(χ(3)
xxxx)
n2
0cε0
(2.18)
Where n0 is the material refractive index, at the point where n2 was measured.
Pulling the strength of the susceptibility and applying the approximation neff ≈
n0, equation 2.19 can be simpliﬁed to
∂
∂z
h
exp

iˆβeff(Ω, Ωp, Ω0)z
∗˜G(Ω, z)
i
= iγ(Ω)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4
exp

iˆβeff(Ω, Ωp, Ω0)z
∗
F
(
F−1
"
˜G(Ω, z)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4 #
F−1
"
˜R(Ω)
F
"
F−1
"
˜G(Ω, z)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4 #∗
F−1
"
˜G(Ω, z)
Aeﬀ(Ω0)
Aeﬀ(Ω)
 1
4 ##
(Ω)
#)
(2.19)
Where γ(Ω) =
n2Ω
cAeff(Ω) is simply a frequency dependent extension of the nonlin-
ear parameter used by Agrawal [24].
Loss is implemented by letting ˆβ ⇒ˆβ + iα/2. Where α is the linear loss coeﬃ-
cient deﬁned by Lambert-Beer’s law.
I(λ, z) = I(λ, 0) exp(−α(λ)z)
(2.20)
Where I is the optical intensity. The z-invariance of the optical ﬁbres means
that the loss-coeﬃcient, α, is treated as z-independent in each ﬁbre. This would
have to be treated diﬀerently if a tapered or bent ﬁbre was considered.
From the above expressions it is apparent that several continuous parameters
are needed as input for the simulations: The eﬀective (section 3.2), the eﬀective
area (section 3.3), the loss curve (section 3.4), and the susceptibility and Raman
term (section 3.5).
2.1.1
Numerical solver and grid
The solver used is similarly developed by Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm [17], there-
fore it will only be discussed brieﬂy.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Propagation equation and simpliﬁcation
13
The GNLSE is solved in the interaction picture, which means that the accu-
racy of the method is determined by the chosen propagation scheme [25]. The
interaction picture works by splitting the equation in a linear part (loss and
dispersion), and a non-linear part, and propagating them in a joint manner in
a multi step (Runge-Kutta) solver.
In Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm’s implementation a Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg scheme
was chosen. The solver is precise to fourth order in the step-size, with an em-
bedded ﬁfth order error estimator. In practice, the more precise error estimator
is chosen as the solution at each step. An embedded error estimator has the
advantage that some measure of error can be estimated at each step, with a min-
imal increased numerical eﬀort, as many of the stepping parameters are shared
for the two solvers. This allows implementing an adaptive step-size controller,
which minimises the numerical eﬀort signiﬁcantly. A local error estimator has
been chosen such that
LE =
PNt
k=0
 ˜
A5[k] −˜
A4[k]

2
N 2
t
(2.21)
Where the subscript in ˜
A refers to the precision of the solver, and Nt is the
number of grid points. Depending on the chosen error tolerance, and the local
error at each point, a set of logical statements determine whether to increase
or decrease the step size, and by how much.
The advantages of solving the
GNLSE in the interaction picture using embedded Runge-Kutta methods com-
pared to other methods are discussed in [25]. The computational cost of running
the code is mostly due to the huge number of Fourier transforms. These are
handled by MATLAB’s Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) routine. The FFT is
conveniently parallelised onto a large number of computing cores, making it an
obvious candidate to Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) parallelisation. Rasmus
Dybbro Engelsholm has implemented a CUDA based GPU parallelisation in
MATLAB, which enables the program to run very fast on a large number of
grid points.
The grid is deﬁned from 3 parameters: The number of grid points, Nt = 219,
the distance between each grid point in time, dt = 1.5fs, and the centre of the
frequency array Ω0 = 2π · 350 · 1012 rad
s . The width of the time array, frequency
array, and the resolution of the frequency array are then given by
Wt = Ntdt = 786ps,
WΩ=
1
2πdt = 1.06 · 1014 rad
s ,
dΩ=
1
2πdtNt
= 2.02 · 108 rad
s
(2.22)
The inverse relationship between frequency and wavelength means that the array
converted to wavelength is not equally spaced. It is very tightly spaced at short
wavelengths, and sparsely at long. Ω0 is chosen so that the array can contain the
==PAGE:30==
14
Theory
desired spectrum. In [11] a record spanning spectrum from 1.4µm to 13.3µm was
obtained in a As2Se3 ﬁbre setup. For this reason the computation grid should
be broader than this, with an extra buﬀer in the long wavelengths end, due to
the sparsity of the grid points. With Ω0 = 2π · 350 · 1012 rad
s
the wavelength
grid boundaries are λmin = 438.72nm, and λmax = 17.988µm. The grid in the
z-direction is set by the adaptive step-size controller. The chosen save points
in z is set prior to running the code, as to restrict the memory footprint to a
minimum.
The boundaries of the time and frequency arrays are periodic. The temporal
pulse spreading through the boundary is not an issue, given that the spectrum
does not start overlapping with itself.
The edges of the obtained frequency
spectrum are usually set by the loss curve. For this reason the spectrum will
not usually pass through the boundary of the frequency array, as long as the
frequency array is tailored correctly to the problem. However, containment of
the spectrum can also be ensured in a more brute force way, by adding a very
large artiﬁcial loss term to the last few grid points near the boundaries of the
domain.
2.2
Fibre ampliﬁers
In a gain ﬁbre the number of photons at a given wavelength, neglecting loss and
all nonlinear eﬀects, is given by
dNph(λ)
dz
= [Ne(z)σe(λ) −Na(z)σa(λ)]Nph(z)
(2.23)
Where Ne (Na) is the population of excited (non-excited) ions.
Nph is the
number of photons, and σ are the cross sections determining the probability
of emission (e) or absorption (a) of a photon. The populations of the diﬀerent
energy levels of the ions are generally determined by coupled rate equations,
that have to be coupled to the propagation equation in the previous section.
Developing a framework for this is out of scope for this project, and for this
reason, the population of the energy levels has been assumed constant along the
ﬁbre. This corresponds to an eﬀective population model. The value of this is
set so that the output power of the ﬁbre matches the power that would have
been obtained in the more general framework (equation 2.23). The setup and
the power levels of the pump and signal have been illustrated in ﬁgure 2.1. In
the eﬀective pump power case equation (2.23) has the following simple solution
Nph(z) = Nph(0) exp(g(λ)z),
g(λ) =
X
i
Ne,iσe,i(λ) −
X
j
Na,jσa,j(λ) (2.24)
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Fibre ampliﬁers
15
z
P
Signal from depleted pump
Depleted pump
Signal from constant pump
Constant pump
Pump
Signal
Figure 2.1: Setup for the EYDF and the Tm doped gain ﬁbres. The signal is
either the seed laser going into the EYDF, or the output of the
EYDF, going into the Tm-doped ﬁbre. For the EYDF the pump
is at 978nm, and for the Tm-doped the pump is at 790nm. Two
cases of pumping is depicted. In the depleted pump case the power
in the pump depletes towards the end of the ﬁbre. In the constant
pump case it does not. The pump power is chosen such that the
two cases have the output signal power in common.
==PAGE:32==
16
Theory
In the above, the gain function has been cast in a way highlighting the pres-
ence of multiple emission and/or absorption peaks. The average populations
are treated as free parameters, that are optimised in order to recreate experi-
mentally obtained spectra as well as possible. The pump is not treated in the
simulations. This corresponds to assuming that the pump light has no eﬀect
on the dynamics, except for the provided gain. This also means there could
be some discrepancy to experimentally obtained spectra as there could still be
pump light left at the ﬁbre outputs.
It is important to note that the eﬀective gain curves provided in this section
are not applicable to any other system, where either the seed average power,
repetition rate, or ﬁbre lengths diﬀer to the system considered in this work.
Generally, if the pump current is kept constant, an increased repetition rate in
the seed leads to higher average power, but lower peak power, and vice versa.
With a higher repetition rate total population inversion is not achieved, leading
to lower peak powers, whereas a lower repetition rate leads to a lower energy
transfer eﬃciency.
In the EYDF only one emission peak is present in the wavelength range con-
sidered (> 1400nm). The EYDF is pumped at 790nm. The gain cross section
is given in [14], and the absolute gain can be seen in the left plot in ﬁgure 2.2.
The amplitude of the peak has been determined by matching the output power
of simulations to the measured output power of unpublished results provided
by Christian Rosenberg Petersen. The purpose of the Ytterbium in an Erbium
doped ﬁbre is absorbing light, and transferring the energy to excite an Erbium
ion. This increases the eﬃciency of an Erbium doped ﬁbre ampliﬁer signiﬁcantly
[14].
The Tm gain curve, except the peak at ∼2300nm, can be obtained from a
parametrisation given in [26]. The peak at 2300nm is not normally seen in a
silica ﬁbre, as it is very close to the loss edge, but as the gain is expected to
push the light out a bit further than the loss edge, it is included here, similarly
to [27]. The gain cross section at 2300nm is given in [14]. In this thesis the con-
sidered wavelength region has two emission peaks and a single absorption peak.
As the eﬀective population is not known in this ﬁbre either, the amplitude of
all peaks are considered free parameters. The eﬀect of the emission and absorp-
tion on the output is correlated, so the eﬀect of each cannot be distinguished
entirely. However, the peak Power Spectral Density (PSD) from the seed laser,
at 1560nm, is at the absorption peak. Thus, the output peak PSD is mostly set
by the absorption. The amplitude of the emission peak at ∼1800nm maye be
used to match the total power with experimental data. Finally, the amplitude
of the high wavelength peak can be used to make the IR-edge of the spectrum
match. The absolute gain in the Tm-doped ﬁbre can be seen in the right plot
in ﬁgure 2.2. Gain is implemented numerically by adding the gain curve, g(λ)
to the loss curve α(λ) in (2.19).
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Fibre ampliﬁers
17
Figure 2.2: LHS) Implemented gain curve for EYDF. RHS) Implemented gain
curve for Tm-doped ﬁbre. The discontinuity in the gain spectrum
is due to the data being taken from a ﬁgure in [14], in which the
high wavelength gain does not go to zero.
==PAGE:34==
18
Theory
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Input parameters for
propagation equation
Obtaining the input parameters for all ﬁve ﬁbres in the cascade represents a
large bulk of the work in this project. A few of the parameters are taken as
being wavelength independent, these can be found in table 3.1. The wavelength
dependent parameters are treated individually in this chapter. They include:
The eﬀective index, (section 3.2), the eﬀective area, (section 3.3), the loss curve
(section 3.4), and the Raman response function, (section 3.5). First, the input
pulse and noise terms are treated in section 3.1.
3.1
Input pulse and noise
The input pulse is a Gaussian with 5% Relative Intensity Noise (RIN) and an
added vacuum noise seed, given by
A(t, 0) =
p
P0

1 + xRIN
2

exp

−t2
2σ2

exp(i(Ωp −Ω0)t) + F−1
"
exp(iφrand)
r
ℏΩ
dΩ
#
(3.1)
==PAGE:36==
20
Input parameters for propagation equation
EYDF[28]
Tm:Si[29]
ZBLAN[30]
As2S3[31]
As2Se3[32]
a[µm]
6
5
3.5
4.5
6
L [m]
5
1.5
Max 7
-
-
NA
0.2
0.22
0.265
0.3
0.76
n2[ m2
W ]
10−20
3.2 [33]
4.23 [33, 34]
2.1 [8]
420 [24]
1500 [24]
SMC[µm]
3.14
2.87
2.42
3.53
11.91
Table 3.1: Constant parameters. The citations given at the name link to the
product speciﬁcations at the manufacturers’ websites. Here, a is the
ﬁbre radius, L is the ﬁbre length, NA is the Numerical Aperture, n2
is the nonlinear refractive index, SMC is the Single Mode Cutoﬀ.
The length of the As2S3 and As2Se3 are to be determined. The
diﬀerence between the nonlinear refractive index of EYDF and the
Tm-doped ﬁbre comes from a large GeO2 content in the Tm-doped
ﬁbre, as will be shown in section 3.2. In [35] it is estimated that the
nonlinear refractive index rises linearly with GeO2 concentration.
The nonlinear refractive index of GeO2 is n2 = 12.5 · 10−20 m2
W [34].
x is a random number drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0 and
standard deviation 1. φrand is vector of random numbers, of length Nt. Each
element is drawn from a uniform distribution in the range [0; 2π[. The seed
laser provides 15mW average power, Pavg, at 1Mhz Repetition Rate (RR) with
intensity pulse Full Width Half Max (FWHM), TFWHM, of 43ps, at λp = 2πc
Ωp =
1560nm. This corresponds to a pulse peak power of
P0 = 2
p
ln(2)Pavg
RR√πTFWHM
= 327.7W
(3.2)
And a pulse width of
σ = TFWHM
2
√
ln 2
= 25.8ps
(3.3)
The factor exp(i(Ωp −Ω0)t) ensures that the input pulse is situated at the cor-
rect place in the frequency grid.
The vacuum noise seed is important for the simulations as any kind of gain will
aﬀect this seed signiﬁcantly. The gain in the active ﬁbres, and the onset of MI is
aﬀected by this, and would otherwise have to be initiated by truncation errors.
The vacuum noise seed is commonly denoted the One Photon Per Mode Noise
(OPPMN). The input RIN is added as the seed laser does not have a stable pulse
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Eﬀective index
21
peak power. Limited by the run-time of the simulations, an ensemble based on
18 noise seeds form the basis for studying the output. The consequences of the
limited ensemble size is discussed in chapter 5.
At this point it is important to note that the noise terms are added to correctly
capture the physics, and it allows calculating the noise of the obtained super-
continuum. However, this project is not a noise study, and as such a negligible
amount of work is put into minimising the output noise.
The ﬁbres considered in this work are not polarisation maintaining, which means
the light will generally exist in both polarisations. Using the scalar propagation
equation corresponds to inputting the light in a single polarisation state, and
assuming no cross talk happens. This is a very weak point in the model. But
for the purpose of this project, this means only half the experimentally observed
powers are used in the simulations. Thus, the output of the simulations should
be doubled, when comparing to the experimentally observed spectra. Inclusion
of both polarisation states could potentially increase the inﬂuence of the non-
linear eﬀects. Thus, neglecting polarisation of the light through using the scalar
model has the opposite eﬀect of neglecting higher order modes. As neglecting
higher order modes leads to better conﬁnement of the light, and thereby an
increased nonlinear interaction.
3.2
Eﬀective index
The temporal evolution of the light is determined by the propagation constant,
which is related to the eﬀective index by
β = neffΩ
c
(3.4)
From this quantity the group velocity vG and and dispersion D are found as
vG = ∂Ω
∂β ,
D = −λ
c
d2neff
dλ2
(3.5)
The dispersion is very useful in understanding the dynamics of supercontinuum
generation. In a wavelength range of low dispersion, light travels at approx-
imately the same speed. Thus, temporal overlap is ensured even though the
pulse is spectrally broad. This is very useful in supercontinuum generation as
the spectral broadening is often limited by the duration of temporal overlap
of the diﬀerent wavelength components in the propagation direction. For this
reason, the pump laser wavelength is often chosen to be close to the Zero Dis-
persion Wavelength (ZDW) of the ﬁbre. In a ﬁbre cascade the picture is more
blurry as the material properties of the diﬀerent materials make it impossible
to match the input wavelength with the dispersion properties of all ﬁbres.
==PAGE:38==
22
Input parameters for propagation equation
The eﬀective index is found with a few diﬀerent approaches to test the validity
of each approach. For the EYDF the silica material index, the constant NA and
the analytical scalar approximation for a step-index ﬁbre are used. The same
approach is applied for the Tm-doped ﬁbre, but here a Scanning Electron Mi-
croscope (SEM) analysis with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) is used to
estimate the dopant concentrations in the ﬁbre. A high concentration of GeO2
in the inner cladding leads to an increased material index. The ZBLAN eﬀec-
tive index is found from a dispersion measurement done by Christian Rosenberg
Petersen [16]. The eﬀective index of As2S3 is found by using both the ana-
lytical scalar, and vectorial approximation, measurements done as part of this
project, as well as a COMSOL simulation. Finally, the eﬀective index of As2Se3
is obtained via the analytical scalar, and vectorial approximation, as well as
COMSOL.
3.2.1
Material indices, and scalar analytical approach -
EYDF and Si:Tm
A step-index ﬁbre with core and cladding index nco and ncl in the scalar approx-
imation is considered. The m = 0 mode in the scalar approximation is given by
ψ = AJ0(κr),
r < a
ψ = BK0(δr),
r > a
(3.6)
Where κ = k0
q
n2co −n2
eff, δ = k0
q
n2
eff −n2
cl, B = A J0(κa)
K0(κa), Jm is the m′th
order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind, and Km is the m′th order modiﬁed Bessel
function of the second kind.
Utilising that the ﬁelds should be continuous and diﬀerentiable at the core/-
cladding interface, the eﬀective index of the fundamental mode can be obtained
from the relation
κJ1(κa)
J0(κa) = δK1(δa)
Km(δa)
(3.7)
The refractive index of either the core or the cladding is found from a Sellmeier
equation, which is usually given on the form
n2 −1 =
X
i
Aiλ2
λ2 −B2
i
(3.8)
The remaining refractive index (core/cladding) is then found utilising a constant
Numerical Aperture (NA), provided by the manufacturers. They can be found
in table 3.1. The NA relates the core and cladding index by
NA =
q
n2co −n2
cl
(3.9)
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Eﬀective index
23
From this the eﬀective index is calculated, as well as the dispersion, given by
equation 3.5. The material index of the EYDF core is taken as the refractive
index of silica given in [36].
3.2.1.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy on Tm-doped ﬁbre
A Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy
(EDS) was used to determine the dopant concentrations in the Tm-doped silica
gain ﬁbre. The energy and intensity of the back scattered electrons and X-ray
photons generated in the sample comprise a ﬁngerprint of the materials present.
This was used to generate a map of the elements, as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Image 1 and 2 in ﬁgure 3.1 are two diﬀerent snapshots used to generate the
maps. They contain the signal from the backscattered electrons, which gives in-
formation about elements, and to some degree also the surface structure of the
sample. The inner cladding can be seen clearly, as well as some contamination,
in the top left corner, that is probably a result of the cleave. Image 5 and 8 show
that Al and Tm cannot be distinguished easily. However, several energy peaks
associated with the ﬁngerprint of Tm were not observed. In this way it can
be concluded that the Tm-dopant concentration is so low that it could not be
determined. The fact that Tm could not be observed is not surprising as dopant
number concentrations are usually measured in ppm, as higher concentrations
often result in clustering, which leads to optical quenching [37]. Furthermore,
it can therefore be safely assumed that the Tm-doping has no inﬂuence on the
nonlinear properties of the ﬁbre.
Image 7 shows very clearly that the inner cladding is Germanium doped. It can
be determined to be 11.1 mol%. The refractive index of GeO2 is given in [38],
where it is also shown that the refractive index of a SiO2 −GeO2 mixture can be
well approximated as a weighted average of the two. Thus, the cladding index
in the Tm-doped ﬁbre is found as a weighted average of the refractive index of
SiO2 and GeO2. In ﬁgure 3.2 the obtained dispersion of the EYDF and Tm-
doped ﬁbre is shown. Most of the light is in the anomalous dispersion regime
leading to soliton formation and MI, when the peak power has been increased
suﬃciently by the gain.
==PAGE:40==
24
Input parameters for propagation equation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Figure 3.1: Element maps of the end facet of the Thulium doped gain ﬁbre ob-
tained using SEM with EDS. The ﬁrst two images are the raw SEM
images, in these the cleave can be seen in the upper left corner.
Furthermore, the outer cladding and the inner cladding can be eas-
ily distinguished. The third image shows Carbon content, mostly
originating from contamination from the cleave. The fourth image
shows Oxygen content, which is fairly evenly spread out. Image
ﬁve shows Aluminium content, which has a slightly higher concen-
tration in the core. Image six shows Silicon, which is seen to have
higher concentration in the outer cladding. This can be explained
by the seventh image showing Germanium content, in which it is
seen that there is a high Germanium concentration in the inner
cladding. Finally, the Thulium concentration is shown in image
eight, which is seemingly identical to the Aluminium content. The
energy of the EDS peaks correspond better to Aluminium, so the
Thulium concentration is deemed too low to be measured using
this analysis.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Eﬀective index
25
Figure 3.2: LHS) Eﬀective index and dispersion of EYDF ﬁbre with ZDW
at 1.24µm.
RHS) Eﬀective index and dispersion of Tm-doped
ﬁbre with ZDW at 1.27µm. The dotted black line in both plots
highlights the zero dispersion wavelength.
3.2.2
Measuring dispersion - ZBLAN and As2S3
In this section the setup for measuring dispersion of both ZBLAN and As2S3
is presented. The ZBLAN data was measured by Christian Rosenberg Petersen
[16], while the data on As2S3 was done as part of this project in collaboration
with Christian Rosenberg Petersen.
The setup is based on[39].
All ﬁgures
illustrating the process of obtaining the dispersion is based on As2S3 data.
In ﬁgure 3.3 the setup for measuring the dispersion of the ﬁbres is illustrated.
The output of an NKT Photonics supercontinuum source with a spectrum from
1µm to 4.5µm is split in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer conﬁguration. One arm
is coupled through the ﬁbre, while the other arm has an adjustable length of
air, using a movable stage. If the mirrors and lenses used in the two arms are
the same, the Optical Path Diﬀerence (OPD) of the two arms is zero if
2C + neff(λ)z = 2B + z ⇔B = C + (neff(λ) −1)z
2
(3.10)
This relation was used, along with the ﬁbre core material index, to choose a
ﬁtting path length, B, such that interference fringes were observed.
The piece of ﬁbre used was approximately 12.5cm long. Once the OPD is zero
the output power as a function of wavelength is measured with an Optical Spec-
trum Analyser (OSA) in the wavelength range from 1000nm to 4600nm. Clear
interference fringes were only observable from 2800nm to 4300nm, with the lower
range limit varying by 200nm and the upper range limit varying by 100nm be-
tween the data sets. The smaller usable wavelength range comes partly from
higher order modes at low wavelengths, and a low coupling eﬃciency at higher
wavelengths, leading to a weak signal. The scanning step size is 0.5nm, and in
==PAGE:42==
26
Input parameters for propagation equation
SCS
z
OSA
B
C
Figure 3.3: Dispersion setup based on a Mach-Zehnder interferometer conﬁg-
uration. A Supercontinuum Source (SCS) with a spectrum from
1µm to 4.5µm is split into two paths using a 50/50 beam split-
ter. The lower path is coupled into the test ﬁbre, while the upper
path goes through an adjustable length of air.
The two paths
are coupled back and the output is measured using an OSA. It is
preferable to use the same mirrors and lenses in the two paths, so
that the phase change due to material dispersion of the lenses and
reﬂections is matched. Both paths share the same total length,
apart from the distance C, and the adjustable distance B. which
are both undergone twice. The length of the test ﬁbre is z
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Eﬀective index
27
Equal. WL @3.25µm
HOM
FM
Figure 3.4: LHS) Raw OSA data (blue), and Fourier ﬁltered OSA data (black).
At the equalisation wavelength at 3.25µm the OPD of the two arms
is exactly matched, this can be seen by the decrease in period of
the interference pattern in both directions away from this point.
At higher wavelengths than the equalisation wavelength multiple
frequencies are evident in the signal. This comes from beating of
the fundamental mode with higher order- or cladding modes. The
obtained peaks are shown with circles, these are found with MAT-
LAB’s built-in function "ﬁndpeaks". RHS) A windowed Fourier
transform spectrogram illustrating the measured raw OSA signal.
The split oﬀof the signal after the equalisation wavelength is due
to multiple modes. The Fundamental Mode (FM) and the ﬁrst
Higher Order Mode (HOM) are marked with a black and a red
line, respectively.
the usable wavelength range a 10nm band pass ﬁlter, and an PbSe detector was
used.
The raw measured data can be seen in the left plot in ﬁgure 3.4. At 3.25µm
the period of the interference signal is highest. At this wavelength the OPD
of the two arms is zero, and this wavelength is denoted the equalisation wave-
length. The fact that the equalisation wavelength has the largest period in the
interference signal can be seen by writing up the output ﬁeld as a sum of the
ﬁelds from each arm
Eout = |E1| exp

i2π
λ L + φ1

+ |E2| exp

i2π
λ (l + neff(λ)z) + φ2

(3.11)
The propagating light picks up the phase exp(iβx), where x is the distance
propagated. The phase shifts picked up from the optical components are labelled
φ1 and φ2. As the same components are used in both arms, the phase shifts
from these are equal. The path length in the upper arm is labelled L, l is the
==PAGE:44==
28
Input parameters for propagation equation
path length in air in the lower arm, and z is the length of the test ﬁbre. From
this the measured intensity is
Iout = |Eout|2 = |E1|2 + |E2|2 + 2|E1||E2| cos
2π
λ (L −l −neff(λ)z)

(3.12)
From this it is seen that the period in the interference signal is largest (in fact
inﬁnite) exactly when the OPD is zero.
The signal has multiple periods which correspond to diﬀerent modes in the ﬁbre.
This is especially evident at wavelengths just above the equalisation wavelength.
The single mode cutoﬀof the ﬁbre is approximately 3.7µm, corresponding to a
V -parameter (V = 2π
λ aNA) of 2.405. Multiple guided modes exist below 3.7µm,
as well as cladding modes, that will not necessarily have attenuated, due to the
high index diﬀerence between the cladding and air, and the ﬁbre being quite
short.
In the RHS in ﬁgure 3.4 a windowed Fourier transform spectrogram of the OSA
signal is shown. Multiple peaks at the same wavelength are evidence of multi-
ple modes. A second mode appears above the equalisation wavelength, which
disappears again at approximately 3.7µm. Thus, indicating that this is the ﬁrst
HOM of the ﬁbre.
An attempt to ﬁlter away the higher order mode was done by using a Fourier
ﬁlter. The OSA signal was partitioned in small wavelength windows by multi-
plying the signal with a moving Gaussian envelope. The partitioned signals were
Fourier transformed, thus obtaining signals corresponding to following a vertical
band on the spectrogram in ﬁgure 3.4. A band pass ﬁlter can then be applied to
remove the signal from the higher order mode, and upon Fourier transforming
back, only one frequency should be present. An example of a ﬁltered window is
shown in ﬁgure 3.5, where the plot on the LHS shows the Fourier transform of
a window centred at λ = 3.5µm. Upon inspection of the RHS-plot in ﬁgure 3.4
it is determined that the FM corresponds to the peak at shortest time delay.
The plot on the RHS in ﬁgure 3.5 shows the eﬀect of ﬁltering away the HOM.
The Gaussian window has been moved in steps of 0.05µm, and all the ﬁltered
signals have been added up. The full Fourier ﬁltered signal can be seen on the
the black curve on the left plot in ﬁgure 3.4.
Any interference peak satisﬁes the relation [39]
L −l −neff(λ)z = (m + i)λ
(3.13)
Where m is an undetermined interference order, that is treated as a ﬁtting
parameter, and i is the interference order relative to m, which is an integer for a
bright fringe and half integer for a dark fringe. The relative interference order, i,
takes the value 0 for the lowest wavelength bright fringe, and 0.5 for the lowest
wavelength dark fringe. For a negative dispersion i is counted upwards until
the equalisation wavelength, and then counted downwards up to the highest
wavelength fringe. The i-values can be seen as the interference order in ﬁgure
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Eﬀective index
29
Figure 3.5: An example of the usage of the Fourier ﬁlter. LHS) The Fourier
transform of the measured signal multiplied by a Gaussian window
centred at 3.5µm. The peak at the shortest delay in time is inter-
preted as being the FM, thus the remaining signal is ﬁltered away
using a low pass ﬁlter. RHS) The measured signal along with the
ﬁltered signal, showing only a single period is left.
3.6.
The eﬀective index is assumed to follow a ﬁve term Cauchy relation
neff(λ) = A1λ−4 + A2λ−2 + A3 + A4λ2 + A5λ4
(3.14)
Which gives the dispersion
D(λ) = −λ
c
d2neff
dλ2
= −1
c (20A1λ−5 + 6A2λ−3 + 2A4λ + 12A5λ3)
(3.15)
Upon inserting equation (3.14) into equation (3.13) it is obtained that
a1λ−5 + a2λ−3 + a3λ−1 + a4λ + a5λ3 = m + i
(3.16)
Where the ﬁtting coeﬃcients, ai, are all given by ai = −Aiz, except a3 =
L −l −A3z. However, it is noted that knowledge of a3, and thereby L and l is
irrelevant as A3 is cancelled out when calculating the dispersion.
Upon Fourier ﬁltering and ﬁtting ﬁve data sets the dispersion curves in ﬁgure
3.7 were obtained. The dotted line is the mean of the ﬁve measurements.
A big issue in the conducted dispersion measurement is that the supercontinuum
source cannot deliver light in the entire spectrum that is guided in the ﬁbre.
For this reason an extrapolation of the curve has to be made. An extrapolation
will undoubtedly fail especially as the Cauchy relation for the eﬀective index
is known to be wrong around material resonances. A better model would be
==PAGE:46==
30
Input parameters for propagation equation
Figure 3.6: Fit of peak/valley wavelengths to interference order. The peak of
the order array is the equalisation wavelength.
Figure 3.7: The obtained dispersion for ﬁve diﬀerent measurements on As2S3,
corresponding to ﬁve diﬀerent values of the length B shown in
ﬁgure 3.3.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Eﬀective index
31
a Sellmeier equation for the refractive index, which is in agreement with the
dielectric function found from linear response theory in solid state physics [40].
In this case the eﬀective index is given by
neff =
s
1 +
X
i
Aiλ2
λ2 −B2
i
(3.17)
Upon inserting equation (3.17) into equation (3.13) it is obtained that
L −l
λ
−z
s
1
λ2 +
X
i
Ai
λ2 −B2
i
= m + i
(3.18)
As seen in equation (3.18) the Sellmeier equation makes the ﬁt nonlinear in the
ﬁtting coeﬃcients. I tried ﬁtting this equation to the data set, using material
parameters, for the resonances Bi, found in [41]. However, as the ﬁtting equation
is nonlinear in the ﬁtting coeﬃcients it is a lot harder to converge, and with the
present dataset I was not able to perform the ﬁt.
==PAGE:48==
32
Input parameters for propagation equation
Figure 3.8: ZBLAN dispersion. Most of the spectrum is in the anomalous dis-
persion regime, which means the broadening in ZBLAN is dom-
inated by soliton dynamics and Raman red-shifting. Two ZDWs
are within the transmittance window of the ﬁbre. The ﬁrst is at
1510nm, the second at 4250nm.
3.2.3
ZBLAN dispersion
In ﬁgure 3.8 the obtained dispersion of the ZBLAN ﬁbre from the measurement
by Christian Rosenberg Petersen is shown. The IR-loss edge of ZBLAN is at
approximately 4.5µm, which means that the bandwidth of the supercontinuum
source should be broad enough to cover the entire region of interest. In fact,
the supercontinuum source is a cascade ending in a ZBLAN ﬁbre, so as long as
the spectrum has fully extended in the source, it is suﬃciently broad.
3.2.4
Comparison of various approaches to obtain the dis-
persion - As2S3 and As2Se3
Since the extrapolated dispersion values on As2S3 are considered too unreli-
able three other approaches to obtain the dispersion is considered: The scalar
analytical model given by equation (3.7), Finite Element (FEM) analysis using
COMSOL as well as a fully vectorial analytical approach with the eﬀective index
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Eﬀective index
33
Figure 3.9: The obtained dispersion of the As2S3 ﬁbre, using four diﬀerent
approaches. The inset shows the dispersion in a small wavelength
range around the zero dispersion wavelength at 6.7µm. The man-
ufacturer, IRﬂex, has provided the green dispersion curve. The
dashed lines indicate the region in which the dispersion was mea-
sured, the remainder of the measured dispersion (blue curve) is an
extrapolation.
found from the relation [42].
 J′
m(κa)
κJm(κa) + K′
m(δa)
δKm(δa)
 J′
m(κa)
κJm(κa) +
 n2
cl
n2co
 K′
m(δa)
δKm(δa)

=
m
a
2 1
κ2 + 1
δ2
 1
κ2 +
 n2
cl
n2co
 1
δ2

(3.19)
using the Bessel Function relations
J′
m(x) = Jm−1 −m
x Jm,
K′
m(x) = −Km−1 −m
x Km
(3.20)
Where κ and δ are deﬁned below equation (3.6).
Simulations in COMSOL
were done on the "ﬁne" grid setting, as well as "ﬁner", both with and without
including material loss, the diﬀerence between all cases was negligible.
The
COMSOL implementation is described in appendix B. A detailed comparison of
the acquired dispersion curves for As2S3 can be seen in ﬁgure 3.9, with the core
==PAGE:50==
34
Input parameters for propagation equation
index given by [43]. A remarkable correspondence is seen between COMSOL,
the analytical approaches, and the data provided by the manufacturer IRﬂex.
Furthermore, there is certainly a fair amount of similarity of the measured curve
to the calculated curves, in the region in which the dispersion was measured.
From this a few things can be concluded:
• The analytical scalar approximation is valid at the refractive index con-
trasts under consideration.
• The almost identical results indicate that IRﬂex has used the same Sell-
meier equation for the core index of the ﬁbre in their FEM analysis.
• The correspondence between the measurement and the remaining ap-
proaches in the measured region serves as validation of the obtained dis-
persion curves.
Below the equalisation wavelength, the FM and HOM cannot be distinguished.
The inability to ﬁlter out the HOM could explain the discrepancy between the
measurement and the other approaches in the low wavelength end of the mea-
sured region.
The input spectrum into the As2S3 ﬁbre will be entirely in the normal disper-
sion regime, as the ZDW is at 6.7µm. This means that a soliton solution no
longer exists. Instead all the input sech-shaped pulses will undergo Self Phase
Modulation (SPM), which will broaden the spectrum.
A comparison of the diﬀerent approaches to obtain the dispersion for the As2Se3
ﬁbre is shown in ﬁgure 3.10, with the core index given in [43]. The obtained dis-
persion is seen to match the dispersion curve given by IRﬂex at low wavelengths.
At longer wavelengths a considerable discrepancy can be seen. The refractive
index in the cladding is found via an assumption of constant NA. Perhaps the
manufacturer, IRﬂex, knows better and has in fact used a non-constant NA
as the input to their FEM calculations. The lower simulated dispersion means
less broadening in time, and therefore individual pulses will overlap in time for
longer. For this reason the obtained width of the spectrum, as well as the rate
of broadening will probably be over estimated, if the dispersion obtained by
IR-ﬂex is the correct one.
It can be seen that the scalar approximation gives almost the same results as
COMSOL, and the vectorial analytical model even at the high index contrast
values from the high NA of 0.76. This gives credibility to the scalar approxima-
tion for the ﬁrst 3 ﬁbres.
The input spectrum into the As2Se3 ﬁbre will be mostly in the normal disper-
sion regime leading to broadening through SPM. However, the ZDW, at 6µm is
lower than the loss edge of the As2S3 ﬁbre, which could lead to renewed soli-
ton formation, and red-shifting through soliton-soliton interaction and Raman
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Eﬀective area
35
Figure 3.10: The obtained dispersion of the As2Se3 ﬁbre using three diﬀerent
approaches. The inset shows the dispersion in a small wavelength
range around the zero dispersion at 6−6.1µm. The manufacturer,
IRﬂex has provided the purple disperison curve.
self-frequency shift. In fact pure SPM based broadening leads to no pulse shape
change in the time domain. As the dispersion is rather low for longer wave-
lengths than 4µm the soliton shape might be well preserved, even though the
dispersion is normal in the As2S3 ﬁbre.
In the chalcogenide ﬁbres the dispersions obtained by COMSOL have been used
as the input for the propagation equation.
3.3
Eﬀective area
The eﬀective area is a measure of the conﬁnement of the mode. A small eﬀective
area increases the inﬂuence of all nonlinear eﬀects. It is usually on the order of
the core area, but longer wavelengths are more poorly conﬁned, and therefore
the eﬀective area increases with wavelength.
From equation (3.3) the eﬀective area is given by
Aeﬀ(Ω) =
R R
|E(Ω, x, y)|2dxdy
2
R R
|E(Ω, x, y)|4dxdy
(3.21)
==PAGE:52==
36
Input parameters for propagation equation
3.3.1
Analytical treatment - EYDF, Si:Tm and ZBLAN
Inserting the ﬁelds in (3.6) the eﬀective area evaluates to
Aeﬀ(Ω) =A4(2π)2
A42π
R a
0 J2
0(κr)rdr +
R ∞
a
J2
0 (κa)
K2
0(δa)K2
0(δr)rdr
2
R a
0 J4
0(κr)rdr +
R ∞
a
J4
0 (κa)
K4
0(δa)K4
0(δr)rdr
2π
R a
0 J2
0(κr)rdr +
R ∞
a
J2
0 (κa)
K2
0(δa)K2
0(δr)rdr
2
R a
0 J4
0(κr)rdr +
R ∞
a
J4
0 (κa)
K4
0(δa)K4
0(δr)rdr
(3.22)
The integrals are handled numerically, where the upper limit has been chosen
such that convergence of the integrals are ensured. The core index in ZBLAN
is based on the Sellmeier equation given in [44], with the cladding found by
assuming a constant NA of 0.2. The eﬀective index used is based on equation
(3.7), and therefore does not correspond to the dispersion given in the previous
section. Any attempt at calculating the eﬀective index did not correspond with
the measurement.
So I decided that the least worst choice was to use the
measurement for the eﬀective index input, and the material indices, along with
the analytical scalar approximation for the eﬀective area.
3.3.2
Chalcogenides
For the chalcogenides the eﬀective area is calculated directly with the ﬁelds
obtained in COMSOL. All of the obtained eﬀective areas are shown in ﬁgure
3.11.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Eﬀective area
37
Figure 3.11: The eﬀective areas of all ﬁve ﬁbres. Note the diﬀerent scales on
all axes. As longer wavelengths are generally not as well conﬁned
as shorter wavelengths, the eﬀective area is seen to increase with
wavelength for all ﬁbres. A higher eﬀective area leads to a lower
nonlinear strength.
==PAGE:54==
38
Input parameters for propagation equation
3.4
Fibre attenuation
There are many sources of loss in ﬁbre optics. The ones treated here are all
intrinsic ﬁbre loss sources. That means external factors, such as temperature
pressure or ﬁbre bending will not be treated. Common for all the ﬁbres is that
they have a region of guidance, with a loss edge at both long and short wave-
lengths, commonly referred to as the IR and UV loss edges.
With enough input power and a long enough ﬁbre the spectral width is deter-
mined by the loss edges.
3.4.1
Analytical parametrisation - EYDF and Si:Tm
For the two silica ﬁbres (EYDF and Thulium doped ﬁbre) the loss curves are
assumed to be identical, and the parametrisation given in [45] is used
αdB/m(λ) = ARay
λ4
+ Aip + Auv exp
λuv
λ

+ Air exp
−λir
λ

α1/m = ln(10)
10
αdB/m
(3.23)
Here OH loss has been neglected. Similarly, conﬁnement loss has been neglected,
as the mode is assumed to be well enough conﬁned that it does not leak out of
the cladding.
In [45] the parameters have been found from a silica Photonic Crystal Fiber
(PCF). However, the loss mechanisms considered are either material parameters,
or unavoidable products of the ﬁbre fabrication, that are not intrinsic to PCFs.
Thus, the parameters from [45] can be safely used
ARay = 1.3 × 10−3 dBµm4
m
Aip = 10−3 dB
m
Auv = 10−6 dB
m
Air = 6 × 108 dB
m
λuv = 4.67µm
λir = 47.8µm
(3.24)
Note λir is 478µm in [45], but this is an error (see ﬁgure 3.12, or ﬁgure 2.3
in [45]). The same values as given here were used in [17], except the constant
loss due to imperfections from the ﬁbre drawing process, Aip, was neglected in
[17]. In most cases this is not important as a constant loss of 10−3 dB
m is only
distinguishable for long propagation lengths.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Fibre attenuation
39
Figure 3.12: Implemented loss curves, note the diﬀerent scales on all axes.
The silica loss curve is used for both the EYDF and Tm-doped
ﬁbre. The silica graph shows the individual constituents of the
ﬁbre loss. The origin of the ﬁbre loss constituents are common
for all ﬁbres, but for the ZBLAN and chalcogenide ﬁbres, mea-
surements of ﬁbre loss were used instead of a parametrisation.
The OH loss, which was neglected in the silica ﬁbres, is apparent
in ZBLAN at 2900nm. In the As2S3 and As2Se3 ﬁbres equiva-
lent noise peaks from SH and SeH are present at 4000nm and
4700nm respectively. Note that the minimum loss of silica is or-
ders of magnitude lower compared to all other ﬁbres. Especially,
the chalcogenides have a very high minimum loss, which means
the applicability of the chalcogenides is limited to relatively short
ﬁbre lengths. Fortunately, this is possible due to their almost 3
orders of magnitude higher nonlinear refractive indices.
==PAGE:56==
40
Input parameters for propagation equation
3.4.2
ZBLAN and chalcogenides
The attenuation of the ZBLAN ﬁbre has been measured by Kyei Kwarkye (un-
published) in the transmitting range from 0.7 µm to 4.2 µm. The loss in the
remaining wavelength grid has been found by using spline extrapolation of this
measurement, ensuring an increasing spline at the edges, so the loss does not
turn negative. The loss in the transmitting region can be seen in the upper right
plot in ﬁgure 3.12.
The loss in the chalcogenides has been provided by the manufacturer IRﬂex
[46]. Similarly to the ZBLAN ﬁbre, the loss curve has been extrapolated using
a spline function. The used loss curve for the chalcogenides can be seen in the
two bottom plots in ﬁgure 3.12.
In fact the attenuation of ZBLAN and the chalcogenides are much greater than
the theoretically achievable minimum loss. Currently, the biggest issue is proper
manufacturing techniques. The theoretical minimum attenuation of ZBLAN is
approximately two orders of magnitude lower than that of silica. It is speculated
that drawing of ZBLAN ﬁbres in space could lead to a signiﬁcant improvement,
due to the lower gravity conditions [47].
3.5
Raman response
The Raman response for the ﬁbres has been obtained in diﬀerent ways. For
this reason they are treated individually in this section. During supercontin-
uum generation the Raman eﬀect is responsible for continuously red-shifting the
spectrum.
3.5.1
EYDF
The Raman response of the EYDF is that of silica. This is a well-known result,
and in this work the full Raman response function given in chapter 8 in Agrawal
[24] is used. It can be seen in the top left corner in ﬁgure 3.13
3.5.2
Si:Tm
In the SEM/EDS analysis, it was obtained that the core of the Tm-doped ﬁbre
ampliﬁer contains 9.46% GeO2. In [34] it is described how the nonlinearity and
Raman response of GeO2 is approximately 5 times bigger than that of SiO2.
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Raman response
41
Figure 3.13: Frequency domain Raman response curves of all the ﬁbres sim-
ulated. Re(˜hR) is the real part of the frequency domain Raman
response function, and Im(˜hR) is the imaginary part. The impor-
tance of these compared to other nonlinear eﬀects in the super-
continuum generation is determined by the size of the fractional
Raman response fR. Note the diﬀerent scales on the axes.
==PAGE:58==
42
Input parameters for propagation equation
For this reason a weighted average of the Raman response of SiO2 and GeO2
given by a Lorentz model is used. In the Lorentz model the individual responses
are given by [24].
hR(t) = τ 2
1 + τ 2
2
τ1τ 2
2
exp
−t
τ2

sin
 t
τ1

Θ(t) ⇒˜hR(ω) =
τ 2
1 + τ 2
2
τ 2
2 −τ 2
1 (i + ωτ2)2
(3.25)
Where Θ(t) is the Heaviside function, and ω is the relative frequency between
the Raman pump and signal. The real part of this function gives the Raman
induced refractive index shift, and the imaginary part gives the Raman gain
curve.
τ1[fs]
τ2[fs]
fR
SiO2
12.2
32
0.18
GeO2
12
83
0.13
Table 3.2: The relevant parameters for the Raman term in SiO2 and GeO2.
All GeO2 parameters are taken from [34], and all SiO2 parameters
are taken from [24].
The relevant parameters for the Lorentz model, as well as the fractional Raman
response of the pure materials is given in table 3.2.
3.5.3
ZBLAN and chalcogenides
The Raman response of ZBLAN and the chalcogenides have been obtained by
ﬁnding the Raman gain (gR(ω)) in the literature, and calculating the full Raman
response from this.
The Raman gain can be measured by inputting a co-propagating broadband
signal with a narrowband pump in a ﬁbre [10].
The Raman gain gR(ω) is related to the imaginary part of the full Raman
response function. The Raman time response hR(t) can be found as
hR(t) = PF 3Θ(t)c
4πωpfRn2
Z ∞
0
gR(ω) sin(ωt)dω
(3.26)
I have not found this relation properly derived in the literature, so I have in-
cluded a derivation in appendix A. Θ(t) is the Heaviside function, ωp is the
frequency of the pump used in the measurement, PF is a factor that depends on
the polarisation properties of the pump and signal in the ﬁbre. As a simple ap-
proach PF = 1 if the polarisation of the pump and signal are parallel, PF = 10,
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Raman response
43
if the polarisation of the pump and the signal are orthogonal, and PF = 2 if
either or both are unpolarised. The value of fR is chosen so that
Z ∞
−∞
hR(t)dt = 1
(3.27)
The full Raman response in the frequency domain ,˜hR(ω), is found by Fourier
transforming hR(t).
ZBLAN
For ZBLAN the Raman gain parametrisation of [10] is used. The Raman gain
has been measured at a pump wavelength of 1650nm, and ﬁtted to two Gaussians
gR(ω) =
X
i
ai exp

−(ω/(2π) −νi)2
2w2
i

(3.28)
Where ω is the frequency shift. The ﬁtting parameters are given by table 3.3.
i
1
2
ai[m/W]
3.52 · 10−14
1.64 · 10−14
νi[THz]
17.4
12.4
wiTHz
0.68
3.46
Table 3.3: The Raman gain parameters of ZBLAN
No polarisor has been used in the setup, so PF = 2.
The obtained Raman
spectrum in the frequency domain can be seen in ﬁgure 3.13, and the obtained
fractional Raman response is fR = 0.0969.
As2S3
For As2S3 the measurements of [48] were used. I have ﬁtted their measured
gain curve, and their measured peak Raman gain of 4.3 · 10−12m/W, to three
Gaussians, according to equation 3.28, thus obtaining the parametrisation given
in table 3.4.
i
1
2
3
ai[m/W]
2.321 · 10−13
4.255 · 10−12
1.892 · 10−13
νi[THz]
5.285
10.599
13
wiTHz
0.7027
0.6325
1.414
Table 3.4: The Raman gain parameters of As2S3
The Raman gain curve was measured at 1472nm. The polarisation state of the
pump and signal were parallel in this experiment, so PF = 1. The obtained
==PAGE:60==
44
Input parameters for propagation equation
fractional Raman response is fR = 0.0103, and the obtained Raman response
in the frequency domain can be seen in ﬁgure 3.13.
As2Se3
For As2Se3 the measurements of [49] were used. The Raman response was once
again ﬁtted to three Gaussians according to equation (3.28), with the parameters
given in table 3.5. The Raman gain was measured at 1540nm. The Pump and
i
1
2
3
ai[m/W]
3.1428 · 10−11
−0.6995 · 10−11
2.1735 · 10−11
νi[THz]
6.9228
5.0088
5.6294
wiTHz
0.4947
0.9416
1.677
Table 3.5: The Raman gain parameters of As2Se3
signal were unpolarised, so PF = 1. The obtained fractional Raman response is
fR = 0.0825, and the total Raman response in the frequency domain is shown
in the last plot in ﬁgure 3.13.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Results
The output of the code is the pulse in the frequency domain. In this section this
is presented in two ways, one is the Power Spectral Density (PSD), and the other
is a spectrogram. The ﬁnal PSD ﬁgures shown are averages over 18 simulations
using diﬀerent vacuum noise seeds and pump Relative Intensity Noise (RIN).
Furthermore, a running average in wavelength has been applied, with a stepsize
of 1nm, and a band pass ﬁlter of 5nm to make the spectra resemble what would
have been obtained using an OSA.
The PSD is calculated from the output as
PSD(λ, z) =
c
 ˜
A(λ, z)

2
RR
λ2
(4.1)
Where the Repetition Rate (RR) is 1Mhz. The PSD is shown in units of dB/nm,
given by PSDdB/nm = 10 log 10(PSD)/109, (0dB/nm corresponds to 1W/nm).
A spectrogram gives a complete temporal and spectral snapshot of the light
at a given propagation distance. It is produced in quite a similar way as the
application of the Fourier ﬁlter in section 3.2.2. The Fourier transform of the
spectrum in the time domain, multiplied by a moving Hamming window is taken.
Upon doing this across the whole time grid, a colormap of the spectrum can be
generated, with time on one axis, wavelength on the other, and the PSD on the
colour scale.
==PAGE:62==
46
Results
4.1
Simulated and experimental results of the ﬁrst
three ﬁbres
The spectra of the three ﬁrst ﬁbres are compared to unpublished spectra that
have been experimentally observed by Christian Rosenberg Petersen. All ﬁbre
lengths are chosen to match what has been used experimentally, and the gain
amplitudes, as well as the wavelength independent coupling eﬃciency between
the ﬁrst three ﬁbres have been chosen to capture the experimentally observed
spectra. The coupling eﬃciency is calculated by ﬁnding the average power over
an ensemble of 18, and scaling them all by the same ratio. The ratio is given
by the simulated average power divided by the experimentally observed average
power. In this way the exact same input power as the experimentally observed
is used as input for the next ﬁbre. Furthermore, it is ensured that the noise
from the pump RIN is retained in the coupling between each ﬁbre.
The re-scaling is done so that the parameter optimisation on the chalcogenides
(and as it turns out also ZBLAN) can be easily used, and tested on an actual
existing system. The total powers experimentally observed are 1100mW out
of the EYDF, 420mW after the Tm-doped ﬁbre unpumped, 800mW after the
Tm-doped ﬁbre pumped, and 400mW out of ZBLAN.
In ﬁgures 4.1, 4.3, and 4.4 the evolution of the PSD, as well as the input and
output spectrogram of the EYDF, Tm-doped ﬁbre, and ZBLAN are shown,
accordingly.
4.1.1
EYDF
The spectral evolution in the EYDF shows the onset of spectral broadening as
side bands appear on both sides of the input pulse after 4 meters of propagation.
As the dispersion is anomalous at the pump, the side bands are presumed to
originate from Modulational Instability (MI). MI is a nonlinear phenomenon
where light, or even OPPMN in a spectral range around a pulse is ampliﬁed.
Considering the simplest form of the NLSE, given by
i∂A
∂z = −γ|A|2A + 1
2β2
∂2A
∂t2
(4.2)
Where β2 = ∂2β
∂Ω2 |Ω=Ωp = −λ2
2πcD|Ω=Ωp, and the nonlinear parameter, γ, is given
by γ =
Ωpn2
cAeff(Ωp). In the case of anomalous dispersion MI gain can be shown to
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Simulated and experimental results of the ﬁrst three ﬁbres
47
Figure 4.1: Top: Single shot and mean spectral evolution of the EYDF. With
the spectrum after 5 meters shown above. The single shot simula-
tion is seen to ﬂuctuate quite a bit, whereas the mean of 18 seeds
is seen to be smoother. A fairly nice accordance is seen between
the simulation and the experiment. The spectral evolution shows
the input pulse steadily gaining during propagation.
Nonlinear
eﬀects kick in after propagating 4 meters. At this point spectral
broadening starts happening, so that the output spectrum spans
approximately from 1.4µm to 1.8µm.
Bottom: A spectrogram showing the input pulse (left) and the
output pulse (right). Both are normalised to their own maximum
value. At the central point in time of the output pulse, the power
is highest, and at this point the spectral broadening is seen.
==PAGE:64==
48
Results
Figure 4.2: The MI gain spectrum around the pump in the EYDF, along with
the normalised PSD after 4 meters of propagation. The PSD is an
average over an ensemble of 4 simulations, using a running average
with stepsize and band pass ﬁlter width of 0.2nm.
be given by
GainMI = Re
"
ω
r
β2γP0 −β2
2
4 ω2
#
(4.3)
Where ω = Ω−ΩP , with Ωp = 2πc
λp ; λp = 1560nm; and β2 = −25.82 ps2
km2 and
γ = 1.3 · 10−3(Wm−1) are determined at the pump. The peak power at the
onset of MI is not easily determinable, as it is in a gain ﬁbre, with a constant
gain along the ﬁbre. However, the onset peak power is determined by when
the MI gain bands are distinguishable from the background, and is found to be
approximately P0 = 2200W after 3 meters of propagation. This gives the gain
spectrum shown in ﬁgure 4.2, which is shown along with the normalised PSD
after 4 meters of propagation. Taking all parameters as constant, the width and
amplitude of the MI gain spectrum is determined by the peak power. The peak
power increases along the propagation in the ﬁbre, which means the width and
amplitude at the gain bands will increase with propagation. This is the reason
why the spectrum has broadened further than the MI gain, and the reason why
the peak of the PSD in the gain bands is closer to the pump, than what is
predicted by the MI-gain spectrum. The ﬂuctuations seen in the PSD is the
ampliﬁcation of the ﬂuctuations from the OPPMN.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Simulated and experimental results of the ﬁrst three ﬁbres
49
4.1.2
Si:Tm
In ﬁgure 4.3 the results of the simulations on the Tm-doped ﬁbre are shown.
The Tm-doped ﬁbre gain curve from section 2.2 was made by matching the out-
put spectrum to a single noise seed. This turned out to be an oversimplication,
as the obtained average output power of 18 seeds, was 25 % bigger, than the
experimentally observed average power. Furthermore, a discrepancy of almost
20dB is seen around the gain band at 1800nm. A possible origin of this discrep-
ancy is the eﬀective gain model (see ﬁgure 2.1). In a more sophisticated model
the power is actually built up more rapidly around 1800nm shifting the onset
of spectral broadening closer to the input end of the ﬁbre. Consequently the
pump is depleted and the gain towards the end of the ﬁbre is diminished. The
earlier broadening, the lower gain towards the end, and the all together more
steady gain results in a smoother dissipation of power from 1800nm towards the
mid-IR. This results in less extreme broadening and lower PSD at 1800nm.
==PAGE:66==
50
Results
Figure 4.3: The obtained results of the Tm-doped silica ﬁbre. Top: Single shot
and mean spectral evolution of the Tm-doped silica ﬁbre. With
the spectrum after 1.5 meters shown above. The PSD of single
shot simulation is seen to ﬂuctuate, whereas the mean of 18 seeds
is seen to be smoother. The spectral evolution of the single shot
shows that the gain band at 1800nm starts building up a lot of
power towards the end. At this point the spectrum rapidly broad-
ens to approximately 2600nm.
A fair correspondence with the
experimentally obtained spectrum is seen except around 1800nm.
Bottom: A spectrogram showing the input pulse (left) and the
output pulse (right). Both are normalised to their own maximum
value. The spectrogram at 1.5 meters shows the increased broad-
ening. Furthermore, the dispersion of the ﬁbre is now apparent
as the light at higher wavelengths than the pump is seen to start
trailing behind. At the longest wavelengths individual solitons are
apparent as individual lines in the spectrograms.
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Simulated and experimental results of the ﬁrst three ﬁbres
51
4.1.3
ZBLAN
In ﬁgure 4.4 the spectral and temporal dynamics of the ZBLAN ﬁbre are shown.
The remaining light at ∼1560nm is in the anomalous dispersion regime right
next to the ZDW. Thus, solitons enter the ZBLAN ﬁbre, but the value of the
dispersion, and thereby also β2, is much lower. This leads to temporal compres-
sion, and thereby spectral broadening of the input solitons. Along with SPM
this pushes light across the ZDW. Once a suﬃcient amount of light is present in
the normal dispersion regime below 1.51µm, phase matching occurs across the
ZDW. At this point dispersive wave generation rapidly moves power to lower
wavelengths [24]. A more clear picture of this eﬀect, where the input is a single
soliton in the anomalous dispersion regime, can be seen in [9].
The remaining light in the anomalous dispersion regime is broadened to longer
wavelengths by soliton dynamics, with the spectrum extending all the way to
the second ZDW at 4.25µm.
The correspondence with the experimentally measured curve is generally good
for longer wavelengths, which for the purpose of mid-IR generation is most im-
portant. The spectral edge of the simulation is seen to extend a bit further in the
simulations. However, due to the very high non-linearity in the following ﬁbres,
the spectral width in these will not be determined by the spectral edge out of
ZBLAN. A lot of small ﬂuctuations in the measured spectrum are not present in
the simulations. This could be due to beating with higher order modes and/or
cladding modes, that are not present in the scalar numerical approach.
The light around the pump at 1.56µm is mostly gone in the experimentally
obtained ZBLAN spectrum. It is diﬃcult to determine the reason why, from a
numerical point of view. But there are two possible explanations, both based
on ineﬃcient coupling into the ZBLAN ﬁbre:
• A large part of the low wavelength light was in a cladding mode.
In
the measured spectra there is still some remnant of the pumps at 790nm
and 978nm used in the EYDF-ampliﬁer and Tm-doped ﬁbre ampliﬁer,
respectively. As the ampliﬁer pumps are not included in the simulations,
these are not seen. However, the ﬁbre ampliﬁers are double clad, so that
any light left at the end of the ﬁbre ampliﬁer will be mostly in the inner
cladding rather than the core.
This leads to very ineﬃcient coupling,
which means that the light at the ampliﬁer-pump wavelengths would be
lost in the coupling into ZBLAN.
• The light is in a HOM. The single mode cutoﬀin the Tm-doped ﬁbre is
at 2.87µm, so it is likely that some light is guided in higher order modes.
HOMs will not couple as eﬃciently into ZBLAN. Light conﬁned in higher
order modes in the ZBLAN ﬁbre can also help explain the lower PSD
generally observed at lower wavelengths than the ZDW, as the dispersive
==PAGE:68==
52
Results
wave generation will not be as eﬃcient, if the power is split among multiple
modes.
Figure 4.4: The obtained results of the ZBLAN ﬁbre. The dashed lines indi-
cate the ZDWs. Top: Single shot and mean spectral evolution of
the ZBLAN ﬁbre. With the spectrum after 7 meters shown above.
In the single shot simulation the PSD is seen to ﬂuctuate, whereas
the mean of 18 seeds is seen to be quite smooth. The spectral
evolution shows rapid broadening to both higher and lower wave-
lengths. After the initial broadening the spectrum expands more
slowly towards longer wavelengths, with the edge of the spectrum
approximately at the second ZDW at 4.25µm. The spectrograms
show that, due to the broadness of the obtained spectrum, and
the high absolute dispersion at low wavelengths, the light at all
wavelengths is delayed relative to the remaining seed laser input
pulse, which almost travels at the highest group velocity, as it is
very close to the ﬁrst ZDW.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Coupling eﬃciency
53
Figure 4.5: The coupling eﬃciencies between ZBLAN and As2S3 (black curve),
and As2S3 and As2Se3(red curve).
4.2
Coupling eﬃciency
The coupling eﬃciency is found with the scalar ﬁelds (equation (3.6)). It is
given by [42]
η =
|⟨ψ1, ψ2⟩|2
⟨ψ1, ψ1⟩⟨ψ2, ψ2⟩
(4.4)
Where the subscripts refer to the ﬁelds in the two given ﬁbres. The inner product
is given by
⟨ψm, ψn⟩=
Z
dr⊥ψ∗
mψn
(4.5)
With the ﬁelds deﬁned in equation (3.6) the coupling eﬃciency can be written
as
η =
R
drψ1(r)ψ2(r)r
2
R
drψ1(r)ψ1(r)r
R
drψ2(r)ψ2(r)r
(4.6)
All angular integrals evaluate to 2π, due to angular symmetry, and cancel out.
The obtained coupling eﬃciencies can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5. The coupling in both
cases is seen to be quite poor when going to higher wavelengths. Especially, the
coupling between the chalcogenides is ineﬃcient, with a loss of more than 50% of
the light at higher wavelengths than 7µm. The COMSOL simulations showed
quite poor mode conﬁnement of the fundamental mode in the As2S3 ﬁbre at
==PAGE:70==
54
Results
higher wavelengths. This is what leads to the high coupling loss. The eﬃciency
of the supercontinuum generation could be greatly improved by reducing this
coupling loss. For example, this could be done by using a As2S3 with a larger
core radius, or a higher NA. However, there is a limited commercial availability
of chalcogenide ﬁbres.
4.3
Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides
Having obtained the numerical spectra from the ﬁrst three ﬁbres, and shown a
reasonable correspondence to the experimentally obtained spectra, it is ﬁnally
time to treat the results from the chalcogenides. These results are interpreted
thoroughly, as knowledge of the important eﬀects and parameters allows im-
proved optimisation.
4.3.1
As2S3
The ZDW at 6.7µm in the As2S3 ﬁbre means that the entire spectrum from
the ZBLAN ﬁbre is in the normal dispersion regime. Therefore, the spectral
broadening in the As2S3 ﬁbre will be dominated by Self Phase Modulation
(SPM) and Optical Wave Breaking (OWB). Under the assumption that each
pulse propagates without interacting with the remaining spectrum, a measure
of the span of generated frequencies through SPM and OWB is found from the
standard NLSE given in equation 4.2. If the dynamics are mostly governed by
the nonlinearity (γ ≫β2), the equation has the solution
A(z, t) = A(0, t) exp(iφ),
φ = γ|A(0, t)|2z
(4.7)
For a secant-hyperbolic (sech)-shaped input pulse, given by A(0, t) = √P0 sech(t/T0),
the chirp frequency is given by
Ωc = −∂φ
∂t = 2γP0z
T0
sech2
 t
T0

tanh
 t
T0

(4.8)
SPM will broaden the spectrum in frequency until the point where dispersion
has made the light at higher (lower) frequencies generated by SPM catch up
to the front (back) of the pulse. At this point a singularity in the derivative
of the temporal pulse is generated, creating very high peak powers leading to a
Four-Wave Mixing (FWM) process called Optical Wave Breaking (OWB). OWB
shifts light from the pump frequency to the frequency at twice the distance from
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides
55
the SPM shifted light. This means that the width of the frequency spectrum
after OWB is given by
∆ΩOW B = 2max|Ωc| = 2γP0zOW B
T0
4
√
3
9
(4.9)
In [50] the wave-breaking distance zOW B for a sech input pulse is found to be
zOW B = T 2
0
β2


3
2 + γP0T 2
0
β2


1/2
(4.10)
Note that the result above has been rewritten to correspond to the deﬁnition of
the NLSE given in equation (4.2). Finally, the width of the spectrum generated
from a soliton through SPM and OWB is given by
∆ΩOW B = 8
3
γP0T0
β2


1
2 + γP0T 2
0
β2


1/2
(4.11)
From this equation a lower bound of the wavelength, at which an input soli-
ton undergoing SPM and OWB will generate light at the loss edge in As2S3,
can be estimated.
This is done through typical soliton values read oﬀthe
output of ZBLAN. At a wavelength of 3µm the input parameters are n2 =
420 · 10−20(Wm)−1, Aeﬀ= 64µm2, giving γ = 0.138(Wm)−1, β2 = 200 ps2
km ,
T0 ∼80fs, and P0 ∼50kW. Under these circumstances a sech-shaped pulse
undergoing SPM and OWB is predicted to extend all the way to 6.77 µm. Soli-
tons at a shorter wavelength than 3µm will not broaden spectrally all the way
to the loss edge in As2S3, and solitons at longer wavelengths will broaden into
the loss edge, which leads to a loss of power. Thus, as simple estimate, the
most eﬀective conversion to high wavelength light is obtained by maximising
the power at wavelengths above 3µm in the output of ZBLAN. This is found to
be after 4.9 meters of ZBLAN ﬁbre as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6. However, it is
seen that the power over 3 µm does not change much after having been built
up. Therefore, from economical considerations, one might choose 1.9 meters of
ZBLAN ﬁbre. Tests were conducted on using either the output after 1.9 meters,
4.9 meters, or 7 meters as the input to the As2S3 ﬁbre, with the most promising
results obtained with 4.9 meters. Thus, the output after 4.9 meters of ZBLAN
is used in the chalcogenides.
In ﬁgure 4.7 the spectral and temporal evolution in the As2S3 ﬁbre are shown.
The spectral evolution shows extremely rapid broadening. With the spectrum
extending slightly past the ZDW at 6.7µm. This is also past the loss edge of
As2S3, which is seen by the rapid attenuation in this region. In fact, the spec-
trum extends almost to 7µm if only 2cm of ﬁbre are used. The light at lower
wavelengths is also seen to attenuate rather quickly, which is of interest, as this
==PAGE:72==
56
Results
100mW @4.9m
97mW @1.9m
Figure 4.6: The integrated PSD at wavelengths above 3µm at the output of
the ZBLAN ﬁbre as a function of propagation length. A maximum
power over 3µm of approximately 100mW is obtained after 4.9
meters, as indicated.
could lead to ﬁbre degradation in the As2Se3 ﬁbre.
The spectrograms show that the individual solitons in the output from ZBLAN
do indeed undergo SPM and OWB, without interacting signiﬁcantly with each
other, or the remaining light. After the rapid broadening of the spectrum, the
spectral evolution is mostly dominated by attenuation.
The total evolution of power, as well as the power at lower wavelengths than
2µm, and higher than 5.5µm, are shown in ﬁgure 4.8. A few things are important
in choosing the length at which to cut the As2S3 ﬁbre.
1. The power in the mid-IR should be optimised. Fortunately, this occurs
almost initially, so that the total integrated power over 5.5µm is optimised
after only 3 −5cm, obtaining 5mW
2. The coupling eﬃciency between As2S3 and As2Se3, as shown in ﬁgure 4.5
is rapidly decreasing for higher wavelengths, so most light extending far
into mid-IR will be lost in the coupling
3. The total power, and especially the total power at wavelengths below 2µm
should be as low as possible, as it leads to degradation in the As2Se3 ﬁbre.
In ﬁgure 4.8 it is clearly seen that in this regard the length of the ﬁbre
should just be as long as possible. Fortunately, the output of the ZBLAN
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides
57
Figure 4.7: The obtained results of the As2S3 ﬁbre, using the ZBLAN output
at 4.9 meters. The dashed lines in the ﬁgures is the ZDW. Top:
Single shot and mean spectral evolution of the As2S3 ﬁbre. With
the spectrum after 0.2 meters shown above.
In the single shot
simulation, the PSD is seen to ﬂuctuate, whereas the mean of 18
seeds is seen to be quite smooth. The spectral evolution shows ex-
tremely rapid broadening all the way to the ZDW and the IR loss
edge. The spectrograms show that this is indeed SPM, which is
followed by OWB, as each soliton from the ZBLAN ﬁbre is broad-
ened into both higher and lower wavelengths. Furthermore, it is
seen that the assumption of each soliton broadening independently
is good, as each soliton draws its own line in the spectrogram at
z = 0.2m.
ﬁbre shown in ﬁgure 4.4 shows that the simulations overestimate the light
remaining in the pump at 1560nm, so that the power handling issues would
not be as signiﬁcant in the lab.
4. There is a practicality issue using very short ﬁbres. If only the mid-IR
power should be optimised, the ﬁbre should have a length of 3cm, which
is so short that it would be rather hard to handle in the lab.
For the purpose of the remainder of this thesis, the output after 5cm of propa-
gation is used as the input for the As2Se3 simulations.
==PAGE:74==
58
Results
Figure 4.8: The power evolution in the As2S3 ﬁbre. The power over 5.5µm
(orange triangles) has a maximum of 5mW after 3cm propaga-
tion. The total power using a low-pass-ﬁlter at 2µm (black stars)
increases initially, as SPM and OWB shifts some light to lower
wavelengths. After a few cm of propagation it falls oﬀ. The total
power (blue circles) is monotonically decreasing.
4.3.2
As2Se3
Finally, the As2Se3 ﬁbre is ready to be investigated. A simulation of 1.5 meters
of As2Se3 ﬁbre takes 3-5 days, on the Tesla V100 GPU which is currently the
most powerful GPU in the DTU High Performance Computing cluster. A max-
imum of 6 of these are available at a given time, which means that simulating
the 18 diﬀerent noise seeds on the As2Se3 ﬁbre, takes a minimum of 15 days.
Thus, the results given in this section are the ﬁnal results that were obtained
within this project. The obtained results are shown in ﬁgure 4.9. Most notably,
at continuous red-shift of light starting at 2.5µm is apparent. At this point the
spectral broadening is not exactly trivial anymore, and for this reason it may be
instructive to take a step back and consider, some of the nonlinear interaction
processes that lead to spectral broadening and when they occur.
The wavelength range with high power light is entirely in the normal disper-
sion, as stated previously, this means there are no solitons at these frequencies.
Thus, the continuous red-shift is not Raman self-frequency shift of solitons, but
perhaps a similar eﬀect on a similar pulse shape. Stimulated Raman Scattering
(SRS) is still possible, which usually shows up as a red-shifted side band at the
maximum Raman gain wavelength relative to an input pulse. If the input pulse
and the gain is strong enough several of these side bands are created at the
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides
59
Figure 4.9: The obtained results of the As2Se3 ﬁbre, using the As2S3 ﬁbre out-
put at 0.05 meters. The dashed lines in the ﬁgures is the ZDW.
Top: Single shot and mean spectral evolution of the As2Se3 ﬁbre.
With the spectrum after 1.5 meters shown above. In the single
shot simulation the PSD is seen to ﬂuctuate quite a bit, whereas
the mean of 18 seeds is seen to be quite smooth. A rapid broad-
ening is seen initially, which seems to come from the part of the
spectrum, that is above the ZDW from the input. Most of the
light at the input is seen to be between 2µm and 3µm. This is
continuously red-shifted through the length of the ﬁbre. The red-
shifting halts once reaching approximately 5µm, but at this point
a large build-up of power is seen at the higher wavelengths. The
build-up continues until the end of the ﬁbre.
discreet wavelengths that correspond to the maximum Raman gain. In addi-
tion, two eﬀects that lead to spectral broadening in normal dispersion are SPM
and Cross Phase Modulation (XPM). During XPM light at two frequencies can
induce a nonlinear polarisation at a frequency lower than the two, and higher
than the two, leading to spectral broadening in both directions.
To test which nonlinear interaction eﬀect is the dominant, a simulation was run,
where the Raman eﬀect was neglected by choosing fR = 0. The simulations,
where the Raman eﬀect has been turned of can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10. Some
spectral broadening is seen, with the spectrum extending past 10µm. However,
the continuous red-shift of light starting at ∼2.5µm, seen in ﬁgure 4.9, is not
present. For this reason it must be concluded that the continuous red-shift is
==PAGE:76==
60
Results
Figure 4.10: Single shot simulation with 70cm of propagation, where the Ra-
man eﬀect is turned oﬀ, by setting fR = 0.
The dashed line
indicates the ZDW Some spectral broadening is seen at the long
wavelengths, but no continuous red-shift of the light centred
around 2.5µm is seen. This ﬁgure is plotted on the same colour
scale as ﬁgure 4.9.
Raman induced
Furhtermore, the dispersion in the ZBLAN ﬁbre has spread out the spectrum in
time, such that the light at the ﬁrst ZDW, at 1.51µm, in ZBLAN is leading at
the input of the As2Se3 ﬁbre. The very high absolute values of dispersion at the
lower wavelengths means that the light at longer wavelengths quickly catches
up with the leading edge of the spectrum. The eﬀect is enhanced by the fact
that the red-shifting light will be slowly overtaken by the light at longer wave-
lengths, so that it is continuously fed with more power. Thus, Raman response
and temporal compression of the spectrum is the reason why the continuous
red-shifting of light from ∼2.5µm to ∼5µm is seen in ﬁgure 4.9.
Towards the end of the ﬁbre the red-shifting is slowed down, but at this point
it has contributed to the spectrum extending far into the mid-IR, with a -20dB
edge at 11.85µm. The spectrograms in ﬁgure 4.9 show the extreme dispersion.
The moving frame of reference in the model is chosen such that light at 1.56µm
is stationary in time. However, at this point most of the spectrum has been
extended to longer wavelengths, and most of the light remaining at the seed
wavelength has been attenuated. The very high dispersion at lower wavelengths
is seen by the spectrum having passed through the edges of the time grid twice,
which is unfortunate, as it means that the leading edge starts interacting with
the trailing edge, and in fact the bulk of the spectrum. Luckily, the PSD at the
trailing edge is very low due to the high attenuation, so that it can be assumed
that the eﬀect is negligible. In ﬁgure 4.11 the power evolution in the As2Se3
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides
61
Figure 4.11: The power evolution in the As2Se3 ﬁbre. The power over 5.5µm
(orange triangles) has a maximum of 14.6mW at the ﬁbre output,
that seems to have barely found its maximum. The total power
(blue circles), and the total power using a low-pass-ﬁlter at 2µm
(black stars) are monotonically decreasing.
ﬁbre is shown. Initially, a single simulation showed that the total power at wave-
lengths above 5.5µm reached its maximum after propagating 1 meter. This was
used to determine the full propagation length of the full ensemble, which was
chosen to be 1.5 meters to add a buﬀer. Unfortunately, the full ensemble of 18
diﬀerent noise seeds, show that the maximum is in fact not entirely reached in
1.5 meters, but it seems to be converging at this point. In hindsight, it would be
preferable to continue propagating until 2m to ensure convergence, however the
conclusions remain largely unchanged. The maximum is found when the rate
of increasing power due to spectral broadening matches the rate of decreasing
power due to attenuation.
The obtained average power over 5.5µm reaches 14.6mW, with a total power of
90mW. The power under 2µm decreases quite rapidly initially, which is due to
the continuous red-shift.
==PAGE:78==
62
Results
4.3.3
Noise calculation on the ﬁnal spectrum
Assuming that the output noise follows a normal distribution at all wavelengths,
the standard deviation of the PSD can be calculated as
SD(λ) =
v
u
u
t
1
N −1
N
X
i=1
(PSD(λ) −PSDi(λ))2
(4.12)
Where PSD is the average PSD over N simulations using diﬀerent noise seeds.
The standard deviation converges to a ﬁxed value if the ensemble is big enough.
As mentioned the ensemble in this work is N = 18. The Standard Deviation Of
the Mean (SDOM) can be calculated as
SDOM(λ) = SD(λ)
√
N
(4.13)
In ﬁgure 4.12 the obtained average spectrum of the cascaded supercontinuum
is shown. A nice thing to note is that the supercontinuum so ﬂat, that it can
be visualised well on a linear scale. The conﬁdence interval given by PSD(λ) ±
SDOM(λ) is shown as the grey area on the curve. On the right y-axis the the
RIN is shown. The RIN is calculated as
RIN(λ) = SDOM(λ)
PSD(λ)
(4.14)
A rather constant RIN of approximately 23 −24% has been obtained.
This
result is rather surprising, and will be investigated further in section 5.3.
==PAGE:79==
4.3 Parameter optimisation of Chalcogenides
63
Figure 4.12: The obtained average spectrum from the cascade plotted on a
linear scale, plotted on top of the mean plus/minus the standard
deviation of the mean. The right y-axis shows the RIN, which is
almost constant at 23%. For the RIN data points a step size of
80nm, and a band pass ﬁlter of 160nm was used in the running
average.
==PAGE:80==
64
Results
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Discussion
As the results have been discussed in the results chapter, this chapter will be
rather short. The discussion will mainly be on the used models, where they
might fall short, and what could have been done diﬀerently.
When doing modelling with the GNLSE it is important to test the impact
of changing the grid. During the process of this thesis many such tests have
been done.
The temporally narrowest solitons observed were approximately
10fs, which means that the temporal resolution of 1.5fs resolves the narrowest
solitons in approximately 7 grid points.
As seen in the spectrograms in ﬁgure 4.9, the low wavelength tail of the spectrum
travels through the edge of the time domain, such that it starts overlapping with
light at longer wavelengths. This could have been avoided using a larger time
domain, however this would have included either compromising the temporal
resolution, or using more grid points.
The main numerical load comes from the large number of Fourier transforms, the
computational cost of a FFT is proportional to Nt ln(Nt). Thus, when Nt ≫1,
doubling the size of the grid approximately leads to twice the numerical load.
Increasing the numerical load of one simulation would mean either compromising
on the tolerance of the adaptive step size controller, or using fewer input seeds.
The number of seeds should hopefully be high enough so that the random
numbers make up the distribution they are drawn from.
To verify this, the
==PAGE:82==
66
Discussion
Figure 5.1: The inﬂuence of the number of input noise seeds used in the sim-
ulations. The number of input noise seeds used in all simulations
is 18.
LHS) For the EYDF the mean of 18 seeds is compared
to using only a single seed, and using 36 seeds. The residual is
the diﬀerence between the mean of 18, and 36 seeds. The curves
for 18 and 36 seeds are almost identical, whereas big ﬂuctuations
are seen, when only using one seed. RHS) The integrated abso-
lute value squared of the diﬀerence of the mean of 36 simulations
and a varying number of simulations from 1 to 24, normalised by
the integrated absolute value squared of 36 simulations. CF is an
abbreviation of "Convergence Factor", and is deﬁned in equation
5.1.
convergence of the spectrum is tested in ﬁgure 5.1. On the LHS a comparison of
using 1, 18 and 36 input seeds in the EYDF is shown. It is seen that the obtained
curve using 18 and 36 seeds correspond well. Huge ﬂuctuations compared to
the averaged results is seen, when only using one seed. Furthermore, the RHS
plot shows the dependence of
CF ≡
R
| PSD36 −PSDx |2 dλ
R
| PSD36 |2dλ
(5.1)
where the subscript refers to the number of simulation, and x is a varying num-
ber from 1 to 24. The rapid decrease seen, indicates that the spectral shape has
somewhat converged using 18 seeds. However, the heavy numerical load and
time restrictions mean that it was only possible to make 36 simulations on the
EYDF, so similar convergence has not been assured in the remaining cascade.
Fibre degradation is not treated in the model, as such the power levels that can
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Importance of the SeH loss peak on the continuous red-shift observed
in As2Se3 ﬁbre
67
be treated numerically are not necessarily viable. However, in [12] average power
levels of 139mW are seen in the output from As2Se3 using nanosecond pulses,
and an almost identical setup, which shows that the obtained results are feasible.
The results in this thesis are to a large extent speciﬁc for the considered setup.
Furthermore, the simulations do not consider that some of the experimentally
obtained spectrum might be guided in HOM, or cladding modes. As such the
length of the nonlinear broadening processes are not determined with certainty.
However, the underlying dynamics in the chalcogenides can be considered as
quite general. With a ZDW at 6.7µm the spectral broadening in the As2S3 ﬁbre
with solitons as input is bound to be dominated by SPM. Furthermore, it was
observed that the broadening of the solitons can indeed be considered indepen-
dent. The Raman induced continuous red-shift of the large pack of power in the
As2Se3 ﬁbre can also be considered a general trait.
5.1
Importance of the SeH loss peak on the con-
tinuous red-shift observed in As2Se3 ﬁbre
The loss curve for the As2Se3 ﬁbre, shown in the last plot in ﬁgure 3.12, shows
a SeH loss peak at 4.7µm. The SeH loss is due to water vapour dissolving in
the glass in the drawing process. Ideally, this can be avoided by drawing, and
using the ﬁbre in a controlled environment, for example in a pure nitrogen en-
vironment.
In the simple case of a soliton undergoing Raman induced soliton self frequency
shift, a local loss peak can trap the soliton, due to the increased exponential
power loss, and the self-regulating nature of a soliton, which slows down the
red-shift rate.
Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the eﬀect of removing this peak, as
this could potentially allow a further Raman induced continuous red-shift. This
would lead to a higher mid-IR edge and a higher mid-IR power. The loss curve
neglecting the SeH loss is shown in ﬁgure 5.2. A single simulation using the
same noise seeds as the spectral evolution seen in ﬁgure 4.9 has been run ne-
glecting the SeH loss, it is shown in ﬁgure 5.3. A comparison of the two ﬁgures
shows that the SeH loss peak has no discernible eﬀect on the Raman induced
red-shift. Furthermore, the mid-IR power remains practically unchanged. As
such, there is no reason to put much eﬀort into reducing the SeH loss in the
drawing process.
==PAGE:84==
68
Discussion
Figure 5.2: Comparison of the full measured loss curve by IRﬂex, and the
same loss curve neglecting the SeH loss, originating from water
being dissolved in the ﬁbre during the drawing process.
Figure 5.3: Single shot spectral evolution in the As2Se3 ﬁbre neglecting the
SeH loss. The dashed line indicates the ZDW. The same noise
seeds are used for this ﬁgure as the spectral evolution seen in
ﬁgure 4.9.
5.2
Lack of continuous red-shift in As2S3 ﬁbre
The spectral broadening is dominated by SPM in the As2S3 ﬁbre, contrary to
the As2Se3, which is dominated by Raman induced continuous red-shift. This
can be understood by the nonlinear parameter γ being approximately a factor
of 3/2 bigger in the As2Se3 ﬁber, and the fractional Raman response ,fR, being
approximately eight times bigger. To investigate the relative importance of the
nonlinear interaction eﬀects in the As2Se3 ﬁbre, when the input spectrum comes
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Cause of the constant RIN in As2Se3 ﬁbre
69
Figure 5.4: Single shot spectral evolution in the As2Se3 ﬁbre, in the case where
the ZBLAN ﬁbre is coupled directly into to As2Se3 ﬁbre.
The
dashed line indicates the ZDW. The spectral evolution shows very
rapid spectral broadening due to SPM, followed by a Raman in-
duced continuous red-shift of the high power spectral range be-
tween 2 and 3 µm.
from a ﬁbre with anomalous dispersion, a single 30cm simulation has been run
using the output spectrum of ZBLAN as input. The spectral evolution is seen
in ﬁgure 5.4. Immediate spectral broadening from SPM and continuous Raman
induced red-shifting is apparent. The continuous red-shift has not slowed down
after 30 cm, so it could be interesting to run this simulation longer. However, it
can be concluded that the lack of continuous red-shift in the As2S3 ﬁbre is due
to the Raman strength only being approximately 1/12 of the Raman strength
in the As2Se3 ﬁbre.
5.3
Cause of the constant RIN in As2Se3 ﬁbre
As a way of understanding the almost constant noise at the end of the cascade
seen in ﬁgure 4.12, the spectral evolution and noise in the Tm-doped ﬁbre are
considered, seen in ﬁgure 4.3, and 5.5, respectively. The output noise of the
Tm-doped ﬁbre shows three interesting features:
• The minimum RIN of 11 % is seen at 1.56µm, which is the input wave-
length to the EYDF ﬁber.
• At the IR edge of the spectrum the RIN peaks, at 60 %. This is due to a
varying extend of the soliton self-frequency shift between seeds. As it is
==PAGE:86==
70
Discussion
Figure 5.5: The obtained average spectrum at the output of the Tm-doped
ﬁbre on a linear scale, plotted on top the mean plus/minus the
SDOM. The right y-axis shows the RIN, which is almost constant
at 23 %. For the RIN data points a step size of 4nm, and a band
pass of 8nm was used in the running average.
only for some seeds that solitons reach the IR-edge of the spectrum, the
noise at the edge is very high.
• In the remaining spectrum the noise is rather constant at approximately
22 %. This is also the noise seen at the MI-gain bands.
This indicates that the relatively narrow spectrum exiting the EYDF does not
extend to the Tm gain bands. This is also evident in the spectral evolution in
ﬁgure 4.3. This explains why the RIN in the entire spectrum is the same as at
the MI gain peaks - the entire spectrum except at the input laser wavelength
has grown out of the OPPMN. The very high RIN of the entire spectrum in the
Tm-doped ﬁbre means that the nonlinear dynamics in the remaining cascade
do not introduce any noticeable spectral noise features.
Unfortunately, this
means there can be drawn no conclusions on the noise properties of the cascaded
supercontinuum source, except that it is important to let the spectrum out of
the EYDF broaden further than the Tm-gain.
An experimental noise study by Kyei Kwarkye et al [27] shows much lower
RIN in the output of the two ﬁrst ﬁbres, in a similar setup, where the output
spectrum out of the EYDF extended much further.
It should be noted that the simulated results from the EYDF do not agree well
at high wavelengths with the experimentally obtained results shown in ﬁgure
4.1. Thus, it cannot be concluded that the noise properties of the experimental
data will resemble the numerical results.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
Characterisation and optimisation of a cascaded mid-IR supercontinuum source
has been achieved through numerical simulations of the GNLSE. The necessary
parameters to propagate light through the ﬁve diﬀerent ﬁbres are provided in de-
tails. This includes gain spectra; experimentally, analytically, and numerically
calculated dispersion curves; and the Raman response function. A thorough
derivation on how to reconstruct the full Raman response from the Raman gain
is presented to ease the process in future applications. Data limitations in the
dispersion measurements led to the development of a new framework to numer-
ically ﬁlter interference with higher order modes in a white light interferometry
setup.
In time of writing, the experimental setup for the cascaded mid-IR supercon-
tinuum laser consists only of the ﬁrst three ﬁbre sections. The output from
these ﬁbres was used to verify the results from each section. Through these
comparisons it was found that the initial cascade can be modelled well using
the GNLSE, which gives conﬁdence in the simulations on the full cascade.
Running the simulations on the already existing setup, has provided valuable
insight that the current seven meter of ZBLAN ﬁbre could be reduced. The
numerical analysis suggests operating at 4.9 meters to allow the spectrum at
∼4µm to fully mature. This preconditions the spectrum to allow an almost
immediate spectral broadening in the As2S3 ﬁbre, extending out to the loss edge
at 6.7µm. This broadening was found to be dominated by SPM. The immediate
==PAGE:88==
72
Conclusion
broadening merits choosing the length of the As2S3 based on practicalities, such
as ﬁbre handling in the laboratory. The As2Se3 ﬁbre section was simulated us-
ing the input from cutting the As2S3 ﬁbre at 5cm, which is considered a feasible
length.
The nonlinear dynamics in the As2Se3 showed a continuous red-shift driven by
a combination of the Raman response and temporal compression, ensuring a
necessary temporal overlap throughout most of the propagation. The continu-
ous red-shift was very important in building the high wavelength power. The
continuous red-shift was not observed in the As2S3 ﬁbre, which is probably due
to a much weaker Raman response.
This work predicts that the setup in question could function as a supercontinuum
laser source spanning 1 −11.85µm (with a 20dB diﬀerence between minimum
and maximum) capable of delivering up to 15mW of output in the spectrum
above 5.5µm. Hence, the numerical tools have proven the possibility of improv-
ing existing setups in both cost eﬃciency and spectral quality, in addition to
the possibility to predict the outcome of and design future experiments.
The simulations neglect coupling to, and propagation of, higher order modes as
well as polarisation. The numerical tool has the ability to propagate such an
intricate system, and the relevant additional parameters, e.g. mode coupling,
could be obtained by FEM methods with relative ease. However, in doing so the
computational eﬀort soars which either extends the nominal time cost or reduces
the resolution. In either case, the eﬀort is likely better spent on targeting a
speciﬁc use-case, e.g. narrow band mid-IR sources tailored to speciﬁc organic
ﬁngerprints. The framework in this thesis provides a signiﬁcant leap towards
bridging the gap between fundamental theory and applications.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Raman time response from
Raman gain measurement
First of all note that the Fourier transform used (see equation 2.1) corresponds
to assuming a backwards propagating wave. This, along with the fact that the
response function is causal, means that the imaginary part of the total response
function changes sign, or in other words ˜hR(−ω) = ˜hR(ω)∗[51], so that the
total response is given by
˜hR(ω) = Re(˜hR(ω)) −iIm(˜hR(ω))
(A.1)
Where ω = Ω−Ω0. The real and imaginary part of the Raman response function
is related through the Kramer-Kronig relations
Re[˜hR(ω)] = 1
π P
Z ∞
−∞
Im[˜hR(ω′)]dω′
ω′ −ω
(A.2)
Im[˜hR(ω)] = −1
π P
Z ∞
−∞
Re[˜hR(ω′)]dω′
ω′ −ω
= 1
π P
Z ∞
−∞
Re[˜hR(ω′)]dω′
ω −ω′
(A.3)
Where P is the Cauchy principal value. I work with (A.3) in the following. The
integral on the RHS is a convolution of Re[˜hR(ω)] and
1
ω−ω′ . I want to apply
the convolution theorem for the inverse Fourier transform, here given by
F−1
(Z ∞
−∞
Re[˜hR(ω′)]dω′
ω −ω′
)
= 2πF−1
 1
ω

F−1n
Re[˜hR(ω)]
o
(A.4)
==PAGE:90==
74
Raman time response from Raman gain measurement
This can be obtained by taking the inverse Fourier transform of (A.3), so that
1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Im[˜hR(ω)] exp(iωt)dω
= π
2π
(2π)2 P
Z ∞
−∞
1
ω exp(iωt)dω
Z ∞
−∞
Re[˜hR(ω)] exp(iωt)dω
(A.5)
The ﬁrst integral on the right hand side can be simpliﬁed by using Euler’s
theorem, exp(ix) = cos(x) + i sin(x), and the fact that
1
ω is an odd function,
while cos(ωt) is even. Using
Z ∞
−∞
sin(ωt)
ω
dω = π
(A.6)
it is obtained that
Z ∞
−∞
Im[˜hR(ω)] exp(iωt)dω = iP
Z ∞
−∞
Re[˜hR(ω)] exp(iωt)dω
(A.7)
The same series of arguments applied to equation (A.2) leads to the result
P
Z ∞
−∞
Im[˜hR(ω)] exp(iωt)dω = i
Z ∞
−∞
Re[˜hR(ω)] exp(iωt)dω
(A.8)
As both of these results must hold it can be concluded that P = 1. Now using
that the Raman time response, hR(t), is the inverse Fourier transform of ˜hR(ω),
as well as being causal
hR(t) = Θ(t)
2π
Z ∞
∞

Re(˜hR(ω)) −iIm(˜hR(ω))

exp(iωt)dω
= 2Θ(t)
π
Z ∞
0
−iIm(˜hR(ω)) exp(iωt)dω
= 2Θ(t)
π
Z ∞
0
Im(˜hR(ω)) sin(ωt)dω
(A.9)
Where the fact that imaginary part of ˜hR(ω) is odd was used.
From [33] the material gain gR is related to Im(˜hR(ω)) by
Im(˜hR(ω)) = PF
3
8gR(ω)
c
ωpn2fR
(A.10)
PF is a factor that depends on the polarisation of the pump and the signal,
when measuring the gain [34]. ωp is the frequency of the pump pulse used in
the experiment. Inserting this it is obtained that
hR(t) = 3PF Θ(t)c
4πωpfRn2
Z ∞
0
gR(ω) sin(ωt)dω
(A.11)
==PAGE:91==
75
The purpose of ﬁnding the time response is to ﬁnd the value of fR through the
normalisation
Z ∞
−∞
hR(t)dt = 1
(A.12)
==PAGE:92==
76
Raman time response from Raman gain measurement
==PAGE:93==
Appendix B
COMSOL implementation
COMSOL is used with the "Electromagnetic Waves, Frequency Domain (ewfd)"
physics interphase, with the "Mode Analysis" study. The model equation is
given by
∇× (∇× E) = k2
0εrE
(B.1)
Where the magnetic permeability has been assumed to be one. The mode proﬁle
is assumed z-invariant, so that
E(x, y, z) = ˜E(x, y) exp(ikzz)
(B.2)
This constitutes an Eigenvalue equation for the eﬀective index
neff = √εr
(B.3)
neff can have a real and imaginary part. If material loss is not included in the
input, the imaginary part comes from some of the ﬁeld radiating out of the com-
puted domain. This is known as conﬁnement loss. If material loss is included
in neff, the imaginary part of neff is the total loss.
A Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) is used as the outer domain. This boundary
condition permits light to escape the cladding. The size of the PML has been
chosen so that light does not reenter the cladding.
One of the main advantages of COMSOL is the fact that COMSOL automati-
cally can generate a non-uniform computation mesh. This allows an increased
==PAGE:94==
78
COMSOL implementation
Figure B.1: The geometry used for the As2Se3 ﬁbre, along with the COMSOL
generated FEM mesh. The red circles have been superimposed to
clearly show the boundaries between the core and the cladding,
as well as the cladding and PML
amount of grid points in regions where the problem is deemed increasingly sen-
sitive. For example, this could be around small geometries, such as the core of
an optical ﬁbre. The implemented geometry, as well as the COMSOL generated
mesh can be seen in ﬁgure B.1.
B.1
COMSOL with MATLAB
COMSOL solves the mode problem at a single frequency at a time. As the
supercontinuum treated in this thesis spans across a huge frequency range, the
frequency window is split into 1000 points. It is rather tiresome to run COMSOL
1000 times, choose the appropriate solution, calculate the derived quantities,
and then store everything manually. Instead a COMSOL API for MATLAB
was used as a wrapper for the COMSOL interface. The input parameters are
passed from MATLAB. COMSOL is set to calculate 20 eigenvalues for each
frequency, starting with the highest frequency. As long as the mode is properly
conﬁned in the cladding, the mode with the highest eﬀective index, with its
value between the core and the cladding index, is the fundamental mode. A
further sanity check on whether the correct mode has been found is that the z-
component of the time averaged power ﬂow increases in the core with increasing
==PAGE:95==
B.1 COMSOL with MATLAB
79
frequency - the fundamental mode is conﬁned better with increased frequency.
The fraction of the time averaged power ﬂow in the core is given by
PF =
R
core E × H∗−E∗× Hdxdy
R
fiber E × H∗−E∗× Hdxdy
(B.4)
In listing B.1 a short example code of how to call COMSOL with Matlab is
shown. First the model is loaded with "mphload", the input parameters are
set with model.param.set. In this case the input parameters are the frequency
"f", the eigenvalue guess "n_guess", the core and cladding indices "n_co" and
"n_cl", and the loss "n_loss". All the relevant output data, which is the ef-
fective index, the overlap integral deﬁned in chapter 2, and the power fraction,
PF, deﬁned in equation B.4.
1
model = mphload ( ’AsS .mph ’ ) % Loads the model
2
model . study ( ’ std1 ’ ) . feature ( ’mode ’ ) . set ( ’ neigs ’ , num2str
(20 ,10) ) ; % Tells COMSOL to
look
fo r
20 eigenvalues ,
and display them with 10 decimals
3
n_guess (1) = n_cl (1) ; % The
f i r s t
guess
f o r an eigenvalue
i s
set
to
the
cladding
index ,
as
the
e f f e t i v e
index
tends
to
the
cladding
index
f or
long
wavelengths .
4
f o r
i i = 1: length ( F l i s t )
5
disp ( i i ) % Shows the
progress
in
the
comsole
6
% The following
l i n e s
set
the
input
parameters with
10 decimals
7
model . param . set ( ’ f ’ , [ num2str ( F l i s t ( i i ) ,10)
’ [THz] ’ ] ) ;
8
model . param . set ( ’ n_guess ’ , num2str ( n_guess ( i i ) ,10) ) ;
9
model . param . set ( ’n_co ’ , num2str (n_co( i i ) ,10) ) ;
10
model . param . set ( ’ n_cl ’ , num2str ( n_cl ( i i ) ,10) ) ;
11
model . param . set ( ’ n_loss ’ , num2str ( n_loss ( i i ) ,10) ) ;
12
13
model . study ( ’ std1 ’ ) . run% Runs the model
14
15
% All
output data
i s
put
into a table
in COMSOL,
and
saved
into
the
corresponding
v a r i a b l e s
16
model . r e s u l t . numerical ( ’ gev4 ’ ) . setResult ;
17
Table = mphtable ( model ,{ ’ tbl1 ’ }) ;
18
n_eff = Table . data ( : , 1 )
19
overlapInt = Table . data ( : , 2 ) ;
20
PowerFrac = Table . data ( : , 3 ) ;
21
22
NF = max( n_eff ) ; % The fundamental mode i s
the mode
with the
highest
e f f e c t i v e
index ;
23
N_eff ( i i ) = NF(1) ; % Sometimes two modes have the
same index
==PAGE:96==
80
COMSOL implementation
24
OI( i i ) = overlapInt ( r e a l ( n_eff ) == r e a l (NF(1) ) ) ;
25
PF( i i ) = PowerFrac ( r e a l ( n_eff ) == r e a l (NF(1) ) ) ;
26
27
28
n_guess ( i i +1) = n_co( i i +1) ; % The guess
f or
the
next
s o l u tion
i s
given by the
previous
solution
29
i f
i i > 1
30
i f PF( i i ) < PF( i i −1) % I f
the power
f r a c t i o n
"PF"
increases ,
something has gone wrong
31
break
32
end
33
end
34
end
Listing B.1: A short version of the MATLAB code used to call COMSOL
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1] Robert Alfano. The Supercontinuum Laser Source. 01 2016.
[2] R. R. Alfano and S. L. Shapiro. Observation of self-phase modulation and
small-scale ﬁlaments in crystals and glasses. Phys. Rev. Lett., 24:592–594,
Mar 1970.
[3] J. C. Knight, T. A. Birks, P. St. J. Russell, and D. M. Atkin.
All-
silica single-mode optical ﬁber with photonic crystal cladding. Opt. Lett.,
22(7):484–485, Apr 1997.
[4] Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm and Ole Bang. Supercontinuum noise reduc-
tion by ﬁber undertapering. Opt. Express, 27(7):10320–10331, Apr 2019.
[5] Christian R. Petersen, Peter M. Moselund, Laurent Huot, Lucy Hooper,
and Ole Bang. Towards a table-top synchrotron based on supercontinuum
generation. Infrared Physics & Technology, 91:182 – 186, 2018.
[6] Norblis website. http://norblis.com/. Accessed: 2020-07-01.
[7] Mid-ir
source
by
thorlabs
using
InF3.
https://www.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=10819.
Accessed: 2019-27-12.
[8] Irnis Kubat, Christian Agger, Peter Moselund, and Ole Bang. Mid-infrared
supercontinuum generation to 4.5 µm in uniform and tapered zblan step-
index ﬁbers by direct pumping at 1064 or 1550 nm. JOSA B, 30, 10 2013.
[9] Christian Agger, Christian Petersen, Sune Dupont, Henrik Steﬀensen,
Jens Kristian Lyngsø, Carsten L. Thomsen, Jan Thøgersen, Søren R. Kei-
ding, and Ole Bang. Supercontinuum generation in zblan ﬁbers—detailed
==PAGE:98==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
comparison between measurement and simulation. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B,
29(4):635–645, Apr 2012.
[10] Christian Petersen, Sune Dupont, Christian Agger, Jan Thøgersen, Ole
Bang, and Soren Keiding. Stimulated raman scattering in soft glass ﬂuoride
ﬁbers. JOSA B, 28:2310–2313, 10 2011.
[11] Christian Rosenberg Petersen, Uﬀe Visbech Møller, Irnis Kubat, Binbin
Zhou, Sune Dupont, Jacob Søndergaard Ramsay, Trevor Benson, Slawomir
Sujecki, Nabil Abdel-Moneim, Zhuoqi Tang, David Furniss, Angela Seddon,
and Ole Bang.
Mid-infrared supercontinuum covering the 1.4–13.3 µm
molecular ﬁngerprint region using ultra-high na chalcogenide step-index
ﬁbre. Nature Photonics, 8:830–834, 2014.
[12] Ramon A. Martinez, Genevieve Plant, Kaiwen Guo, Brian Janiszewski,
Michael J. Freeman, Robert L. Maynard, Mohammed N. Islam, Fred L.
Terry, Oseas Alvarez, Francois Chenard, Robert Bedford, Ricky Gibson,
and Agustin I. Ifarraguerri. Mid-infrared supercontinuum generation from
1.6 to > 11 µm using concatenated step-index ﬂuoride and chalcogenide
ﬁbers. Opt. Lett., 43(2):296–299, Jan 2018.
[13] Irnis Kubat, Christian Agger, Uﬀe Visbech Møller, Angela B. Seddon,
Zhuoqi Tang, Slawomir Sujecki, Trevor M. Benson, David Furniss, Samir
Lamrini, Karsten Scholle, Peter Fuhrberg, Bruce Napier, Mark Farries, Jon
Ward, Peter M. Moselund, and Ole Bang. Mid-infrared supercontinuum
generation to 12.5µm in large na chalcogenide step-index ﬁbres pumped at
4.5µm. Optics Express, 22(16):19169–19182, 2014.
[14] Michel J.F. Digonnet. Rare-Earth-Doped Fiber Lasers and Ampliﬁers, Re-
vised and Expanded. Elsevier Science, 2007.
[15] Shaocong Dai, Yingying Wang, Xuefeng Peng, Peiqing Zhang, Xunsi Wang,
and Yinsheng Xu. A review of mid-infrared supercontinuum generation in
chalcogenide glass ﬁbers. Applied Sciences, 8:707, 05 2018.
[16] Christian Rosenberg Petersen. 2-10 µm Mid-infrared Supercontinuum Light
Sources. PhD thesis, 2016.
[17] Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm. Low Noise Supercontinuum Lasers for Op-
tical Coherence Tomography Systems. PhD thesis, Technical University of
Denmark, 2018.
[18] Christian Rosenberg Petersen, Nikola Prtljaga, Mark Farries, Jon Ward,
Bruce Napier, Gavin Rhys Lloyd, Jayakrupakar Nallala, Nick Stone, and
Ole Bang. Mid-infrared multispectral tissue imaging using a chalcogenide
ﬁber supercontinuum source. Opt. Lett., 43(5):999–1002, Mar 2018.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[19] Seeliger J. Szyszka-Sommerfeld L. Koprowski R. Gedrange T. & Woźniak K.
Machoy, M. The use of optical coherence tomography in dental diagnostics:
A state-of-the-art review. Journal of healthcare engineering, 2017.
[20] Manoj Kumar Dasa, Christos Markos, Michael Maria, Christian R. Pe-
tersen, Peter M. Moselund, and Ole Bang. High-pulse energy supercontin-
uum laser for high-resolution spectroscopic photoacoustic imaging of lipids
in the 1650-1850 nm region. Biomed. Opt. Express, 9(4):1762–1770, Apr
2018.
[21] A. L. Oldenburg, C. Xu, and S. A. Boppart. Spectroscopic optical coherence
tomography and microscopy. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, 13(6):1629–1640, Nov 2007.
[22] Christian Rosenberg Petersen, Rasmus D. Engelsholm, Christos Markos,
Laurent Brilland, Céline Caillaud, Johann Trolès, and Ole Bang.
In-
creased mid-infrared supercontinuum bandwidth and average power by ta-
pering large-mode-area chalcogenide photonic crystal ﬁbers. Opt. Express,
25(13):15336–15348, Jun 2017.
[23] J. Lægsgaard.
Mode proﬁle dispersion in the generalized nonlinear
schrödinger equation. Opt. Express, 15(24):16110–16123, Nov 2007.
[24] G. Agrawal.
Nonlinear Fiber Optics.
Electronics & Electrical. Elsevier
Science, 2007.
[25] Stéphane Balac and Fabrice Mahé. Embedded runge-kutta scheme for step-
size control in the interaction picture method. Computer Physics Commu-
nications, 184(4):1211 – 1219, 2013.
[26] Pavel Peterka, Ivan Kasik, Anirban Dhar, Bernard Dussardier, and Wil-
fried Blanc.
Theoretical modeling of ﬁber laser at 810 nm based on
thulium-doped silica ﬁbers with enhanced 3h4 level lifetime. Opt. Express,
19(3):2773–2781, Jan 2011.
[27] Rasmus D. Engelsholm Manoj Kumar Dasa Deepak Jain Patrick Bowen
Peter M. Moselund Christian R. Petersen Kyei Kwarkye, Mikkel Jensen
and Ole Bang.
In-ampliﬁer and cascaded mid-infrared supercontinuum
sources with low noise through gain-induced soliton spectral alignment.
[28] Eydf data in webpage. https://www.nufern.com/pam/optical_fibers/
937/PM-EYDF-12/130-HE/. Accessed: 2019-14-12.
[29] Tm-doped ﬁber data in webpage.
http://coractive.com/fileadmin/
documents_publics/boutique/Activefibers/tm-fibers/DCF-TM-10_
128_DS100619r1.1.pdf. Accessed: 2019-14-12.
==PAGE:100==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30] Zblan ﬁber data in webpage. https://www.fiberlabs.com/fiberindex/
fiber_smff/. Accessed: 2019-14-12.
[31] As2s3
ﬁber
data
in
webpage.
https://irflex.com/products/
irf-s-series/. Accessed: 2019-14-12.
[32] As2se3 ﬁber data in webpage. https://irﬂex.com/products/irf-se-series/.
[33] Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg.
Nonlinear Optics:
Principles and Applications. CRC Press, 2014.
[34] K. Rottwitt and J. H. Povlsen. Analyzing the fundamental properties of
raman ampliﬁcation in optical ﬁbers.
Journal of Lightwave Technology,
23(11):3597–3605, Nov 2005.
[35] Akira Wada, Satoshi Okude, Tetsuya Sakai, and Ryozo Yamauchi. Geo2
concentration dependence of nonlinear refractive index coeﬃcients of silica-
based optical ﬁbers. Electronics and Communications in Japan (Part I:
Communications), 79(11):12–19, 1996.
[36] I. H. Malitson. Interspecimen comparison of the refractive index of fused
silica. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 55(10):1205–1209, Oct 1965.
[37] S. Poole, D. Payne, R. Mears, M. Fermann, and R. Laming. Fabrication
and characterization of low-loss optical ﬁbers containing rare-earth ions.
Journal of Lightwave Technology, 4(7):870–876, July 1986.
[38] James W. Fleming.
Dispersion in geo2–sio2 glasses.
Appl. Opt.,
23(24):4486–4493, Dec 1984.
[39] Petr Hlubina, M. Kadulová, and D. Ciprian. Spectral interferometry-based
chromatic dispersion measurement of ﬁbre including the zero-dispersion
wavelength. Journal of the European Optical Society - Rapid Publications
vol 7 12017, 5 pages, 7:2017–, 05 2012.
[40] Giuseppe Grosso, Giuseppe Parravicini, and Bruce Patton.
Solid State
Physics, chapter 7. Elsevier, second edition, 2014.
[41] William S. Rodney, Irving H. Malitson, and Thomas A. King. Refractive
index of arsenic trisulﬁde. J. Opt. Soc. Am., 48(9):633–636, Sep 1958.
[42] Jesper Lægsgaard. Introduction to dielectric waveguides. Lecture notes for
course 34041, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
[43] Y. Fang, D. Jayasuriya, David Furniss, Zhuoqi Tang, Lukasz Sojka,
C. Markos, S. Sujecki, Angela Seddon, and T. Benson. Determining the
refractive index dispersion and thickness of hot-pressed chalcogenide thin
ﬁlms from an improved swanepoel method. Optical and Quantum Electron-
ics, 49, 05 2017.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[44] Fuxi Gan.
Optical properties of ﬂuoride glasses: a review.
Journal of
Non-Crystalline Solids, 184:9 – 20, 1995. Non-oxide Glasses.
[45] Peter M. Moselund. Long-pulse Supercontinuum Light Sources. PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 2009.
[46] Francois Chenard, Oseas Alvarez, and Hassan Moawad. Mir chalcogenide
ﬁber and devices. Progress in Biomedical Optics and Imaging - Proceedings
of SPIE, 9317, 03 2015.
[47] Link
to
made
in
space’s
website.
https://madeinspace.us/
capabilities-and-technology/fiber-optics/. Accessed: 2020-07-01.
[48] Chunle Xiong, Eric Magi, Feng Luan, Alessandro Tuniz, S Dekker,
J. Sanghera, L Shaw, Ishwar Aggarwal, and Benjamin Eggleton. Charac-
terization of picosecond pulse nonlinear propagation in chalcogenide as2s3
ﬁber. Applied optics, 48:5467–74, 10 2009.
[49] Bora Ung and Maksim Skorobogatiy.
Chalcogenide microporous ﬁbers
for linear and nonlinear applications in the mid-infrared.
Opt. Express,
18(8):8647–8659, Apr 2010.
[50] D. Anderson, M. Desaix, M. Lisak, and M. L. Quiroga-Teixeiro.
Wave
breaking in nonlinear-optical ﬁbers. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 9(8):1358–1361,
Aug 1992.
[51] Bahaa E A Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich. Fundamentals of photonics; 2nd
ed. Wiley series in pure and applied optics, chapter 3-4. Wiley, New York,
NY, 2007.
