==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Understanding implicit speech acts
using epistemic logic
Mathias Linde (s144468)
Supervisor
Thomas Bolander
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master thesis describes the design of a dialogue system capable of understanding
and reason about the implicity used in received context dependent instructions coming
from multiple humans. The thesis considers two iterations of a dialogue system, which
both are designed with the help of epistemic logic. The purpose of both systems is to
model the knowledge and beliefs of the participants The context of the conversations are
represented using epistemic logic explained using possible world model and the knowl-
edge and belief models. The main difference between modelling knowledge and beliefs
are the semantics. The dialogue system modelling knowledge applies S5, whereas the
belief system applies KD45 semantics.
Both dialogue systems show that they are capable of understanding entirely implied
speech acts with the use of planning. The knowledge system showed that by reasoning
about the speaker’s knowledge, or lack there off, it could determine the unambiguous and
implicit meanings hidden in the speaker’s instruction. The designed belief system did
not follow the described semantics to the point. However it did did show that the ability
of taking the perspective of the speaker is great technique when trying to understand
implicity. Both dialogue system are capable of understanding implicit instructions from
multiple sources, despite an implementation relying on less adequate procedures.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor professor Thomas Bolander at the Technical
University of Denmark. Your guidance, input and feedback has been invaluable in the
creation process of this thesis.
Kongens Lyngby, January 26, 2020
Mathias Linde (s144468)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contexts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Dialogue Systems in General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Modelling Knowledge
7
2.1
Knowledge Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Speech Acts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Implementation of the Knowledge Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Understanding Implicity
27
3.1
Implicit Speech Acts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Implicit Statement Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Modelling Belief
37
4.1
Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Understanding Implicity in Belief Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Discussion & Conclusion
49
5.1
Updating the Model Dynamically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Different Measurements for Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Alternative Techniques to Determine Implied Terms . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Declining Instructions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
The Knowledge Based System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
The Belief Based System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.7
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Humans’ ability to speak and use descriptive communication makes us excellent in com-
municating compared to animals. For instance humans are able to talk about objects
and events from the past, whereas animals are limited to communicating about things
they can refer to in the moment.
One detail of human speech which makes it far more complex and expressive is how
even the most basic of sentences are grounded by some implicit assumptions about what
each party of the communication knows, believes, feel and think. These assumptions
allow humans to make utterances where most of the details are implied and allow humans
to utilize proper nouns in their spoken statements.
This thesis looks into designing a system which given these implicit assumptions,
defined as contexts, will function as a listener in a set of dialogues and will try to
determine the meaning of some implicit utterances [1].
1.1
Aim of the Thesis
The aim of this thesis is to design a dialogue system which understands implicit messages
hidden in an utterance. A major focus is designing a dialogue system which understands
these implicit messages from multiple different speakers. This thesis takes inspiration
from the work of Luciana Benotti [2, 3] but tries to extend the work by expanding the
dialogue system to understand messages from multiple sources.
The task of the thesis is to figure out the best way of representing the knowledge
or belief of the multiple different speakers, which similar to the work of Benotti allows
for inferring the hidden utterance implied by the message of the speaker. This inference
will be done using automated planning.
To help get the points of the thesis across, a single specific use case will be used,
helping building a narrative throughout the thesis.
1.1.1
Narrative
Imagine the classical planing domain of the blocks world. The domain consists of varies
blocks which can be stacked on top of each other or placed on the table surface. The
blocks can be moved one at a time but cannot be moved if another block is placed on
top of it[4].
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Now to add uncertainty to the domain, imagine if a big hat is placed on top of the
blocks, making nearby participants unable to see the blocks and how they are stacked.
The hat must be lifted when a block is moved, making every participant in the room
able to see the performed action. This means that if a participant leaves the room and a
block is moved the absent participant is unaware of the action and believes the stacks to
be unchanged. More over in the room there is a glass windows between the participants
and the hidden stacks. They will therefore have to act as speakers and communicate
with the robot system on the other side of the glass window, making the dialogue system
perform the intended actions. An illustration of the use case is shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The basic narrative setup with two participants wanting to make changes
to the unreachable stacks of blocks, hidden beneath the hat.
The dialogue system will receive messages from the speakers and executing the given
instructions. A message could for instance be: ”Move block B from table to block A”,
which the system then will perform, given that the prerequisites for the action are fulfilled.
As long as the prerequisite is fulfilled every participant in attendance will observe the
hat being lifted and be witness to changes happening to the stacks of blocks.
For the rest of thesis, this domain will be known as the hidden blocks world. An
advantage of this domain is that the blocks world is easy to understand. The narrative
expands the blocks world by including additional layers, making it appropriate for the
aim of this project. More over, in terms of modelling, this domain is not rather complex
in comparison to what the narrative could have been. To make the process of illustrat-
ing the examples using the hidden blocks world as simple as possible throughout the
thesis, only the blocks and the table will be illustrated, and the presence of the human
agents will be explicitly stated. The simplified illustration of the narrative is shown in
Figure 1.2.
1.2
Contexts
This project follows the context definition made by Robert Stalnaker [5], where the
context of a conversation is defined as the description of the situation in which the
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Contexts
3
Figure 1.2: Abbreviated illustration of the hidden blocks world narrative displayed in
Figure 1.1.
conversation takes place. Stalnaker’s definition is based on two observations which he
has made about speech. The first observation is that speech is considered an action and
this action should be understood in terms of how the action is intended to change the
situation it is performed in. Secondly, speech acts are context-dependent, meaning the
way that each speech act is meant to be understood not only depends on its syntactic
and semantic properties but also facts about the situation in which the speech act is
used.
By using these observations Stalnaker determines that the conversation context must
have two roles. The context must define the facts about the current situation and it
must have the role as object in the conversation, and it is the object which is changed
by the different speech acts. It is the context’s information about the situation which is
updated as a result of the actions, i.e. speech acts. The context is viewed differently from
both sides of the conversation, as each party incorporates what they know or believe, as
well as what they know that the other party knows.
The speaker would not use implicity when talking about something if he knew the
listener is ignorant of some details.
And the listener knows that the speaker would
not talk about something that he (the listener) does not know. Here both parties of the
dialogue have to show that they are capable of performing false-belief task. A false-belief
task is the ability to determine that another individual’s belief is wrong in relation to
one’s own believes [6].
Example 1 explains how the context definition relates to the hidden blocks world
domain and how the context changes throughout the participant interacting with the
dialogue system.
Example 1 (Contexts in the hidden blocks world domain.):
Consider the hidden blocks world domain, where an initial state has the blocks piled
in the configuration shown in the following figure, and the agents Alice and Bob are
present. Both agents heard the latest speech acts, meaning they know of the current
pile configuration. The dialogue system knows the setup, too. This is the initial
state of the conversation context.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Consider now that one of the agents, Bob, leaves the room. The other agent,
Alice, then utters the statement, ”Move block A and block B to the table, then place
block C on top of block A and lastly move block B on top of block C.” Which results
in the piling configuration shown below. Now the system will reason that since the
agent Bob is absent he is unaware of the changes and might believe the configuration
is unchanged. Meanwhile the system can reason that the present agent, Alice, is
fully aware of the configuration, since she uttered the statement.
Imagine the first of two scenarios, the agent absent, Bob, returns to the room
and utters the statement, ”place block B on the table and then place block c on the
table.” The dialogue system is expected to deny this utterance. Why? Well, even
though the speech act makes sense for the current pile configuration it does not make
sense that Bob would make this statement since he believes the pile configuration
is unchanged, because he has no way of knowing the utterance would be possible.
When the system hears the utterance from Bob, it would consider the statement as
completely random and denying the utterance.
Imagine now a second scenario where agent Bob returns to the room and utters,
”place block A on the table and move block B from block C to block A.” Now one
would expect the dialogue system to do one of two things, dependent on how the
system is designed. It could either deny the utterance since the information required
for these speech acts to be accepted simply does not hold for the current state of
the context. Another option is to consider what Bob believes and this would allow
the system to determine how Bob imagines the situation. The system would then
change the context according to the utterance by changing the actual configuration
such that it matches Bob’s desired situation, depicted below.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Dialogue Systems in General
5
The famous philosopher of language, Herbert Paul Grice, defined a set of maxims
one should follow in order to communicate in the most effective way possible [7]. The
maxim in regards to quantity states that the speaker of the conversation must try to
convey the utterance with as little information as possible, utilizing the act of implied
messages. But one is not to go completely overboard with the implicit messages one
conveys. On top of this, if the speaker also ensures to follow Grice’s maxim of manners
the speaker will ensure that the messages are as short as possible, but not so implicit
that the actual meaning of the message becomes ambiguous.
The context of a conversation often considers previously uttered statements specifi-
cally the objects from the statements, nouns and proper nouns. This allows new speech
acts to take advantage of pronouns, such that the dialogue system can determine the
specific meaning of the pronouns and their corresponding objects.
1.3
Dialogue Systems in General
A typical architecture for a dialogue system follows a linear flow chart similar to the one
shown in Figure 1.3[8].
The architecture of a text based dialogue system or a spoken dialogue system is
almost indistinguishable. The largest deviation between the text- and spoken dialogue
system is the component for text-to-speech and vice versa. The process of generating a
response unremarkably starts by receiving a message from the user. This message parses
through a speech-to-text component or straight as text to the next component, which
is responsible for decoding the message of the text letting the system understand the
message. In dialogue systems with a completely analytical approach, as in this thesis,
the parsing is done using both a syntactical and a semantics analytical step. These
steps ensure the text based message is composed into a structure which will allow the
rest of the dialogue system to interpret and find an appropriate way of responding.
The parsed message is sent to the dialogue manager which with the help of external
information sources will find the most appropriate response to the message. Once the
dialogue manager has found a response, language generation component is tasked with
generating a syntactic and semantic correct sentence in natural language. This sentence
is then either send directly to the user or through a text-to-speech component in the
case of a spoken dialogue system.
Figure 1.3: Example of a standard architecture for a dialogue system.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
1.3.1
The Scope of the Dialogue System
The scope of the dialogue system covered in this thesis is limited to focusing on the
understanding side of a dialogue system. The thesis has emphasis on the transition
between the language understanding module and the dialogue manager.
The format of the messages used in the dialogue system is simplified to instructions.
In terms of the hidden blocks world domain an utterance could be ”Move block ’B’ from
the table to ’C’”. The simplifications made in this project means that instead of the
message as a natural language utterance it will already be and be structured for instance
as moveB(table,C).
1.4
Structure of the Thesis
This thesis looks into designing a dialogue system which models the listening party
of multiple conversations with different speakers. An initial way of representing the
knowledge of the different speakers is designed. This representation will help model
the context. Afterwards it will be described how this representation can be used as the
backbone, allowing an automated planner to find implied utterances. The representation
will also be used to understand implied objects, by grounding free variables contained
in the messages. Lastly it will be covered how the knowledge representation can be
converted to a belief representation, allowing the dialogue system to model the speakers’
belief. This will naturally allow the automated planner to work a little differently making
assumptions about how the system imagines a speaker thinks a series of events will play
out, and compare these beliefs to how the system actually performs a series of events
based on the state of the world.
Attached to the thesis is two developed dialogue system. The systems are developed
using the programming language Java.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Modelling Knowledge
The first version of the dialogue system is based on representing the knowledge of the
different individuals interacting with the system. This chapter looks into the design of
the underlying model of this system iteration. The aim of the model is to keep track
of the state of the world meanwhile keeping track of the knowledge of the speakers
communicating with the dialogue system.
In this thesis the system is modelling the knowledge of the speakers from an omni-
scient point of view. This simplification entails that the system does not have to take
insecurities in its own knowledge into account. This means the model represents the
actual state of the world and what the individual speaker knows about this world state.
This chapter starts by explaining how the knowledge is represented using an equiva-
lence relation. Next it will be covered how the system handles instructions. This includes
explaining how the system deals with these messages and their effects on the conversa-
tion context. The messages will be processed by first checking relevant preconditions
and secondly update to the model. Lastly the implementation of these operations and
the design of the underlying algorithms used will be explained.
2.1
Knowledge Representation
One way to design the knowledge representation is to follow the examples of Koller[9]
and Benotti[2]. Here a knowledge base represents the true state of the world as a list
of predicates. Meanwhile the individual’s knowledge, or belief, is represented as a near
copy of this true state, specifying which predicates the individual thinks is true. This de-
sign is designed for a single individual where the system needs to quickly determine the
knowledge state, as it is explicitly stated in the database. This design does however fall
short in terms of scalability with regards to the number of individuals, because that each
additional individual essentially requires another near copy of the true state of the world.
The new knowledge model should be able to complete similar tasks as the ones used
in Koller[9] and Benotti[3], besides it should be scalable. This means the performance
of the model should stay more or less constant regardless of the number of participating
speakers. The key knowledge representation chosen for this purpose is based on the
semantics of epistemic logic, given in terms of possible world models with the help of
Kripke structures[10].
The possible world model is defined by the Kripke structure
M = (S,π,K1,...,Kn), where S is the set of possible states of the model, ie. the possible
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Modelling Knowledge
worlds, π : Φ →2S defines for each proposition the states at which this proposition holds.
The available propositions are defined by the set Φ. Finally, Ki ⊆S × S describes a
binary relation between the set of states, where (s,t) ∈Ki is meant to be understood as
from the world s the agent i considers the world t possible.
Every logical formula ϕ is considered true or false in a specific world (M,s) where s is
a world in the model M. This specification is made using the notation (M,s) |= ϕ, which
can be read as ”ϕ holds at (M,s)”. The notation (M,s) is also known as a pointed world
model, since the state s ∈S is considered the actual world of M. The simplest formulas
of the system are based on some primitive proposition p ∈Φ and its truth value are
determined by the π component:
(M,s) |= p (for a primitive proposition p ∈Φ)
iff
s ∈π(p).
Negations and conjunctions formulas follows the standard notations;
(M,s) |= ψ ∧ψ′
iff
(M,s) |= ψ and (M,s) |= ψ′
(M,s) |= ¬ψ
iff
(M,s) ̸|= ψ.
Handling of formulas are given on the form ϕ = Kiψ, and follows the binary relation
Ki. Here the intuition is that the agent i knows ψ in world s, if ψ is true in all worlds
in which i considers possible in the world s. Formally this is written
(M,s) |= Kiψ
iff
(M,t) |= ψ for all t such that (s,t) ∈Ki.
The knowledge system used in this thesis is also known as an S5 system, which means
the relations of Ki are considered being equivalence relations. This relation means that
for a pair (s,t) ∈Ki the agent i considers both worlds s and t equally likely in the current
world (M,s). More specifically it means that in the world (M,s) the agent has the same
information about the world in both s and t, implying that agent i considers the two
worlds indistinguishable.
Since the knowledge system is defined as an equivalence relation it follows a number
of properties. Equivalence relations have the properties of being reflexive, symmetric
and transitive. The reflexive property states that any agent is unable to distinguish any
world A from itself and considers the world itself possible. This is defined by implying
that the relation (A,A) ∈K exists. The reflexive property is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
A
Figure 2.1: The reflexive property implies that (A,A) ∈K .
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Knowledge Representation
9
The symmetric property of the equivalence relation is illustrated in Figure 2.2, and
refers to the fact that any relation of the knowledge system implies that the knowledge
system also contains the mirrored relation. This means that if agent i is standing in world
A and considers another world B possible, i would also consider A possible if standing in
world B. Formally; assuming that (A,B) ∈K it is implied by the symmetric property
that (B,A) ∈K .
A
B
Figure 2.2: The symmetric property, assuming that (A,B) ∈K it implies (B,A) ∈K .
Lastly, the transitive property of a equivalence relations states that if agent i is stand-
ing in world A considers world B possible, and when i stands in world B considers world
C possible, i will also consider world C possible from world A. Illustrated by Figure 2.3.
In the knowledge system this is formally defined as if it is assumed (A,B),(B,C) ∈K
then it is implied that (A,C) ∈K .
A
B
C
Figure 2.3: Tthe transitive property, assuming that (A,B),(B,C) ∈K it is implied that
(A,C) ∈K .
The representation of knowledge is explained in greater details in Example 2, which
shows how an instance of the hidden blocks world domain can be modeled as a possible
world model.
Example 2 (The hidden blocks world domain in terms of possible world
model semantics):
Modelling the knowledge representations from an instance of the hidden blocks world
domain initially requires the specification of the instance. The instance of the do-
main consists of two speakers and of two distinct blocks, hidden beneath the hat.
Say that one of the speakers, Bob, leaves the room, being aware of the configuration
of the two blocks, say B was placed on top of A. As soon as he leaves the room he has
no idea what goes on on the inside. Say for instance Alice flips the stack of blocks
by first placing B on the table and afterwards A on top, Bob cannot distinguish the
two worlds. The resulting possible world model is graphically shown as:
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Modelling Knowledge
s0
s2
s1
Bob
Alice, Bob
Alice, Bob
Alice, Bob
Bob
Bob
The individual nodes represent the different world states S and the binary relations
of Ki is represented by the edges labeled by the agent’s names, i. The world state
with a circle surrounding it is the actual world state.
The propositions Φ defines the possible states of the domain’s blocks, e.g. in-
cludes if the block is clear, or where it is placed. The semantics of π takes these
propositions and determines for which states these are true or false. Say for instance
that the proposition p1 states that ”block B is on the table”, this is true in the worlds
s1 and s2 which means that s1,s2 ∈π(p1).
Note that since the other speaker, Alice, does not leave the room, she will be
fully aware of block configuration. She does not consider any other state possible
as she will observe any instructions and their effects. Note also that even though
there are no instructions of the system which in a single step changes the actual
world from world state s0 to world state s2, Bob still cannot distinguish these two
worlds because of the transitive property of the equivalence relation. Since both of
these two worlds are in an equivalence relation with the state s1 it is implied that
(s0,s2),(s2,s0) ∈KBob.
2.2
Speech Acts
Stalnaker[5]’s defines utterances or speech acts as actions, which change meaning based
on the situation the statements are spoken in. This means that based on the situation in
which the speech acts are performed, the effects which the statements have may change
based on the situation. To justify this viewpoint, Example 3 defines a use case which
illustrates that speech acts can be considered as actions that in turn is very context-
dependent.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Speech Acts
11
Example 3 (The handling of speech acts by the dialogue manager):
Imagine an apple and two baskets are presented each with a specific color; green
and yellow. Now imagine two context situations, one where the apple is in the green
basket and one where it is in the yellow basket. Both scenarios contain two agents,
Alice and Bob, which are fully aware of the apple’s location.
Imagine now that Alice utters the phrase, ”Bob, would you please hand me the
apple.” Bob will now reason about what this instruction requires and in turn what
he is meant to do. The instruction first of all requires the scenario to involve ”the
apple”, well both scenarios does so in either case this condition is met. Additionally,
for Bob to hand over the apple, the apple must originate from somewhere Bob can
reach it. In each case the apple is somewhere Bob can reach it, but as the apple is
in a different basket in the two scenarios the place of origin varies.
The conditions required for Bob to perform the instruction is in both contexts
met, but for different reasons. This entails that the effects following Bob executing
Alice’s instruction also depend on the conversation context. In case the require-
ments for this instruction is met it will have some effects in the particular context.
In general terms this instruction will intuitively have the effect of Alice now having
the apple. It will also have the perhaps counter-intuitive effect of having the apple
removed from its origin. This last effect is dependent on the context and this in-
struction will have different results. Is the apple removed from the green or yellow
basket?
Example 3 explains the process the dialogue system goes through when following
instructions. While it also shows how these instructive speech acts can have different
effects dependent on the conversation context, the instructions used in the hidden blocks
world domain is by design much more explicit. This means that the utterance has to be
explained explicitly by the speaking agent. Example 4 illustrates the process the system
goes through when the given instruction is in the specific hidden blocks world domain.
Example 4 (The handling of instructions by the dialogue manager):
Consider the hidden blocks world domain. Agent Alice wants to instruct the system
to move the blocks around using verbal commands. Imagine the case of three blocks
stacked as shown below.
It is assumed that Alice is fully aware of this stack configuration. Alice might
utter the following ”move block B from block A to the table.” To execute this in-
struction the system first has to ensure the validity of the utterance. This is done
by ensuring that the right conditions are in place in the situation which will allow
Alice’s instruction to make sense. The requirements for this instruction is first of
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Modelling Knowledge
all that block B and block A refers to actual blocks. Secondly since the instruction
states that block B is to be removed from block A the blocks must initially be stacked.
Lastly due to a limitation to the blocks world domain, block B must not have any-
thing else standing on top if it is to be moved. So the instruction requires block B
is clear.
The instruction is carried out by updating the block configuration if the require-
ments of Alice’s instruction is entailed. Here this involves updating the conversation
situation by moving the block B from block A and down to the table. Explicitly this
involves removing the block from block A, making that block clear, and then change
the location of block B to the table surface. These changes re illustrated below.
The dialogue system’s procedure for follows when handling a received speech act
follows a two step process. In the first step the system have to infer the speech act in
relation to the conversation context and see if the speech act is applicable in the current
context. This inference is done by defining a set of preconditions which each speech act
requires in order to be applicable. Considering Example 4 these preconditions involve
the objects involves to be blocks as well as block B to originate from block A. If block
B instead had originated from block C or Alice tried to involve some block D in her
instruction, this step would fail due to non-valid utterance in this context. The second
step of the instruction handling is for the system to invoke the effects of the utterance.
In this case this is done by simply doing exactly what the instructions says; move block
B away from block A and down onto the table surface.The system must also updated
the knowledge of the agents and this update depends on the agents’ presence when the
action is taking place.
It is assumed the participating speaker will not be uttering a phrase if they are
unaware if the instruction is applicable in the current situation. This is based upon
the mindset that only agents knowing the current configuration are allowed to apply
changes.
Because each speech act has a corresponding set of preconditions and effects in the
conversation context, the speech acts will in this thesis be modelled by action schemas
from the automatic planning language STRIPS[11]. Actions in STRIPS are specified
by a set of preconditions which is required for the action to be applicable as well as a
number of effects which refers to the results or outcome of the action. An example of
an action schema in STRIPS is shown in Listing 2.1.
action(a, b, c)
preconditions: pre1(a,b), pre2(a), pre2(c)
effects: eff1(a), !eff1(b), eff2(a,c)
Listing 2.1: STRIPS action schema.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Speech Acts
13
The action schema, represents the different actions which can derive from instanti-
ating the parameters, a, b and c, to different symbols of the system. Action schemas
consists generally of three parts:
• Action name and parameter list, which identifies the action.
• The preconditions, are a conjunction of literals and state what must be true before
the action can be executed.
• The effects are a conjunction of literals, which describes how the actual world
situation changes when the action is executed.
A speech act is applicable in a state if its preconditions are satisfied in the conversa-
tion context; if not the speech act has no effect. While the action schemas of STRIPS
are traditionally best suited for first order predicates, the worlds in the knowledge model
is defined using propositional logic. Here the exact propositional values for each world
is defined using the sets of π, as stated in the semantics. Definition 1 investigates the
exact action schemas used in the hidden blocks world domain.
Definition 1 (STRIPS action schemas in the blocks world domain):
The hidden blocks world domain accepts two core types of speech acts. The two
instructions in question are placing a block on the table, moveToTable, and placing a
block on top of another block, moveOnTop. The action schemas for these two speech
acts are shown in Listing 2.2 and Listing 2.3, respectively.
moveToTable(?b1, ?b2)
preconditions: isAt(?b1,?b2), clear(?b1), isBox(?b1), isBox
(?b2)
effects: isAt(?b1, Table), !isat(?b1, ?b2), clear(?b2)
Listing 2.2: Instruction for moving a block from another block to the table.
The action moveToTable has two variables as input, which represents the object,
?b1, and origin of the object, ?b2.
The preconditions involve that the block is
standing on top of another block, defined by the literal isAt(?b1,?b2). Secondly
the block to be moved is clear, as the domain determines that blocks cannot be moved
if they are occupied, defined by the literal clear(?b1). The last two preconditions
checks the existence of the involves boxes.
The effects states the changes to the system caused by the action, and involves
first of all that the moved block is now at the table and no longer at its origin, de-
fined by the literals isAt(?b1,Table) and !isAt(?b1,?b2), respectively. Secondly
the origin of the block is now clear, and can now be occupied by another block,
clear(?b2).
moveOnTop(?b1,?b2,?b3)
preconditions: isAt(?b1,?b2), clear(?b1), clear(?b3), !(?b1
= ?b3), !(?b2 = ?b3), isBox(?b1), isBox(?b3)
effects: !isAt(?b1,?b2), isAt(?b1,?b3), !clear(?b3), clear
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Modelling Knowledge
(?b2)
Listing 2.3: Instruction for moving a block to on top of another block.
The action moveOnTop has three variables as input, representing what block to
be moved, ?b1, its origin ?b2 and its destination block ?b3.
The preconditions
defines firstly, similarly to the moveToTable action, that the block starts at its
origin and that the block is not occupied, defined by the literals isAt(?b1,?b2)
and clear(?b1). Secondly the preconditions determines that the destination block
must not be occupied either, clear(?b3) and that the object and destination is not
the same, !(?b1 = ?b3). While the system makes sure that the variables ?b1 and
?b3 refers to boxes, the system does not check with regards to ?b2. This allows the
system to move an object off the table surface.
The set of effects that this speech act has on the conversation context includes
positioning the object on the destination block while also removing it from its orig-
inal position, indicated by the literals isAt(?b1,?b3) and !isAt(?b1,?b2), while
also making the origin no longer occupied and making the destination occupied,
!clear(?b3) and clear(?b2).
In a classical automatic planner using STRIPS, the planner will use the schemas to
construct a ground action, where every variable is instantiated by constants from the
first order language[12]. While the dialogue system in this project does use planning,
where this exact grounding processing takes place, the main use of the actions schemas
are used for the speakers to design instructions for the dialogue system. This means
that when the speaker chooses the appropriate message for the system, it is the task
for the speaker to ground the action. The task of the dialogue system is to verify the
preconditions of the grounded action holds, and if matched then apply the effects. This
subject is covered in greater detail when talking about implicit instructions in Chapter 3.
Example 5 fleshes out the notion that the worlds in the possible world model are
defined using propositional statements.
Example 5 (Defining the hidden blocks world with a possible world model
using literals):
To bridge the gap between the knowledge representation of the hidden blocks world
domain and the propositional value of the individual worlds the graph shown below
shows the same graph as Example 2 with the equivalent propositions describing the
world states.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Speech Acts
15
clear(B)
isAt(B,A)
isAt(A,t)
s0
clear(A)
clear(B)
isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s1
clear(A)
isAt(B,t)
isAt(A,B)
s2
Bob
Alice, Bob
Alice, Bob
Alice, Bob
Bob
Bob
The graph view shows how each propositional value p of each world node s
represents the set inclusion s ∈π(p).
While the semantics of the possible world model theoretically allows for possible
world models where block A is both standing on top of block B, isAt(A,B), and
standing on the table surface, isAt(A,t), these worlds and other similar worlds with
contradictions are left out to simplify the possible world model. The other possible
worlds are excluded from the dialogue system because those resulting states are
impossible for the system to reach with the instructions defined later in Section 2.2.
2.2.1
Verifying Preconditions
When the system receives an instruction from a speaker the variables in the propositions
of the preconditions are already grounded. This means the system has to figure out if
it can infer the preconditions of the speech act from the actual world situation. This is
done by looking at each individual proposition p of the preconditions and verify that it is
a proposition used in the model p ∈Φ and by ensuring the proposition is entailed by the
actual world of the model. If the system cannot find the corresponding proposition the
variables of the action must have been assigned to a wrong constant and the verification
will fail.
The task of checking the preconditions of an speech act A are entailed by the current
world s in the model M is a process of ensuring that (M,s) |= Precond(A). In terms
of the possible world semantics this process involves looking at each proposition of the
preconditions p ∈Precond(A) and its value in the preconditions. If the value of the
proposition is conditioned to be true, it must entail for the current world that s ∈π(p).
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Modelling Knowledge
If on the other hand, the value of the proposition in the preconditions are false, it is
required for the world s that s ̸∈π(p).
Now, given the assumption stating that speakers will not give instructions if they
are unaware if the preconditions are entailed the verification of the preconditions must
also take into account the relations of the model, verifying the speaker is aware the
preconditions hold. This means that given the speech act A, the current world s in
the world model M and some agent i, the task of the system is to ensure that (M,s) |=
KiPrecond(A). This means in terms of the semantics, the dialogue system must verify for
every state s′, reachable from s through the Ki relations. If the value of the precondition
p is true, it must be the case that s′ ∈π(p) and if false it must be the case that s′ ̸∈π(p).
Assuming the system receives speech act A from the speaker i in the world s of the
world model M. In order for the preconditions to be verified the system has to verify
that:
• ∀p ∈Precond(A) : p ∈Φ and
• (M,s) |= KiPrecond(A)
Examples 6 and 7 explore cases where the system either has to deny or accept the
preconditions of speech acts in the hidden blocks world domain.
Example 6 (Denying precondition due to no proposition):
Looking at an example where the preconditions fail due to the grounded literals not
corresponding to any propositions of Φ. Imagine the Hidden Blocks World domain,
where block A is bound by two propositions which share the same first order literal
isAt. These propositions isAt(A,B) and isAt(A,t) state that block A is standing
on block B and standing on the table, respectively. The proposition list Φ for this
case is given by: Φ = {isAt(A,B),isAt(A,t)}.
Imagine an instruction from the speaker to the dialogue system involves a grounded
action, where the precondition contains the grounded literal isAt(A,A). It might
be an odd literal, as it is impossible for block A to be standing on top of itself. One
could argue that perhaps the precondition should include a condition stating that
the two parameters should be different. But these additional measurements are un-
necessary, as the verification process will see that the proposition is not a part of
the proposition set isAt(A,A) ̸∈Φ and will deny the instruction.
Example 7 (Verifying blocks world preconditions):
Following the example from Example 6, where Φ = {isAt(A,B),isAt(A,t)}. The
graph illustrates the model M, where an agent i considers the two worlds equivalent
and another agent j who is able to distinguish the worlds:
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Speech Acts
17
¬isAt(A,t)
isAt(A,B)
w
isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(A,B)
v
i
i, j
i, j
This graph illustrates a knowledge representation where the speaker i cannot
distinguish the world, v, where block A is on the table versus the world, w where it
is on top of block B. The graph also illustrates that the current world state is in
fact w, by having the state encircled.
Consider agent i utters an instruction, s with a precondition requiring that block
A is on top of block B.
This is described by the proposition isAt(A,B).
This
precondition is met in world w,
(M,w) |= Precond(s),
and the system is expected to deny such a speech act because i is missing knowledge
of the preconditions,
(M,w) ̸|= KiPrecond(s).
Consider if agent j uttered the same instruction, this would result in another
outcome due to the agent’s knowledge about the preconditions. This time the system
would accept the speech act and invoke the effects, since (M,w) |= KjPrecond(s).
2.2.2
Fulfilling Effects
With the precondition being verified successfully the next step of the instruction pro-
cessing is for the dialogue manager to invoke the effects of the speech act. The dialogue
system must ensure the current world and the possible worlds are changed according to
the speech act. Invoking the effects is a two step process. First the physical changes of
the effects are invoked, changing the stack configuration in the blocks world etc. The sec-
ond step is to update the knowledge of the modelled agents by configuring the relations
sets K .
2.2.2.1
Physical Effects
The aim for applying the physical effects of an action A to the model is to reach a point
where the current world sg models these effects, (M,sg) |= ef f(A). The individual effect
of a certain speech act A is either a negative effect, meaning the proposition should be
set to false or a positive propositions and be set to true. Now for a specific effect there
are two cases the system will consider invoking. For the model M and the current world
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Modelling Knowledge
s the effect p ∈ef f(A) can either already be entailed by the model or not, (M,s) |= p or
(M,s) ̸|= p. In the first case the system do not need to handle this effect at all and can
just move on. But in the latter case the current world needs to be changed, to a world
which entails the effect.
When changing the actual world state a state might already exists which corresponds
to the effected world. However in the case that the state does not exist, the system would
have to generate a new state and insert additional relations for maintaining the model.
In order for the system to avoid having to go look for the state, when updating the
proposition p the dialogue system will be updating which states are in the set π(p). It
updates the set by reversing it, finding the complement set in terms of the set of states
S, π(p) = S\π(p). That way the symbolical name for the current world, or the reference
for the actual world, is not changed but rather the descriptive propositions all states is.
Example 8 explains and justifies the method of updating the actual world state.
Example 8 (Fulfilling effects in the blocks world domain):
Consider the possible world model shown below, where each world states whether the
blocks A and B are on the table or not. The colors indicates the worlds’s properties.
The yellow world has only B is on the table. Pink has both blocks on the table,
blue has no blocks and green has only A on the table.
¬isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
w
isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
v
¬isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
x
isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
y
Initially the actual world is w corresponding to the yellow world. Imagine now
the system is given the instruction to place block A on the table surface. Now using
the technique, the system will update the model by setting the set π(isAt(A,t)) to
its complement. This means the current world, w, will no longer have the properties
asserted with yellow, but instead pink.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Speech Acts
19
isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
w
¬isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
v
isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
x
¬isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
y
2.2.2.2
Epistemic Effects
The second step of fulfilling the effects of an instruction, the dialogue manager will
update the modelled knowledge of the individual participating speaker. The update
of knowledge can go both ways: The system can either add knowledge or it can add
ignorance to the model. The choice of these two tasks depends on the individual speaker
and their availability; are they present or absent when the instruction and its effects are
taking place?
The system adds ignorance if a speaker is absent and does not observe an instruction
and its effects. The process of adding ignorance to the knowledge of a speaker i means
that the system will add equivalence relations to the set Ki, making i consider additional
world possible. When adding ignorance to the model, the system does it for a single
proposition at a time. Adding ignorance about a proposition p to the knowledge of
speaker i is a task where the system makes an equivalence relation to every state in
the state space S. The dialogue system iterates S and for every state s the system will
try to find the complement state s′, in terms of p. This means the only propositional
value which is different between s and s′ is the value of p. The speaker i will no longer
distinguish between the two worlds and the system will be modelling the additional
equivalence relations (s,s′),(s′,s) ∈Ki. Example 9 illustrates how ignorance is added to
the system.
Example 9 (Adding ignorance to the possible world model):
Consider the hidden blocks world domain and the two agents Alice and Bob. Under
the hat is two cubes, A and B placed on the table surface.
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Modelling Knowledge
isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s0
The graph above shows the initial model where both agents are fully aware of
the hidden stack configuration. Reflective relations are neglected. Consider the case
that Bob leaves the room. While he is away Alice instructs the system to move A
off the table. Now Bob cannot distinguish the actual world from the world which
he left behind, shown below.
¬isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s0
isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s1
Bob
Now Alice leaves the room too. While she is away Charlie sneaks in and moves
block B off the table, too. Now both Alice and Bob cannot distinguish worlds where
B is on the table from worlds where it is off. This includes the original world which
Bob still considers possible. The new model is shown below.
¬isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
s0
isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
s1
¬isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s2
isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s3
Bob
Alice, Bob
Bob
Alice, Bob
Notice Bob have an additional relation compared to Alice. The relations hori-
zontal relations illustrates Bob’s ignorance towards the location of block A.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Speech Acts
21
This task of adding knowledge to the system only involves the participating speakers
which hears the instruction and observes the outcome. There are two types of outcomes:
The first outcome is if the instruction is accepted in the verification process, which entails
that anyone present will observe the physical effects. The second type of outcome is when
instructions are not verified and thus denied. Here the fact that the action was denied
will give the participant information about the situation, and therefore will have added
knowledge.
This second case of adding knowledge will not be covered due to some of the assump-
tions made for this thesis. First of all it is assumed that the participants are rational
agents that will not try speech acts with preconditions they do not know are entailed by
the model. If this were possible the conversation would get a little paradoxical. This is
because the fact that the system blocks the speech act because of the speaker’s ignorance
would give the speaker some information about the world. Participants are also rational
since they would not try and utter a statement with false preconditions on purpose.
The case of adding knowledge relies verified speech acts where, in the case of the
hidden blocks world domain, the speech act is verified and its effects will be making
changes to the stack configurations. This change in knowledge is modeled such that the
equivalence relations related to each of the propositions changed by the instruction’s
effects are removed. The process of this is given some proposition p which some par-
ticipant i to no longer be ignorant in relation to. The aim of the process is to remove
relations to possible worlds, where the value of p is different from its value in the actual
world, s0. These are exactly the world states S′ ⊂S where S′ ⊂π(p) iff s0 ̸∈π(p). When
the system have determined these states, it will be removing any relation containing the
state s ∈S′. This means any state (s,r) ∈Ki or (r,s) ∈Ki is removed from the relations
of agent i. With the newly added knowledge the updated model will not allow agent i
to consider any of the states S′ to be possible. Example 10 shows an example of how a
model in the hidden blocks domain is updated to incorporating added knowledge.
Example 10 (Updating epistemic states based on accepted preconditions):
Consider the scenario of Example 9, and imagine Bob enters the room just before
Charlie moves block B. Bob witnesses the stack configuration as Charlie completes
the task. The new possible world model of this new situation is shown below.
¬isAt(A,t)
¬isAt(B,t)
s0
¬isAt(A,t)
isAt(B,t)
s2
Alice
Bob observes Charlie’s action and therefore gets full view of the stack configu-
ration. For this reason, Bob’s equivalence relations are removed from the model,
leading to a decrease in the amount of states reachable from the current world state.
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Modelling Knowledge
2.3
Implementation of the Knowledge
Representation
This section is devoted to a more practical side of the thesis and takes an algorithmic
approach to the processes involved with speech acts. The section looks at the most im-
portant implemented functionalities for the model. The dialogue system is implemented
using Java.
The system will only be modelling the worlds which are reachable from the current
world. This is done in an effort to keep the space usage at a minimum.
2.3.1
Verifying Preconditions
The verifying algorithm receives the preconditions as two sets, representing the positive
and negative preconditions, respectively. It is two disjoint sets of propositions: P∩Q =
/0;P,Q ⊆Φ. The speaking agent i should be aware that these preconditions have the value
that corresponds to the set they came in. What is meant by this is every proposition
p ∈P is true in the actual world state s0, ie. (M,s0) |= Kip, and every proposition q ∈Q
is false in the actual world state: (M,s0) |= Ki¬q. The algorithm which completes the
verification is shown in the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.
This algorithm for verifying preconditions are rather simple. The procedure starts by
iterating through the different propositions sets to verify and ensure they are contained
in the model. Next the procedure determines which world states the speaker i considers
possible. This is handled the getConnected(i) utility function, which tries to traverse
the state space S using only the binary relations of Ki from the actual world s0. Next
the algorithm defines an empty set, unknown_props, which through out the algorithm
will keep track of the propositions which i is unaware of the value of. These unknown
propositions is found by iterating through each proposition of the system, starting from
line 14. The proposition p is deemed unknown if for some state s ∈S where s ̸= s0
the state will have a different value of the proposition from the actual state. This is
determined by the algorithm by looking at the intersection of the set π(p) and the
set only containing s and s0. If the intersection have a cardinality of just 1 then two
reachable states (s and s0) have different values for the proposition p. Since i thus cannot
distinguish between the two states, the proposition is deemed unknown.
Once the algorithm has determined if a proposition p is known or unknown the
algorithm will determine that, if the proposition is part of the preconditions it has
the right value in the current world s0. This is determined by first by checking if the
proposition is part of negative preconditions, p ∈Q. If the precondition is negative the
proposition must not hold in the current world s0 ̸∈π(p) and is a proposition which is
known by the participant. In terms of the semantics this will determine if (M,s0) |= Ki¬p.
Lastly the the verification algorithm checks if the proposition is part of the positive
preconditions p ∈P. Here the proposition must naturally hold in the current world,
s0 ∈π(p).
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Implementation of the Knowledge Representation
23
Algorithm 1 Verifying preconditions of speech acts
1: Given: Proposition lists π, true proposition set P, false proposition set Q, instructing
agent i, set of all propositions Φ, set of all modelled states S, actual world s0.
2: for each p ∈P do
3:
if p ̸∈Φ then
4:
return false
5:
end if
6: end for
7: for each q ∈Q do
8:
if q ̸∈Φ then
9:
return false
10:
end if
11: end for
12: reachable_States ←getConnected(i) ▷World states reachable using the relations of
i
13: unknown_Props ←/0
▷Set defining exactly what i do not know
14: for each ϕ ∈Φ do
15:
for each s ∈S while ϕ ̸∈unknown_Props do
16:
comp ←{s,s0}∩π(ϕ)
17:
if s ∈reachable_State or |comp| = 1 then
18:
unknown_Props ←unknown_Props∪{ϕ}
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
if ϕ ∈Q and (ϕ ∈unknown_Props or s0 ∈π(ϕ)) then
▷ϕ should be false
22:
return false
23:
end if
24:
if ϕ ∈P and (ϕ ∈unknown_Props or s0 ̸∈π(ϕ)) then
▷ϕ should be true
25:
return false
26:
end if
27: end for
28: return true
2.3.2
Updating Knowledge
The task of adding ignorance to the knowledge of a specific agent i is considered first. The
task involves making the relations of the agent Ki to reflect how the set of states which
he cannot distinguish develops. The updating algorithm will given a single propositions
ϕ which the agent will become ignorant of whether it holds or not. This ignorance will be
represented by adding symmetric relation from every state s which the agent currently
considers possible. The world at the other end of the relation will be some relation s′
where the only proposition with a different value in the two states is ϕ. Algorithm 2
shows this procedure.
The algorithm iterates through every state s of the state space S. The goal of the
==PAGE:32==
24
2 Modelling Knowledge
Algorithm 2 Adding ignorance to the knowledge of an individual
1: Given: Proposition sets π, a participant i, set of states S, specific proposition ϕ ∈Φ,
set of propositions Φ, actual world state s0.
2: for all s ∈S do
3:
match ←null
4:
for each state ∈S do
5:
if ∀p ∈Φ : (p = ϕ) ̸= (π(p)(state) = π(p)(s)) then
6:
match ←state
7:
break
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
if match = null then
11:
new state s′
12:
S ←S∪s′
13:
for each p ∈Φ do
14:
if (p = ϕ) ̸= s ∈π(p) then
15:
π(p) ←π(p)∪s′
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
match ←s′
19:
end if
20:
new relation pair1 ←(s,s′)
21:
new relation pair2 ←(s′,s)
22:
if pair1 ̸∈Ki then
23:
Ki ←Ki ∪pair1
24:
end if
25:
if pair2 ̸∈Ki then
26:
Ki ←Ki ∪pair2
27:
end if
28: end for
algorithm is to make a relation between s and some other state s′. If the state s′ does not
exist in the state space yet, the algorithm has to create it. The first step of the iteration
is to check and see if s′ already exists. The logic of line 5 on every other state of the
state space checks to see see if they have the right propositions compared to s. The logic
checks that the other state has exactly the same propositions except when it comes to
the propositions ϕ. If it does not exist a new state is made. Using a similar logic the
algorithm will make sure that the new state is added to the right sets of π, corresponding
to its propositional values. The algorithm ends by adding two new relations to Ki, if
they do not already exist. Two relations are added to represent the symmetric property
of the equivalence relation.
The motivation for adding knowledge to an agent i is to remove his ignorance, this
means to remove relations from the set Ki. When an agent gains knowledge of propo-
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Implementation of the Knowledge Representation
25
sition p he will no longer consider any world s possible where p differs from the actual
world s0. The procedure of this algorithm is first to determine the worlds S′ which i no
longer considers possible. The algorithm removes every relation containing one of these
worlds s ∈S′. To clear up memory the algorithm will at the end remove any state which
is no longer reachable from the world s0. This procedure is explained in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Removing ignorance from the knowledge of an individual
1: Given: Proposition description π, a participant i, set of states S, specific proposition
p′ ∈Φ, actual world state s0, and the relation set Ki.
2: bin ←Empty-set
3: if s0 ∈π(p′) then
4:
bin ←bin∪{∀s ∈S : s /∈π(p′)}
5: else
6:
bin ←bin∪{∀s ∈S : s ∈π(p′)}
7: end if
8: for each (s,s′) in Ki do
9:
if s ∈bin or s′ ∈bin then
10:
remove (s,s′) from Ki
11:
end if
12: end for
13: removeUnreachableStates
The algorithm utilizes another algorithm removeUnreachableStates for removing
the now unreachable states of the model and this process is shown in Algorithm 4. The
algorithm first determines which states are reachable using the getConnectedState
method, which traverses every directed edge, or relation, of the model graph and marks
any state it can reach reachable, it stops once it has traversed every edge. The graph
traversal is performed using breadth-first search. This searching technique is covered in
greater detail in Chapter 3.
==PAGE:34==
26
2 Modelling Knowledge
Algorithm 4 removeUnreachableStates : Removing states and their relations
1: Given: Proposition lists π, indexed list of stateIDs stateIDs, set of propositions Φ,
set of speaker agents speakers, relation sets Ki where i ∈speakers.
2: reachables ←getConnectedState()
▷Returns a list the states which are reachable
3: for each state ∈stateIDS where state ̸∈reachables do
4:
for each ϕ ∈Φ do
5:
π(ϕ).remove(state)
6:
end for
7:
stateIDs.remove(state)
8:
for each s ∈speakers do
9:
for each relation ∈Ks do
10:
if relation.from = state or relation.to = state then
11:
Ks.remove(relation)
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
end for
15: end for
2.3.3
Updating Propositions
The algorithm of updating the model with the physical effects of an action is given the
propositional values for how the current world state is supposed to be. As previously
explained in Section 2.2.2.1 the physical effects are invoked by essentially flipping the
propositions sets π when it needs to be updated in the world. The set are flipped to
its complement to update every set throughout the state space while maintaining the
binary relations K . The algorithm is shown in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Updating a proposition of the actual world state.
1: Given: A set of propositions Φ′ ⊆Φ, set of all propositions Φ, the current world s0,
proposition sets π, the set of states S.
2: for each ϕ ∈Φ do
3:
if (ϕ ∈Φ′ and s0 ̸∈π(ϕ)) or (ϕ ̸∈Φ′ and s0 ∈π(ϕ)) then
4:
π(ϕ) ←S\π(ϕ)
5:
end if
6:
updateKnowledge(ϕ)
7: end for
Any propositions ϕ contained in the set is a proposition which are going to hold in
the new current world. Any proposition ϕ not included in Φ′ will be set to not hold in
the new current world. This is the logic of the algorithm and the check of line 3 ensures
that it is true for the current world state. If the current world model does not follow
this logic then the set π(ϕ) needs to be flipped by setting it equal to its complement
S\π(ϕ).
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Understanding Implicity
This chapter will look at making the dialogue system able to understand implicity in the
instructions uttered by the speakers. The parties of a conversation might want to apply
implicity in the conversation in order for the conversation process to be as effective
as possible. Or phrased differently: Try and make a phrase which conveys the same
meaning, but with as few words and statements as possible, but not to such a extend
that the statement becomes ambiguous and loses meaning. Grice [7] describes this goal
of effective conversations with his maxims.
This thesis deals with two types of implicity. The first kind of implicity is where
a speech act implies another statement, so in theory making a whole preceding speech
statement implicit. The second kind of implicity is where different variables of the speech
act is implicit. An example of the second type of implicity could be the use of pronouns
in the place of proper nouns or common nouns.
Common for the two types of implicity is that they are about making the spoken
statement applicable in the conversation context. In the first type of implicity, in this
thesis named implicit speech acts, the explicitly uttered phrase may not be applicable
right before the phrase is uttered. But once it is uttered it will have implied a sequence
of statements which will make it applicable. This type of implicity relates to the work
of Lewis [13] and his rules of accommodations.
Examples 11 and 12 outline examples of implicit speech acts. The first example
explains the implicit speech act in terms of an everyday example, while the latter explains
the implicit speech acts in terms of the hidden blocks world domain.
Example 11 (Implicitly uttered statement):
Imagine an employee calls his boss one morning, stating, ”I will not come to work
today, my kid got sick”. Assuming that his employer is unaware that he has a kid,
the statement will imply this. The speech act could in fact be even more, ”I have a
kid and I will not come to work today, because he got sick.”
Example 12 (Implicitly uttered statement in the hidden blocks world
domain):
Imagine a scenario in the hidden blocks world domain with a single speaking agent,
Alice, and the stack configuration shown below.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Understanding Implicity
Imagine Alice wants block C to be placed on the table. She knows that the
system is not allowed to move block C as long as block B is placed on top of it, so
Alice can reach the desired configuration by very explicitly uttering the statement,
”take block B off block C and place it on the table, and then take block C off block
A and place it on the table.” Alternatively she could simply have said, ”take block C
off block A and place it on the table,” which implies that the action of moving block
B must be performed first, before handling Alice’s instruction.
The second type of implicity is in this thesis called implicit variables. This implicity
deals with statements where the speaker implies which specific object that the speaker
refer to.
The speaker must balance the use of implicit variables to avoid ambiguity.
Grice’s maxim of quantity warns about this saying that must the statements must not
be so implicit that they loose information or become ambiguous. Example 13 illustrates
the use of implicit variables and what this type of implicity relates to.
Example 13 (Implicit variables in the hidden blocks world domain):
Imagine a scenario in the hidden blocks world domain with a single speaker, Alice,
and a stack configuration similar to the one shown below.
If Alice wants block B to be on the table, she can utter the phrase, ”take block
B from block A and place it on the table.” This phrase is very explicit as Alice do
not have to mention from where block B originates. Instead Alice will utter the
statement, ”take block B and place it on the table.” Now Alice implies that block B
should be taken from its initial location, block A.
To make the utterance even more implicit, Alice could imply that it is block B
she intends the system to move. She could do this by making a statement like, ”tear
down the pile,” which implies both from where she intends the block to be moved
but also implies which block to move. As block B on top of block A is the only stack
in the situation, it is the only stack which Alice can refer to using her statement.
The rest of the chapter will be looking at how the dialogue system deals with both
types of implicity. In general the dialogue system will first check if the uttered statement
is applicable in the current situation before figuring out the meaning of the implicity.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Implicit Speech Acts
29
3.1
Implicit Speech Acts
The understanding of entirely implied statements, relates to the research done related
to causal implicatures and has been a focus point of Luciana Benotti’s work[2, 14].
Finding the implied speech acts are done through planning. It is assumed that the
reader of this thesis is familiar with automated planning. Formally assume a speech act
A has implicit precedent speech acts. This means while A is not applicable in the initial
situation s0 ∈S, (M,s0) ̸|= precond(A). Then A must be applicable in a situation which
is reachable within n implicit speech acts. This provides the foundation for a planning
process, following a classical planning task[12], a triple (Σ,s0,Sg) where:
• Σ = (S,A,γ) is a state-transition system, which in this case is the S5 system, with
the set of A containing the available speech action schemas and γ is a transition
function from one state s′ to another state s′′ using an action a ∈A. Formally
s′′ = γ(s′,a) if a is applicable in state s′.
• s0 ∈S, is the initial state.
• Sg ⊆S is the set of goal states, which the states the planning procedure aims at
reaching.
The system searches for a plan of max length n of speech acts which starts from the
initial situation s0 and stops if either the maximum length is exceeded or some goal state
s ∈Sg where (M,sg) |= precond(A) is reached. In the case of the hidden blocks world
domain, the maximum hidden length has been set to 2, but it is easily changed.
A solution to the planning task is a sequence of speech acts [A1,A2,...,An] where
(M,s0) |= precond(A1), (M,s0⊕ef f(A1)) |= precond(A2),...,(M,Ns) |= precond(An), where
Ns = s0
⊕
i=1...n−1 ef f(Ai).
The goal of the planning task is to find a state sg ∈Sg where the explicitly stated
speech act A is applicable, (M,sg) |= precond(A).
The strategy used to find the plan is Breadth-First Search (BFS). The BFS strategy
is not time and space efficient, but it guarantees to find a solution if there is one. BFS
is also optimal because the plans it finds are guaranteed to be the shortest possible plan.
The properties of the BFS algorithm works for this application, as it is assumed that
the speaker uses implicit speech acts without a huge sequence of implicit speech acts.
With the algorithm thus only trying to find plans of limited size the issues of the time
and space complexities of BFS does not seem that problematic after all[15].
Example 14 shows how the BFS algorithm will find implied statements in the hidden
blocks world domain.
Example 14 (Finding the implicit speech acts):
Imagine the hidden blocks domain and a situation with four blocks as shown below.
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Understanding Implicity
Consider the speaker, Alice, utters the instruction, ”Take block A from the table
and place atop of block C”.
As both block A and block C have to be clear for
this action to be applicable, so this infers that Alice implies the instruction for the
system to move block B and block D off their respective origins before applying the
explicitly spoken instruction.
The graph below illustrates an instance of the automated planner finding an
appropriate plan for reaching the preconditions for Alice’s utterance. The order
in which the conversation context’s states are traversed is shown by each state’s
number. The marked state 6 entails the preconditions and is therefore considered a
goal state.
1
3
4
2
5
6
moveToTable(B,C)
moveToTable(D,A)
moveToTable(D,A)
moveTo(B,C,D)
moveTo(D,A,B)
Node that since the planner follows the technique of BFS every child node of
state 1 is traversed before the planner reaches the goal state.
3.1.1
Implementation
This section covers the implementation allowing the system to determine implicit speech
act, using the BFS strategy. The pseudo code of Algorithm 6 explains the exact algo-
rithm the system uses to determine the implicit speech acts.
The planning algorithm initiates by defining two sets explored and frontier which
each is a collection of previously visited states and states that are yet to be visited,
respectively.The elements of the two sets are nodes which each contain a pair of the
reached world model and the sequence of speech acts, called the path, which has been
used to reach the state of that world model. Initially the explored set is empty and
frontier consists of a pair of the initial world model state and an empty sequence.
The algorithm iterates over the frontier removing an element in each iteration and
add it to explored. The frontier set is implemented as a First-In-First-Out queue to
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Implicit Speech Acts
31
insure nodes with shorter sequences are prioritized. The iterations will terminate with
failure if either the frontier is empty or the maximum path length is reached.
Algorithm 6 Find implicit speech using planning with BFS
1: Given: Acting agent agent, applied action goal-action, set of bound values symbols,
set of action schemas action-schemas, initial world state s0, maximum path length
max-length.
2: explored ←Empty-Set
3: frontier ←Empty-Set
4: node ←a node with State = s0, path = Empty-Set
5: frontier ←insert(node, frontier)
6: loop
7:
if frontier is empty then
8:
return failure
9:
end if
10:
node ←Pop(frontier)
▷takes the node with the shortest path to it
11:
if Length(node.Path) = max-length then
12:
return failure
13:
end if
14:
add node to explored
15:
for each action ∈Permutation(action-schemas,symbols) do
16:
if Applicable(action,node.State,agent) then
17:
newNode ←node.Apply(action)
18:
if newNode.State is not in explored or frontier then
19:
if Applicable(goal-action,newNode.State,agent) then
20:
return newNode.Path
21:
else
22:
frontier ←insert(newNode, frontier)
23:
end if
24:
end if
25:
end if
26:
end for
27: end loop
The algorithm iterates over every possible speech act in the system using the node
from the frontier set to look at each action, and tries to match the node’s world model
with the action. If successful and if the resulting world model state after applying action
is not already contained by a node in either explored or frontier, then that the node
is expandable using that action. The algorithm then creates a new node containing the
resulting world model state by applying the action to the node’s and a plan equals to
node’s but expanded with the action.
The algorithm returns the path as the solution if the new node is a goal state and
the algorithm will add the new node to the frontier if the node differs from the goal
state.
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Understanding Implicity
The time complexity of the BFS based algorithm, consider the total number of
action permutations generated in line 15 noted here as a. The maximum solution length
m insures that the algorithm should stop when exceeding the limit. This means the
maximum number of states generated by the algorithm is
a+a2 +a3 +···+am = O(am).
In terms of space complexity, BFS stores every state generated in memory without any
removal, as they are added to the explored set. There will be a maximum of O(am−1)
states saved in the explored set and O(am) in frontier.
As the space complexity is
dominated by the frontier set, the complexity will also end up at O(am).
3.2
Implicit Statement Variables
When using pronouns it usually relates to entities which follows some order of salience,
for instance the more recently the entity was mentioned. This is covered by Koller[9],
which in turn is inspired by the salience list approach made by Strube[16]. While salience
of entities are not covered further in this thesis, it could have been a feature which would
help the grounding of implicit variables greatly. The salience could have been determined
by scoring the entities based on how recent they had been mentioned.
Formally, assume a speech act A given with a set of parameters P. A subset Ip ⊆
P of the parameters are implicit and are thus not grounded.
The system’s task of
binding these free variables is a naive process of trial and error where. Given a set
of all the grounded symbols Λ, the system will iterate over every permutation of Λ
where a parameter v ∈Ip is bound to a grounded symbol v 7→λ ∈Λ. Each time the
parameter is bound to a value it is checked if the now grounded speech act A′ is applicable
(M,s) |= precond(A′). A grounding is found if the number of these applicable speech acts
is equal to 1. Otherwise the original speech act A must be deemed ambiguous.
Consider a case with a speech act A with partially grounded parameters with two
possible groundings B1 and B2, which both can be applied to the unbound parameters of
A. A(B1) and A(B2) respectively represents the speech act bound by the two groundings.
If both of these groundings makes A applicable, (M,s) |= precond(A(B1)) and (M,s) |=
precond(A(B2)), the system will be unable to find the intended application for the speech
act and must as a result fail.
If on the other hand bounding exists, that is (M,s) ̸|= precond(A(λ)) for all λ ∈Λ,
the system will not be able to find any possible meaning for the speech act and must
fail. Example 15 elaborates on the implicit statement variables.
Example 15 (Instructions which use implicit statement variables):
Imagine a scenario involving agents Alice, Bob, Charlie and David. Alice, Bob and
David starts in a room alone without Charlie. Alice places a cube under a cup.
This action is observed by both Bob and David. Next Bob leaves the room leaving
Alice and David alone. Once Bob has left the room, Alice hides another ball under
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Implicit Statement Variables
33
the table. Bob only observed the first time Alice hid a cube, and is unaware of
the second action taken place. Charlie did not observe any of the two actions, and
are completely ignorant of the cubes and David observed both actions and knows
exactly where any of the two cubes are located.
Now both Bob and Charlie enters the room, all four individuals are now gathered
in the room. If Bob now utters the statement, ”Alice, please hand me the cube”, one
would expect that, since that the only cube which Bob knows the current hiding
spot of is the cube hiding under the cup, Alice would reason that this is most likely
the cube which Bob refers to as ”the cube”. Based on this resolution, Alice nods
and hands the cube from under the cup to Bob.
Instead of Bob uttering the phrase imagine now that it would be Charlie per-
forming the speech act. In this case one would expect that Alice is unable to reason
about which cube Charlie speaks of. This is expected since the phrase ”the cube”
could refer to either one of the two hidden cubes, and from Charlie’s perspective
there is not much help to gather either, since he did not see the actions performed.
This leaves Charlie’s speech act ambiguous and Alice have to either ask Charlie to
elaborate or deny the speech act all together.
Instead of Bob or Charlie, imagine that it is David that utters the statement. In
this case one would expect that Alice finds David’s statement, much like Charlie’s,
to be ambiguous. This is expected, since similarly to Charlie’s case, the phrase ”the
cube” could refer to either one of the two hidden cubes. More over, since David was
attending when Alice hid both cubes, he is completely aware of the situation, and
taking David’s perspective does not help Alice in any way to determine of which
cube David speaks of and similarly to Charlie’s speech act, Alice have to either ask
David to elaborate or deny his speech act all together.
The example outlines three cases which each illustrates the conclusions that the
dialogue system will be able to reach based on the reach of how implicit the speech act’s
parameters can be. The speech act of asking for having a cube c handed to an agent i
from an origin o could correspond to an action give(c,i,o), and would probably have a
precondition stating that c starts at the origin o. In the first case of the question, where
Bob asks for the cube, the only cube which he knows exactly where is, is the cube under
the hat. The cube could be represented by the value C1 and its location defined by
the primitive isAt(C1,Hat). The other cube, C2, which Bob is unaware of the location
of could then have its position defined by isAt(C2,UnderTable). With Bob’s speech
act, give(c,Bob,o), the system will with the two cubes find the two possible groundings
give(C1,Bob,Hat) and give(C2,Bob,UnderTable) and of these two only the former will
be applicable, as for the current situation s0,
(M,s0) |= KBob(precond(give(C1,Bob,Hat))) and
(M,s0) ̸|= KBob(precond(give(C2,Bob,UnderTable))),
and as only one applicable grounding exists the system is able to determine the implicit
meaning behind Bob’s statement. The system will in the process of carrying out the
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Understanding Implicity
speech act’s effects into practice use the newly defined explicit speech act instead of the
given implicit one.
In the second case Charlie utters the same phrase as Bob did. This time however the
agent Charlie is unaware of either cube’s position, the system will reach the conclusion
that,
(M,s0) ̸|= KCharlie(precond(give(C1,Charlie,Hat))) and
(M,s0) ̸|= KCharlie(precond(give(C2,Charlie,UnderTable))),
as the dialogue system is unable to determine any possible grounding for the implicit
parameters, the system has failed the verification process and will not go further and
will not update current situation.
In the third case David also utters the phrase. In this case David is completely aware
of both cubes and their position, this will make the system reach the conclusion
(M,s0) |= KDavid(precond(give(C1,David,Hat))) and
(M,s0) |= KDavid(precond(give(C2,David,UnderTable))).
3.2.1
Implementation
This section will in greater detail go over how the dialogue system attempts to ground
the parameters of a speech act. The pseudo code of Algorithm 7 explains the exact
algorithm used by the system to ground the action.
It should be mentioned that the algorithm is a step of the system’s verification process.
If the algorithm finds way an applicable way of grounding the speech act unambiguously
it will return exactly this grounded speech act which the system then will use to update
the world model according to the action’s effects, if the system does not find a proper
way to bound the speech act it will return NULL.
The algorithm first check if the received speech act is already explicit. It does this
by testing if the action is applicable in the world model, if it is the algorithm has no
task ahead and simply returns the received speech act. If however it is not applicable it
might very well be because some of the parameters are implicit, and that leads into the
rest of the algorithm.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Implicit Statement Variables
35
Algorithm 7 Pre-verification step which bounds implicit parameters of speech act
1: Given: Acting agent agent, spoken speech act original-action, set of bound values
symbols, world state s0.
2: Returns: An action A which is grounded and applicable in the world state by the
agent.
3: if Applicable(original-action,s0,agent) then
4:
return original-action
5: end if
6: applicable-Action ←NULL
7: unbound-Actions ←insert(original-action)
8: loop
9:
if unbound-Actions is empty then
10:
return applicable-Action
11:
end if
12:
action ←Pop(unbound-Actions)
13:
for each par ∈action.Parameters do
14:
if par ̸∈symbols then
▷Parameter is not bound to a symbol
15:
for each sym ∈symbols do
▷Set parameter as every symbol value
16:
newAction ←Copy(action)
17:
newAction.Parameters.Update(par,sym)
18:
if Applicable(newAction,s0,agent) then
19:
if applicable-Action = NULL then
20:
applicable-Action ←newAction
21:
else
22:
return NULL
▷Ambiguous so a failure
23:
end if
24:
else
25:
unbound-Actions ←insert(newAction,unbound-Actions)
26:
end if
27:
end for
28:
break
29:
end if
30:
end for
31: end loop
The algorithm first introduces the variable applicable-Action and the set unbound-Actions
which will contain the variations of the action which could be grounded to an applicable
speech act. It will now iterate over the elements of this set until it has been through
them all and in that case it will return the variable applicable-Action. For each action
the algorithm will iterate over each of the action’s parameters, using the variable par
to represent the current parameter. If the algorithm finds a parameter which is not one
of the system’s symbols par ∈symbols, i.e. not bound to any value, the system will try
and ground the variable by grounding to every symbol in the system. This is done by
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Understanding Implicity
making a new action based on action for each symbol in the system and change the value
of par to that that symbol, as shown on line 17.
If any of these new actions are applicable to the world model then that action has
no longer any implicit variables and are a possible understanding of the speech act.
If however the algorithm has found another grounded and applicable version of the
speech act, as applicable-Action ̸= NULL, then the algorithm concludes the speech act
as ambiguous and returns with a failure. If no other grounded actions has been found
(yet) the variable applicable-Action is set to this new action. If the new action is not
applicable it is added to unbound-Actions. There can be two reasons as to why it would
not be applicable. The first reason is that the action still has implicit and unbound
parameters, and these will picked up in a later iteration of the algorithm. The other
reason as to why it would not be applicable would be because it is fully grounded but
simply not applicable to the current state of the world model. If this would be the case
then it is also picked up in later iterations of the algorithm in which the algorithm will
find that it has parameter par which is not in the symbols set par ̸∈symbols and skip
the action.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Modelling Belief
The second iteration of the dialogue system concerns the representing of the belief of the
different individuals communicating with the system. This chapter will both cover the
representation, its difference from the knowledge representation as well as how implicity
work, both in terms of implicit speech acts and implicit parameters in the speech acts
can be understood while using the belief model.
The aim of the model is first and
foremost to similarly as the knowledge model, to keep track of the state of the world
but instead of knowledge it will keep track of what world situation which the individual
human speakers believes to be true.
Similar to the knowledge system, this system will model the belief of the different
individuals from an omniscient point of view. This means that the model represents the
actual world state as well as the world states the different speakers consider true.
The chapter will essentially cover the same things as the previous two chapters did,
but instead of representing knowledge the system will be representing belief. Starting
with looking at how the belief is represented and the properties of the relation function
this time around. Next the chapter will cover how the representation of the conversation
context has changed and then the design of the different algorithms which is used in the
belief system. Towards the end it is covered how implicity in the new system is dealt
with, as well as how the system can utilize the belief of the speakers to reach conclusion
in relation to implicit speech act.
Just like the knowledge representation, the chosen representation for belief in this
system is based on a Kripke structure[10]. In fact the world model in the belief system
is defined by the same Kripke structure M = (S,π,K1,...,Kn), where:
• S is the set of possible worlds
• π : Φ →2S defines the states in which a proposition is true, where Φ is the set of
propositions
• Ki ⊂S × S describes for each agent i a set of relations between the set of states.
The pair (s,t) ∈Ki means that in the actual world s the agent, i considers the
world t possible.
The specifications and notations for the logical formulas of the belief system is the
exact same as the ones used in the knowledge system and will therefore not be covered
in greater detail again, but rather just listed,
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Modelling Belief
(M,s) |= p (for a primitive proposition p ∈Φ)
iff
s ∈π(p)
(M,s) |= ψ ∧ψ′
iff
(M,s) |= ψ and (M,s) |= ψ′
(M,s) |= ¬ψ
iff
(M,s) ̸|= ψ
(M,s) |= Kiψ
iff
(M,t) |= ψ for all t such that (s,t) ∈Ki.
Now the most key difference between the knowledge representation and the belief
representation is that instead of its relation sets having the properties of a S5 system,
the relation used in belief representation has the properties of a KD45 system.
The state relations used by the KD45 system is not an equivalence relation, but does
otherwise share some of the same properties. Specifically, similarly to the knowledge
representation in the S5 system, the belief representation using a KD45 system also has
the transitive property. As a reminder, this property states that considering an agent i,
if from the world state B the agent would believe in the world C, and the agent i would
from the world state A believe in the world B, i would due to the transitive property
also believe in the world C. This property of the relation Ki means that assuming that
(A,B),(B,C) ∈Ki the it is also implied that (A,C) ∈Ki.
But besides this property, the state relations of KD45 also consist of an additional
property. This property is what is known as the serial property. Informally in terms of
belief, the serial property states that the agent must always have a belief, whether it is
wrong or not. In more detail the serial property means that for the world state set S,
any states of the set will relate to some other state of the world model. Formally this
means that for every agent i and every world state s their relations set Ki will include
a relation to some other world t, (s,t) ∈Ki. If the i believes the world s which he is
standing in, the system must include a reflexive relation to maintain the serial property.
In this thesis, if a world state does not have any relations, it is assumed reflexive.
To help the explanation of the belief representation, consider the Example 16 which
shows how a narrative from the hidden blocks world domain can be modelled using a
KD45 system.
Example 16 (The hidden blocks world domain using the belief model):
Consider the instance of the hidden blocks world domain consisting of the dialogue
system, two speakers Alice and Bob, and with a cube stack configuration consisting
of two cubes, A and B. Imagine now that Bob leaves the room, leaving Alice alone
to alter the cube stacks. The last thing that had happened to the stacks before Bob
left the room was that one of the blocks, say B was stacked on top of the other block,
A. While Bob is away Alice instructs the system to move B down onto the table.
This will mean that while the actual world state changes accordingly to the changes
which Alice made, Bob will believe that nothing has changed. This situation can be
modelled graphically as shown below.
==PAGE:47==
4 Modelling Belief
39
s0
s1
Bob
Alice
Alice, Bob
As Alice never leaves the room she will be fully aware of the state of the world
and thus belief in the actual world state. Bob on the other hand will in the current
world state, s0, believe the old world state to be true, s1, leading to the relation
(s0,s1) ∈KBob. Bob believes s1 is the true world state in what ever the actual world
state would be, including s1 itself, resulting in the reflexive relation (s1,s1) ∈KBob,
a relation which is a result of upholding the serial property.
The speech acts in the belief centered dialogue system are very similar to the speech
acts used in the knowledge centered dialogue system, and the system this time also
handles the received speech acts in a two step process. First step is for the system to
verify the speech act A’s precondition based on the world model M. The preconditions
depend on the actual state of the situation s0 while similarly to the knowledge system
depends on the the speaking agent i’s accessibility relation Ki.
So just as with the
knowledge based possible world model, the instruction’s preconditions must be entailed
by (M,s0) |= Kiprecond(A). The different properties for the binary relation is what differs
the verification of the preconditions from the knowledge based dialogue system.
The second step of processing the speech acts are to fulfill the desired effects of the
instruction. The belief system changes the actual world differently from the knowledge
system, which would have changed the propositions of the states instead of moving the
states around. The belief system on the other hand changes which world state it considers
the actual state. The exact process of fulfilling the effects of some instruction A starts
by searching for the state s′. This state will correspond to applying the propositions of
the instruction’s effects to the actual world s0. It must be the case that (M,s′) |= ef f(A).
If however the state s′ is not found in the searching process, the state is made and added
to the state space S.
The second step of the procedure of updating the model is to update the beliefs of
the participants. This again depends on whether the new actual world state is old or is a
newly added state. If the new state already exists the model will not have relations added.
Instead relations will only be removed. To help explain this consider the three world
states, A, B and C. The states are transitively related meaning (A,B),(A,C),(B,C) ∈Ki,
where i is an absent agent. Initially the actual world is A. If the actual world then
changes to be B the relations related to A, and the state A itself, has to be removed.
This is because it is impossible to traverse the relations of the model and reach A and
from there traverse any of its two relations.
If on the other hand a new state s is added as the actual world state, then the system
will be adding a single relation from s to the old actual world state s′, but only for any
agent i which is currently absent, explicitly (s,s′) ∈Ki.
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Modelling Belief
If an agent i is present in the moment the speech act takes places and the effects
invoked, his relations Ki and in turn his beliefs will be completely cleared. He will thus
believe the world is as it actually is, he will believe in the current world state completely.
4.1
Algorithms
In this section only the algorithms which diverts from the equivalent algorithms from
the knowledge based belief system will be covered. Some of these algorithms cover the
same type of functionality, but different cases. This is for instance, as the first couple
of algorithms cover, when updating the actual world state. The two different cases for
this example is whether the new actual world state already exists in the model. If it
does the world state should be defined as the actual world state, removing unreachable
states. On the other hand if it does not exist in the model, it should be made and new
relations should be added such that the individuals’ beliefs are maintained. Starting
with Example 8, which shows the process of changing the actual world state to a state
already modelled.
Algorithm 8 Updating the actual world state to a state already modelled
1: Given: proposition lists π, new actual state sn ∈S, state space S, set of propositions
Φ, relation sets Ki where i ∈speakers, set of present speakers presence.
2: for each ϕ ∈Φ do
3:
π(ϕ) ←moveToFront(sn)
4: end for
5: S ←moveToFront(sn)
6: removeUnreachableStates
7: for each agent ∈presence do
8:
Kagent ←/0
9: end for
The system does not keep track of the which is the actual state using a specific
variable. Instead the system keep track of it by always having it represented as the
first element of the individual lists. Because of this the new actual state sn is moved
to the front of all of the proposition lists π as well as to the front of the state space
S, a simple procedure shown at lines 2-5. As mentioned previously, if the actual state
is changed to a state already existing, the system will be removing states and relations
which are no longer reachable from the new actual state. This is done using the al-
gorithm removeUnreachableStates which was explained during Section 2.3.2. Lastly
the procedure will be removing any relations for participants who are present when the
model is updated. Since the agent will observe the changes they will become fully aware
of the world as it is.
Next is the procedure of updating the actual state to a new state in the model. To
maintain the structure of having the actual world as the first element of the individual
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Algorithms
41
lists, the new state will be added as the head of the lists. This procedure is described
in Algorithm 9.
Algorithm 9 Adding a new state to the system
1: Given: Set of propositions which holds in new actual state new_state →2Φ, propo-
sition lists π, set of states S, set of propositions Φ, previous actual world s0, set of
participants speakers, set of present participants presence.
2: S ←prepend( new state sn)
3: for ϕ ∈Φ do
4:
if ϕ ∈new_state then
5:
π(ϕ) ←prepend(sn,true)
6:
else
7:
π(ϕ) ←prepend(sn,false)
8:
end if
9: end for
10: state_dif ferences ←/0
11: for each ϕ ∈Φ where |{sn,s0}∩π(ϕ)| = 1 do
12:
state_dif ferences ←state_dif ferences∪{ϕ}
13: end for
14: for each p ∈state_dif ferences do
15:
for each i ∈speakers do
16:
if i ∈presence then
17:
updateBelief(i, p,sn)
▷believe the value in the actual world
18:
else
19:
updateBelief(i, p,s0)
▷believe the value in the old world
20:
end if
21:
end for
22: end for
With the new state being added to the front of the different lists the system will be
able to tell that this is the new actual state. The set is defined by what propositions
are meant to hold in the situation. Once the new state is set as the actual world state,
the algorithm will go on to update the beliefs of the agents. Starting by determining
which propositions are different between the new state and the old world state. This
is determined by the logic of line 11. The iterative loop will cover any propositions
ϕ ∈Φ which has been updated between the two states. For each of these propositions
the dialogue system will, dependent on if the participant is present when the changes
happen, update what the participants believes. If they are present they will observe the
changes and believe the proposition has the value in the new state. If they on the other
hand are absent the agents will believe in the value which the proposition has in the
old world. The last step of adding belief relations was done mostly in order for the new
state to become connected to the rest of the world states of the model.
The following procedure will be looking at how beliefs are updated. It is this algo-
rithm which is run when using updateBelief. Beliefs are updated based on a specific
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Modelling Belief
proposition p and the value of this proposition which the agent is set to believe. The
thinking of how to update beliefs are similar to the think used when updating knowledge.
There are a couple of cases which the system deals with using different procedures. The
first case is if p already has the believed value in the actual world state. If this is the
case, old relations which told that the agent had the opposite beliefs, are to be removed.
The procedure of adding beliefs which represents believing in the actual world is shown
in Algorithm 10.
Algorithm 10 Updating beliefs if it holds in actual world
1: Given: A specific participant i, set of states S, propositions sets π, relations set Ki,
actual world state s0, believed proposition p.
2: for each s ∈S where s ∈π(p) iff s0 ̸∈π(p) do
3:
for each relation ∈Ki do
4:
if relation.to = s or relation.from = s then
5:
Ki ←Ki \relation
6:
end if
7:
end for
8: end for
9: removeUnreachableStates
Every time either the actual world state is updated or the belief of an agent is
updated, there is some probability that a state of the model is no longer reachable from
the actual world state. As the system is only interested in beliefs in relation to the
actual world state, any state which is no reachable from the actual world state is to
be removed, and so are any relation in which the state participates. This algorithm,
removeUnreachableStates, has already been covered in greater detail in Section 2.3.2
with Algorithm 4.
If on the other hand the p’s new believed value is not true in the actual world, the
algorithm again has to deal with multiple cases. One possibility is if the value of the
proposition is already described by some world states in the model. Another possibility
is if the value of p which the agent now will believe is not described by any states. In the
former case, the system will add relations between every pair of states, which are different
exactly in the value of p. In the latter case the task is for the system to make these
states, which are equivalent to every state already in the system, but different exactly
in the value of p. This procedure is very similar to the process of adding ignorance from
the knowledge system, described by Algorithm 2. The algorithm behind the procedure
of adding believes in states which are no the actual state is described by Algorithm 11.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Algorithms
43
Algorithm 11 Updating beliefs if it does not hold in the actual world
1: Given: proposition list π, proposition to update ϕ, value of ϕ to be believed b, state
space S, set of propositions Φ, an agent i, relations of the specific agent Ki.
2: for all s ∈S do
3:
match ←null
4:
for each s′ ∈S do
5:
if ∀p ∈Φ : (p = ϕ) ̸= (π(p)(s′) = π(p)(s)) then
6:
match ←s′
7:
break
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
if match = null then
11:
new state s′
12:
S ←S∪s′
13:
for each p ∈Φ do
14:
if (p = ϕ) ̸= s ∈π(p) then
15:
π(p) ←π(p)∪s′
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
match ←s′
19:
end if
20:
new relation pair ←(s,s′)
21:
if pair ̸∈Ki then
22:
Ki ←Ki ∪pair
23:
end if
24: end for
In fact the key difference between this algorithm and the algorithm used to add
ignorance in the knowledge system is that this algorithm only adds a single relation
between states. It only adds one relation between the states because since the relation
is not symmetric.
The last functionality that the belief system needs is to verify some propositions
through the model. Similarly to the knowledge system, the belief system assumes that
agents only will make instructions if they believe the instruction to be applicable. This
means verifying the preconditions of the instruction A from an agent i in the current
world state s0, by verifying that the model M entails (M,s0) |= Kiprecond(A). In terms
of the procedure, this involves determining which state s ∈S the agent i believes in. The
algorithm behind this procedure is shown in Algorithm 12 and just like the verification
algorithm used by the knowledge system, this algorithm is given a set of allegedly false
propositions Q and a set of allegedly true propositions P. The algorithm will be verifying
for each of these two sets that every propositions correctly either holds or not holds in
the state s.
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Modelling Belief
Algorithm 12 Verification in the belief system
1: Given: A specific participant i, set of states S, propositions sets π, relations set Ki,
set of true propositions P, set of false proposition Q.
2: believed_States ←getConnected(i)
3: for each s ∈S where s ∈believed_States do
4:
for each relation ∈Ki do
5:
if relation.from = s then
6:
believed_States ←believed_States\s
7:
break
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
if s ∈believed_States then
11:
for each q ∈Q do
12:
if s ∈π(q) then
13:
return false
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
for each p ∈P do
17:
if s ̸∈π(p) then
18:
return false
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
end if
22: end for
23: return true
24: Second the preconditions are verified in this believed world.
4.2
Understanding Implicity in Belief Systems
Next is to see how the belief system can be used to understand implicit speech acts.
How does the belief system do this differently than the knowledge system and does it
do it better? Well in fact. The system will be able to use the beliefs of the speaking
participant to infer what the agent’s intended instruction is. Consider Example 17, which
illustrates how the belief system will help find intend in the participant’s instructions.
Example 17 (Using implicity in the belief system):
Imagine the hidden blocks world domain and the conversation context pictured
below. The agent Alice left the room while block B was standing on top of block A
and block C clear. But while she was absent block B was moved such that it sit on
top of block C.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Understanding Implicity in Belief Systems
45
s0
s1
Alice
Consider that Alice returns to the room. Alice utters the phrase, ”flip the stack
around”. One would expect that the system will understand this to mean that Alice
wants block A on top of block B, as shown below.
s2
This is expected since the dialogue system will infer that Alice believes in the
configuration of state s1. Besides Alice’s utterance utilizes both types of implicity.
First of all Alice simply talks about a stack which could be any set of blocks. While
looking at the actual initial world state, s0 can refer to the stack of block B and C.
But Alice believes in fact that B is stacked on top of A, so the system will infer these
two blocks as the stacks. Secondly, when Alice instructs the system to flip the stack,
what she implies is that she intends for the former bottom block, A, to be placed on
the block previously on top of it, B. And this single instruction of course implies,
from the belief of Alice, that block B is moved away from block A first.
The belief system’s inference of implied speech acts as well as of implied parameters
are two procedures very similar to the corresponding procedures of the knowledge system.
But regardless there are some details which are different and these will be covered in
the following couple of sections.
4.2.1
Implicit Speech Acts
The way the belief system reasons about implied preceding speech acts is very similar
to the way the knowledge based dialogue system did. The belief based dialogue system
will also the be using BFS to find the implicit speech acts. But unlike the knowledge
based system, the belief system will have multiple perspectives from which it will figure
out the proper sequence of instructions. There is the actual world state, which is very
similar to the procedure from the knowledge system. This time around the system will
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Modelling Belief
also be able to plan from the perspective of the Agent’s beliefs. From this perspective
the system will be able to reason about what agent’s intended sequence of instruction
is.
Having two different perspectives and two different ways to reach the same goal, the
system will be able to compare the two sequences of instructions. The general mindset is
that the sequence of instruction from the actual world state will be the sequence which
in the end will be applied. Either one of the plans must not exceed some length limit
n. More over, for the hidden blocks domain the found plan from the actual world state
must not be much longer than the plan from the agent’s believed state. This is done to
enforce that the agent is required to partially believe in the actual world. If the plan
from the actual world state is shorter than the plan from the believed state, it most
likely means that the actual applicable instruction of instructions either include a short
cut, which the agent is unaware off, of it just means that the actual state is simply closer
to the intended situation than what the agent believes.
Example 18 explains a narrative off how implied speech acts can be used by the
participant and understood by the dialogue system.
Example 18:
Consider a context from the hidden blocks world domain with a single participant,
Alice. Imagine the context with three blocks below. Alice believes in a world where
block D is on top of A with both block B C standing alone.
The actual world,
however describes that block B is on top of C, defined by the world state s0.
s0
s1
Alice
Now Alice wants the stack configurations to look as the state below. She will
utter the instruction, ”move block A to be on top of C”. Here she implies, based on
her own beliefs, the instruction of moving block D such that block A can be moved
to block C.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Understanding Implicity in Belief Systems
47
s2
While Alice only implied a single speech act, the system has to use an addi-
tional instruction to reach the same result from the actual world state. The system
will reason that this additional action is not that much worse than Alice’s implied
instructions, so it will choose to follow the implied instructions.
4.2.2
Implicit Variables
The process of grounding implied parameters of instructions in the belief based system
also works very similar to the knowledge based system’s solution. To summarize, given
some speech act A which is defined with a set of variables P. Some of these parameters
Ip ⊆P are implied, and are not grounded. Using the dialogue system’s set of all used
symbols Λ the system will iteratively map every parameter v ∈Ip to some grounded
symbol v 7→λ ∈Λ.
If the system finds multiple ways of grounded a parameters, which both makes the
speech act verifiable by the system, the dialogue system will conclude that the instruction
was too ambiguous and deny the instruction. While the knowledge system would use
the agent’s knowledge to verify the different groundings, the belief system will be using
the beliefs of the agents. This means that while the object which the agent refers to is
somewhere completely different than what the agent believes it is, the system will still
be able to infer the correct object. The system uses same function to ground the implied
variables as it did with the knowledge based dialogue system, described by Algorithm 7.
Example 19 explains how the beliefs of an agent will help the dialogue system find
meaning behind the implicit parameters.
Example 19 (Implicit statement variables in a belief system):
This example is a continuation of Example 15. In which Alice, in Bob’s presence,
placed a cube under a hat, and while he was away she hid another cube under the
table. Consider now the case that while Bob was not present Alice took the cube
from under the hat and placed it in a cupboard.
Now Bob enters the room. If he now utters the statement, ”Alice, please give me
the cube,” one would expect that the system infers that Bob is referencing the cube
which she just placed in the cupboard. This is expected since the system will reason
that based on Bob’s beliefs the phrase ”the cube” can only reference one object in
the scene, and that is the cube which Alice placed in the cupboard.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Modelling Belief
As Alice is very honest she will hand Bob the cube from the cupboard when
fulfilling the speech act’s effects.
By using the agent’s believed states to try and find a proper grounding for the implied
instruction variables the dialogue system has shown that it can see the context from the
agent’s perspective. This means it can take into account the beliefs of the participants,
especially if they are false ones, and use this information to gather meaning from a
hopefully unambiguous utterance.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion & Conclusion
This chapter starts with a discussion of the two dialogue systems together with sugges-
tions for improvements and future work with the dialogue system. Lastly, the chapter
will end with a conclusion to the thesis.
5.1
Updating the Model Dynamically
The possible world models designed in this thesis were very dynamic. In an attempt to
save memory the pointed world model was designed such that the state space grew and
shrunk as an effect of the updates requested. This was a trade off as it always kept the
state space at a minimum but at the cost of additional expensive steps used when states
and relations had to be added to maintain the knowledge and beliefs of the individuals.
A dynamic approach seems reasonable when considering the number of propositions
in the different conversation context.
A static state approach would for the hidden
blocks domain result in an enormous memory-usage, and is therefore inappropriate for
this purpose. For a static state space where each state should have an unique set of
propositional values, the number of states would be equal to 2|Φ|, where Φ is the set of
propositions.
For future work it would thus be recommended to keep the dynamic state space. In
terms of the expensive steps, Section 5.5 and Section 5.6 explains how some of these
could be improved.
When that has been said, the current iterations of the models lays the foundation for
the use of higher-order thinking. The system would theoretically be able to reason about
an agents knowledge about another agents knowledge since the relations in both the S5
model and the KD45 model spreads through the whole model. And the same theoretical
possibility applies to the belief system. The epistemic semantics allows for formulas
like (M,s) |= KiKip. While the systems is not capable of doing this in practice, as the
functionality is not implemented, the semantics and relations of the models allows for
these kind of formulas. And this is properly overkill as the systems do not need to reason
about higher-order thinking. For future work the systems could possibly be restricted
in the amount of relations used.
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Discussion & Conclusion
5.2
Different Measurements for Planning
The planning used determine implied speech acts compared the different plans by the
number of instructions. An alternative to this would could be to assign a cost function
to every instruction. This would force the planner to consider the exact action it would
use when expanding the frontier states when planning. In terms of the hidden blocks
world it might have been the case that the system had an easier time when moving a
cube to the table, since it could just push it off. This would make the cost of moving
a block to the table less than the cost of moving the block to another block. That way
the cost function might have diverted the plan.
5.3
Alternative Techniques to Determine
Implied Terms
When the system will be grounding implied terms it simply guesses on the symbol which
the term should represent. If it finds multiple candidates the system will be unable to
determine the specific symbol and fails to verify the instruction. However some sources,
for instance the work of Lewis [13], covers applying a salience score which could be useful
finding the right symbol. The salience score determines which symbol would be most
fitting for the term in the specific utterance. One factor which would make a symbol
more salient is by applying some ordering to the different symbols. If the salience score
was assigned due to time, an object mentioned in the previous instruction it would have
gotten a much higher salience score than if it was mentioned in an instruction one hour
ago.
Most importantly and most appropriate for this system is if the salience score would
be dependent on the specific type of symbol. Currently the dialogue system grounds
randomly based on the set of symbols Λ. This means that for instance if the participants
instructs the system to move something to on top of another block, the system will most
likely try and ground the term something as the Table, which does not make any sense.
It will also attempt to ground the term as the block to which it will be moved. Neither
of these symbols make any sense in the instruction, and should be assigned a very low
salience score.
The grounding of free terms is one of the more inadequate procedures of both systems.
For this reason for future work implying some salience score to the symbols would be a
top priority.
5.4
Declining Instructions
A neglected part of the thesis is what happens when an instruction has been denied. It
is explained that the dialogue system simply denies the interaction. A more realistic and
==PAGE:59==
5.5 The Knowledge Based System
51
appropriate action would have been to update the knowledge or beliefs of the participant.
Not just the speaking participant, in fact any present participant would have observed
that the instruction was denied and would learn or have their beliefs changed based on
this.
It is unclear exactly how this type of update to the relations representing the indi-
vidual’s should be updated. It seems tricky to find a solution for this issue, because the
individual agent would be unsure of why the instruction was denied by the system. For
future work this would be worth researching and make the system also include these
epistemic updates in the case of denied actions.
5.5
The Knowledge Based System
Although the dialogue system based on the knowledge model seem to work it has some
flaws. The first flaw happens if an agent is absent. If, while the agent is absent, the
model changes its actual world and it then later returns to its original actual world state,
the agent will remain ignorant. This is because the current implementation only adds
relations, and in extend ignorance, if the agent is absent. The agent will continuously
be unable to distinguish the actual world from the worlds which the model reached
while the agent were unavailable. It is of course possible that this should be the right
mindset. Since the agent left the room and became absent it should be able to consider
any possible world possible.
Another flaw in the implementation happens when the observable agents needs to
gain knowledge by having relations removed. One would expect the agent to become
fully aware of the actual world. However what the system does currently is that it only
makes the agent aware in relation to the action’s effects. This is more similar to the
dialogue system making an announcement whenever it makes changes to the world. This
is not the intended behavior and should be changed if the project were to continue in
the future.
5.6
The Belief Based System
The functionality behind the belief based dialogue system works as intended for the most
of the time. The way which the system resolves implied preceding instructions is worth
discussing. The system currently does this by planning one sequence of instructions from
the point of view of the participant and one from the actual world state. After some
decision making it will run the sequence of instructions from the actual world state. The
question is, if the participant implies one sequence of actions is it then alright that the
system will go and perform a possibly different sequence of actions? It might not be the
worst solution, since the alternative might have been to simply deny the instruction, as
the participant does not believe in the actual state. Alternatively the system could have
figured out a sequence of actions to reach the state which the speaker believes in. This
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Discussion & Conclusion
however would mean that the system figures out a very long sequence of instructions,
which is not the intended behavior of the system.
While it is covered how the epistemic semantics work and in theory how the KD45
relations are meant to represent belief, the developed belief system ended up not really
following these semantics. The current belief system contains a vast network of relations.
Without following the semantics the system will determine that the world states at the
ends of the chains of transitive relations are the ones which the participant believes. The
semantics of epistemic logic clearly states that it is any reachable states, and not just
those through transitive relations, which the participant believes in.
A task for future improvements is definitely to correct this.
A possible solution
could be to model a belief system which could be changed such that it only keeps track
of a small set of relations. Possibly just a single relation. Whenever the beliefs of the
individuals are to be updated they will do so by updating the specific relation.
By
updating which state the relation points to it will change the belief of the participant.
5.7
Conclusion
Two different but yet very similar dialogue systems have been developed and imple-
mented in this master’s thesis. The knowledge based dialogue system models the knowl-
edge of the participating human agents while the belief based system models the beliefs
of the participants.
Both systems used a possible world model based in epistemic logic, which allowed
them to model the participant based on different possible scenarios of the surroundings.
In order for the systems not to model every possible world the model was developed to
become dynamic in terms of state space and state relations.
The grounding of implied instruction terms were done through a trial and error pro-
cess, which is less than ideal but guaranteed finding a solution. The task of determining
the completely implied speech acts were done through planning using the breadth-first
search technique which turned out excellent for this task. While the model used were
less ideal in terms of performance, this was a trade off done to limit the size of the state
space in the possible world model.
Regardless of their shortcomings, the systems are capable of understanding implied
instructions from communicating humans with different knowledge and beliefs.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Robert M Krauss. “The psychology of verbal communication”. In: International
Encyclopaedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. London: Elsevier (2002),
pages 16161–16165.
[2]
Luciana Benotti. “Frolog: an accommodating text-adventure game”. In: 2009.
[3]
Luciana Benotti. “Incomplete knowledge and tacit action: Enlightened update in
a dialogue game”. In: 2007.
[4]
Naresh Gupta and Dana S Nau. “On the complexity of blocks-world planning”. In:
Artificial Intelligence 56.2-3 (1992), pages 223–254.
[5]
Robert Stalnaker. “On the representation of context”. In: Semantics and Linguistic
Theory. Volume 6. 1996, pages 279–294.
[6]
Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner. “Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and con-
straining function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception”.
In: Cognition 13.1 (1983), pages 103–128.
[7]
H Paul Grice, Peter Cole, Jerry Morgan, et al. “Logic and conversation”. In: 1975
(1975), pages 41–58.
[8]
Michael F. McTear. “Components of a Spoken Dialogue System — Speech Input
and Output”. In: Spoken Dialogue Technology: Toward the Conversational User
Interface. London: Springer London, 2004, pages 79–105. isbn: 978-0-85729-414-2.
doi: 10.1007/978-0-85729-414-2_5. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-
85729-414-2_5.
[9]
Alexander Koller et al. “Put my galakmid coin into the dispenser and kick it:
Computational linguistics and theorem proving in a computer game”. In: Journal
of Logic, Language and Information 13.2 (2004), pages 187–206.
[10]
Frank Van Harmelen, Vladimir Lifschitz, and Bruce Porter. Handbook of knowledge
representation. Volume 1. Elsevier, 2008.
[11]
Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. “STRIPS: A new approach to the application
of theorem proving to problem solving”. In: Artificial intelligence 2.3-4 (1971),
pages 189–208.
[12]
Thomas Bolander. “A gentle introduction to epistemic planning: The DEL ap-
proach”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.02192 (2017).
[13]
David Lewis. “Scorekeeping in a language game”. In: Semantics from different
points of view. Springer, 1979, pages 172–187.
==PAGE:62==
54
Bibliography
[14]
Luciana Benotti and Patrick Blackburn. “Classical planning and causal implica-
tures”. In: International and Interdisciplinary Conference on Modeling and Using
Context. Springer. 2011, pages 26–39.
[15]
Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach.
Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited, 2016.
[16]
Michael Strube. “Never look back: An alternative to centering”. In: Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and 17th
International Conference on Computational Linguistics-Volume 2. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 1998, pages 1251–1257.
