==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Security in Microservices
Christian Skovlund Brockhoff
Mette Grønbech
Supervisor: Nicola Dragoni
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the microservice architecture, the system is made up of small services with a
single responsibility, collaborating to achieve the overarching goals of an application.
This architectural style has gained great popularity in recent years. However, since
this practice has emerged from the industry, research in this area is still just catching
up – this is especially true regarding security in microservices. In this thesis, we
attempt to create an overview of the current state of security in microservices, as
it is reflected in the academic literature on the subject. Furthermore, we present a
solution for one of the security issues that exist within microservices.
The first part of this thesis is a systematic literature review, which generates an
overview of which security challenges there are within a microservice system, how
these differ from those within a monolithic system, and which solutions have already
been proposed to solve some of these issues. The findings of this academic activity
result in a number of research directions that contain open security challenges, in
the areas of user authentication, service-to-service authentication, network security,
trust, and information flow.
The remaining part of the thesis focuses on inter-service trust, for which we propose
a solution design, along with a proof-of-concept implementation in a simple demo
system. The solution is based on a trust nothing, verify everything approach, where
all requests within the system carry both user- and service-tokens, which are verified
by a policy gateway in front of each microservice. The solution is shown to provide
the level of security that was promised during the design, while still adhering to
the key requirements that were devised for it. The implementation of the designed
solution leads to an average performance loss of 14.1%, with the loss ranging from
9.2% to 21.1% overall, when measuring the throughput of the system using load-tests.
This performance loss in a proof-of-concept implementation is deemed acceptable in
exchange for the increased level of security and trust it adds.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineering with the study line
Computer Security.
The authors have contributed equally to the research, design and development pre-
sented in this thesis. The writing of the concrete sections of the paper has been
distributed as follows.
Individual contributions:
Author
Sections
Christian
2, 3.1, 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 5, 6.1, 6.3, 6.4, 7.1, 8.2, 9
Mette
1, 3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, 3.4, 4, 6.2, 7.2, 8.1, 8.3, 8.4
Kongens Lyngby, January 26, 2020
Christian Skovlund Brockhoff
s180218
Mette Grønbech
s180220
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The Microservice Paradigm
5
2.1
The Microservice Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Running Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
An Example: The Sock Shop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Why or Why Not Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
11
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Research Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Search Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.3
Study Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.4
Validity Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Distribution of Publications Over Time (RQ1) . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Security Challenges in Microservices (RQ2) . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.3
Security in Monoliths vs Microservices (RQ3)
. . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.4
Security Frameworks and Approaches for Microservices (RQ4)
25
3.4
Discussion of Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.1
Research Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Focusing on a Security Challenge
37
4.1
Defining Requirements for a Trust Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Designing a Solution
41
5.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
The Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.1
Service-To-Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.2
User-To-Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.2.3
Combining Two Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Implementing the Design
51
6.1
Token Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Policy Gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2.1
Policies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Changes Made to the Sock Shop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.1
Changes to Existing Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.2
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3.3
TLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
The Updated Sock Shop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Results
59
7.1
Correctness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8
Discussion
63
8.1
The Systematic Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Requirements and Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.3
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9
Conclusion
69
A Token Service
73
B The Altered Sock Shop
75
C Policy Gateway
77
D Load Test
79
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Microservices emerged due to a need in the industry for applications to provide
technical capabilities that traditional monolithic systems had difficulty allowing for.
The use of microservices has since then arisen and evolved over the last 10 years,
where they have become increasingly popular. This is in part due to the many ben-
efits that this architectural style offers, along with the other possibilities it opens
up for. These benefits include scalability, resilience, and easy independent deploy-
ment. Combined, these traits allow this approach to create systems that support
continuous integration and continuous deployment, and allow to fully utilize many
of the modern cloud offerings within containerization and orchestration. Innovative
companies such as Netflix and Spotify have made use of this architecture in the de-
velopment of their applications, where they have taken full advantage of its benefits,
and showcased what can be achieved with the use of this architectural style.
In the microservice architecture an application is made up of several services that
collaborate to fulfil the purpose of the application. As such it can be seen as a
variation on the service-oriented architecture (SOA) and Newman even explains the
microservice approach as simply doing SOA well [49].
As the popularity of microservices indicate, the benefits it provides are highly sought
after in the modern digitalised world. However, one key aspect that is less mentioned
in relation to microservices is how their use impacts the security of a system. When
comparing a microservice system, that consists of many small collaborating services,
to a single large monolith, it is not difficult to see that a number of potential security
issues arise with the use of microservices. For instance, there is a great deal of
communication between services, and a much larger number of entry points to the
system, which all needs to be properly handled in regard to security.
However, with the area of microservices being a relatively young field, research into
the security of this architectural style has not been performed extensively yet [2].
And in a time where criminals have also gone digital, and where security breaches
and cyber attacks pose a greater threat as we rely more and more on IT, the area
of security in popular software architectures is a very important one. One of the
issues here, is that it is difficult to find an overview of the security challenges in
microservices, along with which solutions have already been proposed. With this
thesis, we aim to provide an overview of the current state of security in microservices,
and enhance the solution space with an additional one to solve one of the unsolved
security issues.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Problem Definition
With the aforementioned words on security in microservices in mind, the problem
definition for this thesis is comprised of several parts that follow each other in natural
extension.
The initial problem is the lack of overview in regards to which security challenges
the use of microservices introduces. As previously mentioned, the field is relatively
young and as such there exists no general overview on which issues this architecture
presents, or which solutions that have already been proposed to solve them. This
will be the focus of the first part of this thesis where all research on the topic of
security in microservices will be investigated through a systematic literature review.
This will be done to answer the research questions of which security challenges exist
in the use of the microservice architecture, how they differ from those in monoliths,
and which frameworks have already been proposed to solve some of these challenges.
The systematic literature review will highlight which unsolved problems exist in re-
gards to security in microservices, and one of these problems will be chosen to be the
focus of the remainder of the thesis. Based on the problem a solution will be designed
with appropriate requirements defined for it as well. The design will subsequently
be implemented in a microservice system as a proof-of-concept to demonstrate the
idea while also allowing testing of the solution. The testing must be done to ensure
both that the proposed solution solves the chosen security challenge but also to test
the performance of the system with the implemented solution. The reason for this
is that while security is important, it must not be achieved at the expense of neither
the greatest benefits that microservices provide, nor the overall performance of the
system. If this was the case, it would mean that a technically sound solution would
never be implemented in practice, as the impact of doing so would be too great,
which in turn is not beneficial for the security of the system.
1.2
Outline
The rest of this thesis is outlined as follows. Keeping in mind the youth of the
microservice approach, chapter 2 will contain a brief introduction to the microservice
paradigm along with the benefits and drawbacks of using it, to ensure a common
understanding of some of the key aspects.
Following this, chapter 3 delves into the systematic literature review with an elabo-
ration upon the research method, the research questions and the findings for each of
them. At the end of this, a number of potential research directions that were found
during the literature review are presented.
As a natural extension hereof, chapter 4 is spent focusing on one of the security
challenges discovered through the literature review. The chosen security issue is
trust, and this chapter will further establish some requirements, that the proposed
solution must adhere to in order to solve the issue of trust adequately. Then chap-
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Contribution
3
ter 5 elaborates the design of each part of the solution along with the combination
hereof.
The proof-of-concept implementation of the introduced design is detailed in chap-
ter 6, and following this chapter 7 presents the results of the testing conducted on
the implementation, regarding both correctness and performance.
The findings of the literature review along with the designed and implemented so-
lution are discussed in chapter 8, where any problems in the solution along with
possible future work is also elaborated upon. Finally, chapter 9 concludes the work
presented throughout this thesis.
1.3
Contribution
This thesis contains three contributions; an analytical part based around a system-
atic literature review, a solution design for a security issue within the microservice
architecture, and finally a proof-of-concept implementation of the designed solution
in a simple microservice demo system.
The systematic literature review aims to highlight the security challenges that are
present within the microservice architecture, along with any security frameworks
and approaches to security that have been proposed in this domain. Based on the
analysis of this literature review, we identify possible research areas of open security
challenges within the microservice architecture.
A solution is designed to fix one of the security issues that were identified during
the analysis of the systematic literature review. Specifically, the designed solution
will aim to enhance the trust within a system that is based on microservices. This
covers both trust between services, and the ability to trust that the requests that a
service receives were intended and initiated by a user.
Finally, the proof-of-concept implementation of this solution is aimed to show how
this design would function in practice, identify the performance impact of it, and
highlight any potential drawbacks of it.
==PAGE:12==
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
The Microservice
Paradigm
There is no single, definitive definition of microservices. Therefore, in this chapter
we aim to define microservices such as they are used in this thesis, and some of
the concepts behind them. This section will not provide an in-depth walkthrough
of all concepts within the microservice paradigm, but instead attempts to explain
briefly what is necessary for the rest of this thesis. An example microservice-based
system is presented in subsection 2.1.2, illustrating how the architecture can look
in an online sock shop. This example will serve as the basis of the implementation
described in chapter 6.
2.1
The Microservice Architecture
In short, a single microservice is a small, independent service, and it should have
a single responsibility within a larger system. Fowler and Lewis argue that this
responsibility should be based on business capabilities [24]. A microservice should
be developed, deployed, configured, started, stopped, and deprecated independently
from other microservices. It should own its own data and be able to fail without it
affecting the remaining system, and often one microservice is owned by one team of
developers.
Exactly how large or small a microservice should be is still the topic of debate and
up to each organization to decide. Newman describes a microservice as ”small, and
focused on doing one thing well” and ”small enough and no smaller” [49], which is
somewhat vague and leaves it up to the software architects and engineers to decide
what it covers. Nadareishvili et al. note that small is used as a sort of quality, much
like reliable, safe or coherent [46].
A system based on the microservice architecture will consist of multiple microser-
vices, and these must communicate in some way in order to perform larger, more com-
plex tasks. This communication is most often done over HTTP or some lightweight
messaging implementation such as RabbitMQ [24, 55]. In both cases, we use the
approach smart endpoints and dumb pipes, defined by Fowler and Lewis, in which
the endpoints (the actual microservices) do the heavy lifting instead of the pipes
(message queues, a central orchestrator) [24]. Similarly, Newman argues for ”dumb
middleware, with smart endpoints” [49]. This is different from the service-oriented
==PAGE:14==
6
2 The Microservice Paradigm
architecture, with which microservices are often compared, where the enterprise ser-
vice bus is often a smart pipe or middleware, meaning more centralized business
logic. Keeping the business logic within the microservices themselves helps keep
them independent and autonomous.
If a user needs to perform a larger task, he could potentially have to call multiple
microservices, thus leaking abstraction. Also, different users might have different
needs of the system.
To combat this, often an API gateway is used [44].
The
role of the API gateway is to act as a single point of entry for clients of the system,
exposing a single API. It then directs calls from clients into the system microservices
as needed.
2.1.1
Running Microservices
The microservice architecture is often tied closely to cloud computing, where cloud
providers offer access to some computational resource by the concept of X as a ser-
vice. A way of deploying microservices is by using infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
to rent virtual machines from some cloud provider (or in the private cloud of the
organization), and then running each microservice on one or more machines. In typ-
ical IaaS, the provider allows the customer to dynamically scale the computational
resources of a rented machine, and a microservice can then be scaled vertically by
doing this, or horizontally by acquiring more machines on which to run the microser-
vice.
A lightweight alternative to running services directly in a virtual machine is the
container, which encapsulates an application and its dependencies [45]. A widely
used tool for building images and running containers is Docker [18]. This thesis will
not cover containers in depth, but they stay lightweight by sharing resources with
the operating system on which the container is run, and can be started and stopped
quickly and efficiently [45]. Each microservice is then built into a container image,
which is used to start a container. A microservice is scaled up by starting more
containers of that image, and scaled down by stopping containers. The running
system then consists of n containers, each running a single microservice.
Managing many containers – deploying, scaling, etc.
– is a complex task, and
management tools are a very helpful way of managing that complexity. If running
everything on a single machine, Docker itself comes with the Docker Compose tool
[19], which allows the user to create a definition of what containers should be run-
ning for an application, and Docker will then start the necessary containers and
manage other things such as networking. If a single machine cannot provide enough
computational power, we can use tools such as Docker Swarm [20] or Kubernetes
[65] which allow clustering.
Tools like Kubernetes can be used by setting it up on virtual machines provided
by an IaaS setup and managing it within the organization. Alternatively, using
platform as a service (PaaS) or containers as a service (CaaS), the cloud provider
will manage things like clustering and availability. An example of this is the CaaS
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The Microservice Architecture
7
solution Google Kubernetes Engine [27] which provides an interface from which the
organization can rent a cluster of n nodes.
2.1.2
An Example: The Sock Shop
When defining and explaining microservices it is often useful to compare it to the
conceptually simple monolith. In this section we start with a monolithic architecture
and move towards a microservice architecture.
Starting with the most simple depiction of a monolithic application, a three layer
web shop is illustrated in Figure 2.1. It shows three layers: user interface, business
logic and data access. The user interacts with the first layer, it passes input to the
business logic layer which makes the decisions and then calls the data access layer
to persist data. Everything within the web shop runs in a single process.
This web shop can also be thought of as consisting of multiple components or mod-
ules, as is shown in Figure 2.2. Here each module covers a business capability or
area within the web shop, such as orders or shipping which would be responsible
for handling customer orders and making sure wares are readied for physical ship-
ping, respectively. Practically, the code could be structured into different files based
upon these components. This separation into components can provide the basis of
a separation into microservices.
Weaveworks have created an open source microservice demo, Sock Shop, for demon-
strating and testing microservice technologies [72].
The system is comprised of
seven microservices (hence the seven components in the monolithic architecture in
Figure 2.2) that communicate via HTTP and each own their own database if they
need to persist data. The system is illustrated in Figure 2.3.
User interface
Business logic
Data access
User
Web shop
Database
Figure 2.1: A monolithic web shop consisting of three layers and a single database
==PAGE:16==
8
2 The Microservice Paradigm
User
Orders
Payment
Shipping
Cart
Catalogue
Front-end
User
Web shop
Database
Figure 2.2: A monolithic web shop consisting of seven components and using a single
database
Front-end
Orders
User
Payment
Catalogue
Cart
MongoDB
MongoDB
MySQL
MongoDB
Shipping
User
Figure 2.3: The microservices and their databases in the Weaveworks sock shop
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Why or Why Not Microservices
9
Three of the microservices are developed in Java (Orders, Shipping, Carts), three
are developed in Go (User, Catalogue, Payment) and one is developed in JavaScript
(Front-end). Additionally, Catalogue uses a relational database (MySQL) and Cart,
User and Orders use NoSQL databases (MongoDB). This makes for a heterogenous
system with many more technologies than the monolithic counterpart, where the
entire application backend is most likely written in a single language, using a single
type of database.
Communication between the microservices in the sock shop is done by HTTP (dumb
pipes), and each microservice handles its own business logic (smart endpoints). Ship-
ping does actually interact with an instance of RabbitMQ, but purely to simulate
actual shipping, and so this has been omitted from this example.
Each microservice and database is deployed in containers, built from Dockerfiles [17].
Weaveworks have provided deployment configurations for, among others, Docker
Compose, Docker Swarm and Kubernetes. This allows for such easy deployment of
an entire web shop as writing docker-compose up if using Docker Compose or, if
using Kubernetes, kubectl apply -f microservices-demo.yaml.
2.2
Why or Why Not Microservices
An oft-cited reason to use a microservice architecture is the flexible scalability it
offers [49]. In a monolithic architecture, if one feature of the application is under
heavy load and needs to be scaled up, the entire monolith must be scaled up. In
the sock shop example, this could be the user functionality, if a lot of new users are
signing up. When using a microservice architecture, the user microservice can be
scaled independently of the rest of the system. Similarly, lesser used services can be
scaled down without it affecting the performance of the heavier used ones.
Another benefit of the independence of microservices is resilience [49]. Ideally, the
failure of one microservice has no impact on any other microservice, as they are
completely focused on just their own area of responsibility.
Oftentimes though,
microservices depend on each other to at least some degree. In the sock shop, for
example, the front-end microservice is dependent upon the carts microservice to view
and add to user carts. If the carts microservice suddenly fails and is unavailable, the
front-end microservice cannot display the cart, nor add to it, but it can, however,
still offer other functionality such as viewing the catalogue, viewing ones orders and
so on. So if the microservices are sufficiently independent of each other, the system
as a whole can still offer limited functionality if one should fail. This is also known
as graceful degradation.
Microservices offer the ability to keep the development/deployment cycle quick and
nimble, even as the system becomes large. As each service is developed and deployed
independently, the development team can theoretically chose the best tool for the job
(programming language, persistence technology, caching, etc.) and quickly deploy
it, integrating it into the existing ecosystem of microservices. In large monolithic
==PAGE:18==
10
2 The Microservice Paradigm
systems, a change in any small component requires redeployment of the entire mono-
lith, making it less agile and resulting in developers potentially waiting until there
are enough small changes to warrant redeploying the entire system.
With all the benefits of microservices comes some drawbacks. What would likely
have been a single codebase in a monolithic architecture is now multiple codebases,
and what used to be in-process calls is now network-based calls. The fallacies of
distributed computing are very relevant and it presents a whole slew of challenges
to tackle [59]. Of course, some of these challenges could be present in a monolithic
modelling of the same system, but at least in this architecture they are far more
prevalent.
From a security perspective, there is a greater attack surface than in a monolithic
architecture. The seven microservices in Figure 2.3 must all be protected indepen-
dently, whereas there is just a single point to protect in the monolithic version
shown in Figure 2.2. Additionally, research on microservice security is still not very
comprehensive [2].
Many of the problems that the microservice architecture can solve are those that
arise in large systems [46]. Therefore, the architecture is mainly suited for larger
projects with the resources to manage the added complexity, and enough engineers
to handle the infrastructural tasks that arise.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Identifying Security
Challenges in
Microservices
Despite the increasing popularity and the many benefits that the microservice ar-
chitecture offers, it does also introduce a number of different security concerns, that
become more complex to solve in a microservice system than in a monolithic system.
Some of these security challenges have not yet been thoroughly researched, and as
such this is an area that still requires more attention.
Based on this we will in this chapter present a systematic literature review on se-
curity in microservices to shed light on the biggest security challenges within the
architecture. Concretely, this will consist of an analysis of the existing literature
relating to security in microservices, highlighting the security challenges that this
architectural style introduces. Additionally, a comparison between monoliths and
microservices in relation to security is conducted and any security frameworks for
microservices found in the research is presented. Upon the conclusion of this sys-
tematic literature review the open security challenges within microservices that still
require further research are identified and presented.
The rest of this chapter is organized as the following. Our findings within related
work are detailed in section 3.1, which further acts as the motivation for conduct-
ing this systematic literature review. The research method including the research
questions, the filter criteria, and the process followed while selecting studies along
with the validity of it, is presented in section 3.2. Our findings in relation to our
research questions and an analysis thereof is detailed in section 3.3, which contains
a subsection for each of the research questions. Finally, section 3.4 discusses the
systematic literature review and the findings herein, and mention possible future
research directions.
3.1
Related Work
At the time of writing there has not, to the best of our knowledge, been conducted a
systematic literature review specifically on security in microservices. This, in and of
itself, is motivation for performing this study. Broadening the scope, it makes sense
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
to look at literature reviews in microservices in general and examine their findings
pertaining to security.
The comprehensive review of the microservice architecture by Joseph et al. covers,
among a host of topics, security, and offers a taxonomy of the literature found on
security [37]. In this taxonomy, security in microservices consists of two categories,
consisting of three and two subcategories respectively. Specific challenges within
each category are presented, however the taxonomy is fairly coarse-grained, and the
work does not entirely answer the questions we aim to answer with this study.
Further motivating this study, multiple literature reviews found current security
research lacking [2, 13, 60]. Di Francesco et al. note that this can lead to a large
problem in the industry as it increasingly adopts microservice architectures [13].
Alshuqayran et al. found that many applications in the industry do not employ
strict security controls [2]. In a review of grey literature, Soldani et al. find that the
largest security pain in the industry is access control [60].
3.2
Research Method
This section details the method used for conducting this systematic literature review.
We utilize the guidelines proposed by Petersen et al. [54], and further conduct both
forward and backward snowballing until no new articles were found as described by
Wohlin [73].
The next subsections introduce the research questions used in this literature review,
the search strategy, including both the inclusion and exclusion criteria, the study
selection, and finally the concerns in relation to the validity of the study.
3.2.1
Research Questions
The aim of this literature review is to uncover which security challenges are present
in the microservice architecture, and how these differ from a traditional monolithic
system. Furthermore, it is the goal to also examine if any security frameworks or
approaches have already been proposed to solve any of these security challenges
within microservices. Additionally, we wish to provide an overview of the research
activity concerning security in microservices to analyse any trends in the frequency.
Our research questions have been formulated as the following:
• RQ1: How are publications related to security in microservices spread through-
out the years?
• RQ2: What are the security challenges in microservices?
• RQ3: How does security in microservices differ from security in traditional
monolithic systems?
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Research Method
13
• RQ4: Which security frameworks or approaches have been proposed or al-
ready exist for microservices?
These questions will help to uncover the different security challenges present in the
microservice architecture, as well as which of these still need further research to be
adequately solved.
3.2.2
Search Strategy
The first part of the search strategy was forming a search string based on keywords
found in the formulated research questions. Then we looked for alternative spellings
and synonyms for the identified keywords, and used Google Scholar to ensure that
the correct keywords were picked and that they were not too excluding. Here, we are
taking into account that there is disagreement on the spelling of ’microservice’ as it is
sometimes also spelled ’micro service’ or as ’micro-service’. After doing some testing
in the databases, it was discovered that writing ’micro service’ also includes the
spelling ’micro-service’ in the results, and as such the final search string expressed
in pseudo-code is the following: ("microservice*" OR "micro service*") AND
("security").
In order to only extract the publications that are relevant to this literature review,
a number of inclusion and exclusion criteria were defined. These are expressed in
the following.
Inclusion criteria:
• IC1: The work covers microservices.
• IC2: The work covers at least one security challenge in microservices.
Exclusion criteria:
• EC1: The work does not touch upon security in microservices.
• EC2: The security challenge is not applicable for the microservice architecture
in general.
• EC3: The work is not written in legible English.
• EC4: The work is duplicate content.
• EC5: The work is not written.
From these criteria, it should be noted that we have chosen to include publications
that do not necessarily have any aspect of security in microservices as their primary
topic, but merely touch upon a security challenge in microservices during the work.
This has been chosen in order to include as many relevant challenges as possible.
Furthermore, it was decided to not include work covering security challenges that is
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
not generally related to the microservice architecture but instead related to cloud,
containers, etc.
To find all relevant sources for this study the following four electronic databases
were chosen: ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect and SpringerLink.
The searches were conducted using the final search string in the period of the 4th
to the 6th of September 2019, and the number of initial publications found in each
database is illustrated in Table 3.1.
3.2.3
Study Selection
Initially, 1377 publications were found across the four databases, and for each of
these, the title and abstract were screened based on the previously defined inclusion
and exclusion criteria. In the cases where it was clear from the title and abstract that
an article was regarding microservices, but not whether it contained any thoughts
on security, the introduction and conclusion were read. If that was still not enough,
the section headers were briefly examined.
This resulted in 56 publications which were included for full-text read-through, dur-
ing which it was further checked that the articles adhered to the filtering criteria.
This meant ensuring that a specific security challenge was mentioned, and that it
was, in fact, a security challenge in microservices, and not, for example, a challenge
related to the cloud.
The phases described so far were conducted by each of the two authors of this thesis
separately. The rule was then, that the articles that both authors had included
were included, and if both had excluded an article it would be excluded. For those
articles where the two authors had not reached the same decision, and for articles
where both authors had been unsure, a joint review of the article was performed,
and a decision on the fate of the article was then made jointly.
After the full-text read-through, 28 articles were included in the next phase, where
both forward and backward snowballing were applied [73]. Backward snowballing
entails analysing the list of references in all included articles, and further including a
new article if it fulfils all the filter criteria. Forward snowballing imply reviewing all
the citations each of the included articles has, and for this Google Scholar was used.
Database
Search results
ACM Digital Library
38
IEEE Xplore
105
ScienceDirect
296
SpringerLink
938
Total
1377
Table 3.1: Number of papers obtained initially through each database
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Findings
15
Both backward and forward snowballing were continuously applied to the articles
that were included after each round, until a round was reached where no new articles
were added. In this case, the fifth round of snowballing in both directions yielded no
new articles to add, and during the previous rounds a total number of 10 additional
articles had been included.
This lead to 38 being the complete number of publications included after the entire
process, and the number of articles that were retained in each phase can be seen in
Table 3.2.
3.2.4
Validity Evaluation
A study such as this one, that contains a manual selection process, will always be
at the risk of the introduction of bias by the researchers. In order to minimize the
impact of this, a few steps were taken during the process of this systematic literature
review, as described here.
The study selection process has been done individually by both authors of this paper,
which means it has effectively been done twice, after which the outcomes have been
systematically combined. This has helped reduce any research bias there might have
been in the study selection process, and also ensured a shared understanding of the
meaning of the filtering criteria.
The utilization of both forward and backward snowballing has helped reduce any se-
lection bias, by allowing for the introduction of publications that had not previously
been considered.
Finally, the research method and process have been described in detail, to enable
the reproduction of the findings of this study.
3.3
Findings
In this section we present the findings in relation to the research questions presented
in subsection 3.2.1. This includes an overview of the publications regarding security
in microservices over time, an analysis of which topics are mentioned as security
challenges in microservices, how security in microservices differs from security in
Phase
Articles
Initial database search
1377
Filter criteria applied
56
Full-text reading
28
Snowballing
38
Table 3.2: Selection of studies after each phase
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
monoliths, and a presentation of suggested frameworks and approaches to solve
security challenges in microservices.
3.3.1
Distribution of Publications Over Time (RQ1)
With the first research question we seek to find the distribution of literature over time.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the spread of literature over the last five years. Perhaps it comes
as no surprise that almost three quarters of the found literature has been published
within two years of the time of writing. However, this just serves to emphasize the
importance and steeply growing interest of security in microservices. This could also
mean that the lack of research on the area (as mentioned in section 3.1) is being
rectified.
3.3.2
Security Challenges in Microservices (RQ2)
In this section we attempt to answer the second research question of the study by
analysing and discussing the security topics covered (or at least mentioned explicitly)
in the examined corpus. These topics have been categorized as illustrated in Fig-
ure 3.2. It demonstrates the interest in different topics and subtopics in the sources,
but this does not necessarily correlate directly with the number of challenges found
within these topics.
Figure 3.2 shows a particularly high focus on identity and access management (IAM)
and it’s subtopics and, if slightly less so, network security. The former likely fol-
lows from the fact that most IT systems have at least some level of IAM, which
makes it a ubiquitous and fairly straightforward topic to address. In all probability,
the latter stems from the microservices architecture being one where inter-service
communication is done over the network. The following subsections will cover the
categories of topics in more detail.
2015
5.26%
2016
5.26%
2017
15.79%
2018
31.58%
2019
42.11%
Figure 3.1: Distribution of found literature by year
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Findings
17
Security
Other
Same as SOA (5.3%)
Vulnerability detection (2.6%)
Security monitoring (2.6%)
Virtualization (2.6%)
Hardware security (2.6%)
Updating security rules (2.6%)
Security placement (5.3%)
Data security
Encrypting data at rest (2.6%)
Information leaks (2.6%)
Trust
Service-to-service trust (13.2%)
Compromised microservices (7.9%)
Confused deputy problem (10.5%)
Network security
Network attacks (10.5%)
Network complexity (5.3%)
Defining security parameters (2.6%)
Traffic filtering (2.6%)
Intrusion detection (5.3%)
OWASP (10.5%)
Large attack surface (10.5%)
Availability (5.3%)
Identity
and access
management
Other
Token authentication (2.6%)
Developer access (5.3%)
n-party access control (2.6%)
Third party
Authentication (5.3%)
Service-to-service
Service isolation (2.6%)
Access control (26.3%)
Authentication (26.3%)
User
Access control (42.1%)
Authentication (34.2%)
Figure 3.2: Security topics or challenges mentioned or discussed in the literature (per-
centage denotes how many pieces of work mentions a particular topic)
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
3.3.2.1
Identity and Access Management
The topic of IAM gets a lot of attention in the sources found in this study. There
is a slight skew towards the user side, but service-to-service IAM is also very well
covered. The specific subtopics mentioned in the different sources can be found in
Table 3.3.
Many systems use an API gateway as a single point of entry for external users for
a multitude of reasons. To avoid each microservice having to either hold a copy of
user credentials or having a shared database, user authentication can conveniently be
done in the API gateway [4, 8, 11, 31, 49, 74] or in a Single-Sign-On (SSO) gateway
[49] and this is often a good solution. Centralizing user authentication like this
adheres to the core microservice principles of keeping every microservice narrowly
focused. However, as authentication is not done at the microservice level, a challenge
is then how to propagate authentication data downstream from the authenticating
gateway [49, 74].
As with authentication, coarse-grained access control can be handled centrally. As
an example, we could disallow all non-authenticated users from making calls, or, in
a role-based access control (RBAC) setting, only allow users with the administrator
role to access a particular administrative microservice. At some point, though, the
individual microservice must make a final decision on whether to allow a request or
drop it [49]. This means that the amount of authentication/authorization informa-
tion sent downstream from an access control gateway to the system microservices
should be enough that they can enforce a set of policies, but not so much as to
overcomplicate things and overburden the gateway with finding access control re-
lated information about the calling user. Striking a balance between handling access
control at the gateway and microservice levels seems to be key.
Handling authentication and access control at a central gateway presents the risk of
confused deputy attacks [29], which are further discussed later in this section, when
looking at trust-related challenges. A potential open challenge is to find a viable
decentralized user authentication framework.
Topic
Source(s)
User authentication
[4, 7, 8, 11, 30, 31, 41, 47, 49–51, 71, 74]
User access control
[4, 7, 11, 30, 31, 35, 41, 47–50, 56, 57, 69, 71, 74]
Service-to-service authentication [5, 30, 35, 36, 49, 51, 53, 58, 70, 74]
Service-to-service access control [30, 33, 36, 39, 48, 49, 53, 57, 58, 74, 76]
Third-party authentication
[21, 22]
Multiparty authorization
[56]
Developer access
[1, 49]
Token authentication
[5]
Table 3.3: Sources mentioning different identity and access management topics
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Findings
19
As calls from other microservices come from the network, we need a form of authenti-
cation as a minimum protection against intruders. One way to do this is with mutual
Transport Layer Security (MTLS) [14], which is mentioned by multiple sources [35,
49, 53, 70, 74]. Here, in addition to the server having a certificate, the client has
one, and these are both exchanged during the TLS handshake, allowing the server
to also authenticate the client. Because MTLS is placed on top of TCP, it is not
tied to any specific application protocol (HTTP, AQMP, etc.) which is a definite
advantage to this approach. However, using MTLS requires a public key infrastruc-
ture (PKI), and this necessitates finding a way to issue and revoke certificates in
the highly dynamic setting that is a microservice system, where new microservices
are created and run in multiple instances, and old microservices are deprecated and
killed off just as often [36, 49, 53].
Another approach is a symmetric one in which microservices have pre-shared keys,
with which they can then either use HMACs to get message authenticity or, if
confidentiality is needed, authenticated symmetric encryption.
In this case, key
management is a big challenge. Key revocation, for example, is difficult if keys are
pre-shared.
In general, revocation of credentials – be they certificates for TLS, pre-shared sym-
metric keys or sets of usernames and passwords – is a major challenge when it comes
to authentication in microservices. Choosing whether to trust an authenticated mi-
croservice is another challenge that we will discuss later in this section.
From interviews with microservice domain experts, Haselböck et al. gather that
internal authorization measures should be considered to protect the system from
unauthorized calls, but that authorization is not a big challenge due to the existence
of many technologies for it, and cloud providers having these built in [30]. However,
if these things are handled entirely at a single point – say, a gateway – there is hardly
any defence in depth, and internal services themselves are left unprotected [36, 49].
Yarygina and Bagge describe an approach to service-to-service authorization in
which different microservice types have different signing certificates (let us call them
root certificates), which are used to sign the certificates of microservices of that
type [74]. In this way, microservices can be configured to allow requests from a
specific type of microservice by trusting certificates signed with the corresponding
root certificate. While a clever way to use certificates to do access control between
microservices, it comes with the same PKI challenges as mentioned earlier.
With these observations in mind, it seems that inter-service access control is an
open challenge, not yet entirely solved. The approaches mentioned here suffer from
drawbacks or still contain challenges that needs to be solved before they can be
considered to be a viable solution.
Identity and access management of third-party systems or components is something
mentioned a few times: Two of the found sources mention authenticating third-
party (or off-the-shelf) components [21, 22], however none of the sources found in
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
this study examine solutions to this particular problem; Preuveneers and Joosen
treat the topic of authorization across federations [56]. Aside from these sources,
most tend to keep focus on our own microservices and our users, leaving third-party
IAM a somewhat open field to explore.
Beyond having authentication and access control, both user-to-service and between
services, there are other challenges to consider. Microservice architecture often goes
hand in hand with the DevOps phenomenon, where developers must be able to
also handle (at least parts of) the operational sides of things such as deployment
[77]. In complex microservice systems where many developers have fairly free access
to deployment artefacts and configurations, there is an organizational challenge in
minimizing the amount of damage developers can cause [1, 49].
3.3.2.2
Network Security
With microservices being a distributed architecture, it is perhaps natural and to
be expected that network-related topics catches some interest in the literature. Ta-
ble 3.4 lists which sources mention which subtopics within the scope of network
security. Breaking a system into microservices creates complex networks in which
security becomes correspondingly complex [21, 62], and so there are multiple net-
work related security challenges in the microservice architecture. The dynamicity of
microservice-based systems make traditional perimeter security appliances difficult
to use [51].
Being a network-heavy architecture, the microservice architecture is susceptible to
network-based attacks [42, 68, 74], and so this is an issue we should be careful to
address. If traffic is isolated in a private network, the risk of these types of attacks
can be lower due to it being behind a corporate firewall [42]. However, nowhere is
completely safe, and so internal, on-premise networks are still at risk.
With regards to availability, Yarygina and Bagge argue that if an attacker attempts
to disrupt a service, e.g. by a Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack, then fault tolerance
becomes a security concern, and that microservice-based systems should strive to
tolerate partial failures and ensure that these do not propagate throughout the
Topic
Source(s)
Availability
[42, 74]
Large attack surface
[6, 21, 22, 51]
OWASP
[41, 49, 50, 74]
Intrusion detection
[47, 75]
Traffic filtering
[47]
Defining security parameters
[51]
Network complexity
[21, 62]
Network attacks
[42, 68, 74]
Table 3.4: Sources mentioning different network security topics
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Findings
21
system [74]. Marquez et al. also discuss microservices being especially susceptible
to DoS attacks due to API calls into a microservice system cascading into multiple
network calls between microservices [42].
Multiple sources mention how the distributed nature of a microservice architecture
leads to a large number of vulnerability vectors [6, 21, 22, 51]. Dragoni et al. also
note that microservices are independent in programming language (i.e. we can use a
different language and framework for each microservice) which potentially introduces
even more attack vectors to the system, and that functionality internal to the system
may now be exposed externally [21].
The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) regularly maintains a list of
the ten most critical security vulnerabilities in web applications, including issues like
injection (such as SQL injection) and broken authentication [61]. Microservice-based
systems are not exempt from these vulnerabilities, and four of the sources found in
this study mention the list [41, 49, 50, 74]. Due to the potentially large amount of
microservices in a system and their heterogeneity, protecting them all against the
attacks on the OWASP list can be challenging. However, the OWASP list is essential
[49] and perhaps even more so due to the service-to-service communication being
network-based (as opposed to taking place within a single process in a monolith).
Other typical network security concerns such as intrusion detection/response and
traffic filtering should also be considered when building microservices. Nehme et
al. suggest that an API gateway can act as an intrusion detection system (IDS),
but that this is a challenge as the simplest IDS’ are signature-based [40] and these
signatures are customized to the application [47].
3.3.2.3
Trust
A topic which is fairly often mentioned in the found sources is trust, as can be seen in
Table 3.5. Oftentimes, microservices trust each other by design [21, 22, 62]. When
developing microservices, it is easy to focus on securing north-south traffic (from
a user/client to our system) and assume that east-west traffic (traffic between our
microservices) can be trusted, as it is just between our own microservices. However,
blind trust between microservices is potentially dangerous. If an adversary manages
to compromise a microservice in some way, he can potentially coerce it into creating
illegitimate traffic inside the trusted network.
Otterstad and Yarygina advocate for assuming that any input to a microservice is
Topic
Source(s)
Confused deputy problem
[47–49, 74]
Compromised microservices
[52, 62, 75]
Service-to-service trust
[21, 22, 52, 62, 68]
Table 3.5: Sources mentioning different trust-related topics
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
hostile – north-south traffic as well as east-west [52]. Strong methods of authenti-
cation do not change this, as authentication is used to verify and prove an identity,
and the identity of a compromised microservice does not change, only its behaviour.
Even if we can trust the identity of a microservice, as authentication allows us to,
we cannot necessarily trust that the behaviour of the microservice is correct, and
that it has not been compromised.
In the most dire cases of misplaced trust, we can end up in what is known as the
confused deputy problem [29]. In a microservice system this can play out as an
attacker tricking (or completely overtaking) a microservice with certain privileges –
the so called deputy – into making requests to other microservices, who will in turn
perform these requests because the deputy asked them to.
A major challenge in microservice security is then to find a way to establish trust
between two microservices in such a way that limits the possible damage a compro-
mised service may cause. Alternatively, finding a solution that requires no trust
at all and treats all internal services as external. The latter, however, potentially
becomes cumbersome and limiting.
3.3.2.4
Data Security
Protecting data, be it internal or user data, is not a topic often discussed in the
microservice security literature. In fact, only two sources mention topics related to
data security, as shown in Table 3.6. With a multitude of microservices, each with
different security policies, information flow security (secret information should not
be disclosed to the public) becomes a challenge [26].
Regarding encryption, one should use the same algorithms and implementations as
they would in any other system, and not attempt to design or implement their own,
as is almost always the case. Instead, the real challenge in this regard is key man-
agement [49]. With hundreds or thousands of microservices, managing encryption
keys is bound to be more complicated than in the case of a single monolith.
3.3.2.5
Other
Finally, topics which we could not put into the former categories are treated in the
following and shown in Table 3.7.
An architectural challenge is to decide where to place security mechanisms [30, 46]
– at an API gateway or at each microservice? Centralizing security can lead to
Topic
Source(s)
Information leaks
[26]
Encrypting data at rest
[49]
Table 3.6: Sources mentioning different data security topics
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Findings
23
Topic
Source(s)
Security placement
[30, 46]
Updating security rules
[69]
Same as SOA
[21, 74]
Security monitoring
[22, 51]
Vulnerability detection
[68]
Hardware security
[74]
Virtualization
[74]
Table 3.7: Sources mentioning different other, miscellaneous security topics
bottlenecks and slower development, while a completely decentralized solution re-
quires each development team to have a level of security expertise [46]. A mixture
of the two former mentioned models is the defence in depth approach in which we
use multiple defence mechanisms in order to better protect a system [12]. However,
security placement is still a challenge, for even if we place security mechanisms at
multiple levels, which should be placed where?
Two sources specifically mention that the microservice architecture comes packed
with at least a subset of the same security challenges as the Service-Oriented Ar-
chitecture (SOA) [21, 74]. Among the challenges in SOA are authentication and
the lack of end-to-end security [28], along with trust and managing security policies
across services [9].
While the strong decoupling of microservices allows us to choose the most suitable
language, framework or libraries for a given task, these polyglot systems also come
with greater risk of vulnerabilities [68]. Monitoring for vulnerabilities in such dy-
namic systems is a challenge [22], and indeed security monitoring more generally is
a challenge.
Finally, Yarygina and Bagge mention both hardware- and virtualization security as
issues to consider [74]. The heavy use of public clouds means less control over these,
as the cloud providers control both the hardware and the virtualization setups. Per-
haps a challenge is then to identify especially security-critical workloads/microser-
vices and keep these on-premise where an organization may be more in control of
hardware- and virtualization security.
3.3.3
Security in Monoliths vs Microservices (RQ3)
To answer the research question regarding how security in microservices differs from
security in traditional monolithic systems, two approaches have been taken. The
first is to identify which security differences that have been stated explicitly between
the two, in the literature found in this study. The second approach has been to
review the security challenges in microservices detailed in the findings for RQ2 in
subsection 3.3.2, and determine whether any of these are also challenges that are
different, when comparing monoliths and microservices.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
Out of the 38 publications found in this study, only 13 of them explicitly mention
at least one area of security in which there is a difference between microservices and
monoliths. The most commonly mentioned difference is how a microservice system
has a greater attack surface than its monolithic counterpart [6, 21, 35, 47, 51]. This
is the natural result of transitioning towards more distributed architectures, where
communication between the different parts of the system is no longer contained
within the system, but instead happens over communication channels between the
different components in the system. This is furthered by Nadareishvili et al. who
mention that the microservice architecture has a lot more moving parts than a
traditional monolith, which in turn introduces a lot of risks in relation to security
[46].
Similarly, it is also mentioned that the distribution of security is a greater focus
for microservices, as it is no longer sufficient to simply secure a single application,
or control security through a single controller, but instead each microservice in the
system must be secured adequately on its own [10, 41]. An example of this is how
user authentication can be done once for a monolith, as it is a single application,
while each microservice must in some way authenticate the user before processing
his requests [31, 35, 41]. Thus, there is a new need to propagate the authentication
and context of the user throughout the system across several microservices. Another
example of new challenges introduced with a distributed system like microservices is
given by Yarygina and Bagge in their mentioning of distributed secret management
[74]. Again, the difficulty lies in not having just a single application for which to
manage secrets, but instead having multiple services that all need access to this
information.
Ahmadvand et al. argue that with most microservice systems following an approach,
where the teams that develop the microservices are responsible for the entire lifecycle
of a microservice, this also yields greater developer access to all parts of the system
and infrastructure [1]. This results in an increase in integrity threats, either due to
human error or a malicious insider, which is where their focus is. They do further
note that these challenges are neither new nor unique to microservices, but that
such a system does come with an increased risk of these threats.
Nehme et al.
note that infrastructure has a much larger role in microservices than in monoliths
in terms of operating systems, the network, servers, containerization, etc., where
greater attention must be placed on securing these additional aspects [47].
Otterstad and Yarygina mention how microservices in some cases actually give some
benefits in securing against low-level exploits [52]. Specifically, they mention the
strong process isolation, and how each service is typically run on its own machine,
as some of the benefits that are gained by using a microservice architecture. Further
security benefits in microservices, as highlighted by Newman, is the ability to have
more fine-grained security [49]. A few critical microservices can be secured exten-
sively, with the rest of the services being secured normally, which is a capability that
is not possible in a monolith, where the entire application must be highly secured,
to reach the elevated requirements of only a few parts of the system.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Findings
25
Given how the notion of trust between services does not really exist in a monolithic
application, this is definitely a new challenge within microservices, which is also
mentioned by Yarygina and Bagge [74]. Trust in general and its different aspects is
a new issue introduced in microservices. When looking at the trust topics mentioned
in subsection 3.3.2, regarding the security challenges in microservices, a large part of
this is concerned with how services can be compromised and overtaken by a malicious
attacker. The difference from a monolith is that if a monolith is compromised, then
it will most likely not just be a single part of the system that is overtaken, but
rather the entire application. This is also why trust is such an important issue in
microservices, since it can potentially aid in isolating the amount of damage an
attacker can inflict, if it is done correctly.
While all the challenges relating to network security are not necessarily new or
unique to microservices, they do, however, have greater significance in a microservice
architecture than they do in monoliths. This is largely due to the distributed nature
of microservices, and is one of the contributing factors to how microservices are seen
as having a greater attack surface, as mentioned at the beginning of this section.
Finally, the issue of where to place which security measures is again not unique to
microservices, but such a distributed system does come with many different possi-
bilities for how and where to handle it, and some of these have quite an impact on
the performance of the entire system. Thus, there is a difference from monoliths on
this topic, and what the effect of the security placement will be on the entire system,
and on the security it provides.
3.3.4
Security Frameworks and Approaches for
Microservices (RQ4)
In this section, we will present the different security frameworks and approaches that
have been suggested in the literature. 21 out of the 38 publications, found through
our literature search, contained at least a description for an approach to solve one
or more of the security challenges within microservices. These publications, and the
challenges they attempt to solve, are illustrated in Table 3.8, and will be elaborated
upon in the following.
3.3.4.1
User Identity and Access Management
With microservices being a highly distributed architecture, one request from the user
will inevitably result in several calls between the services within the system. This
means that there is a need for all microservices to be aware of whether the user is
authenticated, and what he is authorized to do, and there are quite a few solutions
found in the literature concerning this. This subsection covers those publications
that offer solutions regarding either user authentication, user authorization or both.
A lot of the approaches to solve the issue of user identity and access management
builds upon ideas of using an API gateway in combination with OAuth and JWT
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
Sources
User authentication
User authorization
Information leaks
Service-to-service authentication
Service-to-service authorization
Trust
Network attacks
[4]
x
x
[8]
x
[11]
x
x
[26]
x
[31]
x
x
[33]
x
[35]
x
[36]
x
x
[39]
x
[48]
x
x
[52]
x
x
[53]
x
[56]
x
x
[57]
x
[62]
x
x
[68]
x
x
[70]
x
[71]
x
x
[74]
x
[75]
x
[76]
x
Table 3.8: The publications and which security challenges they propose frameworks or
solutions for
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Findings
27
tokens, and these approaches all allow a user to sign in once, and to then be authen-
ticated through the entire system afterwards. One such solution is presented by He
and Yang, who offer several solutions towards authentication and authorization of
users in microservice systems [31]. Their final approach contains an API gateway
that authenticates users using an Auth Server, grants a JWT token to represent the
user and his authorizations within the system, and creates a reference token, which
is returned to the client and used with all user requests until he logs out. This is in
a similar vein to what Christudas proposes, with the slight difference that Christu-
das specifically uses OAuth, and mentions that the JWT tokens used internally are
encrypted using an asymmetric key [11].
Bánáti et al. have built what they call an Authentication and Authorization Orches-
trator (AAO) on some of the same ideas, however without using reference tokens
or encryption of the JWT tokens [4]. Instead, they propose an Authentication and
Authorization Module (AAM) to be connected to each microservice as a security
sidecar, to determine the authorization entries for the user represented in the token
upon entering each microservice. Nehme et al. similarly propose a solution based
on the concept of a security sidecar, where they attach an access gateway to each mi-
croservice [48]. The user then authenticates with the Access Control Service, which
is an OAuth server, and obtains a token that the access gateways in front of all
microservices can use to check the authorizations of the user.
Watt proposes a setup where Proof-of-Possession (PoP) tokens are used instead of
traditional bearer tokens [71]. This attempts to solve the issue, where if a bearer
token is leaked it can be reused by a malicious entity making requests, where he can
impersonate the original user of the token. The basic concept is that a new PoP
token needs to be generated for every request the user makes after the initial sign in
process. Watts solution uses the OpenID Connect framework, and extends it with
a token service to handle PoP tokens.
When utilizing an API gateway to handle tasks such as authentication and autho-
rization, Chawla and Hemant recommend looking to existing options before imple-
menting a custom gateway from scratch [8]. Specifically they mention Azure API
Management [43] and Ocelot [67] as options, with the former being Microsoft’s so-
lution for their Azure cloud platform, and the latter being an open source .NET
Core-based API gateway.
Preuveneers and Joosen introduce a framework, where user authorization is dis-
tributed among multiple microservices in the system, such that a microservice, upon
receiving a request, will resolve attributes related to the user to determine whether
the call is authorized [57]. However, attributes regarding the user are to be resolved
in the microservice that has the responsibility for the area to which that information
relates. This means that while resolving the attributes of a user, the initial receiver
of the request will involve several other microservices, to determine the authorization
of the user. These authorization policies are defined using a JSON-based alternative
to XACML.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
Preuveneers and Joosen also present a specialized solution regarding multi-party
authorization across different federations, which they motivate with a scenario with
microservices deployed at the edge of the cloud, that has a need to collaborate
across several organizations [56]. The approach to access control they introduce, is
designed to handle user authorization when the users are located across different
domains.
3.3.4.2
Information Leaks
As mentioned in subsection 3.3.2, data security is not widely mentioned in the
literature as one of the big security challenges within microservices. Therefore, it is
not surprising to find that it is also not a topic for which there has been proposed
a lot of solutions. In fact, only one of the articles found during this study contains
an approach to remedy this issue.
Gerking and Schubert present an approach where the information flow is thought
into the design of the system, where appropriate security policies are then formed
[26]. These information flow security policies are then utilized by the use of Uppaal,
which is a model checker that can check in real-time whether the behaviour of the
microservices adheres to their security policies [38].
3.3.4.3
Service-To-Service Identity and Access Management
Service-to-service authentication and authorization are of greater importance in dis-
tributed systems, such as the microservice architecture, due to the high level of
communication between microservices that must be properly secured and trusted.
Here, we will cover those articles, found in this study, that present approaches re-
garding either service-to-service authentication, service-to-service authorization or
both.
Hilbrich and Frank present their approach, which is based on a concept of context
aware authorization of requests in a microservice system [33].
Their idea is to
give each microservice an awareness of its own context, and then when one service
sends a request to another service, it must append its context to the request. The
microservice receiving the request will then have a set of allowed contexts that it
can accept, and use this to authorize requests sent from another service.
Similarly, Zaheer et al. also propose their solution named eZTrust, which is based
around attaching a context that is used for service-to-service authorization [76].
Their solution is designed to run as a security sidecar alongside each microservice
within a system, where it will attach context to requests, and enforce security policies
between services based on these contexts.
The approach introduced by Jander et al.
yields role-based authentication and
authorization between services using password-authenticated key exchanges by jug-
gling (J-PAKE) [36]. By utilizing a J-PAKE exchange between two participants,
they will generate a shared key which will be associated with the roles that are
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Findings
29
available to each participant, and in this manner authentication and authorization
between services can be performed.
Li et al. argue that manual configuration of access control policies by an admin-
istrator is both error-prone and unrealistic, due to the large scale of microservice
applications, and how frequent such a system changes [39]. Bearing this in mind they
propose a solution called Jarvis for service-to-service authorization. Jarvis extracts
possible invocations from the source code of each microservice, and based on this,
creates access control policies, which are then used to authorize service-to-service re-
quests within a microservice system. This of course assumes that the source code is
trustworthy, and can be done in the deployment process, to ensure that the policies
always represent the current version of a given microservice.
With the proposition by Nehme et al. of having a security sidecar in the form of
an access gateway in front of each microservice, they assign this gateway not only
with the task of checking the authorization of the user, but also the authorization
of the component that is accessing the service [48]. Each access gateway attached
to a specific microservice will then have a set of which IDs are allowed to access this
service, and only if both the user and the requesting component are authorized, will
the request be forwarded to the actual microservice.
Indrasiri and Siriwardena provide an introduction to many of the most common
concepts used when solving service-to-service identity and access management [35].
They delve into topics like TLS mutual authentication, API gateway, OAuth, JWT,
XACML and security sidecar, and detail how these can be used to secure service-to-
service communication in a microservice system.
Palm explores the different ways the service mesh Istio can be used to solve service-to-
service access control in microservices without modifying the services [53]. However,
while Istio offers access control and service isolation, Palm eventually concludes that
the performance penalty by using it is too high, while it also adds extra dependencies,
and that it must therefore be used with great care.
Walsh and Manferdelli stress that authentication between services must be done
in an automated way, due to the rapid deployment and dynamic behaviour of mi-
croservices [70]. They present ideas based on using mutual TLS to get certificates,
and then use TPMs for attestation to automatically provide authentication between
services.
MiSSFire is a prototype security framework for microservices presented by Yarygina
and Bagge made to solve the issue of service-to-service authorization [74]. The ideas
behind this are also based on mutual TLS along with a self-hosted PKI, which can
provide basic service-to-service authorization using certificates.
The specialized solution for multi-party authorization across different federations,
presented by Preuveneers and Joosen, is designed to handle authorization between
services that exist in different organizations [56].
Their approach is specifically
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
targeted towards microservices deployed at the edge of the cloud, with a need to
cooperate across different domains.
3.3.4.4
Network Attacks
In a microservice architecture, the communication has shifted from being contained
inside a single process to happening over the network between services. This intro-
duces the possibility of attacks on the network, which is then a greater risk with
a microservice-based system than with other systems. Three of the publications
discovered in this study touch upon solutions for network attacks in a microservice
system.
FlowTap is a solution that is introduced by Sun et al. to monitor communication
between services, and enforce security policies [62]. The traffic monitoring is of both
internal and external network events, with the introduction of a FlowTap primitive
that can then enforce policies, ranging from whether a connection between two ser-
vices is allowed, to which specific requests are allowed between specific microservices.
Torkura et al. propose what they call a security gateway, which performs vulner-
ability detection, security health assessments, and enforce security policies like a
traditional security enforcement point [68]. This vulnerability detection is to un-
cover microservices with vulnerabilities, either within the specific technology used
in that service, or in the implementation itself, such as being exposed to cross-site
scripting, SQL injection, and so forth. The security policies are then to act based
on the assessment of each service, and a proposal by Torkura et al. is to not allow
high risk services to be registered, before the risks have been mitigated. This would
in turn reduce the amount of network attacks it would be possible to mount in the
system, by enabling the elimination of vulnerabilities in the services before they are
deployed.
Otterstad and Yarygina introduce a security monitor aptly named the Security Mon-
itor Service, which is to identify unusual behaviour in services, detect intrusions, and
generally report and act on any inconsistent data or anomalous behaviour [52]. Upon
detection of any issues, the monitor should restart a permuted version of the service
in question, or start a new service and isolate the infected one to learn more about
the attacker. The permutation of the service ensures that the attacker cannot simply
replay the attack.
Yarygina and Otterstad also present an Intrusion Response System (IRS) called the
Microservice Game Engine, which consists of an intrusion detection system along
with a game theoretic approach to react to a network attack in real time [75]. Their
approach is thus not preventive, but instead a countermeasure to minimize the
impact once a network attack has occurred, by performing actions such as restarting
services, reconfiguring, isolating, etc. within the system.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Discussion of Findings
31
3.3.4.5
Trust
Given how microservices are often designed to fully trust each other within the
system boundaries, a compromised microservice can potentially take down the entire
system. Solutions are therefore needed to ensure that all services can reasonably
trust each other. The approaches found in the literature of this study are all centered
around assuring that the microservices cannot be compromised, and that if they are,
it is detected and handled in some way.
The Security Monitor Service introduced by Otterstad and Yarygina is able to detect
any compromised services, and restart a permuted version of them, to ensure that
they are no longer compromised [52]. This in turn gives all services within the system
greater confidence in that they can trust all other running services in the system. Of
course, this is only valid as long as the Security Monitor Service itself has not been
compromised, which Otterstad and Yarygina also mention as an issue themselves,
since such a central service becomes an ideal target for an attacker. Thus, steps
must be taken to secure the monitor appropriately, to maintain the high level of
trust within the system.
With the introduction of FlowTap by Sun et al. they allow for the definition of
security policies on the level of which requests can be performed between specific
microservices, effectively introducing a concept of contracts for which actions can be
performed between services [62]. They argue that this strengthens the trust between
microservices, since even a compromised microservice is restricted in regards to
which connections it can create, and moreover which requests it can send to other
services.
The security gateway proposed by Torkura et al. allows for vulnerability detection,
security health assessments, and enforcement of security policies, which combined
gives the ability to not deploy microservices, which contain any vulnerabilities that
might be exploited [68]. One effect of this is that the trustworthiness of the system is
heightened, as the risk of compromised microservices within the system is decreased,
if this is utilized properly.
3.4
Discussion of Findings
In subsection 3.3.2 we identified various security challenges in the microservice ar-
chitecture discussed in the literature.
These challenges vary in granularity and
specificity, and some are present in every microservice-based system, where some
are more the consequence of another choice. An example of the former is trust, and
as an example of the latter, opting for centralized authentication in an API gateway
presents the challenge of propagating authentication and authorization data into
the rest of the system.
The distributed nature of the microservice architecture naturally results in quite
a few challenges found regarding network security.
The possibly technologically
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
diverse microservices can each introduce vulnerabilities and are susceptible to vul-
nerabilities such as those described by the OWASP. Perhaps the greatest change
from monolithic architectures in this regard is the large amount of attack points,
and an important challenge here is then to find a way to manage this.
Inter-service trust is a very important challenge in the microservice architecture, and
there can be dangerous consequences of ignoring it. Add to this that it is a new class
of challenges from monolithic architectures, finding ways of solving the trust prob-
lem becomes one of the major challenges to solve in the microservice architecture.
Despite this, it is not the challenge that most solutions discussed in subsection 3.3.4
attempt to solve. This could be due to identity and access management (IAM) be-
ing more obviously necessary to solve in a system – a system often cannot be really
secure if everyone is allowed to do everything without restrictions.
Two of the solutions in the found sources that attempt to, to some degree, increase
the level of trustworthiness in a system, do so by identifying compromised microser-
vices. This allows microservices to trust each other, as compromised microservices
(i.e. ones that would breach that trust) would be caught. This is analogous to a
society in which the police catch criminals and we safely trust each other, because
if the person we interact with was a criminal, surely they would be behind bars.
However, what about the time from a microservice turns criminal until it is caught?
And is the police always to be trusted? So while it seems to be a promising way of
creating some level of trust between microservices, it is not enough, and inter-service
trust remains an important challenge.
Being a somewhat broad topic, trust also stretches into IAM. We need some form of
IAM for our users because we do not trust them and for our services because we do
not trust them to not misbehave. Trust should be thought into the system multiple
places, which also adheres to the defence in depth principle. Notably, service-to-
service IAM should be handled in such a way as to protect against confused deputy
attacks.
Microservices do, however, not only introduce security challenges, but in some cases
their use also introduce certain benefits. The distributed nature of such a system
allows for more fine-grained security, which allows critical microservices to be secured
extensively, with the remaining services being secured to a normal degree. At the
same time, each service is typically run on its own machine, resulting in stronger
process isolation, which can increase the security against low-level exploits. However,
co-location attacks, such as the one detailed by İnci et al., are still possible as
sensitive information can still be leaked to others, who are co-located on the same
machine [34]. It is important to note, that such co-location attacks are specifically
relevant when running your microservices in the cloud through a cloud provider,
where you are not in charge of who, if any, you share a physical machine and its
resources with. Thus, a case can be made that while the process isolation that follows
from services running on their own machines is a benefit, the isolation techniques
might still not be strong enough to avoid leaking sensitive information through the
resources that are shared, when your microservice is running on a shared machine.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Discussion of Findings
33
3.4.1
Research Directions
Based on our findings for the research questions and on the analysis thereof, we here
present a number of challenges within security topics, that could be considered for
possible research directions within the area of security in microservices. The list
should not be seen as exhaustive, in the sense that it only covers the topics that
were exposed in the articles found during this systematic literature review.
3.4.1.1
User Authentication
• While several approaches have been offered to solve the issue of user authenti-
cation and authorization in a microservice-based system, we did not find any
comparative analysis or performance testing of the different approaches to eval-
uate them. A research direction could then be to perform such an analysis and
make suggestions on which approaches could be used when, while highlighting
the benefits and drawbacks of each solution.
• Most of the solutions presented for user authentication had an element of
centralization within them, such as a central gateway to handle authentication.
It did not appear as though there had been suggested any viable decentralized
approach for user authentication, which could then be a potential research
direction.
3.4.1.2
Service-To-Service Authentication
• One of the things that a microservice architecture lends itself to is the reuse
of services or components. Thus, a third-party service could be introduced to
the system to perform its given task without the development team needing
to build that component themselves from scratch. However, much of the fo-
cus in the literature on service-to-service authentication is regarding our own
microservices, and as such it appears that there is still missing a good iden-
tity and access management solution for validating third-party components to
ensure that these do not introduce vulnerabilities to the system.
• One of the approaches to solving authentication between microservices was
to utilize mutual Transport Layer Security (MTLS). However, this requires a
public key infrastructure (PKI), and here an open challenge lies in finding a
correct and efficient way of issuing and revoking certificates in such a highly
dynamic setting, as a microservice system typically is.
• In a similar vein, pre-shared keys were also suggested as a symmetric solution
to authentication between services. Here, an open challenge lies in key man-
agement where key revocation is difficult when the keys are pre-shared, and
as such this is also a research direction that could have an effect on service-to-
service authentication in a microservice system.
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Identifying Security Challenges in Microservices
3.4.1.3
Network Security
• Due to how a single request propagates through the system and results in a
large amount of internal network calls, the microservice architecture is very
vulnerable to Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks. It would therefore be beneficial
to find one or more approaches that would diminish the impact of such an
attack on the system.
• A normal signature-based intrusion detection system might have issues han-
dling a relatively dynamic setup such as a microservice system. This presents a
research challenge to uncover how this can be done in an efficient way without
affecting the rest of the system.
3.4.1.4
Trust
• Much of the research we found in association with trust in microservices was
more regarding detection of compromised microservices and vulnerabilities.
This then leads to the assumption that all services can trust each other, since if
they could not, this would have been detected. If this assumption does not hold
then the services are effectively trusting each other blindly, which is a major
security concern. Therefore, more research is needed in the area of trust, both
in regards to how services could correctly establish trust amongst themselves,
and alternatively in how the microservices can effectively communicate with
each other without trusting each other at all.
• A specific problem mentioned in regards to trust is the confused deputy prob-
lem where a microservice can be tricked into performing requests to other
microservices for a malicious entity. This is one of the problems that must be
fixed to heighten the trust in a microservice system, and to limit the amount
of damage that a compromised service can cause.
3.4.1.5
Information Flow
• The nature of microservices promotes having data spread across all services as
each service should have its own copy of the data it needs to fulfil its purpose.
Based on this, the information in a microservice architecture flows around
and as such it can make it more difficult to ensure that secret and sensitive
information does not leave the system. We only found one proposed solution
which could indicate a need for further investigation in this area.
• Another angle here is also how to ensure that sensitive information about in-
dividuals can easily be found, and if necessary deleted, and how to handle
anonymizing data that still needs to be kept when it is spread across a large
number of different microservices. This is especially relevant with the intro-
duction of privacy and data protection rules and regulations such as GDPR
[23].
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Discussion of Findings
35
3.4.1.6
Other
• One of the challenges of security in the microservice architecture was men-
tioned as being where in the system to place which security mechanisms. Here,
research is needed to determine the best placement, and what the consequence
of different placements can be.
• With a distributed system such as the microservice architecture becoming in-
creasingly popular, there is a need to determine what solutions already exist
for distributed secret management, and how these can be utilized in a microser-
vice system in such a way that all services can access the secrets they need. If
no such solution exists, there is a need for further research in this area to find
an appropriate way to solve this issue.
• In a similar vein, management of encryption keys in a distributed system,
with as many actors as some microservice systems have, is also a complex
challenge. Research is needed into how this can be done without affecting the
performance and decentralization of a microservice system.
• Perhaps a difficult area to look into is the area of integrity threats as a result
of more developer access. Naturally, appropriate measures must be taken to
ensure that a single employee cannot compromise the system through their
access. However, which measures can be considered enough for there to be
some form of confidence in that a disgruntled employee cannot compromise
the system? This was not highly mentioned, but given how social engineering
can be a much easier route to take for an attacker, rather than attempting
to compromise a well-secured system from the outside, it is still an important
one.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Focusing on a Security
Challenge
While many of the security challenges presented in chapter 3 are interesting, and
several of them also very important, we have chosen only one of them to attempt
to solve here. The security challenge we have chosen to focus on, is that of trust
between the services within a microservice system. The reason for this is that inter-
service trust is a new concept when comparing microservices and monoliths, and the
security with regards to this has not evolved accordingly.
Without giving much thought to the topic of trust, one risks falling into the trap of
thinking, that as long as we are still only communicating with our own microservices
within the system, then everything is fine. This is, however, not true. Splitting
a system into microservices, that are deployed independently, introduces a great
number of new points, where a malicious entity might attack. This is especially
true, when you consider the fact that all communication between services in the
microservice architecture happens over the network, which means this is exposed to
the outside world. Thus, blindly trusting any requests that come from other services,
makes the system vulnerable if one of those services has been compromised.
There are several types of trust that can be found in a microservice system; trust
between services, trust between the services and the user, trust between services and
any third-party components, and trust in tools and technologies utilized in the sys-
tem to name a few. The remainder of this thesis will focus on trust between services,
and when trust is mentioned it is in this context, unless otherwise specified. If we
are to avoid having blind trust between services, there are generally two directions
to look; establishing trust or having no trust at all.
Establishing trust between services can essentially be seen as creating some form of
session, where at some point in time, the services perform some set of actions that
allow them to trust each other after this point. However, such a solution does not
necessarily account for anything that happens after the trust has been established
between two services.
One of the services could have been compromised in the
meantime and be sending fake requests, and the other services would be none the
wiser. Thus, if going with the idea of establishing trust, then great care must be
taken to how the trust is established, and for how long this trust should last, to
avoid essentially still having blind trust between the services.
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Focusing on a Security Challenge
Having no trust at all between the services in the system results in a solution, where
everything must be verified.
This means that each service will instead have to
verify all requests it receives, and cannot make any assumptions with regards to the
trustworthiness of the other services. Essentially, this is the same as moving the
issue of trust from being between the services, to being between a service and each
request it receives. Naturally, this is much more cumbersome than establishing a
fixed trust, since this approach will affect every request made within the system, and
microservice systems have a lot of service-to-service chatter. It does, however, also
immediately catch it, if for example a service is sending fake requests, because it
has been compromised since the last request. Thus, if it can be done efficiently then
this will provide the most up-to-date view on trust, and will be most susceptible to
changes in the system of the two approaches.
Trust does not exist in the same way or to the same extent in monoliths, since ev-
erything in a monolith mainly happens in the same process on the same machine.
Thus, a monolith trusts all parts of itself and as a result of this, if the monolith is
compromised, then the entire application is compromised and untrustworthy. The
distributed nature of microservices can offer more tolerance in this regard. If re-
silience, fault tolerance, and proper handling of trust is thought into the design of
the microservice system, then one compromised microservice does not mean the en-
tire application is compromised. In fact, it could be able to function normally, or
as close to it as possible.
4.1
Defining Requirements for a Trust
Solution
To ensure that any solution for the issue of trust is correct, and at the same time
in agreement with the most important principles of the microservice architecture,
we will here define a number of key requirements that the solution must adhere
to. These requirements are both related to achieving the goal of trust between the
services, and regarding key elements of the microservice architecture, that must
not be jeopardized by using the solution. The requirements are expressed in the
following.
• R1: Keep decentralization
The decentralization of microservices allows for benefits like scalability. This
becomes increasingly difficult when a centralized element is introduced into
the system, as this can easily become a bottleneck that has significant impact
on the performance of the system. Therefore, the proposed solution should
strive to keep the decentralization of the microservice architecture, to preserve
the scalability of it.
• R2: Preserve single responsibility of a microservice
An important aspect of most definitions of a microservice is that a single service
should in principle have only one overall responsibility. As such, the solution
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Defining Requirements for a Trust Solution
39
should require minimal changes to existing microservices, so that they are still
only focused on doing one thing.
The solution should then, to the extent
possible, be a separate thing that can be attached to each microservice.
• R3: Trust nothing, verify everything
To ensure that all requests are valid, there is a need to not trust anything,
and then to let each microservice verify everything that enters it on its own.
This is to ensure that we first of all do not introduce blind trust between the
services in the system. However, it is also to ensure that a service does not
allow a request, based on the idea that there had been established trust at an
earlier point, since a service could have been compromised in the meantime.
• R4: Traceability of requests
To ensure that a malicious entity cannot just start making requests to services
in the system, each request needs to have associated with it a way to verify
the user who initiated such a request. This enables each service to check that
the user is authorized to perform such a request, before actually executing it,
and thus also hinders an attackers ability to create new requests on his own.
• R5: Policy-based access control between services
Since not all microservices are equal, they should not all be able to perform
all possible requests on each other. This should be enforced with some form of
policy-based access control, where each service is able to add another service
to its policy, to essentially whitelist that service and allow it to perform certain
requests. This will restrict how an attacker can exploit the system, if he is
able to gain control over one of the services.
• R6: Prevent the confused deputy problem
One of the issues of misplaced trust is that of the confused deputy problem.
It is a requirement for a solution for trust between services, that this problem
is hindered in a microservice system, so an attacker is not able to perform
requests which are just blindly executed by other services in the system.
With these requirements in mind, a solution will be designed, that preserves the
important aspects of the microservice architecture, while combatting the issue of
trust between the services. The end goal of the solution is to reduce the impact
that a compromised service can cause on the system. Another benefit of a solution
implementing these requirements is, that it enables more specialized and fine-grained
security within the system.
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Designing a Solution
In this chapter is described the design of our solution to the problem of trust, chosen
in chapter 4. The solution aims to meet the requirements defined in the previous
section 4.1. First, section 5.1 will look at what, if any, similar problems have been
solved in the literature and how this differs from the problem chosen in this thesis.
Then, section 5.2 describes the design of our solution.
5.1
Related Work
As the literature review in chapter 3 showed, the challenge of trust in microservices
is an important and open one.
Solutions proposed to different problems in the
literature are discussed in detail in subsection 3.3.4, and this section will not reiterate
those. However, none of the solutions found in the literature solve the problem we
aim to solve completely, or meet the requirements described in section 4.1. The
closest is Nehme et al. who present a solution for fine-grained access control which
solves part of the problem we are aiming to solve in that the services do not blindly
trust each other [48]. However, it is first and foremost a solution to the problem
of letting the user of a system provide fine-grained access to his resources and it
splits microservices into two categories: resource- and consumer microservices. The
solution we present in section 5.2 is more general in that it treats all microservices
equally. It is also more decentralized than the solution from Nehme et al., where
access control is somewhat centralized in an access control server.
5.2
The Solution
The solution is divided into two parts, considering, respectively, the interaction
between services, and the interaction between a user and a service. The final solution
is then a combination of these two parts. The degree to which the solution fulfils
the requirements put forth in chapter 4 is evaluated in chapter 7. Scenarios are
presented in which microservices communicate with each other and/or users, and it
is assumed that all this communication uses TLS and is therefore confidential.
5.2.1
Service-To-Service
As already mentioned, assuming that the network is secure and blindly trusting any
traffic from within it, presents security problems. If there is no authentication of
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Designing a Solution
microservices, any malicious party who gains access to the network can perform
any action on any other microservice in the system. Even with authentication, a
compromised microservice presents the same problem. In a typical system, not every
microservice needs access to every other microservice. As an example, in the sock
shop described in subsection 2.1.2 and illustrated in Figure 2.3 only services Front-
end and Orders need to call other microservices, whereas the remaining services do
not need to make any outgoing calls.
The solution to this is very straightforward: authenticate each microservice and
perform access control using tokens.
Each microservice will authenticate with a
separate token microservice, receiving a token which it will send along with its
request to other microservices. This flow is illustrated in Figure 5.1. Note that the
first step, where A requests a token, also requires a form of authentication. One
way of doing this is by use of certificates – this solution assumes that there is some
public key infrastructure (PKI) (since we assume communication over TLS), and so
this is a practical way of handling authentication. However, there are other ways
of authenticating services, and this solution does not hinge upon a specific method
being used.
5.2.1.1
JSON Web Tokens
To allow microservices to verify tokens locally instead of having to call the token ser-
vice, we use JSON web tokens (JWT) [3] with an asymmetrical signature algorithm.
Such a token consists of three things:
Header
This contains information about the algorithm used to sign the token.
JWT can either use HMAC with pre-shared keys or RSA, in this solution
the latter is used. This is a simple JSON object.
Payload
Contains the claims of the token. This is a simple JSON object and can
contain custom claims. There are also registered claims which are prede-
fined claims such as issuer (iss) or expiry time (exp).
Signature The final field is a signature with the algorithm defined in the header.
These fields are each base-64 encoded and the complete JWT can then be expressed
as header64.payload64.signature64, where x64 means that x is base-64 encoded, which
1: authenticate
3: requestA, tokenA
A
5: response
B
2: tokenA
TokenService
4: verify tokenA
Figure 5.1: Microservice A fetching a token before making a request to microservice B
which verifies it before sending a response to A
==PAGE:51==
5.2 The Solution
43
can be sent in text-based protocols such as HTTP. The token is only base-64 en-
coded, and thus does not provide confidentiality. Luckily, this solution does not
need confidentiality of the token, but just authenticity. The payload consists of an
expiry time and the identity of the requesting microservice (eg. Orders in the sock
shop example).
Choosing an expiry time is a trade-off between performance and security. A quicker
expiry time means that a compromised token presents a problem for a shorter period
of time, whereas a token that expires too quickly must be refreshed by the service,
possibly hurting performance of the entire system. Therefore, the expiry time should
be short, but not too short.
If the symmetrical HMAC is used, both the provider and verifier of the signature
need to know a pre-shared key.
Alternatively, only the token service knows the
secret key and the verifying microservice needs to call the token service to verify
a token. Neither scenario is ideal in this solution as the former would mean that
any microservice could produce a token identical to what the token service would
produce, and the latter results in a large amount of network calls which are not
free and will likely impact performance heavily. Instead, we use the asymmetrical
version with RSA. Then the token service has a secret key used to sign tokens, and
the microservices only know the public key of the token service, and can then only
verify tokens, not produce them. This also means that some form of PKI is needed,
and we assume that this PKI exists.
5.2.1.2
Access Control
When a microservice receives a request from another microservice, it will contain a
token signed by the token service, and we know that this means that the caller has
authenticated itself with the token service. Therefore, if a request contains a valid
token, it is a valid microservice within the system. However, every microservice
should not be able to perform all actions on every other microservice, and so we
need to verify that the calling microservice is authorized to perform the request it is
attempting to make. The token contains a claim regarding the identity of the calling
microservice, and this identity can be used to perform access control. So, as a part
of step 4 in Figure 5.1, microservice B will perform access control, for example by
checking some access control list (ACL) [12, p. 300]. This is illustrated in Figure 5.2.
Unless explicitly stated, anonymous calls (i.e. calls without a token) are denied.
5.2.1.3
Why It Works
As briefly touched upon, having all requests require the presence of a token means
that an attacker who has gained access to just the network cannot perform requests,
as he does not have a way of authenticating with the token service, and therefore
cannot obtain a token for himself. The only way for this attacker to obtain a token
is to get it from a legitimate microservice. As we assume that all traffic is encrypted
(HTTPS), this is no easy task for an attacker. If, somehow, an attacker obtains a
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Designing a Solution
1: requestA, tokenA
A
4: response
B
2: tokenA not expired?
3: A allowed to make requestA?
Figure 5.2: Microservice B verifies token before performing a request for A
token, the relatively short lifetime of it means that he is limited in the amount of
time to perform malicious actions.
If the attacker obtains a token or compromises a microservice, the access control
can limit the impact of the attack. Looking at the sock shop example, there are
five microservices who has no reason to call other microservices, and thus no other
microservice would accept requests from these five services. Thus, if an attacker
manages to compromise one of these five microservices, the damage is fairly con-
tained, which is the overarching goal of the solution.
5.2.2
User-To-Service
A simple way of propagating user identity into the system is by verifying the user
identity at the system edge (e.g. in the API gateway), and tacking a user identifier
onto the request before sending it further into the system. When a microservice
receives a request and an identifier, it will evaluate whether it should allow the
request based on the identifier. This is illustrated in Figure 5.3 where a user makes
a request to a microservice which then makes a request to another microservice. The
identity of the user is passed along, both from the API gateway to A, and from A to
B, and as such both A and B can perform some form of access control. For example,
if A asks B to delete some resource R on behalf of a user U, B could evaluate if U
owns R and deny the request if that is not the case.
In the described setup, if a malicious party gains access to the network, nothing
stops them from performing requests on behalf of users whose identifier they know.
This can be seen in Figure 5.4 where the malicious party E performs a request on
behalf of some user. The solution presented in subsection 5.2.1 would prevent an
attacker from setting himself up in the network in the manner shown in Figure 5.4.
However, should E instead take over some legitimate service, the problem is very
prevalent.
Instead of having each microservice blindly trust that requesters are actually calling
on behalf of the user they claim, we want to actually verify it. Much like the solution
from subsection 5.2.1, we create a token service responsible for issuing JWT tokens
to the users. Before making a request, the user then authenticates with the token
service, receiving a token claiming the user’s identity. The user then sends this token
==PAGE:53==
5.2 The Solution
45
System
1: requestU, proof-of-identityU
U
4: requestA, idU
A
B
3: can idU perform requestU?
5: can idU perform requestA?
2: requestU, idU
API 
Gateway
Figure 5.3: A user U making a request to A through the API gateway, which results in
A making a request to B
System
3: requestA, idU
A
B
2: can idU perform requestE?
4: can idU perform requestA?
API 
Gateway
1: requestE, idU
E
Figure 5.4: Malicious party E making a request on behalf of some user U
along with his request to the other microservices in the system. This flow is shown
in Figure 5.5. Each microservice verifies the token (i.e. checking for validity) and
then performs access control based on the request and the user identity claim. If
the request made by the user results in another request further into the system – in
Figure 5.5 requestU results in A making requestA to B – the calling microservice
passes along the token, allowing the requested microservice to also check the token
for validity.
The user in Figure 5.5 calls both the token service and A directly. Typically, these
calls would pass through an API gateway like in Figure 5.3, but this has been
omitted in Figure 5.5 to keep the diagram simpler. The presence or absence of an
API gateway does not make a difference to the solution in Figure 5.5, as long as the
user’s token is passed from microservice to microservice.
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Designing a Solution
System
1: authenticate
3: requestU, tokenU
U
2: tokenU
TokenService
5: requestA, tokenU
A
B
4: verify tokenU for requestU
6: verify tokenU for requestA
Figure 5.5: A user U making a request to A, which in turn makes a request to B, passing
along the U’s token. API gateway is omitted for simplicity
5.2.2.1
Access Control
Just like every microservice does not need to be able to perform all actions on every
other microservice, every user should not be able to make every request. Therefore,
just like in the service-to-service scenario, we need a form of access control. The
solution presented here does not require a specific form of access control (role-based
access control [12, p. 303], ACL, etc.) but assumes that a token only grants access
to acceptable resources and actions on a microservice.
5.2.2.2
Why It Works
Requiring a user-token with every request mitigates the attack in Figure 5.4, as the
malicious party would have to obtain a valid token. Assuming that the token service
is secure and not controlled by a malicious party, the only way for an attacker to
obtain a token is by either having a valid way of authenticating – and then the token
would actually belong to the attacker, and thus whatever requests he would perform
would be actually valid and therefore not an attack – or by snooping a token from a
legitimate user. The latter is possible if a system microservice is compromised, for
example if an attacker takes control of A in Figure 5.5. In that case, the damage is
somewhat contained in that the attacker is limited in what actions he can perform
to those that the user, whose token he has obtained, can perform. This means that
data of users who do not make requests to A when it is compromised cannot be
tampered with (the attacker cannot make calls in their name).
5.2.3
Combining Two Solutions
If we combine the two solutions presented in subsection 5.2.1 and subsection 5.2.2
into one, we get a system using tokens both for the user and for each microservice.
The combined flow is shown in Figure 5.6 where a user U makes a request to some
==PAGE:55==
5.2 The Solution
47
microservice A which in turn makes a request to another microservice B. In the
combined flow U receives a user-token which he sends to A along with his request. A
verifies the token and performs access control before receiving its own service-token.
Both the user-token and the service-token is then sent to B, and it can then perform
access control on both the user and the service.
The two token-services are kept separate from each other to minimize the impact
it would have on the system if they were to be compromised. If those two services
were instead one, an attacker with control over that one service would be able to
impersonate any service and any user, and thereby have complete control over the
system. This is further elaborated on below in subsubsection 5.2.3.1.
Having each microservice be responsible for performing access control themselves
does not adhere very much to the single responsibility principle, which is required
in section 4.1. Therefore, a separate gateway microservice, in Figure 5.6 denoted
GatewayA and GatewayB, is responsible for the access control, and one such gate-
way is placed in front of each microservice. The gateway is responsible for verifying
tokens and performing access control on all incoming requests and forwarding re-
quests to the microservice behind it, and a microservice will only allow incoming
requests from its gateway. Having multiple gateways instead of a single point of
access control also meets the decentralization requirement defined in section 4.1.
5.2.3.1
Assumptions
Though already mentioned earlier it should be reiterated that all communication
between microservices is assumed to use standard TLS. If this is not the case, an
attacker with access to the network can sniff both user-tokens and service-tokens
and wreak havoc.
The solution works under the assumption that the token services are not compro-
mised. Should an attacker gain control of these, he can disrupt the system by issuing
invalid tokens or by not issuing tokens at all. If he is in control of the service-token
service, he can issue tokens to himself that allow him to make requests disguised as
any other microservice in the system. However, he would not have access to user
tokens, and as such would only be able to perform actions allowed for anonymous
users. If only the user-token service is compromised, the attacker cannot make any
requests to the rest of the system, as no policy would allow incoming requests from
the user-token service. So for the attacker to perform arbitrary actions upon the
system, he needs control of both token services.
It is also assumed that the gateways are secure. A compromised gateway can perform
arbitrary actions on its microservice, as the microservice trusts the gateway to have
verified tokens and performed access control. Developing the gateway separately
from each microservice makes it easier to ensure the hardness of it. If, instead, each
microservice was responsible for performing its own access control, there would likely
be as many implementations of this as there were microservices in the system, and
more code means a higher risk of bugs [25].
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Designing a Solution
System
1: authenticate
3: requestU, user-tokenU
U
2: user-tokenU
User
TokenService
5: requestU, user-tokenU
GatewayA
6: authenticate
8: requestA,
user-tokenU,
service-tokenA
A
4: verify user-tokenU for requestU
7: service-tokenA
Service
TokenService
10: requestA, user-tokenU
GatewayB
9: verify user-tokenU for requestA,
verify service-tokenA for requestA
B
Figure 5.6: The combined solution flow in which user U makes a request to microservice
A which needs to further request microservice B. API gateway has been
omitted for simplicity
It is not assumed that each microservice is otherwise kept secure in any way, be-
yond having a non-compromised microservice behave according to its design. It is
assumed that if an attacker manages to compromise a microservice, he gains access
to the credentials of said microservice and can therefore obtain service-tokens, im-
personating said microservice. Furthermore, the attacker gains knowledge of the
user-tokens sent along with requests to a compromised microservice. However, the
attacker does not gain access to the user-tokens of any other users than those who
make calls during the time period that the attacker has control of a microservice.
5.2.3.2
Comparison With a Monolith
The proposed solution decentralizes security and places responsibility for it on each
gateway. This means that there are security policies for each piece of the business
logic of the complete system (i.e. for each business capability) and that these are
decoupled. Looking at the sock shop example, the policy (or policies) for Orders
would only consider who is allowed to create orders and view them, whereas the
policies for Carts would consider who is allowed to view a cart and other cart-
related actions. The descriptions of these policies belong to the gateway in front of
Orders and Carts, respectively.
The decoupling of policies yields many of the benefits that microservices themselves
==PAGE:57==
5.2 The Solution
49
offer: Changes to security policies can be quickly deployed, affecting only one gate-
way. Additionally, if every instance of a microservice is deployed with an instance
of a gateway, policy checking scales along with the microservices and so it scales
better and more flexibly than a monolithic system.
In a monolithic system security is also monolithic and centralized. If the monolith
is compromised in some way, eg. by a flaw in the access control configuration or
something of that nature, the security of the entire monolith is compromised. With
the decentralized approach to security presented here, the compromise of a single
microservice does not necessarily mean that the entire system is compromised.
==PAGE:58==
50
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Implementing the Design
With a basis in the requirements introduced in section 4.1 and the design presented
in chapter 5, a proof-of-concept solution has been implemented and incorporated
into the sock shop system. Specifically, a policy gateway to be inserted in front of
all microservices, and the token services to grant tokens to users and services have
been implemented. A number of changes were also necessary to implement in the
sock shop in order for the solution to function, and all of these implementations will
be detailed in this chapter. Finally, the updated architecture of the sock shop with
our solution implemented will also be illustrated.
6.1
Token Services
The design described in chapter 5 contains two token services: one for services and
one for users. The former has been implemented as a simple, lightweight microservice
in Go, with a simple web API for services to request a service-token. For authen-
tication, to keep it simple, each microservice type (Orders, Front-end, etc.) has a
set of username and password. The latter token service is baked into the existing
microservice User. This is due to User already being responsible for authenticating
users in the original sock shop, and so baking the issuing of user-tokens into User
was a low-impact change to the system as it required no major changes to the login
flow.
Both token services issue tokens with an arbitrarily chosen expiry of five minutes.
From a user standpoint it seems like enough time for a user to complete his pur-
chases after having logged in, and from a service standpoint having to re-obtain a
token too often results in poor performance. In addition to the expiry, the tokens
contain claims of the identity of the bearer. The service-tokens contain the claim
"Service":"Id" where Id is the type of microservice, eg. Orders. User-tokens con-
tain a claim "UserID":"Id" where Id is the user identifier within the system. The
sock shop already assigned an identifier to every user, and so this is used in the
tokens said Id.
A brief description and links to the code for the service-token service is found in
Appendix A, and the same is found for the updated User microservice in Appendix B.
==PAGE:60==
52
6 Implementing the Design
6.2
Policy Gateway
The policy gateway is responsible for verifying whether a microservice is allowed
to perform the request it is attempting to, and whether it is allowed to do so for
the user identified in the request. Thus, an instance of the policy gateway will be
positioned in front of each microservice, where it will intercept all requests that
are made to the microservice it protects. For each request it will then determine
whether it is allowed based on the policy of the receiving microservice, and check
the authentication of the user and the microservice.
For a system that contains as much inter-service communication over the network
as a microservice system does, this will clearly result in a large number of requests
where additional actions to verify the request before forwarding it must be done. In
order for this to have as little impact on the performance of the system as possible
it is important that this policy gateway is written as a lightweight program without
much overhead. We have chosen to write the policy gateway in Go for this reason.
Furthermore, the policies to essentially whitelist requests for each microservice must
be written in a structured way, that is both fairly simple for a developer to write
and update, and also simple to work with within the gateway itself. For this it was
chosen to formulate these policies in JSON, which is very easy to customize to any
specific needs, and is also simple to parse in the gateway and to work with. A policy
contains up to as many entries as there are endpoints for a service. Each policy is
described by the URL and the HTTP method which combined make up a specific
endpoint in an API. Additionally, the policy has a list of services that are allowed
to use this endpoint to perform requests. A URL following REST best practices can
contain parameters such as an id of a user. In these policies a parameter in the URL
is shown by encompassing it in curly brackets ({param}). Additionally, to express
that a specific parameter should be found as one of the claims of the user-token in the
request it will have a leading colon within the curly brackets ({:paramInClaims}).
An example of how these policies are structured can be seen in the extract shown
in Listing 1. This extract contains three of the entries from the policies for the user
service.
1
{
2
"entries": [
3
{
4
"url": "/login",
5
"method": "GET",
6
"allow": [
7
"front-end"
8
]
9
},
10
{
11
"url": "/customers",
12
"method": "GET",
13
"allow": [
14
"front-end"
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Policy Gateway
53
15
]
16
},
17
{
18
"url": "/customers/{:userId}",
19
"method": "GET",
20
"allow": [
21
"front-end",
22
"orders"
23
]
24
},
25
...
26
]
27
}
Listing 1: Security policy in JSON
An advantage to having these policies structured in JSON along with a custom-made
policy gateway is that any rules that might arise as required for a specific system
should be fairly simple to construct and implement.
To allow for fast lookups in these policies a data structure has been designed to
accommodate this. The policies will be expressed as policy trees where each node
contains a single part of the URL path. When reading the JSON policy files, infor-
mation such as whether a specific part of the URL is a parameter, whether it should
match a claim in the token, and which other services are allowed to call this URL, is
extracted and stored as satellite data at each node. It was decided to make a policy
tree for each HTTP method that is mentioned in the policy file, rather than fitting
this into the satellite data as well. Thus, an extract of a policy tree for the user
microservice can be seen in Figure 6.1, where the satellite data is also illustrated.
The policy trees for a microservice are generated when the policy gateway is started.
Following this the policy gateway is set up to listen for incoming requests, and when
such a requests comes it will verify and get the service-token and the user-token.
The service-token is required to be in the request header, and if it is not found or
verified, then the request is denied as it is unauthorized. It is possible for certain
requests to be executed without the presence of a user-token, which is done to allow
anonymous requests in the system. However, in the case where the policy specifies
that the id of the user must be present as a claim in the token, then a request
without the user-token will not be accepted. Following the extraction of the tokens,
the request will be checked against the policy trees for the microservice. The specific
path of the URL is traversed to reach the end of the request, where the allow list is
then used to check whether the requesting microservice is allowed to perform this
request. If it is allowed to do so, then the request is forwarded to the receiving
microservice.
Links to the source code of the policy gateway is found in Appendix C.
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Implementing the Design
root
/customers
allow: 
  [front-end]
matchClaim: false
parameter: false
allow: 
  [front-end]
matchClaim: false
parameter: false
/login
/{:userId}
allow: 
  [front-end, orders]
matchClaim: true
parameter: true
/cards
/addresses
allow: 
  [front-end, orders]
matchClaim: false
parameter: false
allow: 
  [front-end, orders]
matchClaim: false
parameter: false
PolicyTree = ["GET", "POST", "DELETE", ...]
...
Figure 6.1: An extract of the policy tree for the user microservice
6.2.1
Policies
The policies for each microservice have been created manually by inspecting the code
of each microservice and noting who has a reason to call who. In the cases where an
API route contains a user identifier, this is marked {:userID} so that the gateway
ensures that the resource the user is attempting to access is, in fact, his own. As
an example, the User microservice has a resource, customers/userId/cards, which
exposes the credit card data of the user with the id userId. In the corresponding
policy file, the route is customers/{:userID}/cards (see Listing 1, line 18), and
so to get access to the credit card information of the user with id 123 by calling
customers/123/cards, you would need a user-token with a claim "UserID":"123".
Note that not all API routes within the sock shop contain the user identifier in
the route, but instead identifies the user in some other way, eg. by having it in
the HTTP body. These specific routes cannot be protected by the means described
above, as the policy gateway only enforces mandatory claims found in the URL in
the {:claim} manner. As this is only a proof-of-concept and we aim to make as
few changes to the existing system as possible in order to make the security solution
work, API routes have not been changed. However, if the solution is to provide full
protection for all routes, some routes would need to be changed.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Changes Made to the Sock Shop
55
6.3
Changes Made to the Sock Shop
The following sections describe the changes that were made to the existing sock shop
microservice demo. Links to the source code can be found in Appendix B.
6.3.1
Changes to Existing Microservices
All microservices in the sock shop are open source, which allows us to make the
modifications to the code necessary for the solution to work. Only changes neces-
sary for the functionality of the solution have been made, and so no performance
optimizations or major changes of flow have been made to the existing microservices.
As described in section 6.1, the responsibilities of the user-token service described
in subsection 5.2.3 has been put into the User microservice, which was already
responsible for authenticating users. When a user logs into the sock shop through
Front-end, the request is forwarded to User which authenticates the user credentials
and issues a user-token which is then saved in the user’s cookie. When Front-end
receives a request from a user that is logged in, it then adds the user-token in the
custom HTTP header ”User-Token” when making requests to other microservices
as a result of the user request. When Orders receives a request from Front-end
which results in Orders making requests to other microservices it also adds the
”User-Token” header.
Front-end and Orders have both been altered such that they fetch a service-token
from Service-tokens if they do not already have one in memory or if it has expired.
They add this token to all outgoing HTTP requests with the custom HTTP header
”Service-Token”.
6.3.2
Deployment
Implementing the design required changes made to the existing sock shop. The al-
tered sock shop is deployed using an altered version of the Kubernetes configuration
mentioned in subsection 2.1.2. An example of such a configuration for the microser-
vice User can be seen in Listing 2, which shows a part of the original configuration
of the user microservice.
1
...
2
kind: Deployment
3
...
4
spec:
5
containers:
6
- name: user
7
image: weaveworksdemos/user:0.4.7
8
ports:
9
- containerPort: 80
10
...
11
kind: Service
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Implementing the Design
12
...
13
spec:
14
ports:
15
- port: 80
16
targetPort: 80
17
...
Listing 2: The containers definition from the original Kubernetes deployment configura-
tion of the user microservice in the sock shop
The deployment (lines 1-10) describes what a pod, the smallest deployable unit in
Kubernetes [64], running the user microservice should look like [63]. A pod wraps
one or more containers, and in the deployment in Listing 2 it wraps just a single con-
tainer, the one running the user microservice. It runs from the weaveworksdemos/
user:0.4.7 image which is created by Weaveworks and freely available on Docker
Hub, the largest online library of images for running containers [16]. It exposes port
80 from the user-container to the pod, and this port is exposed on the pod (i.e. it
is available for other microservices in the system to make requests on that port) in
the service description (lines 11-17), which acts as a kind of load-balancer over the
pods defined by the deployment [66].
To deploy the policy gateway along with a microservice, we add it to the pod with
the microservice. This is shown in the example in Listing 3 which shows the updated
configuration of the user microservice. Here, firstly, the user microservice is run on
another image with the updated functionality such that it issues user-tokens. Sec-
ondly, another container, user-gw, is added to the deployment configuration. The
policy gateway is setup to listen on port 8443 and to forward requests to localhost
port 80. When multiple containers are running in the same pod, they share the
address localhost, which is why the gateway forwards to this address. Furthermore,
a policy-file is mounted to the filesystem of the gateway.
1
...
2
kind: Deployment
3
...
4
spec:
5
containers:
6
- name: user
7
image: user_changed
8
ports:
9
- containerPort: 80
10
- name: user-gw
11
image: policy-gateway
12
ports:
13
- containerPort: 8443
14
env:
15
- name: LISTEN_PORT
16
value: "8443"
17
- name: FORWARD_ADDR
18
value: localhost
==PAGE:65==
6.4 The Updated Sock Shop
57
19
- name: FORWARD_PORT
20
value: "80"
21
- name: POLICY_PATH
22
value: /etc/pgwconf/policy.json
23
volumeMounts:
24
- mountPath: /etc/pgwconf/policy.json
25
name: policy-volume
26
...
27
kind: Service
28
...
29
spec:
30
ports:
31
- port: 443
32
targetPort: 8443
33
...
Listing 3: Updated Kubernetes deployment configuration of the user microservice and
its policy gateway
Finally, the service has been altered so that requests on the pod’s port 443 is routed
to the container exposing port 8443 – i.e. the policy gateway. Without altering the
setup further, this means that any other microservice requesting the user service
on port 443 will be routed to the policy gateway instead of the actual service, so
the policy gateway has been placed effectively in front of the microservice. Since
the port exposed by the user container is not exposed to the outside by the service,
other microservices or parties in the network cannot request the service directly, as
per the design described in subsection 5.2.3. These changes to the deployments and
services have been made for all relevant microservices, so that a policy gateway is
placed in front of them, hiding the actual services.
6.3.3
TLS
In the original, unaltered sock shop all communication is done via HTTP without
TLS. As the design described in subsection 5.2.3 assumes that all traffic is HTTPS,
this has also been added to the system such that all traffic from microservices to
other microservices’ policy gateways is done over HTTPS. Given more time for
implementation, traffic between a microservice and its own gateway should also be
done via HTTPS.
6.4
The Updated Sock Shop
The sock shop system as deployed in Kubernetes can be seen in Figure 6.2.
It
illustrates how the service that is exposed to the user is Front-end, and how only
Front-end and Orders make calls to Service-tokens, as they are the only microservices
in the system that make calls to other microservices. All services but Front-end and
Service-tokens are deployed in pods with policy gateways which are exposed to the
remaining system. The former is exposed externally and therefore does not require a
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Implementing the Design
service-token and the latter issues service-tokens and is therefore open to calls from
all microservices.
Cart
Gateway
Front-end
User
Gateway
Orders
Gateway
Catalogue
Gateway
Gateway
Payment
Gateway
Shipping
Service-
tokens
Figure 6.2: Overview of the Kubernetes setup with policy gateways. The dotted-lined
rounded boxes denote pods and the bold outer dotted-line box denotes the
Kubernetes cluster. Databases have been omitted for simplicity
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Results
In the following we describe how the implemented solution has been tested and the
results thereof. This is done in two parts: section 7.1 which examines the correctness
of the implementation and whether it functions as expected, and section 7.2 where
we have run load-tests to test the performance of the system with the added security
versus that of the old system.
7.1
Correctness
For the implemented solution to be correct it must meet two criteria: the existing
functionality of the system (creating a user, ordering socks etc.)
must continue
to work as before, and the requirements from section 4.1 should be met. The for-
mer has been tested both by the authors manually browsing the sock shop website
and by running the load-test described in section 7.2, and both tests indicate that
none of the existing functionality is lost. The latter has been manually tested by
starting containers within the sock shop Kubernetes cluster and making requests to
microservices, verifying that only the correct requests are allowed, hereby simulating
an attacker with or without stolen tokens.
The simple case of an attacker gaining access to the network and making requests
without any tokens is shown in Figure 7.1.
This scenario is much like the one
illustrated in Figure 5.4 back in subsection 5.2.2. Here, the attacker attempts to
call the User microservice to obtain credit card information of an existing user, but
is met with a 401 Unauthorized response, which is the correct behaviour.
The screenshot in Figure 7.2 shows an attacker with a valid service-token from the Or-
Figure 7.1: A simulation of a malicious party getting access to the sock shop network
and attempting to call the User microservice to steal credit card information
from a user
==PAGE:68==
60
7 Results
Figure 7.2: A simulation of a malicious party calling the User microservice to steal credit
card information with a valid service-token from a compromised Orders mi-
croservice but no valid user-token
ders microservice, which is allowed to make calls to the customers/{userId}/cards
endpoint of the User microservice. However, as the attacker provides no valid user-
token, the request is met with 401 Unauthorized.
In the opposite scenario, an attacker with a stolen user-token but no valid service-
token is simulated in Figure 7.3. The user-token does actually have a claim for the
identifier provided in the request URL, but since the attacker does not have a valid
service-token, the request is denied with a 401 Unauthorized.
Finally, if an attacker obtains both a valid service-token and a valid user-token, he
can successfully steal the credit card information of the user with the identifier from
the claim in the user-token, as shown in Figure 7.4. The solution implemented here
does not provide any protection for this scenario, as the policy gateway does not
have any way of knowing that these tokens were acquired maliciously. However, the
tokens expire 5 minutes after they were issued, so if they both happened to be issued
at exactly the same time, this would limit the attack window to a 5-minute period.
There are of course many other API endpoints within the sock shop than just the
one attacked in this section and there are more possible combinations of expired
tokens, invalid token-signatures, invalid claims, etc. that can be tested. However,
the simulated attacks presented here seem to indicate that the implemented solution
correctly disallows invalid requests.
Figure 7.3: A simulation of a malicious party calling the User microservice to steal credit
card information with a user-token from a compromised user but no valid
service-token
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Performance
61
Figure 7.4: A simulation of a malicious party calling the User microservice to steal credit
card information with a valid service-token from a compromised Orders mi-
croservice and a valid user-token
7.2
Performance
Weaveworks have developed, along with the sock shop demo, a load-test based on
Locust, which is a framework for creating load-tests of APIs and web services [32].
Locust works by defining tasks in Python, which are then run concurrently by a
number of users. The load-test created by Weaveworks defines one such task, which
gets the list of socks available in the shop, picks one at random, logs on and attempts
to buy it. The load-test used in this section defines another task, which simply
browses the available socks on the shop and looks at the details for a random sock.
Additionally, the original task has been altered such that it also creates a new user.
The load-test then runs the first task and the latter at a ratio of 1:2. The addition
of the latter task was made to better emulate actual users casually browsing a web
shop without making a purchase.
Performance of the altered system (i.e. the sock shop with the solution implemented)
was then tested by running the load-test on both the original and the altered system,
comparing how many requests per second each setup could handle. The Locust
clients were run on a laptop with an Intel i7-7700HQ 2.8GHz processor with 16GB
RAM, running Python 3.7 on Windows 10. The clients were aimed at a single-node
Kubernetes cluster on a Docker Desktop [15] installation on another laptop with an
Intel i7-7700HQ 2.8GHz processor with 16GB RAM running Windows 10. Links to
the code used to run the load-test is found in Appendix D.
The load-test was run 10 times on both the original sock shop, and on the sock shop
with the trust solution implemented. Before each test was run, the entire sock shop
was recreated from scratch, resulting in a clean system with nothing in the databases
when the tests were run. Each execution of the load-test was run for five minutes,
after which the throughput, in terms of the number of requests per second that the
system was able to handle, was noted. The throughput of each test is illustrated in
Figure 7.5, where the baseline is the original sock shop without the trust solution.
==PAGE:70==
62
7 Results
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
Throughput (requests/s)
Baseline
Including Trust Solution
Figure 7.5: The throughput as indicated by the results of performing the load-test 10
times on the sock shop both with and without the trust solution
Clearly, the introduction of the trust solution has resulted in a throughput loss.
This loss is examined further with the statistics shown in Table 7.1.
Here, the
average throughput loss is calculated to be 14.1%. The best case throughput loss
is calculated by comparing the worst performing run of the original sock shop, with
the best performing run of the sock shop with the trust solution. Conversely, the
worst case throughput loss is calculated by comparing the best performing run of
the original sock shop, with the worst performing run of the sock shop with the trust
solution implemented. Thus, they are the minimum and maximum throughput loss
measured, respectively. This results in a throughput loss that lies in the range of
9.2% to 21.1%.
Since the original sock shop was created such that it runs purely over HTTP, the
performance baseline of the sock shop is also based on HTTP communication. Be-
cause of this, the load-tests with the trust solution applied to the system have also
been run under these same circumstances, which means they have been run without
TLS. This has been done to enable the comparison of just adding the trust solution,
rather than also adding TLS to the entire system. However, we do assume in chap-
ter 5, that a system that implements our trust solution already communicates over
HTTPS, and if this is not the case, then the final impact on performance will be
further impacted by the addition of TLS.
Best Case
Average
Worst Case
Throughput Loss
9.2%
14.1%
21.1%
Table 7.1: Performance of the trust solution based on throughput loss
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
In this chapter, we will sum up and discuss some of the different aspects that have
been touched upon during this thesis. This includes the systematic literature review
that was conducted initially, the requirements and the correctness of the designed
solution for trust, and what was observed in regards to performance of the sock shop
with the trust solution implemented. Finally, some specific areas of future work with
regards to the trust solution will be detailed.
8.1
The Systematic Literature Review
The systematic literature review of security in microservices highlighted a number
of security challenges that present themselves in the microservice architecture, along
with what has been suggested as solutions for some of them. Furthermore, it con-
tained a comparison of security in a microservice system and a monolithic one. This
has given a view of the current state of the microservice architecture with regards
to security, and enabled us to show some areas that are still lacking behind in the
research area.
More importantly, however, the literature review also highlighted that security has
gained more attention recently with regards to publicised research – when the review
was conducted, the year 2019 already accounted for more than 40% of the literature
on security in microservices, with several months left of the year. While the topics
covered in the review are certainly still relevant, this also shows that the challenges
and solutions presented there are not the final truth. New research might very well
have been conducted within the field in the time that has passed, and therefore
the findings should be seen more as a snapshot that indicated possible research
directions, and laid the foundation for the work on trust conducted in this thesis.
Another important note is that microservices emerged from the industry, and has
become popular here due to the many benefits it can open up for. This also means
that the research is just trying to catch up, investigate issues and find best practices,
which is especially true for security in the area. As such, it might be that not all
security issues have been brought to light yet, and therefore would not necessarily
have been captured in the systematic literature review conducted in this thesis.
==PAGE:72==
64
8 Discussion
8.2
Requirements and Correctness
As found in section 7.1, the implemented solution works as intended. The added
security does not hinder existing functionality, and the system does not allow illegal
requests from attackers trying to make requests on data that does not belong to
them. Below we evaluate the solution in regards to the requirements defined in
section 4.1.
• R1: Keep decentralization
Token creation and issuing is centralized in the service(s) responsible for this.
However, verifying the tokens and making access control decisions is decentral-
ized, in that the gateways handle this locally without having to call the token
services or any other token verifying entity. One of the pitfalls of centralized
systems is that a breakdown in the central system paralyzes the remaining
system, however, should the token service(s) be down for a period of time, the
remaining microservices of the system are still able to function for as long as
the already issued tokens are still valid.
• R2: Preserve single responsibility of a microservice
The added token service(s) are only responsible for issuing tokens and since
access control is handled by a specific gateway and not the microservices them-
selves, we argue that the solution adheres to the single responsibility principle.
The only modification to the original microservices is that they must authen-
ticate with the token service(s) to obtain tokens, but this is not a business
capability or a piece of functionality, and so the core responsibilities of the
microservices have not been altered.
• R3: Trust nothing, verify everything
The solution introduces the policy gateway, and every microservice must trust
their own policy gateway. However, the solution also assumes that the gate-
ways are secure and can therefore be trusted. It is also easier to concentrate
development on securing the gateway instead of every single microservice, and
so it is likely better to only trust the gateway and not every other microservice
within the system.
The policy gateway does not establish any form of implied trust with other
microservices within the system, but instead, as R3 requires, verifies both
user-tokens and service-tokens for every request.
• R4: Traceability of requests
Every request within the system contains a user-token with the claim of the
initiating user, meeting this requirement. Passing down the user-token from
request to request also makes it possible to make authentic audit logs where
we can trace exactly which actions in the system are caused by which user.
• R5: Policy-based access control between services
The policy gateway is responsible for handling access control based on a policy.
The implementation of the policy gateway described in section 6.2 performs
==PAGE:73==
8.3 Performance
65
access control based on policies written in JSON, and so this requirement is
also met.
• R6: Prevent the confused deputy problem
As the simulated attacks in section 7.1 showed, a confused deputy (i.e.
a
compromised microservice) is limited in what effects it can have on the re-
maining system. The concrete example in Figure 7.2, where an attacker has a
valid service-token granting access to the User API for credit card information,
would be a successful confused deputy attack if the User policy did not require
a user-token proving that the initiating user does in fact own that data.
8.3
Performance
As detailed in section 7.2, performance tests were executed on the sock shop both
with and without the trust solution. The results of this was that the addition of our
trust solution came with a cost in the form of a 14.1% performance loss on average
in terms of throughput measured over five minutes.
With the introduction of the policy gateways that reside in front of every microser-
vice in the system to protect it, some side-effects that impact the performance of the
system were also introduced. The policy gateway receives requests, verifies them,
and then forwards them to the microservice it protects, compared to before where
these requests would go straight to the microservice. Naturally, this has resulted in
the amount of network calls to essentially double within the system. An extra re-
quest sent over the network will inevitably take more time in transit and execution,
than if it was not there, or if it happened inside the same process rather than over
the network.
Another important thing to note in relation to the performance tests is the amount
of work that is actually done inside the sock shop. The sock shop was created for
demonstration purposes and in reality it only performs very lightweight operations
within the system. As such, the static overhead that is inevitable when performing
more network calls might be proportionately bigger in a simple simulation system
like the sock shop, compared to a more complex system that actually performed
more demanding tasks.
In an attempt to reduce the performance impact of the solution, the policy gateway
has been optimized in the areas that were immediately obvious. The gateway was
also profiled as a part of this, but the delay from a request enters the gateway till it
has been verified and is forwarded is very short (less than 1 ms), and much of the
performance drawback seems to be from the added network calls.
Whether or not this 14.1% performance loss in the sock shop is acceptable, is hard
to definitively decide. In our opinion, 14.1% is acceptable when considering the
added value in terms of greater security in the system in a potential attack, as
demonstrated in section 7.1. The loss is further justified, given how the network
==PAGE:74==
66
8 Discussion
calls within the system have essentially doubled to provide this added security. The
implementation of the trust solution was made as a proof-of-concept, primarily to
illustrate the security aspects of the designed solution, and therefore performance has
also not been the first priority, so there might be further improvements to be made.
If the performance loss is too great for a given microservice system, one approach
to minimize this could be to add the policy gateway within the microservice itself,
rather than having it as a security sidecar, as it is in our approach. This does,
however, introduce an additional responsibility to each microservice, by having it
within the same service, and as such this is not the recommended approach.
8.4
Future Work
From the systematic literature review of security in microservices, an area of straight-
forward future work lies in the research directions that were suggested in subsec-
tion 3.4.1. Here, some of the key topics for future work were in figuring out how
to handle inter-service trust, solving issues that become increasingly complex in a
distributed setup such as authentication of both users and services, and managing
the information flow, just to name some of the general areas. Beyond these, how-
ever, there are also a number of other directions for future work in relation to our
designed and implemented solution for trust.
For the solution presented in this thesis, the focus has been on a microservice system
where services communicate with each other through requests sent over HTTP to
their APIs. One approach that is also prevalent in the industry when working with
microservices, is the use of message queues to provide a more decoupled and event-
driven system. The solution presented here does not automatically work for such a
scenario, yet the same ideas can still be used for this. This does, however, require
some work, as the policy gateway is not necessarily usable in the exact same way.
Its functionality must instead be performed when a service pulls a message of the
queue, where the same ideas of tokens and policies can be reused. Here lies then a
future task to design the appropriate security measures in this scenario, implement
it, and test the correctness and performance of the solution in this setup.
One area of future work is that of the policies and the policy gateway. In the proof-
of-concept implementation presented in this thesis, any policies specified regarding
other services and users are done in the same policy file and are very much linked
together. An improvement of this would be to separate the policies to give a better
separation of concerns. This would also enable the creation of policies such as ”only
users of this specific type is allowed to perform this type of request” without also
influencing the logic behind the service policies.
For the proof-of-concept implementation it was chosen that the policy files were to
be written manually for each microservice. However, a large microservice system
might already contain hundreds of services, and new additions along with changes to
existing services might happen so frequently, that it is infeasible for the developers
to create and maintain such policy files. A future task would then be to create a way
==PAGE:75==
8.4 Future Work
67
for these policy files to, at least to some extent, be automatically generated before
this solution is feasible to implement in a large scale system. The generation could
for example be based on the source code, though this then adds the assumption that
the source code is always in a state where it can be trusted.
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
In this thesis we set out to research the current state of security in the microservice
architecture and to solve a current and relevant problem within this realm.
To highlight the security challenges within the microservice architecture, along with
approaches presented to mitigate these, we performed a systematic literature review
on the topic of security in microservices. A methodical approach has been followed
for the execution of the study to increase the quality, and most steps of the study
were conducted by both of the authors to reduce selection bias. Following this, both
forward and backwards snowballing were utilized to further reduce selection bias
and to ensure the inclusion of any key publications that might have been missed.
This resulted in 38 publications which were read and analysed to answer the research
questions posed.
A total of four research questions were sought answered in the literature review:
(RQ1) how the distribution of articles that relate to security in microservices are
spread throughout the years, (RQ2) which security challenges in microservices are
mentioned in the literature, (RQ3) how security in microservices differs from secu-
rity in monoliths, and (RQ4) which security frameworks or approaches have been
proposed for microservices.
A quantitative analysis was performed to answer RQ1 which showed that security
in microservices has been mentioned increasingly in publications especially since
2018. Here it should be noted that publications were included as long as they in
some capacity touched upon security in microservices so the articles found do not
necessarily have security as their main topic. The security challenges covered in the
corpus were analysed, categorized and illustrated to answer RQ2. This resulted in
the main topics being identity and access management, network security, trust, data
security and other topics with a number of topics beneath each of them that were
all elaborated on. For RQ3 the differences in security presented in the literature
were detailed, while also covering which topics from RQ2 were new or significant
for microservices. The frameworks or approaches that have been proposed in the
publications were also categorized and explained in broad terms to answer RQ4.
Based on the answers to these research questions it was possible to examine which se-
curity challenges are most significant and which ones are lacking in terms of solutions
to solve it sufficiently. Open research directions were found within the topics of user
authentication, service-to-service authentication, network, trust, and information
flow. Several of the topics identified in RQ2 were not found to have corresponding
==PAGE:78==
70
9 Conclusion
solutions in the literature. Given how service-to-service trust is a challenge intro-
duced with the microservice architecture and the consequences of ignoring it can
be grave, we determined that trust is one of the biggest security challenges in mi-
croservices and selected this as a challenge to present a solution for. This is also
due to the fact that trust also extends into identity and access management which
is another big security challenge in microservices that does however have a number
of approaches for a solution proposed in the literature.
Six requirements were defined for a trust solution: (R1) keep decentralization; (R2)
preserve single responsibility of a microservice; (R3) trust nothing, verify everything;
(R4) traceability of requests; (R5) policy-based access control between services; and
(R6) prevent the confused deputy problem. These requirements are meant to both
ensure that a solution achieve the security goals, and that it adheres to the key
elements of the microservice architecture.
We presented a solution design, divided into two parts considering, respectively, the
interaction between services and the interaction between a user and a service. In the
combined solution, both users and microservices authenticate with token services
to obtain JSON web tokens, and these tokens are sent along with every request
between microservices, such that any microservice that receives an API request can
verify which microservice made the request and what user initiated the request. A
policy-gateway is then placed in front of each microservice, with the responsibility
of verifying tokens and enforcing access control policies before deciding whether to
allow or disallow a request to the microservice it protects. Having each microservice
be protected by an access control policy in this way allows for more decoupled
security than in a monolith and gives some of the same benefits to the security
solution that the microservice architecture itself provides, such as scalability and
decoupled deployment.
The designed solution has been implemented into the sock shop – an open-source
microservice demo system created by Weaveworks.
The policy gateway was im-
plemented as a lightweight microservice in the Go language, and its policies are
described in JSON. Furthermore, the service- and user-token services have been im-
plemented as a stand-alone microservice written in Go and as an integrated part
of the original user-microservice, respectively. The sock shop deployment has then
been updated to include the policy gateways and token services, and the necessary ex-
isting microservices have been altered such that they correctly obtain service-tokens
and pass around the user-tokens.
Finally, the implemented solution has been tested to determine whether the solution
is feasible. The implementation works correctly in that it does not inhibit existing
functionality of the sock shop and that it performs access control on requests between
microservices, and the requirements formulated for the solution were found to be
met in a satisfactory manner. The performance of the system with the security
solution is, on average, 14.1% lower than that of the old sock shop with no security
solution, measured in the amount of user requests the system handles per second
over a period of five minutes, which is likely a reasonable trade-off in most systems.
==PAGE:79==
9 Conclusion
71
Summarizing, the objectives of the thesis – identifying open challenges within secu-
rity in microservices, designing a proof-of-concept to one of these challenges, and
implementing and testing said design – have been successfully met.
==PAGE:80==
72
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Token Service
The service responsible for issuing service-tokens to the remaining microservices
in the sock shop is found at https://github.com/cbrockhoff/trust-solution/
tree/master/microservices/token-service and it is written in Go.
==PAGE:82==
74
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
The Altered Sock Shop
The repository at https://github.com/cbrockhoff/trust-solution contains the
source code created and altered by the authors during this thesis. The microservices
that have been changed are described briefly below.
Front-end
The front-end microservice, written in JavaScript, is found at https://github.com/
cbrockhoff/trust-solution/tree/master/microservices/front-end which is
a clone from https://github.com/microservices-demo/front-end which has
been altered such that the microservice fetches service-tokens and passes user-tokens
around correctly. In the load-tests a version of this that does not use HTTPS to
call other microservices was used.
Orders
The orders microservice, written in Java, is found at https://github.com/
cbrockhoff/trust-solution/tree/master/microservices/orders which is a
clone from https://github.com/microservices-demo/orders which has been al-
tered such that the microservice fetches service-tokens and passes user-tokens, re-
ceived from the front-end microservice, around correctly. In the load-tests a version
of this that does not use HTTPS to call other microservices was used.
User
The
user
microservice,
written
in
Go,
is
found
at
https://github.com/
cbrockhoff/trust-solution/tree/master/microservices/user which is a clone
from https://github.com/microservices-demo/user which has been altered
such that it creates a user-token for the user when he logs in.
Deployment
The sock shop is deployed with the Kubernetes configuration found at https:
//github.com/cbrockhoff/trust-solution/blob/master/deploy/kubernetes_
==PAGE:84==
76
B The Altered Sock Shop
config.yaml which is an altered version of https://github.com/cbrockhoff/
trust-solution/blob/master/deploy/original_kubernetes_config.yaml
which
is
originally
found
at
https://github.com/microservices-demo/
microservices-demo/blob/master/deploy/kubernetes/complete-demo.yaml.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX C
Policy Gateway
The implementation of the this microservice, written in Go, is found in https:
//github.com/cbrockhoff/trust-solution/tree/master/microservices/
policy-gateway. In the load-tests, a version of this microservice that does not use
TLS was used.
==PAGE:86==
78
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX D
Load Test
The load-test run in this thesis were run using Locust [32] with the locustfile
found at https://github.com/cbrockhoff/trust-solution/blob/master/load-
test/locustfile.py which is an altered version of the file found at https://
github.com/microservices-demo/load-test/blob/master/locustfile.py.
It
was run with the following command
locust \
--no-web \
--only-summary \
--clients=100 \
--hatch-rate=100 \
--run-time=5m \
-H http://IP:30001
where IP is the IP of the machine running the sock shop in Kubernetes.
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Mohsen
Ahmadvand
et
al.
“Integrity
Protection
Against
Insiders
in
Microservice-Based Infrastructures: From Threats to a Security Framework”.
In: Software Technologies: Applications and Foundations. Edited by Manuel
Mazzara, Iulian Ober, and Gwen Salaün. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2018, pages 573–588. isbn: 978-3-030-04771-9.
[2]
Nuha Alshuqayran, Nour Ali, and Roger Evans. “A systematic mapping study
in microservice architecture”. In: 2016 IEEE 9th International Conference on
Service-Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA). IEEE. 2016, pages 44–
51.
[3]
Auth0. JSON Web Tokens - jwt.io. https://jwt.io. (Accessed: January 9,
2020).
[4]
A.
Bánáti
et
al.
“Authentication
and
authorization
orchestrator
for
microservice-based software architectures”. In: 2018 41st International Con-
vention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Mi-
croelectronics (MIPRO). May 2018, pages 1180–1184. doi: 10.23919/MIPRO.
2018.8400214.
[5]
A. Bandeira et al. “We Need to Talk About Microservices: an Analysis from
the Discussions on StackOverflow”. In: 2019 IEEE/ACM 16th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). May 2019, pages 255–
259. doi: 10.1109/MSR.2019.00051.
[6]
J. Bogner et al. “Microservices in Industry: Insights into Technologies, Char-
acteristics, and Software Quality”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Software Architecture Companion (ICSA-C). March 2019, pages 187–195. doi:
10.1109/ICSA-C.2019.00041.
[7]
Harsh Chawla and Hemant Kathuria. “Implementing Microservices”. In: Build-
ing Microservices Applications on Microsoft Azure: Designing, Developing,
Deploying, and Monitoring. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pages 21–41. isbn:
978-1-4842-4828-7. doi: 10.1007/978- 1- 4842- 4828- 7_2. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4828-7_2.
[8]
Harsh Chawla and Hemant Kathuria. “Securing Microservices”. In: Building
Microservices Applications on Microsoft Azure: Designing, Developing, De-
ploying, and Monitoring. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pages 193–223. isbn:
978-1-4842-4828-7. doi: 10.1007/978- 1- 4842- 4828- 7_7. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4828-7_7.
==PAGE:90==
82
Bibliography
[9]
Jacqui Chetty and Marijke Coetzee. “Towards an information security frame-
work for service-oriented architecture”. In: 2010 Information Security for South
Africa. IEEE. 2010, pages 1–8.
[10]
Binildas Christudas. “Microservices Architecture”. In: Practical Microservices
Architectural Patterns: Event-Based Java Microservices with Spring Boot and
Spring Cloud. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pages 55–86. isbn: 978-1-4842-4501-
9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-4501-9_4. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4842-4501-9_4.
[11]
Binildas Christudas. “Microservices Security”. In: Practical Microservices Ar-
chitectural Patterns: Event-Based Java Microservices with Spring Boot and
Spring Cloud. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pages 733–777. isbn: 978-1-4842-
4501-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-4501-9_18. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4842-4501-9_18.
[12]
Wm Arthur Conklin et al. Principles of computer security. McGraw-Hill Edu-
cation Group, 2015.
[13]
Paolo Di Francesco, Patricia Lago, and Ivano Malavolta. “Architecting with
microservices: A systematic mapping study”. In: Journal of Systems and Soft-
ware 150 (2019), pages 77–97.
[14]
Tim Dierks and Eric Rescorla. “RFC 5246-the transport layer security (TLS)
protocol version 1.2”. In: Internet Engineering Task Force (2008).
[15]
Docker Inc. Docker Desktop for Mac and Windows | Docker. https://www.
docker.com/products/docker-desktop. (Accessed: January 24, 2020). 2020.
[16]
Docker Inc. Docker Hub. https://hub.docker.com/. (Accessed: January 17,
2020). 2020.
[17]
Docker Inc. Dockerfile reference | Docker Documentation. https:/ /docs.
docker . com / engine / reference / builder/. (Accessed: January 8, 2020).
2019.
[18]
Docker Inc. Enterprise Container Platform | Docker. https://www.docker.
com/. (Accessed: January 8, 2020). 2020.
[19]
Docker Inc. Overview of Docker Compose | Docker Documentation. https:
//docs.docker.com/compose/. (Accessed: January 8, 2020). 2019.
[20]
Docker Inc. Swarm mode overview | Docker Documentation. https://docs.
docker.com/engine/swarm/. (Accessed: January 8, 2020). 2019.
[21]
Nicola Dragoni et al. “Microservices: Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow”. In:
Present and Ulterior Software Engineering. Edited by Manuel Mazzara and
Bertrand Meyer. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pages 195–
216. isbn: 978-3-319-67425-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-67425-4_12. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67425-4_12.
[22]
C. Esposito, A. Castiglione, and K. R. Choo. “Challenges in Delivering Soft-
ware in the Cloud as Microservices”. In: IEEE Cloud Computing 3.5 (Septem-
ber 2016), pages 10–14. issn: 2325-6095. doi: 10.1109/MCC.2016.105.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
83
[23]
European Commission. New era for data protection in the EU: what changes
after May 2018. https : / / ec . europa . eu / commission / sites / beta -
political/files/data- protection- factsheet- changes_en.pdf. (Ac-
cessed: January 24, 2020). May 2018.
[24]
Martin Fowler and James Lewis. Microservices. March 2014. url: https://
martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html.
[25]
John E Gaffney. “Estimating the number of faults in code”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering 4 (1984), pages 459–464.
[26]
C. Gerking and D. Schubert. “Component-Based Refinement and Verification
of Information-Flow Security Policies for Cyber-Physical Microservice Archi-
tectures”. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture
(ICSA). March 2019, pages 61–70. doi: 10.1109/ICSA.2019.00015.
[27]
Google. Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) | Google Cloud. https://cloud.
google.com/kubernetes-engine/. (Accessed: January 8, 2020).
[28]
Jonathan Gossels and Richard Mackey Jr. “Service oriented architecture: Se-
curity challenges”. In: SystemEXPERTS Corporation (2005).
[29]
Norm Hardy. “The Confused Deputy:(or why capabilities might have been
invented)”. In: ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review 22.4 (1988), pages 36–
38.
[30]
S. Haselböck, R. Weinreich, and G. Buchgeher. “An Expert Interview Study
on Areas of Microservice Design”. In: 2018 IEEE 11th Conference on Service-
Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA). November 2018, pages 137–
144. doi: 10.1109/SOCA.2018.00028.
[31]
Xiuyu He and Xudong Yang. “Authentication and Authorization of End User
in Microservice Architecture”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol-
ume 910. 1. IOP Publishing. 2017, page 012060.
[32]
Jonatan Heyman et al. Locust - a modern load testing framework. https:
//locust.io/. (Accessed: January 20, 2020).
[33]
M. Hilbrich and M. Frank. “Abstract Fog in the Bottle - Trends of Comput-
ing in History and Future”. In: 2018 44th Euromicro Conference on Software
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA). August 2018, pages 519–522.
doi: 10.1109/SEAA.2018.00089.
[34]
Mehmet Sinan İnci et al. “Seriously, get off my cloud! Cross-VM RSA Key
Recovery in a Public Cloud”. In: IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2015.1-15
(2015).
[35]
Kasun Indrasiri and Prabath Siriwardena. “Microservices Security Fundamen-
tals”. In: Microservices for the Enterprise: Designing, Developing, and Deploy-
ing. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2018, pages 313–345. isbn: 978-1-4842-3858-5. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4842-3858-5_11. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4842-3858-5_11.
==PAGE:92==
84
Bibliography
[36]
Kai Jander, Lars Braubach, and Alexander Pokahr. “Defense-in-depth and
Role Authentication for Microservice Systems”. In: Procedia Computer Science
130 (2018). The 9th International Conference on Ambient Systems, Networks
and Technologies (ANT 2018) / The 8th International Conference on Sus-
tainable Energy Information Technology (SEIT-2018) / Affiliated Workshops,
pages 456–463. issn: 1877-0509. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.
2018.04.047. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1877050918304009.
[37]
Christina Terese Joseph and K Chandrasekaran. “Straddling the crevasse: A
review of microservice software architecture foundations and recent advance-
ments”. In: Software: Practice and Experience (2019).
[38]
K Larsen, P Pettersson, and W Yi. “Uppaal”. In: Uppsala University, Sweden
and Aalborg University, Denmark.[Online]. Available: http://www.uppaal.com
(1997).
[39]
Xing Li, Yan Chen, and Zhiqiang Lin. “Towards Automated Inter-Service Au-
thorization for Microservice Applications”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIG-
COMM 2019 Conference Posters and Demos. SIGCOMM Posters and De-
mos ’19. Beijing, China: ACM, 2019, pages 3–5. isbn: 978-1-4503-6886-5. doi:
10.1145/3342280.3342288. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3342280.
3342288.
[40]
Hung-Jen Liao et al. “Intrusion detection system: A comprehensive review”.
In: Journal of Network and Computer Applications 36.1 (2013), pages 16–24.
[41]
Raj Malhotra. “Deep Dive Into Microservices Development with Java”. In:
Rapid Java Persistence and Microservices: Persistence Made Easy Using Java
EE8, JPA and Spring. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pages 141–220. isbn: 978-
1-4842-4476-0. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-4476-0_6. url: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4476-0_6.
[42]
Gastón Márquez and Hernán Astudillo. “Identifying Availability Tactics to
Support Security Architectural Design of Microservice-based Systems”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 13th European Conference on Software Architecture - Volume 2.
ECSA ’19. Paris, France: ACM, 2019, pages 123–129. isbn: 978-1-4503-7142-1.
doi: 10.1145/3344948.3344996. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
3344948.3344996.
[43]
Microsoft. API Management: Establish API Gateways. https : / / azure .
microsoft.com/en- us/services/api- management/. (Accessed: October
23, 2019). 2019.
[44]
Fabrizio Montesi and Janine Weber. “Circuit breakers, discovery, and API
gateways in microservices”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.05830 (2016).
[45]
Adrian Mouat. Using Docker: Developing and Deploying Software with Con-
tainers. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2015.
[46]
Irakli Nadareishvili et al. Microservice architecture: aligning principles, prac-
tices, and culture. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2016.
[47]
A. Nehme et al. “Securing Microservices”. In: IT Professional 21.1 (January
2019), pages 42–49. issn: 1520-9202. doi: 10.1109/MITP.2018.2876987.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
85
[48]
Antonio Nehme et al. “Fine-Grained Access Control for Microservices”. In:
Foundations and Practice of Security. Edited by Nur Zincir-Heywood et al.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pages 285–300. isbn: 978-3-
030-18419-3.
[49]
Sam Newman. Building Microservices: Designing Fine-Grained Systems. 1st.
O’Reilly Media, February 2015, page 280. isbn: 978-1491950357.
[50]
Quy Nguyen and Oras Baker. “Applying Spring Security Framework and
OAuth2 To Protect Microservice Architecture API”. In: Journal of Software
(2019).
[51]
Peter Nkomo and Marijke Coetzee. “Software Development Activities for Se-
cure Microservices”. In: Computational Science and Its Applications – ICCSA
2019. Edited by Sanjay Misra et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2019, pages 573–585. isbn: 978-3-030-24308-1.
[52]
Christian Otterstad and Tetiana Yarygina. “Low-Level Exploitation Mitiga-
tion by Diverse Microservices”. In: Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing.
Edited by Flavio De Paoli, Stefan Schulte, and Einar Broch Johnsen. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2017, pages 49–56. isbn: 978-3-319-67262-5.
[53]
Jonas Palm. Service isolation in large microservice networks. 2018.
[54]
Kai Petersen, Sairam Vakkalanka, and Ludwik Kuzniarz. “Guidelines for con-
ducting systematic mapping studies in software engineering: An update”. In:
Information and Software Technology 64 (2015), pages 1–18. issn: 0950-5849.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.03.007. url: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584915000646.
[55]
Pivotal Software Inc. Messaging that just works - RabbitMQ. (Accessed: Jan-
uary 8, 2020). 2020. url: https://www.rabbitmq.com/.
[56]
D. Preuveneers and W. Joosen. “Towards Multi-party Policy-based Access
Control in Federations of Cloud and Edge Microservices”. In: 2019 IEEE Eu-
ropean Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS PW). June
2019, pages 29–38. doi: 10.1109/EuroSPW.2019.00010.
[57]
Davy Preuveneers and Wouter Joosen. “Access control with delegated autho-
rization policy evaluation for data-driven microservice workflows”. In: Future
Internet 9.4 (2017), page 58.
[58]
Daniel Richter, Tim Neumann, and Andreas Polze. “Security Considerations
for Microservice Architectures.” In: CLOSER. 2018, pages 608–615.
[59]
Arnon Rotem-Gal-Oz. “Fallacies of distributed computing explained”. In: URL
http://www.rgoarchitects.com/Files/fallacies.pdf 20 (2006).
[60]
Jacopo Soldani, Damian Andrew Tamburri, and Willem-Jan Van Den Heuvel.
“The pains and gains of microservices: A systematic grey literature review”. In:
Journal of Systems and Software 146 (2018), pages 215–232.
[61]
Andrew van der Stock, Brian Glas, and T Gigler. “OWASP Top 10 2017”. In:
The Ten Most Critical Web Application Security Risks (2017).
==PAGE:94==
86
Bibliography
[62]
Y. Sun, S. Nanda, and T. Jaeger. “Security-as-a-Service for Microservices-
Based Cloud Applications”. In: 2015 IEEE 7th International Conference
on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom). November 2015,
pages 50–57. doi: 10.1109/CloudCom.2015.93.
[63]
The Kubernetes Authors. Deployments - Kubernetes. https://kubernetes.
io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/. (Accessed: Jan-
uary 17, 2020). 2019.
[64]
The Kubernetes Authors. Pods - Kubernetes. https://kubernetes.io/docs/
concepts/workloads/pods/pod/. (Accessed: January 17, 2020). 2019.
[65]
The Kubernetes Authors. Production-Grade Container Orchestration - Kuber-
netes. https://kubernetes.io/. (Accessed: January 8, 2020). 2020.
[66]
The Kubernetes Authors. Service - Kubernetes. https://kubernetes.io/
docs/concepts/services-networking/service/. (Accessed: January 17,
2020). 2019.
[67]
ThreeMammals. Ocelot. https : / / threemammals . com / ocelot. (Accessed:
October 23, 2019). 2018.
[68]
Kennedy A. Torkura, Muhammad I.H. Sukmana, and Christoph Meinel. “In-
tegrating Continuous Security Assessments in Microservices and Cloud Native
Applications”. In: Proceedings of the10th International Conference on Utility
and Cloud Computing. UCC ’17. Austin, Texas, USA: ACM, 2017, pages 171–
180. isbn: 978-1-4503-5149-2. doi: 10.1145/3147213.3147229. url: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/3147213.3147229.
[69]
D. Trihinas et al. “DevOps as a Service: Pushing the Boundaries of Microser-
vice Adoption”. In: IEEE Internet Computing 22.3 (May 2018), pages 65–71.
issn: 1089-7801. doi: 10.1109/MIC.2018.032501519.
[70]
Kevin Walsh and John Manferdelli. “Mechanisms for Mutual Attested Mi-
croservice Communication”. In: Companion Proceedings of the10th Interna-
tional Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing. UCC ’17 Companion.
Austin, Texas, USA: ACM, 2017, pages 59–64. isbn: 978-1-4503-5195-9. doi:
10.1145/3147234.3148102. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3147234.
3148102.
[71]
Ruaridh Watt. Proof-of-Possession Tokens in Microservice Architectures. 2018.
[72]
Weaveworks. Microservices Demo: Sock Shop. 2017. url: https : / /
microservices-demo.github.io/.
[73]
Claes Wohlin. “Guidelines for Snowballing in Systematic Literature Studies
and a Replication in Software Engineering”. In: Proceedings of the 18th Inter-
national Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering.
EASE ’14. London, England, United Kingdom: ACM, 2014, 38:1–38:10. isbn:
978-1-4503-2476-2. doi: 10.1145/2601248.2601268. url: http://doi.acm.
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/2601248.2601268.
[74]
T. Yarygina and A. H. Bagge. “Overcoming Security Challenges in Microser-
vice Architectures”. In: 2018 IEEE Symposium on Service-Oriented System En-
gineering (SOSE). March 2018, pages 11–20. doi: 10.1109/SOSE.2018.00011.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
87
[75]
Tetiana Yarygina and Christian Otterstad. “A Game of Microservices: Au-
tomated Intrusion Response”. In: Distributed Applications and Interoperable
Systems. Edited by Silvia Bonomi and Etienne Rivière. Cham: Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2018, pages 169–177. isbn: 978-3-319-93767-0.
[76]
Zirak Zaheer et al. “eZTrust: Network-Independent Zero-Trust Perimeteriza-
tion for Microservices”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on SDN
Research. SOSR ’19. San Jose, CA, USA: ACM, 2019, pages 49–61. isbn: 978-
1-4503-6710-3. doi: 10.1145/3314148.3314349. url: http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/3314148.3314349.
[77]
Liming Zhu, Len Bass, and George Champlin-Scharff. “DevOps and its prac-
tices”. In: IEEE Software 33.3 (2016), pages 32–34.
==PAGE:96==
