==PAGE:1==
Live Road Assessment based on modern cars: A
prototypical geographic information system for
road maintenance planning
Markus Berthold
26. January 2020
Supervised by: Ekkart Kindler
Technical University of Denmark
1
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
2
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at DTU Compute at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in
Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, 26 January 2020
Markus Berthold
3
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (English)
The goal of this thesis was to design a prototypical geographic information sys-
tem to support maintenance planning focused on the condition and quality data
of Danish roads from LiRA. By analyzing related software systems, several key
aspects of the domain were extracted. These were used in combination with the
handling of the condition and quality data from LiRA to design and implement
the prototype LiRA Map. The prototype was then evaluated based on feedback
provided by an end user and a set of acceptance criteria to investigate its re-
sults as a proposed geographic information system. It was also evaluated by a
developer to investigate its potential of being further developed or if the results
of it could help develop a ﬁnished product.
4
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (Danish)
M˚alet for denne afhandling var at designe en prototypisk geograﬁsk information-
ssystem til understøttelse af vedligeholdelsesplanlægning med fokus p˚a tilstands-
data af danske veje fra LiRA. Ved at analysere relaterede softwaresystemer, blev
ﬂere nøgleaspekter af domænet udvundet. Disse blev brugt i kombination med
h˚andteringen af tilstandsdata fra LiRA til at designe og implementere proto-
typen LiRA Map.
Prototypen blev evalueret baseret p˚a feedback leveret af
en slutbruger og et sæt acceptkriterer for at undersøge dens resultater som et
foresl˚aet geograﬁsk informationssystem. Den blev ogs˚a evalueret af en udvikler
for at undersøge dens potentiale for at blive videreudviklet eller hvis resultaterne
af den kunne hjælpe med at udvikle et slutprodukt.
5
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Ekkart Kindler for supervising this project and for pro-
viding this interesting opportunity. Our weekly meetings and your guidance
throughout the project were of great value to me.
I would also like to thank Shahrzad M. Pour for the wide range of support,
contributing to so many aspects of this project.
Lastly, I would also like to thank Matteo Pettinari for advising me and for
the interesting research of LiRA.
6
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
3
Abstract (English)
4
Abstract (Danish)
5
Acknowledgements
6
1
Introduction
10
2
Methodology
12
2.1
Design Science
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Agile Software Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Domain Analysis
16
3.1
Rosy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Vejman
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
OpenStreetMap (OSM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
End Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Domain Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Design
24
4.1
User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
OpenStreetMap (OSM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2
Mapsui
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.3
Shapeﬁle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.4
Database & Query Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Implementation
30
5.1
OpenStreetMap (OSM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Mapsui
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Shapeﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Database & Query Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Evaluation
45
6.1
Evaluation by an end user . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Technical evaluation by a developer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Acceptance Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Future Work
51
7
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusion
54
Appendices
55
A Glossary
55
B Technical Evaluation
58
Bibliography
63
8
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1
Design Science cycles [13]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Domain model of Rosy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
An example of the visualization from OSM
. . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Domain model of Vejman
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Domain model of this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Component diagram of LiRA Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7
The namespace and grid element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
OSM layer added as tiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
9
The default starting position of the map . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
10
The rendered world with only tiles provided by OSM . . . . . . .
32
11
The creation of the Shapeﬁle object and the layer to the map . .
32
12
The rendered world with the tiles from OSM and the shapeﬁle
layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
13
The ﬁrst 20 rows of the .dbf ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
14
The logical model design of the database . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
15
The function getSectionsOfRoad
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
16
The function for selecting a road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
17
The rendered world when a road is selected . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
18
The button ”Go” when using the address bar as its input . . . .
39
19
The button ”Go” when using the selected road as its input
. . .
40
20
Distance between all vertices and their respective lengths
. . . .
41
21
Finding two surrounding vertices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
22
Formula for linear interpolation inserted with values . . . . . . .
42
23
The rendered world with KPI values being visualized . . . . . . .
42
24
The function getSectionsAndAttributeOfAllRoads for retrieving
secentions and their values of a chosen attribute . . . . . . . . . .
43
25
The rendered world with IRI values being visualized . . . . . . .
44
9
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Live Road Assessment based on modern cars [3] (LiRA) is a project on assessing
the condition and quality of Danish roads. By taking advantage of sensors built
into modern cars, data can be extracted and analyzed to directly or indirectly
show the condition and quality of the road. This diﬀers from the traditional
method currently in use, which is a method of manually measuring once a year
through other machinery. The focus of LiRA is to rather have continuous mon-
itoring and to automate the process through collecting data with modern cars
to yield a higher eﬃciency and reduced operation cost. For this, software will
be developed to help achieving diﬀerent aspects of the project, one being this:
a geographic information system (GIS) for maintenance planning.
The end user, who is from The Danish Road Directorate, planning the mainte-
nance of Danish roads, needs an information system to facilitate their mainte-
nance planning such that they can easily store, ﬁnd, and manage their prioritized
data in a precise manner. Presentation and the ability to work with that infor-
mation is important as the end user should be able to view their data without
diﬃculty in a visualized overview and furthermore also be able to view that
data in a simpler textual representation. Having such piece of software that can
support the end user’s current activities and with a focus on live information in
a clear overview, could be beneﬁcial in the process of the end user’s maintenance
planning.
Such piece of software is to be constructed with the three cycles in design sci-
ence in mind, namely The Relevance Cycle, The Rigor Cycle, and The Design
Cycle. These three cycles will be beneﬁcial for the design of the software and
improvement of it. The piece of software, as of now, will be an application that
is open source. It will consist of a visualized overview of an interactive 2D map
of the Danish roads overlaid with information of the condition and quality of
the roads, together with textual representation of the very same data. It will
be able to support the end users in their process of road maintenance planning
with features that are focused on supporting their current activities. Potential
features to include could be the visualization of the current cost to repair vs.
the potential future estimated cost to repair (considering the development of
the road condition). The application could also be able to show current top is-
sues, try to predict potential future issues based on their development, together
with showing the potential rising cost of postponing repair on speciﬁc positions.
With that information, the application could also be showing a prioritized list
of issues which is an estimate based on current information, development and
potential increase in cost of repair. The application could also allow for the
end user to manually add data of condition and quality of roads that did not
originate from LiRA, and furthermore allow the end user to specify when and
where a maintenance has occurred.
The information of the condition and quality of the roads will be stored in
10
==PAGE:11==
a relational database, which is for both current and historical data. By actively
picking up incoming data, preparing and storing it in the database, the appli-
cation could account for this and update. The application could be able to use
the new data together with older data. This will produce a view of the current
condition and quality of the roads while also keeping historical data to produce
context and development information.
This piece of software will work together with LiRA, in which after raw data
has been collected by sensors in cars and translated through the use of ma-
chine learning, this piece of software will continue the process as the geographic
information system with the goal of facilitating the process of the end users’
maintenance planning.
It will serve as an information system for collecting,
storing and managing data of the condition and quality of the Danish roads.
This piece of software will therefore from now on be known as LiRA Map.
The possible results this project could achieve would be the learning of the
requirements needed to produce such software and for providing a core solution.
The knowledge acquired from this project can then be extended and used in the
development of a ﬁnished product.
11
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
This chapter discusses the strategy and approach used in this project and the
research question. The chapter therefore also presents a description of the three
cycles in Design Science together with how they are used in the project. Fur-
thermore, the process of agile software development is also described together
with how it is used.
2.1
Design Science
This piece of software will be constructed with the three design science cycles in
mind, namely The Relevance Cycle, The Rigor Cycle, and The Design Cycle [13].
Design Science can be a beneﬁcial tool to use when building a new information
system, but is also beneﬁcial for the surrounding environment. As through the
use of Design Science, it can help the process of building a new information
system, which in the end should be an improvement to the environment itself.
The three cycles can be seen in Figure 1, where they are incorporated with the
environment, the design science research, and the knowledge base.
Figure 1: Design Science cycles [13]
Before discussing each cycle, the environment, the design science research, and
the knowledge base, found in Figure 1, are important to understand before-
hand. The environment is the space in which people, organizations and existing
technologies are located. Inside the environment are unsolved problems or op-
portunities that would beneﬁt the environment if solutions were found. The
design science research is the project that tries to answer a research question
relevant to problems in the environment. The answer is based on an imple-
mentation and evaluation of a solution to a problem. The knowledge base is
the space in which relevant knowledge of best practice theories and methods
exist. They are the scientiﬁc tools, experience and expertise in which the design
science research can apply [14].
12
==PAGE:13==
The Relevance Cycle acts as the process for obtaining the requirements of
this piece of software in context to addressing the problems in the environment,
and to deﬁne the acceptance criteria for later evaluation of the implemented
solution. The results of that evaluation might reveal ﬂaws in the implemented
piece of software, in which a new iteration of the relevance cycle might provide
new requirements or new acceptance criteria.
The requirements obtained for this project have been discovered through the
process of the domain analysis and the creation of the user stories. These act
as the requirements for LiRA Map, and have acceptance criteria that are used
for deciding if LiRA Map has been successfully implemented. The acceptance
criteria derived in this cycle are developed through User Stories and are also
presented in Chapter 4.1 User Stories.
The Rigor Cycle acts as the process for providing this project with informa-
tion already gained from previous projects and existing knowledge. This makes
it possible to learn what is already known from the knowledge base. This cycle
is also needed to ensure the innovation of this piece of software with reference
to what already exists. It is important that the piece of software produces new
research contributions and does not become a routine design of what already
exists.
The appropriate knowledge that has been drawn from the knowledge base, are
the aspects discovered from Chapter 3 Domain Analysis. They were developed
from previous projects’ experience and are to be reused in this project. The
new contribution, which diﬀerentiates LiRA Map from being a routine design,
is the method of handling the condition and quality of roads derived from LiRA.
The Design Cycle is the process of implementing and evaluating the intended
piece of software and relies on the output from the Relevance Cycle and the
Rigor Cycle.
It is important in the Design Cycle to consider multiple solu-
tions to a problem, and implement the solution that satisﬁes the requirements
derived from the Relevance Cycle with the knowledge derived from the Rigor
Cycle. Several iterations of this cycle are necessary in order to implement, eval-
uate and generate feedback for possible required changes in the implementation.
Through the gained input from the other cycles, solutions have been imple-
mented to create LiRA Map, and is presented in Chapter 5 Implementation.
Evaluation of that implementation through the use of acceptance criteria de-
rived from the Relevance Cycle is presented in Chapter 6 Evaluation. Together,
these three cycles are beneﬁcial for the design of LiRA Map and will help im-
prove it at every iteration.
13
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Agile Software Development
LiRA Map will be developed through the process and some principles from agile
software development [15]. As there are many principles behind agile software
development [8], only the few that were practiced in this project will be dis-
cussed.
Agile software development is an approach available when developing a piece of
software. It is focused around the developed product, such that it can stay ﬂex-
ible to changes throughout the development. Therefore, the requirements are
not deﬁned and rigid before development has begun, but instead derived and
modiﬁed throughout the development. As factors might change due to newer
discoveries, the requirements might change and therefore need modiﬁcations.
Often seen in other processes than agile software development, is that the re-
quirements that were deﬁned from the beginning are not necessarily satisfying
the needs at the end of a project anymore. Thus, being open to changing re-
quirements is one of the advantages from agile software development. It is, of
that reason, important to keep the structure of the developed piece of software
ﬂexible such that it can better adapt to these coming changes.
In order for the project to be agile, interaction between the developer and the
end users is necessary. This helps guide the project and development of the
piece of software. Collaboration between the developer and end users provides
feedback and gives a higher chance of this project being successful. As end users
are more involved, they also gain a better understanding of what satisﬁes their
requirements. This also lessen the eﬀectiveness of rigid requirements that are
deﬁned prior to the development.
The requirements for LiRA Map are not deﬁned and set prior to start of its
development, but instead derived and modiﬁed throughout the development.
Speciﬁcally, the requirements are based on the user stories that were devel-
oped incrementally.
These user stories were shaped based on conversations
between the developer and end users, and are presented in chapter 4.1 User
Stories.
2.3
Research Question
In terms of the objective of this project, a research question has been formu-
lated to specify what this project intends to answer. It pinpoints the purpose
of this project, and provides the goals. The presented research question will be
answered and evaluated in Chapter 6 Evaluation.
Research Question:
How should a prototypical geographic information system be designed to best
support road maintenance planning with the condition and quality data of Dan-
ish roads from LiRA?
14
==PAGE:15==
There are several aspects included in the research question which are impor-
tant for this project to answer. One focus is on how LiRA Map can provide
support to the end users’ maintenance planning, and thereby it should provide
purposeful features for the end users. Another focus is how LiRA Map should
be designed to handle the condition and quality data from LiRA. This project
intends to ﬁnd a feasible way to do so, as there exists the need to store and
maintain condition and quality data from LiRA. The design should therefore
prioritize this objective. Another focus of the research question is to also design
this prototype in such a way that it stays ﬂexible and allows for continued devel-
opment. It should therefore remain extendable such that future developers can
continue the development of it or use what has been learned from this project
to help create a ﬁnished product.
15
==PAGE:16==
3
Domain Analysis
Through several meetings with the domain experts from The Danish Road Di-
rectorate and Sweco, several key aspects of this project’s domain have been
explored and two related software systems used and produced by them have
been analyzed. The mentioned related software systems are Rosy [16] and Vej-
man [17]. They have been discussed in order to understand their functionalities,
their purposes, their processes, and how they are being used by the end users.
Another objective of these meetings was to also ﬁnd common elements that can
be reused for this project, e.g. how the geographical data is referenced.
3.1
Rosy
Rosy is a pavement management system developed by Sweco for maintenance of
roads, bicycle lanes, and sidewalks. Its functionalities are built around presen-
tation of various layers of information, which can be displayed and visualized on
a map. Such information could be the general traﬃc of a lane or the reported
defects or other kind of information. This is then used for helping in advising
the end users in their road maintenance planning.
It contains many similar
objectives to this project, and is therefore very useful to learn from in order to
better understand the domain. The domain model of Rosy created from this
discussion can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Domain model of Rosy
16
==PAGE:17==
Rosy is used by the end users to better plan their road maintenance. Doing so,
helps them create their budget plans in order to reach road condition targets
set for the speciﬁc road. An example could be to realize what is achievable with
a certain amount of money. The output of a budget plans is not necessarily
the optimal solution, but might be suﬃcient for what is currently needed or
for the following years. Their origin of data is either from the Municipality
of Copenhagen or crowdsourced from third parties. When new data is coming
in, tasks are created based on their budget plans. They consist of daily main-
tenance tasks or new manual inspections. In the case of manual inspections,
small defects are repaired immediately, while larger defects are reported and
left unrepaired. Depending on dynamically changing prices, the report of the
larger defects is now delegated to contractors for them to repair. When Rosy is
notiﬁed on the changes to the road, it will schedule later evaluations such that
a new manual inspection of that maintenance can ensue.
The underlying backbone that Rosy is using for static road information is Open
Street Map [4] (OSM), which is an open source database for geographical data
of the world. This is used for visualizing the world with all roads, bicycle lanes,
and sidewalks into an interactive map. An example of that can be seen in Fig-
ure 3. This is however only needed as the foundation for displaying what is
important, the presentation layers as previously mentioned, such as the general
traﬃc of a lane and reported defects or other kind of information. This addi-
tional information is layered on top of OSM and functions as a way to display
their data that they use in their road maintenance planning. This additional
information can be selected and viewed per section, which are divisions of lanes.
These sections are created whenever maintenance of a road occurs, and can be
divided further into subsections. Whenever a defect on a road is discovered,
information about that can be viewed on its section by selecting it on the map.
Here it is possible to view what type of defect it is, its amount (measured in
area or length depending on the type), its position relative to the start of the
section by notation of To and From in meters, and the speciﬁed lane number
depicted as 0 for the far right lane and increasing for each lane to the left. This
way of referencing the geographical data is a suitable method for this project
to adopt.
17
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3: An example of the visualization from OSM
Detailed information of a road can also be viewed such as the International
Roughness Index (IRI), the Rolling Resistance (RR), and the pavement type
the road is currently consisting of. These parameters describe the road state
comprehensively, which is important knowledge to have for the road mainte-
nance planning, and is therefore valuable to adopt in this project as well.
3.2
Vejman
Vejman is a company tool which includes a pavement management system used
by The Danish Road Directorate and several municipalities in Denmark. The
pavement management system is able to show general road data (static knowl-
edge and information of roads), and operational data that they use for main-
tenance. It is possible to visualize this information onto a map for an easier
overview. The actual map that displays the world can be generated from many
diﬀerent sources, depending on the user’s wish, e.g. a topographical map or
OSM as the geographical source. The map module allows the user to click and
view detailed information of a speciﬁc section. This information is the road and
route number, chainage information (for when the section begins and ends), ge-
ographical information, category, status, pavement, and condition index. Here
condition index is a value meant to score damages on sections by their severity.
This is an aggregation of several parameters that describe a section derived from
visual inspections. This is a useful method for organizing and sorting damages
to sections by their severity in order to easily ﬁnd the most damaged sections.
A view of the domain model of Vejman can be seen in Figure 4.
18
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4: Domain model of Vejman
Vejman is using their own method of referencing Danish roads. Roads are unique
to the 7 digits and motorways are down to 2 digits. An example could be Hels-
ingørmotorvejen (E55, E47, 19) which is denoted M19 in Vejman. This is their
way to organize and uniquely identify roads.
Belægningsoptimering is a program that is used to report the ﬁndings from
manual visual inspections. It is used to report damages, and is usable while
oﬄine which is usually the case when on site using a portable device.
The
data reported is then synchronized with a server next time the user is online,
in which that server communicates and updates Vejman with the newest infor-
mation. Parameters that describe a section are then updated, which in turn
updates the condition index to reﬂect the newly learned severity of the section.
Belægningsoptimering is also used to plan maintenance of roads by taking into
19
==PAGE:20==
account the budget available and plans a strategy for optimizing a road’s pave-
ment.
There exists a simple application for viewing road data on a map in Vejman.
It allows a user to more intuitively view information of roads compared to the
pavement management system in Vejman. Filters can be applied for the user to
select what data to show, which is often used for presentation purposes at The
Danish Road Directorate. However, this application does not allow any changes
to data, and thus is read-only.
3.3
OpenStreetMap (OSM)
As OSM is used for both software systems, a more detailed description of OSM
is needed to better understand its importance in this domain.
OSM is an open-source project focused on providing a free database of geograph-
ical data representing the physical world. It is driven and growing based on the
output of its community, being individual users and their GPS devices or larger
companies that have provided geographical data. This combined crowdsourced
data is therefore able to map the physical world and provide an alternative so-
lution instead of other sources of geographical data that might be unavailable
or require license fees.
The structure of the data in OSM, conceptually, is not that complex, and is
divided into three elements, namely Nodes, Ways, and Relations. Nodes are
what represent points in the world and are deﬁned by their longitude, latitude
and id. They represent single entities that are set in place. In order to give
meaning of multiple Nodes, and to portray that they as a group can represent
something larger, such as a line, ﬁgure or shape, Ways are introduced. Ways are
several Nodes in an ordered list, and as such, a Way can represent something
larger than what a single Node could. A Way is therefore able to represent a
line such as a road, and able to describe that road with information such as
where it starts and ends, the shape of it and where it bends, and the length
of it. The last element Relation, is a grouping of several elements and is used
to describe the elements’ relation to each other. An example could be several
Ways and how their relation to each other can represent a route. Together,
these elements of data (the database of OSM), are able to represent the world
in a proper spatial context, that correctly relates and represents actual objects
in the physical world.
OSM and many other sources of geographical data are representation of the
physical world as a 2D display. As the world they represent is a sphere, certain
issue arrive when projecting the sphere as a 2D display. Therefore, diﬀerent
projected coordinate systems exist to overcome these issues, and they each have
their advantages and disadvantages. OSM uses a Spherical Mercator projec-
tion coordinate system, speciﬁcally the one described as EPSG:3857. This is a
20
==PAGE:21==
broadly used projection, and is considered a standard. In a geographic coordi-
nate system, latitude and longitude is normally used to represent vertical and
horizontal position of the world, respectively. However, it is therefore important
to be aware of that in projected coordinate systems like EPSG:3857, that the
notion of latitude and longitude is replaced with x/y coordinates described in
meters.
3.4
End Users
After studying Rosy and Vejman, it became clearer who the end users of this
domain are. This chapter will therefore brieﬂy diﬀerentiate the two kinds of end
users.
The end users are from The Danish Road Directorate, however there are diﬀer-
ent kinds of end users. They can be diﬀerentiated based on their work tasks,
their objectives and focuses. One end user might focus on speciﬁc tasks through
the use of an application, and another kind of end user might be focused on the
management aspect and overall overview and usage of an application by other
end users. Therefore, it is important in this domain, to be aware that there
exists diﬀerent kinds of end users, and that they have diﬀerent needs to sat-
isfy.
3.5
Domain Model
From studying Rosy and Vejman, several important aspects have been extracted
and deemed useful to reuse. In total, the related domain model of this can be
seen in Figure 5.
21
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5: Domain model of this project
The usage of sections to refer to a speciﬁc portion of a road will be continued,
as well as having the same parameters that describe those sections. OSM as the
source of the geographical world will also be used, however, sections in OSM are
not the same sections in Vejman. As many functionalities rely on sections, it is
important to have the data referring to the correct roads, and therefore sections
deﬁned by Vejman will have to be used instead.
The notion of diﬀerent defect types in Rosy or diﬀerent condition types in
Vejman is also intended to be reused in this project and will be known as con-
dition types. They represent the diﬀerent variations a condition can consist of,
whether the condition is a pot hole, a crack, rutting, or any of the other types,
and therefore, a single condition is limited to only one of the many condition
types. A full list of all condition types can be found in Appendix A Glossary.
To further deﬁne a condition, values are speciﬁed. They are about where the
condition starts and ends, which sometimes are equal to each other, as some
conditions do not span that far, e.g. a pot hole. There is also the value of which
section it is found on, the lane of the road, together with an amount which is the
length of the condition. Amount is used as the value that deﬁnes the severity
22
==PAGE:23==
of the condition.
Pavement types are also intended to be reused. They are the diﬀerent types
of materials that a road is composed of, and is linked to sections such that a
section is deﬁned to only consist of one of the many pavement types that exists.
A full list of all pavement types can be found in Appendix A Glossary
The notion of a condition index to describe the severity of the damages on
a section will also be reused. It serves as a great tool to aggregate all conditions
and their severity found on a section in order to score that section with a sin-
gle value. This also simpliﬁes the possible use cases of ﬁnding urgent cases or
sorting sections based on their damages.
23
==PAGE:24==
4
Design
From Chapter 3 Domain Analysis, several important aspects have been ex-
tracted and deemed useful to reuse. They are now aspects that are important
to include in the design of LiRA Map. Before LiRA Map is realized, it is im-
portant to ﬁrst assess how it should be realized. This includes the usage of user
stories in the development process, and the architecture of it.
4.1
User Stories
In order to develop what is important for the end users, user stories [10] have
been incorporated in the development process. They are intended as a way for
end users to describe and request their requirements, such that a developer can
implement features that support them. User stories are functionalities that the
end users ﬁnd valuable to have in the application. This method of end users
describing their requirements means that they have a strong inﬂuence on the
outcome of the development iterations, which is more desirable, as the end users
may be more knowledgeable than the developers at knowing the expected usage
of the application.
It is important that these user stories are understood by the developer and
that the developer is aware of the context. This is relevant, as without this, a
developer might misinterpret the user story and the outcome of the implemented
feature might be incorrect, and thus needs to be reimplemented properly. When
several user stories have been created, they have to be sorted based on their pri-
ority. This way, a developer can take the user story with the highest priority
and implement features that support this user story. A developer can then pro-
ceed with the next user story, and will therefore only implement one user story
at a time. However, as user stories are not necessarily known upfront, and sev-
eral might appear throughout the development process, they will therefore have
their priorities considered and sorted with together with the already written
user stories.
In order to verify that the implemented features work correctly and as expected
by the end user, each user story has their acceptance criteria. Acceptance cri-
teria should be evaluated such that the user story can be regarded as complete
by the end user. The presented acceptance criteria for the user stories are later
evaluated in Chapter 6 Evaluation.
The following user stories and acceptance criteria are written by the developer,
but from the perspective of an end user. They are prioritized and implemented
in the order as presented. Future user stories could be of higher quality if writ-
ten by an actual end user instead of a developer. A list of future work, which
could generate new user stories, can be found in Chapter 7 Future Work.
24
==PAGE:25==
User Story 1: As a managing end user, I want to work with OSM related
data, so that I can avoid restrictions and work with free geographical data, and
that the work stays open-source.
Acceptance Criteria 1.1: The projection of the world should be de-
cided by OSM.
User Story 2: As an end user, I want to have a 2D map, so that it is possible
to have a visual representation, overview and navigational use of the physical
world.
User Story 3: As an end user, I want to be able to select a road on the map,
so that it is possible to view information for that speciﬁc road.
Acceptance Criteria 3.1: When the cursor hovers over a road, selec-
tion should occur when right-clicking the mouse.
Acceptance Criteria 3.2: When selection has occurred, it should be
visibly indicative that a road has been selected through highlighting of
the selected road.
Acceptance Criteria 3.3: The left side of LiRA Map should present
the road name, number of conditions and sections speciﬁcally to the se-
lected road.
User Story 4: As an end user, I want to ﬁnd a road by its name, so that I can
easily select that road and have the map focused on it instead of navigating to
it manually.
Acceptance Criteria 4.1: This should incur when typing a road’s name
and pressing the button ”Go”.
Acceptance Criteria 4.2: As there might be multiple roads of the
same name, the chosen road to navigate to should be the largest of them
all.
Acceptance Criteria 4.3: When the map is focused on the road, the
level of zoom should show the whole road.
User Story 5: As an end user, I want to have a visual representation of sec-
tions’ KPI when I select a road, so that I can easily view the severity of the
conditions of a road on the map.
25
==PAGE:26==
Acceptance Criteria 5.1: The color of severity should range from green
to red.
Acceptance Criteria 5.2: The precision of the visualization should
be down to one meter’s accuracy.
User Story 6: As an end user, I want to have a visual representation of a cho-
sen attribute (IRI, RR), so that I can easily get an overview of that attribute
of all roads on the map.
Acceptance Criteria 6.1: The chosen attribute should be available
from a list of options.
Acceptance Criteria 6.2: Only one attribute can be chosen at a time.
Acceptance Criteria 6.3: This should incur when pressing the but-
ton ”Visualize” after an attribute has been chosen.
Acceptance Criteria 6.4: The color of severity should range from green
to red.
Acceptance Criteria 6.5: The precision of the visualization should
be down to one meter’s accuracy.
4.2
Architecture
As several user stories have been created, they give an idea of the requirements
LiRA Map has. They also help deﬁne the nature of it and its possibilities and
limitations. Based on the requirements, several components have surfaced as
what LiRA Map should be based on. There are many deciding factors in choos-
ing the architecture.
Components have their advantages and disadvantages,
and thus the explanation and reasoning of each component will be discussed
in this chapter. The described components and how they interact with other
components can be seen in Figure 6.
26
==PAGE:27==
Figure 6: Component diagram of LiRA Map
4.2.1
OpenStreetMap (OSM)
From User Story 1, it was required to have OSM as the source of geographical
data. OSM, as previously mentioned in Chapter 3 Domain Analysis, is an open
source database for geographical data of the world. The advantage of OSM, is
that it is possible to give a complete geographical reference of Denmark, which
is needed in this project and LiRA. OSM also does not hinder the ability for
LiRA Map to be open-source. It also allows it to avoid restrictions and license
fees that exist in alternative geographical databases, which might have been a
relevant issue if OSM was not an option. OSM is also continuously updated
with new data to stay current with the gradual changes of the world.
4.2.2
Mapsui
From User Story 2, it was deemed important to have an interactive 2D map
which made it possible to render visual representation of chosen data.
The
decided component to use is Mapsui [11].
Mapsui works as the component
that renders the world based on the geographical data provided by OSM. The
inherited compatibility of Mapsui being built around OSM, gives it a great ad-
vantage to use as a component in this application. Mapsui is also open-source
and provides a documentation [12] for how to integrate and use Mapsui in an
application.
Through layers in Mapsui, it is possible to add content to the rendered map
it provides. Layers are the individual layers of information that Mapsui is able
to render one by one. For each added layer, the latest will be the last to be
rendered, and thus the one displayed on top, where the ﬁrst added layer will act
as the background.
27
==PAGE:28==
From a list of possible frameworks [5] to use with OSM, OsmSharp was orig-
inally the target choice, in which that framework recommends Mapsui as the
component to use in UI and rendering projects. Alternative frameworks from
that list were considered but were not chosen due to the combination of the
advantages of Mapsui, its intuitiveness, preference of programming language,
license and its support for possible future oﬄine rendering.
4.2.3
Shapeﬁle
From User Story 3, it was required to be able to select roads. As Mapsui does
not support the ability to select and extract information of a road, as Mapsui
is merely a tool to render the world, it was necessary to include the usage of a
shapeﬁle. A shapeﬁle is ﬁle in a format that allows information of geographical
locations, which in turn could be used to draw lines that represent roads. These
lines can then be overlaid on top of the map that Mapsui renders. This then
provides the ability to select roads on the map.
The advantage of a shape-
ﬁle, is that it is possible through supporting ﬁles, to store information of the
drawn lines. This way it is not only possible to draw lines, but also possible
to know which line represent which road, which is critical information to have.
The shapeﬁle has the ﬁle extension .shp, and its main supporting ﬁles are the
database ﬁle with the ﬁle extension .dbf and the index ﬁle with the ﬁle extension
.shx.
The structure in which the .shp, .dbf, and .shx ﬁle work together, is on the
premise that each row in the .shp ﬁle corresponds to the same row in the .dbf
ﬁle, and that the .shx follows the same structure. As the .dbf ﬁle stores data for
a speciﬁc geometry in the .shp ﬁle, it is necessary to have an agreement on how
they correctly match each other. Often seen in databases, there is an id used
as a reference key, but that is not the case for these ﬁles as they work solely on
row sequence.
4.2.4
Database & Query Module
The last components to introduce are the query module and database which are
connected to all user stories in some way. The query module is responsible for
retrieving information stored in the database that is relevant to the user stories.
In User Story 4, 5 and 6, these components are responsible through functions
to ﬁnd the relevant information in which the end user is interested in and want
to visualize on top of the map. In User Story 4, they provide all road names
available to search for. In User Story 5, they provide the KPI values for all the
sections of a road, and in User Story 6 it is the values of a chosen attribute for
all roads. The remaining parts of the user stories mentioned, is up to the other
components to correctly address.
The requirements for this database was that it should allow the storage of the
28
==PAGE:29==
measurement values originating from LiRA. These measurement values are the
output of the calculated results from cars, and reﬂect the condition and quality
of roads. After sensors built in cars have collected data, processed it through
machine learning, and created a meaningful result, this output should be stored
in this database, and is therefore refereed to as the measurement values.
As measurement values might only contain some attributes, jsonb [2] is ideal
to use as its data type.
The data type helps by making it possible to only
store known values of an attribute, and thereby save storage space on not stor-
ing unknown or null values. This is a similar advantage to the principle of an
Entity-Attribute-Value model [9], but without some of the disadvantages that
follow when using such model such as a degraded performance on querying [7].
jsonb is an upgraded version of json and its advantages are noticeable in terms
of eﬃciency, especially with its support of indexing. The data is stored in a
binary format where json is limited to text only, and jsonb is also aware of the
data types of the values it stores.
In order to describe the measurement values, there should be metadata of it.
Metadata functions as a way of describing another set of data, in this case
measurement values. The data that is important to know about measurement
values are the diﬀerent possible data types, minimum values, maximum values
or the date of measurement. jsonb is again a suitable method for storing this
metadata, as some attributes in the measurement values should be described
diﬀerently, and that jsonb again is eﬃcient in only storing known descriptions.
The database should also support storage of information about repairs that
have occurred. It can be important for an end user to be able to specify when
a section of a road has been maintained. A repair is deﬁned through which
section it is for, the pavement type that was used, and when it occurred. It
is important for the end user and LiRA Map to be able to know of repairs, as
repairs deﬁne speciﬁc points in time where the state of a road has underwent
major changes. A case could be that conditions no longer exist, and therefore
that speciﬁc point in time refers to when conditions are no longer valid.
In relation to repairs, sections have an expected due date in which it should be
maintained before that date occurs. This is the expected due date of the pave-
ment of a section. When a new pavement is installed, a due date follows, and
therefore the database needs to support the storage of that information.
29
==PAGE:30==
5
Implementation
As the design of the architecture and the included components have been re-
alized, the technologies and development used in the implementation of this
application will be covered in detail in this chapter. All important aspects and
functionalities will be explained together with their related implementation and
source code.
The implemented application is a desktop client application written in C#,
and built in the IDE Visual Studio 2019. It has been developed through the use
of Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF), which is a UI framework focused
on building Windows applications in the .NET framework.
5.1
OpenStreetMap (OSM)
OSM is an integral aspect of this project and LiRA, and therefore also in LiRA
Map. OSM not only provides geographical data, but also helps deﬁne and create
rules for the implementation of LiRA Map. The foundation is OSM and it acts
as the core of it, which means that the implementations of later functionalities
rely on them being developed such that they are compatible with OSM.
The geographical data from OSM is only used to portray the physical world in
a proper spatial context. The data serves as the backbone for how LiRA Map
should create a 2D view of the world and the behavior of that view. There-
fore, the data of OSM is only integrated as a foundation of the creation of the
representation of the world.
5.2
Mapsui
In order to make sense of the geographical data that OSM provides, and to be
able to visualize that, the .NET component Mapsui was chosen as the compo-
nent responsible for that. It understands the structure of OSM, and is built to
be able to handle the incoming stream of data.
Mapsui is utilized such that it is able to provide a viewport that renders a
map representing the world as seen from OSM. To do this, MainWindow.xaml
has to be aware of the namespace and grid element a seen in Figure 7. This
would create the object MyMapControl which contains everything related to
Mapsui and its possibilities.
namespace
xmlns:xaml=”clr-namespace:Mapsui.UI.Wpf; assembly=Mapsui.UI.Wpf”
grid element
<xaml:MapControl Name=”MyMapControl”></xaml:MapControl>
Figure 7: The namespace and grid element
The background layer of the created viewport is the world generated through
the geographical data from OSM as tiles. These tiles only act as images, and
30
==PAGE:31==
therefore have no information stored in them as their only purpose is to display
the world. This layer of tiles is created and added as the ﬁrst layer to the map
object MyMapControl in MainWindow.xaml.cs as seen in Figure 8.
Figure 8: OSM layer added as tiles
Since this project has its focus on Danish roads, the default starting position had
been set to a place in Denmark through a longitude and latitude position. Since
OSM is based on the Spherical Mercator projection, speciﬁcally the coordinate
system EPSG:3857, the longitude and latitude position had to be translated to
that coordinate system. The position in the Spherical Mercator notion, could
then be used to set the default starting position of the map, together with an
appropriate level of zoom which can be seen in Figure 9.
Figure 9: The default starting position of the map
The results of having Mapsui rendering a world based on the geographical data
of OSM, provide the visual results as seen in Figure 10. This gives an interactive
world with a background layer, which is now ready to accommodate the following
implementations.
31
==PAGE:32==
Figure 10: The rendered world with only tiles provided by OSM
5.3
Shapeﬁle
In order to implement features that support User Story 3, a shapeﬁle was in-
troduced. Mapsui supports the usage of that, and therefore has an object type
called Shapeﬁle. This was used to create an object which is based on the actual
ﬁle (newShapeFileEPSG3857.shp) as seen in Figure 11. When creating this ob-
ject, it is required to set the location of the .shp ﬁle that is used. Through this,
the creation of the new object will not only ﬁnd the .shp ﬁle but also the related
supporting ﬁles (.dbf, .shx) if they exist with the same name in the same folder.
This means that the created object is not only aware of the geometry of the
shape, based on the .shp ﬁle. It is also aware of the data associated with each
individual geometry, based on the .dbf ﬁle. Lastly, it also has an index ﬁle for
faster retrieval operations, based on the .shx ﬁle.
Figure 11: The creation of the Shapeﬁle object and the layer to the map
These three ﬁles (.shp, .dbf, .shx) are produced and used by Sweco. Sweco have
privately shared these ﬁles within the LiRA project, where the original .shp
ﬁle had been created under another projection, namely a projection coordinate
system known as ETRS89 or EPSG:4258. This is diﬀerent to the projection
coordinate system used for OSM, which is EPSG:3857. In order to have the
shapeﬁle compatible with OSM, all its geometries had to be converted to the
32
==PAGE:33==
projection coordinate system EPSG:3857. This was done through the tool QGIS
[6], which was able to import the original shapeﬁle and export a new shapeﬁle
in the correct projection coordinate system.
Since the shapeﬁle had been created and was converted to a compatible projec-
tion, it was now possible to add it as another layer on the map. However, as this
layer contains the lines that represents roads, it was needed to have this layer
added with the notion ”IsMapInfoLayer = true”. This was needed for Mapsui
to recognize that this layer contained information and should therefore be able
to pass that information when selected on the map. This layer containing the
shapeﬁle geometry and data was now ready to be added to the map as seen in
Figure 11.
The results of adding this shapeﬁle to the map that Mapsui renders can be
seen in Figure 12. It shows the black lines drawn on top of the tiles provided by
OSM. These black lines are the geographical shapes provided by the shapeﬁle
that represent roads.
Figure 12: The rendered world with the tiles from OSM and the shapeﬁle layer
Through the .dbf ﬁle, it was possible from a line drawn on the map, to know the
name of the road, its RoadKey, and length as seen in Figure 13. This enriched
each geometry with information and made it possible to refer correctly to a
road, based on the line line drawn on the map. As several roads exist with the
same name, due to them being related or extensions of each other, the unique
key identiﬁer known as RoadKey, made it possible to still know which road was
referred to based only the geometry. Therefore the column RoadKey was used
as reference key in LiRA Map.
33
==PAGE:34==
Figure 13: The ﬁrst 20 rows of the .dbf ﬁle
5.4
Database & Query Module
In order to implement features that support User Stories 3, 4, 5 and 6, a database
and a query module for using the database within LiRA Map was implemented.
The database would be responsible for storing data, and the query module would
handle how that data was retrieved through LiRA Map.
The database is a relational database built in the management system Post-
greSQL. PostgreSQL was the preferred management system to use, as it is free
and open-source. Furthermore, it also supported the data type jsonb, which was
needed for several tables.
The database is structured around roads as they are the primary objects of
LiRA Map. Roads can be divided into multiple sections, where they each have
their pavement speciﬁed. Sections are deﬁned by where they start and end on
a road in meters together with a calculated length of that. An overview of the
total structure can be seen in Figure 14.
34
==PAGE:35==
Figure 14: The logical model design of the database
Measurement values from LiRA are also stored per section of the data type
jsonb. This was because of the reasoning of the advantages of the data type
jsonb, which was to store only the known values of an attribute and to reduce
storage space. An example could be that only the attribute IRI is known, and
all other attributes are unknown or null, where this allows the database to save
space by not storing null values. A case could also exist where a new attribute
appears, and instead of adjusting a possible new column of a table, it can just
be added immediately with the others since jsonb supports this.
A table for metadata for these measurement values also exists.
It describes
the attributes through the very same data type, jsonb. These deﬁnitions should
also act as constraints, such that future inserted data follow the intentions and
are valid measurements. This is listed in future work. An example of the meta-
data for the attribute IRI could be: ’{”datatype”: ”ﬂoat”, ”minValue”: 0}’,
where it is speciﬁed that the values for the attribute IRI must be of the data
type ﬂoat, and that the value must be above 0.
Sections also have a calculated condition index (KPI), which is based on the
values of the measurement values. There exists a formula which calculates the
KPI value based on diﬀerent weighed values of the measurements. This table of
sections, similarly to all other tables, is timestamped for possible development
analysis.
Roads also have conditions associated with them, and as a condition is always
deﬁned as one of the possible condition types that exists, this needed to be
35
==PAGE:36==
reﬂected in the database, and as such the types are speciﬁed in the table condi-
tion type. Similar to sections, conditions are also deﬁned by where they start and
end, which lane of the road the condition exists on, and also its amount and as
such the table condition had to support these values together with a timestamp.
In order for the database to support storage of information of repairs that have
occurred, the table repair was created. It exists due to the possibility for end
users to be able to specify when a section of a road has been maintained and
therefore the database already now has a table for information of that. This
table needed to support the values that deﬁne a repair which consists of which
section it is for, the pavement type used, and when it was maintained through
a timestamp.
A table also exists for storing information of when a section is expected to
last till. As this is the expected lifetime of a section, the table section lifetime
was created and support information of which section it is, the expected due
date, and timestamps.
In order to use this database together with the application, the query mod-
ule was implemented.
It supported select statements and insert statements.
The select statements were used throughout LiRA Map for many of the imple-
mented features, but the insert statement was only used once, which was for
migration of road relevant data from the .dbf ﬁle into the database. This mi-
gration used the sequence of row numbers as id, such that the database and the
.dbf ﬁle had a reference key. The support for insert statements will be useful
for future work and future features to be implemented, but since the support
of select statements is considered most valuable as of now, only that will be
covered in this chapter.
The support for select statements was implemented in the DataBaseHandler.cs
ﬁle. It was built using the data provider Npgsql, which is for accessing Post-
greSQL databases in .NET applications. Npgsql is also free and open-source,
which was a requirement for this project. The method selectQuery(String sql)
was created and could be called with the speciﬁc select statement included. It
used the NpgsqlConnection and NpgsqlDataAdapter to open a connection for
accessing the database, and to query the select statement. The method select-
Query(String sql) would then return the table values inserted into a DataTable,
where this table would then hold the returned results from the queried select
statement.
One of the functions implemented in the database, which relied on the abil-
ity for LiRA Map to call it through the previously mentioned select statement
support, can be seen in Figure 15. An example of a select statement that used
this function is ”select * from getSectionsOfRoad(’1017684800000’)”, with an
example roadKey. This function would, through this roadKey, ﬁnd four values of
all the sections related to this road. These values are where the sections begin,
36
==PAGE:37==
end, their length and KPI value. This function was one part of an implemented
feature, which was needed in order to support several user stories.
Figure 15: The function getSectionsOfRoad
5.5
Features
As the database and foundation of LiRA Map had been established, features
that support the user stories were implemented. They consist of the ability to
select a road on the map, searching in the address bar and navigating to that
road, visualizing KPI values of sections on the map, and visualizing the values
of a chosen attribute of all sections of all roads on the map.
Selecting a road
The feature for User Story 3 included the ability to select a road based on the
geometry drawn from the shapeﬁle. A mouse listener was set up from launch,
and would trigger an event on mouse click. This would then call the method
OnPreviewMouseDown(). The method was set up such that when the end user
right clicks on top of a geometry of a road, it would retrieve the mouse position
of the screen. This position was then used to call the method GetMapInfo() to
create an object of the type MapInfo that contained information of the selected
geometry of that position. The method contained a margin of 5px to allow some
imprecision when clicking. If the MapInfo contained a feature, it meant that a
geometry had successfully been selected. This can be seen in Figure 16. A new
layer of the exact geometry of the road was then created in the color blue to
visualize that the speciﬁc road had been selected. The left side of LiRA Map
was then informed of the road’s name such that the end user could see that in
the address bar.
37
==PAGE:38==
Figure 16: The function for selecting a road
As it was now possible to select roads, the newly created geometry in the color
blue would indicate to the end user that a road had successfully been selected.
The results of that can be seen in Figure 17, where map of the world that Mapsui
is rendering is reﬂecting this.
Figure 17: The rendered world when a road is selected
Address bar and the button ”Go”
The features for User Story 4 included the address bar and the button ”Go”.
The address bar is a ComboBox which was editable such that an end user would
be able to type a road’s name into it. It is populated with all distinct road names
at the launch of LiRA Map, and adjusts for possible road names when the end
user begins typing. The end user can then select the intended road name even
before it is fully written.
38
==PAGE:39==
The button ”Go” can either use the address bar as its input or the road name
of the selected geometry for which road it should navigate the view of the map
to. When using the input of the address bar it needs to be aware of that there
exist several roads with the same name, which previously mentioned is due to
some roads being related or extension of each other. Therefore it was decided
that it should select the largest road with that name, as that is the most likely
intended use case from an end user’s point of view. To do this, it was needed
to ﬁnd all roads with that name and their id’s. This was done through a select
query using roadInput.Text which contained the value of the address bar. Now
that there might be multiple roads with the same name, each road had to be
iterated in order to determine which road was the longest. This could be done
by comparing all of their lengths which were stored in the .dbf ﬁle and therefore
known in the Shapeﬁle object. When all roads had been iterated and the longest
road had been determined, its geometry could be used to navigate the map to
the BoundingBox of the geometry as seen in Figure 18.
Figure 18: The button ”Go” when using the address bar as its input
The button ”Go” was also capable of using the selected road as input as seen
in Figure 19. The input would then need to use both roadInput.Text and se-
lectedRoadKey. The reason why selectedRoadKey is not enough, even though it
is unique, is in the case where a road is selected, but the address bar also has
a diﬀerent road name typed. That must mean that the end user just typed a
road name, and is therefore no longer interested in the selected road, but the
39
==PAGE:40==
road of the address bar. Therefore it was needed to compare roadInput.Text and
selectedRoadKey ﬁrst, and if they referenced to the same road, then this method
could be used. Since they matched to the same road, the id of the road could be
extracted through the select query. With this id, the geometry could be found,
and the map could be navigated to the BoundingBox of the geometry.
Figure 19: The button ”Go” when using the selected road as its input
Visualizing KPI values of sections
The feature for User Story 5 included implementing a visualization of sections’
KPI values. It was decided that the colors green, yellow-green, yellow, orange
and red would be suﬃcient colors to represent the ranging condition index. This
feature is a continuation of the feature that allows an end user to select a road.
A select query using the function getSectionsOfRoad() was issued with the road-
Key of the selected road. This returned all sections found on that road with
the values of where they begin and end, and also their respective KPI value.
For every section that was returned, each had to be drawn based on where they
start, end, and their KPI value.
As it is very unlikely that a start value or end value is one of the vertices
in the geometry of the selected road, new vertices were created through interpo-
lation to create exact data point. Linear interpolation was used to create a new
vertex for the start position of a section. In order to ﬁnd the two vertices that
surrounds the start position, distances between all the vertices were calculated
and summed up such that all vertices had a length, namely the length from the
beginning of the road (ﬁrst vertex). This can be seen in Figure 20.
40
==PAGE:41==
Figure 20: Distance between all vertices and their respective lengths
This gave the option to compare all vertices’ length with the start position as
the start position was a value in the form of a length. This would then be used
to ﬁgure out which two vertices surround the start position by comparing their
lengths to each other. When the length of the start position was higher than a
vertex and lower than the subsequent vertex, then the two surrounding vertices
were found, and can be seen in Figure 21.
Figure 21: Finding two surrounding vertices
When two vertices surrounding the start position were found, the formula for
linear interpolation was used to create a new vertex representing the start po-
sition. This was done by taking the vertices’ geographical values (x & y), and
the values of their lengths to ﬁgure out exactly where the newly interpolated
vertex belongs to geographically. This can be seen in Figure 22. After this, the
process of linear interpolation was repeated for the end position as well.
41
==PAGE:42==
Figure 22: Formula for linear interpolation inserted with values
The interpolated start vertex and the interpolated end vertex was also used to
ﬁnd all vertices found in between these two interpolated vertices. All of these
vertices could now be used to create an exact representation of a section on
a road.
This meant that they all had to be added into a LineString.
This
LineString would join an array of LineStrings, which would be used to create a
new layer using CreateLayer() that took the KPI value of each section in order
to determine the color of every section. The method CreateLayer() would do
this by assigning each section a style and run through a switch statement based
on the KPI value. The KPI value, which was a ﬂoat, would be rounded down to
an integer, where 0 = Green, 1 = YellowGreen, 2 = Yellow, 3 = Orange, 4 = Red.
In total, all sections of a road and their KPI values were now visualized un-
der a layer and added to the map. This can be seen in Figure 23 where the
map of the world that Mapsui is rendering is reﬂecting this. The blue geometry
is showing that the road is selected and also that there exists no data for the
whole road, because the remaining colors show that there is only data for certain
sections of the road.
Figure 23: The rendered world with KPI values being visualized
42
==PAGE:43==
Visualizing the values of a chosen attribute of sections on all roads
The feature for User Story 6 included a similar implementation as the previous
feature in order to visualize the values of a chosen attribute instead. The diﬀer-
ences are that a ComboBox was created for choosing one of possible attributes,
and a button which will color all roads that have values of the chosen attribute
associated with them on their sections. These two elements were added to the
left side of LiRA Map. Another diﬀerence to the previous feature, is that val-
ues of the chosen attribute had to be retrieved diﬀerently. This is because the
format for storing the values of the attribute was through the jsonb data type.
Therefore only the select query, which handles this diﬀerence, will be described,
and can therefore be seen in Figure 24.
Figure 24: The function getSectionsAndAttributeOfAllRoads for retrieving se-
centions and their values of a chosen attribute
This function was queried when an attribute had been chosen and the button
was clicked. It extracted the road id, start position, end position, and the value
of the chosen attribute for all sections. The reason why road id was included,
was due to the need to have a reference key between the database and the .shp
ﬁle which stored the geometry of all roads, namely the vertices. This way, there
was information for which road had which sections and attribute values. As the
values of the chosen attribute were stored in the column measurements values
with the data type jsonb, the syntax as shown in Figure 24 was used to select
the values. It searches in the column for the value of the chosen attribute, and
returns the value as a ﬂoat.
Similarly as previous feature of visualizing KPI values, each section found could
now be visualized. First, vertices representing the start and end positions were
created through linear interpolation.
Then these values, together with the
in between vertices, were added into a LineString, which joined an array of
LineStrings, and were created as a new layer with each sections being colored
by its value of the chosen attribute through the method CreateLayer().
In total, an example where the chosen attribute is IRI can be seen in Fig-
ure 25. All sections and their IRI values were now visualized where the map of
43
==PAGE:44==
the world that Mapsui is rendering is reﬂecting this.
Figure 25: The rendered world with IRI values being visualized
44
==PAGE:45==
6
Evaluation
As mentioned in Chapter 2.1 Design Science, several evaluations of LiRA Map
are necessary in order to generate feedback usable for the following iterations
of the design cycle. This chapter will therefore discuss an evaluation of it by
an end user, a technical evaluation by a developer, and an evaluation of the
research question of this project.
6.1
Evaluation by an end user
LiRA Map was presented to an end user from The Danish Road Directorate.
A short introduction to the application and how it works was given, which in-
cluded an explanation of the features and functionality. LiRA Map was then
reviewed by the end user, in which several comments were expressed about the
existing functionalities and features and its potential for future features to be
implemented.
The end user saw potential in extending the feature of selecting roads, such
that it could be extended to also allow for selection of only sections. This would
allow the end user to focus in on a speciﬁc section of a road, instead of only
be allowed to view the road as a whole. As a task might be focused only on a
speciﬁc section of a road, it would be beneﬁcial to extend this feature to select
sections as well.
The feature of visualizing the values of a chosen attribute of section on all
roads, was also a feature that could be improved by adding several optional
ﬁlters to the visualization. Possible ﬁlters were to only visualize those sections
that had values that were above a minimum value or below a maximum value,
or that it should only visualize a speciﬁc area of interest. A task the end user
might have could be to visualize only the values for a selected area of the map
where the values were above a given minimum value.
A new feature was also discussed which was about the possibility to export
the selected data. Whether it was for a selected road or the visualizing of a
chosen attribute, it could be beneﬁcial to allow the end user to export the data
of interest to a textual representation. LiRA Map currently only gives a visual
presentation of that data, but the end user might have tasks where the textual
data is the relevant information to work with.
The formula that the condition index should be based on might diﬀer depending
on the end user. One might have tasks that are focused on conditions within the
type ”Pot hole”, and are therefore not interested in the condition index when it
is an aggregation of all the diﬀerently weighted condition types. The end user’s
focus is therefore on a diﬀerent condition index where the condition type ”Pot
hole” is weighted more heavily. The possibility to allow end users to work with
diﬀerent condition indexes that are based on diﬀerently weighted formulas could
45
==PAGE:46==
be a potential feature to implement.
A concern was presented that LiRA Map was too strict with sections. As it
is very focused around sections, it could create issues where an end user might
want to investigate a small part of a section, but is limited to the focus of the
whole section. It is not possible to go further in detail. A case might exist
where the ﬁrst half of a section is in a very severe state, and the other half is in
a pristine state, in which the whole section is in a mediocre state as the section
is visualized as an average of all conditions found on that section. Therefore
it should be possible for an end user to focus only on a portion of a section,
which could be achieved by allowing end users to divide sections into subsections.
The possibility to maintain and edit data in LiRA Map was also sought af-
ter. Currently it only proposes data as read-only and therefore does not present
the possibility to edit data or write new data directly. This could be useful as
editing data might be necessary. It could be a positive addition to this project
if a solution for this was established.
As LiRA Map should be working together with LiRA, live and continuous data
that LiRA Map receives is important to present. Sometimes, the interesting
part of that data is the individual conditions that were found with a high sever-
ity. A view of individual conditions could be beneﬁcial to have, as sometimes
it is just an individual condition that is in a severe state, and therefore not
the whole section that is of concern. Plotting of individual conditions and the
ability to view them independently could help daily maintenance tasks as daily
maintenance are focused on short term repairs which often are the individual
conditions. LiRA Map is currently focused on sections and therefore leans to
a presentation of a long term view, but lacks the ability to focus on the short
term view.
The end user also presented new data collected from LiRA which were focused
on some motorways. In the next iteration, LiRA Map could be extended to
include this new data. Changes would have to be made, as noticeably the cur-
rent shapeﬁle is limited and does not include the motorways that the data is
about. This would also bring LiRA Map a step closer in the direction of working
together with LiRA.
As written in Chapter 2.2 Agile Software Development, collaboration with end
users helps guide the project through the feedback that was given. The men-
tioned points in this chapter can adjust the currently applied user stories and
also be used to generate new to the list, and thus the requirements for this
project are to be modiﬁed as expected.
46
==PAGE:47==
6.2
Technical evaluation by a developer
LiRA Map, the source code behind it, its database, and this report were pre-
sented to a developer. The developer understood the purpose of LiRA Map
and its functionalities and was already aware of the context as the developer
was working on the project of LiRA. The presented work was then evaluated
with the focus on both functional and non-functional requirements. The com-
plete evaluation can be found in Appendix B Technical Evaluation, together
with deﬁnitions of each new concept introduced that can improve LiRA Map.
This chapter will therefore only summarize and discuss the results of the eval-
uation.
Functional Requirements
The user stories written in Chapter 4.1 User Stories were tested and the results
were that the features implemented to support the user stories where working as
expected. OSM had been employed properly, Mapsui has been used appropri-
ately, roads could be selected and condition and section information was shown,
roads were searchable and navigated the map correctly, KPIs for a single road
were shown correctly, and a chosen attribute for multiple roads was shown cor-
rectly.
User Story 3 was desired to better inform the end user with more detailed infor-
mation of the selected road. The information only contained the road’s name,
number of conditions and number of sections, but can in the future be extended
to include a much broader degree of information. What information is the most
useful for an end user should be discussed to address this user story.
Non-Functional Requirements
To better facilitate the usability of LiRA Map, context sensitive help, user/error
message, and notiﬁcations could be integrated. When hovering over controls in
LiRA Map, the end user can be informed about the context and functionality
of the control. The same could be applied on the map, such that when hovering
over objects in the map, information could be displayed. Discussions with end
users would be needed to investigate how to best design this with the highest
usefulness and to formulate new user stories. Topics to discuss could be about
when this is needed, when it should be enabled, how it should be displayed, and
exactly what information it should contain.
LiRA Map lacks a way of portraying to the end user that actions have oc-
curred, that changes have been made, or that unexpected use has occurred. It
would be beneﬁcial to integrate the use of user/error messages and notiﬁcations
to address diﬀerent scenarios to the end user. They should be added in consis-
tent manner to all functionalities and to the diﬀerent intended and unintended
scenarios.
47
==PAGE:48==
LiRA Map is bound to a speciﬁc resolution and the display of the controls
are hard-coded to work in that resolution.
This removes the possibility for
end users to scale the user interface as they see ﬁt. Controls should follow the
scaling, and therefore the user interface has to be redesigned to follow these
expectations when resizing the resolution.
As also mentioned in the evaluation by an end user, export of data of inter-
est could be beneﬁcial. Export of selected data needs to be further discussed
to ﬁgure out exactly what needs to be exported, the expected formats, and in
which circumstances it is needed.
LiRA Map as it currently is built, imposes challenges to upcoming extension as
it has a tightly coupled architecture. The graphical user interface, business logic,
and data model are too dependent on each other. A proposed solution is to move
towards a loosely coupled architecture through the Model–view–viewmodel pat-
tern as it facilitates such architecture.
LiRA Map also faces problems with its adaptability. Possible conﬁgurations
are currently needed as problems arise when LiRA Map has to function on dif-
ferent machines. Noticeably is the connection string to the database which is
hard-coded. As diﬀerent machines have diﬀerent environments, conﬁguration
of at least the connection string should be possible. A solution could be to
conﬁgure the connection string under an installation process.
Exception handling and logging of errors are also lacking. LiRA Map is only
able to handle a very few unexpected conditions, and could be greatly improved
by introducing a greater use of exception handling and also the process of log-
ging errors. This would not only beneﬁt the use of LiRA Map, but also allow
developers to better diagnose and detect problems.
Test-driven development was proposed as a development process to focus on
the testability of LiRA Map. It currently lacks test cases, and putting more
focus on tests could improve it to ensure that its functionality is executed as
expected. This development process is more focused on writing test cases and
then implementations that pass those tests. It was also recommend to test the
components of LiRA Map through unit testing. The acceptance criteria for the
user stories could be used as speciﬁcations of the requirements for tests to pass.
The mentioned points of this evaluation can be used to improve LiRA Map.
The already existing user stories can be adjusted or continued to better de-
scribe the requirements. New user stories could also be established in order to
describe exactly how these mentioned points should work. There are also un-
used techniques addressed in this chapter that could beneﬁt both the end users
and the developers if made use of.
48
==PAGE:49==
6.3
Acceptance Criteria
The acceptance criteria for each written user story are used as speciﬁcations of
the requirements for when the user stories can be considered correctly imple-
mented. They can be found in Chapter 4.1 User Stories.
Testing them through software written tests would have been preferred as also
mentioned in the technical evaluation.
Instead, the acceptance criteria were
tested throughout the development process by the developer to see if the fea-
tures that support the user stories were implemented correctly and working as
expected. There were found many ﬂaws throughout the development, which
were corrected and led to changes in the implementation. Exceptions to this
are the ﬂaws that have yet to be discovered from the manual testing by the
developer.
The user stories were also manually tested by the developer who wrote the
technical evaluation as viewed in Appendix B Technical Evaluation. And as
written, all user stories were considered implemented correctly and working as
expected. However, user story 3 could be improved to contain a better presen-
tation of information.
As such, from the acceptance criteria, all user stories are considered imple-
mented correctly and working as expected.
However, software written tests
could greatly improve this evaluation as that may discover ﬂaws more eﬃciently
and could replace the current reliance of only testing manually.
6.4
Research Question
The objective of the research question and the aspects it contained have been
answered through the realization of LiRA Map. The focus on how LiRA Map
can provide support to the end users’ maintenance planning has been managed
through the developed features and functionalities that it provides. However,
it has been clear from the evaluation with an end user and from the technical
evaluation, that there were untouched possibilities to include, and modiﬁcations
of existing feature to address in order to better support the end user’s mainte-
nance planning.
The aspect of the research question about the handling of the condition and
quality data from LiRA, is also managed through the design of the database.
That was a prioritized objective, where focus was put into the realization of how
it should store and maintain the condition and quality data. The presentation
and usage of that data could have been improved as mentioned in the evalua-
tions as there are many possibilities yet to address.
The focus of the research question about designing this prototype with the
focus of staying ﬂexible, and allowing for continued development has not been
49
==PAGE:50==
realized as intended. As mentioned in the technical evaluation, this prototype
did not manage to stay ﬂexible, and therefore could use correction to the archi-
tecture. However, what has been learned from this project can be used to help
create a ﬁnished product.
50
==PAGE:51==
7
Future Work
While this project managed to include all the aspects presented in the imple-
mentation, there is still work which could be beneﬁcial to LiRA Map. There was
a lot of constructive feedback received through both the evaluation by an end
user and the technical evaluation, and instead of discussing each point again,
this chapter will only discuss a list of future work which has yet to be mentioned,
but would still be valuable to LiRA Map.
• Implement the ability for end users to be able to specify repairs.
The database currently allows storage of repairs that have occurred, but it
is not possible for an end user to specify such in LiRA Map. That ability
should be available as repairs are important to specify. This is because
repairs deﬁne when sections have been maintained and as such LiRA Map
should know that current data for a section is no longer representing the
actual state of that section.
• Implement a functionality for extracting urgent cases by attribute.
Urgent cases have a higher importance in maintenance planning due to
their nature, and it is therefore important to know which those are. It
depends on the context of their urgency, and that is deﬁned through their
attribute. A function for ﬁnding urgent cases based on a chosen attribute
would therefore be beneﬁcial and would allow the end users to quickly ﬁnd
and view them.
• Relieve the use of the shapeﬁle.
A disadvantage of the shapeﬁle provided by Rosy, is its limitation of roads
included. Its purpose is currently to be able to select roads, however, that
may be possible through OSM and Mapsui only. A method would have
to be derived on how to extract which road is selected through Mapsui. If
that is possible, the shapeﬁle would be unnecessary and the limitation of
roads would be removed as OSM is aware of all existing roads.
• Support of historic data in the database.
As condition might change over time, their evolvement can be impor-
tant to be aware of. One could argue that since a condition might rapidly
increase in severity, and a consequence of that is a higher cost of repair, it
could be beneﬁcial to be aware of the development of conditions such that
it is possible to interfere or prevent such higher cost of repair. Historic
data of a condition might also give an approximation of its severity in the
51
==PAGE:52==
short future with the help of extrapolation.
This would require a distinction between what is current and what is
historic. A solution could be to store all entries in history tables of same
structure as the current existing table, where the timestamp of each entry
deﬁnes the timeline.
• Implement an interface for incoming LiRA data.
As LiRA outputs measurement values of the condition and quality of
roads, that data should be transferred to the database of LiRA Map.
A way of retrieving that data could be done through the implementation
of an interface. This interface would allow communication between LiRA
Map and LiRA, with the purpose of ultimately transfering data of mea-
surement values from LiRA to the database of LiRA Map. This interface
would then be utilized whenever there are new results in LiRA such that
LiRA Map can correctly present the most recent known state of the phys-
ical world.
• Use attributes’ metadata as insert constraints on future insert statements.
When data of measurement values from LiRA are received through the pre-
viously mentioned interface, and before inserting them into the database,
a safety practice could be to ensure that the incoming data is valid. As
there are already deﬁned metadata for multiple attributes, that metadata
can be used to ensure that incoming data is inside the expected bound-
aries. In case that is not true, this safety practice would prevent invalid
data from entering the database.
• Transform the standalone application into a cloud based web application.
LiRA Map is currently a standalone application that runs on Windows
and would have to be installed on every computer that intends to use it.
This could be infeasible, and it therefore might be preferable to access
LiRA Map through a web browser. This would circumvent the need of
installing LiRA Map on every computer and allow one installment on a
server in which all computers can connect to. This delivery of an applica-
tion is known as Software as a service (SaaS), and would require LiRA Map
to be functioning as a web application. As it is currently built through
Windows Presentation Foundation under the .NET framework, it would
need to be changed to a framework focused on web development. A pos-
sible choice could be the ASP.NET framework, which not only is designed
for web development, but allows the programming language that the logic
of LiRA Map is written in to remain the same.
52
==PAGE:53==
• Containerize LiRA Map through Docker.
Docker [1] was suitable for this project, but was never realized. Docker
would have containerized LiRA Map such that Mapsui and other potential
future dependencies would have been packaged together with LiRA Map.
This way they would be bundled into a single package and would make it
easier to deploy LiRA Map. This container would also ensure that LiRA
Map is running in the same environment on every machine, no matter
the machine or its settings, which would be helpful when developing to
eliminate machine speciﬁc issues.
53
==PAGE:54==
8
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to determine how a prototypical geographic infor-
mation system should be designed to best support road maintenance planning
with the condition and quality data of Danish roads from LiRA.
Based on the domain analysis, several key aspects were discovered and extracted
for reuse in this project as presented in Chapter 3.5 Domain Model. The results
of the domain were reused together with the handling of condition and quality
data from LiRA to design the proposed prototype LiRA Map. LiRA Map was
implemented based on the user stories presented in Chapter 4.1 User Stories,
and were used in the evaluation of it. The results of the evaluation by an end
user were that there were many changes and new features to further discuss to
improve the prototype. Through the technical evaluation by a developer, it was
determined that the already implemented features were implemented correctly.
However, there was still many beneﬁcial aspects that could be implemented in
LiRA Map. Questions also arose of its potential for further development due to
the extendability of the architecture.
The requirements that this geographical information system were built on, gives
potential for helping the development of a ﬁnished product that uses the con-
dition and quality data from LiRA.
54
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A
Glossary
The following terms are deﬁnitions that are needed to fully understand the con-
text of this project.
Road: A directed connection from A to B made of asphalt for cars to travel on.
A road has up to two directions.
Lane: A division of a road for cars to stay in bounds. There can be multi-
ple lanes on a road.
Condition: A damage in various forms in the asphalt of the road.
Cracks: The separation of asphalt that is no longer able to hold
together. Is a condition type. The direction is following the road,
opposite of transverse cracks that cross the road.
Alligator cracks: A net pattern of connected cracks.
Is a con-
dition type.
Raveling/Cuttings: Loss of stone material in the surface. Often
seen as a collection of many small holes and a general porous as-
phalt. Is a condition type.
Aggregate loss OB: The lack of stone in the surface material. Is a
condition type.
Flaking/Delamination: Loose or removed parts of the road. Often
started as bumps due to water and pressure from underneath. Is
a condition type.
Pot hole: An areal damage in the form of a hole in the road.
Is a condition type.
Depressions and settlement: Portion of the road which has sunk to
a degree due to soft underground. Is a condition type.
Rutting: The indentation of the asphalt on a road. Caused by
repeated heavy pressure over time. Is a condition type.
Unstable Wearing Course: Shifting of the road surface as a whole,
which has been pushed to the side due to traﬃc and the curvature
of the ground. Is a condition type.
55
==PAGE:56==
Bleeding: Smoothing of the road surface causing a slippery ef-
fect. Is a condition type.
Maintenance: The act of trying to undo the damage a condition inﬂicted. Oc-
curs in March due to weather. Repairs the condition, and thus removes it.
Section: A division of a road. Maintenance of a condition can create a new
section, and can divide sections into subsections. It is also possible to join two
adjacent subsections back to a section.
Dynamic Section: A way to divide a road into dynamically created divisions
based on the attributes considered. For each added attribute, the road is split
once more based on the location of where those attributes begin and end.
Pavement: There exist diﬀerent types of pavements and they are composed
of diﬀerent materials and thus have diﬀerent beneﬁts. A section can be repaired
with a speciﬁc type of pavement.
Geolocation: The reference of the position of an object on the world through
the use of latitude and longitude.
Map: A 2D visualization of the physical world. Conditions can be added on top
of the map for additional information through their geolocation.
Condition index: (KPI (Key Performance Indicator)): A scale used to evaluate
the severity of conditions on a section. Goes from 0 and up, where 0 means
perfect state and the higher the scale, the worse the severity of the section is.
This is calculated based on a formula where conditions types are weighed and
the conditions on the section are valued.
Urgent cases: A set of sections with the highest condition indexes, and are
therefore those that need maintenance the most.
Socioeconomic cost: The total cost from issues that citizens are imposed through
indirect consequences from actions or inactions.
Measurements: Values for attributes that are used to describe the road state.
IRI (International Roughness Index): The deviation of a road’s
elevation over a distance.
MPD (Mean Proﬁle Depth): The average depth of the texture
in the surface of the road.
56
==PAGE:57==
Friction: The estimated grip a car has on the road.
Currently
measured by a special device known as a Viafrik car.
RR (Rolling Resistance): The deceleration applied to a car due
to the road’s friction.
Noise: Determines the sound level a road generates from cars driv-
ing on it. Has a negative socioeconomic cost. Currently measured
by a special device known as a CPX trailer.
Emission: The added level of fuel consumption a road introduces
due to its conditions. Has a negative socioeconomic cost.
OSM (Open Street Map): A database of the world containing static geograph-
ical data.
CPH Open source (by the municipality of Copenhagen): A shapeﬁle of static
data of the newest information of roads in Copenhagen. Updated and published
every month.
Price Catalogs: Contains dynamic prices of repair and and resurfacing of a
road. Changes due to outside factors e.g. oil in Saudi Arabia.
57
==PAGE:58==
Appendix B
Technical Evaluation
58
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis Evaluation
Thesis fulﬁlled by Makus Berthold,
Evaluation by Shahrzad M. Pour, Postdoc Researcher at DTU
January 2020
1
Evaluation
The thesis develops a Geographic Information System(GIS) addressing the de-
ﬁned requirements of end user(The end user is the Danish Road Directorate)
in the LiRA project. This technical evaluation consists of evaluations of both
functional, and non-functional requirements of the developed application.
1.1
Learnability
Prior to the detailed evaluation of the application, as part of the assessment it
is emphasised that dealing with geographical data requires learning by the stu-
dent both concerning the format of the data, and also regarding the appropriate
tools to interpret and represent the data which makes the work done consid-
erable from the learning perspective. Accordingly, the shapeﬁle format as the
geospatial vector data format for geographic information system software are
appropriately used and interpreted as primitive geometric shapes like points,
lines, and polygons. Open Street Map (OSM) has been employed as the source
of geographical data properly. To visualise the data in 2D format, MapsUI as
the rendering component introduced by OSM, has been employed suitably.
Also a detailed domain analysis of two softwares of Rosy and Vejman which
are currently used by the end user has been provided. The analysis helps to
understand their functionality and ﬁnd the common elements which can be
reused in the LiRA project.
1.2
Evaluation on Functional Requirements
The functional requirements of the solution asked by the end user have been
tested according to the provided user stories in the thesis:
• User Story 1: OSM has been employed properly.
• User Story 2: MapsUI has been used appropriately to render and visu-
alise the geographical data.
59
==PAGE:60==
• User Story 3: The road can be selected, and the statistics regarding the
number of sections and the number of conditions of the selected road are
shown properly. It would be desired if these statistics could be shown in
more details to the end user.
• User Story 4: The roads are searchable via their name and then the
map will navigate to the related geographic area as expected.
• User Story 5: KPIs are shown for the sections of one particular road at
once.
• User Story 6: The user is able to select one of the multiple indices, and
the value of chosen index is shown for the sections of all the roads at once.
1.3
Evaluation on non-Functional Requirements
This section stipulates the criteria used to judge the operation of the software
application, rather than speciﬁc behaviours deﬁned as functional requirements.
• Usability: Usability refers the degree to which the software solution’s
attributes make the solution easy to operate and control.
– Context sensitive help: A context sensitive help can be added
to the solution in order to facilitate usability of the solution. This
is doable through adding screenTips, pop-up windows or menus on
controls of the User Interface.
The context sensitive help can be
added in two diﬀerent aspects to the solution:
∗UI Controls: UI controls can be enriched with the context sen-
sitive help, such that when user hovers over the controls, he/she
can be informed about functionality of the control.
∗Geographic queries: The context sensitive help can be appli-
cable on the map, such that when user hover over the objects on
the map, the data regarding the attributes of the objects at the
pointed location can be queried and be shown to the user.
∗Flexible UI: It is desirable that users have the ability to resize
the UI window to allow for easy comprehension of content, layout
and navigation.
This is doable through adding screenTips, hyperlinks to the relevant
help pages, pop-up windows/menus on the controls of the User In-
terface, or over the map control itself.
– User/error messages, and notiﬁcation: The solution can be
enriched with appropriate and consistent messages across the appli-
cation. The messages can be displayed on the UI depending on the
scenario which user experiences. In case of errors, they shall not ter-
minate the session causing the loss of any valid data entered. The
scenarios can be entering the wrong input data, pushing a UI button
without entering the required data, and etc.
60
==PAGE:61==
• Performance: The degree to which the solution uses appropriate amounts
and types of resources when it performs its function under diﬀerent cir-
cumstances. The current developed system is a single user application.
Thereby one way of evaluating the performance of the software is con-
sidering the needs of LiRA project in future.
The possibility that the
system can be extended to represent the ﬂow of raw data collected from
car sensors can be a means for evaluation of the software performance at
later stage. Whenever a new batch of raw data is read and interpreted,
a trigger module as part of the system can be implemented to inform the
system as a notiﬁcation to represent the data to the end user.
• Interoperability: The capability of the solution to interact with one or
more speciﬁed systems, whether it is via data import/export, or through
direct integration capabilities. Accordingly, the solution can be improved
in two diﬀerent aspects:
– Data import/export: The solution can be enriched with capability
to import geographic shape ﬁles directly, and be able to export the
data regarding the selected area of the map. The end user can select
which information is desired to be exported such as diﬀerent condi-
tion indices of the selected map area or one/several sections. Both
functionalities of import and export can be exposed to the solution
via an API.
– Integration capabilities: The solution does not follow a design
pattern to propose a loosely coupled software architecture such that
the development of the graphical user interface is mixed with the
business logic, and the backend logic(data model). A Model–view-
–viewModel(MVVM) can be a suggested architecture, where WPF
is used as the UI layer. MVVM eases the separation of development
of the graphical user interface from development of the business logic
or the data model. The current tightly coupled architecture imposes
several challenges along the expected upcoming changes.
• Adaptability: The degree to which a solution can be adapted to diﬀerent
hardware devices or software solutions in diﬀerent operating environments.
– Conﬁguration: An early step to any adaptability is that the sys-
tem should be conﬁgurable. As an example currently, the connection
strings to connect to the database is hard-coded and cannot be con-
ﬁgured independently.
• Maintainability: The degree to which a solution can be used to diagnose
defects/failures.
– Logs: The code requires to be enriched with logging and exception
handling such that the system will not stop working if there is any
exception. An example, the system stops when there is an error in
connecting to the database.
61
==PAGE:62==
• Testability: Adding unit tests to the software solution is highly recom-
mended to check the code behaviour. This can move the solution develop-
ment towards the Test-Driven software development such that the whole
project will beneﬁt from in the long time. As suggestion, dependency in-
jection can be used to facilitate the software testing, the classes can be
written more modular with more speciﬁc functions, so the code can be
reused much easier.
62
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1] Enterprise Application Container Platform — Docker, 2019. URL: https:
//www.docker.com/.
[2] JSON Types, 2019.
URL: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.5/
datatype-json.html.
[3] LiRA Project, 2019. URL: http://lira-project.dk/.
[4] OpenStreetMap, 2019. URL: https://www.openstreetmap.org/.
[5] OSM Frameworks, 2019. URL: https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/
Frameworks#Displaying_interactive_maps.
[6] QGIS, Open-Source GIS, 2019. URL: https://qgis.org/.
[7] Replacing
EAV
with
JSONB
in
PostgreSQL,
2019.
URL:
https://coussej.github.io/2016/01/14/
Replacing-EAV-with-JSONB-in-PostgreSQL/.
[8] Kent Beck, Mike Beedle, Arie van Bennekum, Alistair Cockburn, Ward
Cunningham, Martin Fowler, James Grenning, Jim Highsmith, Andrew
Hunt, Ron Jeﬀries, Jon Kern, Brian Marick, Robert C. Martin, Steve Mel-
lor, Ken Schwaber, JeﬀSutherland, and Dave Thomas.
Manifesto for
agile software development, 2001.
URL: http://agilemanifesto.org/
principles.html.
[9] Roland S Chen, Prakash Nadkarni, Luis Marenco, Forrest Levin, Joseph
Erdos, and Perry L Miller.
Exploring performance issues for a clinical
database organized using an entity-attribute-value representation. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association, 7(5):475–487, 2000.
[10] Mike Cohn. User stories applied : for agile software development. Addison-
Wesley, 2004.
[11] Paul Den Dulk. Mapsui, 2019. URL: https://mapsui.com/.
[12] Paul Den Dulk. Mapsui Documentation, 2019. URL: http://mapsui.com/
api/index.html.
[13] Alan R Hevner and Samir Chatterjee. Design research in information sys-
tems : theory and practice. Springer, 2010.
[14] Alan R Hevner, Salvatore T March, Jinsoo Park, and Sudha Ram. Design
science in information systems research. MIS quarterly, pages 75–105, 2004.
[15] Robert C. Martin. Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and
Practices. 2002.
[16] Sweco.
Drift
og
vedligeholdelse
af
belægninger
og
assets,
2019.
URL:
https://www.sweco.dk/vi-tilbyder/infrastruktur/
63
==PAGE:64==
drift-og-vedligeholdelse-af-belagninger-og-assets2/?service=
RoSy%C2%AE%20RAMS%20-%20Road%20Asset%20Management%20System.
[17] Vejdirektoratet.
Kortvisning, 2019.
URL: https://apps.vejman.dk/
kortvisning.
64
