==PAGE:1==
Design of an interface for remote monitoring of 
critical deviations in the daily activities of a frail 
elderly home-dwelling family member
Andreas Villadsen 
s143994
Ditte Jørgensen
s145327
MSc thesis Design and Innovation
January 26th 2020  
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
Andreas Villadsen
s143994
Ditte Jørgensen
s145327
Design of an interface for remote monitoring of critical deviations in 
the daily activities of a frail elderly home-dwelling family member
This thesis is the final project of the MSc programme in Design & Innovation. The thesis is 
conducted with DTU management at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfilment of the 
requirements to obtain a M.Sc.Eng. The project was carried out in the 5 months’ period from 
August 26, 2019 to January 26 2020.
Students:
Andreas Villadsen
Ditte Jørgensen 
Supervisor: 
Henning Boje Andersen
==PAGE:4==
 
==PAGE:5==
Abstract 
Lack of oversight of a frail home-dwelling elderly can in some
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases lead to critical events going unnoticed. Consequences of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are often costly, irreversible, or even fatal. Thus, many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives of frail elderly persons living alone, often experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feelings of worry and are burdened by concerns related to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well-being of the elderly. ​Existing research proposes to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alleviate these problems by use of in home monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies. However, most of the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems target healthcare professionals and not the relatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as main users. Therefore, this thesis strives to explore the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design of a user interface, of an in home monitoring system,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targeting relatives as the main users.  
 
Particularly, the thesis adopts a user centric design thinking
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
approach,
to
investigate
how
a UI and its underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system should be designed, in order to alleviate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worries and concerns experienced by the relatives and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly. Through semi-structured interviews with 7 relatives
 
 
 
 
  
 
and
14
elderlies,
user
needs
and
requirements
were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated. The focus being to empathize with users through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their stories, worries and perceptions of the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring
system.
Additionally,
three
loops
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype-facilitated user tests were conducted to uncover UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific user needs and requirements. 
 
 
 
The resulting UI design proposal, is a minimalistic teal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coloured user interface for smartphones, named SenseFriend.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The UI revolves around a dashboard with a status indicator,
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
communicating the level of deviation in behavioural trends.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the UI contains a log of the latest activities and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
an overview of the weekly and monthly trends in specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities. ​Based on 3 rounds of evaluation and testing with
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
users, it is safe to assume that the proposed UI design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents
the
test
participants’
essential
needs
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements. However, whether or not, the proposed UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design
encapsulates
the
average
relatives’
needs
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements, cannot be concluded from this project. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank our thesis supervisor Henning Boje
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andersen, Professor emeritus, Senior Researcher at DTU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management engineering, for providing inspiration, feedback
 
 
 
 
 
 
and guidance throughout the project. 
 
We would also like to acknowledge everyone that participated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in interviews or user tests, thank you for setting time aside to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meet and talk to us. Without you, this project would not have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been possible. 
 
A special thank you to Gitte Ifergan, Group leader of the care
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centre Bonderupgård, as well as the staff and users of the care
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centre. Thanks for giving us a unique opportunity and taking
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
good care of us while we were your guests. 
 
Lastly we would also like to thank Lars Nørh, chief consultant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of quality and innovation in the elder care sector of Aalborg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipality, for sharing his thoughts and experiences with us. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Reading guide 
The thesis consists of 7 chapters in total. In the first chapter,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intro​, the thesis project is introduced and outlined and in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
last chapter, ​outro​, the thesis project is concluded and reflected
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
upon. The 5 chapters in between are structured according to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the process of the project, where each chapter represent a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
specific phase. Each chapter has its own specific colour, and in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the beginning of each chapter a model will indicate the phase
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of the process. In the end of each chapter, the particular phase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are
wrapped
up
with
a
discussion,
reflection
and
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sub-conclusion.  
  
Throughout the thesis, appendices are referenced with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simple code in square brackets, indicating the number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chapter and sequence. Eg. [A 3.2] will reference the second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appendix in the third chapter. The appendices are compiled in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a separate document, enabling the reader to investigate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appendices alongside the reading. We will encourage the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reader to do so, as it can enhance the understanding of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process. Though, it is still possible to read and understand the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis without the appendices.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
External literature is referenced using the citation style
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Psychological Association 6th edition (APA). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
author and year are referenced in brackets directly in the text,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like: (Norman, 2013).  
 
In
the
following,
a
glossary
of
the
used
terms
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abbreviations are presented, and can be used throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reading to support the reader’s comprehension.  
 
Regarding figures and tables, if they do not contain a source
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
reference in the figure/table text, the content is original work
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
from the thesis team.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
Terms 
 
Relative 
The relative to an elderly family member or a friend that is 
providing care to the elderly. (caregiver, next of kin)  
 
Elderly family member  
The elderly person, whom the relative is worried about. It 
could also be a friend.  (care receiver) 
 
Fall alarm  
A device that enables the elderly to notify emergency services 
with the click of a button.  (Fall pendant, faldalarm, nødkald) 
 
Safety visit/call 
A home care service offered to check up on elderly people 
worried about falling or other critical events. It can both be in 
the form of a visit or a phone call. 
(tryghedsbesøg/tryghedsopkald) 
 
Multimodality 
Refers to the use of more than one mode. In the context used in 
this thesis, it refers to the use of more than one sensor/sensor 
type collaborating for the same specific purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations 
 
AAL / Ambient Assisted Living  
UI / User Interface 
REACH / Responsive Engagement of elderly promoting
 
 
 
 
 
Activity and Customized Healthcare 
UX / User Experience 
ADL / Activities of Daily Living 
IADL / Instrumental Activities of Daily Living 
FOF / Fear of falling 
ICT / Information and Communication Technologies  
RAM / Remote Activity Monitoring 
PIR / Passive Infrared 
EMG / Electromyography 
ECG / Electrocardiography 
IRC / Infrared Radiation Changes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPC / Statistical Process Control  
EWS / Early Warning  Score 
 ​IoT / Internet of Things 
USM / User Story Map 
MVP / Minimum Viable Product 
Lo-Fi / Low fidelity 
Hi-Fi / High fidelity 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
==PAGE:11==
 
Content 
1. INTRODUCTION
4 
1.1. Project origin
4 
1.2. Project scope
4 
1.3. Research questions
5 
1.4. Thesis Process
6 
1.5. Theoretical framework
8 
2. BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION
10 
2.1. Methodology
11 
2.2. Problem context
12 
2.3. Technological domain
18 
2.4. Discussion
32 
2.5. Reflection
34 
2.6. Conclusions
34 
3. USER RESEARCH
36 
3.1. Methodology
37 
3.2. User research - relatives
38 
3.3. User research - elderly
50 
3.4. Stakeholder map
62 
3.5. Conclusion
64 
4. DEFINITION OF THE SENSOR-SYSTEM
65 
4.1. Methodology
66 
4.2. System breakdown
66 
4.3. Initial user requirements
67 
4.4. Concept definition
68 
4.5. User scenarios
76 
4.6. Discussion and reflection
80 
4.7. Conclusion
80 
5. UI DESIGN
81 
5.1. Methodology
82 
5.2. Scoping of the UI design
86 
5.3. Loop 1: Type and level of information
89 
5.4. Loop 2: Setup and configuration
95 
5.5. Loop 3: Refined UI design
100 
5.6. The final UI design
108 
5.7. Discussion
114 
5.8. Reflection
114 
5.9. Conclusions
115 
6. DISCUSSION
116 
6.1. Methodology
117 
6.2. Micro
117 
6.3. Meso
119 
6.4. Macro
122 
6.5. Reflection
124 
6.6. Conclusion
125 
7. OUTRO
126 
7.1. Process reflection
126 
7.2. Conclusion
128 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter the thesis project will be introduced and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clarified. In the following, the project origin, scope and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research questions will be presented. Furthermore, the thesis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process and plan will be presented. 
1.1. Project origin  
The project idea originates from a thesis proposal put forward
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
by the thesis supervisor, Henning Boje Andersen. The proposal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arose based on his work carried out in the EU funded project,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsive Engagement of elderly promoting Activity and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Customized Healthcare (REACH). The REACH project revolves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around the idea of a remote monitoring system developed to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
be used by professional caregivers (REACH 2020, n.d.).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, while working on the REACH project, it became clear
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
to him that there might also be a user need and a market
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
potential for a system targeted the relatives of frail elderly
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people instead of healthcare professionals. This resulted in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following thesis proposal:  
Design of a dashboard to monitor remotely daily activities of a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
frail elderly home-dwelling family member. 
For us as students, the thesis proposal was especially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting, as one of the main goals for our thesis project was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it should be people centred. Furthermore, we found the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal relatable as lack of oversight of an elderly family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
member has caused problems in our own families. Therefore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we found it obvious to seize the opportunity and adopt the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis proposal. Additionally, ​most of the research focused on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring
systems
for
elderly
is
targeted
healthcare
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professionals or home care. This makes monitoring systems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targeted
the
relatives
a
relatively
under-explored,
but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dynamic, and promising area. Therefore, going into the project
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we were motivated by both academic curiosity, and strong
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empathy towards the context of the problem. Ultimately, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also saw the project as a unique opportunity to investigate and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
potentially add to this relatively novel area. 
1.2. Project scope 
The main purpose of the project is to explore the design of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
user interface (UI), exploiting ambient in-home sensors,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aiming to provide peace of mind for relatives worrying about a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
frail elderly family member living alone. In other words, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purpose is to explore the design of a UI and the underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
sensor system, of an ambient assisted living system (AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system) able to monitor and detect critical events and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviations in behavioural trends of a frail elderly person living
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
alone. In this regard, the main focus of the project is on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user
needs, requirements, and user experience of said
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
==PAGE:13==
 
monitoring system. The project will not only be centered
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around the visual presentation of data but also the types of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data that users wish to have access to, possibilities of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configuration, as well as the usability of the UI and the sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. 
 
The ​primary user of the proposed monitoring system is relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
concerned with the well-being of a frail elderly person living
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
alone. However, a sensor system will be installed in the home
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the frail elderly person, thus making them a ​secondary user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of the proposed monitoring system. The project will therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also focus on including the needs and requirements of the frail
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly person in the context of the design. 
 
Besides affecting the primary and secondary users, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system will potentially impact different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external stakeholders. Therefore, the project also aims to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discuss the likely impacts of the proposed monitoring system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on both an individual, organisational and a societal level. 
1.3. Research questions 
The research focus of the thesis project is expressed through a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
main problem statement and 4 specific research questions. 
 
 
Problem statement 
What are the key features of a monitoring system that will
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
enable relatives, of a frail elderly family member living alone, to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detect critical events and deviations in behavioral trends and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thereby relieve worries by both the relatives and the elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family member? 
 
Research questions 
●
What is the current status and history of ambient assisted
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
living (AAL) systems that target the detection of critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
events and deviations in activities of frail elderly citizens? 
 
●
How would a pilot study of a proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, utilising interviews and prototype-facilitated user
 
 
 
 
 
 
tests, uncover user needs and requirements? 
 
●
Which user interface design would fulfill the essential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user needs and requirements for the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system? 
 
●
What are the likely societal impacts on a micro, meso and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
macro level of monitoring systems of the proposed type? 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:14==
 
1.4. Thesis Process  
The thesis project has been divided into 5 phases; ​background
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
investigation, user research, definition of the sensor-system, UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design​ and ​discussion, ​see figure 1. 
 
 
The aim of the ​background investigation phase was to gain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge about the problem context and the technological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain surrounding the thesis. This phased helped creating a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
knowledge baseline for the subsequent phases of the thesis. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this report, the background investigation is represented in the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
form of a descriptive background chapter introducing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reader to the context of the thesis project.  
  
The aim of the ​user research ​phase was to investigate both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the relatives’ and the elderlies’ user needs and requirements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the proposed monitoring system. The user research was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
carried out through semi-structured interviews aimed at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding their stories, worries and perceptions of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed system.  
  
Learnings
from the user research and the background
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation was used in the ​definition of the sensor-system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase. In this phase, the underlying sensor-system of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system was defined in order to have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
specific baseline to develop the UI design from.  
  
The aim of the ​UI design phase was to develop a proposal for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
UI design for the proposed monitoring system, fulfilling the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
essential user needs and requirements. The phase was carried
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out with an iterative approach where the UI was developed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and refined through 3 loops of prototype facilitated user tests.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Besides developing a specific UI design, this phase also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided a deeper understanding of the user needs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements of the proposed monitoring system.  
  
Lastly, the aim of the ​discussion phase was to discuss likely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
benefits and challenges related to the proposed system on both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a micro, meso and macro level, with the aim of understanding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what impacts the proposed system could have on the society. 
  
To plan and structure the thesis throughout the project, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Gantt chart has been used. The Gantt chart has been revised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concurrently with the development of the process plan. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first edition of the Gantt chart can be seen in [A 1.1], while the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
final edition can be seen in [A 1.2].  
  
The report is structured according to the phases of the process
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and besides an intro and outro chapter, each chapter will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present a specific phase of the process. 
 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 - The 5 main phases of the thesis project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
==PAGE:16==
 
1.5. Theoretical framework  
In this section, the theoretical framework behind the thesis is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
described. For better readability, the specific theories and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods used throughout the thesis will be introduced in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding chapters.  
1.5.1. Design thinking 
The design process and problem solving approach of the thesis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has mainly been driven by the Design Thinking framework.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design Thinking can in its essence be described as a solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
development framework with a human/user-centric focus
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Plattner et al., 2010). From the approach presented in Brown
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& Wyatt (2010), 5 stages for working with the Design Thinking
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework can be derived: 
 
1. Empathize ​- Seeking to understand the users needs,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
pains and feelings. 
2. Define - Putting the user needs in relation to a problem
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
that can be solved. 
3. Ideate ​- Exploring the solution space and proposing a
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
solution. 
4. Prototype ​- Building a solution that meets parts of the
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
user needs. 
5. Test - Testing the solution with users in order to gather
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
valuable feedback. 
 
Even though the framework is described in stages, Design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thinking does ​not ​require the designers to follow a linear,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
stage-gate process. Instead, Design Thinking enables projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to loop back through the stages as the project evolves if so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
desired (Brown & Wyatt, 2010). This is apparent in the thesis
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
project, as the last 3 stages of the design thinking framework
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been worked through in iterations, see figure 2. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 - How an iterative UX design process can be adopted to the  5 
stages of the design thinking framework. 
 
The thesis project has developed through the 5 stages of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design thinking in the following ways; Initially it was sought to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Empathize with potential users by conducting semi structured
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews with both relatives and elderly and by investigating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the problem context. The identified user needs and pains were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
==PAGE:17==
 
then analysed and used to create themes and user personas,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which were used to ​Define the problem and solution space.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thereby giving the project a direction and focus to ​Ideate,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Prototype ​and ​Test solutions to the right problems. By testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UI prototypes new user insights were gained and assumptions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eliminated. With new knowledge, a new loop of ​Ideation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prototyping and ​Testing were conducted. This process was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
completed 3 times in total before developing a final UI design
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
proposal. 
1.5.2. Lean UX design 
Besides the design thinking approach, the approach for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing the UI design has been heavily inspired by the lean
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UX design approach presented by Klein (2013). The approach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revolves around testing ideas and hypotheses as quickly and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
often as possible. ​The lean loop is presented as a framework to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
do so, see figure 3. ​The lean loop ​revolves around 3 steps,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Building, Measuring ​and ​Learning, that should be iterated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout a design process in order to develop the ​product,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gather ​data ​and gain ​Ideas​. The steps making up the lean loop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be translated directly into the 3 stages; ideate, prototype
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
and test, of the Design Thinking framework. Hence using ​the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lean loop ​as a foundation for the UI design phase translated
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well into the Design thinking framework used in the thesis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project. 
 
Fig. 3 - “The Lean loop” graphic presented in the book “UX for lean 
startups” (Klein, 2013) 
 
Additionally, the ​lean UX ​approach to the UI design phase fit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the relatively short time-frame of the thesis project, as it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabled us to develop a user-driven and user-validated UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design in a short time frame.  
 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:18==
 
2. BACKGROUND 
INVESTIGATION 
In this chapter, key background information relevant for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem context and technological domain of the thesis is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented. The aim of this phase was to establish a knowledge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
baseline to support the subsequent phases of the thesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
==PAGE:19==
 
2.1. Methodology 
In this section, the specific methods, tools, and approaches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in the background investigation phase are described. 
2.1.1. Literature search  
To find relevant literature a number of different search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods were applied. First a block search method was used,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
where different search blocks were generated from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following stated search questions: 
 
●
How does the demographic development in Europe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
impact the healthcare system and the support of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly generations? 
 
●
How does hospitalization or long-term illness affect the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wellbeing of an elderly? 
 
●
How does relatives obligation to help an elderly family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
member impact their quality of life? 
 
●
What is the current outlook on telemedicine and welfare
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies for elder care? 
 
●
What state of the art research has been done on remote
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity monitoring of frail elderly people? 
●
What technological solutions are applicable in remote
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity monitoring of elderly people? 
 
For each question, a work document was made, where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important search facets and search terms were listed. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facets were then divided into blocks, containing all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different terms. The work documents for each question,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including the specific search terms can be seen in [A 2.1]. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
block search strategy did however not prove to be successful,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as it was unable to produce search results of relevant articles.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When changing the search terms and either adding or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
removing blocks, we found either too few articles or too many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
irrelevant articles. However, the method worked great as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
brainstorm method for search terms. The identified search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
terms were utilised in a random search strategy, which gave
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
more relevant articles.  
  
The best strategy was found to be the citation pearl growing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach, where citations of fundamental and relevant articles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were used to find more relevant articles on the desired topic.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This approach was then applied every time a new relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
article was found. The databases used for the literature search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has mainly been DTU find it, Web of Science and PubMed. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
total, the literature search resulted in 80 relevant articles,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are all included in the background investigation. 
 
11 
==PAGE:20==
 
Additionally, to investigate the market, searches on both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
google and YouTube was made with captions like; ​“monitor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly”, “monitoring elderly in home”, “in home monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly” ​and​ “relative monitoring elderly”. 
2.2. Problem context 
The purpose of researching the problem context was to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
validate the initial idea of the problem and to gain a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
comprehensive understanding of both the main problem and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related subproblems. 
2.2.1. An ageing society  
The world population is steadily becoming older. Globally, the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
share of people aged 60 years or older has increased from 9,2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% in 1990 to 11,7 % in 2013 and is projected to reach 21,1 %
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
in 2050 (United Nations, 2013). Furthermore, the elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
population is also becoming older, as the life expectancy is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing. It is projected that the global share of people aged
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 years or older will increase from 14 % in 2013 to 19 % in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2050 (United Nations, 2013). 
 
In EU, the share of people aged 65 years or older is projected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to rise from 20 % in 2018 to 31 % in 2100, while the share of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the people aged 80 years or older is projected to nearly triple
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
from 6 % to 15 % in the same time span (Eurostat, 2019[A]). 
 
In Denmark, the amount of people aged 80-89 is expected to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase by approximately 90 % from 2018 to 2040. Regarding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the people aged 90 or above the amount is expected to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase by around 150 % by 2040 compared to 2018 (KL,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019[A]), see figure 4. 
 
Fig. 4 - Increase in the amount of old people from 2018 to 2025, 2030 and 
2040, source; (KL, 2019[A])  
 
At the same time the share of working-age people is predicted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to
decrease
in the future. Globally, the ratio between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
working-age people (aged 15-64) and older people (aged 65
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
years or more) has declined steadily since 1950 and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decline is expected to continue in the future. In 2013, the ratio
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was 8 working-age persons for one elderly person and it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:21==
 
expected to fall to 4 by 2050 (United Nations, 2013). This ratio
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is even lower in the more developed regions of the world. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instance, in the EU, the ratio in 2018 was slightly above 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
working-age persons for each elderly person and is expected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be fewer than 2 in 2100 (Eurostat, 2019[A]).  
  
If the retirement policies of today is retained at the same level,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
these
demographic
developments
will
cause
significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
pressure on the labour force. Consequently, it is expected that
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
there will be less healthcare workers to support the increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aged population in the future. 
  
The big question is, if the elderly will experience a healthier
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
ageing in the future or if the morbidity will rise proportionally
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
with the life expectancy. If morbidity will increase with age, it
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
will cause an increasing pressure on the healthcare system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Chatterji et. al, 2015). 
2.2.2. Frailty in elderly people  
The likelihood of functional disability increases with age. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
survey made by the Congressional Budget Office [CBO] (2013)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the USA, based on data from 2000-2010, demonstrate this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation.
The
results
show
that
18
%
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community-dwelling
people
aged
65-74
experienced
 
 
 
 
 
functional limitations. For the age group 75-84 the results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were 31 % and more than half (54 %) of the people aged 85 or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
above experienced functional limitations (CBO, 2013), see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
figure 4. 
 
Fig. 4 - Overview of the increase in functional limitations with age, 
source;  (CBO, 2013) 
 
In the CBO (2013) study the functional limitations were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
derived from an assessment of the elderlies’ difficulty with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performing
basic
activities
of
daily
living
(ADLs)
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs). The basic ADLs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are related to self-care and refer to the daily tasks that make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an
individual
live
independently
in
their
home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Seniorliving.org, n.d.). The ADL’s included in the CBO study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are the following; 
-
Bathing, dressing, eating, walking, transferring out of bed
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
or a chair​ and​ using the toilet. 
13 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
The IADLs are more complex and refer to the tasks that enable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an individual to live independently within a community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Seniorliving.org, n.d.). The IADLs included in the CBO study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are the following;  
-
Preparing
meals,
shopping,
using
the
telephone,
 
 
 
 
 
 
managing money ​and ​taking medications. 
 
The term ADL were originally developed as an index of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities of daily living by Dr. Sidney Katz and his team at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Benjamin Rose Hospital in Ohio in 1963 (Noelker & Browdie,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2013). The index is also known as the Katz index and was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
original only based on the basic activities of daily living. Later
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Katz developed the instrumental activities of daily living as an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
add-on to functional assessment strategy (McCabe, 2019). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assessment of ADLs is perceived as one of the best and most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used strategies for evaluating the functional status of elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people (McCabe, 2019). 
2.2.3. Hospitalisation of elderly people 
It is commonly known that hospitalisation of elderly people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can lead to negative side effects, affecting their future health
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and well-being. Research have shown that many elderly people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
develop new functional limitations after a hospitalisation (Wu
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
et al., 2000; Covinsky et al., 2003; Volpato et al., 2007; Gill et al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2010). The older and more frail the patients are, the more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likely they are to experience functional decline and disabilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after hospitalisation. Results of Volpato et al. (2007) show that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
almost 25 % of patients aged 85 years or above developed new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functional disabilities over the course of hospitalisation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations made by Gill et al. (2010) show that up to 41.1 %
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of frail and hospitalised women aged 85 or more experienced a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
transition
from
no
disability
to
mild
disability
after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitalisation. 
 
King (2006) describes the hospital environment as “hazardous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to older adults” (p. 270) and note that some of the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasons for functional decline are complications derived from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the following aspects of hospitalisation; 
●
Enforced bed rest 
●
Hospital acquired infections 
●
Falls due to environmental hazards 
●
Medications 
●
Malnutrition 
 
This underlines the value of avoiding hospitalisation of elderly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as it can be the root cause of new complications. 
2.2.4. Falls in elderly people  
The ageing process may affect vision, strength and balance,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which can lead to an increased risk of falling for adults aged 65
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or
more
(National
Safety
Council,
n.d.).
According
to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:23==
 
Sundhed.dk (2018), around every third person aged 65 or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
older will experience at least one fall incident yearly.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, Bergen et al (2016) notes that falls account for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the leading cause of fatal and nonfatal injuries for older adults
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(aged 65 or more). Fleming & Brayne’s (2008) survey of fall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incidents among persons aged 90 or more, shows that persons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who fell were unable to get up again in 66 % of the reported
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fall cases. A key learning was that the inability to get up after a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
fall increases with age, due to a decrease in muscle function. 
If an elderly person is living alone and is unable to get up by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves, the consequences can be fatal. The time spent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lying on the floor waiting for help can cause additional harm,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
besides the damage caused by the fall. These additional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complications
can
be
pressure
sores,
carpet
burns,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dehydration, hypothermia (sub-cooling), pneumonia, and in
 
 
 
 
 
 
worst case death (Tinetti et al., 1993). The survey conducted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by Tinetti et al. (1993) shows that persons with an inability to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
get up, after a fall, had a greater chance of experiencing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
permanent functional decline (35 %), than persons who were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
able to get up by themselves (26 %).  
 
For a 12 week-period Gurley et al. (1996) followed the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paramedics of San Francisco to carry out a study. They were
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
investigating the cases where a person was found helpless or
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
dead. Based on the study they defined a typical patient in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
following way; 
A typical patient was an 82-year-old white woman who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was found by a neighbor during a routine check. She
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
was lying on the floor, soiled by dirt, feces, and urine,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and had garbled speech. She was estimated to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been incapacitated for more than 72 hours. She was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
admitted with decubitus ulcers and dehydration. After
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 days, she was discharged to a skilled-nursing facility.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(Gurley et al, 1996, p. 1711) 
The Gurley et al. (1996) survey found that the longer time the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
person had been lying helpless, the more cases of mortality,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospital admissions, and dischargement to facilities like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nursing homes were recorded.  
 
Because of the critical consequences a fall can cause, many
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
older adults experience the phenomenon ​fear of falling (FOF).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Legters (2002), an average of 30 % or more of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
older adults, who have not experienced falling, will have some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degree of FOF. Regarding older adults who have experienced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
falling, it is claimed that the average prevalence of FOF is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
doubled to 60 % or more. The experience of fear of falling can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have consequences for the wellbeing of the older adults.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hadjistavropoulos et al (2011) identified that FOF can lead to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduced
quality
of
life,
activity
restriction,
loss
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independence, and an increased risk of falling. ​A 2010 study
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
also found that anxiety about falling may lead to higher risk of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
falling. Results of the study show, that despite having a low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
physiological fall risk, worrying about falling leads to more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:24==
 
falls compared to elderly who does not worry as much
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Delbaera et al., 2010) 
 
The research done in this field substantiates the importance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing and introducing tools that can both reduce the fear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of falling and help detect if an elderly person is lying helpless
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
in their home, as it can have fatal consequences for the elderly.  
2.2.5. Elderly people living alone 
If an elderly person lives alone, many of the above-mentioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges and complications can be worsened. Without a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partner to provide support and awareness, it is hard to detect
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
and get timely help when accidents or decline in health occur.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Eurostat (2019[B]), an increasing number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
older people are living alone, especially elderly women. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2017, 40,4 % of older women (65+) were living alone in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EU. In Denmark, the share of older women living alone was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more than 50 % in 2017, where the same number for older
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
men were only 35 %. An analysis made by KL (2019[B]) shows
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that elderly people (65+) are living alone in an average of 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
years after their partner has passed away. In 72 % of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysed cases, it is woman who lives the longest. The women
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will in average live alone in 17 years before they pass away,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where men will live alone in an average for 10,5 years. 
In Japan, the world's most rapidly aging society, elderly people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
die alone and unnoticed in their apartments every day. It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
estimated that around 4000 elderly die alone and unnoticed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every year in Japan (Onishi, 2017). It is not uncommon for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their remains to go unnoticed for weeks, until for instance a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
neighbour start complaining about the smell. The problem has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gotten so big that an entire industry has emerged around
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cleaning up apartments after decomposing bodies (Kuo, 2015).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The case of japan is a horrifying example of what can happen
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
because of an ageing society lacking oversight of its elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
population. And it stresses the fact that elderly people living
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alone, compared to elderly people living with a spouse, have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
higher risk of taking their last breaths suffering and helpless. 
2.2.6. Relatives caring for an older adult 
The help and care that relatives provide for elderly family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members are substantial contributions. A relative involved in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
care can entail a worthy and meaningful life for the elderly,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
despite illness and physical decline. However, many relatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience, that long-term care can be associated with high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social-, economic-, work- and health related costs (Ældre
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sagen, n.d.). 
According to a 2017 Voxmeter survey made for Ældre Sagen,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 % of the Danish population provides or have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing care for an elderly family member (Ældre sagen,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2017). From the same survey, the following insights about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives were concluded; 
16 
==PAGE:25==
 
●
The majority of the relatives are family, mostly children,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but also children-in-law and grandchildren. 
●
Most relatives help an elderly living in a private home
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
or a sheltered housing unit for elderly. 
●
The relatives are mostly between 30-69 years old. 
  
In the same study, 95 % of the relatives agreed or partly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreed with the statement: “​it is natural for me to help” and 89
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% agreed or partly agreed with the statement: ​“it is a pleasure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
for me to help” (Ældre sagen, 2017). The majority of relatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had positive experiences of providing help and care. However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some relatives also agreed that it could be associated with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative experiences. The negative statements where the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biggest part of the relatives agreed or partly agreed were the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following;  
●
“I have to disregard myself and my personal needs” ​(35
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% agreed or partly agreed) 
●
“I have feelings of guilt and bad conscience” (26 %
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreed or partly agreed) 
●
“It is burdening for me to provide help” ​(21 % agreed or
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partly agreed) (Ældre sagen, 2017).  
  
In Denmark, there are expectations to what areas of the help
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and care the home-care services are responsible for, and what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
areas the relatives are responsible for. According to Ældre
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sagen’s survey on relatives, 72 % agreed or partly agreed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it is the relative’s job to help with “Support, oversight, finding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
missing things, and providing motivation by visiting and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
telephone conversations”. On the other hand, 78 % disagreed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or partly disagreed that it is the home care’s job to “perform
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
treatments of wounds, insert catheter, and give injections or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other treatment” (Ældre sagen, 2017).  
 
 
17 
==PAGE:26==
 
2.3. Technological domain 
In this section, the technological domain related to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system is explored. This is done by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigating the current status and history of the AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research field. Also by reviewing research where sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology is applied to monitor and detect critical deviations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and events in the elderly’s home. 
2.3.1. Ambient assisted living 
Ambient assisted living (AAL) is an umbrella term used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
categorize multiple disciplines, technologies, research, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
products. The AAL field aims at utilising information and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication technologies (ICT) for creating smart solutions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within healthcare and telehealth systems, with the purpose of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling elder people to age well at home (Belbachir, Drobics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& Marschitz, 2010; Al-Shaqi, Mourshed & Rezgui, 2016). AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems have shown great potential for solving many of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
societal challenges that comes with an ageing population,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while on the same time improving the lives of elderly people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Belbachir et al., 2010; Costin et al., 2011; Cahill et al., 2019).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The AAL field covers many topics, but one of the largest is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity monitoring and emergency monitoring. Such systems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus on event detection and behaviour understanding in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context of the environment (Monekosso, Florez-Revuelta &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remagnino, 2015). Other AAL systems focus on human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
machine interaction, e.g. using light prompts to train the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly in time orientation (Guillomía, Artigas, & Falcó, 2019).
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
In the context of this project, the focus has been on AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems of the former topic, namely systems concerned with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity and emergency monitoring. 
 
In 2008, the AAL field gained traction in literature following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the founding of the EU joint programme, ​AAL-programme​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aimed to promote research and development in ICT-solutions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for ageing well (AAL-Programme, n.d.[A]). Prior to the EU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme, many published articles used terms such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remote Activity Monitoring (RAM), Health smart homes, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telehealth monitoring to describe similar solutions, and some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
still do. However, it seems that the AAL field has united many
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researchers working within this domain and it has become the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
preferred way of describing such solutions.  
 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:27==
 
AAL systems consist of sensor networks, computer networks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and software applications interconnected to monitor, analyse,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpret and exchange information. From an engineering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design viewpoint, Memon et al. (2014) defines AAL systems as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being: 
Multi-engineering systems consisting of components
 
 
 
 
 
and equipment from different engineering domains
 
 
 
 
 
 
spanning device manufacturing, energy consumption,
 
 
 
 
 
robotics, computing, and telecommunication. (Memon
 
 
 
 
 
et al., 2014, p. 4320) 
  
AAL systems are often thought to be used to provide insights
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about a patient’s well-being directly to a nurse or a doctor.
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Therefore, AAL systems are also thought to be used as part of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
telemedicine practices to remotely provide health services to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patients. A 2018 EU market study of telemedicine concludes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the market potential of telemedicine is strong and is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 14% in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the coming years. Furthermore, the EU study found evidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggesting that telemedicine is cost-effective in 73.3% of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cases covered by literature (European commission, 2018). Cost
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effectiveness being one of the key drivers for AAL systems, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current efforts within the field seems to create successful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions. As outlined in section 2.2, there is an immense
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
socio-economic value in helping elderly stay independent and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in familiar surroundings for longer, as it may reduce the need
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
for external care. Something that the EU acted upon in 2008,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when they under article 185 of the Treaty on the Functioning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the European Union, established the joint AAL programme,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involving 22 countries of the EU. The first joint AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme running from 2008 to 2013 was deemed a success,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
receiving
a
very
positive
evaluation
by
the
European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commission. The programme was renewed as a new AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
program running from 2014-2020 as part of the EU horizon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2020. The new joint AAL programme is an applied Research,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development,
and
Innovation
funding
programme
that
 
 
 
 
 
 
supports projects developing ICT solutions for ageing well. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
goals of the programme are to:  
1) Benefit the individual and their family.  
2) Benefit support and care systems across Europe.  
3) Benefit European economies.  
Furthermore, the programme underlines the importance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involving end-users in the development of AAL products,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stating that involvement of end-users is considered essential in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
projects that are to be funded by the programme (AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme, n.d.[B]). 
  
In literature, AAL systems or parts of them are examined,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explored, tested, and/or developed in many ways. However, all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AAL systems have one thing in common; they all utilise some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
form of sensor technology. In the following section, an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overview of how different sensor technologies has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in the context of AAL will be presented. 
19 
==PAGE:28==
 
2.3.2. Applied technologies in AAL monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems 
To understand what sensor technologies are applicable in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
monitoring system, different AAL research articles were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reviewed. It was found that research in the AAL field differs in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus. Some research focus on developing new methods,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
techniques, or technology solutions, while other research focus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on testing systems or developing new ways to analyse and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpret information. Additionally, it was found that there are
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
many
different
AAL
approaches
for
monitoring elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home-dwelling people, differing in application purpose and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor types. From the AAL literature reviewed, 4 different
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
application categories were derived: 
 
1. Emergency
detection
-
​Systems
concerned
with
 
 
 
 
 
 
detecting critical events, such as falls or vocal distress
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calls. 
 
2. Activity
monitoring
-
​Systems
concerned
with
 
 
 
 
 
 
detecting frailty or decline in health by monitoring and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluating daily activities. 
 
3. Combined:
Emergency
&
Activity
monitoring
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
Systems concerned with both detecting critical events
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as monitoring daily activities. 
 
4. Health
monitoring
-
​Systems
concerned
with
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring specific vital parameters or functions (e.g.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECG monitoring of a person's heart signature). 
 
Furthermore, it was found that the systems could be based on
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two main sensor types or a combination of both: 
 
1. Wearable - sensors that are encapsulated in a wearable
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
device, a watch, a pendant, a phone, a shoe or a piece of
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
clothes etc.  
 
2. Ambient - sensors that are placed in the home of the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly that do not need to be carried or worn by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly. It could be sensors embedded in different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
furniture or sensors simply attached to walls or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
furniture. 
 
An overview of the specific purposes, type of sensors and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied sensor technologies for each category can be seen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
table 1 on the following pages.  
 
20 
==PAGE:29==
 
Table 1: AAL-system application categories divided in purpose, type of sensors 
(A=Ambient and W=wearables) and applied sensor technologies.  
 
 
 
21 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
 
22 
==PAGE:31==
 
The most used sensor technologies and their application
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities is described in the following sections. 
Application of audio sensors 
Using microphones to capture and analyse audio events in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
home setting, is a concept that many researchers have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explored. Ranging from studies concerned with using audio to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detect activities of daily living (Siantikos et al., 2017; Vuegeri
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
et al., 2015; Giannakopoulos & Konstantopoulos, 2017; Vacher
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
et al., 2009) to studies focusing on fall and emergency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detection (Li, Ho & Popescu, 2012; Principi, et al., 2015;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacher,
et
al.,2019).
In
general,
promising
results
are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showcased
in the literature. In an experimental setup,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Siantikos et al. (2017) was able to distinguish between 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different
bathroom
activities
with
an
average
70%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classification performance. Interestingly, this was done with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low cost hardware (Raspberry-PI) and with minimal training
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the machine learning algorithm. In the case of emergency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detection, Principi et al. (2015) developed a system able to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
detect distress calls or abnormal acoustic events with the use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of only a few microphones mounted on the ceiling. The system
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would
also
function as a hands-free home automation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
controller,
and
even
in
distress
situations
hands
free
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication could be established through the system. With
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimental results of 87.32% and 95.53% accuracy in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emergency detection, respectively for a day setting and a night
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
setting, the systems shows very promising results.  
The robustness of solely using audio sensors is currently not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
good enough for real world application, as is evident in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature.
Especially
when
concerned
with
emergency
 
 
 
 
 
 
situations, it is crucial to have an extremely low margin of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
error. However, audio modality is a promising way to acquire
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
information that are not available through other classical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors (Vacher et al., 2009). Thus, audio sensors can be very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
valuable as complementary sensors in a sensor network. 
Application of PIR sensors 
A passive infrared (PIR) sensor is a highly useful motion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detector, due to its sensitivity to the Infrared Radiation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changes (IRC) induced by human motion (Guan et al., 2019).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The PIR sensor and other similar infrared sensors are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commonly known and widely used in applications such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automatic light switching or home intruder alarm systems. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
can be argued that PIR sensors also raise less privacy concerns,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the technology is only able to detect changes in radiation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and not, for instance, capture images or sound. On top of this,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PIR sensors come with a low price tag and a low operating
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
power consumption, making it a popular choice for AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications.  
In the AAL field, PIR sensors have been used in a wide range of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
applications; detecting activity patterns, detecting frailty,
 
 
 
 
 
 
detecting sleep patterns, fall detection and in home localisation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(see table 1 for references). In the literature, PIR is shown to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
be valuable in various configurations, whether it is a part of a
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
23 
==PAGE:32==
 
network of sensors or by itself. A 2018 experiment, involving
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
46 elderlies (60-91 years old), showcased impressive results in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their efforts of detecting frailty by use of PIR sensors. With a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sensor installed in each room of the participants’ apartment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(see fig. 5), they were able to detect sleep duration, intensity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
movement, location occupancy of different rooms, and number
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of transitions between rooms. The study found that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domestic living pattern of an elderly, detected by PIR sensors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and a door contact sensor, could successfully identify if an
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly was frail or robust. Even claiming to reach a 100% true
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
positive rate of frailty detection, if a 19% false positive rate
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
was tolerable (Goonawardene, Tan & Tan, 2018). Furthermore,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Kaushik & Celler (2007) concludes that increasing the amount
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of PIR sensors in a room to 4 per room, can greatly increase
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the sensitivity of the system, enabling detection of activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as reading a book or talking on the phone. One of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advantages of PIR is that it can be configured to only require
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
very low computational time to be interpreted, meaning that a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PIR system essentially can capture human activity in real time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Something that a Chinese study from 2019 showcased, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which they were able to detect 5 human activities (​walking,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
fast walking, sitting, squatting, and falling​) in real time with an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
average correct classification rate of 91.6 % (Guan, et al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019). 
Fig. 5 - PIR = Passive infrared sensor, DC = Door contact sensor & 
GW = Internet gateway. Source: (Goonawardene, Tan & Tan, 
2018). 
Application of video sensors 
Video
cameras
are
a
popular
choice
in
surveillance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications, and are known to be used for surveillance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purposes in many public places. However, due to advances in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computer vision and image processing techniques, the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
video sensors has also found its place in the AAL field. Through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computer vision it is possible to extract valuable information
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
from image or video sources, even in real time. A good example
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
24 
==PAGE:33==
 
of the capabilities of video based systems is presented in Yu et
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
al (2012) where they, in a simulated home environment, can
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
distinguish between the activities of ​walking, standing, sitting,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lying, ​and ​falling​, with a fall detection rate of 97.08% and a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
very low false positive detection rate of 0.8%.
Such high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accuracy suggests that video sensors could indeed be one of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most robust ways to detect falls. Unfortunately, in home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
video sensors are not perceived well by the end-users,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
especially if users are visible or recognizable in the AAL system
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Arning & Ziefle, 2015). In an attempt to alleviate privacy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues when using camera sensors, Ricciuti, Spinsante & Gambi
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(2018) developed a fall detection system using a Kinect camera
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
in a top view configuration. A Kinect camera only captures
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depth information, hence the images it can produce cannot be
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
used to visually identify persons, see fig. 6 for an example.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
With the Kinect setup, they could detect falls with an incredible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accuracy of 98.6%. However, a single Kinect sensor could only
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
cover an area of 8.25m​2​, meaning a high number of sensors
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
would have to be installed for the system to cover whole home.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In conclusion, video sensors prove to be very useful in an AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
setting, but that does not come without raising concerns about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ethics and privacy. 
Fig. 6 - Human subject as captured by a kinect camera. 
Source: (Ricciuti, Spinsante & Gambi, 2018) 
Application of wearable sensors 
Wearable sensors come in many different variations. Today,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most people walk around with an advanced wearable sensor in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their pocket every day, as smartphones and smartwatches are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usually
equipped
with
accelerometers,
gyroscopes,
 
 
 
 
 
pedometers (step counter) and some even with ECG sensors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some researchers have investigated the opportunities of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exploiting the use of smartphones and smartwatches in an AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context. Sukreep et al (2019) proposes a fall and daily activity
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
recognition system based on smartphone and a smartwatch.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Through experiments they claim to be able to recognise 14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
daily activities and falls with an accuracy of 99.19%. Similarly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
==PAGE:34==
 
Cheng et al. (2013) presents a framework utilising a wearable
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
accelerometer and surface electromyography to detect daily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities and falls with an accuracy of 98%. In general,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wearable sensors seems to be a promising technology for AAL
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
applications.
However,
wearable
technology
demands
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration from the elderly, in the form of agreeing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remembering to wear the device, preferable both day and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
night, as well as changing or recharging its batteries. 
2.3.3. Hardware limitations 
AAL systems have to interpret information gathered by one or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more sensors, why they become a limiting factor for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance of the AAL system. McNaull et al. (2012) outlines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and
discuss
factors
that
can
influence
the
quality
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information gathered by sensors in an AAL setting. They
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highlight; ​intrinsic design flaws, component manufacturer,
 
 
 
 
 
 
calibration, application, and ​integrity as five influential factors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that can impact the data quality. Furthermore, they discuss the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance of avoiding sensor error readings in an AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
healthcare setting, as it can lead to both false negative or false
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive events, creating potential dangerous situations for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users relying on the system. In general, McNaull et al. (2012)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
underlines the importance of robustness in AAL systems, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calls for more focus on accuracy and robustness in the design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of AAL systems for healthcare purposes. Other studies propose
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a solution to this topic, could be to incorporate multiple data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sources in the interpretation of specific events (Guettari et al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2010; Fernandez Arguedas et al., 2014; Deen, 2015). Deen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2015)
describes
the importance of sensor fusion and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multimodality approaches as: 
 
The global performance of a sensing activity from a suite of
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
sensors should not be sensitive to individual sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failures, so robust data fusion is very important in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wireless sensor network. That is, the wireless sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network must be much more capable than simple sum of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capabilities of sensors. (Deen, 2015, p. 596) 
In the case of in home localization Guettari et al. (2010) shows
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that a multimodal approach can greatly increase the accuracy
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the system. By combining 2 modalities, an infrared sensor
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
system and a microphone based system, they could improve
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the accuracy of the system by 54%. Furthermore, Fernandez
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arguedas et al. (2014) proposes a sensor fusion technique,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
providing a foundation for a scalable and dynamic multimodal
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
sensor network. Through experiments, they provide promising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results supporting the hypothesis that; higher amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complementary
sensor
information
will
provide
higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
robustness and accuracy in a decision-making process. 
In conclusion, it is clear that more sensors in an AAL context
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means higher robustness and accuracy. 
26 
==PAGE:35==
 
2.3.4. Existing AAL products for relatives 
In the academic literature found and described above, no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market available products were tested. The literature revolves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around testing and developing technologies for AAL systems in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experimental settings. However,
by searching youtube and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
google, it was possible to find three AAL products available on
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the market today. The products will briefly be described in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following and more pictures of the specific products can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seen in [A 2.2]. 
ELsa™ Activity sensing 
Elsa is developed by the finish company MariCare, who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describe themselves as the leading supplier of
sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies for the care sector (MariCare, n.d.). Elsa consist of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a smart stick, with motion sensors in each end, that can detect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if a fall occurs, and send an alarm to a preselected mobile.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Furthermore, the sticks can also collect behavioral data, based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the movement between rooms, that can help clarify
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether the elderly is eating frequently, sleeping enough and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how often they visit the bathroom. Elsa also provides magnets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for monitoring the use of for instance the refrigerator or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cupboards. The behavioral data is shown in an UI, where the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different activities of the elderly are logged throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
day, see fig. 7. Only activities related to the rooms or items of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the house can be detected, such as sleeping, eating, using the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bathroom and going outdoor. From the UI, different alarms can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be activated, which allow a rule-based interpretation of the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
sensor data (MariCare, n.d.).
The expected price for a start
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
package containing a gateway, 3 sensor sticks and 2 magnets is
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
3.400 DKK with a monthly subscription fee on 320 DKK
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(CareWare, n.d.). 
 
 
Fig. 7 - A section of the interface provided by the Elsa activity sensing solution 
Source: (MariCare, n.d.) 
 
Elsa is mainly designed for and offered to the municipalities’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
homecare but could also be considered to be used by relatives.  
27 
==PAGE:36==
 
Aalborg municipality is currently testing the Elsa system in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
pilot project. We have interviewed the chief consultant, Lars
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nørh, who is running the pilot project, about their experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the system. Lars explained that their incentive for testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system is to evaluate whether the system can function as a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
substitute for a physical home care visits, in the cases where
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the older citizens are asking for so called safety visits. He also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notes that they believe that the system can make citizens afraid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of falling more secure in their own home, which potentially can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce the risk of falling. Even though the pilot project is still
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
running, Lars mentions that they have been satisfied with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance of the system, as it has alarmed the homecare
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when the citizens have fallen, and they have only experienced a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
small amount of error calls. A more detailed description of Lars
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Nøhr’s answers can be seen in [A 2.3]. The answers from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interview will be used again in the discussion of the final
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system proposal in chapter 6.  
Canary care 
Canary care is a system developed by the british company with
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same name, founded in 2013 (Canary Care, n.d.). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
canary care system is mainly branded as a system for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
relatives, but it is also mentioned on the webpage that it can be
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
used in a homecare setting, where the homecare workers also
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can get access to the monitored data. The system consist of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
collection of wireless multipurpose sensors, that can be used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as both motion and door sensors, a visitor card for home care
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
or other relatives and an interface, see fig. 8. The system is sold
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
in different packages, containing from 1 to 10 sensors.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Depending on the amount of sensors and their respective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
placement, the user can gain insights in movement, bathroom
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visits, sleep, visitors, room temperature, refrigerator use, use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of water tap, or when the medicine cupboard is opened
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Canary Care, n.d.).  
 
 
Fig. 8 - The Canary Care system, Source: (Canary Care, n.d.) 
 
The Canary Care UI contains an overview of the elderly’s daily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
routines and makes it possible to set rules in order to receive
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alarms if, for instance the elderly has not been in the kitchen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the morning. Furthermore, it is possible to make the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:37==
 
push notifications that prompts the relative to check up. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
price of a package with 4 sensors is around 1.000 DKK with a
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
monthly subscription fee on around 270 DKK.  
TruSense  
TruSense is a product developed by the American company of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same name (TruSense, n.d.). TruSense is a collection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
connected home sensors, like contact sensors, motion sensor,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
water sensors, and GPS trackers, that can be purchased and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used in a range of different ways. The sensors are easily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed on the walls of the home with adhesive tape, see fig. 9. 
 
Fig. 9 - The TruSense motion sensor attached to a wall with adhesive tape, 
Source: (TruSense, n.d.) 
 
Like Canary Care, TruSense is also a rule based system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TruSense proposes the following rules as options; “​too long in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
room”,
“away
from
home”,
“day
started/not
started”,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“temperature out of range”, “vehicle out of area”, “water leak”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and “​door open too long”​. TruSense is directly targeting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American family caregivers by offering their product to reduce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the financial and emotional costs of caregiving (TruSense, n.d.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.  
The price of the platform is around 1.300 DKK with a monthly
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
subscription cost of around 330 DKK (Electronic360, n.d.). 
2.3.5. Data interpretation  
In an AAL system, vast amounts of sensor data are collected.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To derive meaning from the raw data, it should be processed
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
and/or interpreted in some way. It is an integral part of an AAL
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
system to transform the data into a format that is valuable and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
understandable for the user.  
  
In its essence AAL interpretation techniques are built on either
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematical-statistical processing or rule based processing of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the raw data. In some cases, AAL systems also use a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination of rule based and statistical processing to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpret data. An example of this is the proposed AAL system
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
presented in Goonawardene, Tan & Tan (2018), where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple layers of interpretation are used. In their proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, PIR sensor data was used to depict an elderly’s living
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:38==
 
pattern, by extracting 5 rule based features from the raw data
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e.g. sleep duration, location occupancy and frequency etc).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The interpreted 5 features were then further analysed and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpreted by a machine learning algorithm, to measure the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
frailty of the elderly.  
  
Another interpretation technique that could be applied in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AAL setting, is the statistical method called ​Statistical Process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control (SPC). Anhøj & Bjørn (2009) presents how SPC can be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used in healthcare to analyse and understand variations in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processes. They present how SPC effectively and easily can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to distinguish between common cause variations and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
special cause variations in healthcare related processes. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relation to AAL monitoring, SPC could very well be a promising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
solution to detecting special cause variations (significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviations) in behavioural data. 
  
Early Warning Scores (EWS) is another interesting data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpretation practice. EWS is widely adopted in hospital
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
settings, to identify hospital patients that are likely to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deteriorate and need urgent attention. EWS systems exploit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the fact that acute changes in vital parameters (heart rate,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blood
pressure,
respiratory
rate
etc.)
occur
before
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deterioration. A set of simple algorithms is used to derive a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
score from the measured vital parameters, representing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patient's likelihood of deterioration. The EWS system thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provides a window of opportunity for clinical interventions to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occur in an attempt to prevent serious patient deterioration
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Patel et al., 2018; Zografakis-Sfakianakis et al., 2018). Some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
studies have explored the possibilities of bringing Early
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warning Systems into pre-hospital settings. For instance, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anzanpour et al. (2016) an IoT-enabled wearable sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system is proposed to be used as an early warning system in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an in-home setting. However, commercially available solutions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for bringing EWS out of hospital settings are yet to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed. 
 
The above examples of interpretation methods could all be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible candidates to utilise in the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. However, as the focus of the thesis project has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the
user needs and requirements for the UI and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system,
the
specific
interpretation
methods
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
algorithms have been viewed as a ​black box system​. A ​black box
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
is a system containing all the functions to convert certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inputs into the desired outputs (Cross, 2008). In this case, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inputs are AAL sensor data and the outputs are detection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical events and deviations in behavioural trends, see fig. 10. 
 
Fig. 10 - AAL interpretation system expressed as a black box. 
30 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
For the purpose of the project, it was deemed feasible to build
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
algorithms, able to detect critical events and deviations in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behavioral trends of a frail elderly person. 
The intention of expressing the interpretation system as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
black box was to focus the design project on the users needs,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and not discouraging solutions based on the feasibility of data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpretation. 
2.3.6. User acceptance of AAL systems 
Multiple studies cover the topic of acceptance of AAL solutions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
among the elder population (Mann et al., 2001; Arning & Ziefle,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2015; Pol et al., 2016; Feldwieser et al., 2016; Mitchell et al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018). An AAL system might be able to solve incredibly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
valuable tasks, but if it does so at the expense of the person
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
living with it, the value of the system quickly diminishes. To
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design a valuable and usable AAL system, it is important to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate what key factors influence the elderlies’ perception
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and accept of AAL solutions. 
  
In Arning & Ziefle (2015) the preferences and acceptance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
video based health monitoring are evaluated in a range of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
scenarios, based on 4 attributes. It is found that a key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acceptance driver is better emergency detection. Acceptance is
 
  
 
 
 
  
shown to be high for public health monitoring, but the overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acceptance of video monitoring in private homes was very low.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In a study conducted by Mann et al. (2001), it was found that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
many of the participants showed enthusiasm towards the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usefulness and importance of the in-home monitoring devices
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they were shown. However, a majority of the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
predominantly showed enthusiasm towards other people
 
 
 
 
 
 
using the devices, and not towards personal use, as they did
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not feel like they personally needed it. This shows some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anecdotal evidence of acceptance towards the technology, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not a desire to use it themselves.  
  
Another topic relevant to technology acceptance is cyber
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
security and privacy. Wilkowska & Ziefle (2012) finds that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy
and
security
is important determinants in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acceptance of assistive technology in a home environment.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Notable
findings
were
that
ailing
elderly
had
lower
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements to the security and privacy standards, compared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to healthy adults. In Pol et al. (2016), a study focusing on older
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
people's perspective on sensors in their home, it is concluded
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
that older people's sense of safety is more important to them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than their sense of privacy. In the study 11 elderly participants,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
living alone, had sensor networks consisting of contact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors, PIR sensors and a toilet flush sensor installed in their
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
homes. The clear majority of participants indicated that they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
felt safer and that knowing they were kept an eye on, helped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them stay more independent. However, in Mitchell et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2018) 6 out of 30 study participants complained that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:40==
 
applied system was too disruptive and intrusive, rejecting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
idea of sensors in their homes. 
 
CEN CWA (2020 forthcoming) depicts that a reduction of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy is acceptable when the outcome is an increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
confidence that correct care is provided when needed. They
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
propose a model where the balance between the need for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
privacy and the need for care is dependent on the progression
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
of frailty and the progression of the technology, see fig. 11.  
 
 
Fig. 11 - ​Balance between privacy and care needs under the progression of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology and state of frailty, ​Source: ​(CEN CWA, 2020 forthcoming) 
 
CEN CWA (2020 forthcoming) state that the concrete balance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point depends on a complex of two contextual factors; 
1) Recognition that the care receiver’s need of care may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change over time (with progression of frailty). 
2) The advance of technology allows for ever deeper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensing and pattern recognition. 
 
These findings support the claim that the concerns of privacy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and
intrusiveness
are
individual
and
heavily
context
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dependant.
Hence,
it
is
important
to
investigate
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand each elderly’s acceptance of the proposed system,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
before it is bought and implemented into their home.  
 
CEN CWA (2020 forthcoming) propose a practical, structured
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
guide
to
achieve
an
ethically
responsible
introduction,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation
and
operation
of
sensor
monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies in private homes of citizens in need of care. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CWA guide propose that the caregiver should follow a risk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
governance
model,
containing
an
adaption
of
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well-established process of informed consent. This should help
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
guarantee
that
the
monitoring
technologies
are
only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented in the extent accepted by the care receiver.  
2.4. Discussion 
Through the background investigation, it was found that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in-home monitoring systems of frail elderly people has been a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
research field for many years. The motivation and problem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
==PAGE:41==
 
context for conducting such research seems to have remained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar. In Celler et al. (1995), a design of a remote monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
system able to monitor health status is proposed. They refer to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
a rapidly ageing society and the rising healthcare costs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly as motivation. Surprisingly, 25 years later, AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researchers still talk about the same things and propose
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modern versions of essentially the same system. How come
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AAL systems has been a research field for over 25 years, yet
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there has been very little uptake of such systems in today's
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
society?  
In 1995, a limiting factor could be attributed to the ICT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure and the costs of sensor technologies. But, today
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICT infrastructure has matured well beyond being a limiting
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
factor and consumers surround themselves with sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies everyday (Medagliani, Leguay, Duda, et al., 2014).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So, what might the reason be, that AAL systems are not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed in all the homes of our elderly population? An
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explanation might be that AAL systems are still in the process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of being accepted into society. In his book, design of everyday
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
things, Don Norman discusses this phenomenon:  
“Technology changes rapidly, but people and culture
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change slowly. Change is therefore simultaneously
 
 
 
 
 
 
rapid and slow. It can take months to go from invention
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to product, but then decades - sometimes many decades
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
- for the product to get accepted.” (Norman, 2013, p.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
268).  
People and culture might very well be the last limiting factor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the AAL system uptake in society, as the technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stopped being an actual limitation many years ago. 
While reviewing many articles for this thesis the thesis group
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
often noticed articles describing a technical AAL solution as
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
being “non-intrusive” without any evidence to back up the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
claim. Within the thesis group this was a concern often
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed. A concern that was however shared by a 2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
review of the progress made within AAL for promoting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent living by the elderly. The review found that “Most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the reviewed research appears to ignore and assume that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users will accept the system in the way they design it.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Al-Shaqi, Mourshed & Rezgui, 2016, p. 17). This might be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
result of many studies within the research field of AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems, focus on building systems to be used by healthcare
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professionals and not the elderly adults themselves. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design requirements and goals of the system will in that case
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainly be led by the healthcare professionals and not the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly who are supposed to live with the systems. Such a lack
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of end-user focus can in turn lead to a mismatch between goals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of the AAL system and the end-user needs and expected gains,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ultimately impacting the end-users’ technology acceptance
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Chen & Chan, 2011). This calls for more user centered design
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approaches and underlines the importance of including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end-users early in the design of AAL systems.  
 
33 
==PAGE:42==
 
2.5. Reflection 
Throughout the process of investigating the background
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domains,
it
was
difficult
to
know
when
to
limit the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation. The AAL field involves many topics and domains
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the thesis team was not familiar with prior to starting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project. A strong enthusiasm towards understanding the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domains led to a decision of allocating more time, than was
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previously expected, for this phase.
In retrospect, the time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seemed to be well spent, as it resulted in a solid foundation of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
knowledge, of which the rest of the project was built upon.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall, this lead to very few moments of doubt, when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
background related questions arose in the following phases of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project. 
2.6. Conclusions 
The purpose of the background investigation was to gain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge of the problem context and the technological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain of the thesis. Based on 80 articles, the background
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domains of the project have been investigated. First, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation of the problem context validated assumptions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding the nature of the problem; It is a fact that the society
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
is ageing and that it can cause enormous effects on the health
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
care system in the future. Also, central to the problem, ageing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comes with an increased risk of functional limitations and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
falling. Both of which can have grave consequences for an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly person living alone.  
  
In the technological domain, the status and history of AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems were investigated. A table containing an overview of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
research on AAL systems and applications were made and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application possibilities of leading sensor technologies within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the AAL field were presented. Lastly, the limitations of sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hardware, the possibilities for data interpretation, and the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
acceptance of AAL systems were investigated and discussed. 
 
34 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:44==
 
3. USER RESEARCH  
In this chapter, the process and results from the user research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase will be presented and discussed. The aim of this phase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was to investigate the user needs and requirements through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semi-structured interviews with both relatives and elderlies,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aiming to understand their stories, worries and perceptions of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the proposed AAL system.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:45==
 
3.1. Methodology 
In this section, the specific methods, tools, and approaches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in the user research phase are described. 
3.1.1. Semi-structured interviews  
The user research has been done through semi-structured
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one-on-one interviews with both relatives to elderly family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members living alone and elderly people living alone. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semi-structured approach was chosen in order to manage the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topics of the interviews but still allow flexibility in the process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thereby making room for questions that were not included in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interview guide to be asked if new ideas arise throughout
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the interview. In this project, a relatively clear research focus
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
was established before conducting the interviews. Therefore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to investigate specific topics, it made sense to have some form
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of structure in the interviews compared to a completely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unstructured interview. Semi-structured interviews are mainly
 
 
 
 
 
 
a qualitative method, focusing on the participants’ point of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
view. A focus which was actively sought to understand and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empathize with users, in line with the design thinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework. Having some structure in the interviews also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensured some form of cross comparability between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews, making it easier to analyse afterwards.  
  
The interview procedure and interview style, have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspired by the qualitative interviewing methods presented in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bryman (2012). The interviewing procedure are further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described internally in section 3.2 and 3.3. 
3.1.2. Affinity diagram  
To analyse qualitative data from interviews, an affinity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diagram method was applied. The affinity diagram is a great
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
tool for consolidating insights from different users to produce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a comprehensive and shared picture of the user group (Beyer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
& Holtzblatt, 1998). When using the method, verbal statements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the interviews are compared to each other and grouped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into themes. Doing so it is easy to identify specific relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topics as well as shared and contrary opinions expressed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the user group. 
3.1.3. Personas  
To
encapsulate
the
relative’s
different
needs,
multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personas were developed. Personas are fictitious characters
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on insights from the real users encountered. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personas should create an image of the targeted user that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convey key information and is memorable, engaging and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actionable (Pruitt & Adlin, 2006). The personas worked as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tangible representations of the target users and was used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actively in the design process, as design targets, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maintain a user-centered design process. 
37 
==PAGE:46==
 
3.2. User research - relatives  
In this section the user research of relatives are presented. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
main with the user research of the relatives, were to;  
1) Investigate their worries and difficulties related to taking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
care of their elderly family member. 
2) Investigate their thoughts and perception of the concept of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in-home sensor monitoring.  
Recruiting process 
One of the recruitment criteria was that participants should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
close relatives to an elderly person living alone, preferably
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aged 75 or more. An additional criteria was that they should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have some degree of worries about their family member’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well-being and health status. The first step of the recruitment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process was to go for the “the low-hanging fruits”. This was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
done by asking our friends and family if they knew someone
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
who was taking care of and worrying about an elderly family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
member. Through this strategy, we managed to get in contact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with 6 different relatives, being professors from DTU, our own
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family and friends, and our friends’ family.  
  
The second step of the process was to reach out to more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential participants, in the hope of recruiting someone that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we did not have a relation to. To do this, a recruiting poster
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
was made [A 3.1] and shared in different Facebook groups and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on our own Facebook page. Even though the Facebook post
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was forwarded more than 20 times, only one participant was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recruited from this strategy.  
Participants 
In total 7 relatives have been interviewed. 3 women and 4
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
men. The mean age of the participants was 57 (min: 43, max:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60). The participants’ relation to the elderly family member
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were mostly sons and daughters, only one was a nephew and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
one a son in law. Regarding the distance between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants and the elderly, 3 of the participants lived far
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
away (300 km or more), 1 in a medium distance of (80km),
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
and 3 lived close to the elderly (25-5 km). The time span of
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which the participants had been worried ranged from 6 years
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
as the longest and 4 months as the shortest period. Data on the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different participants can be seen in [A 3.2]. 
Interview procedure 
Preferably, the interviews were carried out face to face,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however this was only possible in three of the interviews. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rest of the interviews were handled via a phone call. This was
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
due to long distances between us and the participants. All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews were audio recorded for later analysis. 
  
38 
==PAGE:47==
 
The interviews were conducted as semi-structured interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following a premade interview guide [A 3.3]. The interview
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
guide included both general questions about their worries and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges,
and
concept
specific
questions,
about
their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thoughts and ideas of in home sensor monitoring. 
  
Related
to
their
worries
and challenges, the following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions were asked: 
●
What are your biggest worries about your elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative’s wellbeing? 
●
What do you currently do to ease your mind? 
●
What is the most challenging parts of taking care of, and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
helping your elderly relative? 
  
Questions related to the concept of in home monitoring were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asked after a description of a concept. The most important
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
follow-up questions were the following; 
●
Could you be interested in using a concept like this? 
●
How could you imagine this concept could help you? 
●
What do you think your elderly family member may say
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be monitored with sensors?  
●
What do you see as the biggest challenges with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept like this? 
Analysis 
Most the data, extracted from the interviews with the relatives,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was qualitative. The answers to the question; “could you be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in using a concept like this?” was the only data that
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be quantified with a yes or no answer. However, many of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the participants did not answer with a quantifiable yes or no,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
which made it challenging to quantify. The qualitative data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were
analysed
by
creating
an
affinity
diagram, where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants’ quotes were explored, discussed, and organised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into groups, in order to identify recurring themes across the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different participant’s answers, see [A 3.4]. To collect the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quotes for the affinity diagram, each recorded interview was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
listened through while valuable quotes were written down.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quotes were deemed valuable if they expressed a thought, a
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
worry, or another emotion, thus small talk and out of scope
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anecdotes were not included. Each quote was noted down on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its own piece of paper, so it could be moved around to create
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
themes.  
3.2.1. Results 
In this section, the general themes derived from the affinity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diagram are presented together with examples of quotes from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interviews. The interviews were carried out in Danish, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quotes presented below have been translated to English as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directly as possible. The original Danish quotes can be seen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[A 3.5]. The results are divided in two sections, first section is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
about worries and challenges and the second section is about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
perceptions of the concept. 
39 
==PAGE:48==
 
Worries and challenges  
Falls are the biggest worry 
The most repeated “biggest worry” was that their elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
family member would fall and would not be able to get up by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themself: 
“[biggest worry] It is that she falls in the middle of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
night and can’t get up again” - ​participant 1 (female)  
 
“(...) You often hear nasty stories about people who fall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and lay helpless for a long time, maybe multiple days, I
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
think that is my concern” ​- participant 4 (male)  
 
A sign of life brings peace of mind  
The majority of the participants shared the feeling that getting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a sign of life from the elderly could put their mind at rest.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Among the participants, this sign of life was mainly achieved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through an answer to a phone call. Some of the participants
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
had permanent agreements about calling on a specific time
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
each day: 
“I call her every day at 9:30, so I can get a sign of life each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
day, sometimes it is just a short call and other times we
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
chat for 5 minutes​” - participant 4 (male) 
 
Another more alternative way of getting a sign of life, that one
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of the participants shared, was to play wordfeud (a phone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
game):  
“I play wordfeud with my mom for instance, and if there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
is a day where she is not playing, then I would wonder
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
what was happening”​ - participant 5 (male) 
 
Action plan if the elderly does not answer the phone  
Another
theme
that
was
shared
among
many
of
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants, was that they adopted specific strategies for how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to act if the elderly did not answer the phone. If the elderly did
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
not answer, they would typically call again later. If there was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
still no answer, they would start to worry and check up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physically by coming by or arranging someone else to visit, if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
they live far away: 
“[what if she doesn’t answer?] I call again, that is one of
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
the strategies, the other strategy is to ask my siblings if
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
they have been in contact with her (...), and then I would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
come by, I don’t live that far away”​ - participant 7 (male) 
 
Daily social contact is comforting 
In relation with the sign of life, one of the participants also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed that it brings peace of mind knowing that someone
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been visiting the elderly, and if this was not possible she
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
would be worried: 
40 
==PAGE:49==
 
“If we all lived far away, then it would be a big challenge
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
for me to know that no one was visiting her, then I would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
convince her that the homecare should come by daily” ​-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
participant 6 (female)  
 
Planning and communication across family members 
Another theme that recurred among two different participants,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was the fact that taking care of the elderly involves planning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and communication across many family members: 
“But if they are not home [the ones that usually come by
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
daily], then we will set it up, so we know that some of us is
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
calling or coming by” -​ participant 6 (female) 
 
“We have a whatsapp group chat that we use to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communicate about her, not with her, but around her” -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
participant 7 (male) 
 
Challenging to live far away 
An interesting aspect mentioned by one of the participants was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the most challenging part was the large distance between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them, which made it impossible to come by and help with the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everyday life of the elderly: 
“[most challenging] It is that I can’t just pass by” ​-
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Participant 1 
 
 
 
 
Challenging not to cross the elderly’s boundaries  
Another
challenge
that
was mentioned by one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants was the difficulty of avoiding to cross any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundaries of the elderly. And that it was challenging to avoid
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
interfering too much in the elderly’s own decisions related to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their everyday life.  
“[the most challenging thing about helping] Sometimes it
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
is actually not to cross the boundaries and not to take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
charge and say what she has to do… because it is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
always that we agree with her choices about what she
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
easily can manage herself” - ​participant 6 (female) 
 
Hard to assess the elderly’s well being as they refrain from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharing their problems 
A theme that was recurring many times, was that it can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extremely difficult for the relatives to figure out how the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderlies are feeling. This is a result of the elderly not sharing
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
their concerns, as they do not want to burden their children
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with their problems: 
“She was not feeling well and had not been feeling well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for many days, but she did not feel like she had the right
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to tell any of us [her children] because we were busy, you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
see” - ​participant 1 (female) 
Perception of the concept  
In total 6 out of the 7 participants expressed a mainly positive
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
attitude towards the concept of in home sensor monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:50==
 
aimed at helping relatives to provide care and oversight. 5 of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the participants expressed that they would be interested in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using a system like the one proposed, however not without
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
precautions. In the following, themes related to the relatives’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perception of the concept will be presented.  
 
It could put the mind at rest 
One theme that recurred related to the advantages of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept was that the system could make the relatives more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calm, by avoiding some of the worries they have today: 
“Surely, it could be smart if I could see on an app that she
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was okay, even though she has not been calling that day,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then I would not be so worried” - ​Participant 4 (male) 
 
It could provide more rest for the elderly  
Besides putting the relatives mind at rest, one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants expressed that an extra benefit of the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, was that it potentially could entail that her mom would
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
get more rest and relief: 
“You see, the fact that we didn’t have to come by could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
give her some rest. You can also say that she would avoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that people are always calling and asking how she is” -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
participant 6 (female) 
 
 
 
 
There are limits  
A theme that was recurring among the positive-disposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants, was that they would not accept all kinds of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring. Almost all of the participants expressed some kind
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of precaution with the level of monitoring: 
“Camera is gross right, you don’t want that installed in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
your mother’s home (...), but something that is more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
passive that measure toilet flush and water use, then you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could still detect life signs” ​- participant 5 (male) 
 
“I would confine it [system] as much as possible, so it did
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
not feel that much like surveillance” - ​participant 1
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(female) 
 
Challenging for the elderly to accept  
Another theme that emerged from the discussion about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept, was that many of the participants expressed concerns
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether the elderly would accept the proposed system:  
“ [about in home sensor monitoring] I don’t think she
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
[mom] would like it (...) I think that is the biggest
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
challenge” ​- Participant 6 (female) 
 
 
 
42 
==PAGE:51==
 
However, the majority of the participants expressed that they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would only install and use the system if the elderly would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accept it: 
“It is an important part that it is done with an acceptance
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
from the elderly in relation to the surveillance aspect and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensitive personal data” -​ participant 5 (male) 
 
Worried about replacing the social contact 
Related to the disadvantages and potential challenges of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept one theme recurred among 4 of the participants. The
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
participants expressed a concern about that the system could
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
replace the social contact the relatives are currently having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the elderly: 
“It could be that it could entail that you did not visit the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly quite as often” ​- Participant 2 (male) 
 
“The argument for calling daily would not be there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anymore, that is maybe the downside to it” - ​Participant
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
4 (male) 
 
Critical of the usefulness of the system  
This is not a theme that recurred among many participants,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
however it is still important to have in mind when designing
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system. One of the participants expressed many critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thoughts about the usefulness of the concept. One of his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerns was that the proposed monitoring system would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an extra burden if it gave him too much data to interpret: 
“I don’t want to be flooded with data, that would not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make sense, it would just create uncertainties, then we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would have to interpret the data and we would be 4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
people that would interpret it differently, then we had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discuss that” ​- participant 7 (male) 
 
Another of his concerns was how data from sensors could help
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
him figure out how his mother was doing, because in his mind,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the best way to figure this out was to talk with her; 
“The way I know how she is, is to hear how she talks” -
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Participant 7 (male) 
 
Requested insights 
When discussing the concept, many of the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed specific wishes for insights they would like to gain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about their elderly family member. The requested insights are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
listed below: 
●
Did they get out of bed? (3) 
●
Is there general activity in the home?  (3) 
●
Have they been drinking enough water? (2) 
●
Did they stay in the bathroom for too long? (1) 
●
Has the toilet been flushing as usual? (1) 
●
Have there been any social contact? (1) 
●
Did they fall and are they yelling for help? (1) 
●
Have there been a normal water or power usage? (1) 
●
Have the home care been there? (1) 
 
43 
==PAGE:52==
 
The numbers are indicating how many participants have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requested the specific insights. An interesting aspect is that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
even though most of the participants were most worried about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
falls, only one requested an insight about actual fall incidents.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This can indicate that it is individually, what the relatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceive as valuable insights in order to put their mind at rest.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Or, it might indicate that some of the participants were in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
doubt of what sensor technologies are capable of.  
 
Requested features  
Besides the requested insights, extra features to the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were also requested. One participants requested a kind of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automated skype solution; 
“One thing that would be wonderful would be if I could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
see her, but she should definitely not activate it herself” -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Participant 1 (female) 
 
Another participant requested something the elderly could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activate themself, in order to lower the surveillance aspect in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system;  
“Maybe something she could activate herself (...) if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
something was beeping every eight hour (...) then we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could all see that she had turned it on or off” - participant
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
6 (female)  
3.2.2. Personas 
In order to encapsulate the insights gained from interviewing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the relatives, 3 persona cards were created. The personas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent 3 different archetypes of relatives encountered in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the user research. The personas were given a look, a name, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
job, and a short background story, where their worries and
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs are described. The personas served as a foundation for
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the next steps of the design process. By focusing on designing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions for the 3 personas it was ensured that design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerations and decisions were grounded in empathy for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the users. The persona cards are presented on the next 3 pages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in fig. 12, 13, and 14. 
 
44 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
Fig. 12 - Persona 1: Thomas, the anti surveillance relative 
 
 
45 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
Fig. 13 - Persona 2 - Marie, the worried career woman 
 
46 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
Fig. 14 - Persona 3 - Preben, the technology driven relative 
 
 
47 
==PAGE:56==
 
3.2.3. Discussion 
A limiting factor of the presented user research of the relatives,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is the fact that only 7 relatives participated in the interviews.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The initial aim was to interview at least 10 relatives in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase the amount of insights. However, it was challenging
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and time consuming to recruit relatives, thus it was decided to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
move forward with the insights gained from the 7 participants.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
This was done well knowing that during the interface design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase the plan was to involve new relatives. Furthermore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including 10 participants would not change the fact, that it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
not possible to state anything statistically significant about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market need or the acceptance towards in home monitoring,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on this research. But the qualitative insights gained from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the 7 participants was enough to identify 3 archetypes of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives that was further used as personas throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design process. Had more interviews been conducted a 4th
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
archetype might have appeared, or the archetypes could have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been defined in higher detail.  
3.2.4. Reflection 
An interesting aspect to reflect upon, is whether the interviews
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
were conducted face to face or over the phone. 4 of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants lived far away from us, thus it was decided to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conduct
the
interviews
over
the
phone.
However,
we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced a critical difference between the interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted face-to-face and the interviews conducted over the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phone. First of all, the face to face interviews were longer and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
felt more thorough relative to the phone interviews. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicates that the face-to-face interviews have resulted in more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharing of information, increasing the chance of receiving more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
valuable insights. When reflecting upon how it felt to conduct
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the different forms of interviews, it is clear that the face-to-face
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
interviews were far better at making us empathize with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user. During face-to-face interviews, we could witness the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participant’s facial expressions and body language, thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling us to add another layer to the user statements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retrospectively, it would have been preferred to conduct the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phone interviews over a skype video call instead, enabling us
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to see the face of the participants while interviewing them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the phone interviews made the user research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quicker and effective, as we were able to talk to some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants on the same day as recruiting them. If we had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insisted on conducting a skype call, it would likely have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
required more planning from both sides. 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:57==
 
3.2.5. Conclusion 
In total 7 semi-structured interviews were conducted with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
target users. Generally, 6 out of the 7 participants, expressed
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
positive attitudes towards the proposed monitoring system, 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
of which expressed an interest in using a monitoring system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
From the analysis of the interviews 16 different themes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emerged: 8 themes about the relatives’ worries and challenges
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related to the care of the elderly and 8 themes about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives’ perceptions of the proposed monitoring system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From the analysis it was concluded that many of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants’ worries could be alleviated by simply receiving a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sign of life from the elderly (e.g. a phone call). Also, most of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives explained that it was challenging to evaluate the well
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
being of the elderly. Furthermore, it was evident that many of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the participants had varying needs and boundaries for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed
monitoring
system,
underlining
the
need
for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customizability. As a result of the analysis, 3 personas were
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
created, expressing the different needs and boundaries of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants; ​The anti surveillance relative, The worried career
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
woman ​and The technology driven relative​. The key learnings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the interviews with the relatives are summarised in table
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  
 
 
 
Table 2: Key learnings from the interviews with the relatives 
Key learnings - Interviews with relatives 
-
The participants’ biggest worry is if the elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will fall and lay helpless for a long period of time. 
 
-
The participants find it hard to assess the elderly’s
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
well being, because the elderly often refrains from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharing their problems. 
 
-
The participants expressed concerns about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
system replacing social contact. 
 
-
Many of the participants had varying needs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundaries for the proposed monitoring system  
 
 
 
49 
==PAGE:58==
 
3.3. User research - elderly 
In this section, the process and results of the user research of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly are presented. The main goals with the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research of the elderly, were to: 
1) investigate the elderlies’ worries about living alone as well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as worries related to their health.  
2) investigate the elderlies’ perception of in home sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring. 
Recruiting process 
The
goal
was
to
recruit
participants
within
the
age
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demographic of 75+ that were living alone at home (e.g. not in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a care home). The recruitment strategy was to produce a one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
page recruitment poster [A 3.6] , and send it in an email to
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity centres for elderly people in the municipality of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copenhagen, Frederiksberg and Lyngby Taarbæk. In the emails
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we were asking if they could post it on their walls or if we
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
could come by to recruit in person. The first cooperative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respondent were the activity centre Bonderupgård located in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vanløse. In Bonderupgård, many elderly people meet every
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
day to do exercises or to attend social events. The thesis group
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ended up spending 3 days recruiting and interviewing people
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
in Bonderupgård. The recruitment strategy was to first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish a relationship with the people of the activity centre.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This
was
done
by
attending
lunch and having casual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conversations with the elderly people of the activity centre, see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 15. This helped the thesis team become familiar faces in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity center. Ultimately, being a familiar face made it much
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
easier to recruit participants, as the people in the activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centre were happy to cooperate and help us recruit their peers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after being interviewed.  
 
 
Fig. 15 - Picture from the first day at the activity centre, getting to know the 
elderly by having casual conversations. 
Participants 
All the participants were elderly people visiting the activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centre,
Bonderupgård, in Vanløse in the municipality of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copenhagen.
In
total 14 participants took part in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
==PAGE:59==
 
interviews. The average age of the participants were 82 with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the youngest participant being 74 and the oldest 93. 6 (43%)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of participants were male and 8 (57%) were female. 13 (93%)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of the participants were living alone and 1 (7%) lived with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
spouse. Also 5 (36%) of the participants owned a manual fall
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
alarm, in the form of a pendant. 
Interview procedure 
A series of face to face semi-structured interviews were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted. The interviews were prepared to have a higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
degree of structure, compared to the interviews conducted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the relatives. From personal experiences of talking to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly people (eg. our own grandparents), it is known that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some elderly can have short attention spans. Making the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interview guide more structured was done in an attempt to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capitalise on their attention. Furthermore, effort was put into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
avoiding the use of technical terms and words that could seem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foreign to the elderly. 3 concrete ways of explaining the idea of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in home monitoring were rehearsed beforehand. Doing so, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were able to explain the concept with 3 different examples,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
increasing the chance the participants would understand the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept. The participants were only available for interviews in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited time frames during the day, therefore interviews were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted over the course of 2 days. All interviews were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted with 1 interviewer and 1 notetaker and were audio
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
recorded for later analysis. 
 
As preparation for the interviews, an interview guide was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
made [A 3.7]. The interview guide included both general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions and specific questions, related to the concept of in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home sensor monitoring. The general questions were mainly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about; 
●
Worries about living alone 
●
Worries about health  
●
Receiving help from home care and relatives  
●
Their relative’s worries about them 
 
After a description of the concept, the participants were asked
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions
related
to
the
concept.
The
concept related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions were mainly about; 
●
Their thoughts  about a concept like this 
●
Their willingness to get a concept like this installed in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
their own home 
●
Their perceived advantages and disadvantages of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept 
 
If a participant showed a positive attitude towards the concept,
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
they were asked follow up questions about what kind of data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be too much to share with their relatives. This was done
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in order to investigate what type of data that would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceived as too private to share.  
 
Finally, the participants were asked if they were afraid of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
falling or if they knew someone who had fallen and was not
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
==PAGE:60==
 
able to get up, in order to clarify how big of a worry it is for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
elderly people. This question was asked in the end, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
avoid priming the elderly with these thoughts throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interview.  
Analysis 
From the interviews both quantitative data and qualitative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data was extracted. A range of yes/no questions (e.g. “Do you
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involve relatives in your worries?”) were used to quantify the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answers from the interviews. An overview of the quantitative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data extracted from the interviews can be seen in [A 3.8]. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualitative data was analysed by creating an affinity diagram
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the same approach as described in the previous section.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How the specific quotes were grouped into themes can be seen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in [A 3.9]. 
3.3.1. Results 
In this section the results from the analysis of the interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be presented. The results are divided into two sections,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one about worries and one about perceptions of the concept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The results are presented through both quantitative and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualitative data. General themes derived from the analysis are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented
together
with
examples
of
quotes from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews. Because the interviews were carried out in danish,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the quotes displayed in this section has been translated to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
english as directly as possible. The original danish quotes can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be seen in [A 3.10]. 
Worries  
Only 3 out of 14 (21 %) articulated that living alone made
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them feel unsafe to some degree. Two different themes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed the reasons for a lower sense of security when living
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
alone; 
 
Unsafe because of a previous case of illness 
Some of the participants expressed that they started to feel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unsafe living alone after an experience of acute illness: 
“(...) I have just suffered from a brain haemorrhage, so
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
right now I can feel a little unsafe. (...) what happens if
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
something occurs?, because even though I have a phone, I
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
have to be able to activate it”  -​ participant 7 (male, 75) 
 
Unsafe due to experiences of crime  
Some of the participants explained that they felt insecure living
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alone because of previous experiences of crime, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
burglary: 
“Of course I am not happy about burglary and things like
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that, I have been burgled before” - participant 4 (female,
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
87) 
 
52 
==PAGE:61==
 
The rest ( 79 %) articulated that they have no explicit worries
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about living alone. Their reasoning for this could be divided
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into two themes: 
 
Feeling safe due to frequent social contact 
One of the recurring answers was that they felt safe if they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
experienced a frequent social contact, often in the form of their
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neighbours, which made them belief that someone is keeping
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
an eye on them and will notice if something is wrong: 
“The residence [where he lives] has always been really
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
really good and we share concerns for each other (...), and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if there is someone you have not seen in a day or two,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
then you ring at the door and ask how they are doing, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
keep sure that you don’t lie on the floor and can’t get up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and things like that” -​ participant 2 (male, 79) 
 
Aids can improve the sense of security 
Another theme that emerged, was that different aids, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fall alarms, wheelchairs and walkers also provided a sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
security when living alone: 
“You see, I have this little alarm [a fall alarm pendant]
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that I can press if I get scared” - ​participant 4 (female,
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
87) 
 
Another interesting aspect to investigate, was the elderly’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perception of their health status. Thus, all the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were asked if they worried about their health and what their
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biggest concerns related to their health was. 8 of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants (57 %) expressed that they had worries about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their health. Among these answers, two themes emerged, both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about the kind of worries and the way of dealing with them. 
 
Worried about impairment of conditions 
Among the participants that were worried about their health, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
lot expressed fear and worries about impairment of their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions: 
“Now I have experienced this [brain haemorrhage], thus I
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
am often thinking about if it could happen again, and I
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
am afraid if I suddenly have a headache” - participant 7
 
   
 
  
  
  
(male, 75) 
 
Accepted impairment  
An interesting theme that emerged from the answers, was the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fact that the majority of the participants accepted their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditions, which helped them ease their mind: 
“It [his biggest health related worry] is that I am
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
probably not going to be able to walk normally again,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because of some neuritis [nerves infection] in my legs…
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but ehh… you have to say; the time comes as it is and you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
have to live with it, if it can’t be fixed according to the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
experts, so be it” -​ Participant 5 (male, 78) 
 
Among the participants that did not worry about their health,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the following two themes emerged. 
 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:62==
 
Have been worried before  
Some of the participant did not have any worries about their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health at the time they were interviews, but have been worried
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about their health at another point in life; 
“No not right now [worry about health] (...) I have an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
artificial knee that has been really swollen and I have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
been really worried, if I should have a new knee again or
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
if I should end in a wheelchair… but it has died down
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
again and now I don’t feel anything” - ​Participant 9
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(female, 79) 
 
Living in the moment 
Many of the participants expressed that they do not spent time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thinking or worrying about their health, because they just live
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the moment and take one day at a time: 
“I don’t think about it [her health] that much, I take every
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
day as it comes…”- ​participant 11 (female, 93) 
 
“Ordinarily, I don’t walk around worrying, I try to deal
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
with it as best as I can” -​ participant 14 (female, 78) 
 
When asking the participants if they worried about falling, 5
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
(36 %) of them expressed that they were worried. From the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answers to this question two themes emerged: 
 
Precautions alleviate worries 
Some of the participants who were worried about falling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed that being precautious when moving around, helped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them limit their worries: 
“I have not fallen yet, I don’t hope so either, I use
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
something like walking sticks when I am out walking” ​-
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
participant 2 (male, 79) 
 
“I walk slowly and I am careful, because I know why I fell
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
that time a couple of years ago” - participant 11 (female,
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
93) 
 
Furthermore, the elderly also expressed worries about falling,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if they have experienced falling before: 
“I am somehow afraid of falling, because I have friends
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
who have fallen and broken different things (...), and I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
have also fallen myself, and I have broken my wrist, and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
so on, thus I walk very carefully” ​participant 3 (female,
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
87) 
 
Not worried about falling, yet 
Some of the participants who stated that they did not worry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about falling, were aware that it might become an issue in the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
future:  
“Not quite at this moment [worried about falling], I don’t
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
have that problem… but it could possibly become a worry
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
in the future” ​- participant 1 (male, 79)  
 
Besides the elderly’s worries about living alone and their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health, it was also interesting to investigate their relation to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
==PAGE:63==
 
their relatives. This was investigated through asking the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants if their children were worried about their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
condition and how they feel about it. Related to these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions 6 (43 %) of the participants indicated that their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives (children in this case) worries about them. Four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different themes emerged from this topic; 
 
Comfortable that relatives worry about them 
Some of the participants who indicated that their children
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worry about them, expressed that it feels nice and that it make
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
them feel safe: 
“I know that they worry about me, we have a close
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relationship, sometimes they call just to ask how I feel,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
that makes me feel safe”​ - participant 14 (female, 78) 
 
“Yes, my son worry about me (...) sort of generally about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everything, and I think that is very nice” ​- participant 8
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
(male, 88) 
 
Relatives interfere in their way of living  
Besides the positive feelings about relatives worrying, another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more negative theme also emerged. Some of the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed that the relatives interfere in their way of living and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decides things about their life: 
“I was sick and did not have strength enough, that was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
why my daughter made this set up, they [the family] felt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more save knowing that I had a thing like that [fall
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
alarm]” -​ participant 12 (female, 90)  
 
Another participant expressed that it could be annoying when
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
his children interfere too much in his way of living: 
“It is of course pretty good that they ask, but sometimes
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they have ideas for a lot of things, that I have already
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
thought about, so it can turn out to be slightly annoying”
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- ​participant 7 (male, 75) 
 
No worries because I am tough and fit 
Among the participants who expressed that their relatives do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not worry about them, it was often reasoned that it is because
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
their relatives think they are tough and fit: 
“No, quite the opposite, they brag about me and about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what I do, and tell everyone that they can just get going
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like their dad… but they are not worried about me” -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
participant 1 (male, 79) 
 
“My daughter is not worried, she tells me that I will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
become at least 100 years old” - Participant 11 (female,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
93) 
 
 
 
55 
==PAGE:64==
 
Unwillingness to burden their children  
Some of the participants expressed a concern about burdening
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
their children, because they have already have enough on their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plate with work and children: 
“(...) but there are also some things that I don’t think I can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
burden them with and talk to them about” - ​participant 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
(male, 79) 
Perceptions of the concept 
When explaining the idea of in home sensor monitoring to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detect falls or other problems, the participants expressed both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative and positive attitudes towards the concept. However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the majority of the participants (9, 64 %) were positive about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the idea of in home monitoring. 5 (36 %) of the participants
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
were dismissive of the idea. An interesting insight was that all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the male participants (6 out of 6) expressed a positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
attitude towards the idea, while the majority of the female
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants (5 out of 8) expressed a negative attitude towards
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the concept. The remaining female participants (3) expressed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive thoughts. Among the participants with positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitudes towards in home monitoring, 4 general themes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emerged. 
 
 
 
 
Noncritical acceptance  
Some of the participants demonstrated a beyond positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitude
towards
the
concept,
without
expressing
any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
precautions. This was both regarding their thoughts and when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asked if they would like it to be installed in their own home: 
“It would not bother me at all, it really wouldn’t” -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Participant 2 (male, 79) 
 
“OK yes, you can just go ahead and install it [installing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the sensors]” -​ Participant 10 (male, 80) 
 
Automation is an advantage  
When discussing the advantages and disadvantages about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept of in home monitoring, one of the shared advantages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was that it is favourable that it is automatic. In this regard, the
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
concept was compared to the fall alarm they already know,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that you have to activate manually in order to get help: 
“(...) just imagine if you have an alarm like that [manual
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fall alarm], but have a fall and turn unconscious, well,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
then it won’t help. Then it is good with a system like that
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
[in home sensor monitoring]” ​- participant 14 (female,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
78) 
 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:65==
 
Offering a peace of mind  
Another theme about advantages that emerged, was that in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home monitoring could offer a greater feeling of comfort and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
make the elderly feel more safe in their home, ultimately giving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them peace of mind: 
“The biggest advantage is the comfort it gives, sometimes
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
I imagine what if a disaster strikes? How long do I then
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
have to lie without help? I probably wouldn’t think as
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
much about it, with such a system [in home monitoring]”​-
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
participant 7 (male, 75) 
 
Personally, I don’t need it 
An interesting insight was, that even though the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
liked the idea, it did not mean that they were willing to have it
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
installed in their own home. 2 of the participants that were
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
positive about the idea, expressed that they would not like to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
get it installed in their own home. They reasoned this with a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
non-existing personal need: 
“It is a good idea, but I have good neighbours who keep
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
an eye on me, but I can imagine others, who are not as
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lucky as me, for them it would be nice to have [in home
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring]” - ​Participant 14 (female, 78) 
 
 
 
 
 
Among the participants that expressed negative thoughts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about in home monitoring, 3 different themes emerged. 
 
Against surveillance  
One
of
the
themes
that
were
repeated
among
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative-disposed participants was that the concept was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directly linked to surveillance, which the participants were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against and thought would be too much: 
“I think we are about to turn into a surveillance society
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and that is awful. I think the idea you propose is deeply
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
terrifying. You shouldn’t be under surveillance, then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people must come to visit you” - ​participant 9 (female,
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
79) 
  
“Apparently, I would be under surveillance, I don’t want
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
that, that is too much” - ​Participant 12 (female, 90) 
 
I already have a fall alarm  
Another
contention
mentioned
from
one
of
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative-disposed participants, was that her manual fall alarm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was enough: 
“I don’t think it is necessary, really. When I have my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
alarm [fall alarm], then it is enough for me” - Participant
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
4 (female, 87) 
 
 
 
57 
==PAGE:66==
 
Too much to demand from my children 
A third reason some of the participant mentioned, was that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they were not interested in burdening their relatives with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
system like that: 
“Why should my daughter help me, when there are others
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who can help? I would not like my daughter to be bound
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to something like that [the proposed monitoring system]”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-​ Participant 11 (female, 93) 
 
From the discussion about what and how much data the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly would share with their relatives,  4 themes emerged. 
 
No problem to share data with children 
The participants mainly expressed positive thoughts about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharing the data with their relatives (children): 
“Personally, I would be really comfortable with the fact
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that someone was watching, supposing I had a fall in the
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
bathroom” -​ participant 1 (male, 79) 
 
“It wouldn’t bother me, if my daughter was able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitor my data” -​ Participant 7 (male, 75)  
 
I have nothing to hide 
Some of the participants could not see a problem with sharing
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the data as they did not had anything to hide: 
“Well, I have nothing to hide, really, so it does not matter
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
to me [to share the data]” -​ Participant 7 (male, 75) 
 
No problem with sleep monitoring 
The majority could not see a problem with sensors under the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
bed that could monitor their sleep: 
“It [sensor] does not disturb my sleep, really, (...) I am
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
open for everything” - ​Participant 10 (male, 80). 
 
The line is drawn with personal hygiene  
For one of the participants, the monitoring of his hygiene was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
too personal for him to share: 
“(...)The thing about if I am washing my hands or not... I
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
am not that sure I want people to know that about me...
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how well my hygiene is (...) Well, that is too intrusive” -
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
participant 1 (male, 79) 
 
With some of the participants it was also discussed weather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they would like to watch and keep track of the data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves. Some of them expressed that it would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting: 
“I think it would be interesting to also watch the data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
myself” -​ Participant 8 (male, 88).  
 
 
 
58 
==PAGE:67==
 
And some of the participants expressed that they were already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to tracking themselves with their smartphones: 
“I already keep track on that [steps] today, I have such a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
smartphone that can track all the steps I walk during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
day (...) it is something I care a lot about” - ​participant 1
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
(male, 79) 
3.3.2. Discussion 
An
interesting
finding
was
that
participants
who
had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced acute illness or was in the process of dealing with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
long term illness, seemed to have a higher acceptance towards
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the concept of in home monitoring. This echoes findings from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other studies, e.g. Pol et al. (2016). Another interesting finding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was that owning a manual fall alarm (pendant), seemed to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase the participants sense of safety, meaning that a simple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
system was enough to increase their sense of safety. For some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants owning the pendant alarm was enough to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disregard the idea of having sensors installed. However, other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants that already owned a pendant alarm also showed
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
enthusiasm towards in home sensors. This could in part, be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to the fact, that they have already made peace with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thought of needing such devices to help stay more independent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and safe in their home.  
  
One concern about the results from the interviews, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether the elderly had understood the concept of in home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring correctly. The reason for this concern, was that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the interviews it was noticed that some participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thought the concept was an anti-theft alarm. Unfortunately,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
even after carefully explaining the concept again, with different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examples, some few participants were still commenting on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept as if it was a theft alarm. This made us doubt how
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many of the elderly fully understood the system we proposed. 
 
 
59 
==PAGE:68==
 
3.3.3. Reflection 
When reflecting upon the process of interviewing the elderly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two aspects were found to be especially interesting. The first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being the focus of the elderly participant. Many of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews took longer time to conduct than expected, mainly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since the participants often digressed from the subject at hand.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It felt like many of the participants were happy to talk to us
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about their life and share stories about their children. Even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
though listening to the stories gave some relevant insights into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly’s relationship with their relatives, the focus on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actual topic and questions was lost in some of the cases. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience showcased both the strengths and limitations of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semi structured interviews. On one hand, it was valuable to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviate slightly from the topic, but on other accounts the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews lost value when deviating greatly from the topic.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking another approach to the interviews, for instance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducting the interviews using a survey, would likely have
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
kept participants more focused, thus speeding up the process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In that case, the results of the interviews would also change
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from qualitative to more quantitative. However, from a Design
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Thinking perspective, it can be argued that qualitative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews would be the better choice to empathize with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users. 
  
The second aspect was related to the participants’ difficulty
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with understanding the concept, already discussed above. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept was only presented to the participants through an oral
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explanation. This taught us how difficult it can be to explain a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
concept, when the technology behind is new and complex. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
retrospect, it would have been helpful to have drawings or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mock-ups to support the explanation. This might have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eliminated some of the participants’ confusion. Another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alternative considered, was to postpone the involvement of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly to a later stage of the process, where we would have a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
better idea of what the concept could do, hence enabling us to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be clearer in the description of the system. However, involving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly early in the design phase was a conscious choice, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
it was important to also empathize with them before making
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design choices. 
 
 
60 
==PAGE:69==
 
3.3.4. Conclusion 
In total, 14 semi structured interviews were conducted with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly people living alone. Through the interviews, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants’ worries related to living alone and related to their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health
were
investigated.
Furthermore, the participants’
 
 
 
 
 
 
perception of a proposed remote monitoring system was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated. From the analysis of the interviews 14 themes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about the elderlies’ worries and 11 themes about their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perception of the concept emerged. In general, it can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concluded that 9 of the elderly expressed a positive attitude
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
towards the concept of in home monitoring and 5 of them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed a dismissive attitude towards the concept. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supports the importance of an established agreement or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
informed consent between the elderly and the relative, before
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
buying and implementing the system. The key learnings from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interviews with the elderly is summarised in table 3. 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Key learnings from the interviews with the elderly 
Key learnings - Interviews with elderly 
-
9 out of the 14 participants expressed that they 
found the proposed monitoring system valuable 
 
-
Most of the participants who was worried about 
their health or had experienced falling expressed a 
personal need for the system. 
 
-
The participants perceived the increased feeling of 
safety as the main advantage of the proposed 
system. 
  
-
The automation of the system was perceived as a 
strong advantage (compared to an emergency 
pendant). 
 
-
The majority of the participants did not see any 
problem in sharing data about their daily activities 
with their relatives (except personal hygiene) 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
==PAGE:70==
 
3.4. Stakeholder map 
Besides affecting the lives of the main users, the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system can also affect other external stakeholders.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In order to investigate this, a list of stakeholders, that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potentially
could
be
affected,
was
brainstormed.
The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brainstorm was based on learnings from the background
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation
and
the
user
research.
The
identified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders were divided in 3 categories: 
 
1. Primary
stakeholders​:
​The
users
and
direct
 
 
 
 
 
 
influencers on the daily use of the proposed AAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. 
 
2. Secondary
stakeholders​:
​Non users that can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involved in, come in direct contact with, or be directly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
affected by the use of the proposed AAL system.  
 
3. Contextual stakeholders​: ​Non users that might have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interest in the effects of the proposed system. 
 
The identified stakeholders were mapped in an onion style
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholder map (see fig. 16). The stakeholder map was used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the thesis team to discuss potential conflicts between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders
that
could
occur
when
implementing
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed system. From the discussion, 4 potential points of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
conflict were identified (marked with a lightning symbol in fig.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
16).  
 
 
Fig. 16 - Stakeholder map - The lightning symbol indicates where possible 
stakeholder conflicts might occur (original content). 
 
62 
==PAGE:71==
 
The identified points of conflict will be described in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following. 
 
Stakeholder conflict: Healthcare professionals 
The proposed monitoring system might end up being used by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives as a tool to provide “evidence” for a health-related
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
concern. A relative could for instance show data from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system to the elderly person’s general practitioner,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to convince the practitioner of an arbitrary health concern.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, a practitioner might have to refuse to take the data
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the AAL system seriously, to avoid clouding his professional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
judgement. In a general sense, healthcare professionals must
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
rely on robust data sources to base their decisions on, e.g. data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coming from medical equipment that is calibrated after certain
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
standards, or what they can see and physically feel on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patient. That is not to say that healthcare professionals do not
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
listen to relatives’ statements, but rather that they should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distance themselves from using 3rd party data sources when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diagnosing patients. In some cases, this might lead to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative being frustrated that a healthcare professional does
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
not take the data seriously. In the same context, the healthcare
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professional might be frustrated having to explain why the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data is not of use. 
  
Stakeholder conflict: Emergency response 
A potential effect of the proposed system, could be an increase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in false alarm calls to the emergency response service. In a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
situation where the proposed system detects a critical event or
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
a critical deviation it might prompt the relative to call
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emergency services immediately. However, the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
system might have detected a critical event that does not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
necessarily require the assistance of the emergency services.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The conflict therefore arises, if the proposed system will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prompt users to overreact and misuse emergency services. 
  
Stakeholder conflict: Home care 
From the interviews conducted with relatives, it was evident
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
that some relatives could imagine using the proposed system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to monitor home care visits. Some relatives stated that, if given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the opportunity, they would like to know if the home care had
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
shown up on time and if the home care had shown up on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weekends or not. However, this could in turn be interpreted by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the home care workers as being spied on, thus creating an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unpleasant
work
environment.
Potential
conflicts
could
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore arise between the relative and the home care
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workers and the municipality.  
  
Stakeholder conflict: Neighbours 
A stakeholder that might be unwillingly involved in the care
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and oversight of the elderly, is the neighbour. Certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situations might arise, where the system detects a deviation or
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
a critical event, but the relative is too far away to physically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
check up on the elderly. In a case like that, the relative might
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
think to call the neighbour of the elderly and ask them to check
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:72==
 
up on the elderly. The neighbours will probably feel morally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obligated to do so, in case it was an emergency. The conflict
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
arises, if this becomes an often-recurring situation. This could
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be the case, if for instance, the relatives were highly sensitive
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to small deviations that they can infer from the data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communicated through the system.  
  
These identified conflicts were taken into consideration when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
moving forward with the system definition and UI design. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
was important to develop a design that would not foster these
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
conflicts, but rather a design that could prevent the occurrence
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of these. 
 
 
 
3.5. Conclusion   
In this chapter, the process and results from the user research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase have been presented and discussed. The user needs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements have been investigated through semi-structured
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews with 7 relatives and 14 elderly people living alone,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aiming to understand their stories, worries and perceptions of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the proposed monitoring system. The results of the interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are presented and concluded in section 3.2 and 3.3. In general,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it was outlined that both the relatives and the elderly face
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different worries and thus have different needs for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed system. In conclusion, it was found to be important
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
that the user should be able to personalise the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system to suit their individual needs. Lastly, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholder map was made to discuss potential stakeholder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conflicts that could arise with the implementation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed
system. 4 potential points for conflicts were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identified. 
 
 
64 
==PAGE:73==
 
4. DEFINITION OF THE 
SENSOR-SYSTEM  
In this chapter, the process of defining the sensor-system of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the proposed monitoring system is presented. The aim of this
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
phase
was
to
explore and define how the underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system should work, in order to establish a baseline for
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the UI design.  
 
 
 
 
65 
==PAGE:74==
 
4.1. Methodology 
In this section, the specific methods, tools, and approaches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in this phase are described. 
4.1.1. Morphological Chart 
Morphological analysis and creation of a morphological chart
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
is a method to explore and identify alternative design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions. Generally, the method is used to widen the search
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for new solutions. The morphological chart is constructed of a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
list of features or functions, essential for to the product,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combined with a list of different means to how the functions
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might be achieved (Nigel Cross, 2008). The method was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adapted and applied in this phase, to systematically explore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and define specifications of the underlying sensor system. 
4.1.2. User scenario 
In this chapter, user stories were used to explore how the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different personas would use the defined sensor-system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writing user scenarios is a narrative method that can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied to explain and concretize ideas, guide design, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communicate value (Geven et al, 2006). Through storytelling,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the perspective and context of the personas’ actions are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explored, including their emotions and motivations for acting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as they do (Quesenbery & Brooks, 2010). 
4.2. System breakdown  
The concept definition was initiated with a system breakdown,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
with the aim of understanding and defining what different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parts
the
monitoring
system
consists
of.
The
system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
breakdown was combined with a goal breakdown, in order to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
understand how the different parts of the system relate to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
achievement of a main vision. The breakdown was carried out
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a breakdown structure approach, where the main vision
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and system is branched out to goals and subsystems, see fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
Fig. 17 - Top level of system- and goal breakdown structure  
66 
==PAGE:75==
 
As seen on figure 17, the overall system vision, providing peace
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of mind to relatives of frail elderly people living alone, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used as the top level of the breakdown structure. From the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vision, the main system was derived. The main system was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then broken down into 3 goals describing what the system is
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
trying to achieve at its core. From each of these goals a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsystem was derived; 
  
In home sensor-system: This subsystem contains functions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and attributes related to achieving the goal of monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behavioural trends and events. This being for instance all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hardware needed for monitoring and the installation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
running of those.  
  
Data interpretation system: This subsystem contains the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functions related to processing and interpreting the data from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the sensors, to detect deviations in behavioural trends and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical events. 
  
UI for relatives: This subsystem is the communicative part. It
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
should enable the relatives to receive information about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviations in the behavioural trends and critical events.  
  
The three subsystems are closely interrelated, which means
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the design choices made within one subsystem can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence the others. For instance, the design of the in-home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system and the data interpretation system have a great
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
influence on how the UI for relatives can be designed. Thus, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a baseline for designing the UI for the relatives, it was
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
found important to first establish a conceptual definition of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
in-home sensor-system and the data interpretation system. 
4.3. Initial user requirements 
To scope the concept definition, a range of initial user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements for the monitoring system were defined. As a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
base for this, the previous collected data were reviewed, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
going through the background investigation and the results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the user research. This approach helped establish a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
common understanding of the user needs, and made sure that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the initial requirements were driven by previous learnings.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The monitoring system was at this point still in a conceptual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
stage, thus the initial requirements was on a high level of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
abstraction. The requirements that were defined is presented
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in [A 4.1]. 
 
 
67 
==PAGE:76==
 
4.4. Concept definition  
To define the concept of the sensor-system, both the ​in-home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system and the ​data interpretation system ​were broken
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further down into a range of attributes; 
  
In home sensor-system 
●
Sensor installation 
●
Data output 
●
Sensor type 
●
Power source 
●
Connectivity 
  
Data interpretation system 
●
Processing location 
●
Interpretation approach 
  
The different attributes represent possible specifications for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the subsystems. To expand the solution space, different ideas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for each attribute were brainstormed, see fig. 18. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspiration for the ideas mainly came from the background
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation
of
the
technological
domain
and
wishes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed by the relatives in the user research. With the initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept requirements as a point of reference, a concept was
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
defined based on the list of ideas. The chosen concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifications have been highlighted with a black border in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
figure 18. 
 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
Fig. 18 - System brainstorming and definition (black frame= chosen 
specifications) 
 
 
69 
==PAGE:78==
 
The chosen system definition revolves around enabling the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users to customize the system, both regarding the desired
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functionality
and
level
of
obtrusiveness.
By supporting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple sensor types (PIR, contact & microphone), the users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can pick, choose, and combine the sensors that enable them to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fulfil their needs. In the following, reflections about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specification choices are presented. 
 
In home sensor-system 
Sensor installation 
In terms of sensor installation, it was important that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installation would be simple and easy, and not require house
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconstruction work. The idea is that sensors will be installed
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
on surfaces with either screw mounts or adhesives. While in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some cases, sensors could also just be placed in a less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
permanent configuration, for instance on a shelf. Wearable
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
sensors were decided not to be included. The main reason for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this is that it requires collaboration from the elderly to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
function, in the form of remembering to wear it and turn it on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
etc. Some relatives expressed concerns related to the elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having to manually interact with parts of the system, thinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it was too hard for the elderly to properly operate such things.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, it could possibly still be valuable to include
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wearables as a supporting unit, but not as a stand-alone part of
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the system. 
  
Data output 
Multiple different data outputs can be gathered from the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
types of sensors, as it has been shown in literature and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed in the background research. 7 out of the 8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considered data outputs were chosen to be included in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept. All the features included has been specifically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requested by the relatives interviewed in the user research.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, it was prominent that not all users would have the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need for the same outputs. Therefore, the idea of implementing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many
different
data
outputs,
was
to
increase
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configurability of the concept. This demand a function in the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
UI, where the output can be selected or deselected. Some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data outputs, simply rely on how and where sensors will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed in the physical space of the house. Monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resource usage (power and water) was an idea requested in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the user research, as a way of monitoring the daily living in a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
very unobtrusive and passive way. An interesting idea that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could find its use, but not without the compromise of replacing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
water gauges and electrical meters. It was deemed not suitable
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
for this concept, as it would require advanced installation and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
possibly
construction
work
to
be
done
in
the house.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nevertheless,
it
would
be
interesting
to
include
such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology in the construction of future houses. 
  
 
 
70 
==PAGE:79==
 
Sensor type 
In total, 9 sensor types were considered for the concept. The
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor types ​PIR and ​Microphone were both chosen to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
included in the concept. Both ​PIR ​and ​Microphone sensors can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be categorised as multipurpose AAL sensors, as they can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used in a range of different sensing activities. Including both
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors, makes it possible to greatly increase the robustness of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system, as well as giving the user a choice between 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
different multipurpose sensors. Additionally, contact sensors
 
 
 
 
 
 
were also chosen to be included, as they give the possibility to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitor opening of doors, cupboards, and refrigerators etc. in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a simple way. These sensors have more specific purposes as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as less depth of information, but are easier to interpret.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The main reasons for including the 3 mentioned sensors in the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
concept was: 
1) To enable high customizability with low amounts of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors. 
2) To accommodate different user preferences. 
3) To increase robustness through multimodality. 
  
Power source 
Powering the sensors in the home, was chosen to be done with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
batteries. The use of batteries eases the setup and installation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and removes the need for installing new wires in the home.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, using battery power entails that the batteries will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have to be recharged or changed after prolonged use. Hence,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the power consumption of the sensors should strive to be as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low as possible. Another design consideration would be to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have the UI indicate the power level of the various sensors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed, making it easy for the relatives to predict when to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change or recharge the batteries. 
 
Connectivity  
Both Wi-Fi and 4G was chosen as connectivity options. 4G
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enables the system to be installed in a home, with no Wi-Fi
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
connection, thus easing the installation process. However, if
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the system could only function with 4G, users that already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subscribe to a Wi-Fi service, would wonder why the system
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could not utilise this. Keeping both options available should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not, to the thesis groups knowledge, be a complex or costly
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
affair. 
 
Data interpretation system 
Processing location 
A pressing issue in monitoring humans is privacy and security
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
concerns. Because of this, it was considered the best choice to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
process the data locally. By processing raw data locally, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
possible to avoid transferring sensitive raw data over the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internet. As an example, when using a microphone sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed on the bathroom to detect bathroom usage (e.g.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flushing, bathing, brushing teeth), the audio recordings would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have to either be sent to the cloud for processing or be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processed locally. Processing such recordings locally, would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mean that the actual recordings would never be stored
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
==PAGE:80==
 
anywhere, and that it would never leave the privacy of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user’s home. The results of the interpretation of the recordings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will eventually leave the house, to be sent to the UI in a simple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
form, e.g. in a simple text string like “toilet flushed”. 
  
Interpretation approach 
Interpreting the data collected by the sensors is an important
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
task. The data collected has to be interpreted into something
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
useful and understandable for the users. As found in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
background
investigation,
this
is
usually
done
with
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rule-based approach or a mathematical-statistical approach. It
 
 
  
 
  
was decided, that the system should use both approaches. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reason for implementing a statistical data interpretation is to
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
enable the relatives to receive a deduced status indication of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the behavioural trends. It is assumed, that this could make it
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
easier for the relatives to figure out when the health or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wellbeing of the elderly is declining. Furthermore, all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial monitoring systems targeted relatives were found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to only be based on rule-based data interpretation. Thus, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
possible to differentiate by introducing a statistical approach.  
The reason for implementing a rule-based interpretation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach, is to provide the possibility to create customized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if-then alarms, based on specific individual needs. For instance,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if the elderly has been away from home for more than 5 hours
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
or if they have not left the bedroom before 12. 
 
 
72 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
73 
==PAGE:82==
 
4.4.1. Storyboard  
Based on the definition of the sensor-system, a simplified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
storyboard was made, visualising and describing the overall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use of the proposed monitoring system, see fig. 19. Overall, 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
major steps of interaction were identified; 
  
Step 1: This is the initial step of interaction, where both the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly and the relative agree on the implementation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. In this step, it is important to establish informed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consent from the elderly. 
  
Step 2:
At this step the elderly and the relative discuss and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decide in collaboration what type and number of sensors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be purchased. 
  
Step 3: The purchased sensors are easily installed in the home.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The elderly should also be involved in the installation process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This way the elderly will be aware of where the sensors are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installed. 
  
Step 4: After installing the sensors in the home, the relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can now make the desired configurations of the system in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UI. 
  
Step 5: Now the sensors are installed and the system is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configured, the relative can view the status of behavioural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trends and receive alarms if critical deviation or events occur.  
  
If the condition of the elderly worsens, the user might want to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upgrade or change the system setup, eg. install more sensors to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enable real time fall detection. In that case step 1-4 would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
repeated. 
74 
==PAGE:83==
 
Fig. 19 - simplified storyboard, describing the overall use of the proposed 
monitoring system  
 
 
75 
==PAGE:84==
 
4.5. User scenarios  
The proposed monitoring system was further explored and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described through the creation of 3 user scenarios. The user
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
scenarios were based on the 3 user personas (Thomas, Marie
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
and Preben), that was defined during the user research phase.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each scenario is described through a user story. The user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stories describe the motivation, goals, and use context of each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persona. The scenarios focus on what the users want, rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than how to achieve it. Meaning that the scenarios attempt to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describe the experience and not details about the installation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
setup or interface. 
  
The floorplan visualisations (fig. 20 - 22) of the 3 scenarios
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
also effectively display the customisable aspect of the concept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the user scenarios helped explore the variances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of use that the UI should be compatible with. The scenarios are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented on the next pages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
==PAGE:85==
 
4.5.1. Scenario 1 - The least invasive 
Thomas’ biggest worry is that his mom will fall and hurt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
herself and end up lying on the floor helpless, for many hours
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or even days before anyone notice her. However, he is not a big
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
fan of surveillance, so he just wants to have a simple setup,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
with only one sensor, that can monitor the general activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
level and detect behavioural trends to give him an indication of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sign of life. It is important to him that the system is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceived by his mom as intrusive, thus he does not want to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
place the sensor in the bedroom or the bathroom. His mother
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spends most of the time in the living room during the day, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he chooses to place the sensor here. When going about his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
busy day, Thomas can through an UI on his phone quickly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
check if his mom has gotten up from bed and entered the living
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
room as she usually does. He sends a text to his mom saying
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
good morning, and even if she doesn't answer within the hour,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
his mind is at ease, as he knows she has moved around the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
house as she normally does. See figure 20 for a visualisation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the sensor setup. 
 
Fig. 20- ​Scenario 1​ floor plan. Green dot = PIR sensor 
 
 
77 
==PAGE:86==
 
4.5.2. Scenario 2 - A Sensor in every room 
Marie is worried that her mother will fall and hurt herself
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while being in the garden, so she chooses to buy a contact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
sensor to install on the door. In this way, she can set up the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system to push an alarm, if her mom goes outside and don’t
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
return after a critical period of time. Marie is also worried that
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
her mother is sitting still all day long, so she also decides to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
buy and install a PIR sensor in each room. With the PIR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors, Marie can track her mother’s daily level of activity,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and observe how the activity evolves over time. This helps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marie to know when her mom is in a period of slump, sitting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
still or sleeping all day. Marie can then plan to come by and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take her mother out for walks. See figure 21 for a visualisation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of the sensor setup. 
 
 
Fig. 21 - ​Scenario 2​ floor plan. Green dot = PIR sensor & blue dot = contact 
sensor. 
  
78 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
4.5.3. Scenario 3 - Real time fall detection &
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
activity sensing 
Preben is worried that his father will fall and be unable to get
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up without help. He is afraid that his father will lay on the floor
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for a long time before he or somebody else will notice that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
something is wrong. Because of this, he wants to install enough
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors to enable real time fall detection. Therefore, Preben
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decides to buy and install two PIR sensors and one Microphone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in each room.
Preben also wants to have an indication of his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
father's well-being, especially if his health seems to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
declining. He will therefore also use the sensors to evaluate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
movement between rooms, sleeping pattern, intensity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
movement, activity recognition etc. Furthermore, he would like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be reassured when the homecare has visited his father, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he also installs a contact sensor on the door. Preben just wants
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what is best for his father, and puts his faith in the technology
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to greatly improve both his own life and his father’s. See figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 for a visualisation of the sensor setup. 
 
 
 
Fig. 22 - ​Scenario 3​ floor plan. Green = PIR, blue = contact sensor, yellow = 
Microphone. 
 
 
79 
==PAGE:88==
 
4.6. Discussion and reflection 
The process of defining the underlying sensor-system was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
carried out, to have a baseline for designing the UI. By doing so
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some of the choices made, when defining the in-home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system would end up dictating design possibilities of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interface. Another option was to design the UI first, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then let the UI design set the requirements for the underlying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor system. However, it was decided that to promote a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
more realistic UI design, it made sense to define the underlying
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors
system
first.
Furthermore,
creating
a
specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
definition of the underlying sensor system, made it easier to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
communicate the concept idea to the users when carrying out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user tests. Having a specific definition to reference, made the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept more realistic, compared to referring to some sort of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
magic sensors that could monitor whatever the users wanted.  
  
In the end, it can be argued that by letting a realistic definition
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of the underlying sensor system limit the UI design, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution space became narrower. A narrow solution space is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not necessarily a good thing, when the goal is to find
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
innovative solutions. However, in the case of this project, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
helped us to set up the right boundaries, giving us more time to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refine the UI design. 
  
4.7. Conclusion 
In this phase, the underlying sensor-system of the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring
system
has
been
defined.
First,
the
main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system was broken down into three subsystems; ​in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home sensor-system, data interpretation system ​and UI for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives. The functions of the in-home sensor-system and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data interpretation system were further explored and defined.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The result of this phase was a specific conceptual idea of how
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the sensor-system behind the UI should work. Based on this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conceptual idea, the use of the monitoring system was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated through a simplified storyboard and 3 different
 
  
 
 
  
 
user scenarios based on the 3 personas created in the user
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
research. 
 
 
 
80 
==PAGE:89==
 
5. UI DESIGN 
In this chapter the UI design phase will be presented. The goal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of this phase was to develop a design proposal for an UI that
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
can
fulfill
the
essential
user
needs
and
requirements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Throughout the chapter an iterative UX design process,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
containing a scoping and 3 design loops, will be presented.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concluding, a final UI design proposal will be presented.  
 
 
 
 
 
81 
==PAGE:90==
 
5.1. Methodology 
In this section, the specific methods, tools, and approaches
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied in the UI design phase are described. 
5.1.1. Lean UX approach 
As explained in the intro chapter, the UI design process has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been inspired by the lean UX design approach proposed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laura Klein (2013). Mainly, the process has been driven by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
idea of the “lean loop”, where ideas and hypothesis are quickly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
validated through simple user tests. Through the UI design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase, the UI has been developed through 3 specific design
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
loops, see fig. 23.  
 
In each loop, ideas were build into interactive prototypes. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototypes were subsequently tested with users, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gather new learnings and new ideas. In Loop 1, the prefered
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
type and level of information were investigated. This was done
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by developing and testing 3 different low-fidelity (Lo-fi)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboards. In loop 2, the setup and configuration flow was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed and tested, also with a lo-fi prototype. Learnings
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
from loop 1 and 2 were then compiled and used in loop 3,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where a refined dashboard design were developed and tested
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through a high-fidelity (hi-fi) prototype. Lastly, the learnings
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
from loop 3 were used to develop the final UI design proposal. 
 
fig. 23 - The UI design process consisting of 3 loops 
 
In this chapter, the 3 loops will be presented through three
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsections; 
●
What​: ​Describing the ideas and prototype to be tested. 
●
How​: ​Describing how the ideas are tested. 
●
Outcome​: ​Describing the learnings from the tests. 
82 
==PAGE:91==
 
5.1.2. User story mapping 
The idea behind user story mapping (USM) is to tell the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
story through different levels, in order to gain a shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding of the product, why you are building it and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what it should contain (Patton, 2009). Furthermore, it can help
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
you keep the user and their needs in mind in order to ensure a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
user driven design process (Patton, 2009). In this project, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USM was used to scope the UI design while also functioning as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a changeable recipe for designing the different views of the UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout the process.  
5.1.3. The 10 usability heuristics 
The 10 usability heuristics defined by Jakob Nielsen are 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
general principles and rules of thumbs for interaction design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Nielsen, 1994). The heuristics were used as general guidelines
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to keep in mind when designing the UI and was used as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
checklist continuously throughout the design process. The 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
heuristics are as follows:  
1. Visibility of system status  
2. Match between system and the real world 
3. User control and freedoms 
4. Consistency and standards 
5. Error prevention 
6. Recognition rather than recall 
7. Flexibility and efficiency of use  
8. Aesthetic and minimalist design  
9. Help users recognize, diagnose and recover from errors 
10.Help and documentation  
 
The idea behind all the heuristics are further described in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
article on Jakob Nielsen’s webpage (Nielsen, 2005). 
5.1.4. Interactive prototypes 
In order to test and validate the different iterations of UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designs, interactive prototypes were developed. The idea
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behind the interactive prototypes is to simulate a real UI in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
order to get as close to a real product as possible. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactive prototypes have been made in Adobe XD, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme
specially
developed
to make interactive UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototypes. In Adobe XD you can sketch each view of the UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and then link them to each other, so it is possible for the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
to click through the prototype, mimicking a real product,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without having to develop backend software. 
5.1.5. Validation 
The most important part of an iterative UX design process is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
validate your ideas fast and learn from them in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continuously improve the product as you learn more and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more. When it comes to detecting usability issues, Nielsen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2000) have shown that it is possible to identify around 85%
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
==PAGE:92==
 
of usability issues with only five participants. Hence Nielsen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
states that;  
The best results comes from testing no more than 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
users and running as many small tests as you can afford.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Nielsen, 2000) 
Therefore, in the case of this thesis it was strived to do as many
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
tests as possible, with around 4-5 users participating in each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test. 
5.1.6. Think aloud testing 
“Thinking aloud may be the single most valuable usability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engineering method” - Jakob Nielsen writes in his textbook
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
usability engineering (1993). Think aloud testing involves the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants sharing their thoughts while simultaneously
 
 
 
 
 
 
navigating through the user interface. This allows for designers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to easily understand how users view the prototype and makes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it easy to identify misconceptions. Think aloud testing provides
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualitative feedback on the system that is being tested, as the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
users share their experience. The biggest strength of the think
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aloud test is that it is possible to see what the participants are
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
doing while simultaneously hearing their reasons for why they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are doing so (Nielsen, 1993). For that reason, when conducting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
think aloud tests in this thesis, the participants screen actions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the prototype was recorded and synchronized with their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verbal comments. However, a limitation of the think aloud
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
method is that thinking aloud can seem strange and unnatural,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thus affecting the way participants interact with the prototype.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For instance participants might work their way slower through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system.  
5.1.7. Prototype fidelity  
During the 3 loops of testing, the prototypes used for testing
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differed in fidelity. The fidelity of a prototype refers to how it
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
communicates the realism of the final product. The fidelity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototypes generally vary in the areas of ​Visual design, Content
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ​Interactivity (Babich, 2017). For instance the prototype
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used in the first loop had low interactivity, and low visual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design. This was done intentionally to put focus on the content
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the prototype rather than the visual design of the prototype.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whereas the prototype used in loop 3 was a high fidelity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
prototype, looking and functioning almost like it was a finished
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
product. The idea of testing with a high fidelity prototype is to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
force the participants to be critical and give more honest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback, even on the small details. The hypothesis is that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when a prototype looks like a real product, the users will be
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
more likely to behave naturally and expect more of it, when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
testing it. Furthermore if a prototype has low fidelity, it is
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected that the users are less critical, as they clearly can see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it is an unfinished product. On top of that, low fidelity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototypes often require more imagination from the user,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which can end up limiting the outcome of the tests. 
 
84 
==PAGE:93==
 
The prototype strategy used has been to start low and then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase the fidelity in every loop. One of the main reasons for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
starting with low fidelity prototypes was to be able to build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple
prototype
variations
in
a
short
time
frame.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Afterwards as key design choices had been made, the fidelity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the prototype could be increased. Ultimately ending up with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
close to finished design proposal for an UI. 
 
 
85 
==PAGE:94==
 
5.2. Scoping of the UI design 
In order to explore and define what the UI should contain, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
small scoping phase was carried out.  
5.2.1. User story mapping 
In order to discuss and define what functions the UI should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contain, a user story map was made, see fig. 24. Here the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overall user goals were defined and broken down into a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence of activities the user should go through in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fulfil their goals. The activities were then broken down into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific tasks the user should have the possibility to perform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
via the UI. Throughout the UI design process the USM worked
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as a shared recipe for building the specific views and the flow
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the UI. Furthermore, the USM was used as a tool for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussing and defining what features should be a part of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
minimum viable product (MVP). The idea behind a MVP is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
only focus on the core value of the product when developing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and testing the product. Tasks that were not assumed to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important for the MVP was moved down to the 2. edition slice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the USM.  
 
86 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
Fig. 24 - User story map 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
==PAGE:96==
 
5.2.2. User flow 
In order to get a better idea of the functions and views the UI
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should contain and how it should be designed, the user flow
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
were investigated. The usage of the UI could be divided in 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
different user flows representing different moments and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasons for interaction, see fig. 25.  
 
1. First time use 
This user flow is only meant to be happening the first time of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user and is a prerequisite before the system can function. This
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario can be broken into 2 separate use flows, setup (install
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
sensors) and configuration (choose insights, define alarms).  
 
2. Daily use  
This scenario is where everything have been set up and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configured and the system is running automatically. Here the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use flow is triggered by a thought/concern about the elderly
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
family member or a notification/alarm. Either the user checks
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the UI to get peace of mind or the user receives an alarm if an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
alarm is triggered.  
 
3. Change of setup and reconfiguration  
This use scenario only happens after the initial setup and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configuration, if a user wants to change the configuration after
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system have been used for a while or if the user wants to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
add a new sensor. 
 
Fig. 25 - User flow: the usage of the interface can be  divided in 3 different 
flows 
 
88 
==PAGE:97==
 
Even though the first time use flow and reconfiguration flow is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
viewed as two separate flows, many of the features would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same. This means that the part of the UI that should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support the first time use should be reused for the UI part that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should support the reconfiguration flow.  
5.3. Loop 1: Type and level of 
information  
The focus of this loop was first of all to investigate what kinds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of data and what level of information the user would prefer to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
see in the main dashboard view of the UI. Furthermore, the test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the dashboards designed in this loop was also used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
validate
the
concept
of
the
underlying sensor system,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previously defined in chapter 4. 
5.3.1. What  
The main dashboard view is the first thing the relative will see
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when they open the app. It should contain only the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relevant information, that can give the relatives piece of mind.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In order to investigate what level and what type of information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the relatives prefer, 3 different variations of dashboards were
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
developed. The level and type of information displayed on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboards was varied according to the needs of the 3 user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
personas and their respective use scenarios. A low-fidelity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semi-interactive prototype was made for all three dashboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variations. Keeping the fidelity low was done both in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emphasize the variations in content and not variations in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aesthetics and to minimise the time used at developing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype.  
 
The dashboard variations are described in the following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section together with pictures of their respective prototypes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An overview of all the views from each dashboard prototype
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be seen in [A 5.1] 
 
89 
==PAGE:98==
 
Dashboard 1 - Low level of detail 
This dashboard was designed to align with the needs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persona 1, Thomas, who did not want to feel like he was spying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on his mother. This design takes into account that in scenario
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1, there would only be one PIR sensor installed in the living
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
room. The dashboard is kept simple and the immediate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication of knowledge is done by showing a thumbs up
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
or thumbs down symbol. If a deviation is detected the symbols
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
would change accordingly, see fig. 26.  
 
Fig. 26 - Main view for both a good (left) and a bad (right) scenario 
 
One of the things that can put Thomas’ mind at rest is knowing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
is knowing that his mother has gotten out of bed and have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
started the day. Therefore, this dashboard is designed to push
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
a notification when the first activity of the day is detected in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the living room, see fig. 27. Furthermore the dashboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contains a simple history view of the daily activity level during
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the last week. This can give Thomas an idea of the general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity level of his mother.  
 
 
Fig. 27 - Notification (left) and history view (right) 
90 
==PAGE:99==
 
Dashboard 2 - Medium level of detail 
This dashboard was designed to align with the needs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persona 2, Marie, who is worried about her mother falling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when she is in the garden. The dashboard is designed with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario 2 in mind, where contact sensors are installed at the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
front and back door and 1 PIR sensor is installed in each room.
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
An activity score is presented, the score is thought to be based
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
on the level of deviation from the normal activity level, see fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. 
 
Fig. 28 - Main view in two scenarios, not home (left) and sleeping (right) 
 
This dashboard also shows more specific activity related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information, eg. ​not home, sleeping or ​active​, and the time for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the activity transition, see fig. 28. Furthermore, a rule
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connected to the front or back door can be set, so Marie can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
receive an alarm when her mom has been away from home for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
too long, see fig. 29 (left). The history view show a graph with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the daily activity scores during a week and a month, see fig. 29
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
(right). 
 
 
Fig. 29 - Notification (left) and history view (right) 
91 
==PAGE:100==
 
Dashboard 3 - High level of detail 
This dashboard variation was designed to align with the needs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of persona 3, Preben, who wants to know if his father has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fallen. It is designed with scenario 3 in mind, where 2 PIR and
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
1 microphone sensor is installed in each room as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contact sensors on the doors. This dashboard aims to provide a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
high level of detail. At the main view, an overall well being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicator is shown, see fig. 30 (left).  
 
Fig. 30 - Main view (left) and detailed activity list (right) 
Furthermore, a “menu” of both ​sleep, movement, toilet use and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visits ​can be seen, where the square will be marked red if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
deviations have been detected in the respective activity, see fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 (left). Additionally, this dashboard also has an activity log,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showing the latest recorded activities of the elderly, see fig. 30
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(right).When clicking on eg. sleep in the menu, a detailed graph
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
over the sleep pattern can be seen. Because of the many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors installed, real time fall detection is provided. If a fall is
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
detected, a notification will be pushed, see fig. 31 (left).  
 
Fig. 31 - Fall notification (left) and detailed view of sleep pattern (right) 
92 
==PAGE:101==
 
5.3.2. How  
The user’s perceptions of the different dashboard variations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were investigated through tests and interviews with possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end users. The dashboards were tested with 4 participants in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
total, 2 previously interviewed and 2 new. The participants
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
were all relatives to a home dwelling elderly person living
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
alone, making them the target users. 
  
The participants were asked to click through one concept at a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
time and comment on what they liked and did not like. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end they were asked to choose which dashboard variation they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
liked the best and explain why. Furthermore, the illustrations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the 3 scenarios (from p. 77-79) were printed out. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were shown after the test of the dashboards in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitate a discussion about the number of sensors and their
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
placement, respective to the amount of detail available on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard. A test guide [A 5.2] was used to conduct the tests,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in order to structure the tests in the same way. 
  
Pictures of the wireframes from the dashboards were printed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out and brought to the tests. The printouts were used to take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notes on during the interviews and tests in order to document
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the results in an easy way. 
 
5.3.3. Outcome  
In this section the most interesting outcomes of the test will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented. All of the tests results are presented in details in [A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.3].  
  
All of the participants showed interest in using one or more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variations of the dashboard which validated that the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
idea had developed in the right direction. 
​All participants liked the simple thumbs up/down indicator in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard 1, as it provided an easy to understand and instant
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indication of whether the status is positive or negative. In this
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
regard
most
participants
found
the
​activity
score
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well-being indicator in dashboard 2 and 3 to be confusing and
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
ambiguous. 2 participants asked “what does it mean? is it good
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
or bad?” when looking at the activity score displayed on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard 2. They suggested that such a score or indication
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
could be written in words instead of numbers to make it less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
ambiguous.  
 
The indication of the current activity e.g. ​home / not home /
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
sleeping shown in dashboard 2, was perceived as being highly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
valuable by all participants. When asked about the importance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the time stamp on the indication, all participants agreed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it was especially important to keep the timestamp.  
 
93 
==PAGE:102==
 
3 out of 4 participants perceived the activity log in dashboard
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 to be valuable. The log was useful for them to gain more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context to the status of the elderly. The participants also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned
that
the
activity
log
could
encourage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication, a sort of ​ticket to talk​. For instance, a relative
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
getting encouraged to call the elderly in order to hear about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly’s day, if the elderly for instance, had been away
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from home for a longer period that day. 
  
The history view incorporated in all 3 dashboard variations
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
was perceived as valuable. The participants liked the idea of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being able to see a development over time, especially over
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
longer periods. However, some participants questioned how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system was able to calculate the activity score to make the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
graphs. Also it was noted that the graphs would be easier to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
read if they were labelled with weekdays instead of dates.  
  
3 out of 4 participants perceived the monitoring of toilet use as
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as monitoring of sleep to be unimportant or too intrusive.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drastic changes in toilet use for instance, could indicate illness,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and thus be valuable in the sense of discovering illness in its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
early development. However, one of the participants were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerned that monitoring sleep and toilet use, would only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make her even more worried or confused. Another participant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explained that he did not expect to be able to interpret the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sleep and toilet use data into something useful.  
Based on the outcome from the user tests in this loop an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
updated user requirement list for the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system was developed, see [A 5.4]. The key learnings from loop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 are summarized in table 4. 
 
Table 4: Key learnings from loop 1 
Key learnings - Loop 1 
-
The simple thumbs up thumbs down status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indication from dashboard 1 was highly valuable
 
 
  
 
 
 
and easy to understand. 
 
-
The indication of current activity e.g. ​home​/​Not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home/sleeping​ is highly valuable. 
 
-
A monthly activity graph provides a valuable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overview 
 
-
An activity log could provide more context to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simple status indication and function as a ​ticket to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
talk 
 
-
Well being indicator ​and ​activity score from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard 2 & 3  were too ambiguous. 
 
-
Toilet
use
and
sleep
patterns
are
not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting/useful. 
94 
==PAGE:103==
 
5.4. Loop 2: Setup and configuration 
From the user research and loop 1 a key learning was that the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
relatives strongly preferred an AAL system they could install
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves. In order to fulfil this need, it is important that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
interface can guide the user easily through the setup and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
installation of the system. Furthermore, it is important that the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
interface contains an intuitive configuration flow, giving the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user the experience of being able to tailor the system to fit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their specific needs.  
5.4.1. What 
In this loop, a prototype of the setup and configuration flow
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was developed and evaluated. This was done to investigate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how the first time use interface should be designed in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure an easy and intuitive setup and configuration of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system.  
 
First step in developing the setup and configuration flow was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to explore what different wireframes were needed to ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an intuitive flow for the user. This was done through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brainstorming different wireframes on post its and connecting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them to each other to create different flows, see fig. 32. 
 
 
Fig. 32 - Section of the post it flow, showing the section where sensors 
should be installed and paired.  
Developing the first wireframes on post its helped open up the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution space and facilitated valuable discussions, that led to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
more common understanding of how the prototype should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed. The final post it flow can be seen in [A 5.5].  
 
An interactive prototype was made based on the final post it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
flow. The flow was divided in two, a setup flow and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configuration flow. The different steps of each flow is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
illustrated and categorised as ​physical or ​in App in figure 33
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
below. All the steps that are categorised as in App are actions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95 
==PAGE:104==
 
to do in the App, where all the physical steps are actions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related to the house or the sensors.  
 
Fig. 33 - Illustration of the prototype flow for the setup and configuration. 
 
The prototype was made with a low-fidelity visual design with
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
blue and white colours in order to keep the focus on the flow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and not the visual design. A part of the prototype can be seen
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in fig. 34, showing two views from the set up flow, and in fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35, showing two views from the configuration flow. All the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
views of the prototype can be seen in [A 5.6]. 
 
Fig. 34 - Two views of the setup flow from the prototype  
96 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
Fig. 35 - Two views of the configuration flow from the prototype. 
 
 
5.4.2. How 
The interactive prototype was evaluated through a usability
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
test in order to investigate if the flow was intuitive for the user
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and if the level of guidance provided was enough. 
  
The tests were carried out as ​Think aloud tests ​(Nielsen, 1993)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the participants are asked to communicate their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thoughts and reason their actions while performing them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following the think aloud test, a short unstructured interview
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
discussing specific elements of the flow was conducted. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test was carried out with 5 participants.  
  
To provide context to the test, the participants were asked to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
read a document describing a specific setup scenario, setting
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
the scene before starting the test [A 5.7]. The document
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described a scenario for why they were setting up the system,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while also giving details of how the participants should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
configure the system. In on other words, it provided a specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
setup scenario that the participants had to roleplay. In order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simplify the prototyping process, the interactive prototype was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed as a relatively linear path, meaning some buttons or
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objects were not coded. The scenario was therefore also a way
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to steer the participants in the right direction and avoid having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants click on buttons and object that would not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
function. 
97 
==PAGE:106==
 
In order to make the flow more realistic, a paper cut-out of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
floor plan and the different sensors were provided [A 5.8]. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants could then simulate the placement and installation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the sensors in the various rooms and doors of the house,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while they were navigating through the prototype on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
computer, see fig. 36.  
 
 
Fig. 36 - Test setup in loop 2: Sensors are getting installed in the house 
 
The tests were documented by screen and audio recording. By
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
doing so, we were able to play back the participants’ cursor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
movement and clicks in the prototype while simultaneously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hearing the participants verbalise their thoughts.  
 
The action plan for the test were noted down in a test guide [A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
5.9] in order to have a common script and ensure that all the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tests were carried out in the same way. 
5.4.3. Outcome 
In this section the most relevant outcomes of the test will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented. 
  
The overall flow of the prototype seemed to be perceived as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intuitive by all participants. It made sense for the participants
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to do actions in the particular order that was designed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, it was identified that 1 step of the flow seemed to be
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
redundant.
The
intended
flow
of
first
​choosing
sensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
placements ​and then ​choosing where to start installing was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceived as doing the same thing twice. Due to the perceived
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
redundancy, the flow was changed to combine the choice of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor placement and where to start installing, into the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
view [A 5.10]. 
  
 
98 
==PAGE:107==
 
A number of usability issues were also identified. The relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues identified is listed below: 
 
●
Lack of visual feedback on successful pairing with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor 
●
Clickable lists should not share visual design with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-clickable lists. 
●
Text boxes with no clickable options should not share
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visual design with buttons that are clickable (e.g. in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
define alarms section of the flow) 
●
The configuration flow lacks guidance or descriptions of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
options to better guide the user. 
  
Even though the setup and configuration flow is only supposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
to be done once as part of a ​first time use situation, many of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actions will be accessible in the UI in order to reconfigure the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. Therefore, many of the learnings from this loop was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to refine the dashboard in the next loop. 
 
Based on the outcome from the user tests in this loop an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
updated user requirement list for the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system was developed, see [A 5.11]. The key learnings from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loop 2 are summarized in table 5. 
 
 
 
 
Table 5: Key learnings from loop 2 
Key learnings - Loop 2 
-
Flow was perceived as intuitive and key actions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were simple to understand and follow. 
 
-
The set up flow could be improved by adding more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
guidance and description of options. 
 
-
Text boxes with no clickable options should not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
share visual design with buttons that are clickable. 
 
-
Clickable lists should not share visual design with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-clickable lists. 
 
 
 
99 
==PAGE:108==
 
5.5. Loop 3: Refined UI design 
The focus in this loop was to refine the dashboard view based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on learnings from loop 1 and loop 2, and to choose a visual
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
design aesthetic in order to get one step closer to the final
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interface design. 
5.5.1. What 
In this loop a high-fidelity prototype was made of the UI. This
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UI is the one enabling the user to conduct the actions and tasks
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the daily use flow and the reconfiguration use flow. The UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was divided into two parts that should be designed. One of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them being the main dashboard that should enable the user to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
view data and navigate through different views. The other one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is the settings menu that enables the user to view current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
settings and reconfigure the system.  
  
Brand identity  
In order to increase the fidelity of the dashboard a brand
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
identity was developed. First of all, a primary colour was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
selected to be used for the logo and the interface. Choosing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
right colour for both the brand and the interface is important,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
because it has a great effect on the users’ perception of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product and how they feel when they interact with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product. In order to find a fitting colour, the feelings it should
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
evoke were brainstormed: ​Calm, Secure, Respectful, Honesty,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trust, Love. ​These feelings were used as search terms to find
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
colours and inspiration. The results were collected in a mood
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
board, see fig. 37.  
 
 
Fig. 37 - Color moodboard - the colors are representing the feelings that the 
design are intended to evoke 
The colours of the mood board were added to the dashboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design one at a time to experiment with what worked best and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the end a dark turquoise also called teal was chosen as the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
primary colour.  
  
 
 
100 
==PAGE:109==
 
Secondly, a proposal for a name and a logo were created, see
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
fig. 38.  
 
 
Fig. 38 - Logo and name proposal 
 
The reasoning behind the name was that it should indicate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
core functions of the system. Therefore, it was evident to use
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the word sense, both because the system is based on sensors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and because it helps the relatives to sense if somethings is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
wrong. Furthermore, it was important that the name should be
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with something positive and friendly in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent the product’s caring function. Adding the word
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
friend
gave
the
name
a personal feeling and positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associations. The name Sense Friend, can also associate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system with a mascot that is helping you. 
  
The reasoning behind the logo was also that it should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent the core functions of the system in a simple design. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
lot of different logos were sketched out in a brainstorm and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
final logo proposal was chosen to be a sensor icon combined
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
with a heart. 
  
Visual design of main dashboard  
An important part of refining the dashboard was to improve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the visual design. One of the key design principles behind the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard design was that it should be kept simple and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
minimalistic. A minimalistic design should promote the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
screen space to the most relevant information and the visual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aesthetics should not take away focus from the information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displayed. When it comes to the content of the dashboard,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learnings from loop 1 were used as a base for the further
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
development of the dashboard content.  
  
In order to find inspiration, existing dashboard designs were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explored [A 5.12]. Additionally, the visual design layout was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explored by sketching different dashboards designs on paper,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
see fig. 39 and [A 5.13].  
 
 
Fig. 39 - Section of the dashboard ideation sketching 
 
101 
==PAGE:110==
 
Throughout the ideation process the level of information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visualised on the main dashboard and the behavioural status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indication were varied. In order to investigate what the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would prefer, 2 different dashboard variations were developed
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
[A 5.14]. 
  
Variation 1  
A dashboard with more information, where the focus is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divided between both the behavioural status indication, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
latest activity and the weekly history view. In this variant the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indication of deviations in behavioural trends is indicated by a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
smiley-face when there are no deviations and a red question
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
mark if a deviation has been detected, see fig. 40. 
 
Variation 2  
A simple main dashboard where the status of deviation is in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus and only the latest activity is shown. In this variant, the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
status of deviations in behavioural trends is indicated by a red
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
or green ring around a picture of the elderly family member,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
see fig. 41. The idea behind adding a profile picture was to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
make the dashboard more personalised and to remind the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that there is person on the other end of the system. 
 
Fig. 40 - Dashboard variant 1 
 
 
 
102 
==PAGE:111==
 
 
 
Fig. 41 - Dashboard variation 2 
 
 
 
Settings menu 
In order to make the dashboard more refined a setting menu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
was designed. The visual design for the menu was inspired by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
google maps menu and Rejseplanen app menu [A 5.15]. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frames from the configuration flow in loop 2 were updated
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
based on the learnings from the tests and incorporated into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this version. The menu allows the user to access their personal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
settings and change them, see fig. 42.  
 
 
Fig. 42 - Design of the setting menu (left) and the configuration frame for 
custom Alarms (right) 
 
103 
==PAGE:112==
 
 
History and activity log view 
Based on learnings from loop 1, a history view and an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activity log was made accessible from the main dashboard,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
see fig. 43.  
 
Fig. 43 - History view (left) and activity log (right). The views can be 
changed In the bottom bar menu by clicking on the respective icons 
 
The history view provides a bigger picture of how the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desired insights is changing over a longer period of time,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
while the activity log can provide context to activity trends
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and be used as a ticket to talk. 
 
All of the designed views were compiled into an interactive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype. In order to decrease the time of developing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype, only the first dashboard variant was connected to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the menu and all the specific settings were not made fully
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactive. The second dashboard variant was included in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the prototype in order to enable the users to compare the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designs. An overview of the prototype and its possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactions can be seen in [A 5.16]. 
5.5.2. How 
With the aim of increasing the fidelity of the prototype it was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
showed on a smartphone. This was done to make it feel like it
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
was a real and functional App and also to test the interface in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the right size. 
  
The prototype was evaluated through a usability test and a
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
discussion about the user’s preferences. The usability test was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
carried out by handing a phone with the prototype to the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants and asking them to click around in order to test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104 
==PAGE:113==
 
the navigation in the dashboard and in the setting menu. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion was based on showing the two different dashboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variants
and
asking
which
one
they
prefer
and why.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the participants were asked about their thoughts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on other parts of the visual design, like the colour and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visual design. 
An action plan for the test were formulated [A 5.17] in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a common script and ensure that all the tests were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
carried out in the same way. The prototype and the two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard
designs
were
tested
and
discussed
with
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants. 
5.5.3. Outcome 
In this section the most relevant outcomes of the test will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented. All of the tests results are described in more detail
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in [A 5.18]. 
  
Initially, all of the participants stated that the prototype looked
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and felt like a real app they could have bought in the app store.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This confirmed that the goal of increasing the fidelity of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype had succeeded. 
  
All of the participants liked the minimalistic design and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
colour choice. One participant stated that it was important for
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
him that the design was as simple as possible, so that he could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus on the most important aspect, the well-being of his loved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one. This validated the overall visual design and colour choice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For that reason, it was decided to bring the visual design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aesthetic and colour choice into the development of the final
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design proposal. 
  
Regarding the structure of the two different dashboard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variants, all 4 participants preferred ​variant 2​. Main reasons
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the preference towards ​variant 2 was the simplicity of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard layout and the focus on the behavioural deviation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicator. It was not deemed important for participants to see
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the history view on the main page of the dashboard, when they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could access it easily from the bottom navigation bar. One of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the participants reasoned his preference of ​variant 2, with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
fact that he only needed to know if there were any apparent
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
deviations. In case of a deviation he would then look into the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
history view or the activity log in order to figure out what was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
going on. In general, he was not interested in being presented
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with data that he would have to interpret himself, but rather to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use the histographic data and the activity log to put a deviation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
warning into context. Based on this outcome it was decided to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
use the structure of dashboard 2 in the final design.  
  
The participants’ preferences were more diverging when it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
came to the profile picture of the elderly displayed on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard. 2 participants were indifferent about having a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
picture displayed. One of the participants mentioned that she
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would expect her mother to become annoyed if she wanted to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
105 
==PAGE:114==
 
take a picture of her for the dashboard. On the other hand, one
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participant really liked the idea of a profile picture, as he
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
thought it made the dashboard more personal. The participant
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared the profile picture to having a picture of your
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
children displayed on your phone when receiving a call from
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
them, and that it was something that made him happy. Based
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on this learning it was decided to make the dashboard function
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as default without a picture, but that it should accommodate
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
the possibility of adding a picture, if a user so desired. 
  
Regarding the usability and navigation of the interface it was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
found that some of the features were too difficult to see. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
text in the bottom bar menu, the time and type of activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displayed under the latest activity and the menu icons were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioned as parts that were difficult to see. In order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the final design these features should increase in size
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and/or contrast.  
  
Besides the above mentioned outcomes, the participants also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had specific ideas for improvement. For instance, 2 of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants mentioned that they would, in case of a deviation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
being detected, prefer the deviation pop up to be shown as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
default when you open the app. This way the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would not be in doubt as they would not be presented with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normal view of the dashboard. 
  
Another interesting idea mentioned was to add an extra level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of deviation status. For instance, the frame around the profile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
picture could display a yellow colour if a minor deviation had
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
been detected and then turn red if the deviation exceeds a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
critical level or green again if the activity goes back to normal.  
  
Furthermore, one of the participants had an idea about how to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the overview of the sensors. He suggested that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
battery status should be green, yellow or red and there should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be a clear indication if one of the sensors did not work as
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supposed to.  
  
Based on the outcome from the user tests in this loop an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
updated user requirement list for the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system was developed, see [A 5.19]. The key learnings from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loop 3 are summarized in table 6. 
 
 
 
106 
==PAGE:115==
 
Table 6: Key learnings from loop 3 
Key learnings - Loop 3 
-
The participants liked the overall visual design 
and color choice. 
 
-
All of the participants preferred the simple 
structure of dashboard 2. 
 
-
A profile picture is a personal preference and both 
scenarios should be possible. 
 
-
Some features of the interface were to small and 
difficult to read or notice. 
 
-
Resolution of deviation detection on the main 
dashboard could be increased by adding an 
indication of minor deviation. 
 
 
 
107 
==PAGE:116==
 
5.6. The final UI design 
Based on the learnings gained through the three loops one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
final UI design was developed. The final UI proposal is both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showcasing the identified user needs and requirements for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed
monitoring
system
and
can
be
used
as
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demonstration of the proposed monitoring system in a future
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
perspective. In this section, the design choices and views of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
final UI will be presented. For an overview of the essential UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
views see [A 5.20]. 
  
Dashboard: Home view 
It was decided to continue with the second dashboard variant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed in loop 3, as this was the one all of the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preferred. The participants especially liked the simplicity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design that put emphasis on the behavioural trend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicator. In order to increase the focus even more the colour
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicating frame around the picture/smiley were made slightly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thicker, see fig. 44. 
  
Another key learning was that adding a profile picture of the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
elderly should be an option, but the dashboard should also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
function without it. Therefore, the final proposal has a version
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
with a profile picture and one without. In the version without a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
profile picture a smiley is used as a placeholder in the normal
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
activity scenario, as it brings positive associations, see fig. 44
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(right). 
 
Fig. 44: Final UI proposal: The two possible dashboard editions, with 
picture (left) and without picture (right). 
 
 
108 
==PAGE:117==
 
Three stages of behavioural feedback 
The idea of adding a yellow indication of minor deviation,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
proposed in loop 3, was considered and discussed before
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementing it in the final design; 
When only having 2 stages of feedback - Green and red, the
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
dashboard could for instance indicate normal activity ​(green),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while in reality the behavioural trends of the elderly person
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were negatively deviating. The dashboard would in that case
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
keep on indicating that activity is normal until a certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviation-threshold is reached, thus going from indicating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normal activity ​to ​critical deviation in an instant. The binary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach of indicating behavioural deviations might therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be lacklustre in format, and lead to misunderstandings and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unpleasant surprises.  
  
The hypothesis is therefore; ​by ​increasing the resolution of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback it is possible to provide a more nuanced feedback to the
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
user and avoid misunderstandings, hence increasing the value of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the interface​. 
  
Therefore, it was decided to implement a middle stage,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicated by a yellow frame and the text ​Minor deviation, ​see
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 45 (middle)​. ​This change will enable the user to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actionable information at an earlier stage of deviation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However it will possibly change the way the ​critical deviation
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(red) indication is perceived by the user. By adding the ​minor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviation indication, the ​critical deviation indication will most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likely be perceived as more severe. The change in perception
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coming as an effect of the ​critical deviation indication being an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional
step
further
away
from
the
​normal activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indication. The threshold for a ​critical deviation ​should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore be increased accordingly. 
In order to increase the importance of the feedback of a critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
deviation a red exclamation mark was put on top of the profile
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
picture and a pop up with details and instant call function is
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown when the app is opened, see fig. 45 (right).  
 
Fig. 45: Final UI proposal: Green, yellow and red color indicating the 
status of deviation in behavioral trends (with picture). 
 
109 
==PAGE:118==
 
For the dashboard version without a profile picture, a question
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
mark was used to indicate the middle stage of deviation, see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fig. 46. The idea behind using a question mark was to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communicate the fact that it is not really good or really bad,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but somewhere in between.  
 
Fig. 46: Final UI proposal: green, yellow and red color indicating the 
status of deviation in behavioral trends (without picture). 
 
History view 
In loop 1 it was learned that it can be valuable for the users to
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
see both a weekly overview and a bigger picture (e.g. monthly
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to yearly). Therefore, it was chosen to incorporate both views
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the history view, accessible from the main dashboard view.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, it was made possible to switch between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desired insights in a top bar menu, see fig. 47. 
 
Fig. 47: Final UI proposal: The history view with both weekly and monthly 
overview. Activity level (left) and visits (right) 
 
 
110 
==PAGE:119==
 
Sensor status feedback  
The feedback of the sensor status was improved by adding a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
better indication of the battery level and connection of each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor. If a sensor is low on battery or is missing connection,
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
feedback will be given in the form of a red warning symbol
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
both in the menu and in the sensor overview, showing which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
room the sensor is placed in, see fig. 48 (left). 
 
 
Fig. 48: Final UI proposal: Warning symbol on sensor overview (left) and 
sensor battery and signal status (right) 
By clicking at the room in the sensor overview, the user can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
access a list of all the sensors installed in the room and see
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which of the sensors that should be checked, see fig. 48 (right).  
 
Activity log 
The readability in the activity log was improved by increasing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the contrast and making the text black, see fig. 49.  
 
 
Fig. 49: Final UI proposal: Increased contrast of the text and background in 
the activity log for better readability 
111 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
 
Alarms 
Lastly, the final alarm views were designed. The relative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should receive notifications in cases where a fall is detected, a
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
personal alarm is triggered or a critical deviation in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behavioural trends is detected.  
  
If a fall is detected, the relative should have the possibility to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
call the elderly directly from the notification view, in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
figure out the severity of the fall, see fig. 50 (left). When
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
swiping right on the notification, the app is entered, see fig. 50
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(right). The red colour and exclamation mark should symbolise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the case can be critical.  
  
When a personal alarm is triggered, the notification message
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be less serious, see fig. 51 (left). Though, it should still
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
be possible to enter the app directly in order to make a call to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the elderly to check up on them. In the case where a personal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
alarm is triggered, the frame around the picture will remain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
green if no deviation in the behavioural trend has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detected, see fig. 51 (right). 
 
 
Figure 50: Final UI proposal: Notification is pushed if a fall is detected (left) 
and the app’s home view is changed (right). 
 
 
112 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
 
Figure 51: Final dashboard proposal: Notification is pushed if a personal 
alarm is triggered (left) and the app’s home view is changed (right). 
 
 
113 
==PAGE:122==
 
5.7. Discussion 
One of the main focus points of the final UI design is the status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
indication of behavioural trends. The concept revolves around
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an advanced algorithm being able to detect deviations in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly person's behaviour. In the thesis team the concept of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detecting deviations in behavioural trends were discussed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many times. What behaviour patterns are relevant to analyse?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what determines whether something is considered a minor
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
deviation or a critical deviation? What if a person’s “normal”
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
behaviour pattern changes over time? To answer these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions we could only guess. Designing such an algorithm is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
not expected to be an easy task, but for the purpose of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project such an algorithm was deemed to be feasible. However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if the final UI design presented in this chapter was to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed further and made into a reality, one of the biggest
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
challenges is expected to be the development of this algorithm.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was concluded that in the event of going forward with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, it would be wise to involve healthcare professionals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as geriatric doctors and mathematical experts in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research and development of such an algorithm. 
  
After loop 3, only minor changes were requested from the test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants. Thus it was safe to assume that the final design
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal presented in this chapter encapsulates the needs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements of the users involved in the tests. However, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
not possible to say that the final design proposal fulfils all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives needs and requirements. Before starting an actual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of the proposal, it would be smart to validate the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
UI design in a test run of larger scale. For instance, it would be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
interesting to test if relatives living in other parts of Denmark,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or even other countries, would have similar requirements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perhaps a relative in Finland worries about other things than a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
relative in Spain does. Ultimately, the design work done in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, is a product of the users that were involved. In the end
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it is hard to evaluate if it was the right users to involve. The
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obvious way to evaluate would therefore be to involve even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more users.  
5.8. Reflection 
In loop 1, 3 different dashboard variations were prototyped. It
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
was a conscious design choice to keep the fidelity of the 3
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
variations low, amongst other reasons; in order to build them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quickly. However, designing and building prototypes of the 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
variations took longer time than initially expected. A reason for
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
this might be that it was decided to build the prototypes in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adobe XD, enabling the prototypes to be interactive. However,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when
looking
back
at
test done in loop 1, including
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactivity in the prototypes did not make a big difference.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Also the visual design fidelity of the prototypes could most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
==PAGE:123==
 
likely have been even lower, without changing the outcome of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the tests significantly. For instance, the prototypes for loop 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
could have been made with sketches on paper or cut-outs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cardboard, in order to reduce the time spend in this loop.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, for loop 2 and 3, it made sense to have a higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
amount of interactivity, as the usability was one of the focus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
points of the tests.  
5.9. Conclusions 
In this chapter, the user needs and requirements of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system, dubbed “SenseFriend”, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
further uncovered. This was achieved through 3 loops of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designing, prototyping and user testing of UI designs. Finally,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the learnings were consolidated and synthesized into a final
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
design proposal for the UI of the proposed monitoring system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The proposed UI design has a minimalistic and simple layout
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
with a teal colour theme. The dashboard view of the UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revolves
around
a
behavioural
trend
status
indicator,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communicated by a green, yellow or red coloured ring.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, recent activities recorded by the system is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displayed in a log format and a historical data is presented
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
with graphs. 
 
 
 
 
115 
==PAGE:124==
 
6. DISCUSSION 
In this chapter, the discussion phase is presented. The aim with
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
this phase was to discuss likely benefits and challenges related
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the proposed system on both a micro, meso and macro level,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
with the aim of understanding what impacts the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system could have on the society. 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
==PAGE:125==
 
6.1. Methodology 
The approach taken to discuss likely societal impacts of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system, has been to view the impacts on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 different societal levels. The approach is inspired by the 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
levels of analysis often used in social sciences; Micro, Meso and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Macro​.  
The micro, meso and macro levels can be used in many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different contexts of the society. In this discussion they have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been used in the following way:  
On the ​Micro level, impacts of the proposed system are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed in relation to the primary users, the relative and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly. On the ​Meso ​level, impacts related to the municipalities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and their home care processes are discussed. On the ​Macro
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
level, socio-economic impacts are discussed in relation to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modern welfare society of Denmark. Relevant benefits and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges of all 3 levels are presented and discussed in the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following.  
6.2. Micro 
Benefits 
Peace of mind for relatives 
The core aim of developing the system is to bring peace of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mind for the relative. Many relatives naturally involve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves in the care of their parents or in-laws. Even though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it is natural for the relatives to help their elderly family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
member, the user research of this thesis have shown that it can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
be challenging and end up causing a lot of worry. The proposed
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system can support the relatives with data about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly’s behavioural trends and daily activities and warn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them about deviations and critical events. In this way the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system can alleviate worries and speculations, hence reduce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some of the challenges relatives face when becoming involved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the care of the elderly. This can give the relatives a surplus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of mental resources, that can be shared among children, grand
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
children and their job. Ultimately leading to an improved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality of life.  
  
Peace of mind for elderly 
The main benefit for the elderly will also be an improved peace
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of mind. A key takeaway from the background investigation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the user research, was that many elderlies worry about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
falling
and
that
many
elderlies,
who
have
previously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced illness, worry about deterioration. The proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system will likely give these elderly a sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
security, knowing that a relative will be notified if they fall or if
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
their behavioural patterns changes dramatically. In this regard,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an interesting aspect in the future development of the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be to incorporate a UI for the elderly. In this way, the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly could track their daily activities themself, hence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing a sense of empowerment. This will become more
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 
==PAGE:126==
 
valuable in the future, where the older generations will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experts in using smartphones.  
  
Extend time of independent living 
Another, more clinical, benefit for the elderly is the fact that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system can help extending the time of living independently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in their own home. Detecting critical deviations in behavioural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trends, will most likely make it possible to intervene early and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
avoid serious deterioration. As a result, it will be possible to
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
avoid or postpone long term illness and hospitalisation and in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worst case death. In the same regard, the increased sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
safety, the system can provide, might cause a decline in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
elderlies’ fear of falling. In the background research, it was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found that the fear of falling can increase the risk of falling.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hence the system might reduce the risk of falling, and thereby
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce the risk for complications related to falling. Ultimately,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leading to postponing the need for extensive care (e.g. moving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nursing home) and thereby extending the time of the elderly’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independence. 
  
Improved relationship 
An extra benefit of the proposed system could be an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvement of the relationship between the relative and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly. Today, it is in many cases hard for relatives to figure
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out how the elderly is doing. They have to question the elderly
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and it might feel like an interrogation. One of the interviewed
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives explained concerns about always asking the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions when calling (e.g. how are you feeling, did you get
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dinner), speculating that it might be annoying for the elderly to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
always get asked how they were doing. However, with the use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the proposed system, the relatives could be informed about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this
through
the
UI.
Thereby
changing the subject of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conversations from the health of the elderly towards other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topics. 
 
Cost savings 
The economic benefits of the proposed system on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual level will not be a case in countries like Denmark,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
due to universal healthcare insurance. However, in a country
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
like USA, where people have to pay for healthcare themselves,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the proposed monitoring system could have economic benefits
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for both the elderly and the relative. The use of a monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
system might lead to cost savings by avoiding or postponing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitalization and the need for extensive home care.  
 
Challenges 
False-negative risk  
A challenge with the proposed system is that it can lead to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
false-negative cases. A false-negative is defined as a result that
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
appears negative when it should not. In this context being that
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system states that everything is normal in a situation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where it should have detected something critical. Therefore, in
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
==PAGE:127==
 
order to avoid false-negative cases, it is very important to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
develop the system as robust as possible. However, technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can never be 100 % reliable, as there will always be a chance of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
human errors and inadequate use. For that reason, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important that the functions of the system are communicated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clearly to both the relative and the elderly. This is assumed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
be a challenging aspect, as it requires the system providers to
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
communicate the technology in a way the relative can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand. It is really important that the relative understand
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the technology, as they are the one to pass the information on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the elderly in a way they understand. The challenging aspect
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
is that there are many links where information can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
misunderstood, hence increasing the risk of inadequate use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system.  
 
If the relatives or the elderly have blind faith in the system, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
can lead to “dangerous” situations. For instance, a situation
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
might arise, in which the system will not detect a critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
deviation, giving the relative an idea of everything being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alright. Where in reality the elderly is doing bad, but does not
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
bother asking for help, as they think it will be detected by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
system.  
 
Less social interaction  
Another possible challenge with the system is that it could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cause a decline in the social interaction between the relative
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the elderly. This was a concern shared among many of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives interviewed in the user research. The relatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questioned whether they would call or visit their parents less if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
they had a monitoring system. Visits and calls from relatives
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might be the only social interaction for many elderly people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
living alone. In an analysis of loneliness among elderly, made
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by KL, it was found that a higher number of visits from their
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
children had a positive effect on the elderlies’ degree of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loneliness (KL, 2018). This shows that this is a risk that should
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
be mitigated. However, some of the interviewed relative also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed that the system could improve the social interaction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the elderly, as the system provides information to talk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about. Furthermore, the information about the current activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the elderly can give the relative and idea of when it is best to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
visit the elderly. Hence improving the circumstances for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased social interaction.  
6.3. Meso 
Benefits 
Replacing minor home care needs  
By offering the proposed system as a private commercial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution, it can still have some beneficial effects for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipalities. One being that the system could replace or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce home care services related to oversight and so called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
safety visits (tryghedsbesøg). With the implementation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, relatives would not have to worry about the elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lying helpless on the floor. Thus, implementing the system can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119 
==PAGE:128==
 
postpone the demand for home care until a certain point. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
instance, until a point where the elderly will need help with
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
daily activities of living. For the municipality, this would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effectively reduce the total costs of home care per citizen.  
  
Relatives might take over care services  
A likely effect of the proposed monitoring system will be that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives will engage more in the care of the elderly. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instance, if an elderly shows signs of minor behavioural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviations, a relative will likely take action, and figure out if
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
something can be done. This could involve the relative taking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly out for more walks and beginning to help the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly with activities such as grocery shopping and so on. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
hypothesis is, that it is more likely for a relative with access to
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
knowledge of the elderly’s state of health to intervene and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide care, than for a relative without access to such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge. If relatives start taking it upon themselves to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide
support
and
perhaps
some form of care, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipality will benefit from not having to spend resources
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on such care services. An indirect effect of this, is also a likely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
increase in social interaction between the elderly and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative, alleviating feelings of loneliness. 
 
Postpone the need for extensive care 
By implementing a monitoring system, it is likely that some
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
types of home care services or that staying at a nursing home,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
could be postponed. The main hypothesis behind this claim is,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that if the proposed system succeeds in detecting signs of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deterioration
early
enough,
long
term
illness
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitalisation
can
be
avoided.
Long
term
illness
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitalisation can lead to serious decline in the elderly’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functional abilities, hence increasing the need for home care.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the system’s detection of falls and other critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
events, will make the elderly feel safer, empowering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly to keep living in their own home for longer. Ultimately,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this can postpone the need of moving to a nursing home.  
 
Granted by the municipality as a home care service 
In a case where a monitoring system can provide the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economical benefits mentioned above, the municipality will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a natural interest in implementing such systems in the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
homes of its elderly citizens. Therefore, it could also be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
possibility that the proposed system could be granted through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the municipality as a replacement of home care services. The
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
first steps in this direction has already been taken by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipality of Aalborg. 
In an interview with Lars Nørh, chief consultant of quality and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
innovation in the elder care sector of Aalborg municipality, he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explains that they see a potential benefit in granting a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system instead of a home care service (see [A 2.3]
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
for interview notes). Another interesting insight from Lars
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nørh was that even though they are testing a monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
==PAGE:129==
 
system targeted the home care professionals, some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatives have shown interest in receiving the information in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to use it as a private solution. Because of this, Lars Nørh
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was not dismissive of a solution where the municipality would
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
grant a monitoring system targeted the relatives. However,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lars Nøhr also explained that they will have to investigate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cost-effectiveness of this scenario, before knowing if it would
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
be worthwhile to grant a monitoring system instead of a home
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
care service.  
  
Furthermore,
by
getting
involved
in
the
provision
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring systems, the municipality will have the ability to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence which systems that will be implemented in their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens’ homes. Thus, making sure that the systems installed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are reliable and of a certain standard, instead of relying on the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens to choose the right system. 
 
Big data 
In a case where hundreds of houses in a community are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equipped with the proposed monitoring system, it would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible to create a sensor network capable of “diagnosing” an
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
entire community. By having a network of sensors spread out
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
in a community, vast amounts of activity and frailty related
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data could be collected and analysed. From analysing the data,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community wide patterns and trends could be identified and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used by the municipality to, for instance, prioritize certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
things in elder-care budgeting and planning. However, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would only be possible if the monitoring systems are granted
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
by the municipality and if it the user accept that the monitored
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
data may be shared with the municipality. 
 
Challenges 
Data insights being ignored by municipalities 
If the proposed monitoring system is sold as a private
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial solution to the users, it can potentially cause
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conflicts between the users and the municipality. If the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system indicate that the elderly is deteriorating,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the users might be inclined to request more home care or that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the elderly should be transferred to a nursing home. But if the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
municipality does not recognise the proposed system as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showing truthful data, users can feel that the municipality is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wrongfully ignoring the signs of deterioration. Therefore, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
important for the providers of the monitoring system to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish some sort of partnership with municipalities in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to accommodate such conflicts.  
 
Require technical support  
In a case where a municipality grants the proposed solution to
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens as an alternative home care service, the municipality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will also have an obligation to help the citizens with technical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support. The extent of the technical support needed for such a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
monitoring system will be hard to estimate. In such a case it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
highly recommended that the municipality will set high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 
==PAGE:130==
 
demands to the system providers regarding system uptime.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the municipality, picking the right partners to deliver such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a system is of utmost importance. 
 
Obligation to intervene 
In a case where the municipality gets access to data through a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
monitoring system like the one proposed, a moral challenge
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
might arise. If a system is able to provide robust evidence that
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
a citizen is deteriorating, the municipality will feel obligated to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervene. Having access to such knowledge might mean that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more
cases
of
deterioration
will
be
discovered.
The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipality will in that case have to allocate more resources
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to help the deteriorating citizens. In itself it is great that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
citizens in need will receive the help they need. But the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipality might end up having an increase in citizens that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need care, thus spending more resources, when the opposite
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was the intention. 
6.4. Macro 
Benefits 
In the ageing society we face today, a rising demand on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
healthcare and elder care will cause immense economic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pressure on the welfare society. In a 2018 report from VIVE,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the future healthcare spending in Denmark is expected to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase from around 160 billion DKK in 2018 to around 200
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
billion DKK in 2050, due to the demographic effects (Iversen &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kjellberg, 2018). A solution like the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system will likely be able to alleviate some of the economic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pressure caused by the ageing society. A number of likely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effects of the proposed monitoring system, that can reduce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public spending will be presented here. 
  
Less spending on elder care 
The spending on elder care will likely be reduced by: 
●
Postponing the need for extensive care, in the form of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
home care and nursing homes (see section 6.3). 
●
Involving relatives in more care activities, e.g. providing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
oversight (see section 6.3). 
 
Less spending on healthcare 
Early detection of critical events such as falls, will likely reduce
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the degree of deterioration the fall incident can cause, hence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reducing the need for healthcare. Without a monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, an elderly person that had fallen, will in some cases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end up lying helpless on the floor for many hours. A wide range
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of complications could then follow, not from the fall itself, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from lying on the floor for long periods, e.g. lying on a cold
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
floor for many hours might lead to pneumonia. Therefore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being able to intervene early, before extra complications of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
fall develop, will reduce the need for healthcare of the elderly. 
122 
==PAGE:131==
 
In the same regard, detecting deviations in behavioural trends
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might
also
help
reduce
healthcare
spending.
Detecting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviations might enable early interventions that in turn can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
help the elderly avoid long term illness and hospitalisation. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitals today, systems like Early Warning Scores (EWS), are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to detect deviations in vital parameters. By detecting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviations, the hospital staff is able to do early clinical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions in order to avoid serious patient deterioration.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The hypothesis is, that by intervening early, lives can be saved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and future spending can be greatly reduced. Something which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would also apply to an in home monitoring setting. 
 
Less spending on fall incidents 
In the background investigation, it was found that the fear of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
falling may lead to higher risk of falling. If the elderly’s anxiety
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
about falling can be reduced, with the implementation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system (as also described in section 6.2),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the number of fall incidents might also be reduced. In the end,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reducing resources spent on treating fall incidents and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible complications of falls. 
 
Challenges 
Imbalance in society 
If the proposed monitoring system is sold as a private
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial solution, it can cause imbalance in society.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Depending on the price of the system, some citizens might not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be able to afford it. In this case, an imbalance can occur if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
wealthy citizens, due to owning a monitoring system, will be
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
able to demonstrate their need for more home care. This is yet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
another reason why it would be beneficial to grant the system
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the municipality, enabling all citizens a possibility to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
acquire
the
system.
However,
starting
at
the
private
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commercial market might be a good idea in order to develop
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and mature the system, thereby reducing the price over time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An example of this is the robotic vacuum cleaner. The robotic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vacuum cleaner, was initially a luxury product, too expensive
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
for many households. But, as the market demand started to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase, more companies began to produce and sell the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product and the price decreased immensely. The decrease in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
price made the product affordable for the municipality, that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gladly adopted it as a tool to relieve the home care cleaning
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services.
The
same
scenario could likely occur in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective of in home monitoring systems. 
 
Political discussion  
Even though the system is designed with the intention to help
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and relieve the relatives, some may perceive it as an imposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
responsibility for the relatives. The relatives’ responsibility to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
help with the care of an elderly family member has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed for many years in Denmark. According to Ældre
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sagen, there is two contrary opinions on the matter. Some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
believe that the elderly should have the right to receive care
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without the involvement of their relatives, because they have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123 
==PAGE:132==
 
paid taxes throughout their entire lives. Another opinion is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it is innate for relatives to help and take responsibility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when their family members grow old, and that it should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
natural for the relatives to step in, when the amount of elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase in the society (Ældre Sagen, 2016). Consequently, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
expected that the implementation of a monitoring systems
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
targeted the relatives would be a subject for discussion,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether it is as a private commercial solution or as a solution
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
granted by the municipality.  
 
6.5. Reflection 
In this chapter, the most relevant benefits and challenges, from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the thesis teams point of view, have been reflected upon.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, before a system like this should be developed and
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduced to the market, a more thorough impact and risk
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
analysis should be carried out. By doing so, it will be possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
to verify whether or not the system can provide the intended
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value and. Furthermore, it will be uncovered what challenges
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
can be mitigated through the design of the system. In order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate the impacts more thoroughly, we recommend that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external stakeholders should be involved. These could for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instance be some of the identified contextual stakeholders in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section 3.4 of chapter 3. Especially, Ældre Sagen could be an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting stakeholder to involve, as relatives of elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people is one of their key interests. During the last phase of the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, we attempted to get in contact with the persons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsible for the field of relatives in Ældre Sagen. Our intent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was to hear an expert opinion about the likely impacts of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed monitoring system. Specifically, what likely impacts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system could have on relatives and the elderly as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their internal relation. Unfortunately, it was not possible to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish contact. It was chosen to postpone establishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contact to Ældre Sagen until a later phase of the project, in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to have a specific system design to present. In retrospect,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it could have been beneficial to establish contact earlier in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, as it would have increased the timeframe for response.  
 
 
124 
==PAGE:133==
 
6.6. Conclusion 
In this chapter, the likely impacts of the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system have been discussed. Identified benefits and challenges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on a micro-, meso-, and macro level of the society are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented and discussed. On the micro level, the benefits of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating peace of mind and empowering elderly to stay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent for longer are discussed. Furthermore, challenges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relating to social contact and robustness of the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system is discussed.  
On the meso level it is discussed how municipalities can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
benefit from reducing and postponing the need for home care,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as how municipalities can benefit from offering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system as a granted home care service. Challenges
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
related
to
the
involvement of the municipality in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
procurement and data collection of the monitoring system is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also discussed. 
On the macro level, it is discussed how the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system might be beneficial for a welfare society by
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
reducing spending on elder care and healthcare. Finally,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges related to how the proposed system can enter the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market, and the political perception of the system are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed. 
 
 
 
 
125 
==PAGE:134==
 
7. OUTRO 
In this chapter, the thesis project will be closed through a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
reflection of the overall process and a conclusion on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project as a whole. 
7.1. Process reflection 
The individual phases of the project have been discussed and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflected upon throughout the report, in their respective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chapters. Therefore, the aim of this section is to reflect upon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the process in general. Looking back at the thesis project, there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are many decisions and activities that can be reflected upon.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, three major points for reflection were found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
especially interesting to go in detail with; 
7.1.1. Change of project scope  
The scope of the project has changed throughout the process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from focusing on both the UI design and the industrial design,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to limiting the focus on just the UI design. Even though the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project proposal revolved around designing a UI for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring system, we were motivated to explore and develop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a more holistic solution. Therefore, the initial project plan [A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1] was divided in 6 phases, including a product design phase,
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
with the aim of exploring the industrial design of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensor-system. However, as the project evolved and the UI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design phase was about to start we began to reconsider the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initial plan. We realised that the time allocated for the interface
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design was too scarce to carry out the intended 3 loops of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
design, prototyping and user testing. This forced us to either
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revise the plan or to compromise on the depth of the UI design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase. Ultimately, we choose to eliminate the product design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase from the thesis, which resulted in the final project plan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with 5 phases instead of 6 [A 1.2]. This change allowed us to
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have time enough to develop a more detailed and well tested
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
design proposal for a UI, which was the core of the project
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposal given in the first place. However, we still recommend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the industrial design of the sensor devices could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
valuable to explored in a future project. 
7.1.2. Project management 
Throughout the project, a Gantt chart has been the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management tool for keeping track of the project. The Gantt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chart has been valuable for the initial planning of the project
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and to make sure that the overall time plan was kept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the Gantt chart has provided a good overview of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the process and high level tasks of the different phases.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without the Gantt chart it would have been difficult to assess if
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
the project was ahead or behind schedule. However, the Gantt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chart has not been sufficient for managing the individual tasks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within each phase. Looking back, a tool like Trello could have
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
126 
==PAGE:135==
 
been useful for planning and managing each phase while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
working on it. While working on a big project like the master
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
thesis, the workload did sometimes seem immense and it was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
difficult to keep track of loose ends. Especially in the last two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weeks of the project, where the focus was the thesis writing,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we have spent substantial time on making to do lists for each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
day. This was done in order to make sure that important parts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the thesis were not neglected in a time under pressure. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
has shown how important it is to spend time on establishing a
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
management strategy from an early point in the project.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, a learning for future projects is to remember to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allocate time for project planning and management earlier in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project plan. 
7.1.3. User involvement 
Throughout the project, user involvement has been a key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus. From the beginning of the project we have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proactive in finding users, by developing a recruitment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategy as one of the first tasks of the project. It turned out to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
be a harder and more time consuming task to recruit users and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
setup interviews, than initially anticipated. The initial strategy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
involved sharing recruitment flyers in our network, both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through digital and analogue channels. However, it did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grant substantial results. Likely reasons for this, is that we did
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
not target the right forums for recruitment, that the target user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group were highly specific (worried relatives of a frail elderly
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
person living alone), and the fact that we could only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compensate the participants with our gratitude. In the end it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
was possible to setup 7 interviews with relatives. The initial
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
strategy for reaching out to and setting up interviews with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly people living alone, was to go through the relatives. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
turned out to be difficult to make an actual appointment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the relatives, and shaped up to become a time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consuming process, involving a lot of scheduling and travel
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
time. Luckily, we received an offer to come and spend the next
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
morning in one of the many eldercare activity centres we had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emailed. It turned out to be a perfect place to find the target
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
users as the majority of the elderly in the activity centres
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced some form of frailty and were living alone. During
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the UI design phase, user tests were conducted in 3 loops. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
would have been preferable to have included new participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for each loop of testing. By including new participants in each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loop, the UI design and the sensor-system behind could have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been validated with more potential users. However, because of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the difficulty in recruiting participants, many of the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants took part in all 3 loops of testing. Thus, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insights gained through the 3 loops were based on more or less
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same participants. However, due to the time constraint of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project, the recruitment of more participants would have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taken valuable time from the design process. Resulting in less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loops of development and testing. Hence, it was decided to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
utilise the contacts already established, in order to have time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for more loops and refinement of the UI design.  
127 
==PAGE:136==
 
7.2. Conclusion 
In this project, a user centric design thinking approach has
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
been used to explore a UI design, exploiting ambient in-home
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
sensors, aimed at providing peace of mind for relatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worrying about a frail elderly family member. Throughout the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, user needs and requirements have been uncovered by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducting semi-structured interviews with 7 relatives and 14
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
elderlies and through 3 loops of prototype facilitated user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tests. The learnings from the interviews and the user tests,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were subsequently used to develop a UI design proposal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fulfilling the essential user needs and requirements identified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in this project. 
  
The final UI proposal dubbed SenseFriend is a minimalistic teal
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
coloured App for smartphones. The SenseFriend interface
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revolves around a dashboard view containing a status
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicator, communicating the level of deviation in behavioural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trends, and the latest detected activity. The status indicator is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comprised of a green, yellow or red coloured ring with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complementary text indicating 3 different states of behavioural
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
trends; Normal activity, Minor deviation and Critical deviation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From the dashboard an activity log and a history view can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
accessed, which enables the user to view the activities of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
latest 24 hours as well as weekly and monthly trends of  
 
specified activities. Besides the main views, the UI contains a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
menu, enabling the user to configure insights, custom alerts,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors and profile settings. Furthermore, SenseFriend can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
push alarms to users, in cases where a fall is detected, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
customized alarm is triggered or a critical deviation in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behavioural trend is detected.  
  
Finally, the likely societal impacts of the proposed monitoring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system have been discussed on a micro-, meso- and macro
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
level. The highlighted likely impacts on the micro level being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an improved peace of mind for both the relative and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elderly, empowering the elderly to stay independent for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
longer. On a meso and macro level this can result in savings for
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
both the municipalities and society in general, as the elderly’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need for both homecare and healthcare will likely decrease or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be postponed. 
 
 
128 
==PAGE:137==
References 
AAL Programme. (n.d. [A]). Strategy 2014-2020 for the Active And Assisted Living Programme. Retrieved from 
http://www.aal-europe.eu/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/20151001-AAL-Strategy_Final.pdf 
AAL Programme. (n.d.[B]). AAL Programme webpage . Retrieved October 8, 2019, from http:/www.aal-europe.eu/about/ 
Abdoune, L., & Fezari, M. (2016). Everyday Life Sounds Database: Telemonitoring of Elderly or Disabled. ​J. Intell. Syst​, ​25​(1), 71–84. 
Ældre Sagen. (2017). ​Undersøgelse om pårørende​. 
Ældre Sagen. (n.d.). Pårørende. Retrieved October 10, 2019, from https://www.aeldresagen.dk/presse/maerkesager/paaroerende 
Ældre Sagen. (2016). ​Pårørendepolitik: Dialogguide til ældrepolitiske frivillige​. 
Al-Shaqi, R., Mourshed, M., & Rezgui, Y. (2016). Progress in ambient assisted systems for independent living by the elderly. 
SpringerPlus​, ​5​(1), 1–20. 
Alexander, I. F. (2005). A Taxonomy of Stakeholders: Human Roles in System Development. ​International Journal of Technology and 
Human Interaction (IJTHI)​, ​1​(1), 23–59. 
Alwan, M., Rajendran, P. J., Kelli, S., Mack, D., Dalali, S., & I, M. W. (2006). A Smart and Passive Floor-Vibration Based Fall Detector for 
Elderly. ​International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies: From Theory To Applications​, 3–7. 
Anhøj, J., & Bjørn, B. (2009). Statistisk processtyring i sundhedsvæsenet. ​Ugeskrift Læger​, ​21​, 1764–1768. 
==PAGE:138==
Anzanpour, A., Rahmani, A. M., Liljeberg, P., & Tenhunnen, H. (2016). ​Context-Aware Early Warning System for In-Home Healthcare 
Using Internet-of-Things​. ​1​, 547. 
Arning, K., & Ziefle, M. (2015). “Get that Camera Out of My House!” Conjoint Measurement of Preferences for Video-Based 
Healthcare Monitoring Systems in Private and Public Places. In ​LNCS​ (Vol. 9102, pp. 152–164). 
Babich, N. (2017). Prototyping 101: The Difference between Low-Fidelity and High-Fidelity Prototypes and When to Use Each. 
Retrieved January 14, 2020, from Adobe website: 
https://theblog.adobe.com/prototyping-difference-low-fidelity-high-fidelity-prototypes-use/ 
Barger, T. S., Brown, D. E., & Alwan, M. (2005). Health-status monitoring through analysis of behavioral patterns. ​IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Part A:Systems and Humans.​, ​35​(1), 22–27.  
Belbachir, A. N., Drobics, M., & Marschitz, W. (2010). Ambient assisted living for ageing well - An overview. ​Elektrotechnik Und 
Informationstechnik​, ​127​(7–8), 200–205. 
Bergen, G., Stevens, M. R., & Burns, E. R. (2016). Falls and fall injuries among adults aged ≥65 years — United States, 2014. ​Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report​, ​65​(37), 938–983. 
Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1998). ​Contextual Design: Defining customer-centered systems​. Morgan Kaufmann Publ. 
Brown, T., & Wyatt, J. (2010). ​Design Thinking for Social Innovation​. 
Cahill, J., Portales, R., McLoughin, S., Nagan, N., Henrichs, B., & Wetherall, S. (2019). IoT/sensor-based infrastructures promoting a 
sense of home, independent living, comfort and wellness. ​Sensors (Switzerland)​, ​19​(3), 1–39. 
Canary Care. (n.d.). Canary Care webpage. Retrieved February 14, 2020, from https://www.canarycare.co.uk/ 
==PAGE:139==
CareWare. (n.d.). Elea activity sensing. Retrieved January 14, 2020, from 
https://careware.dk/om/tidligere-arrangementer/aal-forum-exhibition/products/elea-activity-sensing/ 
Celler, B. G., Earnshaw, W., Ilsar, E. D., Betbeder-Matibet, L., Harris, M. F., Clark, R., … Lovell, N. H. (1995). Remote monitoring of 
health status of the elderly at home. A multidisciplinary project on aging at the University of New South Wales. ​International 
Journal of Bio-Medical Computing​, ​40​(2), 147–155. 
CEN CWA. (2020). ​Guidelines for introducing ambient and wearable monitoring technologies balancing privacy protection against the 
need for oversight and care​. (Forthcoming). 
Chang, Y. C., Lin, C. C., Lin, P. H., Chen, C. C., Lee, R. G., Huang, J. S., & Tsai, T. H. (2013). EFurniture for home-based frailty detection 
using artificial neural networks and wireless sensors. ​Medical Engineering and Physics​, ​35​(2), 263–268. 
Chatterji, S., Byles, J., Cutler, D., Seeman, T., & Verdes, E. (2015). Health , functioning , and disability in older adults — present status 
and future implications. ​The Lancet​, ​385​(9967), 563–575. 
Chen, K., & Chan, A. H. S. (2011). A review of technology acceptance by older adults. ​Gerontechnology​, ​10​(1). 
Cheng, J., Chen, X., & Shen, M. (2013). A framework for daily activity monitoring and fall detection based on surface 
electromyography and accelerometer signals. ​IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics​, ​17​(1), 38–45. 
Congressional Budget Office [CBO]. (2013). Rising Demand for Long-Term Services and Supports for Elderly People. In ​Washington, 
DC: Congressional Budget Office​. Retrieved from 
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/44363-LTC.pdf%0Ahttps://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=Risi
ng+demand+for+long-term+services+and+supports+for+elderly+people&btnG=&hl=en&as_sdt=0,44#0 
Costin, H., Rotariu, C., Adochiei, F., Ciobotariu, R., Andruseac, G., & Corciova, F. (2011). Telemonitoring of vital signs – An effective 
tool for ambient assisted living. ​IFMBE Proceedings​, ​36​(Figure 1), 60–65. 
==PAGE:140==
Covinsky, K. E., Palmer, R. M., Fortinsky, R. H., Counsell, S. R., Stewart, A. L., Kresevic, D., … Landefeld, C. S. (2003). Loss of 
independence in activities of daily living in older adults hospitalized with medical illnesses: Increased vulnerability with age. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society​, ​51​(4), 451–458. 
Cross, N. (2008). ​Engineering Design Methods​ (3rd ed.). 
Deen, M. J. (2015). Information and communications technologies for elderly ubiquitous healthcare in a smart home. ​Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing​, ​19​(3), 573–599. 
Delbaere, K., Close, J. C. T., Brodaty, H., Sachdev, P., & Lord, S. R. (2010). Determinants of disparities between perceived and 
physiological risk of falling among elderly people: Cohort study. ​BMJ (Online)​, ​341​(7770). 
Doukas, C. N., & Maglogiannis, I. (2011). Emergency fall incidents detection in assisted living environments utilizing motion, sound, 
and visual perceptual components. ​IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine​, ​15​(2), 277–289. 
Eisa, S., & Moreira, A. (2017). A behaviour monitoring system (BMS) for ambient assisted living. ​Sensors (Switzerland)​, ​17​(9). 
Electronic360. (n.d.). Video: New Smart Home Technology Aimed at Senior Living. Retrieved January 14, 2020, from 
https://electronics360.globalspec.com/article/9680/video-new-smart-home-technology-aimed-at-senior-living 
European commision. (2018). ​Market study on telemedicine​. Retrieved from ​http://europa.eu 
Eurostat. (2019[A]). The EU’s population projected up to 2100. Retrieved October 2, 2019, from 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/products-eurostat-news/-/DDN-20190710-1 
Eurostat. (2019[B]). ​Ageing Europe​. 
Feldwieser, F., Marchollek, M., Meis, M., Gietzelt, M., & Steinhagen-Thiessen, E. (2016). Acceptance of seniors towards automatic in 
home fall detection devices. ​Journal of Assistive Technologies​, ​10​(4), 178–186. 
==PAGE:141==
Fernandez Arguedas, V., Zhang, Q., Izquierdo, E., Fernandez Arguedas, V., Zhang, Q., & Izquierdo, E. (2014). ​Multimodal Fusion in 
Surveillance Applications​. 
Fleming, J., & Brayne, C. (2008). Inability to get up after falling, subsequent time on floor, and summoning help: Prospective cohort 
study in people over 90. ​Bmj​, ​337​(7681), 1279–1282. 
Geven, A., Schrammel, J., & Tscheligi, M. (2013). Narrations and Storytelling as Methodological Key Elements for Studying User 
Experience. ​Nordic Conference on Human Interaction​, 79–83. 
Ghayvat, H., Mukhopadhyay, S., Shenjie, B., Chouhan, A., & Chen, W. (2018). Smart home based ambient assisted living: Recognition 
of anomaly in the activity of daily living for an elderly living alone. ​I2MTC 2018 - 2018 IEEE International Instrumentation and 
Measurement Technology Conference: Discovering New Horizons in Instrumentation and Measurement, Proceedings​, 1–5. 
Giannakopoulos, T., & Konstantopoulos, S. (2017). Daily activity recognition based on meta-classification of low-level audio events. 
ICT4AWE 2017 - Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Ageing 
Well and e-Health​, 220–227. 
Gill, T. M., Allore, H. G., Gahbauer, E. A., & Murphy, T. E. (2010). Change in disability after hospitalization or restricted activity in 
older persons. ​JAMA - Journal of the American Medical Association​, ​304​(17), 1919–1928. 
Goonawardene, N., Tan, H. P., & Tan, L. B. (2018). Unobtrusive detection of frailty in older adults. ​Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
(Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)​, ​10927 LNCS​, 290–302. 
Guan, Q., Li, C., Qin, L., & Wang, G. (2019). Daily activity recognition using pyroelectric infrared sensors and reference structures. 
IEEE Sensors Journal​, ​19​(5), 1645–1652. 
==PAGE:142==
Guettari, T., Aguilar, P. A. C., Boudy, J., Medjahed, H., Istrate, D., Baldinger, J. L., … Maly-Persy, M. (2010). Multimodal localization in 
the context of a medical telemonitoring system. ​2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, EMBC’10​, 3835–3838. 
Guillomía, M. A., Artigas, J. I., & Falcó, J. L. (2019). Time orientation training in AAL. ​Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing​, 
806​, 121–128. 
Gurley, R., Lum, N., Sande, M., Lo, B., & Katz, M. (1996). Persons found in their homes helpless or dead. ​New England Journal of 
Medicine​, ​334​(26), 1710–1716. 
Hadjistavropoulos, T., Delbaere, K., & Fitzgerald, T. D. (2011). Reconceptualizing the Role of Fear of Falling and Balance Confidence 
in Fall Risk. ​Journal of Aging and Health​, ​23​(1), 3–23. 
Houlberg, K., & Ruge, M. (2019). VIVEs kommunetal 2019 . 5 : Flere småbørn og ældre vil presse især yderkommuners økonomi. 
VIVEs Kommunetal 2019​, ​5​, 64–67. 
Irfan, M., Refai, M., Beijnum, B. F. Van, Buurke, J. H., & Veltink, P. H. (2019). Gait and Dynamic Balance Sensing using Wearable Foot 
Sensors. ​IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering​, ​27​(2), 218–227. 
Kaushik, A. R., & Celler, B. G. (2007). Characterization of PIR detector for monitoring occupancy patterns and functional health 
status of elderly people living alone at home. In ​Technology and Health Care​ (Vol. 15). 
Kim, J., Choi, H. S., Wang, H., Agoulmine, N., Deen, M. J., & Hong, J. W. K. (2010). POSTECH’s U-health smart home for elderly 
monitoring and support. ​2010 IEEE International Symposium on “A World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks”, 
WoWMoM 2010 - Digital Proceedings​, 0–5. 
King, B. D. (2006). Functional decline in hospitalized elders. ​Medsurg Nursing : Official Journal of the Academy of Medical-Surgical 
Nurses​, ​15​(5), 265–272. 
==PAGE:143==
Kishimoto, M., Yoshida, T., Hayasaka, T., Mori, D., Imai, Y., Matsuki, N., … Yamaguchi, T. (2009). An internet-based wearable 
watch-over system for elderly and disabled utilizing EMG and accelerometer. ​Technology and Health Care​, ​17​(2), 121–131. 
KL. (2019[A]). ​Demografiske udfordringer frem til 2040​. Retrieved from 
https://www.kl.dk/media/18610/demografiske-udfordringer-frem-til-2040.pdf 
KL. (2019[B]). ​Hvor lang tid bor man alene efter partnerens død?​ Retrieved from 
https://www.kl.dk/media/19397/hvor-lang-tid-bor-man-alene-efter-partnerens-doed.pdf 
KL. (2018). ​Ensomhed blandt ældre. ​Retrieved from ​https://www.kl.dk/media/18602/ensomhed-blandt-aeldre.pdf 
Klein, L. (2013). ​UX for lean Startups​. O’Reilly Media. 
Kuo, L. (2015). The growing industry of cleaning up after elderly Japanese who die alone — Quartz. Retrieved January 14, 2020, 
from https://qz.com/380685/photos-cleaning-up-after-japans-lonely-deaths/ 
Legters, K. (2002). Fear of Falling. ​Physical Therapy​, ​82​(3), 264–272. 
Li, Y., Ho, K. C., & Popescu, M. (2012). A microphone array system for automatic fall detection. ​IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 
Engineering​, ​59​(5), 1291–1301. 
Li, Y., Ho, K. C., & Popescu, M. (2014). Efficient source separation algorithms for acoustic fall detection using a microsoft kinect. ​IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering​, ​61​(3), 745–755. 
Ma, X., Goonawardene, N., & Tan, H. P. (2018). Identifying Elderly with Poor Sleep Quality using Unobtrusive In-home Sensors for 
Early Intervention. ​Acm International Conference Proceeding Series​, ​18​. 
Mann, W. C., Marchant, T., Tomita, M., Fraas, L., & Stanton, K. (2001). Elder acceptance of health monitoring devices in the home. 
Care Management Journals​, ​3​(2), 91–98. 
==PAGE:144==
MariCare. (n.d.). MariCare Home. Retrieved January 14, 2020, from https://maricare.com/en/ 
McCabe, D. (2019). Katz Index of Independence in Activities of Daily Living (ADL). ​Try This: General Assesment Series - Best Practices 
in Nursing Care to Older Adults​, ​8​(2), 72–73. 
McNaull, J., Augusto, J. C., Mulvenna, M., & McCullagh, P. (2012). Data and information quality issues in ambient assisted living 
systems. ​Journal of Data and Information Quality​, ​4​(1). 
Memon, M., Wagner, S. R., Pedersen, C. F., Aysha Beevi, F. H., & Hansen, F. O. (2014). Ambient Assisted Living healthcare frameworks, 
platforms, standards, and quality attributes. ​Sensors (Switzerland)​, ​14​(3), 4312–4341. 
Mitchell, L. L., Peterson, C. M., Rud, S. R., Jutkowitz, E., Sarkinen, A., Trost, S., … Gaugler, J. E. (2018). “It’s Like a Cyber-Security 
Blanket”: The Utility of Remote Activity Monitoring in Family Dementia Care. ​Journal of Applied Gerontology​. 
Monekosso, D., Florez-Revuelta, F., & Remagnino, P. (2015, July 1). Ambient Assisted Living. ​IEEE Intelligent Systems​, Vol. 30, pp. 
2–6. 
Nambiar, S., Nikolaev, A., Greene, M., Cavuoto, L., & Bisantz, A. (2016). Low-Cost Sensor System Design for In-Home Physical Activity 
Tracking. ​IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine​, ​4​(December), 1–6. 
National Safety Council. (n.d.). Top Causes of Unintentional Injury and Death in Homes and Communities. 
Nielsen, J. (2000). Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users. Retrieved January 17, 2020, from 
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/why-you-only-need-to-test-with-5-users/ 
Nielsen, J. (1994). Enhancing the explanatory power of usability heuristics. ​Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems Celebrating Interdependence - CHI ’94​, 152–158. 
Nielsen, J. (1993). Usability Testing. In ​Usability Engineering​ (pp. 165–206). 
==PAGE:145==
Noelker, L. S., & Browdie, R. (2013). Sidney Katz, MD: A new paradigm for chronic illness and long-term care. ​Gerontologist​, ​54​(1), 
13–20. 
Norman, D. A. (2013). ​The design of everyday things (revised and extended edition)​. Basic books. 
Onishi, N. (2017). A Generation in Japan Faces a Lonely Death - The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2020, from 
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/30/world/asia/japan-lonely-deaths-the-end.html 
Patel, R., Nugawela, M. D., Edwards, H. B., Richards, A., Le Roux, H., Pullyblank, A., & Whiting, P. (2018). Can early warning scores 
identify deteriorating patients in pre-hospital settings? A systematic review. ​Resuscitation​, ​132​(August), 101–111. 
Patton, J. (2009). ​User story mapping - Discover the whole story, build the right product​ (Vol. 11). 
Plattner, H., Meinel, C., & Leifer, L. (2015). Design thinking research: Making design thinking foundational. In ​Design Thinking 
Research: Making Design Thinking Foundational​. 
Pol, M., Van Nes, F., Van Hartingsveldt, M., Buurman, B., De Rooij, S., & Kröse, B. (2016). Older people’s perspectives regarding the 
use of sensor monitoring in their home. ​Gerontologist​, ​56​(3), 485–493. 
Principi, E., Squartini, S., Bonfigli, R., Ferroni, G., & Piazza, F. (2015). ​An integrated system for voice command recognition and 
emergency detection based on audio signals​. 
PRUITT, J. S., & ADLIN, T. (2006). The Persona Lifecycle. In ​The Persona Lifecycle​. 
Quesenbery, W., & Brooks, K. (2010). Storytelling for User experience: Crafting Stories for Better Design. 
REACH 2020. (n.d.). REACH webpage. Retrieved January 17, 2020, from http://reach2020.eu/# 
==PAGE:146==
Ricciuti, M., Spinsante, S., & Gambi, E. (2018). Accurate fall detection in a top view privacy preserving configuration. ​Sensors 
(Switzerland)​, ​18​(6). 
Rubenstein, L. Z. (2006). Falls in older people: epidemiology, risk factors and strategies for prevention. ​Age and Ageing​, 37–41. 
Seniorliving.org. (n.d.). Activities of Daily Living (ADLs). Retrieved October 11, 2019, from 
https://www.seniorliving.org/caregiving/activities-of-daily-living/ 
Shiba, K., Kaburagi, T., & Kurihara, Y. (2017). Fall Detection Utilizing Frequency Distribution Trajectory by Microwave Doppler 
Sensor. ​IEEE Sensors Journal​, ​17​(22), 7561–7568. 
Siantikos, G., Giannakopoulos, T., & Konstantopoulos, S. (2017). Monitoring Activities of Daily Living Using Audio Analysis and a 
RaspberryPI: A Use Case on Bathroom Activity Monitoring. ​Communications in Computer and Information Science​. 
Steele, R., Lo, A., Secombe, C., & Wong, Y. K. (2009). Elderly persons’ perception and acceptance of using wireless sensor networks to 
assist healthcare. ​International Journal of Medical Informatics​, ​78​(12), 788–801. 
Sukreep, S., Elgazzar, K., Chu, C. H., Nukoolkit, C., & Mongkolnam, P. (2019). Recognizing Falls, Daily Activities, and Health 
Monitoring by Smart Devices. ​Sensors and Materials​, ​31​(6), 1847. 
Sundhed.dk. (2018). Fald og faldtendens hos ældre. 
Sundhedsstyrelsen. (2006). ​Faldpatienter I Den Kliniske Hverdag​. Retrieved from 
http://sundhedsstyrelsen.dk/~/media/1E493E28DB284605A110EEAF1EAE0503.ashx 
Tinetti, M., Liu, W., & Claus, E. (1993). PREDICTORS AND PROGNOSIS OF INABILITY TO GET UP AFTER FALLS AMONG ELDERLY 
PERSONS. ​Jama-Journal of the American Medical Association​, ​269​(1), 65–70. 
TruSense. (n.d.). TruSense webpage. Retrieved January 14, 2020, from https://mytrusense.com/ 
==PAGE:147==
Tsipouras, M. G., Giannakeas, N., Tegou, T., Kalamaras, I., Votis, K., & Tzovaras, D. (2018). Assessing the Frailty of Older People using 
Bluetooth Beacons Data. ​International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications​, 
2018​-​Octob​(690140), 5–11. 
United Nations. (2013). World Population Ageing 2013. ​Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division​. 
Vacher, M., Aman, F., Rossato, S., Portet, F., & Lecouteux, B. (2019). Making Emergency Calls More Accessible to Older Adults 
Through a Hands-free Speech Interface in the House. ​ACM. Trans. Access. Comput.​, ​12​. 
Vacher, M., Fleury, A., Portet, F., Serignat, J.-F., & Noury, N. (2009). Complete Sound and Speech Recognition System for Health Smart 
Homes: Application to the Recognition of Activities of Daily Living. ​Recent Advances In Biomedical Engineering​, 1–30. 
Vacher, M., Portet, F., Fleury, A., & Noury, N. (2011). Development of audio sensing technology for ambient assisted living: 
Applications and challenges. ​Digital Advances in Medicine, E-Health, and Communication Technologies​, ​2​, 35–54. 
Vermesan, O., Friess, P., Guillemin, P., Sundemaeker, H., Eisenhauer, M., Moessner, K., … Baldini, G. (2014). ​Internet of Things – From 
Research and Innovation to Market Deployment River Publishers Series in Communication​. River Publishers. 
Volpato, S., Onder, G., Cavalieri, M., Guerra, G., Sioulis, F., Maraldi, C., … Fellin, R. (2007). Characteristics of nondisabled older 
patients developing new disability associated with medical illnesses and hospitalization. ​Journal of General Internal Medicine​, 
22​(5), 668–674. 
Vuegeri, L., Van Den Broeck, B., Karsmakers, P., Van Hamme, H., & Vanrumste, B. (2015). Energy efficient monitoring of activities of 
daily living using wireless acoustic sensor networks in clean and noisy conditions. ​2015 23rd European Signal Processing 
Conference, EUSIPCO 2015​, 449–453. 
==PAGE:148==
Wallace, B., Harake, T. N. El, Goubran, R., Valech, N., & Knoefel, F. (2018). Preliminary results for measurement and classification of 
overnight wandering by dementia patient using multi-sensors. ​I2MTC 2018 - 2018 IEEE International Instrumentation and 
Measurement Technology Conference: Discovering New Horizons in Instrumentation and Measurement, Proceedings​, 1–6. 
Wilkowska, W., & Ziefle, M. (2012). Privacy and data security in E-health: Requirements from the user’s perspective. ​Health 
Informatics Journal​, ​18​(3), 191–201. 
Wu, A. W., Yasui, Y., Alzola, C., Galanos, A. N., Tsevat, J., Phillips, R. S., … Lynn, J. (2000). Predicting functional status outcomes in 
hospitalized patients aged 80 years and older. ​Journal of the American Geriatrics Society​, ​48​, 6–15. 
Yu, M., Rhuma, A., Naqvi, S. M., Wang, L., & Chambers, J. (2012). A posture recognition-based fall detection system for monitoring an 
elderly person in a smart home environment. ​IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine​, ​16​(6), 1274–1286. 
Zografakis-Sfakianakis, M., De Bree, E., Linardakis, M., Messaritaki, A., Askitopoulou, H., Papaioannou, A., & Aggouridakis, P. (2018). 
The value of the Modified Early Warning Score for unplanned Intensive Care Unit admissions of patients treated in hospital 
general wards. ​International Journal of Nursing Practice​, ​24​(3). 
