==PAGE:1==
Chute allocation in airports using
early baggage storage as buﬀer
Master thesis in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
By Pernille Frost Fahl´en - s143911
Supervisor: David Pisinger
Technical University of Denmark - February 1st, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
TITLE PAGE
English title
Chute allocation in airports using early baggage storage as buﬀer
Danish Title
Chute allokering i lufthavne med brug af EBS lager som buﬀer
Language
English
Author
Pernille Frost Fahl´en (s143911)
Education
MSc Mathematical Modelling and Computation at DTU
Supervisor
David Pisinger, Professor at DTU Management Engineering
Time period
August 1st 2019 to February 1st 2020
Semester
4th semester
Extent
Master thesis - 35 ECTS points
ii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This report is the ﬁnal step in completing a master’s degree in mathematical modelling
and computation at the Technical University of Denmark. The extent of the project
is 35 ECTS-points and are going on for the past 6 months. The project is made in
collaboration with Copenhagen Airport, who have provided the data and information
on their baggage handling process.
I would like to thank Copenhagen Airport Baggage Process and Operations and
especially Franciska Maria Jenrich for providing the data and information on their
process, while always be ready for answering any additional question along the way.
I would also like to thank my supervisor David Pisinger for great support, and
guidance throughout the whole project, and for making it possible to investigate
this interesting topic.
This thesis is produced by:
Pernille Frost Fahl´en
February 1st 2020
iv
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
SUMMARY
This project applies the guided local search to a chute allocation problem, to see
if it is a good solution method. The chute allocation problem is deﬁned and some
real-life cases are presented. First is the method being tuned for optimal running
conditions with a simpliﬁed solution method without including the early baggage
storage. This showed some good and useful results. Afterward was early baggage
storage added as a buﬀer and determiner of which overlaps could be accepted or not.
This did not worsen the results but solve some of the diﬃculties from the previous
tests.
After showing that the solution method indeed is useful for solving the chute allocation
problem fast, the limit of the current layout of the Copenhagen Airport baggage
facilities is pushed to its limit to see how the method is reacting to diﬃcult and
larger cases. It showed that the capacity on the early baggage storage was stressed
at certain times, but not something that could not be handled by small changes after
the method gave a good proposition of the chute allocating. The method showed
that 3.2% of the ﬂights experienced overlaps while only 0.6% of the timespots where
overlaps. And this solution was found in only 33 seconds. For such a big case it is
a great allocation that only needs smaller manually changes afterward and then is
used in real-life.
The project is ﬁnished oﬀby testing diﬀerent expanding options on the layout.
The expansions are tested for most improvements after increasing the early baggage
storage capacity or adding extra chutes. This showed that the two types of expansion
solved diﬀerent problems. Therefore the is the recommendation based on whether
the future additional ﬂights are distributed evenly throughout the day or in busier
periods.
vi
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
Title Page
ii
Preface
iv
Summary
vi
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Airport Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
CPH Baggage Handling
8
2.1
Chute Demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Legal Chute Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Chute Opening Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Early Baggage Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Predictions on Baggage Amounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Future Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
The Chute Allocation Problem
20
3.1
Input Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Real-life Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Model for the Chute Allocation Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
viii
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
4
Guided Local Search as a Solution Method
32
4.1
Greedy Heuristic (GH) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Guided Local Search (GLS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Fast Local Search (FLS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
GH, GLS and FLS Combined
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Results and Analysis of the Solutions to the CAP Model
38
5.1
Selection of GH Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
The Penalties Impact on Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Solution Method with Early Baggage Storage as a Buﬀer
44
6.1
Overlap Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Criteria for Legal Overlap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Results and Analysis of the Solution Method with EBS
48
7.1
Selection of GH Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Comparison of Solution Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Expansion Performance
52
8.1
Results of Expansion with Case 22-12-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Case with 500 Flights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.3
Results of Expansion with New Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9
Conclusion
60
Bibliography
62
A GH Strategy Test Results
64
A.1 Case 20-03-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 Case 08-08-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.3 Case 01-10-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.4 Case 22-12-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B Penalty Test Results
68
C GH Strategy with EBS Test Results
70
C.1 Case 20-03-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.2 Case 08-08-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.3 Case 01-10-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C.4 Case 22-12-2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
D GH Strategy with EBS Test Results for 500 Flights
74
ix
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Today the air travel dominates international transportation of passengers, but maybe
in the future other transportation possibilities could take over some of the short
distance passengers [1]. This does not mean that there will get any fewer passengers
traveling by plane, on the contrary, several organisations in the air traﬃc industry
anticipate that the demand and travelers will increase rapidly for at least the next
decade [1, 2, 3].
The capacity of the airports plays a key role in driving the airline competition, and
therefore it is one of the 4 challenges that the air traﬃc industry deals with at the
moment [2]. With a high increase in demands in the coming years, airports have to
adjust and make some changes to follow how the world changes. This means dealing
with the ongoing challenges to keep the air travel business attractive now as well
as in the future. Here a great functioning airport is one of the keys to success and
progress [2].
Capacity should be assured on every front, but especially within the baggage handling
process [4].
It is crucial for an airport’s progress and development that it can
maintain and process all the needed baggage. Also, baggage handling is a huge
contributor to the passenger’s experience of the trip [5]. Everyone can imagine the
hurdle it causes when you are missing your baggage at the arrival. That is one of
the reasons why airport operations are very important for the customer satisfaction.
The baggage is either in the hands of the airport, a baggage handler or the airline
along the way to its destination, see ﬁgure 1.1. The journey for a bag, after the
passenger checks in the baggage, contains a lot of diﬀerent steps, and in every step,
something can go wrong. In recent years some changes in the baggage handling
2
==PAGE:14==
1.1. AIRPORT STRUCTURE
process have been done, and fortunately, it has resulted in fewer mistakes and lost
bags [5]. SITA also states that the number of bags has grown drastically the past
decade while the number of mishandled bags, that have lowered just as much [5].
Figure 1.1: The baggage journey starting from check-in and ends with hand-out at the arrival
based on the illustration by SITA [5].
1.1
Airport Structure
An airport consists of an airside and a landside.
Airside includes the runway,
taxiways, aprons, aircraft maintenance areas, and traﬃc control facilities [6]. The
landside includes the facilities used by the passengers, cargo terminals, supporting
facilities, ground access facilities and any additional nonaviation facilities [6]. It is
3
==PAGE:15==
1.2. LITERATURE REVIEW
very important to know where the bottleneck within all operations is placed for the
airport to be aware of its limits.
Within the landside category of the airport is the baggage handling process is placed.
To check if the baggage infrastructure is capable of handling the needed baggage
amount, to run the airport, the bottleneck within this process needs to be compared
with all bottlenecks from other processes. Therefore it is crucial that they have
the same unit to be able to compare them correctly. A unit making it possible to
compare within capacity is passengers per hour [6].
A bag is either categorised as inbound or outbound. Inbound is all incoming baggage
via ﬂights, some have to be transferred to another ﬂight and some have to be handed
out to the passengers. Outbound baggage is the baggage going out of the airport
this includes all bags being checked-in and transferring.
The bottleneck for the baggage process could be placed at the check-in counter,
convoys system (including screening capability, convoy capacity and storage) and
inbound baggage processing. This project will not address the overall bottleneck
for the baggage process but determine the capacity for the outbound convoy system
(including transfer baggage). Due to the increase in ﬂight traﬃc, the maximum
capacity has to be well known in each airport so, if necessary and possible, it can
solve the problems before they occur [3].
A convoy is transporting the bags from check-in to the baggage facility. The baggage
facility consists of a convoy belt leading chutes where the baggage can be dropped.
When a bag has reached the correct chute, it will drop down the chute and the
handler will move it into a wagon or on to a container. If the chute is already ﬁlled,
then the bag will keep circulating until there is room enough on the chute. If the
chute is not open yet, then the bag is being stored at storage convoy which are
being emptied at a speciﬁc time. When the storage convoys are ﬁlled or no tracks
are emptying in time, the bag will keep circulating on the convoy belt. If too many
bags have to circulate in the convoy belt it could be ﬁlled up, and thereby the bags
for the other ﬂights can not reach their chutes in time.
1.2
Literature Review
Airports, in general, have been broadly studied. The studies have been documented
and there exists a lot of diﬀerent literature on the subject. Some of the research
digs into solving issues relating to the increase in ﬂight traﬃc worldwide.
An
airport consists of many diﬀerent aspects and each can be examined further. Asri,
4
==PAGE:16==
1.2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Fakhrulddin, Al-Humairi and Al-Mhanna have reviewed the research on the ground
handling operations (GHO) and mentions that especially the on time performance
(OTP) rate is investigated thorough [7]. This makes it possible to compare totally
diﬀerent aspects in the baggage operation.
The baggage handling system is a part of the GHO and several researchers have
investigated diﬀerent ways to handle these processes to optimise the OTP. Mostly
is simulations used to solve the transportation problems where a bag has to be
transported from the check-in desk to the ﬂight. Many problems in the baggage
handling operation can be compared directly with other problem types where a
good solution method already exists. Johnstone, Creighton and Nahavandi have
simulated a convoy system to ﬁnd the best possible layout of it while minimising the
bottlenecks in a complex transportation system, [8]. Their results show the layout
of the convoys system with minor changes does not have any eﬀect on performance
as long as the bottlenecks have the needed capacity.
Within the design of a convoy system the routes of the baggage is considered. In
[8] it was simulated but it could also be seen as a vehicle routing problem which
originally can be presented in a mixed integer programming (MIP) model. Zeinaly,
De Schutter and Hellendoorn have shown that with smaller changes to the MIP
model it can be presented as a linear programming (LP) model instead, [9]. This
results in a much faster and easier way to solve the problem because the LP has
signiﬁcant computational advantages.
This project is a chute allocation model presented.
This model has theoretical
similarities to a 2D bin packing problem. A 2D bin packing problem is a highly
known and researched area. iIt is a NP-hard problem and this means that no exact
methods can solve the problem easily. Therefore is searching methods such as e.g.
branch-and-bound and column generation used to search for the optimal solution.
The guided local search method has been used for 3D bin packing problems by
Faroe, Pisinger and Zachariasen [10], where they ﬁnd that it works for these types
of problems. The alternation between 3D and 2D is only to have a constant depth
of the object.
As described earlier was a possible solution method to 2D bin packing problems
column generation. This approach has been used before in an outbound baggage
handling problem by Frey, Kolisch and Artigues [11]. Their results showed that the
column generation method reduces the maximal workloads on chutes by more than
60% compared to the procedure used beforehand.
5
==PAGE:17==
1.3. OUTLINE
1.3
Outline
This project reﬂects on the work of testing the use of guided local search in a
chute allocation problem.
For at start the reader is introduced to the baggage
handling process in Copenhagen Airport in chapter 2. Here is the importance of the
optimization of the baggage operation stated. Later on in the chapter all background
information on how the baggage handling process is set up and used today presented.
This leads to chapter 3, where the chute allocating problem is reviewed. The chapter
also includes a review of the data used for testing the model and how it is handled
to reach a useful output.
In chapter 4 the guided local search solution method is presented. The chapter goes
through all diﬀerent aspects of the algorithms that are programmed to run the tests.
Afterward, in chapter 5, are the results from solving the chute allocation problem
with guided local search presented and reﬂected on.
In chapter 6 is the early baggage storage algorithm presented as an addition to the
guided local search solution method. Afterward, in chapter 7, is the results from the
tests of the new method including the early baggage storage presented and reﬂected
on.
After testing the new method some extra test runs will be presented in chapter 8. It
will be tested what eﬀects expansion of the baggage facilities in Copenhagen Airport
would have on the number of ﬂights that can be handled. At last, a conclusion on
the ﬁndings is found in chapter 9.
6
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
CPH BAGGAGE HANDLING
”Busy” and ”Record” is two words being posted over and over again on the webpage
of Copenhagen Airports (CPH) traﬃc statistics [12]. This is the two best describing
words of the European air traﬃc when it comes to traveling passengers [13]. For the
last 10 years, after the ﬁnancial crisis ended in 2009, the number of travellers have
increased quite drastically and does not seem to stop anytime soon, ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The total number of travellers passed through the terminals in CPH for the last 10
years [12].
More ﬂights, travellers and bags do not necessarily mean that the airport is expanding
physically. Therefore it is crucial to optimise several processes within the airport.
The baggage handling process is one of them. Here it is important to know the
limits of the current baggage convoy-system such that the airport can keep up with
the anticipated increased number of ﬂights and travellers for years to come.
8
==PAGE:20==
2.1. CHUTE DEMAND
In CPH the airport is responsible for the baggage handling system. The handling
companies then pay the airport for the usage of their equipment. Therefore is it
CPHs responsibility that the correct gear is running and comply with restrictions,
e.g. safety.
The handlers would often ask for a lot of chutes assigned to one ﬂight, although
it would only carry a few bags. Therefore CPH had to set up some guidelines to
restrict how many chutes they could get assigned on each ﬂight depending on the
number of bags and their packing method. This made it possible to ﬁt all ﬂights in
the current baggage facility.
2.1
Chute Demand
To determine the demand of chutes for a speciﬁc ﬂight some information about the
ﬂight is required beforehand. First of it is important to know the aircraft type and
which packing method it is using. The packing method depends on the design of
the aircraft-type, it could use either bulk or containers for packing. When packing
in containers, the packing method can again be divided into two, depending on the
design of the aircraft, it has either a wide or narrow body. Respectively they are
called AKE and AKH.
The number of demanded chutes depends highly on the number of bags the ﬂight
has to carry. This is not known before all bags are on board, and therefore an
estimate is calculated.
The bags are divided into three diﬀerent categories: Local, Transfer and Priority.
For a bag to be categorized as Local the destination of the ﬂight have to be the end
destination for the passenger. To a bag to be categorized as Transfer, the bag has
to be transferring at the destination of the ﬂight. For a bag to be categorized as a
priority, the passenger carrying the bag have paid extra to guarantee that it will get
on the ﬂight they travel with.
No matter the number of bags and packing method all ﬂights must be assigned at
least 1 chute and maximum 4 chutes. A ﬂight using containers as its packing method
while containing all three diﬀerent baggage types, should at least be assigned 2
chutes. Almost the same applies to ﬂights using bulk as their packing method, here
5 bags of each type is required for the ﬂight to be assigned 2 chutes as a minimum.
The number of chutes for a ﬂight is found using the tree in ﬁgure 2.2.
Using the tree in ﬁgure 2.2, every ﬂight is starting with no chutes and then all
9
==PAGE:21==
2.1. CHUTE DEMAND
Figure 2.2: Tree used to assign extra chutes for a ﬂight depending on the forecast on numbers of
each baggage type.
baggage types are considered once.
A ﬂight will then be assigned 0 chutes or
additional 1 or 2 chutes for each baggage type. With the minimum and the maximum
number of chutes in mind as well, a ﬂight gets assigned from 1 to 4 chutes each.
To be more clear about the number of demanded chutes, some examples of ﬂights
can be seen in table 2.1. When e.g. a ﬂight is using bulk as a packing method and
have to carry 3 Local bags, 15 Transfer bags and 15 Priority bags, then the ﬂight
does not demand any chutes, but since all ﬂights have to be assigned at least one
chute, the demand for this ﬂight is one chute.
Another example could be if the ﬂight is still using bulk as the packing method but
now have to carry 6 Local bags, 6 Transfer bags and 6 Priority bags. The tree in
ﬁgure 2.2 does not assign any chutes for the ﬂight, but since all baggage type is
present and is all more than 5, the ﬂight is being designated to demand 2 chutes.
The third example is still a ﬂight using bulk as packing method and is still carrying
more than 5 bags in each baggage category, but here the tree in ﬁgure 2.2 assign
1 chute because of the more than 20 Local bags, 1 chute because of more than 20
Transfer bags and 1 chute for more than 20 Priority bags. This gives the ﬂight
10
==PAGE:22==
2.2. LEGAL CHUTE COMBINATIONS
assigned 3 chutes in total, and since 3 already is more than the 2 that were the
minimum for the case, the total demand of chutes for this ﬂight is 3.
The fourth example is based on a ﬂight using containers as the packing method and
carry 3 Local bags, 15 Transfer bags and 15 Priority bags. This gives the ﬂight a
demand on one chute for 15 Transfer bags and one for 15 Priority bags. In total,
the ﬂights demand 2 chutes.
The ﬁfth example is based on a ﬂight using containers as the packing method and is
having a narrow body. The ﬂight has to carry 102 Local bags, 85 Transfer bags and
102 Priority bags. The ﬂight is demanding one chute based on the 102 Local bags,
two chutes based on 85 Transfer bags and 1 chute based on the 102 Priority bags.
This gives the ﬂight a total demand of 4 chutes, which is the maximum number of
chutes a ﬂight can demand.
The last example is almost the same as the ﬁfth, the only diﬀerence are that the
body type of the aircraft is wide instead of narrow. This means that the intervals in
the tree, ﬁgure 2.2, is changed a bit. The diﬀerence gives the ﬂight 1 chutes based
on each baggage category. The total demand of chutes is therefore 3 for this ﬂight.
Packing method
Local
Transfer
Priority
Demand
Bulk
3
15
15
1
Bulk
6
6
6
2
Bulk
51
22
22
3
AKH or AKE
3
15
15
2
AKH
102
85
102
4
AKE
102
85
102
3
Table 2.1: Examples on cases for calculated chute demand based on packing method and amount
of baggage of each type.
2.2
Legal Chute Combinations
CPH is at the moment using one of there baggage facility areas, this is called
BF3.
In BF3 there are 151 chute locations.
Not all locations are usable or in
use.
Each chute is designated to one handler or all handlers.
There are four
diﬀerent handling companies operating: SAS Ground Handling (SGH), Aviator
Airport Services Denmark a/s (AVIATOR), Menzies Aviation a/s (MENZIES) and
Copenhagen Flight Services (CFS).
11
==PAGE:23==
2.2. LEGAL CHUTE COMBINATIONS
All handlers have their own designated chutes no other company can operate. And
then there are some ﬂex chutes which can be operated by all companies. In the area
map, ﬁgure 2.3, it is shown which chutes are active and who is operating it. When
a chute is listed as ﬂex it can be operated by all handlers. All baggage on each
ﬂight is handled by one handling company. Often the company owning the aircraft
is having an agreement with one handling company. This agreement means that the
speciﬁc ﬂight requests a speciﬁc handler. The ﬂight can therefore not be placed on
every possible chute.
Figure 2.3:
Map of the chute area in BF3
including
color-coded
distributing
of
which
handler a speciﬁc chute is operated by.
Figure 2.4: View of all the legal patterns
respectively to the areal plan.
Another restriction for determining the legal chutes for the ﬂights, is a the ﬂight
packing method and body type. If a ﬂight is using containers as the packing method
and the aircraft is having a wide body (AKE), then the equipment on the chute needs
to be more advanced. Not all chutes have this advanced equipment. Each chute is
categorized as ”hook” or ”lifts-all” based on there available equipment. ”lifts-all”
can process all ﬂights, while ”hook” cannot process AKE ﬂights. This means some
12
==PAGE:24==
2.3. CHUTE OPENING HOURS
AKE ﬂights have even more restrictions, and some chutes cannot legally be allocated
to them.
Having all these restrictions in mind each ﬂight has to be assigned the demanded
number of chutes. It is easy when a ﬂight only demands one chute. But when a
ﬂight demands more than one chute, then the chutes assigned need to be in the
neighborhood of each other. To assure that the assigned chutes for one ﬂight is
within the same neighborhood some legal patterns chute pairs are created. The
legal patterns are shown in ﬁgure 2.4 divided into groups based on the demanded
number of chutes.
A ﬂight now has a set of possible chute combinations that are legal to be allocated.
The size of the set is based on how tightened the ﬂight is by the previously described
restrictions.
2.3
Chute Opening Hours
To ensure that there is enough capacity in the baggage facility each ﬂight needs to
be placed in a schedule. This schedule shows all chutes and whether or not a ﬂight
is allocated to the chute at a speciﬁc time. The time can be divided into slots of
diﬀerent intervals. For this project, a timeslot is always with 5 minutes intervals.
Each ﬂight has a standard time of departure (STD) where it is set to leave the
airport. This means that all bags have to be on board the ﬂight before STD. To
ensure that all bags are on the ﬂight before the departure time, CPH is using some
diﬀerent timespans for how long the chutes have to be open before STD. The opening
hours are based on the number of bags and is determined using the guidelines in
table 2.2 or in busy periods table 2.3. The opening hours are set between 60 minutes
and 180 minutes.
1 −20 BAX
21 −50 BAX
> 50 BAX
Bulk:
60 minutes
90 minutes
150 minutes
Container:
60 minutes
90 minutes
180 minutes
Table 2.2: Standard opening hours for chutes allocated to a ﬂight depending on the total number
of bags.
A ﬂight with a chute demand higher than one could have diﬀerent opening hours
on the allocated chutes. The opening hours on each chute depends on the reason
for the chute to be demanded. Using the same example cases as for calculation the
13
==PAGE:25==
2.3. CHUTE OPENING HOURS
1 −50 BAX
51 −100 BAX
101 −200 BAX
> 200 BAX
Bulk:
60 minutes
90 minutes
120 minutes
150 minutes
Container:
60 minutes
90 minutes
150 minutes
180 minutes
Table 2.3: Minimum opening hours for chutes allocated to a ﬂight depending on the total number
of bags.
chute demand, table 2.1, the minimum opening hours are found using the previous
knowledge about the demanding chutes and the number of bags in each category,
see table 2.4.
The ﬁrst example is getting none chutes based on the baggage amount, and therefore
the opening hours should at least be 60 minutes.
In the second example, the demand is 2, but none of the chutes are added because
of the baggage amount therefore the minimum opening hours for both chutes are
set to 60 minutes.
In the third example, the ﬁrst chute is demanded because of the 51 Local bags and
because it is more than 50 bags the opening hours for this chute are 90 minutes.
The remaining two chutes are demanded because of the 22 bags of Transfer bags
and the 22 Priority bags. This gives these to chutes an opening time of 60 minutes
each.
Fourth example is demanding two chutes one because of the 15 Transfer bags and
the second because of 15 Priority bags. This gives both chutes a minimum opening
time of 60 minutes.
Fifth example demands 4 chutes. One chute is demanded because of the 102 Local
bags and since the ﬂight is using containers as the packing method it will have a
minimum opening time of 150 minutes. The second and third chute is demanded
because of the 85 Transfer bags. This gives to chutes with the minimum opening
time of 90 minutes each. The last chute is demanded because of the 102 Priority
bags. This gives a minimum opening time of 150 because of the packing method.
The last example is similar to the ﬁfth, the only diﬀerence is that the 85 Transfer
bags only demands one chute and therefore only one chute is having the minimum
opening time of 90 minutes.
14
==PAGE:26==
2.3. CHUTE OPENING HOURS
Packing method
Local
Transfer
Priority
Demand
Min. Opening
Bulk
3
15
15
1
[60]
Bulk
6
6
6
2
[60, 60]
Bulk
51
22
22
3
[90, 60, 60]
AKH or AKE
3
15
15
2
[60, 60]
AKH
102
85
102
4
[150, 90, 90, 150]
AKE
102
85
102
3
[150, 90, 150]
Table 2.4: Examples on cases for setting opening hours on chutes based on number of bags and
the reason for the demanded chute.
To simplify the problem all chutes allocated to the same ﬂight are getting the same
opening time. If the opening time diﬀers within the ﬂight then all chutes opening
time is set to the highest opening time within the ﬂight. This simpliﬁcation means
that the problem can be placed in a schedule using squares. The best solution is
found when no squares are overlapping. A solution to the problem could, therefore
be displayed in a time-chute schedule like the one in ﬁgure 2.5. Where each ﬂight is
represented by a yellow box and placed in the correct position based on the opening
time and allocated chutes. The background color represents the handler operating
the chute, using the same colors as in ﬁgure 2.3. The red marked areas is where
overlaps occur.
On ﬁgure 2.5 there is a solution displayed. This is not an optimal solution because
of the overlaps. Two ﬂights are overlapping when they have been scheduled for the
same chute at the same time. To know whether or not two ﬂights are overlapping
the pattern of chutes must be known. Due to ﬁgure 2.4, there is 12 patterns to
choose from. The pattern is chosen based on the demand and is diﬀerent for each
ﬂight. Also, the placement of the pattern in the area map in ﬁgure 2.3 is important.
When the ﬁrst chute in the pattern is known, the rest of the chutes is known as
well because of the chosen pattern. The ﬂights can be placed as squares in the
time-chute schedule. The height of the squares is determined based on the opening
time. When the start timeslot is known the full square can be placed correctly in
the schedule. The placement of a ﬂight in the time-chute schedule can, therefore,
be done knowing the following four information about the square: Legal pattern,
demand, start chute and start time.
15
==PAGE:27==
2.4. EARLY BAGGAGE STORAGE
Figure 2.5: Example of a solution showed in the time-chute schedule. Time is from left to right
and chutes is increasing from bottom to top.
2.4
Early Baggage Storage
When a bag is checked-in before the opening time of the targeted chute it is being
stored on an early baggage storage convoy (EBS). In CPH BF3 there are 14 EBS
convoys each with a capacity between 85 and 124 pieces of baggage, see table 2.5
for details on the accurate number for each convoy. They vary in capacity because
they do not all have the same length. In reality, the capacity is a guideline because
the baggage can vary in size and rotation on the convoy. The capacity is, therefore,
a theoretical capacity. To ensure that a bag reaches the target chute before STD,
the baggage for the respective ﬂight has to be released from the EBS at least 60
minutes before STD.
For now, CPH has at least one EBS convoy emptying every 20 minutes. When an
EBS convoy is emptying all of the baggage on the convoy is loaded oﬀ. Therefore it
could take some time before the last bag. If more than one convoy is emptying at
the same time, some waiting time could occur. The waiting time occurs when EBS
convoys are above each other then they use the same ramp for emptying the convoy.
That is why the 60 minutes of safe traveling time is important to comply.
16
==PAGE:28==
2.4. EARLY BAGGAGE STORAGE
EBS Convoy
Capacity
Convoy 1:
85
Convoy 2:
86
Convoy 3:
110
Convoy 4:
110
Convoy 5:
120
Convoy 6:
113
Convoy 7:
116
Convoy 8:
124
Convoy 9:
85
Convoy 10:
86
Convoy 11:
110
Convoy 12:
110
Convoy 13:
120
Convoy 14:
115
Table 2.5: Overview of the capacity of all convoys used for EBS.
The EBS convoys are important for busy periods when the distribution convoy is
loaded, then the baggage waiting for the target chute to open does not absorb a spot
for a baggage piece where its chute is open. Optimizing the use of EBS is, therefore,
a great opportunity to increase the capacity of the baggage handling system.
Currently, are chutes having a very long opening time and the baggage is not getting
down the chutes to occupy one person regularly but is spread out on a large timespan.
An employee for one handler is, therefore, going back and forth between several
chutes when a bag is sliding down. This is not an optimal time use for the handlers.
With better use of the EBS convoys, the time use for the handlers will get better.
In the paper, [14], the opening time on every chute is aimed to be 60 minutes in
the future when the EBS convoy system is used properly and not only for baggage
arriving very early. This means that there would get busy periods on a chute and
baggage will arrive at the chutes in clusters.
17
==PAGE:29==
2.5. PREDICTIONS ON BAGGAGE AMOUNTS
2.5
Predictions on Baggage Amounts
In CPH Baggage Process and Operations (BPO) they have historical data on previous
ﬂights. This data is used to predict the number of bags on a future ﬂight. Information
about the ﬂight is given but the number of passengers and bags can vary and is not
speciﬁc until the ﬂight is departing. To ensure that the ﬂights are assigned the
correct amount of chutes, they are using a machine learning model that calculated
the expected amount of baggage for each ﬂight.
The machine learning model is trained on data from 2017 and 2018 and is not at
the moment being updated any further.
The model is calculating the expected
amount of baggage based on e.g. the airline, handler, destination and ﬂight type.
All of which is known beforehand. E.g. if a ﬂight is listed as charter then there is
often more baggage per passenger than on a normal route ﬂight. All this is being
considered and gives CPH BPO something to act on and use in the scheduling of
chutes.
2.6
Future Problems
As stated earlier is the ﬂight traﬃc increasing as well as the number of passengers.
The amount of baggage is, therefore, increasing too. If there is not enough capacity
to process all the incoming baggage, then the airport has reached its limits, but
like any other business, they do not want to miss any costumers. Therefore it is
important to follow the development and meet the demands of the travellers. If they
cannot keep up, they will potentially miss getting new routes and passengers.
In the future, it is crucial to know the limits in diﬀerent areas of the airport and
how to expand these areas to keep improving and raise the capacity most eﬃciently.
It is also good to know the bottleneck in advance to know where to set in the eﬀort
before the capacity limit has been reached. It could take a while (maybe years) to
expand the convoy system if that is what’s necessary.
To ﬁnd the capacity limit a stress test is a good tool to use. In this case, it means
that using a larger data set including several more ﬂights with various amounts of
baggage. When the limit is reached, then it could be a good idea to test whether
more EBS capacity or more chutes would increase the capacity the most. These
tests will be done at the end of this project.
18
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
THE CHUTE ALLOCATION PROBLEM
In this chapter, all aspects of the chute allocation problem are explained from input
to output. The introduction to the problem will be presented based on four diﬀerent
real-life cases. Then the restrictions on the problem will be presented, such that the
model will give a legal and useful output in the end.
The idea for solving the problem is to correctly allocate chutes to the ﬂights departing
from the airport. The chute allocation problem is a yes/ no problem, but it can be
reformulated to a minimizing problem. In this optimising problem, the overall goal
is to minimise the number of ﬂights not being placed correctly in the time-chute
schedule. This means that a penalty occurs when the restrictions are not respected.
A perfectly legal solution to the problem, therefore, obtained with an objective of
0. Any other solution to the problem will not be legal and usable in real-life right
away.
3.1
Input Data
This section introduces all the data needed to model the CAP. The input data could
be real-life data for giving an output can be used directly. Or the input data could
be simulated to give an output estimating the limits of the current system. Or even
tests with changes to the current baggage handling system could be used to improve
the setup. Regardless of the type of input data, it has to include information on the
chutes, ﬂights and baggage. If the EBS is included in the model, there has to be
included information on this as well.
20
==PAGE:32==
3.1. INPUT DATA
3.1.1
Chute Data
The chutes are the foundation of the whole problem. If there are no chutes the
problem cannot be solved. Therefore the data on the chutes is fairly detailed in the
amount and positions of them and who can use them.
• Number: A unique number assigned to each chute.
• Handler: The handler serving the chute or ﬂex if all handlers can serve the
chute.
• Equipment: The available equipment for loading baggage between chute and
a wagon or container.
3.1.2
Flight Data
A lot of information on every ﬂight is given beforehand. Most of the information is
used to assign the correct type of chutes to each aircraft. Also, the closing time on
chutes is being determined by information on the departure time of the ﬂight.
• Name: The ﬂight name is unique and consists of a letter combination referring
to the aircraft company and some numbers referring to the itinerary.
• Standard time of departure: The STD includes information on the date
and take oﬀtime on the ﬂight.
• Ground handler: The handler company which is used for the aircraft.
• Aircraft group: Information on the size of the aircraft. A, B and C are
ﬂights with a narrow body, while ﬂights of type D, E and F have a wide body.
• Packing method: The packing method is either C for containers or B for
bulk which is were wagons are used.
• Type: The ﬂight is either a route ﬂight or a charter ﬂight. This has a huge
impact on the baggage amount and check-in type for the ﬂight.
3.1.3
Baggage Data
The information on the baggage is not always available. If the CAP model is set to
assign chutes for future ﬂights, then the number of baggage is not available. The
information is still needed for the model to run, therefore the amount of baggage is
forecasted by a machine learning model. The forecast for baggage is based on earlier
experiences on similar ﬂights. It is important as well to know when a bag is entering
the baggage handling system to know how much capacity is used. The check-in time
for all baggage is based on real-data determine the fraction of all baggage checked-in
at diﬀerent intervals before take oﬀ.
21
==PAGE:33==
3.1. INPUT DATA
• Local check-in, priority bags: The number of local checked-in priority bags
at the airport for each ﬂight.
• Local check-in, local bags: The number of local checked-in bags that are
being checkedout at the destination for each ﬂight.
• Local check-in, transfer bags: The number of local checked-in bags that
are transferring at the destination for each ﬂight.
• Transfer check-in, priority bags: The number of priority bags transferring
from another ﬂight for each ﬂight.
• Transfer check-in, local bags: The number of transferring bags from another
ﬂight and is being checkedout at the destination for each ﬂight.
• Transfer check-in, transfer bags: The number of transferring bags from
another ﬂight and is transferring from the destination for each ﬂight.
• Attendance proﬁle, check-in: Percentage of the total number of check-ins
at a certain time.
This can be divided into as many time intervals and
categories as wanted.
• Attendance proﬁle, transfer: Percentage of the total number of transfer
check-ins at a certain time. This can be divided into as many time intervals
and categories as wanted.
3.1.4
EBS Data
In addition to the simple CAP model, early baggage storage can be used. To use
EBS some information is needed. The necessary information can be used to check
if the opening time for chutes could be shortened. Depending on the level of details
in the data it could be used to determine a schedule for emptying the EBS convoys.
• Name of convoys: Unique name for each track used for EBS.
• Max capacity: The maximum number of spots available for early bags on
all EBS convoys.
• Emptying times: The timeslot where each track is emptied.
22
==PAGE:34==
3.2. REAL-LIFE CASES
3.2
Real-life Cases
All experimental results are based on four diﬀerent cases. The cases are real-life
data from CPH Airport. The data includes the needed information explained in
section 3.1. All four cases are taking place in 2018 with diﬀerent level of bustle. The
impact on the baggage amount can be found in many diﬀerent aspects, e.g. vacation
time, number of ﬂights and their capacity.
When people are travelling for vacation using charter ﬂights it is clear that the data
shows that the amount of baggage on these ﬂights is higher than the usual on a
route ﬂight. When the number of ﬂights is higher then the number of passengers
must be assumed to be higher too. This means that the amount of baggage must be
higher as well. The data shows that the ﬂight capacity plays a role in the amount of
baggage but these ﬂights are often used to ﬂy longer distances and here passengers
tend to carry more baggage with them.
3.2.1
Case 1: 20-03-2018
This case consists of 340 ﬂights and is handling 20.172 bags in total. The ﬂight with
the smallest amount of baggage carries 1 bag and the ﬂight with the most baggage
is carrying 569 bags. It takes place on a normal working day in Denmark. This
means that most travellers are business-related and there are only 7 ﬂights listed as
charter. In ﬁgure 3.1 it can be seen that the number of bags is distributed evenly
throughout most of the day.
Figure 3.1: The baggage leaving CPH for each time step in case 1.
23
==PAGE:35==
3.2. REAL-LIFE CASES
3.2.2
Case 2: 08-08-2018
This case consists of 358 ﬂights and is handling 22.525 bags in total. The ﬂight with
the smallest amount of baggage carries 1 bag and the ﬂight with the most baggage is
carrying 438 bags. It takes place at the end of the Summer Break in Denmark. This
means that more people are travelling on vacation compared to case 1. There are
14 ﬂights listed as charter ﬂights for this day which is twice as many for case 1. The
charter ﬂights are carrying more than the average baggage amount for this day. In
ﬁgure 3.2 it can be seen that the baggage is distributed evenly throughout the day
but in the afternoon it is particularly busy. The overall baggage level throughout
the day is higher than for case 1 as well.
Figure 3.2: The baggage leaving CPH for each time step in case 2.
3.2.3
Case 3: 01-10-2018
This case consists of 400 ﬂights and is handling 25.055 bags in total. The ﬂight with
the smallest amount of baggage carries 1 bag and the ﬂight with the most baggage
is carrying 578 bags. This day is a Monday and more ﬂights are departing this day
than any of the other cases. In ﬁgure 3.3 it can be seen that the amount of baggage
this day is peaking in the middle of the afternoon, while the rest of the day is fairly
evenly distributed. The overall level of baggage in this case around the same as case
2.
24
==PAGE:36==
3.2. REAL-LIFE CASES
Figure 3.3: The baggage leaving CPH for each time step in case 3.
3.2.4
Case 4: 22-12-2018
This case consists of 264 ﬂights and is handling 30.406 bags in total. The ﬂight
with the smallest amount of baggage carries 17 bags and the ﬂight with the most
baggage is carrying 631 bags. There are 19 ﬂights listed as charter ﬂights these
days which is the highest of all cases. The case takes place on the ﬁrst day of the
Christmas Holiday in Denmark. Passengers tend to carry extra baggage and the
average amount of baggage on a ﬂight this day is almost doubled. In ﬁgure 3.4 it
can be seen that the amount of baggage is peaking in the morning and at noon. The
overall level of baggage is quite high all day. This case is very extreme compared to
the other three cases and is the busiest day of them all.
Figure 3.4: The baggage leaving CPH for each time step in case 4.
25
==PAGE:37==
3.3. MODEL FOR THE CHUTE ALLOCATION PROBLEM
3.3
Model for the Chute Allocation Problem
In this chapter, the prerequisites to a model for the problem are introduced. Afterwards
a compact formulation of the model is shown. At last, it will all be torn apart to
explain the thought and processes behind the model’s individual pieces.
3.3.1
Sets
• F is the set of ﬂights and therefore the input to the model.
• C is the set of chutes. This set is the same for all cases because all cases take
place at the same facility. Since CPH Baggage Facility is having 151 chutes
(some not in use) then this set is [1 : 151].
• T is the set of timeslots. This set depends on the timespan that would like to
be modeled. If the timespan is one day then the set is [1 : 288] because it is
cut into 5 minutes intervals.
• Tf is the set of timeslots for each ﬂight f ∈F. This set is depending on the
ﬂight and is found using STD and the opening time from table 2.2 or 2.3.
• Kd is the set of possible patterns to choose from depending on the demand,
df. For this model the possibilities is showed in ﬁgure 2.4 and is therefore [1]
for df = 1, [1, 2] for df = 2, [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] for df = 3 and [1, 2, 3, 4] for df = 4.
• Pf is the set of legal patterns for ﬂight f ∈F.
The set is based on the
restrictions explained in chapter 2. In this set the demand, handler and all
neighborhood patterns are included as diﬀerent combinations of chutes such
that a pattern p = [c1, c2, ..., cd] ∈Pf.
3.3.2
Variables
• xf,c,t is conditioned on the ﬂight f ∈F, the chute c ∈C and the timeslot t ∈T.
When ﬂight f is assigned chute c in timeslot t then the variable gets value 1
otherwise it is 0. The decision variable is therefore binary. The dimensions of
the decision variable is F × C × T.
• oct is the total number of ﬂights placed on a speciﬁc chute c ∈C on a speciﬁc
timeslot t ∈T.
• yct is the overlap on timeslot t ∈T on chute c ∈C.
If two ﬂights are
overlapping then the overlap value is 1. If three ﬂights are overlapping then
the overlap value is 2, etc.
• kf is the pattern number that ﬂight f ∈F uses.
26
==PAGE:38==
3.3. MODEL FOR THE CHUTE ALLOCATION PROBLEM
• c′
f is the ﬁrst chute that ﬂight f ∈F uses.
3.3.3
Parameters
• df is the demand of chutes for ﬂight f ∈F.
• t′
f is the time where the chutes opens for ﬂight f ∈F.
• pkc′t′ is describing the chosen pattern chosen for ﬂight f ∈F from the set Pf. A
pattern is based on the decisions of pattern number, kf ∈Kd, the chute where
the pattern starts, c′
f ∈C and the time when the chutes are opening, t′
f ∈T.
The parameter, pkc′t′, consists of a list of chutes used in the pattern such that
pkc′t′ = [c1, c2, ..., cd]. For simpliﬁcation in notation f is removed when the
pattern variable is written since pkc′t′ should have been notated correctly as
pkfc′
ft′
f.
3.3.4
Compact Formulation
Minimise
X
c∈C
X
t∈T
yct
(3.1)
Subject to
X
f∈F
xfct = oct
∀c ∈C, t ∈T
(3.2)
oct−1
X
n=1
n = yct
∀c ∈C, t ∈T, oct > 1
(3.3)
yct = 0
∀c ∈C, t ∈T, oct ≤1
(3.4)
X
pkc′t′∈Pf
xfc′t′ = 1
∀f ∈F
(3.5)
xfct ∈BF×C×T
(3.6)
oct ∈I+
C×T
(3.7)
yct ∈I+
C×T
(3.8)
kf ∈I+
F
(3.9)
c′
f ∈I+
F
(3.10)
if pattern p ∈Pf is chosen for ﬂight f ∈F
then ∀c ∈p ∧∀t ∈Tf : xfct = 1
(3.11)
27
==PAGE:39==
3.3. MODEL FOR THE CHUTE ALLOCATION PROBLEM
3.3.5
Objective function
The objective function (3.1) is determining the total overlap in the entire time-chute
schedule. One overlap occurs when two ﬂights are placed on the same chute at the
same timeslot. Since the overlap variable yct is being summed for all chutes and
all timeslots, the overlap between two ﬂights can be counted multiple times.
If
two ﬂights overlap on more than one timeslot or more than one chute they will be
counted the same number of times.
The solution with an objective of 0 will be the only solution usable in real life. There
cannot be several ﬂights using the same chute at the same time and therefore are
solutions with an objective of more than 0 not usable in real life. Such solutions can
though be used in the process of ﬁnding the best solution.
3.3.6
Constraints
The constraints are set to make the solution feasible, but not necessarily usable in
real life. The constraints ensure that the decision variables take on correct values in
the solution.
Constraint (3.2), (3.3) and (3.4) ensures that the overlap yct is correct. The overlap
is calculated based on the total number of ﬂights assigned to a speciﬁc chute at
a speciﬁc timeslot, oct. The number of overlaps can be calculated mathematically
using the formula:
overlap =
flights−1
X
n=1
n
(3.12)
This formula can only be used when there are two or more ﬂights overlapping,
otherwise, the overlap is zero. Constraint (3.3) and (3.4) are therefore used in each
of these situations where the number of ﬂights in the same spot is either less than
or equal to 1 or greater than 1.
Constraint (3.5) ensures that one legal pattern is used for every ﬂight. The legal
pattern is chosen cuts oﬀthe rest of the possible patterns. This constraint ensures
therefore that a ﬂight only is placed once in the time-chute schedule.
(3.11) is an implication such that the chosen pattern pkc′t′ ∈Pf causes all timeslots
on the correct chutes from the chosen pattern to get the value 1 in the matrix xfct.
This ensures that the ﬂights are placed in the time-chutes schedule based on the
selected pattern pkc′t′.
28
==PAGE:40==
3.4. RESTRICTIONS
Constraint (3.6), (3.7), (3.8), (3.9) and (3.10) deﬁnes that all the variables have to
be within the correct set of numbers.
3.4
Restrictions
As explained earlier in chapter 2 several restrictions for allocating a chute to a ﬂight
exists. All restrictions are summed up in the set of legal patterns, Pf, where a pattern
is described as pkc′t′. Within the legal patterns, a series of diﬀerent combinations of
chutes is found.
An algorithm for creating the patterns have to go through all restrictions and sort
out the patterns that are not allowed. To start out the set of possible patterns is
created from combining the 12 diﬀerent orientations of patterns in ﬁgure 2.4 with
the area plan in ﬁgure 2.3. Then all the patterns not complying with the restriction
on demand, handler and equipment are removed. After this process, each set of
patterns includes only legal patterns for the respective ﬂight. The layout of the
algorithm can be seen in an algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Legal Patterns
/* Determine the set of legal patterns
*/
1 for ∀f ∈F do
2
Pf ←all combinations of chutes within the same neighborhood
3
for ∀pkdc′t′ ∈Pf do
4
remove pkc′t′ if demand is incorrect
5
remove pkc′t′ if handler is incorrect
6
remove pkc′t′ if equipment is insuﬃcient
7 return Pf
3.5
Output
When the model is solved the solution provides a lot of diﬀerent information to
navigate between. All variables can be used to say something diﬀerent about the
solution.
xfct is a binary output that takes the value 1 when a ﬂight is placed on the chute
in the timeslot otherwise it is 0. This can be interpreted directly to the time-chute
schedule.
29
==PAGE:41==
3.5. OUTPUT
oct is an integer telling how many ﬂights are placed on a chute in a timeslot. This
can be summed up and used to check whether or not all ﬂights are placed with the
correct amount of timeslots and chutes.
yct is an integer telling how many overlaps there is on a chute in a timeslot. This
can be summed up and give an overview of how close the time-chute schedule is to
use full in real life where no overlap is acceptable.
kf is the pattern number chosen for a ﬂight. This can be used to see if a pattern
orientation is used more often than others or maybe if some are not being used at all.
c′
f is the ﬁrst chute in the pattern that a ﬂight is using. This variable can be used
to place the squares in the time-chute schedule combined with the chosen pattern,
kf.
30
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
GUIDED LOCAL SEARCH AS A SOLUTION METHOD
In this project, the solution method is a combination of the fast local search (FLS)
and guided local search (GLS). FLS is a hill-climbing method, while GLS makes
it possible to escape local maximum and local minimums. The method was ﬁrst
used in a scheduling problem by Voudouris and Tsang in 1995, [15]. Later on, the
method was used in a packing problem by Faroe, Pisinger and Zachariasen in 2000,
[10]. The method has previously also been used in e.g. network problems, [16]. The
CAP problem is similar to a 2D packing problem. The GLS and FLS will, therefore,
most likely work on the chute allocating problem and is used as a solution method
in this project.
To begin the GLS and FLS regulation process a feasible start solution is needed. This
solution could be found in numerous ways using heuristics. Any solution would be
useful because the GLS and FLS will improve that solution. A start solution should,
therefore, be found fast and with as little eﬀort as possible. To ﬁnd a start solution
for this problem a greedy heuristic (GH) approach will be used.
4.1
Greedy Heuristic (GH)
Heuristic algorithms are a method of approximating a ”good” feasible solution
quickly. In general, they are used when a NP-hard problem needs a feasible solution
fast.
The solution found using a heuristic algorithm will not always be a great
solution, but for this project, it is used to ﬁnd a feasible start solution.
A GH algorithm can be done in many diﬀerent ways, the only ”rule” is that some
restrictions determine which solution piece is placed ﬁrst, second, and so on. The
32
==PAGE:44==
4.1. GREEDY HEURISTIC (GH)
restrictions can vary from problem to problem.
For this project, the ﬁrst solution generated by the GH algorithm determines the ﬁrst
proposition for the chute allocation. The algorithm checks if there is an available
legal pattern for the ﬁrst ﬂight.
Then the next ﬂight is placed using the same
approach if there is room enough for the square without overlapping any other
squares it is placed.
If a square cannot be placed without an overlap, it is not
placed in the ﬁrst round. This goes on until every ﬂight has been considered and
either placed or not. When all ﬂights have been considered the overlap acceptance,
for the next round are increased by one. Now all ﬂights not placed in the ﬁrst round
is considered again with an acceptance of one overlap.If a ﬂight is still not placed
the acceptance overlap will increase for each round. until every ﬂight is placed in
the time-chute schedule.
Since the GH algorithm considers the ﬂights one by one in the order of the ﬂights
from the input ﬁle, diﬀerent sorting of the input ﬁle could have some inﬂuence on
the result and the performance of the GLS and FLS algorithms. Some diﬀerent
strategies of sorting the ﬂights are, therefore, being tested to see if the impact of the
start solution is important to the output in terms of runtime and optimal solution.
Three diﬀerent strategies are being tested: Sorted by STD (earliest to latest), sorted
by the total number of bags (highest to lowest) and random ordering.
4.1.1
GH Strategy: Sort by STD
The ﬁrst GH strategy is sorting the ﬂights by STD. The ﬂight considered ﬁrst will
be the ﬂight with the earliest STD, and then the ﬂight with second earliest STD
etc.. When using this approach, the ﬂights will be placed in the time-chute schedule
from left to right according to the time-chute schedule in ﬁgure 2.5.
This method is not clear when several ﬂights are having the same STD. If two
ﬂights are having the same STD, then it is random which one is considered ﬁrst in
the algorithm. Also, when a later ﬂight has to be assigned 4 chutes and smaller
ﬂights have a STD right before this ﬂight they will occupy the chutes and it could
therefore sometimes be diﬃcult to place larger ﬂights without an overlap if they are
having a STD in a busy period.
4.1.2
GH Strategy: Sort by BAX
The second GH strategy is sorting the ﬂights based on their total amount of baggage.
The ﬁrst ﬂight considered will be the ﬂight with the most baggage, and then the
33
==PAGE:45==
4.2. GUIDED LOCAL SEARCH (GLS)
ﬂight with second most baggage is considered etc.. When using this approach the
”heavy” ﬂights taking a lot of space in the time-chute schedule will be placed ﬁrst,
and then the smaller ﬂights will be placed afterwards.
This method could ensure that the larger squares in the time-chute schedule will be
easier to place without overlap. Because the ﬂights placed when there is much more
space for them. While the smaller ﬂights will ﬁll out the gaps between the bigger
ﬂights. Theoretically, would it be easier to place the smaller demanding ﬂights in
diﬀerent spots with less overlap because they do not need that much space between
already placed ﬂights.
If more than one ﬂight is carrying the same number of bags, they will be considered
in random order. This should not have that much inﬂuence on the results.
4.1.3
GH Strategy: Random
The third GH strategy is nor sorting the ﬂights. The ﬂights are picked in random
order and, therefore, the outcome could get very diﬀerent. The previous two GH
strategies were based on assumptions that the squares would be packed tight, either
vertical or by puzzle the smaller pieces in at last. This strategy does not have any
thoughts in ordering the ﬂights wisely.
When randomizing the ﬂights, it could get some very diﬀerent results to start out.
This could give some interesting results on performance for the following GLS and
FLS algorithms. This method could get very lucky and ﬁnd the optimal solution
before even starting the GLS and FLS algorithms. The solution from GH could get
to a point where no squares can move enough to ﬁnd a better solution in the GLS
and FLS algorithms.
4.2
Guided Local Search (GLS)
GLS is a method guiding the search for a better solution to ﬁnding another local
minimum or maximum, such that it potentially could ﬁnd the global minimum
or maximum and thereby the optimal solution for a problem. When using it e.g.
in combination with the FLS, it tries to force the FLS algorithm to ﬁnd another
better solution by adding penalties to the existing solution. The found solution will,
therefore, seem worse and the FLS algorithm will try ﬁnding another local minimum
or maximum.
34
==PAGE:46==
4.3. FAST LOCAL SEARCH (FLS)
When a start solution is found, using one of the GH strategies, the next step is to
determine penalties based on the solution from the GH. In the GLS algorithm, some
guideline to when a ﬂight is being penalised determined. There are many diﬀerent
ways to approach this, but for this project, the biggest overlap is being penalised to
see if one of the ﬂights could be forced to be placed elsewhere.
For this project, the GLS is set up to penalise the ﬂight with biggest overlap by
multiplying the overlap with a factor. The output from GLS is then used as input
for the FLS algorithm. The penalty factor could potentially have a huge impact on
the solution that would be found next in the FLS. Because of the diﬀerent levels of
restrictions in diﬀerent problems the penalty factor could impact the runtime of the
algorithms and whether or not it is found at all. Therefore it is a great idea to test
out some diﬀerent factors to pinpoint what the best factor is for the speciﬁc problem.
4.3
Fast Local Search (FLS)
FLS is a method used to ﬁnd local minimums and maximums fast. In a scheduling
problem (packing problem) the squares having an overlap will be tried to navigate
a little bit out of the original spot and then checked if the solution is improved. If
the new position gives a better solution, then the square will be placed in the new
position. This process goes on until no squares cannot move anywhere, and a local
minimum is found.
In this project, the FLS algorithm is being twisted a bit because of the restrictions
on where the squares can be placed. This means that the squares could be split
into two on the time-chute schedule. E.g. if a ﬂight has demanded 3 chutes, and
the handler is operating chute 1, 2, 3 and 4, a legal pattern could be [1, 2, 4], this
would give a split. To make it possible for ﬂights to comply with the restrictions,
are all legal patterns considered instead of small movements in the schedule. This
means that if a ﬂight is having an overlap, then the FLS algorithm will try any other
legal position of this particular square, and then the best position will be chosen.
This process goes on until no squares are movable to better positions, and a local
minimum is found.
4.4
GH, GLS and FLS Combined
When combining the three algorithms they support each other and regulates the
solution found to pinpoint the optimal solution. First of the start solution is found
using the GH algorithm, then the GLS algorithm penalises the overlaps, and at last,
35
==PAGE:47==
4.4. GH, GLS AND FLS COMBINED
the FLS algorithm ﬁnds the local minimum. The GLS is then again penalising the
new overlaps and if the same overlaps are still there, they would be penalised even
more. The penalties assigned to a ﬂight on a timespot is not removed at any time.
It could potentially keep increasing and at last, it will be so high that it forces the
square to move somewhere else. The process of ﬁnding the optimal solution using
the three algorithms is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Flow diagram showing the steps to ﬁnd an optimal solution starting from no solution
using GLS as the solution method.
A global minimum or maximum could e.g.
be found on example in ﬁgure 4.2.
The graph includes diﬀerent solutions for the same problem. For this project, the
minimums are an interesting part due to ﬁnding the minimum overlap. The curve
goes up and down, and if the GH ﬁnds a solution near a local minimum, then the FLS
will navigate to ﬁnd the speciﬁc solution in the local minimum in the neighborhood.
But the local minimum is not the optimal solution. The GLS algorithm, therefore,
penalises the solution in the minimum such that the local minimum is being dragged
up to having a bigger objective. Suddenly the local minimum is not a local minimum
and the FLS will search for the next local minimum.
36
==PAGE:48==
4.4. GH, GLS AND FLS COMBINED
Figure 4.2: Example of a solution curve based on 25 diﬀerent solutions to the same problem.
37
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS OF THE SOLUTIONS TO
THE CAP MODEL
In this chapter, the results from the CAP model will be displayed and analyzed. The
model will be tested on all four cases and in diﬀerent combinations of GH strategies,
penalty factors and runtime. This will end in a conclusion on which combination
is best for the allocation of ﬂights. I the following chapters will EBS be introduced
to the solution method and tested to compare what eﬀect the EBS has on the results.
The GH, GLS and FLS algorithms have all been programmed in Julia-code, afterward
a run-ﬁle was created to ensure that they are working together as shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
5.1
Selection of GH Strategy
To test which GH strategy is the best for this problem all three diﬀerent strategies
will be tested in every case. The results found are listed below in table 5.1. The
results state which case is tested, the solution in terms of the overlap of timeslots
and the number of overlaps between ﬂights. Then the runtime for when the best
solution was found and the overall runtime.
In the ﬁrst round where the diﬀerent GH strategies will be tested, the penalty factor
will be set to 2. This means that a ﬂight is better oﬀchoosing an overlap of 2 than
the current overlap with a penalty. This could result in a jump to ﬁnd another local
minimum, which is the purpose of the penalty factor.
By the ﬁrst look of the results in table 5.1 it is diﬃcult to see which GH strategy is
the best. To conclude which is the best a ranking system is used to label each of the
38
==PAGE:50==
5.1. SELECTION OF GH STRATEGY
Case
GH
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
Ranking
20-03-2018
STD
39 (1)
17.37 sec.
10842.91 sec.
3
BAX
0 (0)
239.62 sec.
239.79 sec.
1
Random
14 (1)
8.36 sec.
10858.15 sec.
2
08-08-2018
STD
28 (1)
14.98 sec.
10836.90 sec.
3
BAX
14 (2)
1457.87 sec.
10831.97 sec.
2
Random
2 (1)
359.69 sec.
10856.77 sec.
1
01-10-2018
STD
31 (2)
1808.01 sec.
10980.02 sec.
3
BAX
0 (0)
202.69 sec.
202.89 sec.
1
Random
0 (0)
707.04 sec.
707.24 sec.
2
22-12-2018
STD
34 (2)
811.12 sec.
10824.61 sec.
2
BAX
28 (2)
1812.49 sec.
10881.91 sec.
1
Random
67 (4)
260.55 sec.
10865.08 sec.
3
Table 5.1: Solutions from running the CAP model using diﬀerent GH strategies.
solutions in each category (GH strategy). Each case gets assigned a ranking from
one to three where one is the best and three is the worst. If the solutions are the
same then the runtime for the solution is the tiebreaker. In the end, all rankings
are merged and give the overall ranking where the GH strategy with the smallest
number is labeled the best GH strategy. The ranking can be seen in the last column
of table 5.1. When the rankings are added together they get their total rankings of:
STD:
3 + 3 + 3 + 2 = 11
BAX:
1 + 2 + 1 + 1 = 5
Random: 2 + 1 + 2 + 3 = 8
It is clear that the best GH strategy is to sort the ﬂights by the number of baggage
that they have to carry. This strategy was the best in all cases except 08-08-2018
where the random order of the ﬂights was the best. This shows that a better solution
to this case is possible, although it is not the optimal solution.
The runtime limit was set for 3 hours for all runs. After 3 hours the algorithms
were stopped since the runtime then would be unrealistic for the purpose of ﬁnding
some good results in a reasonable time. This algorithm should be able to run fast
and allocate chutes to ﬂights if an extra ﬂight is suddenly added. Therefore is it
important that the runtime is appropriate. The 12 runs of 3 hours to test the GH
strategies gave results which can be divided into two groups. The ﬁrst group is
39
==PAGE:51==
5.1. SELECTION OF GH STRATEGY
all runs where the optimal zero-solution was not found. Here is their best solution
found within the ﬁrst 35 minutes. This means that for the last more than 2 hours
no better solution was found. The second group is where the zero-solution is found.
Here are the best solutions found within 15 minutes. The runtime is cut oﬀsince
the best possible solution is already found.
When looking at the solutions, with no zero-solution found, there is a pattern of
fast regulating in the beginning and then after 45 minutes, the algorithms start
circulating around the same results. An example of this can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1,
which looks like the other solution was no optimal zero solution was found. See the
rest of the ﬁgures with the development of the solution in the appendix A. It shows
that the solutions found were very diﬀerent in the ﬁrst couple of iterations, but after
2500 seconds it seems that the solutions go into a loop where the solution is not
improved.
Figure 5.1: The solution development for each iteration in case 01-10-2018 using STD as GH
strategy.
In the tests where the optimal zero-solution was found, the solutions were found
fairly quick and in under 10 iterations. An example of this can be seen in ﬁgure
5.2 while all the rest of the similar solution developments can be seen in appendix
A. The strategy where the ﬂight inputs are sorted by the number of bags is ﬁnding
the zero-solution in two cases while the random GH strategy only ﬁnds it in one of
these cases. The third GH strategy, STD, does not ﬁnd the optimal zero-solution in
any of the cases. Which is why the STD strategy places last in the scoring.
40
==PAGE:52==
5.1. SELECTION OF GH STRATEGY
Figure 5.2: The solution development for each iteration in case 01-10-2018 using BAX as GH
strategy.
Though the zero-solutions are not found in all cases the results are not bad. Starting
from case 22-12-2018, which seems to have the worst results, it only has an overlap
of 67 timeslots throughout a day which is equivalent to 34,560 timeslots. This means
that it only overlaps for about 0.2% of the timeslots, which is nearly nothing. Of
cause there should be enough space for all ﬂights but it gives a good layout to
allocate chutes between the ﬂights.
Case 08-08-2018 and 22-12-2018 have not found the optimal solution in any of the
used GH strategies, which is preferred. To test if an optimal solution exists, the last
case, which gave the overall weakest results, would be tested using the random GH
strategy numerous times. After 25 runs, one of the solutions found was an optimal
solution with no overlap. This means the optimal solution for this case exists, but
it seems this solution approach using GH, GLS and FLS have trouble ﬁnding the
solution within a realistic runtime. All 25 solutions are displayed in ﬁgure 5.3.
All tests regarding the GH strategy leads to the conclusion that the sorted bags is
the best approach. This strategy gives the overall fastest and best result, though
the random strategy could give some better results but with some uncertainty in
runtime because of multiple runs.
41
==PAGE:53==
5.2. THE PENALTIES IMPACT ON SOLUTION
Figure 5.3: 25 solutions using GH strategy randomizing the input order of ﬂights. The solutions
are shown as points as overlapping timeslots and runtime for ﬁnding the solution.
5.2
The Penalties Impact on Solution
The penalty factor has in the previous runs been set to 2 to start. In this section,
some diﬀerent penalty factors will be tested.
The penalty factor is used in the GLS algorithm and is a factor multiplied with the
current overlaps. A normal overlap has the penalty 1, but if the overlap is being
detected to the worst overlap, then the penalty factor will be multiplied. This causes
the two ﬂights involved in the worst overlap to move in the schedule and thereby
force the FLS to ﬁnd another local minimum solution.
The penalty factors impact on the solution is tested the same way as for the GH
strategy in the previous section. The test uses the same case and the same GH
strategy in all runs. The only variable in the runs is the penalty. For the test case,
08-08-2018 is used with the best detected GH strategy, sorted by the number of
bags. The runtime limit is set to 35 minutes because previously it has been shown
that any extra time is not needed. The results are listed in table 5.2.
The tests show that the previously used penalty factor of 2 results in the best solution
along with the penalty factors 1.5 and 1.75. The only diﬀerence is that they ﬁnd
the solution a bit slower than when using penalty factor 2. When the penalty factor
is set to a factor outside this scope it gives a solution twice as high. Further on only
the penalty factor of 2.0 will be used.
42
==PAGE:54==
5.2. THE PENALTIES IMPACT ON SOLUTION
Case
Penalty
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
08-08-2018
1.01
27 (1)
13.17 sec.
2156.90 sec.
1.25
27 (1)
23.49 sec.
2147.56 sec.
1.5
14 (2)
1478.80 sec.
2154.69 sec.
1.75
14 (2)
1481.12 sec.
2154.36 sec.
2.0
14 (2)
1464.60 sec.
2129.65 sec.
2.25
27 (1)
14.78 sec.
2153.38 sec.
2.5
27 (1)
13.93 sec.
2124.08 sec.
5.0
27 (1)
14.16 sec.
2149.36 sec.
10.0
27 (1)
13.59 sec.
2140.59 sec.
25.0
27 (1)
14.75 sec.
2125.26 sec.
Table 5.2: Solutions for case 08-08-2018 using diﬀerent penalties.
The results found in this chapter show that for the CAP model the best stable
solution is found using the sorted by bags strategy in the GH algorithm. Afterwards
is the best penalty factor in the GLS algorithm found to be 2. The overall GH, GLS
and FLS ﬁnd some good results that are very useful for allocating chutes. A good
solution is found within 15 minutes. Of cause a zero-solution and a smaller runtime
are preferable and that is why the EBS is tried to be incorporated as a buﬀer in the
following chapters, to see if a faster runtime and better solutions are reachable.
43
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
SOLUTION METHOD WITH EARLY BAGGAGE
STORAGE AS A BUFFER
This chapter goes through the addition of EBS to the previously used solution
method of GH, GLS and FLS. Afterwards, this new solution method will be tested.
EBS is used to store all the early arriving bags at the airport. In BF3 there are
14 diﬀerent convoys with diﬀerent capacities, see section 2.4 for detailed information.
To incorporate the opportunity to store bags before their chutes open a new algorithm
will be necessary. This new EBS algorithm is used after the FLS. It checks if the
overlaps in the local minimum found in FLS is possible to edit such that the ﬂights
still have enough time for loading. This means that there is an addition to the
ﬂow diagram, which was used previously. The new ﬂow diagram including the EBS
algorithm can be seen in ﬁgure 6.1. The EBS algorithm changes the overlaps sent
to the GLS algorithm, such that the allowed overlaps due not get a penalty added
in the GLS.
Figure 6.1: Flow diagram showing the steps to ﬁnd an optimal solution starting from no solution
using GLS with EBS as a solution method.
44
==PAGE:56==
6.1. OVERLAP SCENARIOS
In the EBS algorithm, some diﬀerent checks are made to ensure that the overlap
is not too comprehensive to be allowed. This means that the overlaps have to be
detected, and based on the case the overlap is checking if the opening time is enough
and if there is space enough on the EBS convoys for the extra baggage that needs
to be stored.
The EBS algorithm speeds up the process of ﬁnding a better solution because it
gives some slack to the restrictions. It means that some of the solutions found in
FLS would get better because of the EBS and thereby ﬁnd a better solution faster
than in the previous tests.
6.1
Overlap Scenarios
Diﬀerent cases of overlaps could occur in the time-chute schedule, these are shown
in ﬁgure 6.2. The ﬁrst four cases showed diﬀerent scenarios with an overlap between
two ﬂights. These ﬂights are named depending on their STD. The ﬂight with the
latest STD is set as ﬂight 2, while the other one is named ﬂight 1. The opening
time for a ﬂight can only be changed from the beginning of the opening time. This
means that the ﬁrst example would like to change the start of the opening time
to the same as the STD. This cannot work because there need to be at least 60
minutes of opening time, as explained in section 2.4. In the other three scenarios
with overlap between two ﬂights, the light blue part of the ﬂight is cut oﬀﬂight
2’s opening time. If there is 60 minutes or more opening time left for ﬂight 2 then
the second criteria have to be checked. The second criteria whether there is room
enough on the EBS convoys for the extra amount of baggage or not.
Figure 6.2: Diﬀerent scenarios with overlaps between two or three ﬂights seen in a time-chute
schedule.
45
==PAGE:57==
6.2. CRITERIA FOR LEGAL OVERLAP
In ﬁgure 6.2 there is showed 2 cases where three ﬂights are involved in an overlap.
These are dealt with in pairs but the same way as the scenarios with two ﬂights
involved. For the ﬁrst scenario, the same ﬂight is being cut in opening time (light
blue area) because of the overlap between the ﬁrst pair. Then the small darker
blue area is cut oﬀbecause of the overlap from the second pair. If the second pairs
overlap is included in the ﬁrst pairs legal and accepted overlap then the second pairs
overlap would already be accepted.
In the second scenario with three ﬂights, the ﬁrst pair being dealt with as if there
were like scenario 2 and the second pair is dealt with the same way. The diﬀerence
is that the ﬂight getting marked as ﬂight 2 in the ﬁrst pair is ﬂight 1 in the second
pair. Other than that are they not interfering with each other pairwise.
6.2
Criteria for Legal Overlap
As described before are there two criteria that the overlap have to comply to be
legal, minimum 60 minutes opening time and capacity enough on the EBS convoys
to store the extra amount of early bags. The EBS convoys system is already in
use before the EBS algorithm starts. Therefore is the available space on the EBS
convoys varying. In ﬁgure 6.3, 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6 the amount on baggage stored on
the EBS convoys is showed for each case.
Figure 6.3:
Amount of baggage on the EBS
convoys in case 20-03-2018.
Figure 6.4:
Amount of baggage on the EBS
convoys in case 08-08-2018.
The amount of baggage is found using the attendance proﬁle. It is already known
how much baggage is going on each ﬂight, but in addition to that, a ﬁle is predicting
the arrival of baggage depending on earlier experience applicable. The attendance
proﬁle is stated in percentage and is therefore usable for all ﬂights.
It gives a
46
==PAGE:58==
6.2. CRITERIA FOR LEGAL OVERLAP
Figure 6.5:
Amount of baggage on the EBS
convoys in case 01-10-2018.
Figure 6.6:
Amount of baggage on the EBS
convoys in case 22-12-2018.
coeﬃcient that can be multiplied with the expected amount of bags and thereby
calculate the number of bags arriving at a certain timeslot before STD.
The baggage for one ﬂight can arrive at the airport in two diﬀerent ways. It can
be checked-in or it can be transferring from another ﬂight. As described earlier
in section 3.1.3 all bags can be divided into 6 categories based on whether they
are checked-in or transfer and local, transfer or priority at the destination. The
categories can be gathered such that it is held in two categories, local check-in
and transferring bags. This is important when it comes to the coeﬃcient from the
attendance proﬁle, which is split into one for check-in bags and one for transferring
bags.
Take for instance a ﬂight with 67 check-in bags and 40 transferring bags.
The
check-in bags would be converted into the number of bags arriving 365 minutes before
STD, 360 minutes before STD etc. (5 minutes intervals). While the transferring
bags will be converted into bags arriving 900 minutes before STD, 270 minutes
before STD, 260 minutes before STD etc. (10 minutes intervals). This is done for
all ﬂights and then they are added for each timeslot. The bags are leaving the EBS
convoys when their chute opens and is therefore removed from the total number of
bags on the EBS convoys in the timeslot that it opens. This means that the number
of bags on the EBS convoys is constantly changing, see ﬁgure 6.3 to 6.6.
It can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3 to 6.6 that there is a lot of extra room up til the maximum
capacity of 1600 bags. The EBS convoys can, therefore, be used as a buﬀer for when
the cuts in opening hours are complying with the limit of 60 minutes.
47
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS OF THE SOLUTION
METHOD WITH EBS
This chapter will go through the results from running the CAP model with a solution
method including the EBS as a buﬀer. GH, GLS, FLS and EBS is programmed in
Julia-code. To run the algorithms proper a run-ﬁle was created to ensure that they
are working together as shown in ﬁgure 6.1. No ﬁles from the previous runs have
been changed only a new run-ﬁle and the EBS algorithm is new.
7.1
Selection of GH Strategy
The GH strategy needs to be tested again with the EBS included in the solution
method. The results from diﬀerent start inputs could potentially make it easier
to create acceptable overlaps and thereby a much faster runtime. A medium good
solution found in the previous tests could potentially be the zero-solution in this
test. The penalty factor would maybe not be added to the same ﬂights and timeslot
positions because the overlap might be acceptable.
The solution search could,
therefore, be very diﬀerent.
The tests for the GH strategy is being done using the same approach as earlier with
a runtime limit of 3 hours and the penalty factor 2.0. In this way, the solutions
can be compared directly, especially for the STD and BAX strategy. The solutions
from solving the case with the EBS included are listed in table 7.1.
The table
contains information about the case, GH strategy, solution (both timeslots overlaps
and ﬂights overlapping), runtime for a solution and the overall runtime. Apart from
this is their solution development saved in graphs which can be seen in appendix C.
48
==PAGE:60==
7.1. SELECTION OF GH STRATEGY
Case
GH
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
Ranking
20-03-2018
STD
0 (0)
47.20 sec.
47.36 sec.
2
BAX
0 (0)
211.49 sec.
211.68 sec.
3
Random
0 (0)
34.77 sec.
34.93 sec.
1
08-08-2018
STD
0 (0)
48.15 sec.
48.32 sec.
1
BAX
0 (0)
126.39 sec.
126.58 sec.
2
Random
0 (0)
147.88 sec.
148.07 sec.
3
01-10-2018
STD
25 (2)
844.05 sec.
10859.57 sec.
3
BAX
0 (0)
215.03 sec.
215.24 sec.
2
Random
0 (0)
202.38 sec.
202.60 sec.
1
22-12-2018
STD
34 (2)
814.95 sec.
10831.59 sec.
3
BAX
28 (2)
1799.35 sec.
10884.46 sec.
2
Random
21 (3)
2087.12 sec.
10866.15 sec.
1
Table 7.1: Solutions from running the CAP model with EBS using diﬀerent GH strategies.
All solutions get rankings to determine which GH strategy is the best. The overlap
of timeslots is the deciding factor and the runtime is a tiebreaker. This gives the
following ranking for each of the strategies:
STD:
2 + 1 + 3 + 3 = 9
BAX:
3 + 2 + 2 + 2 = 9
Random: 1 + 3 + 1 + 1 = 6
The ranking system ﬁnds that when the input is randomized, then the best solutions
are found the quickest. The results are overall much better than in the previous
tests. Some early FLS local minimum solutions with overlaps that are accepted and
therefore is a zero-solution found fairly quickly and with fewer iterations. It seems
though that the 22-12-2018 case still is the trickiest to solve.
The Random GH is tested for case 22-12-2018 25 times to see if the zero-solution is
found faster and more frequently than for the tests without the EBS. The solutions
from the 25 tests can be seen in ﬁgure 7.1. The tests gave one zero-solution and
the solution was found because the GH algorithm placed all ﬂights with no overlaps
from start. This means that the EBS algorithm did not have a part in this great
result.
49
==PAGE:61==
7.2. COMPARISON OF SOLUTION METHODS
Figure 7.1: 25 solutions using GH strategy randomizing the input order of ﬂights with EBS. The
solutions is shown as points as overlapping timeslots and runtime for ﬁnding the solution.
All 25 solutions have one thing in common that their overlaps in the diﬀerent local
minimums do not get accepted as legal overlaps either due to lack of time or capacity
on the EBS convoys. The solution search is therefore not changed from the tests
without the EBS. The same goes for the other GH strategies in case 22-12-2018
which gives the same results and their solution development curves are looking very
similar (see appendix A and C).
7.2
Comparison of Solution Methods
Now two solution methods have been tested on the same cases. The solution methods
are directly comparable because they have the same inputs and penalty factor.
It is very clear that with the use of EBS the solution is found much faster and it is
better as well for the ﬁrst three cases. In case 22-12-2018 there is no diﬀerence in
using the two methods. Both in terms of testing the best GH strategy and when the
25 random tests are run they give the same spread of solutions. The EBS algorithm
slows down the process of ﬁnding the best solution. It has to run the EBS algorithm,
although it does not change anything, because the overlaps are not accepted.
Overall is the method including the EBS as a buﬀer giving the best results in terms
of overlap and runtime. This method is therefore used together with the randomizing
50
==PAGE:62==
7.2. COMPARISON OF SOLUTION METHODS
GH strategy further on when an expansion is tested out to see what impact it could
have on the solution.
51
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8
EXPANSION PERFORMANCE
In this chapter diﬀerent expansions for BF3 will be challenged to see the eﬀects on
the capacity. First of it will be tested on case 22-12-2018 which there have been
some diﬃculties to ﬁnd the optimal zero-solution for. The method used for these
tests will be the GH, GLS, FLS and EBS which earlier was showed to be the most
eﬀective. After testing the already tested case 22-12-2018, will a new case be tested
as well. The new case consists of 500 ﬂights to see if some simple expansions could
make up for the lack in capacity.
The easiest possibilities to increase the capacity of the baggage facility are by
increasing the number of chutes, the EBS convoy systems capacity or tighten the
opening time. If there are more chutes then there is more room for extra ﬂights on
the chute axis. If there is a higher capacity in the EBS then the opening time could
be less than it is today. If the opening time is tightened then there would be room
for more ﬂights on the time axis.
To expand the number of chutes is some of the ”Not in use” chutes from the map on
ﬁgure 2.3 switch out with ”Flex” instead such that all handlers can use to extension.
When adding more possible patterns to the legal pattern set, Pf, it would potentially
make room for previously overlapping ﬂights to move in a non overlapping position
and thereby ﬁnd a zero-solution in less iterations.
8.1
Results of Expansion with Case 22-12-2018
First of is it tested whether an increase in EBS capacity or chutes is having the
highest impact on the solution. On the current EBS convoys is the average capacity
52
==PAGE:64==
8.1. RESULTS OF EXPANSION WITH CASE 22-12-2018
115 bags. Therefore will the EBS capacity be raised with 115 bags for each run.
When looking at the map in ﬁgure 2.3 is chute 149 giving the most extra patterns
added to the legal patterns set, Pf. Afterward is chute 1-4 added separately. The
results from all runs can be seen in table 8.1.
+EBS
+Chutes
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
115
0
0 (0)
721.55 sec.
721.69 sec.
230
0
3 (1)
579.98 sec.
2511.26 sec.
345
0
3 (1)
1784.33 sec.
2010.83 sec.
460
0
0 (0)
161.50 sec.
161.66 sec.
0
[49]
43 (4)
822.70 sec.
2535.70 sec.
0
[49,4]
14 (1)
1737.31 sec.
2536.19 sec.
0
[49,4,3]
8 (1)
4.93 sec.
2681.02 sec.
0
[49,4,3,2]
21 (2)
236.07 sec.
2551.64 sec.
0
[49,4,3,2,1]
10 (2)
15.29 sec.
2524.22 sec.
Table 8.1: Solutions from running case 22-12-2018 with diﬀerent expansion of EBS and chutes
separately.
The results from table 8.1 shows that when adding extra chutes the results is not
improving. The results from increasing the capacity on the EBS is showing better
results than the previous tests. Case 22-12-2018 is not having that many ﬂights
and therefore adding extra chutes will not improve the results. But if the existing
ﬂights can be allowed to cut of some opening time and then place the bags on
the EBS convoys instead then in the solution is improved. This is because of the
concentration in ﬂights is not spread out trough the day, it is very concentrated in
the middle of the day as showed earlier.
To see if there is a beneﬁt in increasing both EBS capacity and number of chutes
is case 22-12-2018 tested again by crisscrossing the factors from the previous run in
table 8.1. The new results is listed in table 8.2.
The results shows again that there are big improvements when increasing the EBS
capacity. But this might not be the solution to all problems. If the case includes
more ﬂights and was challenged to get overlaps accepted because of the lack in time
for loading, then extra chutes might be the solution. And while it seems that the
extra chutes does not have an impact on the solution in case 22-12-2018 it might be
opposite in a diﬀerent case.
53
==PAGE:65==
8.2. CASE WITH 500 FLIGHTS
+EBS
+Chutes
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
115
[49]
26 (1)
2138.56 sec.
2576.59 sec.
115
[49,4]
36 (2)
13.34 sec.
2524.96 sec.
115
[49,4,3]
0 (0)
322.19 sec.
322.34 sec.
115
[49,4,3,2]
0 (0)
2.18 sec.
6.83 sec.
115
[49,4,3,2,1]
0 (0)
2.16 sec.
6.74 sec.
230
[49]
0 (0)
1.99 sec.
6.62 sec.
230
[49,4]
0 (0)
2.13 sec.
6.77 sec.
230
[49,4,3]
41 (2)
28.02 sec.
2549.54 sec.
230
[49,4,3,2]
13 (1)
53.46 sec.
2515.17 sec.
230
[49,4,3,2,1]
20 (2)
7.69 sec.
2579.58 sec.
345
[49]
28 (1)
2219.29 sec.
2539.75 sec.
345
[49,4]
0 (0)
1585.08 sec.
1585.22 sec.
345
[49,4,3]
25 (1)
9.93 sec.
2539.93 sec.
345
[49,4,3,2]
0 (0)
1203.67 sec.
1203.81 sec.
345
[49,4,3,2,1]
40 (2)
14.97 sec.
2545.71 sec.
460
[49]
0 (0)
39.78 sec.
39.91 sec.
460
[49,4]
0 (0)
38.28 sec.
38.41 sec.
460
[49,4,3]
0 (0)
35.78 sec.
35.91 sec.
460
[49,4,3,2]
0 (0)
2.14 sec.
6.95 sec.
460
[49,4,3,2,1]
0 (0)
4.03 sec.
9.48 sec.
Table 8.2: Solutions based on diﬀerent EBS capacity and extra ﬂex chutes.
8.2
Case with 500 Flights
For a new case is it crucial that it is challenged on the chutes to see if extra chutes can
improve a solution or if it have to be in collaboration with increase of EBS capacity
as well. Earlier we had case 20-03-2018 and 08-08-2018 which had many ﬂights
spread out evenly through out the day at least in comparison with case 22-12-2018.
Therefore is these two cases now combined into one new case. Previously they both
have been solved to optimality because a zero-solution was found. Especially easy
after including EBS in the method. These two cases includes almost 700 ﬂights
which is a huge increase. Therefore is all randomised and cut down to 500 ﬂights.
In ﬁgure 8.1 can the load on the EBS convoy system be seen for the new case.
In ﬁgure 8.1 it can be seen that the curve exceeds the capacity of 1600 bags without
54
==PAGE:66==
8.2. CASE WITH 500 FLIGHTS
Figure 8.1: Amount of baggage on the EBS convoys the case with 500 ﬂights.
cutting in the opening time. This does not mean that the algorithm fails, there just
cannot get any new bags added to the EBS in these periods. This can be dealt with
by extending the opening hours when possible such that some chutes opens earlier
than anticipated and thereby remove some of the bags from the EBS earlier.
A basic solution without adding any expansion to the model is set to run for 3 hours
with switching GH strategy to ﬁnd the result basis that needs improvement. The
results is listed in table 8.3.
Case
GH
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
500 Flights
STD
207 (17)
6982.63 sec.
11673.11 sec.
BAX
197 (9)
32.31 sec.
12403.28 sec
Random
214 (16)
1317.33 sec.
11450.72 sec.
Table 8.3: Solutions from running the new input set with 500 ﬂights using diﬀerent GH strategies.
The results in table 8.3 is quite high compared to any of the other cases tested in
this project, but actually are they not that bad. The overlap from the random GH
is only overlapping 0.6 % of the time and this is spread out on 3.2 % of the ﬂights.
The results is found using few iterations which can be seen in the solution evolution
curves from appendix D.
55
==PAGE:67==
8.3. RESULTS OF EXPANSION WITH NEW CASE
8.3
Results of Expansion with New Case
This new case with 500 ﬂights is deﬁnitely diﬀerent from case 22-12-2018.
The
distribution of bags trough out the day is more constant for this new case. It will
now be tested whether or not an increase in EBS capacity or number of chutes will
improve the solution the most. The solutions is found using the same approach as
for case 22-12-2018 where the random GH strategy is used and the same expansions
is tested. The results can be seen in table 8.4.
+EBS
+Chutes
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
115
0
267 (19)
848.15 sec.
3170.27 sec.
230
0
261 (29)
1930.06 sec.
3437.02 sec.
345
0
302 (23)
3463.91 sec.
3464.16 sec.
460
0
274 (23)
445.23 sec.
3134.05 sec.
0
[49]
287 (20)
1347.99 sec.
2983.94 sec.
0
[49,4]
178 (17)
747.12 sec.
3226.75 sec.
0
[49,4,3]
167 (19)
1556.44 sec.
3023.77 sec.
0
[49,4,3,2]
160 (11)
35.03 sec.
3142.81 sec.
0
[49,4,3,2,1]
108 (7)
1248.52 sec.
2904.88 sec.
Table 8.4: Solutions from running the new case with 500 ﬂights with diﬀerent levels of expansion
of EBS and chutes separately.
The solutions in table 8.4 shows that for this case is it the increase in number of
chutes that improves the solution the most. While the increase in EBS capacity not
improves the solution at all. The runtime limit was set to 40 minutes, but since each
iteration took such a long time the runtime exceeded 50 minutes just because the
last iteration had to ﬁnish. Because all iterations took such a long time it meant
that the solution search had to get very lucky from the beginning to start in a spot
not far from the global minimum.
To see if there is a beneﬁt in increasing both EBS capacity and number of chutes is
the case with 500 ﬂights tested again by crisscrossing the factors from the previous
run in table 8.4. The new results is listed in table 8.5.
56
==PAGE:68==
8.3. RESULTS OF EXPANSION WITH NEW CASE
+EBS
+Chutes
Solution
Solution time
Overall time
Ranking
115
[49]
269 (24)
48.07 sec.
3361.62 sec.
4
230
[49]
209 (28)
2986.60 sec.
3598.75 sec.
1
345
[49]
223 (23)
631.03 sec.
3852.13 sec.
2
460
[49]
259 (23)
812.56 sec.
3441.32 sec.
3
115
[49,4]
185 (13)
1922.35 sec.
2751.08 sec.
2
230
[49,4]
224 (15)
29.33 sec.
3197.53 sec.
4
345
[49,4]
220 (17)
731.49 sec.
2995.52 sec.
3
460
[49,4]
165 (10)
1665.91 sec.
3118.74 sec.
1
115
[49,4,3]
184 (11)
405.97 sec.
3033.69 sec.
1
230
[49,4,3]
234 (17)
555.19 sec.
3318.20 sec.
4
345
[49,4,3]
209 (18)
2941.15 sec.
3496.16 sec.
3
460
[49,4,3]
190 (17)
410.15 sec.
3300.98 sec.
2
115
[49,4,3,2]
103 (10)
25.10 sec.
2898.40 sec.
2
230
[49,4,3,2]
99 (7)
31.67 sec.
2957.91 sec.
1
345
[49,4,3,2]
142 (9)
35.61 sec.
2892.79 sec.
3
460
[49,4,3,2]
238 (14)
2727.33 sec.
3163.37 sec.
4
115
[49,4,3,2,1]
134 (14)
812.73 sec.
3004.92 sec.
3
230
[49,4,3,2,1]
142 (9)
33.86 sec.
2958.23 sec.
4
345
[49,4,3,2,1]
99 (7)
610.99 sec.
2896.55 sec.
1
460
[49,4,3,2,1]
129 (12)
395.25 sec.
3186.36 sec.
2
Table 8.5: Solutions based on diﬀerent EBS capacity and extra ﬂex chutes in the case with 500
ﬂights.
When looking at the solutions in table 8.5 there is no clear signs of what works and
what does not. Therefore is a ranking system used to see if any pattern of greater
solutions exists. Since it have been shown that the increase in chutes is giving the
best results it is ranked in each category of extra chutes assigned. When adding the
rankings each increase of EBS capacity have a total ranking of:
115: 4 + 2 + 1 + 2 + 3 = 12
230: 1 + 4 + 4 + 1 + 4 = 14
345: 2 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 1 = 12
460: 3 + 1 + 2 + 4 + 2 = 12
57
==PAGE:69==
8.3. RESULTS OF EXPANSION WITH NEW CASE
There is no clear result telling that the EBS capacity expansion have any part of
improving the solution. Therefore is it best for this type of case, where the ﬂights
are distributed evenly throughout the day, to increase the number of chutes.
Just to check if the zero-solution can be found to this new case with 500 ﬂights is an
extra test made. Here is the EBS capacity doubled and all chutes labeled as ”Not in
use” is changed to ﬂex. This gave the zero-solution within 7 minutes. The solution
evolution curve can be seen in ﬁgure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: Solution evolution for the run of 500 ﬂights with 1600 extra EBS capacity and all
chutes in use.
Figure 8.2 shows that after 7 iterations is the zero-solution found. This is because
of the extra room for the smaller ﬂights. The extra chutes makes room enough on
the EBS convoys to store any extra bags as well. The solution method is clearly
working but when the input causes the time-chute schedule to be tightened too much
the method struggles to improve the solution highly. This can be seen in ﬁgure 8.3
which shows the evolution of the solution search when the current layout of BF3 is
used.
58
==PAGE:70==
8.3. RESULTS OF EXPANSION WITH NEW CASE
Figure 8.3: Solution evolution for the run of 500 ﬂights using the Ranndom GH strategy.
59
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 9
CONCLUSION
This chapter wraps up the conclusions and results found trough out this project.
The interplay between the greedy heuristic guided local search and fast local search
is shown to be a good method for solving the chute allocation problem. After tuning
the algorithm on greedy heuristic strategy and penalty factor it gave some very useful
and quick results.
Some diﬀerent greedy heuristic strategies were tested and the randomising (no
ordering) was found to be the overall best approach.
When the penalty factor
was tested it showed that in a span from 1.5 to 2.0 it gave the best results. While
if the penalty factor was outside this scope the solution was worsened. The penalty
factor was set to 2.0 because it made it possible for the ﬂights to be penalised quickly
enough to ﬁnd another local minimum in the FLS algorithm, but still not too fast
so that some local minimums were overlooked.
After adding the early baggage storage as a possible buﬀer, the results showed
clear improvements in terms of runtime and solution. The new method had some
diﬃculties with improvement in one of the more extreme cases.
But for all the
regular cases an optimal solution was found in no time even though the early baggage
storage algorithm slowed down the runtime of each iteration. The algorithms have
for this entire project been used on a data set for one day. This could easily be
scaled down and thereby bring down the runtime if a decision needed to be made
quicker, or if a smaller timespan is known in advance.
For know is the current setup and capacity big enough to handle the baggage amount.
But in the future statistics shows that it will increase. To ﬁnd the smartest way to
60
==PAGE:72==
overcome such an increase a new test case was composed with 500 ﬂights (increase
of about 100 ﬂights compared with today). The results showed that the algorithm
could ﬁnd a solution with overlap 0.6% of the timespots. There would have too
many alterations to the solution to make it work in practice.
Some minor additions to the baggage facility were found to depend on the type
of case that needed to be handled. When a case with less ﬂights but with higher
average chute demand and opening time more chutes available improved the solution
the most. While if it is a case where the baggage is distributed evenly throughout
the day an increase in baggage storage gave the best improvements. Therefore to
conclude further on this question, some marked analysing have to be made. The
future increase in ﬂights is either distributed evenly or concentrated in speciﬁc time
periods of the day. And this indicates where to expand to improve the capacity the
most.
For further research of this topic could it be interesting to use e.g. column generation
on the same cases to see if the solution method is better or worse.
Also the
distribution of chutes to speciﬁc handlers could be tested to see if a better layout was
possible. If all chutes where set to ﬂex it would give some mayor advantages because
of the increase in possible legal patterns. And if at the same time the opening time
for all chutes were set so low, that the bags where arriving at the chutes in groups
as suggested in [14]. Then some of the disadvantages for the handlers would be
removed.
61
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] IATA and SOIF.
Future of the Airline Industry 2035.
International Air
Transport Association, 2018.
[2] ACI Europe and its membership in association with Exambela Consulting. An
Outlook for Europe’s Airports - Facing the Challenges of the 21st Century. ACI
Europe, 2010.
[3] European Union SESAR and Eurocontrol.
European ATM Master Plan.
SESAR, 2015.
[4] Saleh Mumayiz Norman J. Ashford and Paul H. Wright. Airport Engineering
- Planning, Design, and Development of 21st Century Airports. John Wiley
Sons, 4. edition, 2011.
[5] SITA. Baggage report 2018. [Online; accessed 2019-09-12].
[6] Amedeo Odoni Peter Belobaba, Cynthia Barnhart. The Global Airline Industry.
John Wiley Sons, 2. edition, 2016.
[7] Ali Al-Humairi Najah Al-Mhanna Hayat El Asri, Ali Fakhrulddin. Aircraft
ground handling operations:
A literary review.
4. October 2018, [Online;
accessed 2019-09-14].
[8] Saeid Nahavandi Michael Johnstone, Doug Creighton.
Simulation-based
baggage handling system merge analysis. April 2015.
[9] Hans Hellendoorn Yashar Zeinaly, Bart De Schutter. An mpc scheme for routing
problem in baggage handling systems: A linear programming approach. April
2013, [Online; accessed 2019-12-13].
62
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Martin Zachariasen Oluf Faroe, David Pisinger. Guided local search for the
three-dimensional bin-packing problem.
INFORMS Journal on Computing
15(3):267–283, 2003.
[11] Christian Artigues Markus Frey, Rainer Kolisch.
Column generation for
outbound baggage handling at airports. June 2017.
[12] CPH Airport.
Traﬃc statistics.
https://www.cph.dk/en/about-cph/
investor/traffic-statistics, [Online; accessed 2019-08-20].
[13] ACI Europe. Aci europe statistics. https://www.aci-europe.org/, [Online;
accessed 2019-08-22].
[14] David Pisinger and Samuel´ı Hjøllum Rude. Optimizing baggage handling using
push / pull and advanced algorithms. 2019.
[15] C. Tsang, E.P.K. Voudouris. Fast local search and guided local search and their
application to british telecom’s workforce scheduling problem. March 1997.
[16] Ian D.Henning Gilberto Flores Lucio, Martin J. Reed. Guided local search as
a network planning algorithm that incorporates uncertain traﬃc demands. 8.
August 2007, [Online; accessed 2020-01-17].
63
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
GH STRATEGY TEST RESULTS
A.1
Case 20-03-2018
64
==PAGE:76==
A.2. CASE 08-08-2018
A.2
Case 08-08-2018
65
==PAGE:77==
A.3. CASE 01-10-2018
A.3
Case 01-10-2018
66
==PAGE:78==
A.4. CASE 22-12-2018
A.4
Case 22-12-2018
67
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
PENALTY TEST RESULTS
68
==PAGE:80==
69
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
GH STRATEGY WITH EBS TEST RESULTS
C.1
Case 20-03-2018
70
==PAGE:82==
C.2. CASE 08-08-2018
C.2
Case 08-08-2018
71
==PAGE:83==
C.3. CASE 01-10-2018
C.3
Case 01-10-2018
72
==PAGE:84==
C.4. CASE 22-12-2018
C.4
Case 22-12-2018
73
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX D
GH STRATEGY WITH EBS TEST RESULTS FOR 500
FLIGHTS
74
