==PAGE:1==
Quantifying Absolute Sustainability of Energy
Systems to Support Assessment of UN
Sustainable Development Goal 7
February 2, 2020
Technical University of Denmark
Author:
Caroline Herlev Gebara,
s144195
Supervisor:
Alexis Laurent,
Associate Professor
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was carried out at the Technical University of Denmark, division of Sustainability
in the research group Quantitative Sustainability Assessment (QSA) under the supervision of Asso-
ciate Professor Alexis Laurent. The thesis was prepared as part of the candidacy for graduating in
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy Engineering. The thesis was written to match the structure
of a scientiﬁc paper and therefore the main report is kept in a concise format, while the supporting
material is accompanied as appendices. In the continuation of the main report, ”Supporting Infor-
mation I” holds additional methods and results while ”Supporting Information II” supports some of
the outcomes in the main report.
I would like to thank my supervisor Alexis Laurent for highly valued collaboration and constructive
discussions. I would also like to thank Ph.D. Student Alexandra Leclerc from QSA for assistance and
guidance with Input-Output modelling in MatLab. Finally, I would like to thank all associated with
QSA for knowledge-sharing, interesting discussions and contributions and for being very welcoming.
Caroline Herlev Gebara s144195, 02/02/2020
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract (English)
The UN sustainable development goals (SDGs) seek to motivate actions, which are essential to
humanity and the planet Earth. The UN SDG 7 aims to provide aﬀordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all. To assist in reaching this goal, three targets have been deﬁned, which
reﬂect its overall progress. These indicators cover i) access to aﬀordable, reliable and modern energy
services, ii) the global share of renewable energy, and iii) the global energy eﬃciency. However, the
existing SDG 7 indicators lack environmental sustainability aspects, which are crucial for assessing
sustainability beyond the social and economic dimensions. In order to be able to gauge country
performance within sustainability, the indicators need clearly deﬁned absolute boundaries for when
a red line is being crossed at both the national and sectoral levels. Here I propose a framework to i)
critically review indicators proposed in previous reports and scientiﬁc literature to develop a complete
set of indicators for SDG 7, ii) complement this deﬁned set of indicators with associated absolute
thresholds or objectives that altogether can represent an absolutely sustainable state (for SDG 7),
and iii) operationalise this set to the furthest extent possible to assess SDG 7 performances of all
possible countries in the world. More than 200 indicators were identiﬁed and, based on criteria such
as relevance, simplicity, and avoidance of redundancy, were shortlisted to obtain a recommended set
which was regarded as an “ideal” list of indicators for SDG 7, including both social and environ-
mental indicators. For the operationalisation of the ideal set of indicators, data was retrieved for 42
countries and ﬁve geographical regions representing the remaining countries, approaching a global
coverage in the assessment. Each indicator was measured against a threshold value, which was
derived at a global scale and afterwards downscaled to national and sectoral levels based on diﬀerent
sharing principles. The results of the application showed that all countries performed unsustainably
in most of the indicators. The ranking of energy sectors against SDG 7 was found to be sensitive to
the choice of the allocation principle, as well as the weighting approach, to obtain a ﬁnal country
index score. Finally, the ranking obtained in this current assessment showed contrasting conclu-
sions to the ranking based on the SDG Index & Dashboards (Sachs et al., 2019). These results
demonstrate the need to include environmental indicators in SDG 7 to fully track all dimensions of
sustainability. Furthermore, it illustrates the importance of developing the SDG 7 targets deﬁned
by the UN, strengthening the link to the overall goal of achieving sustainable energy systems. This
study, therefore, acts as the ﬁrst step towards i) guiding further discussion on developing relevant
indicators for SDG performance assessment and potentially redeﬁning the targets and ii) providing
basis for further scientiﬁc development of improving SDG assessment indicators, developing relevant
and robust thresholds for benchmarking purposes and developing improved weighting schemes.
Keywords
Absolute sustainability, sustainable development goal 7, sustainable development, sus-
tainable energy, planetary boundaries, energy indicators
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract (Danish)
FN’s Verdensm˚al fokuserer p˚a at motivere initiativer, der er essentielle for menneskeheden og plan-
eten Jorden.
FN’s verdensm˚al nummer 7 handler om at sikre at alle har adgang til p˚alidelig,
bæredygtig og moderne energi til en overkommelig pris. Tre delm˚al, der har til form˚al at assistere
i at n˚a hovedm˚alet, er blevet deﬁneret. De dækker s˚aledes over i) adgang til p˚alidelig og moderne
energiforsyning til en overkommelig pris, ii) vedvarende energi i det globale energimix og iii) den
globale hastighed for forbedring af energieﬀektiviteten. Herunder er indikatorer blevet udviklet til at
tage pulsen p˚a Verdensm˚al 7 i verdens lande. De eksisterende indikatorer indeholder imidlertid ikke
nogle miljømæssige bæredygtigheds aspekter, hvilket er helt afgørende for at vurdere bæredygtig
udvikling ud over de sociale og økonomiske parametre. For at kunne m˚ale hvordan lande klarer
sig i den bæredygtige udvikling, m˚a disse indikatorer beskrive tydelige grænser for hvorn˚ar noget er
bæredygtigt p˚a b˚ade nationalt plan of p˚a sektor niveau. Jeg foresl˚ar her en model for at i) kritisk
vurdere allerede foresl˚aede indikatorer in tidligere rapporter and videnskabelig litteratur med henblik
p˚a at udvikle et komplet sæt af indikatorer til at understøtte Verdensm˚al 7, ii) supplere denne dette
sæt af indikatorer med dertilhørende absolutte grænser eller klare m˚al, der tilsammen kan danne
basis for at deﬁnere en absolut bæredygtighed (for Verdensm˚al 7) og iii) operationalisere dette sæt i
størst mulig omfang for at vurderer den nuværende præstation inden for Verdensm˚al 7 for alle lande,
hvor det er muligt. Mere end 200 indikatorer er blevet identiﬁceret, og p˚a baggrund af kriterier, s˚a
som relevans, enkelthed og at undg˚a dobbeltælling, blev reduceret til en kortere liste, der tilsam-
men formede en anbefalet ”ideel” liste af udvalgte indikatorer under Verdensm˚al 7. Herunder b˚ade
sociale og miljømæssige indikatorer. For operationaliseringen af det ideelle sæt af indikatorer, var
det lykkedes at matche data fra 42 lande og fem geograﬁske omr˚ader dækkende over resterende
lande for at imødekomme et globalt perspektiv i s˚a vid mulig udstrækning. Hver indikator var m˚alt
op imod en grænseværdi, som først var udledt som global værdi og herefter nedskaleret til national
og sektoriel plan ved hjælp af forskellige fordelingsprincipper. Resultaterne af undersøgelsen viste
for de ﬂeste indikatorer at alle lande overtr˚adte grænseværdierne for bæredygtighed. Rangeringen
af nationernes energisektorer med hensyn til Verdensm˚al 7 viste sig at være sensitiv over for valget
af fordelingsprincip samt over for hvordan resultaterne var vægtet til den samlede score. Til sidst,
viste ranglisten fra dette studie modstridende konklusioner med ranglisten baseret p˚a SDG Index &
Dashboards (Sachs et al., 2019). Disse nævnte resultater peger p˚a nødvendigheden af at inkludere
indikatorer i Verdensm˚al 7 med miljømæssigt perspektiv, for at kunne m˚ale alle dimensioner inden
for bæredygtighed. Ydermere illustrerer det vigtigheden af at udvikle FN’s delm˚al under Verdensm˚al
7, for at styrke det overordnede m˚al om at opn˚ar bæredygtige energisystemer. Denne analyse kan
ses som startskuddet til at i) motivere til større diskussion inden for udviklingen af relevante indika-
torer til at vurderer Verdensm˚alene og eventuelt redeﬁnere delm˚alene og ii) danne en basis for videre
videnskabelig udvikling for at forbedre indikatorer til vurdering Verdensm˚alene, udvikle relevante of
robuste grænseværdier til benchmarking form˚al og udvikling af forbedrede vægtningsmetoder.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
AESR
Absolute Environmental Sustainability Reference
CF
Characterisation Factor
EE-MRIO
Environmentally Extended Multi-Regional Input-Output
ES
Earth System
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
IAEG-SDGs
Inter-Agency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
NMVOC
Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds
PBs
Planetary Boundaries
RCP
Representative Concentration Pathways
Ro.
Rest of
RoW
Rest of the World
SI
Supporting Information
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SDSN
Sustainable Development Solutions Network
SDR
Sustainable Development Report
SOS
Safe Operating Space
STE
Socio- and Techno-Economic
URR
Ultimate Recoverable Reserves
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
Fate factors: the overall persistence of a substance in the environment.
IAEG-SDG indicators: Refer to the indicators developed by the Inter-Agency and Expert Group
on SDG Indicators which were adopted by the General Assembly of the UN (The General Assembly
of the United Nations, 2017).
Life cycle assessment (LCA): A technique for assessing potential environmental impacts associ-
ated with all stages of a product’s or an activity’s life cycle.
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs): Four projections that describe diﬀerent 21st
century pathways of GHG emissions adopted by IPCC its ﬁfth Assessment Report (AR5) in 2014
(Pachauri et al., 2014))
SDG Index:In this report this refers to the Sustainable Development Reports formerly known as
the SDG Index & Dashboard by Sachs et al. (2019).
Thresholds: In this study this term is used for both boundaries of environmental sustainability and
for the socio- and techno-economic indicators for the sake of simplicity. When used in the context
of the latter, this is more an objective or a target of sustainable development rather than an actual
threshold.
Tipping-points: Used in relation to the climate system, when they are exceeded, they can lead to
large changed in the system and can be irreversible.
Ultimate Recoverable Reserves (URR): An estimate of the total amount of a resource that
can ever be recovered. It covers the cumulative production, discovered reserves, and undiscovered
reserves.
UN target: The targets, which are deﬁned under each SDG by the UN.
ix
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract (English) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract (Danish) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Assessment framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Literature review of existing SDG 7 indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Identiﬁcation of proposed indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Classiﬁcation and selection of suitable indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Absolute sustainability thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Deﬁnition of absolute sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
Determination of global thresholds for SDG 7 indicators . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.3
Downscaling to national and sectoral level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Current country performance assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Collection of indicator data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Normalisation of SDG 7 indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.3
Weighting and aggregation of SDG 7 indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Results and Discussion
19
3.1
Proposed sets of SDG7 indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Absolute sustainability thresholds for SDG 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Current performance of national energy sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.1
Normalised country scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.2
Weighting and ranking of countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.3
Cross-correlation analysis: relative vs. absolute sustainability . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3.4
Uncertainty and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
xi
==PAGE:14==
4
Conclusions and Recommendations
55
References
59
Supporting Information I
67
A.1
Supporting methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.1.1
Literature review of SDG7 indicators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.1.2
Indicator metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.1.3
Absolute sustainability assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.1.4
Derivation of global thresholds for the proposed indicators . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.1.5
Downscaling principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
A.1.6
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
A.2
Supporting Tables and ﬁgures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
xii
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
Chapter 1
Introduction
A burgeoning of the global economy has initiated increasing expectations of living standards and
shifted demand from basic goods to more sophisticated goods in many places of the world. However,
while some people live in a cornucopia of goods, the reality in other parts of the world is severe
poverty and limited access to resources (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2018; UNIDO, 2018). The continu-
ing global rise in population and economy are furthermore driving the extraction of natural resources
and the increase in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions due to the appertaining consumption, which
has already impacted ecosystems and human well-being across the world (Masson-Delmotte et al.,
2018). These alarming signs have led the United Nations (UN) to enter into a global agreement in
2015 to mitigate climate change. This agreement is referred to as the ’Paris Agreement 1.5°C goal’
and aims at holding global warming below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue eﬀorts to
limiting it to 1.5°C (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2018). Earlier in 2015, the UN member states adopted
a 2030 Agenda for sustainable development and action for people, planet and prosperity (United
Nations, 2015). The core of this agenda consists of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
which covers 17 goals and 169 sub targets that should be achieved in 2030.
It has been recognised that energy is essential in achieving economic and social development, and
SDG number 7, which is focusing on energy, has therefore become a central role in the 2030 Agenda
(Fuso Nerini et al., 2018). SDG 7 aims to ”ensure access to aﬀordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all” and is composed of ﬁve targets to underpin the goal: 7.1) ensuring uni-
versal access to aﬀordable, reliable and modern energy services, 7.2) increasing renewable energy
(RE) share, 7.3) double global rate of energy eﬃciency improvement, 7.a) enhancing international
cooperation on clean energy research and technology, and 7.b) expanding infrastructure and de-
veloping technologies, where the two latter are termed as ’means of implementation’ instead of
outcome-based indicators (United Nations, 2019a; United Nations inter-agency technical support
team, 2014). On a global scale, almost 60 % of all human-induced GHG emissions are produced
by the energy sector (electricity, heat, and transport) (Pachauri et al., 2014). Therefore SDG 7
strongly needs to be considered when meeting the Paris Agreement goal and a linkage between the
Page 1 of 138
==PAGE:16==
Introduction
SDG 7 and decarbonisation is required (UN DESA, 2018). So far, a large number of studies have
dealt with GHG emissions related to energy systems. However, other environmental impacts have
been disregarded, potentially leading to burden-shifting (Laurent & Espinosa, 2015). Furthermore,
energy development is interlinked with other SDGs in targeting social issues such as poverty, hunger,
healthcare and education (Fuso Nerini et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018). It is therefore important to
develop tools that can guide decision-makers to address sustainable development within the energy
sector with regards to a social, economic and environmental domain.
The Inter Agency Expert Group on SDG (IAEG-SDG), being an oﬃcial body aﬃliated in the UN,
developed a number of indicators to monitor the progress towards the SDGs. Furthermore, a great
number of additional indicators have been developed and proposed in literature to assess and moni-
tor the progress towards the SDGs. Scrutinising on SDG 7, the proposed indicators currently limited
to include socio-economic and technological aspects, where the environmental dimension is absent.
This is mainly due to the fact that none of the SDG 7 targets deﬁned by the UN are explicitly re-
ﬂecting the needs for sustainability, even though the goal calls for ”sustainable energy for all”. This
creates a gap between the goal and the indicators, especially ignoring the importance of gauging
environmental sustainability. Another shortcoming of the currently proposed indicators is that no
perspectives on absolute sustainability is included in the assessment, which means drawing a line
between the state of being sustainable or not. Addressing global goals is inevitable in achieving
global sustainability, nevertheless, policy-making is done at national level and not internationally.
This means that to achieve global goals, national policy-makers need to take action and be able to
monitor their performances. This calls for the development of national-level indicators with a global
perspective (Taylor et al., 2017).
This study is dedicated to developing the assessment for gauging SDG 7 performance across coun-
tries, to reﬂect the current state of energy sectors in the perspective of absolute sustainability. The
main objectives aim to 1) perform a critical review of existing indicators proposed for assessing SDG
7 targets and complement them to ﬁll potential gaps, 2) derive comprehensive sets of indicators
for SDG 7, 3) develop absolute environmental and social thresholds for sustainable development of
energy sectors at national scale, and ﬁnally 4) apply the developed framework to countries in the
world to characterise and compare country performances.
Page 2 of 138
==PAGE:17==
Methodology
Chapter 2
Methodology
2.1
Assessment framework
The methodological framework of this study has been divided into four steps. A simpliﬁed overview
of the framework is illustrated in Figure 2.1. Step 1, consist of a literature review of the existing
and proposed indicators that directly targets SDG 7. The output of this review is a raw list of all
the obtained SDG 7 indicators suggested by diﬀerent sources. In Step 2, criteria of classifying each
indicator was framed with the aim of arriving at a more consistent shortlisted set of relevant indica-
tors. Two outputs were obtained from this classiﬁcation, one being an ’ideal set’ of indicators and
the other being an ’operational set’, which was applied in this study, containing the indicators having
high data availability and for which absolute sustainability thresholds could be obtained. The assess-
ment in Step 3 was carried out parallel to the previous steps. Here, the methodology of assessing
absolute sustainability and principles of downscaling were deﬁned. The backwards arrow from Step
3 to Step 2 represents the iterativeness between the two processes by matching the thresholds to
the indicators. Finally, the thresholds were applied to all indicators in Step 4 and the performances
of the energy sectors in each country were assessed by applying weighting to obtain a single SDG 7
index score. The outputs of this process are i) an SDG 7 ranking of country performances, and ii)
an analysis of the results based on various statistical tests. In order to arrive at Step 4 and obtaining
a ﬁnal ranking of the energy system performance in each country, Steps 1-3 need to be established.
This chapter follows the same chronology, where the applied method used in each step is described.
The robustness of the results was investigated with respect to diﬀerent downscaling principles and
assessed qualitatively with respects to data quality and limitations. All the results are assisted by
Supporting Information (SI) I (existing of supporting methods and results) and SI II (an electronic
spreadsheet).
Page 3 of 138
==PAGE:18==
Methodology
Figure 2.1: Overview of the applied methodology used in this study. The backward arrow from Step 3 to
Step 2 represents the iterativeness of the processes of matching indicators with thresholds.
2.2
Literature review of existing SDG 7 indicators
2.2.1
Identiﬁcation of proposed indicators
A screening of existing and proposed SDG 7 indicators was done using the diﬀerent searching engines
”Web of Science” (webofknowledge.com) and ”Google Scholar” (scholar.google.com). Only English
written journals and reports were included in the search and sources were only considered if they
were directly targeting SDG 7. The number of scientiﬁc papers that addressed new SDG 7 indicators
was scant and hence almost all the relevant indicators were obtained from public reports or proposed
from Gibert (2018)1 in this study. In total, seven main sources were considered and combined into a
ﬁrst iteration full list of SDG 7 indicators. All the indicators from these sources were directly related
to target 7.1-7.3, (accessibility, RE share, and eﬃciency), yet diﬀering in what was being measured
(Sachs et al., 2019; Schmidt-Traub et al., 2015). Some sources approached the gaps between SDG
7 and environmental impacts, and the importance of measuring the interlinkages to other SDGs
(UN DESA, 2018; Fuso Nerini et al., 2018).
No sources were found to address environmental
1”Review and Assessment of National Indicators for UN Sustainable Development Goal nr. 12”, internal QSA project
Page 4 of 138
==PAGE:19==
Methodology
sustainability nor relate to absolute boundaries.
When considering other SDGs, several indicators were found to be tracking environmental issues.
This made it relevant to seek inspiration from these indicators with respect to translating them into
an energy system context to gauge SDG 7. A screening of the existing indicators for all other SDGs
was therefore conducted in order to propose more indicators that track environmental performances
directly and integrate them into SDG 7.
Additional indicators were proposed to complement the IAEG-SDG indicators as well in order
to fully gauge accessibility of reliable, aﬀordable, and safe energy. A more detailed description of
the literature review can be found in SI I A.1.1 and the full list of indicators can be found in SI
II. In this assessment ’energy systems’ and ’energy sectors’ are used interchangeably. The energy
sector is deﬁned as sectors that produce and supply electricity and heat as well as transportation.
The transport sector was included in this deﬁnition since the transport fuel is combusted at the
end-use stage and due to electriﬁcation of the transport sector, which will move transportation to
the electricity sector (ERTRAC et al., 2017).
2.2.2
Classiﬁcation and selection of suitable indicators
In order to achieve a more reﬁned list of suitable SDG 7 indicators, a classiﬁcation approach was
developed.
Here each retrieved indicator from the literature review was classiﬁed into the tiers
A-E, based on the following criterion (i) relevance to scope, (ii) representativeness, (iii) clarity and
simplicity, and (iv) data quality and method applicability, by following the ranking tree presented
in Figure 2.2. An elaboration on each criteria and a description of each tier is given in SI I A.1.1.
After classifying each indicator from the entire list of indicators to the diﬀerent tiers the set of ideal
indicators was obtained from collection of all indicators assigned to tier A, A* and B. Indicators
that were not relevant for the scope, represented elsewhere in the list, and were of composite nature
were deducted from the ideal set. Many environmental indicators were proposed in the initial list,
covering emission ﬂows, footprints, and impact categories. In accordance with criteria (ii) it was
decided to shorten the list by selecting footprint indicators that covered diﬀerent aspects of environ-
mental issues, while overlapping impact categories and emission ﬂows could be merged and covered
by the footprints. The selection was done to cover the same aspects as the ILCD recommended
impact categories: ’carbon footprint’, ’photochemical ozone formation footprint’, ’ozone depletion
footprint’, ’particulate matter footprint’, ’ terrestrial acidiﬁcation footprint’, ’marine eutrophication
footprint’, ’freshwater eutrophication footprint’, ’land footprint’, ’mineral and metal footprint’, ’fossil
resource footprint’, ’water footprint’, ’ionising radiation footprint’, and ’chemical footprint’ (Euro-
pean Commission, 2012). These indicators are referred to as environmental indicators throughout
the report, while the other indicators are referred to as socio- and techno-economic (STE) indicators.
Page 5 of 138
==PAGE:20==
Methodology
Figure 2.2: Ranking tree for assisting the shortlisting of the retrieved indicators. Rank A-B were chosen as
the ideal indicators that form the proposed set of SDG 7 indicators in this study, and hereof were indicators
of tier A and A* forming the operational (opr) list applied in this study. The dotted arrows represent the
possibility of indicators to move up the tiers if better data and method becomes available.
Having obtained the ideal set of indicators, the indicators were further evaluated based on the data
availability and methodology and assigned to tier A, A* and B. The three criteria i) country coverage,
ii) data availability and quality, and iii) method applicability. See SI I A.1.1 for a more detailed
Page 6 of 138
==PAGE:21==
Methodology
description. The indicators of tier A and A* were used for performing the absolute sustainability
assessment given that absolute sustainability thresholds could be obtained. This set of indicators is
referred to as the ’operational set’.
2.3
Absolute sustainability thresholds
To address the absolute sustainability thresholds in this study, a screening of the deﬁnitions and
applications of concept was done in a literature review. The review of absolute thresholds for the
two groups of STE and environmental indicators was kept separately, thus a focus was put on the
environmental aspects, due to the deﬁnition of absolute sustainability found in literature. This is
described in Section 2.3.1.
Following that, Section 2.3.2 provides an explanation of the approaches used for deﬁning absolute
thresholds within this study and matching the metrics of each proposed indicator. Finally, Section
2.3.3 presents the allocation principles used to allocate the shares of the global thresholds to the
energy sectors at national scale.
2.3.1
Deﬁnition of absolute sustainability
The concept of absolute sustainability has recently gained more attention by the scientiﬁc community,
where it has been referred to as the ability of societies to operate within the carrying capacity of
the Earth system (Chandrakumar & Mclaren, 2018; Bjørn et al., 2016). The carrying capacity has
been deﬁned by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) as ”the maximum sustained environmental intervention
a natural system can withstand without experiencing negative changes in structure or functioning
that are diﬃcult or impossible to revert”. Hence, the concept puts environmental sustainability at
the centre as a prerequisite for societies to thrive. In this current assessment, the focus is therefore
put on deﬁning absolute sustainability for SDG 7 for the environmental dimension. Enabling to
quantify absolute sustainability for SDG 7, requires suitable ’thresholds’ that can be linked to each
indicator. An absolute threshold can be deﬁned as an absolute environmental sustainability reference
(AESR), where systems can be deﬁned as sustainable if their impact scores are staying within this
reference value (Ryberg, 2018). This is diﬀerent from relative references, where an activity or a
product is ranked ’better’ or ’worse’ based on a chosen environmental reference value or compared
to another product. This practice is normally used in Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), which quantiﬁes
the environmental impacts associated with a product or an activity within a life cycle perspective
(Hauschild et al., 2017). However, this does not tell whether the activity is sustainable or not. The
two concepts are illustrated in Figure 2.3, where activity A and B are ranked on their environmental
performances. In a) activity B is ranked more sustainable, due to its comparison with activity A.
In b) both activities are ranked unsustainable due to the sustainability reference. The deﬁnition of
carrying capacity has been used to set AESRs and supplement existing environmental sustainability
Page 7 of 138
==PAGE:22==
Methodology
assessment methods (e.i. footprints and LCA) to achieve absolute sustainability measures (Bjørn &
Hauschild, 2015; Bjørn et al., 2016). In a study by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015), this was proposed
for LCA, by using carrying capacity to deﬁne normalisation references.
In their study, absolute
environmental thresholds from literature were translated to match the metrics of LCA midpoint
impact categories, which they achieved for 11 impacts.
Figure 2.3: The concept of relative and absolute sustainability assessment. a) Activity B is ranked better
in the terms of sustainability compared to activity A. b) Activity A and B are ranked unsustainable due to
the sustainability reference, where activities are only sustainable on the right-side of this reference. Modiﬁed
from Bjørn et al. (2016).
An attempt to quantify carrying capacity, and another key concept for assessing global absolute
environmental sustainability, is the Planetary Boundaries (PBs) framework. The framework was
developed by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009) and later updated by Steﬀen et al. (2015) with the aim of
scientiﬁcally assessing the risk of destabilisation of the Earth system caused by human activities.
This exact point of destabilisation is also referred to as ’tipping points’ and remains within a zone
of uncertainty. As illustrated in Figure 2.4, the PBs are deﬁned upstream before entering the zone
of uncertainty, which potentially lies well below the true tipping point (Steﬀen et al., 2015). As an
alternative to the previously mentioned approach for linking absolute sustainability to LCA, Ryberg
(2018) developed an approach for linking the PBs to LCA, by translating the environmental ﬂows
into matching the metrics of the PBs (Ryberg, 2018). The beneﬁt of this approach is that it allows
for expressing the indicator results in the same metrics as the PB control variables, which strengthen
the communication for decision-makers that are already aware of the PBs (Ryberg, 2018). However,
the method is limited to the PBs suggested by Steﬀen et al. (2015) and it is therefore not possible
to investigate other potential absolute sustainability boundaries suggested from literature.
A recognised threshold for achieving sustainable development is the political framework of the
Paris Agreement 1.5°C goal, aiming at staying below a 1.5-2°C warming compared to pre-industrial
levels (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2018). This refers to a ’budget’ of a total cumulative amount of
emissions that the climate can aﬀord without transgressing the 2°C increase. Figure 2.5 illustrates
such a budget according to the pathway of the 2°C scenario (2 DS) from today until 2100. The
shaded area illustrates the carbon budget of cumulative emissions in that time period. This type of
budget relies on a deﬁned time horizon, and therefore the budget is reﬂecting a remaining budget
Page 8 of 138
==PAGE:23==
Methodology
Figure 2.4: The concept of the planetary boundaries (PBs), where the PB is set at the lower points of
the uncertainty range. SOS: safe operating space that corresponds to the allocated share of impacts which
are below the boundary. Modiﬁed from Steﬀen et al. (2015).
within this period, for being able to achieve a certain target in the end year. This approach varies
from the deﬁnition of absolute sustainability thresholds as presented earlier, where the threshold is
ultimately deﬁned independently of time. Nevertheless, the budget approach can act as a tool for
guiding decision-makers in deﬁning time-tailored thresholds to manoeuvring towards a sustainable
future.
Figure 2.5: Carbon budget under 2°C scenario. The carbon budget is deﬁned as the cumulative GHG
emissions given in Gt CO2 equivalent per year until 2100. 2DS: 2 degree scenario. Data adapted from
Climate Action Tracker Partners (2018).
In the case of all environmental thresholds deﬁned globally or regionally, the thresholds of relevance
need to be tailored to ﬁt the assessed activity (Sandin et al., 2015). This is done by allocating a
share of the ’allowed’ impacts, which deﬁnes whether the activity is absolute sustainable or not.
This will be elaborated on in Section 2.3.3.
Page 9 of 138
==PAGE:24==
Methodology
Absolute sustainability points to fact that the Earth system holds ﬁnite resources and limits to
the accumulation of impacts. This limited amount of resources has provoked a discussion on the
whole concept of sustainable development (Griggs et al., 2013). Griggs et al. (2013) suggested
a reformulation of sustainable development, that raise the environmental sustainability above the
social and economic respecting the Earth’s limits before other domains. This is in accordance with
the deﬁnition of absolute sustainability from literature described earlier. However, Raworth (2012)
combined environmental and social boundaries by building upon the concept of the PBs to include a
social dimension to target the interdependencies of the two dimensions. This was deﬁned as a social
minimum of living standards referred to as the ’Social Foundation’. The social foundation relies on
the philosophy that all people should be free of deprivation, meaning meeting all basic needs such as
hunger, poverty, equality etc. (Raworth, 2012). Yet, no deﬁnition of absolute social nor economic
sustainability was identiﬁed from the literature.
2.3.2
Determination of global thresholds for SDG 7 indicators
Since the suggested footprint indicators in this study are expressed as annual impacts (e.g. kg/year),
the challenge was to match the metrics to suggested thresholds from literature. Based on the screen-
ing from literature, the approach suggested by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) was deemed suitable for
this assessment, due to the footprint indicators and due to the possibility of including thresholds
suggested from diﬀerent frameworks. The determination of each threshold was based on diﬀerent
sources that was deemed the best ﬁt to the indicator.
The approach for determining and deﬁning thresholds was based on the nature of the indicator,
tackling either the environmental, social or technological aspects. This created the need for deﬁning
diﬀerent approaches of deriving thresholds. Three of such approached were identiﬁed and applied
in this study and are summed in the Table 2.1.
The ﬁrst approach identiﬁed follows the concept of zero-deprivation and is referred to in this study
as All-or-Nothing. It reﬂects that the threshold is deﬁned by the ’ideal’ or optimum state, where
everything outside this state falls short, e.i. not sustainable. This applied to the socio-economic
indicators, where thresholds were deﬁned at the state where no people are deprived or where they
have the highest well-being. This concept also applied for the techno-economic indicators, where
the same concept is extended to include ’technical deprivation’. Similarly, it reﬂected the situation of
using a technical solution which is not optimal, and hence only the technological optimum deﬁned
the state of zero-deprivation. The all-or-nothing concept applied pari passu with environmental
accumulated exceedance indicators, where everything above the exceedance level will be counted as
a shortfall of the threshold. It should be noted here, that the boundaries applied for this category
of indicators are rather desired objectives to reach the ideal state than actual thresholds. However,
for simplicity, the term threshold is kept for all indicators.
Page 10 of 138
==PAGE:25==
Methodology
Table 2.1: Conceptual framework of selecting thresholds in this study, based on the group of indicators
and the choice of method for deﬁning thresholds. n.a. = not applicable.
Method
Description
All-or-nothing
Threshold is set according to one solution being ideal, where all
outside this point is falling short and hence deemed unsustainable.
This method applied for the concept of zero-deprivation used for
socio-economic indicators, for techno-economic indicators with a
technological optimum, and for environmental exceedance indicators.
These are mainly deﬁned in a 0-1 range (or percentage based), where
all values but the optimum value (either 0 or 1) are deemed
insuﬃcient.
Steady state
Threshold is deﬁned as a Steady State (static), where sustainability
has already been reached. This means that the allowed impacts
reﬂect the sustained annual impacts, with which the state of the
natural systems of the assessed impacts is sustained. The threshold is
therefore also referred to as ’static’, since the threshold is
time-independent and applies at all times. The method is applicable
to environmental indicators describing impact ﬂows (e.g. emissions,
extraction).
Moving Budget
(dynamic)
Threshold is deﬁned by an allowed amount of accumulated impacts
within a time horizon, e.i. an impact budget. The threshold is hence
not set at the sustainable level, but is set based on achieving the
sustainable state at a certain point in time. This method is therefore
referred to as dynamic, since the threshold is time-depended, and
should be recalculated every year. The threshold answers: ”what
should the constant level of annual impacts be, if respecting the
deﬁned budget?”. This method can be considered more pragmatic
rather than ideal compared to the steady state method, since it
allows more impact in the ﬁrst year of assessment compared to the
target year where becoming sustainable. The method is applicable to
environmental indicators, where a cumulative amount of impacts can
be obtained.
The second approach was termed as Steady State.
This method was deﬁned by measuring
the annual impacts at which level the sustainable state could remain unchanged, and hence only
applicable to environmental indicators. This was identiﬁed by the deﬁnition of carrying capacity by
Bjørn & Hauschild (2015), where the threshold is set at this steady state impact level that maintain
Page 11 of 138
==PAGE:26==
Methodology
a sustainable state. Hence, the threshold is deﬁned at a level where the sustainable state has already
been reached. The approach deﬁnes a time-independent threshold that applies to all times.
The third approach was termed as Moving Budget. The threshold was here deﬁned as ”a
threshold that moves towards achieving or maintaining an absolute sustainable state of the Earth
system at a certain point in time”. This means that in lieu of deﬁning thresholds at a sustainable
state in the year of assessment, the thresholds reﬂected the ’average annual impact’ that can be
aﬀorded (e.i. budget), if the annual impact level is kept constant throughout the period. As opposed
to the steady state method, this method is time-dependent, and as the name implies a ’moving’
budget that needs to be revised every year as the budget shrinks. See Figure 2.6 illustrating this
concept and Equation 2.1 for determining the annual budget, where ’I’ denotes Impacts and t0 and
tideal respectively the year of assessment and the chosen end-year where the sustainable state is met.
The approach was applicable to environmental indicators, where an accumulated budget of impacts
could be deﬁned.
Figure 2.6: Concept of the ’dynamic budget’ approach for deﬁning annual thresholds in absolute terms.
The curve is reﬂecting the actual abatement path that deﬁnes the budget, and the bars below the curve
illustrates the average annual threshold over the whole period of the budget.
Annual average
impact budget
time horizon

=
R tideal
t0
I(t) dt
t0 – tideal
(2.1)
The PBs framework by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009) and Steﬀen et al. (2015) and the sources used for
deriving carrying capacity values by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) were used as a point departure in
this study. Other sources were also obtained from the literature review, for matching the indicators,
which were not covered in these sources. The thresholds proposed in this study do not solely reﬂect
the existing thresholds since other values do exist. In this case, the determination of threshold for
Page 12 of 138
==PAGE:27==
Methodology
each indicator relied on normative choices, based on the thresholds that were available and best
applicable to the proposed indicators of this present study. This included the possibility of matching
the metrics of the indicators. A detailed description of the choices and calculations behind each
threshold can be found in SI I A.1.4.
2.3.3
Downscaling to national and sectoral level
The absolute thresholds represent the total limits for the world, which need to be distributed among
all actors. The distributed Share of Threshold (SoT) can then be considered as an AESR at national
or sectoral level. In this study, this applies to the environmental footprint thresholds, since the
remaining indicator-thresholds apply universally to all levels (e.g. percentage-based). To address
environmental impacts of national energy sectors, the shares are ﬁrstly distributed among countries
and secondly to sectoral level. The distribution of shares was carried out by the use of diﬀerent
allocation principles, which diﬀer in ethical perspectives and political beliefs (Grasso, 2012).
The absolute threshold or the SoT in the given energy sector is then found by multiplying the
share, which will be referred to as the allocation key, aenergy,n for the energy sector in region ’n’ by
the global threshold ’Tworld,i’ of the investigated indicator ’i’ (as given in Equation 2.2).
SoTi,n = aenergy,n · Tworld,i
(2.2)
Consequently, if an impact score for a given country is smaller or equal to the associated SoT, then
the country performance can be considered absolute sustainable based on the chosen allocation
principle.
Several allocation principles have been suggested from literature based on the justice of the distri-
bution of beneﬁts and burdens (Grasso, 2012). Four principles were investigated in this study, with
the aim of investigating the robustness of the ﬁnal results. The applied principles covered diﬀerent
viewpoints based on equality of people (egalitarian), maximisation of utility in society (utilitarian),
maximisation of utility in society but higher weight given to low-impacting activities (prioritarian),
and distribution reﬂecting the current level of impacts (grandfathering). The theory behind the
principles can be found in SI A.1.5. The choice of the principles in this study intended to include
a mix of the diﬀerent principles often considered in literature (Ryberg, 2018). Another criterion for
the choice of allocation principles in this study was the availability of data needed for calculating
the shares.
The four principles are summarised in Table 2.2. Three out of the four principles allocate an equal
share of impacts per person (principle 1-3), while the last solely allocates shares based on the current
status of impacts (principle 4). The applied principles investigate the diﬀerences between favouring
low-impacting countries and having a preference towards countries and sectors with a currently high
level of impacts. It should be stated that several other principles do exist, e.g. based on cumulative
Page 13 of 138
==PAGE:28==
Methodology
impacts, historical responsibility based and suﬃcientarianism, which could be equally suitable in this
study (Grasso, 2012; Greaker et al., 2013; Caney, 2009).
Table 2.2: Allocation principles applied in this study based on diﬀerent sharing principles from literature.
Population (pop), Gross Value Added (GVA).
Allocation
principles
Equation for allocation share
Description
1. egalitarian +
utilitarian
Popcountry
PopWorld · GVAenergy sector, country
GVAcountry
Downscaled from world to country
level by population (egalitarian) and
from country to sectoral level by GVA
(utilitarian)
2. egalitarian +
utilitarian +
prioritarian
Popcountry
PopWorld · GVAenergy sector, country
GVAcountry
· c
c = ImpactWorld
PopWorld
·
Impactcountry
Popcountry
–1
Downscaled from world to country
level by population (egalitarian) and
from country to sectiral level by GVA
(utilitarian). The correction factor ’c’
adjust the share towards favouring low
impacting countries based on current
impact level.
3. egalitarian +
grandfathering
Popcountry
PopWorld · Impactenergy sector, country
Impactcountry
Downscaled from world to country
level by population (egalitarian) and
from country to sectoral level by
status quo current impacts
(grandfathering)
4. grandfathering
Impactenergy sector, country
ImpactWorld
Downscales to from world to sectoral
level from based on status quo
measured for each impact
(grandfathering)
Page 14 of 138
==PAGE:29==
Methodology
2.4
Current country performance assessment
This section describes the process of arriving at a ﬁnal ranking list of a countries’ given energy sectors.
This involves how data was collected for the ideal set of indicators, normalisation of indicator values
to reﬂect the absolute sustainability perspective, and weighting to be able to compare performance
across countries. The results were analysed by sensitivity towards the diﬀerent allocation principles
and followed by a cross-correlation analysis.
2.4.1
Collection of indicator data
The majority of data for the STE indicators was obtained from open source databases, scoping
for well-established and sound sources as well as striving for a high country coverage. Data on
footprints, for covering the environmental indicators, targeting globally and being consistent for
all footprints were not available in high numbers. Hence, it was decided to use Environmentally
Extended Multi-Regional Input-Output (EE-MRIO) tables to model environmental ﬂows for the
energy sector. EE-MRIO tables link monetary activities from producer to consumer to environmental
ﬂows (e.g. emissions and extraction) assuming linearity between impacts and products (Kitzes, 2013;
Mattila, 2017; Hauschild et al., 2017). This model was chosen because ﬁrstly it allows modelling of
both national and international ﬂows and secondly because it allows obtaining consumption-based
impacts. This means that if a product is produced in country A and consumed in country B, country
B will be assigned the impacts of the product. This consumption-based impacts therefore grasp the
life style and demand of goods within a country. The data used as input to the model was taken from
Exiobase v3.4, available for download at www.exiobase.eu. The database covers 44 countries and 5
rest-of-the-world (RoW) regions, 447 emission categories, 662 material and resource categories, and
163 industries. The database did not provide data at sectoral level, instead a ’best guess’ selection
of the industries associated with the energy sector was done based on the name description of the
industries (see SI I Table A.32) amounting to 30 industries. The model was run in Matlab for the
30 industries and the end-use of those industries. A more detailed description of the data collection
behind the proposed indicators is presented in SI I A.1.6.
Since many of the proposed indicators relied on the Exiobase database, which has a limited
country resolution, a sub-set of countries was derived for the assessment in the current study,
coherent with the countries in Exiobase. This was done in order to make the assessment more
harmonized and comparable across indicators and to select a sub-set that covered most of the
indicators. Ideally, future studies should strive for a fully global data coverage.
2.4.2
Normalisation of SDG 7 indicators
In order to compare the indicator performances to the thresholds and to enable comparison across
indicators, all values were normalised according to Equation 2.3, where ’S’ is the normalised score,
Page 15 of 138
==PAGE:30==
Methodology
’x’ is the obtained indicator value, and ’upper’ and ’lower’ represent the bounds that deﬁned the
interval of the indicator values.
S =
x – lower(x)
upper(x) – lower(x)
(2.3)
All indicators were normalised so that a higher value represented more deprivation than in the case
of a lower value. The steps below were applied to set the upper and lower bounds for the diﬀerent
types of indicators.
1. For percentage-based indicators, where 100 % represents the best performance, use 0 as upper
bound and 100 as lower bound
2. For percentage-based indicators, where 0 % represents the best performance, use 100 as upper
bound and 0 as lower bound
3. For indicators based on a scale, use best obtainable value as lower bound and 0 as upper bound
4. For indicators that apply the all-or-nothing principle and can obtain all values, use the target
value as lower bound and twice this value as upper bound - cap values < 0 at 0 and values > 1
at 1
5. For environmental indicators with deﬁned absolute thresholds, use absolute thresholds to set
upper bound and 0 as lower bound
The normalised score measures the ’degree of deprivation’ by measuring the distance to the target.
This means that if 100 % is the optimum value, then an achievement of 70 % equals 30 % de-
privation. The normalisation enabled to compare across indicators, however, comparison between
STE indicators and environmental indicators was not possible since the limits are deﬁned diﬀerently
for the two types of indicators as illustrated by Figure 2.7. For the indicators based on the all-or-
nothing concept, all scores above 0 express a shortfall and the performances are hence regarded as
unsustainable. For the environmental footprint indicators, everything between 0 and 1 reﬂects an
absolute sustainable state, while all scores above 1 expresses an overshoot (e.i. unsustainable zone).
The evaluation of the country performances were therefore kept separately between the two types
of indicators. It was decided to keep the two types of indicators in diﬀerent scales, to reﬂect better
the understanding of the normalised value, especially to gauge how far an environmental indicator
is from approaching the threshold or to what extend it has been transgressed.
Page 16 of 138
==PAGE:31==
Methodology
Figure 2.7: Possible ranges of performance of normalised values for indicators based on the all-or-northing
(AoN) principle and based on limits to the environment. The normalised score of the AoN indicators are
solely deemed sustainable at a score of zero and the maximum deprivation is at a score of one. For the
Environmental footprint scores everything between zero and one is reﬂecting a sustainable state, while all
values above one designate transgression of the sustainable state.
2.4.3
Weighting and aggregation of SDG 7 indicators
The ranking of the indicator scores can be done at diﬀerent levels, respectively 1) at indicator level,
2) at group level (e.g. social, environmental), and 3) as a ﬁnal index score. To obtain scores at level
2 and 3, weighting of the indicators is required before aggregating scores across indicators. In this
study, two weighting principles were explored. Where one of them was applied at the group level, and
both were used to obtain a ﬁnal index score. Since there was a mismatch between the normalised
indicator scores for STE indicators and environmental indicators, they had to be harmonised in order
to obtain ﬁnal index scores at level 3 in both weighting principles.
The ﬁrst principle is referred to as equal weighting, which gives equal weight to all indicators. Prior
to this, an extra step was used with respect to harmonising the indicator scores between groups by
indexing all values by the mean indicator score. The values were then given an equal weight and
aggregated into a ﬁnal index score.
The second principle is referred to as score-based weighting. In this approach the weighting and
aggregation were ﬁrst applied at group level, resulting in a group score for STE and environmental
indicators separately. A global average weighting factor was found for each indicator, as the average
country score within each indicator as given in Equation 2.4, where wworld,i is the weighting factor
for indicator ’i’ and ’S’ is the array of all country scores within the indicator. The total score for
a country is then obtained as the weighted summation of all indicator scores as given in Equation
2.5, where I = 10 for the STE indicators and I = 16 for the environmental indicator, and ’n’ is the
assessment country.
Page 17 of 138
==PAGE:32==
Methodology
wworld,i = mean(Si)
,
I
X
i=1
mean(Si)
(2.4)
Sn,goal =
I
X
i=1
Sn,i · wworld,i
(2.5)
After obtaining the two scores for each country, the countries were ranked separately within each
group of indicators to identify diﬀerences between the two domains. Afterwards, it was explored to
derive a ﬁnal SDG 7 index score by ﬁrstly indexing each group score by the mean score and averaging
the two scores into one.
It should be noted that the index scores (level 3) in this study lose the perspective of absolute
sustainability due the division by mean values. Hence, these ﬁnal scores are solely computed to
obtain the ﬁnal ranking of countries and the ranking scores represent the relative order of countries
to reach absolute sustainability.
Page 18 of 138
==PAGE:33==
Results and Discussion
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Proposed sets of SDG7 indicators
Table 3.1 forms the recommended ideal set of SDG 7 indicators, which contains 26 indicators in
total. The following describes the choices behind the indicators under each target.
Target 7.1
Except from the two IAEG-SDG indicators 1.1 and 1.2 in Table 3.1, four more indicators were added
herein including a measure of energy poverty, quality, safety, and reliability with the aim of gauging
target 7.1 fully. The full list of retrieved indicators contains other indicators such as composite
indices, which were excluded for clarity and simplicity reasons and indicators that were speciﬁc to
climate, technology or development, which were deemed unﬁt to global assessment or for the energy
sector as a whole (see justiﬁcation in SI II the excel ﬁle).
Target 7.2
Three extra indicators are proposed as complement to the existing IAEG-SDG indicator of target
7.2 (2.1 in Table 3.1), to reﬂect the RE transition. Indicator 2.2 in Table 3.1 is proposed to reﬂect
the actions taken towards national RE deployment, by measuring the average annual percentage
share of RE-based installed capacity over a three years period. As complementary to this, indicator
2.3 was proposed reﬂecting the percentage share of decommissioned energy capacity, which was
based on fossil fuels in the same period as indicator 2.2. This was included to reﬂect the actions
taken towards decommissioning fossil-based capacity, since a country can achieve 100 % in 2.2 while
still having fossil-based energy running. It should be noted that the two indicators should be seen
together with indicator 2.1, since 2.2 and 2.3 are rather measuring initiatives. A country with a high
share of RE can have a low score in 2.2 if new capacity is simply not needed and vice versa. For
both indicators nuclear power was excluded as this was not termed as RE and neither as fossil-based
energy. Indicator 2.4 was added to measure the political incentive towards phasing out fossil fuel.
Page 19 of 138
==PAGE:34==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.1: Recommended ideal list of SDG7 indicators. The list consists of all indicators of tier A, A* and B internally (int) proposed in this
study. The indicators are extracted from the full list in SI II. The column ”source” indicates from where the indicator was proposed for SDG 7
or other SDGs. The sources behind the obtained data can be found in SI I A.1.2
.
No.
Name
Unit
Description
Source
Int.
tier
Target 7.1 - By 2030, ensure universal access to aﬀordable, reliable and modern energy services
1.1
Access to electricity
% population
Counts the proportion of the population of a country
with access to electricity based on national household
surveys
IAEG-SDGs
(2016)
A
1.2
Reliance on clean fuels and
technology
% population
Counts the proportion of the population in a country
primarily relying on clean fuels and technologies for
cooking, heating and lighting divided by the number
of people reporting any of those usages.
IAEG-SDGs
(2016)
A
1.3
Energy poverty
% population
Counts the share of the population, where the en-
ergy expenses exceed 10 % of the household income.
Inspired by Rademaekers et al. (2016).
This study
B
1.4
Energy quality
scale 1-7
The indicator is proposed for measuring the security
of supply in percentage share of time. Instead a proxy
was chosen to gauge this aspect, being based on a
ranking scale from 1 to 7, where 1 is not reliable at
all and 7 is extremely reliable. The indicator proxy
data for measuring energy quality was obtained from
World Economic Forum (2018).
This study
A*
continues on next page
Page 20 of 138
==PAGE:35==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.1 continued from previous page
1.5
Absence of past accidents
related to energy services
no. of reportings
The indicator measures the number of reported acci-
dents, which are related to energy services.
This study
B
1.6
Corruption index for PPPa
energy
Scale 0-100
Data is based on national corruption index as a proxy
for the energy sector, since data was not available to
ﬁt indicator. The corruption index is measured on a
scale from 0 to 100, where 0 is highly corrupted and
100 is least highly clean. The indicator data is taken
from Transparency International (2015) and works as
a proxy to reﬂect the legality within the energy sector.
UNECE
(2017)
A*
Target 7.2 - By 2030, increase substantially the share of RE in the global energy mix
2.1
Share of renewable energy
in TFECb
% MWh
Counts the percentage share of renewable energy in
the TFEC in MWh
IAEG-SDGs
(2016)
A
2.2
Share
of
RE
in
newly
installed energy capacity
(MW)
% RE MW/year
Counts the percentage share of additional installed
energy capacity which is assigned to RE each year.
The indicator takes an average annual measure on a
period of three years.
This study
A
2.3
Share
of
fossil
energy
in decommissioned energy
capacity (MW)
%
fossil
based
MW/year
Counts the percentage share of decommissioned en-
ergy capacity in a country that is based on fossil
sources per year. The indicator takes an average an-
nual measure on a period of three years.
This study
A
continues on next page
Page 21 of 138
==PAGE:36==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.1 continued from previous page
2.4
Fossil fuel subsidies
% GDP
Counts the amount of subsidies to consumption of
fossil fuels as percentage share of GDP in a country
Schmidt-
Traub et al.
(2015)
A*
Target 7.3 - By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy eﬃciency
3.1
Energy intensity
MJ/USD2011
Counts the TPES per GDP and captures the en-
ergy needed to produce one unit of economic output.
It works as a proxy for measuring energy eﬃciency,
where a small intensity indicates high eﬃciency.
IAEG-SDGs
(2016)
A
3.2
Supply side eﬃciency
% MWh
Counts the eﬃciency as the TFEC divided by the
TPES and reﬂects the eﬃciency of the energy system
and energy losses in a country.
This Study
A*
Target 7.4 - By 2030, ensure environmentally sustainable energy production and consumption (new)
4.1
Carbon footprint
kg CO2eq/year
Counts the CO2 equivalent of gaseous emissions as-
sociated to the life cycle of an activity, which are
relevant to climate change.
Gibert
(2018)
A*
4.2a
&
4.2b
Photochemical ozone for-
mation footprint: 4.2a im-
pacting vegetation (veg.)
and 4.2b human health
(HH)
kg NMVOC eq/
year
The indicator assess the impacts from ozone and
other reactive oxygen compounds, which are formed
in the troposphere by the primary contaminants
VOCs (CH4, RH) or CO in the presence of NOx and
light. Measured by the amount of NMVOC per year.
Gibert
(2018)
A*
continues on next page
Page 22 of 138
==PAGE:37==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.1 continued from previous page
4.3
Ozone depletion footprint
kg
CFC-11
eq/
year
Measures the amount of the ozone depleting sub-
stance CFC-11 in the stratosphere per year, resulting
in less absorption of solar radiation and hence and
increased UV radiation at Earth’s surface
This study
A*
4.4
Particulate matter foot-
print
kg PM2.5eq/year
Measures the amount of ﬁne particulate matter with
diameter < 2.5 µm with regards to human health
impacts
Gibert
(2018)
A*
4.5
Terrestrial
acidiﬁcation
footprint
kg SO2eq/year
Measures the amount of protons that potentially
leads to acidiﬁcation of terrestrial ecosystems
Gibert
(2018)
A*
4.6
Marine
eutrophication
footprint
kg N eq/year
Measures the amount of runoﬀand leach of nutrients
from soil to riverine and marine systems indicated by
nitrogen equivalent.
This study
A*
4.7
Freshwater eutrophication
footprint
kg P eq/year
Measures the transfer of nutrients from soil to fresh-
water and its potential to cause eutrophication mea-
sured in phosphorous equivalent.
This study
A*
4.8
Land footprint
m2/ year
Covers land occupation including land transformation
compared to natural level, and its potential to cause
loss of species. It includes the diﬀerence between the
species richness of natural and anthropogenic land
covers. The indicator is given an area of annual crop
equivalent.
Gibert
(2018)
A*
4.9
Water footprint
m3/year
Measures the volume of consumed blue water, scaled
to reﬂect the country speciﬁc scarcity compared to
the world average values.
Gibert
(2018)
A*
continues on next page
Page 23 of 138
==PAGE:38==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.1 continued from previous page
4.10
Fossil resource use foot-
print
kg oil eq/year
Reﬂects the scarcity of fossil resources. The indicator
measures the relative energy content of each fossil
resource compared to crude oil based on HHV3.
This study
A*
4.11
Mineral
and
metal
use
footprint
kg Cu eq/year
Measures the average amount of extra ore that needs
to be produced in the future, due to 1 kg extraction
of a mineral compared to the average extra amount
of or per kg of copper extracted
This study
A*
4.12
Ionising radiation footprint
kBq Co60 eq to
air/year
Measures the ionising radiation potential of 1 kBqd
due to emission of a substance into a speciﬁc com-
partment relative to the potential of 1 kBq of Cobalt-
60 emitted to air.
This study
B
4.13
Chemical footprint
1,4 DCB eq/year
Covers the impacts of toxic chemicals on both
ecosystems (freshwater, marine and terrestrial eco-
toxicity) and human health (carcinogenic and non-
carcinogenic toxicity).
The impact indicator mea-
sures the potential impact of a chemical compared
to the impact of 1,4 DCBe.
Gibert
(2018)
B
4.14
Particulate
matter
peak
exposure
No. of people
Counts the number of people exposed above the daily
particulate matter threshold of 25 µg/m3. Comple-
mentary to 4.4.
This study
B
4.15
Metal and mineral recy-
cling rate
% kg
Measured the recycling rate of minerals and metal in
percentage out of virgin material. Complementary to
4.11.
This study
B
a PPP = Power purchasing parity, b TFEC = Total Final Energy Consumption, c HHV = Higher Heating Value, d kBq = kilo Becquerel
e 1,4 DCB = 1,4-dichlorobenzene
Page 24 of 138
==PAGE:39==
Results and Discussion
Target 7.3
For this target, the IAEG-SDG indicator (3.1 in Table 3.1) measures energy eﬃciency improvement
by energy intensity based on GDP of a country, which is proposed as a proxy by IAEG-SDGs (2016).
In this study indicator 3.2 was proposed complementary to the existing IAEG-SDG indicator, to re-
ﬂect the actual eﬃciency independently of economic growth. Data was estimated from OECDdata
at stats.oecd.org in absolute values (mill. USD 2015) and divided by GDP of the countries obtained
from World Bank at data.worldbank.org.
Target 7.4
The newly proposed target, consist of 16 indicators (counting 4.2a and 4.2b separately) recom-
mended to gauge the environmental sustainability dimension of SDG 7, which is not covered by any
of the previous targets. While target 7.1 is devoted to gauging energy accessibility and thus the more
social aspects of SDG 7, target 7.2 and 7.3 are both limited to speciﬁc technology development. This
makes no room for environmental indicators, such as particulate matter or land footprint that are not
ﬁtting in the any of the existing UN targets. It is therefore proposed to develop a new target within
SDG 7, e.i. target 7.4, which is formulated as follows: ”By 2030, ensure environmentally sustainable
energy production and consumption”. The indicators of target 7.4, may be found in other SDGs,
such as carbon footprint (SDG 12 and 13), water footprint (SDG 6 and 12), and land footprint (SDG
15). Nevertheless, the framework of the SDGs can accommodate that, since this is already done for
a few existing indicators, e.i. material footprint exists for both SGD 8 and 12 (IAEG-SDG, 2016).
This is inevitable due to the interlinking between the existing UN targets, hereunder interlinkages
with SDG 7, which is a reason for including a broad range of environmental indicators for SDG 7 in
this assessment. The proposed indicators mainly consist of footprint indicators, which are based on
environmental midpoint impact categories of relevance for the energy sector. Recall Section 2.4.1,
all footprint indicators included in this study were obtained from national footprints by combining
the Exiobase EE-MRIO tables with LCIA methods from ReCiPe (Huijbregts et al., 2016). Except
for the water footprint, which was combined with country speciﬁc average CFs by AWARE (Boulay
et al., 2019). It should also be noted that diﬀerent characterisation models, as well as databases
for the MRIO model, can equally be selected for the assessment. Indicator 4.14 in Table 3.1 was
added as a complementary indicator to indicator 4.4 (PM footprint) was added to address the ex-
posure to daily pollution above the limits recommended by the World Health Organization (2005).
The indicator reﬂects the time-integrated exposure to people in a speciﬁc region that exceeds the
24-hour mean guidance value of the World Health Organization (2005). To complement indicator
4.11, (metal and mineral footprint), indicator 4.15 was proposed to measure the amount of recycled
material.
Including all 26 indicators to gauge SDG7 is not necessarily needed nor ideal for the sake of con-
ciseness. However, it is important to have a comprehensive set of indicators, for being able to
identify the importance of each indicator as well as spotting inter-indicator correlations and trade-
Page 25 of 138
==PAGE:40==
Results and Discussion
oﬀs. Therefore, a re-evaluation of the list of indicators should be prioritised in the assessment with
the aim of short-listing the set.
For indicators of target 7.1-7.3, data was obtained from open source databases, where the data
source with the highest country completeness was chosen if multiple databases were available. For
some indicators, no data or suitable proxies were obtained, excluding them for being applicable in
this assessment (e.i. tier B). For indicator 1.4 and 1.6, proxies of data were used to reﬂect the
indicator, since a complete match was not obtained, which is why they are ranked as A*. Data was
successfully obtained for all footprint indicators from the input-output model, except for ionising
radiation and therefore ranked as tier B. The chemical footprint was assigned to tier B as well, due
to shortcomings in impact assessment (Sala, 2011). More information on each indicator as well as
data description is found in SI I A.1.2. A new set of indicators is therefore introduced as the opera-
tional set, where the indicators of tier B are excluded, due to lack of suﬃcient data or low data quality.
3.2
Absolute sustainability thresholds for SDG 7
Thresholds were obtained for all the indicators of tier A and A* from Table 3.1, except from indicator
4.11 (metal and mineral resource use) due to lack of suggested thresholds from literature and due
to lack of reasoning for deﬁning a single threshold based on the aggregation of all the metals and
minerals. The following describes the obtained values for both STE- and environmental indicators
which are assessed separately.
STE indicators
Table 3.2 presents all the thresholds (e.i. desired objectives) for the STE indicators. Almost all
thresholds are based on percentage, expressing the state of zero-depression by either 0 or 100 %.
This is except from indicator 1.4 (electricity quality), 1.6 (energy corruption), and 3.1 (energy
intensity). 1.4 was based on a score from 1-7 that represents the quality of the electricity. The data
is based on World Economic Forum (2018) and has been applied as a proxy for measuring energy
quality. Data for indicator 1.6 was based on the national corruption index values from Transparency
International (2015) and used as a proxy for the energy sector in this assessment, assuming that
national corruption is reﬂecting all sectors. These scales provides the bases for the thresholds for
1.4 and 1.6, however, it should be prioritised to develop more suitable data to match the indicators.
For energy eﬃciency and intensity, setting an absolute threshold was not straightforward with
regard to the deﬁnition of absolute boundaries.
Energy intensity and eﬃciency are not per se
reﬂecting sustainability or non-sustainability since energy can come from diﬀerent sources that diﬀer
a lot in impacts and hence it is challenging to set a reasonable cap of the amount of allowed
energy consumption. Energy intensity expressed as energy consumption per GDP has been deemed
Page 26 of 138
==PAGE:41==
Results and Discussion
an imperfect proxy for energy eﬃciency by the United Nations (2016) since it can be aﬀected by
a number of other factors that are not necessarily linked to pure eﬃciency. Setting an absolute
threshold for this indicator would require a choice on the amount of ’allowed’ energy production,
which raises the question of whether this should be decided upon the concept of zero-deprivation
or by limits to impacts on Earth systems, which both would require well-formulated projections of
future population, expected consumption, and technology development. In this assessment, the
threshold for 3.1 and 3.2 are set according to neither of those concepts, due to the previously
mentioned issues. Instead indicator 3.1 was deﬁned according to the deﬁnition of the UN target,
by matching the global intensity in 2030 if a doubling of the average improvement rate from 2010
to 2030 was achieved (e.i. 2.6 % per year). For indicator 3.2, this was set at 100 % according to
the zero-deprivation principle. These values are highly debatable, since suggesting a global intensity
might not be suitable for all countries and since the threshold are rather arbitrary than linked to
actual environmental boundaries. Furthermore, setting a threshold of 100 % eﬃciency is rather
unrealistic considering with the current available technologies. This, points to the fact that other
parameters than the technology factor might become necessary in deﬁning thresholds for energy
eﬃciency indicators. Further discussion on energy eﬃciency thresholds can be found in SI A.1.3.
Table 3.2: Thresholds for the socio- and techno-economic indicators applied in this study (indicator 7.1,
7.2, and 7.3). Thresholds are set according to the ’all-or-nothing’ concept, where energy sectors fall short
if performing outside the thresholds. ’Threshold’ covers the target value/objective of the indicator. ’Basis
for threshold’ indicates the reasoning behind the threshold value.
No.
Indicator
Threshold
Unit
Basis for thresholds
1.1
Access to electricity
100
% population
Zero-deprivation; all below
threshold fall short
1.2
Reliance on clean fuels
and technology
100
% population
Zero-deprivation; all below
threshold fall short
1.4
Electricity quality
7
Scale
Zero-deprivation; all below
threshold fall short
1.6
Corruption index for PPP
energy
100
Scale
Zero-deprivation; all below
threshold fall short
2.1
RE share
100
% MW
Technology optimum; all
energy must be RE based
2.2
Share of RE in newly
installed capacity (MW)
100
% MW
Technology optimum; all
new capacity must be
RE-based
2.3
Share of fossil energy in
decommissioned MW
100
% MW
Technology optimum; all
decommissioned capacity
must be fossil based
Page 27 of 138
==PAGE:42==
Results and Discussion
2.4
Fossil fuel subsidies
0
% GDP
Technology optimum; no
incentives should be given to
fossil fuels
3.1
Energy intensity
3.5
MJ/USD2011
Doubling of eﬃciency
improvement rate;
normalised to global
intensity
3.2
Supply side energy
eﬃciency
100
%
Maximum deployment; full
eﬃciency of energy
conversion and use
Environmental indicators
Table 3.3 presents all thresholds of the environmental indicators at global level. All the thresholds
at the level of national energy sectors can all be found in SI II the Excel spreadsheet for all four
allocation principles.
4.1 Carbon Footprint
Five thresholds were proposed for carbon footprint, due to the bigger attention towards limiting
climate change and due to the diﬀerent carbon sinks and cycle complexity (Ciasullo et al., 2014).
This included the 1.5-2°C goal of the Paris Agreement, the radiative forcing and atmospheric CO2
concentration PBs suggested by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009), and the PB of ocean acidiﬁcation, which
is also linked to CO2 (Rockstr¨om et al., 2009; Steﬀen et al., 2015). It should be kept in mind
that 1.5-2°C goal and the PB for radiative forcing reﬂects all GHGs and is hence given in CO2 eq,
whereas the atmospheric CO2 concentration and ocean acidiﬁcation reﬂects the impacts of CO2
alone. The moving budget was applied to derive at the threshold values since this was deemed
the most available and applicable method. The budgets are based on the diﬀerent Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs). These projections were then run by the MAGICC6 model developed
by Meinshausen et al. (2011), setting the end-year at the point in time of reaching the sustainable
level. For the 1.5°C scenario, the budget was obtained from a newly suggested pathway by Rogelj
et al. (2016) that consistent with a 1.5°C increase in 2100. Comparing the 2 DS value to the value
obtained by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) of 6.81 1012 kg CO2 equivalent per year, the threshold is
set higher in this assessment. One reason for this is the use of a diﬀerent approach where Bjørn
& Hauschild (2015) deﬁnes carrying capacity being equivalent to the steady state deﬁnition in this
assessment, which leads to a more strict threshold, justifying the lower value obtained in their
study. Their model is further based on a number of assumptions and normative choices, hereunder
a substance distribution of GHGs based on 2010 and the Global Warming Potentials based on 100
years. Compared to the remaining carbon budget proposed by Masson-Delmotte et al. (2018), this
Page 28 of 138
==PAGE:43==
Results and Discussion
is 580 Gt CO2 within a certainty of 50 %, corresponding to 7.07 1012 kg CO2 per year (2018 to
2100), and hence well below the values of 2 and 1.5 DS in Table 3.3. However, the value of IPCC
covers the amount of CO2 emissions that lead to a warming of 1.5°C minus the warming from
non-CO2 contributors Masson-Delmotte et al. (2018), and hence only describe the limits for CO2.
This justiﬁes the higher value of this assessment, where all GHG emissions are included as CO2
equivalents. However, the value obtained in Table 3.3 is still high, knowing that the CO2 emissions
cover approx. 75 % of the total GHG emissions (Pachauri et al., 2014). This is believed to be
linked to other model assumptions that contribute to uncertainty, such as temperature response to
CO2, warming contribution from non-CO2 emissions, and baseline year. Given that a large degree
of variance is found across diﬀerent models to obtain remaining carbon budgets, the threshold is
considered reasonable lying in the high end of the uncertainty range (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2018).
Table 3.3: Thresholds for environmental indicators given in indicator-applicable metrics together with the
basis of each threshold. For carbon footprint, more thresholds are proposed, due to the multiple threshold
basses. Eco: ecosystems, HH: human health, TBD: to be developed.
No.
Indicator
Threshold
Unit
Basis for threshold
4.1
Carbon FP
1.80 1013
kg CO2 eq/yr
Temperature increase of 2 °C
4.1
Carbon FP
1.53 1013
kg CO2 eq/yr
Temperature increase of 1.5 °C
4.1
Carbon FP
6.71 1012
kg CO2 eq/yr
Radioactive forcing of 1 W/m2
4.1
Carbon FP
1.09 1012
kg CO2/yr
Atmospheric CO2 concentration
above 350 ppm
4.1
Carbon FP
1.55 1013
kg CO2/yr
Minimum 80 % of saturation
state compared to PI level
4.2a
Photochem. Ozone
formation FP (veg.)
7.70 109
kg NOx eq/yr
3 ppm · h · AOT40 during
may-july (WHO)
4.2b
Photochem. Ozone
formation FP (HH)
1.28 1017
kg NOx eq/yr
Maximum 8 hour mean of 100
µg/m3 (WHO)
4.3
Ozone depletion FP
3.60 108
kg CFC-11 eq/yr
Below 5 % reduction of ozone
concentration
4.4
Particulate matter
FP
1.40 1011
kg PM2.5 eq/yr
Maximum annual average of 10 µ
g/m3 (WHO)
4.5
Terrestrial
acidiﬁcation FP
1.60 1013
kg SO2 eq/yr
117 meq H+/ m2/ year
4.6
Marine
eutrophication FP
5.40 109
kg N-eq/year
Critical value of 1 mg/L Nitrogen
to surface runoﬀ, PB of nitrogen
losses
continues on next page
Page 29 of 138
==PAGE:44==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.3 continued from previous page
4.7
Freshwater
eutrophication FP
8.58 109
kg P-eq/year
Water quality criteria 160
mg/m–3
4.8
Land FP
2.01 1013
m2 croland eq
Maximum 15 % cropland of
world ice-free land area
4.9
Water FP
4.00 1012
m3/yr
Maximum 4,000 km3 blue water
consumption
4.10
Fossil resource use
4.51 1012
kg oil eq/yr
Average use based on URR and
time horizon of 300 yrs
4.11
Metal and mineral
resource use FP
-
-
To be developed
4.12
Ionosing radiation
FP
-
-
To be developed
4.13
Chemical FP
-
-
To be developed
4.14
Particulate matter
peaks
0
% people above
daily threshold
Based on 24-hour mean threshold
of 25 µg/ m3 (To be developed)
4.15
Metal and mineral
recycling rate
100
% kg
All-or-nothing (To be developed)
4.2 Photochemical ozone formation footprint
For photochemical ozone formation impacting on vegetation (4.2a), the threshold value was taken
from the assessment of Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) of 2.70 1010 kg NMVOC equivalent per year,
which was translated to NOx equivalent instead. This resulted in the lower value of Table 3.3, due
to the higher ozone formation potential of NOx (Huijbregts et al., 2016).
For ozone formation impacting on human health (4.2b), the value obtained in this study, was
calculated based on world average intake factors based on van Zelm et al. (2016). The value seems
rather high compared to indicator 4.4 (particulate matter), which also targets human health. How-
ever, the impact potential of ozone compared to PM2.5 is estimated to be 2-4 orders of magnitude
lower, backing up a higher threshold for ozone formation (van Zelm et al., 2016). Furthermore,
one should note the world average intake fraction, which contribute to uncertainty, since the intake
fractions are spatially diﬀerentiated and thresholds should therefore ideally be obtained regionally.
4.3 Ozone depletion footprint
This threshold was taken directly from Bjørn & Hauschild (2015), which build on the PB of Rock-
str¨om et al. (2009). The value should be taken with caution as its basis is highly uncertain, due to
the incomplete knowledge about developing this threshold, which has resulted in the more arbitrary
threshold than based on scientiﬁc consensus (Rockstr¨om et al., 2009; Bjørn & Hauschild, 2015).
Despite the fact that the ozone depleting substances (ODSs) have been phased out thanks to the
Page 30 of 138
==PAGE:45==
Results and Discussion
Montreal Protocol (1987), the current ozone hole is still expected to rise in the coming years (Forster
et al., 2010; Steﬀen et al., 2015). Nitrous oxide also works as a ODS, although it is not accounted
for in the Montreal Protocol. Therefore, the results in from this assessment will measure the impacts
directly related to nitrous oxide (Forster et al., 2010).
4.4 Particulate matter formation footprint
The threshold was set based on the steady state method with respect to human health based on
suggested limits of annual average PM2.5 concentration by the World Health Organization (2005).
The metric was translated using the average human breathing rate, the population in 2011 and a
global average intake factor based on van Zelm et al. (2016).
4.5 Terrestrial acidiﬁcation footprint
The threshold obtained for terrestrial acidiﬁcation was taken from Bjørn & Hauschild (2015), which
builds on critical load values from Bouwman et al. (2002). This threshold value was translated to kg
SO2 equivalent using the acid equivalence of sulphur (2 H+/mole) and the molar mass of SO2. The
value is a global average value of uncertainty ranges for diﬀerent regional thresholds, and hence is
not consistent with the more precautionary approaches used for other indicators were an uncertainty
range is given. The value is therefore assumed higher than in the case of choosing the minimum
value within the uncertainty.
4.6 Marine eutrophication footprint
To obtain a threshold on potential impacts for marine eutrophication, the lower boundary of the
critical value range (e.i. 1.0-2.5 mg/L nitrogen to surface runoﬀ) of De Vries et al. (2013) was
taken as a steady state threshold. The corresponding boundary for annual nitrogen losses, as given
in the paper, was applied to match the required metric in this study (De Vries et al., 2013). Com-
pared to Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) where the value was 2.02 1011 kg N equivalent per year, the
obtained value for indicator 4.6 in Table 3.3 is low, and hence the use of the diﬀerent models is not
robust. Nevertheless, this value applied in this study was from a sound source and provided direct
global boundaries in the metrics applicable to this study. It was also chosen over the value of Bjørn
& Hauschild (2015), to avoid the steps of scaling fate factors from European values to a global level.
4.7 Freshwater eutrophication footprint
The indicator threshold was based on the PB for phosphorous ﬂows from terrestrial ecosystems to
freshwaters proposed by Carpenter & Bennett (2011). The value obtained in this study is larger than
the one obtained by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) (e.i. 5.78 109 kg phosphorous equivalent), although
of same order of magnitude. The value from Table 3.3 is taken as a direct ﬁt to the indicator
metric from the source which was deemed a better ﬁt. However, no natural background level for
this indicator was retrieved and the value is thereby believed to be slightly overestimated.
Page 31 of 138
==PAGE:46==
Results and Discussion
4.8 Land footprint
Since the impact result of the land footprint was obtained as the area of cropland equivalent, the
previous PB suggested by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009) was directly matching the indicator, proposing a
maximum of 15 % of the ice-free land area to be covered by cropland. Even though this PB was
developed by Steﬀen et al. (2015) to reﬂect the minimum cover of forest area, the previous PB was
still deemed a suitable proxy for a steady state threshold in this assessment. However, developing
the threshold for crop equivalent or apply a new impact assessment method to obtain footprint
results that match the new PB is preferable, since the forest biomes were deemed more important
than other biomes in coupling of land-use and climate (Steﬀen et al., 2015). No other thresholds
based on crop land equivalent was found in the literature review.
4.9 Water footprint
The water footprint was taken directly from the PB framework by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009), where the
lower bound of maximum consumptive blue water extraction was 4,000 km3. Gerten et al. (2013)
suggested a new boundary of 2,800 km3 per year (average of 1,100-4500 km3 yr–1), however, they
state that this is still provisional and needs further analysis, which is why it was not selected for this
assessment.
4.10 Fossil resource use footprint
The moving budget method was used to achieve the annual thresholds for fossil resource use based
on the remaining reserves of oil, coal, and gas, derived from Ultimate Recoverable Reserves (URR)
and cumulative production by Mohr et al. (2015). Deriving the annual thresholds were based on
a normative choice of a time horizon of 300 years, where it was assumed that the energy sector
would be fully fossil-free. The use of URR values for the three resources vary a lot across diﬀerent
sources, due to high uncertainties in estimated the probable reserves, which is considered to add
large uncertainty to this threshold (McGlade, 2012; Nehring, 2009). The choice of 300 years is also
an arbitrary value for predicting fossil-independency, which was deemed a fair choice for considering
long-term scarcity, even though the end of production might occur earlier (Mohr et al., 2015). How-
ever, predicting the date where the world becomes liberated from fossil-dependency is not simple
and depends a lot on alternative technology development and political will of nations.
For the footprints of metal and mineral resource use, ionising radiation and chemicals, no thresholds
are proposed in this study. However, for the metal and mineral resource use, a brief discussion of
how to assess this indicator is presented in SI I A.1.4. Due to the very diﬀerent properties and
uses of the diﬀerent minerals and metals and the use of marginal CFs, aggregating them under one
threshold, this not seen as straightforward as for the fossil resources. It is therefore proposed to
explore the approaches of weighting the resources. The threshold indicator 4.14 gauging the 24-
mean peak exposure for particulate matter, was set to zero, relying on the concept of all-or-nothing,
where the performance fall short if the share of people exposed to a concentration above the limit
Page 32 of 138
==PAGE:47==
Results and Discussion
is more than 0 %. Indicator 4.15 were set to 100 % indicator a technical optimum value based on
the all-or-nothing concept as well. No results were obtained for both indicators.
Overall, the proposed thresholds should be taken with caution. The values listed in Table 3.2 and
3.3 were based on ’best estimates’ from literature and translated to ﬁt the indicators, however, a
limited number of proposed thresholds were suggested, which encourages further investigation on
deﬁning each threshold and investigating the possibilities of translating more thresholds from liter-
ature into the annual impact pressures, proposed in this assessment. Moreover, it can be discussed
whether other metrics are more appropriate, since many suggested thresholds from literature are not
deﬁned as annual ﬂow rates, and hence the approach by Ryberg (2018) (recall Section 2.3.1) can
be relevant to explore for as assessment like this. Nevertheless, the use of these metrics are simple
to communicate and directly linked to the impacts produced by an energy facility. The proposed
thresholds presented here should be seen as a guiding proposal within the suggested methodology
that yet calls for further development.
3.3
Current performance of national energy sectors
3.3.1
Normalised country scores
The normalised indicator scores are presented in heatmaps in this section. Since the STE and the
environmental indicators are not comparable (cf. Figure 2.7), the analyses of the scores are kept
separately for the two groups. Normalised values can be found in SI I Table A.35-A.39.
STE indicators
The performances of the countries based on the STE indicators are provided in Table 3.4, where the
dark green color indicates zero deprivation. In general, most countries perform optimally in indicator
1.1, access to electricity, followed by indicator 2.4, fossil fuel subsidies. The high score in electricity
accessibility for most countries was expected due to the rapid increase in electricity deployment
around the world and since most of the countries assessed are developed countries. Hence around
14 % of the population lack access to electricity, which is the case for the less developed regions
including India, South Africa, and the Rest of (Ro.) Asia (incl. Paciﬁc), Ro. Africa, and Ro. Middle
East (International Energy Agency, 2017). For 2.4 it can be discussed whether all the scores should
be this close to ideal since all subsidies to fossil fuel is a shortfall and since 100 % GDP allocated
to fossil fuel subsidies is not considered realistic. In a future study, it should be reassessed to move
the ”worst case” value (e.i. 100 %) to a lower percentage, which reﬂects better the importance
of this barrier. The main hotspot shared among all countries and regions appears to be indicator
2.1 regarding the RE share. Even though many countries are switching towards RE, the global
Page 33 of 138
==PAGE:48==
Results and Discussion
energy sector is still highly depended on fossil-fuels, especially in the case of the transport sector.
In a number of countries, the share of RE is much higher when considering electricity alone, yet
the other energy sectors are still heavily fossil fuel based (e.g. transport and heat), which is why
electriﬁcation of other sectors is often mentioned as an important factor in increasing the RE share
(ERTRAC et al., 2017; Capion et al., 2019).
Contrary to indicator 2.1, many of the countries
perform well in the indicator 2.2 (% new RE capacity) and 2.3 (% decommissioned fossil-based
capacity), which measures the initiatives towards the RE transitions, which supports the expected
development. Yet, a number of countries fall short, implying that some barriers for a faster RE
transition still exist, such as political resistance and high cost of RE technologies. Indicator 3.2 is
also a hotspot across many countries, showing a very diﬀerent pattern compared to the IAEG-SDG
indicator (3.1) to gauge energy eﬃciency, where most countries get an intermediate score. However,
since the threshold for this indicator is set at 100 % all countries will show a degree of deprivation,
due to the fact that it is not technically possible to reach 100 % eﬃciency due to losses. This is why
it should be considered to look into a new threshold that reﬂects a maximum technical performance.
However, Luxembourg approaches a performance close to 100 %, which is considered very high.
Scrutinizing the energy mix, Luxembourg is supplied almost exclusively by energy imports, which
might be a relevant factor to investigate, in order to understand this high eﬃciency.
Overall, it appears that the STE indicators favour the developed and high-income countries,
where countries like India, Indonesia, South Africa and the RoW regions often perform worst. See
SI I Table A.40 for the diﬀerent income groups.
Page 34 of 138
==PAGE:49==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.4: Heatmap based on normalised scores for the STE indicators (1.1-3.2). The scores are normalised
to reﬂect the optimum (e.i. sustainable state) at the lowest value and worst performance at the highest
value. The colours illustrates the degree of deprivation, based on a three-colour scaling with the following
limits: minimum value = 0 (dark green) indicating the sustainable state, mid = 0.1 (yellow), max = 1
(red) indicating maximum deprivation. Light grey cells represent missing data. no: not occurring.
Country
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
no.
Bulgaria
Canada
China
no.
Croatia
no.
Cyprus
no.
Czech Republic
no.
Denmark
no.
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
India
no.
Indonesia
Ireland
no.
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
no.
Netherlands
no.
Norway
Poland
no.
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
no.
United Kingdom
United States
Asia and Pacidifc
America
Europe
Africa
Middle East
Page 35 of 138
==PAGE:50==
Results and Discussion
Environmental indicators
The normalised scores for the environmental indicators are provided in the heatmaps in Table 3.5-3.7
for allocation principle 1, 2, and 3. The result for principle 4 is not presented here since all countries
obtain the same score due to the grandfathering allocation (allocation based on current impact
level). Values for all four allocation principles are found in SI I Table A.36-A.38. The ﬁve results for
indicator 4.1 reﬂect the use of the ﬁve diﬀerent thresholds for indicator 4.1 (carbon footprint).
Across the diﬀerent allocation principles, a common trend shows that indicator 4.2b (ozone formation
HH) and 4.7 (freshwater eutrophication) perform better than the other indicators and perform at a
sustainable level almost across all countries. This is also observed from Figure 3.1, which presents
a boxplot of the variance of the results for allocation principle 1, where all the normalised scores
for 4.2b and 4.7 are found below the threshold line (red line). This signiﬁes that the two impacts
are not important issues for the energy sector, compared to other potential impacts. For freshwater
eutrophication, this is a sensible observation, as phosphorous emissions are mainly associated with
mining, untreated sewage, and agricultural activity, whereof these sources are not directly linked to
energy production. Laurent & Espinosa (2015) studied the environmental impacts associated with
electricity production around the world, where freshwater eutrophication was found as the lowest
impact across regions, which is in accordance with the appearance of indicator 4.7 in the heatmaps
in the study. However, some countries transgress the threshold for freshwater eutrophication, when
considering Table 3.6 and 3.7, hereunder Canada. The reason for this is believed to be due to
the mining activities within the country, which aﬀects the size of the allowed emissions in principle
2 and 3.
In principle 2, low-impacting countries are favoured due to the correction factor (see
Table 2.2) that discriminates the energy sectors, based on the impact level of the whole country.
Canada’s energy sector, does not account for a high share of phosphorous emissions within the
whole country, yet at country level, the amount of phosphorous emissions is high, which is being
reﬂected in the threshold. Principle 3, gives higher shares to the high-impacting sectors, and hence
Canada is granted a low share, due to their relatively small impacts from the energy sector. Since
some countries transgress the limit and other countries approach it, the indicator remains relevant
to consider when assessing absolute sustainability (see normalised values in Table A.36-A.38).
For indicator 4.2b, all countries perform sustainably with a score below and far from reaching the
threshold, which is consistent across all allocation principles. A reason for this is the high threshold
deﬁned globally (recall Table 3.3), indicating that the impact level coming from the energy sectors
is well below the threshold based on recommendations from World Health Organization (2005).
Despite the lack of spatial diﬀerentiation, which should ideally have been applied to this indicator
threshold, all countries are far from reaching the thresholds, e.g. the threshold is still seven times
larger than the largest observed values across countries.
This implies that the indicator is not
adequate for the energy sector after all, therefore, it should be reassessed whether to include this
indicator in the proposed SDG 7 set.
Page 36 of 138
==PAGE:51==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.5: Heatmap for normalised scores for the environmental indicators (4.1-4.10) of allocation prin-
ciple 1 (equal per capita + GVA share). The colours illustrates the sustainability performance, based on a
three-colour scaling where the sustainable state in the range 0-1 is indicated by green colours (dark green
being the lowest impacts), the range 1-100 (unsustainable state) is indicated by yellow and everything >
100 (unsustainable state) is indicated by a red colour (dark red being the highest impacts). Light grey cells
represent missing data.
Country
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.2b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Rep.
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
UK
US
Ro. Asia
Ro. America
Ro. Europe
Ro. Africa
Ro. M.E.
Page 37 of 138
==PAGE:52==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.6: Heatmap for normalised scores for the environmental indicators (4.1-4.10) of allocation prin-
ciple 2 (equal per capita + GVA share + correction factor favouring low-impacting countries).
The
colours illustrates the sustainability performance, based on a three-colour scaling where the sustainable
state in the range 0-1 is indicated by green colours (dark green being the lowest impacts), the range 1-100
(unsustainable state) is indicated by yellow and everything > 100 (unsustainable state) is indicated by a
red colour (dark red being the highest impacts). Light grey cells represent missing data.
Country
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.2b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Rep.
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
UK
US
Ro. Asia
Ro. America
Ro. Europe
Ro. Africa
Ro. M.E.
Page 38 of 138
==PAGE:53==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.7: Heatmap for normalised scores for the environmental indicators (4.1-4.10) of allocation prin-
ciple 3 (equal per capita + grandfathering). The colours illustrates the sustainability performance, based
on a three-colour scaling where the sustainable state in the range 0-1 is indicated by green colours (dark
green being the lowest impacts), the range 1-100 (unsustainable state) is indicated by yellow and everything
> 100 (unsustainable state) is indicated by a red colour (dark red being the highest impacts). Light grey
cells represent missing data.
Country
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.2b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Rep.
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
UK
US
Ro. Asia
Ro. America
Ro. Europe
Ro. Africa
Ro. M.E.
Page 39 of 138
==PAGE:54==
Results and Discussion
For most indicators, all countries perform unsustainably (yellow and red colours in the heatmaps),
where the biggest hotspots are found for indicator 4.1 (carbon footprint) and 4.2a (ozone formation
veg.). Even though the magnitude of the scores varies within the range of thresholds for indicator
4.1, they all perform as hotspots in the assessment for most countries in the ﬁrst allocation principle
1 and 2. This highlights the substantial impact that energy production has on climate change, which
is highly transgressed across all countries (Pachauri et al., 2014). There is an exception of a few
countries when varying the allocation principle and the choice of threshold, this variance between
the diﬀerent carbon footprint thresholds can be seen in Figure 3.1. The two scores based on the PB
framework (e.g. 4.1c and 4.1d) are resulting in the highest scores covering the biggest variances,
which is due to the more conservative approach from this framework, setting the threshold at the
minimum of the uncertainty range (recall Section 2.3.1). What mostly stands out is the PB based
score, based on atmospheric CO2 concentration (e.i. 4.1d), which spans the biggest variance by
far with a interquartile range above the others (note the logarithmic scale in the y-axis). It is not
consistent with the fact that the primary PB (e.g. radiative forcing) is generally more stringent than
the other (Steﬀen et al., 2015). One reason for this is linked to the choice of scenario modelled
to obtain the annual threshold in this assessment. The scenarios run with the MAGICC6 model
target CO2 reductions over other GHGs, e.g. CO2 is the only gas that obtains negative emissions
in RCP2.6, and therefore lower the allowed CO2 emissions. Furthermore, the GHG emissions from
the energy sector are composed of > 75 % CO2, which makes this substance a speciﬁc hotspot for
the energy sector (Pachauri et al., 2014). Adding to that, the average amount of CO2 emissions
obtained with the EE-MRIO model in this study accounts for approx.
90 % of the total GHG
emissions (in CO2eq.), e.i. higher than expected. This is believed to be linked to uncertainties of
the model and its inputs, resulting in this notably higher overshoot. Even though the other scores
for 4.1 have ranges well below those of the interquartile of the 4.1d, they all reveal an overshoot
across all countries, with more than a factor 100 for some countries. It is therefore evident that
climate change is a hotspot impact category within energy sectors, which supports its big attention
among policy-makers.
The high scores in the second main hotspot in 4.2a (ozone formation veg.) are linked to NOx
and NMVOC emissions. In this assessment these are related to combustion, which is directly linked
to energy production and internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles. The scores indicate an alarming
overshoot across all four principles, which appears to be even worse than for some of the carbon
footprint scores. It should be kept in mind that the global threshold values obtained respectively for
ozone formation and carbon footprint are based on diﬀerent approaches in this study (e.g. steady
state and moving budget recall Table 2.1), which inﬂuences the normalised scores. Furthermore, the
sources threshold for ozone formation is based on an extrapolation from European to Global level,
which add uncertainty to the ﬁnal results. It is obvious that indicator 4.2b is a hotspot in the energy
sector, which should not be overlooked.
For the ’resource’ indicators 4.8 (land footprint) and 4.10 (fossil resource footprints) principle
1 and 2 also show an overshoot across almost all countries and even hotspots for some countries.
Page 40 of 138
==PAGE:55==
Results and Discussion
The high impact of fossil resource use is expected due to the limited resources and to its direct link
to combustion and carbon footprint. For land use the impacts are related to the area taken up by
the energy sectors for energy production purposes, which is linked to all sources of energy, especially
from biomass from crops (Dale & Kline, 2017).
Figure 3.1: Boxplot of the variability of normalised indicators scores based on allocation principle 1. The
red line represents the threshold values. Note the logarithmic scale on the y-axis. Boxplots indicate 25–75
percentile (e.i. Q1 and Q3) with the median indicated by the midline, while whiskers indicate the minimum
and maximum values excluding outliers. The dots indicate the outliers of the data sets, which are deﬁned
as values 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQ) above Q3 or below Q1.
Overall, it appears that more countries perform best for principle 3 and least for principle 2 followed
closely by principle 1. It was expected that the per capita low impacting regions would perform
much better with allocation principle 2, due to the correction factor in principle 2 that prioritise low-
impacting countries over high-impacting countries. This is conﬁrmed in the heatmaps (and values in
Table A.36-A.38) where the European countries perform least in principle 2 in most indicators, while
the countries India and Indonesia perform notably better. Altogether, all regions appear to perform
closer to a sustainable level when applying principle 3 and 4. The reason for this trend is explained
by the diﬀerent allocation shares from national to sectoral level, where the GVA based allocation (e.i.
allocation principle 1) provides smaller shares compared to the impact based allocation. Vice versa,
principle 2 including the correction factor that favours low-impacting countries, results in poorer
Page 41 of 138
==PAGE:56==
Results and Discussion
performances than principle 3. Overall, the results are biased against the sub-set of countries that in
general have higher per capita impacts associated with their energy sectors than the world average,
resulting in the overall better performance in the grandfathering principle (e.i. allocation principle
4). This bias towards the more developed, high-income countries gives an inadequate representation
of the global performance, which should be kept in mind when interpreting the results. This means
that the results are not robust to the choice of allocation principle, since the choice of downscaling
principle from country to sectoral level results in a delicate balance for some countries between being
sustainable or unsustainable.
As mentioned, the GVA of the energy sectors obtained from the input-output model accounted
for a smaller share of the full country compared to shares based on impacts, which is might indicate
that the sector adds small value to society compared to other sectors, justifying the smaller allo-
cated share of impacts for this principle. However, a general underestimation from the EE-MRIO is
believed to exist, since it was found that the energy globally obtained carbon footprint from energy
value was only reaching , which could be an indication that the whole sector is underestimated and
ergo the GVA will be as well. This is an important factor that contributes to the overall uncertainty
of the results, where some countries would move below the red line (see Figure 3.1) if the GVA share
was increased.
3.3.2
Weighting and ranking of countries
Rankings were compared across the diﬀerent weighting approaches and compared to ranking based
on the SDG Index & Dashboards by Sachs et al. (2019). In this section allocation principle 1 was
taken as a default to investigate the diﬀerent weighting approaches. Results for allocation principle
2 and 3 are documented in SI I Table A.45-A.48. The rankings based on the total SDG 7 score are
given in Table 3.8 and 3.9 based on equal weighting and score-based weighting respectively. The
ranking based on the separate group-scores for STE and environmental indicators can be found in
SI I Table A.41 and A.42.
Within the two rankings, the Netherlands performs in the top two, whilst the two rankings share Rus-
sia, Canada, Cyprus and Greece in their bottom six. The Netherlands is highly fossil fuel dependent
in its energy supply being mainly supplied by oil and natural gas (IEA, 2020). The reason for this
relatively steady position at the top of both rankings is not obvious given their energy landscapes.
Hence, their performance is mainly due to the relatively good performance in both the STE and the
environmental indicators (see SI I Table A.36 and A.35). This results in a better ﬁnal score that
them the country to the top, compared to the countries that have bigger trade-oﬀs between the two
groups. For the bottom performing countries, all four countries perform amongst the lowest in the
indicators carbon footprint and ozone formation (veg.) that contribute to high impact. Scrutinizing
on the STE indicators it is found that Russia obtained a high degree of deprivation in the indicators
Page 42 of 138
==PAGE:57==
Results and Discussion
related to RE deployment, because the main part of newly installed capacity in Russia is based on
fossil fuels, while no fossil-based capacity has been decommissioned. The country is far from reach-
ing the target of energy intensity, which contributes to higher deprivation. Canada obtains a similar
lowest score for energy intensity (e.i. 3.1), which is believed to be caused by the high impacts in the
environmental indicators. Cyprus and Greece have some of the highest impacts in indicator 4.2a,
4.2b, and 4.4, which all relate to particle emissions, and can be linked to the energy mixes of the
countries, where Greece still has a high dependency on coal and Cyprus is almost exclusively supplied
by crude oil and is inﬂuenced by the use of a sulphur rich oil (EEA, 2005). In general, is it not
easy to spot clear trends in the rankings, where both high income (H) and lower- to upper middle
income (LM and UM) countries are more or less mixed across the rankings as well as countries
with higher and lower fossil-based energy shares. The allocation parameters that determines the
downscaled shares (e.i. population and GVA share) have an impact on the results, which are con-
tributing to this ranking. Furthermore, the addition of the environmental indicators creates a delicate
balance between top performers, in the STE and the environmental group, for obtaining high posi-
tions in the ﬁnal rankings due to anti-correlation between the STE and the environmental indicators.
Comparing the diﬀerences between the two rankings, it is evident that the weighting principle has a
great inﬂuence on the results. A standing out observation is that India and Australia move from the
bottom 10 ranks based on equal weighting to the top 10 in the score-based weighting. Furthermore,
it is seen that more of the RoW regions move upwards while the European countries move down
the list in the score-based ranking. The reason for these diﬀerences is that countries that perform
well in the hotspot indicators (having larger magnitudes), also obtain a better score in the score-
based weighted results. Here more weight given to the environmental indicators in the score-based
ranking, where the European in general appears to perform worse. For the environmental indicator,
photochemical ozone formation (veg.) determines by far the biggest share of the score (> 78 %)
followed by land, water and carbon footprint (18 %), whereas for the STE indicators this is the RE
share indicator (> 30 %), followed by the corruption and energy intensity and eﬃciency (10-15 %).
For ozone formation (indicator 4.2a) India has the smallest impacts, followed by Brazil, Indonesia,
Ro. America, and Australia, and for carbon footprint this is Ro. Africa followed by India, Indonesia,
Brazil and Ro. Asia (see values in Table A.36).
For the STE indicators Sweden and Norway top the scores of the hotspot indicator 2.1 (RE
share). While for the environmental scores Brazil, India, and Indonesia top the hotspot (indicator
4.1 and 4.2a). These observations are reﬂected in the two separated group scores for STE and
environmental indicators (see SI I Table A.41 and A.42), where Norway and Sweden top the ﬁrst
list and India and Brazil the second. Same observations can be seen from the bottom countries,
where Greece and Cyprus have the largest ozone formation footprints. Altogether, it appears that
the magnitudes of some of the environmental indicator scores, especially 4.2a, are reﬂected in the
ﬁnal SDG 7 ranking of the score-based weighting to a higher degree, judging from the similarities
of the rankings.
Page 43 of 138
==PAGE:58==
Results and Discussion
Table 3.8: Ranking of energy sectors based on
equal weighting for all indicators. A low rank
score indicates a better performance.
Rank
Region
Score
1
Netherlands
0.44
2
Hungary
0.49
3
Portugal
0.51
4
France
0.53
5
Ireland
0.53
6
Turkey
0.54
7
Austria
0.55
8
Luxembourg
0.56
9
Brazil
0.57
10
Slovak Republic
0.60
11
United Kingdom
0.61
12
Lithuania
0.62
13
Belgium
0.63
14
Croatia
0.63
15
Japan
0.64
16
Spain
0.65
17
Switzerland
0.66
18
Malta
0.69
19
Norway
0.72
20
Denmark
0.74
21
Sweden
0.75
22
Germany
0.76
23
Czech Republic
0.79
24
Italy
0.81
25
Mexico
0.81
26
Romania
0.81
27
Poland
0.88
28
America
0.97
29
Indonesia
1.02
30
Latvia
1.02
31
United States
1.03
32
Estonia
1.06
33
Bulgaria
1.13
34
Slovenia
1.15
35
Middle East
1.20
36
South Africa
1.25
37
China
1.28
38
India
1.33
39
Finland
1.36
40
Europe
1.39
41
Africa
1.47
42
Cyprus
1.53
43
Greece
1.72
44
Russian Federation
1.73
45
Australia
1.76
46
Canada
1.79
47
Asia and Pacidifc
1.82
Table 3.9:
Ranking based on score-based
weighting for all indicators. A low rank score
indicates a better performance.
Rank
Region
Score
1
Brazil
0.45
2
Netherlands
0.55
3
Luxembourg
0.55
4
India
0.59
5
Ro. America
0.61
6
Belgium
0.61
7
Lithuania
0.62
8
Australia
0.62
9
Indonesia
0.63
10
France
0.66
11
Ireland
0.69
12
Hungary
0.70
13
Slovak Republic
0.71
14
Turkey
0.71
15
Czech Republic
0.73
16
United Kingdom
0.74
17
Sweden
0.75
18
Ro. Asia and Pacidifc
0.76
19
South Africa
0.76
20
China
0.76
21
Poland
0.79
22
Switzerland
0.80
23
Japan
0.81
24
Romania
0.81
25
Austria
0.81
26
Ro. Africa
0.83
27
Croatia
0.84
28
Estonia
0.84
29
Latvia
0.86
30
Mexico
0.87
31
Finland
0.90
32
Ro. Middle East
0.94
33
Ro. Europe
0.97
34
Bulgaria
1.01
35
Germany
1.02
36
Denmark
1.02
37
Portugal
1.05
38
United States
1.08
39
Malta
1.08
40
Italy
1.26
41
Spain
1.43
42
Slovenia
1.50
43
Norway
1.52
44
Russia
1.53
45
Canada
1.92
46
Greece
3.22
47
Cyprus
4.11
Page 44 of 138
==PAGE:59==
Results and Discussion
Comparing the ranking of this study with the SDG 7 ranking based on the SDG Index and Dashboards
by Sachs et al. (2016, 2019) (referred to as SDG Index in the following), large diﬀerences can be
observed. The top performers such as the Netherlands, Hungary, Luxembourg, and India are found
much further down the list, while the top performers in the SDG Index assessment consist of
Sweden, Norway, France, and Switzerland (see SI I Table A.43 and A.44). Another observation is
that Canada moves from the bottom four to position six in the SDG index rank, indicating that the
values behind the set of indicators are very diﬀerent. Juxtaposing the top ﬁve and bottom ﬁve in the
two frameworks, no similarities appear. To check the correlation between the diﬀerent assessment,
the two ﬁnal rankings in this study are plotted against the ranking based on the SDG Index 2016,
which are found in Figure 3.2 and 3.3.
Figure 3.2: Shaded area = annual GHG emis-
sions in RCP2.6 scenario, ﬂat area = annual
emissions average over the full period. Modelled
with MAGICC6 Meinshausen et al. (2011).
Figure 3.3: Shaded area = annual GHG emis-
sions in RCP2.6 scenario, ﬂat area = annual
emissions average over the full period. Modelled
with MAGICC6 Meinshausen et al. (2011).
As observed from the two plots, the ranks of this study do not show linear correlations with SDG Index
ranking. However, there might be an increasing monotonous correlation, which was investigated by
a Spearmans rank order test. The Spearman’s rank order coeﬃcient measures the strength and
direction of the monotonic relationship be between two ranked variables. This test was done for
the SDG Index 2016 ranking respectively with each of the rankings within this study, e.i.
the
total index scores based on equal weighting and score-based weighting and the scores for each of the
groups; STE and Environmental indicators. The four rankings in this study were also tested pairwise.
The results are presented in Table 3.10 by the R-squared value to compare linear correlation, the
Spearman’s rank order coeﬃcient (Rho), and the p-value to explain the signiﬁcance level hereof.
Juxtaposing the SDG Index ranking and the index scores of this assessment, the rho value shows
very weak monotonous correlation in both cases (e.i. Test 1 and 2 in Table 3.10), and even a
negative value for the score-based ranking implying conﬂicting results. This was expected due to
the addition of new indicators in this study, especially the addition of the environmental dimension.
Looking at the correlation between the group scores (STE and Environmental), a higher correlation
Page 45 of 138
==PAGE:60==
Results and Discussion
is observed for the STE group scores than for the index scores while the environmental group
scores show even less correlation.
For the environmental scores the R-squared values show no
correlation, however, applying the Spearman’s rank order illustrate a moderate negative correlation.
This supports this previous reasoning, that the STE ranking is more similar to the SDG Index ranking
than the environmental ranking is.
Table 3.10: The table contains an overview of the correlation between the rankings based on diﬀerent
weighting principles within this study and with the rankings based on SDG 7 scores from SDG Index 2016
calculated based on Sachs et al. (2016). The R2 value is adjusted to ﬁt the data set and explains how
much the variance of the investigated pair correlate. Rho is the Spearman’s rank order coeﬃcient that
measures the strength and direction between two ranked variables. The p-value tells the signiﬁcance level
of rho, red text indicated a p-value > 0.05.
Test
X axis
Y axis
R2
Rho
p value
1
Index - Equal weighting
SDG Index 2016
0.69
0.32
2.8E-02
2
Index - Score based
SDG Index 2016
0.37
-0.31
3.2E-02
3
Group - STE Score
SDG Index 2016
0.71
0.51
3.1E-04
4
Group - Environmental
SDG Index 2016
0.11
-0.53
1.4E-04
5
Index - Equal weighting
Index - Score based
0.75
0.42
3.2E-03
6
Group - Environmental
Index - Score based
0.86
0.87
2.2E-16
7
Group - STE
Index - Score based
0.65
0.05
7.3E-01
8
Group - Environmental Score
Index - Equal weighting
0.43
0.11
4.6E-01
9
Group - STE
Index - Equal weighting
0.89
0.55
7.5E-05
10
Group - STE
Group - Environmental
0.28
-0.37
1.1E-02
The last six paired tests in Table 3.10 include the internal rankings of this study. Test 5 shows that
the two index rankings (e.i. including all indicators) are showing only weak correlation justifying
the diﬀerences observed between the two rankings (e.i. Table 3.8 and 3.9). Moving on to Test
6 to 9, this shows the correlation between the group scores and the total index scores based on
the two weighting principles. Here, a signiﬁcantly high correlation (rho > 0.8) is obtained between
the environmental group ranking and the score-based index ranking (Test 6), while no correlation is
observed for the ranking of the STE group (Test 7) (p value < 0.05). This signiﬁes that the environ-
mental indicators drive the ﬁnal index score when using the score-based weighting, which gives more
weight to the environmental indicators than the STE indicators. The test for the equal-weighting
based principle (Test 8 and 9) show an opposite trend, where the STE group is more correlated
than the environmental group (e.i. showing no correlation). Finally, Test 10 illustrates the lack
of correlation between the scores of the two groups. The observations illustrate the importance
of the environmental indicators when comparing the SDG Index ranking. Furthermore, the choice
of weighting approach has a substantial eﬀect on which indicators are being favoured. Since the
Page 46 of 138
==PAGE:61==
Results and Discussion
score-based weighting approach gives higher weight to indicators with larger values, e.i. hotspots,
these contribute more to the ﬁnal group score. Yet, the reason that the score-based index score is
aﬀected more by the environmental group is linked to the larger variety of scores within this group
(see Figure A.7 in SI I), which spans a higher variation and contains large outlier values, which
explains more of the total index variance.
It is evident that the two frameworks (this study and Sachs et al. (2016)) are resulting in very
diﬀerent conclusions. This was expected due to the presence of a high number of environmental
indicators recommended in the newly deﬁned target in this study (see Section 3.1). In an audit
of the SDG Index 2019, the Joint Research Centre (JRC) (the European Commission’s science
and knowledge service) studied the statistical coherence of the SDG indicator structure, where
they tested the correlation between the SDG goal scores and the overall SDG Index scores (Rita,
2019).
Here they found that some indicators as well as goal scores were negatively correlating
with the overall index, stressing the issue of trade-oﬀs between social and environmental indicators.
Hence, the issue of having environmental indicators together with social indicators has already been
acknowledged, calling for a developed method for indicating the progress of both dimensions. At
any rate, gauging the SDG 7 without the inclusion of environmental indicators depicts the country
performances very diﬀerently, which is misleading if decision-makers want to include all dimensions of
sustainability. It is recognised that the currently proposed set of SDG 7 indicators is rather extensive
and that it is debatable how much each indicator should weight in the ﬁnal SDG 7 score. For these
reasons, it is recommended to explore the possibilities of short-listing the set, developing reasonable
weighting schemes that underpin the overall goal and investigating the possibilities of overcoming
contradictions between indicators.
3.3.3
Cross-correlation analysis: relative vs. absolute sustainability
A cross-correlation analysis of the proposed indicators was done to investigate the co-variations and
co-dependencies between indicators and potentially be able to short-listen the number of indicators.
The correlation between all indicators are indicated by Pearson correlation coeﬃcients and it was
checked whether the correlation was statistically signiﬁcant indicated by a signiﬁcance level of 5 %.
A correlation between indicators and the overall index implies that the SDG 7 index score represents
the values behind the assessed indicator well. In the JRC audit of the SDG Index 2019, a cross-
correlation analysis was also used to check for redundancy, by identifying highly correlated indicators
(Rita, 2019). Avoiding over-counting of a single value can then be done by simply excluding one
of the highly correlating indicators. This is normal practice when assessing relative sustainability
(e.g. in LCA), where one indicator is selected as a proxy for other highly correlating indicators
(Kalbar et al., 2017). Hence, this test was applied to the indicator values before being exposed to
normalisation as in assessments that target relative sustainability (see values from impact assessment
in Table A.34). Hereafter, the same analysis was used to investigate the correlation between the
Page 47 of 138
==PAGE:62==
Results and Discussion
normalised scores reﬂecting absolute sustainability, with the aim of spotting potential diﬀerences
from the two analyses.
Relative sustainability
Table 3.4 shows the correlation between the obtained indicator values that reﬂects only relative
sustainability with the indicator speciﬁc metrics (see values in SI I Table A.34). The negatively
correlated indicators are highlighted by red, highly correlated indicators above 0.8 are highlighted
blue, and correlation that was not statistically signiﬁcant is marked in grey. A high number of
indicators are representing a negative relation to each other, especially in the middle zone of the
ﬁgure, where the STE indicators are compared to the environmental ones.
This represents the
trade-oﬀs that exist between the social and environmental dimension of sustainability, meaning that
a country with a low score in one of the dimensions is expected to get a high score in the other
dimension. Furthermore, it is observed that some indicators correlate strongly (Pearson coeﬃcient
> 0.8), where indicator 4.1 (carbon footprint) appears to be collinear (lies on the same straight
line) with 4.5 (terrestrial acidiﬁcation). Hence if one is to assess whether an energy sector becomes
more sustainable with potential changes (recall Figure 2.3), one of the indicators can perform a
proxy for the direction of change for both indicators. This also applies for indicator 4.2b with 4.4
and potentially more of the high correlating indicators.
Absolute sustainability
Figure 3.5 presents correlation coeﬃcients between all the normalised indicator scores. The total
SDG 7 scores for the two weighting principles for allocation principle 1 are also added to reﬂect the
similarities between indicators and index scores. Similar ﬁgures are found for allocation principle 2
and 3 in SI I Figure A.8 and A.9. The same trade-oﬀs between many of the STE and environmental
indicators can be observed here as was found in the ”relative” analysis. Considering the correlation
with the SDG 7 index scores 15 out of 21 indicators are signiﬁcantly correlating with the equal
weighting index (Index 1), while this is ﬁve for the score-based weighting (Index 2). The higher
the correlation the more the respective indicators drive the overall index score, where more STE
indicators correlate with Index 1 and only environmental indicators correlate with Index 2. This
is consistent with previously reasoning of the environmental indicators driving Index 2 (cf. Table
3.10). The underlying drivers of this group appear to be indicator 4.2a and 4.2b (ozone formation
impacting on vegetation and human health). 4.2a having the highest normalised indicator scores
underpins the earlier statement that the high magnitude indicators explain more of the variance of
Index 2. Comparing this analysis with the previous (e.i. for relative sustainability), fewer indicators
are found to be highly correlating. Hence, it is not suﬃcient to investigate the correlation for relative
sustainability, the indicators need to co-vary in terms of absolute sustainability, due to the changed
performances determined by the thresholds.
Furthermore, using the same approach as presented above for non-normalised results would mean
Page 48 of 138
==PAGE:63==
Results and Discussion
that indicator 4.2a and 4.2b potentially could perform as a proxy of each other, since they are highly
correlated, rationalising the exclusion of one or the other. However, while this works for investigating
relative sustainability, this is not the case for absolute sustainability, since the perspective of absolute
sustainability will be lost for the excluded indicator. For indicator 4.2a, where all countries are highly
overshooting the threshold and indicator 4.2b, where all countries perform well below (see values in
Table A.36), this illustrates well this point; using 4.2b to represent both would lead to very diﬀerent
conclusions, since the magnitude of indicator 4.2a is dismissed. This stresses an important diﬀerence
between to relative and the absolute perspective of sustainability, where the same approach is not
suited in the latter case. Identifying strong correlations can however still be used to suggest potential
indicator groups, which can be used to create a basis for new weighting schemes.
Page 49 of 138
==PAGE:64==
Results and Discussion
Figure 3.4: Correlation coeﬃcients for all indicator values before normalisation to thresholds. All coeﬃcients above 0.85 are marked in blue, all
negative correlated indicators in red, and correlation between two indicators that was not statistically signiﬁcant are highlighted in grey.
Page 50 of 138
==PAGE:65==
Results and Discussion
Figure 3.5: Correlation coeﬃcients for all indicator and index score based on allocation principles 1. S1 and S2 represents the ﬁnal score of
indicators based on equal weighting to indicators and equal weighting to targets respectively. All coeﬃcients above 0.85 are marked in blue, all
negative correlated indicators in red, and correlation between two indicators that was not statistically signiﬁcant are highlighted in grey.
Page 51 of 138
==PAGE:66==
Results and Discussion
3.3.4
Uncertainty and limitations
Throughout this assessment, a number of limitations have given rise to uncertainties of the results.
A quantitative assessment of the uncertainties is not possible, because of lack of information, there-
fore the sources of uncertainty and the limitations are discussed qualitatively. The uncertainties are
grouped into four types and discussed separately below, being data uncertainty, modelling uncer-
tainty, uncertainty due to choices, and epistemological uncertainty.
Data uncertainty
The number of indicators proposed in this study introduces uncertainty from the data sources used
for measuring the indicators. The STE indicator data obtained from various databases were limited
for some indicators, where data was not obtainable or limited in quality and geographical coverage.
This was such as indicator 1.4 and 1.6 where proxy data was used to measure the indicator, and
indicator 2.4 (fossil fuel subsidies) and 3.2 (supply side eﬃciency) which was only obtained for 73 and
48 countries respectively. Data coverage for the footprint indicators was limited to the Exiobase v3.4
database that deﬁned the assessed sub-set of countries, that were limited to the 42 countries and ﬁve
RoW regions. The limitation in geographical coverage resulted in a bias towards European countries
and some of the major economies in the world, while the remaining countries from other continents
were aggregated into the ﬁve RoW regions, and hence the indicator data for the RoW regions is not
a rightful representation of all countries herein. This potentially adds large uncertainty, due to lack
of country data in some STE indicators that were aggregated and due to the lack of resolution in
Exiobase. This country bias further leads to a bias in the interpretation of the normalised results and
country ranking, where a higher resolution of the RoW region will possibly change the landscape of
the heatmaps and move the country ranks of this assessment.
The environmental indicator data was based on 2011, due to the lower temporal data availability
of Exiobase. This is inconsistent with the assessment year, which makes the indicator values for the
environmental indicators less temporally representative. If the energy landscape of countries went
through major changes, between 2011 and 2015, this would potentially change their performance
with regards to absolute sustainability as well as move up- or downward the ﬁnal ranking. This is
believed to have an important relevance at country level for countries that perform borderline to be-
ing sustainable or not, and to their position relative to other countries in the ﬁnal ranking. However,
this is not believed to change the overall picture of the worse and better performing countries in the
ranking, since such big-scale changes often takes a long time. Furthermore, the sector-resolution of
Exiobase is believed to have an important eﬀect on the indicator results. The industries included
in Exiobase are not grouped at sector level and since many industries could be overlapping and a
speciﬁcation of the diﬀerent industries was not available. Therefore, the ﬁnal choice of industries
to represent the energy sector (see Table A.32) is an important source of uncertainty. Based on
the obtained carbon footprint value for all countries, this value was found to be underestimated
compared to existing knowledge of impacts from the energy sector (Pachauri et al., 2014). Hence,
Page 52 of 138
==PAGE:67==
Results and Discussion
this is considered an indication of the whole sector being underestimated, which potentially adds
uncertainty to the ﬁnal impact results, meaning that several countries might perform worse. This
low sectoral representativeness, this is not expected to change the ranking results markedly, since all
countries are believed to be inﬂuenced more or less equally by this uncertainty parameter. However,
it is considered an important uncertainty factor that aﬀects the magnitude of the normalised results.
Modelling uncertainty
The data quality obtained from the EE-MRIO model also stands some uncertainties due to the
modelling approach.
First of all, the method is not measuring environmental impacts directly,
yet indirectly by linkage to economic ﬂows. This is based on an assumption of homogeneity across
product outputs that they carry the same environmental impact independently of the exact producer
and product (Kitzes, 2013). This is not the case in reality, where one economic unit within a sector
depends a lot on the speciﬁc product and the spatial diversity. This contributes to an unjust between
the speciﬁcity of each consumed product which potentially leads to under- or overestimations for
speciﬁc energy sectors around the world. The EE-MRIO model also works as a linear model that
assumes a constant input ﬂow is equal to a constant output ﬂow and does not capture impacts related
to unpaid work. These limitations of the model is an important source of uncertainty, which will
aﬀect all the indicators results and their level of impacts with regards to absolute sustainability. This
disregards the technological advantages that might be in some countries and therefore potentially
aﬀects the country performances and their ranks.
Other model uncertainties arise from the global threshold values. The thresholds obtained form
literature all depend on diﬀerent models, which diﬀer en assumptions and simpliﬁcations. This in-
cluded the use of global average CFs and intake factors for regional impacts, projections of emissions
in the future, and diﬀerent impact pathway models. This underlying uncertainty is believed to aﬀect
the normalised scores, moving countries closer or further from the threshold, however, this it will
not lead to changes in the ranking, since the relative change between countries will remain.
Uncertainty due to choices
A number of methodological choices were made in this study, which lead to uncertainty of the results.
One of them is the choice of using the annual impact metrics for the environmental indicators,
which results in a bias towards thresholds from literature which are better suited for the translation.
Hence, some thresholds were discriminated based on the given metric, where lack of knowledge
for translating the metric resulted in exclusion. Also, three diﬀerent methods were identiﬁed and
used for deﬁning the thresholds (recall Table 2.1) leading to inconsistencies in the deﬁnition of the
absolute sustainability thresholds, which may give an advantages to some indicators over others (e.g.
moving budget is less strict than steady state). This should be kept in mind when interpreting the
results and it should be considered to harmonise the thresholds of the environmental indicators to
reﬂect the same deﬁnition of absolute sustainability.
Another choice is the allocation principle used for deﬁning the national and sectoral thresholds.
Page 53 of 138
==PAGE:68==
Results and Discussion
This was explored with three diﬀerent principles, where the normalised results were not robust to
diﬀerent principles. This choice relies on the values of the developer and there is not one principle
that is more correct than others. It it therefore important to clearly communicate the diﬀerent
ethical values behind each choice are, to be able to evaluate the result in the light of this choice
and avoid possible misinterpretations.
The weighting approaches used in this study for obtaining the ﬁnal index scores were also method-
ological choices that result in diﬀerent weight to the social and environmental dimensions and in-
ﬂuences the ranking of countries. Hence, no clear consensus about the weighting principle exists,
and it is recommended to investigate alternative possibilities of weighting and potentially develop
reasonable weighting schemes. The choice of weighting and the values behind the choices needs to
be clearly communicated to stakeholders, in order to provide a strong basis for interpretation and
decision-making.
Epistemological uncertainty
Uncertainty linked to lack of understanding about the Earth systems is highly associated with the
choice of environmental sustainability thresholds. Scientiﬁc thresholds could not be obtained for all
indicators, due to the high uncertainty about the Earth system responds eﬀects on emissions and
since the ecological tipping points are yet unknown (Steﬀen et al., 2018). Furthermore, translating
the thresholds proposed in literature into annual impacts contributes to potentially more uncertainty,
due to the complexity of some indicators fates and persistence. The gap between existing knowledge
and the true tipping-points is considered a very important factor that adds large uncertainty to the
normalised results in this study, determining directly whether a country is performing sustainable or
not. Therefore, it is an uncertainty-hotspot within absolute sustainability assessments, which calls
for additional research. Regarding the rankings, these are not expected to be strongly inﬂuenced
by this parameter, since all countries will be inﬂuenced by this changes and therefore their relative
performances will be maintained, however, that would depend on the choice of weighting scheme,
where the score-based weighting in this study, would be aﬀected by this and since new indicators
potentially become hotspots as a result of changed thresholds values.
Limitations within the study give rise to uncertainties, and it is desired to develop the the method-
ology to obtain more accurate results. Running a Monte Carlo simulation is recommended to get
a better understanding of the eﬀects of the underlying uncertainties. Despite these eﬀects on the
result, the main conclusions are not anticipated to change markedly being that; many energy sectors
across the world perform unsustainably in most indicators; important trade-oﬀs between IAEG-SDG
indicators and environmental indicators exist; and the SDG 7 rankings of countries within this as-
sessment are very diﬀerent compared to the ranking based on the SDG Index. This points to the
importance of the environmental indicators and the absolute measure, crucial to obtain a more
rightful ranking of the countries’ energy sectors when assessing sustainability.
Page 54 of 138
==PAGE:69==
Conclusion and Recommendations
Chapter 4
Conclusions and Recommendations
The assessment presented in this study provides an insight on how absolute sustainability can be
gauged for SDG 7. It was found that the environmental indicators introduced important trade-oﬀs
to within SDG 7 and that analysis showed conﬂicting results with the assessment based on the SDG
Index & Dashboards by Sachs et al. (2016), which demonstrates the need for including environmen-
tal indicators in the goal in order to gauge sustainability.
Further, the cross-correlation analyses illustrated that the same conclusions cannot be obtained
from relative and absolute assessments. Shortlisting of indicators cannot be based on correlation
measures, since one loses the absolute perspective and hence, the magnitude of normalised scores
remain a more suitable parameter to exclude indicators. The results of this assessment are intended
to motivate and guide stakeholders and policy-makers within the energy sector towards planning
future energy infrastructure based on absolute sustainability.
Yet, limitations and uncertainties
were identiﬁed which could have a great inﬂuence on the ﬁnal results (see section 3.3.4). This
calls for further scientiﬁc development of the assessment, to overcome some of these shortcomings.
The following provides speciﬁc recommendations to stakeholders followed by recommendations on
methodological developments.
Recommendations to stakeholders
• Consider the addition of a target 7.4 when assessing SDG 7 to be able to cover environmental
sustainability. Currently, the UN targets under SDG 7 do not relate to environmental sustainability
and based on the literature review this did not motivate any proposal of environmental indicators.
The deﬁnition of the proposed target used in this study can be used as a point of departure for
developing this goal (see Section 3.1).
• Ensure that all aspects of SDG 7 are covered by the set of indicators to match the goal deﬁnition
by the UN. This includes social, economic, and environmental indicators. The conclusions in
Section 3.3.2 demonstrates the importance of this from the diﬀerences between the indicator
Page 55 of 138
==PAGE:70==
Conclusion and Recommendations
groups and from including environmental indicator or not.
• Consider the integration of absolute sustainability thresholds for benchmarking purposes to eval-
uate country performances based on how far they are from approaching possible tipping-points.
The cross-correlation analyses in Section 3.3.3 show clear diﬀerences between the relative and
the absolute measures, which is why this is important to consider when evaluating the sustainable
development of countries.
Recommendations for further development and application of SDG 7 indicators
Speciﬁc recommendations:
• Develop additional databases that cover more energy indicators with a global scope. This includes
data on environmental emissions ﬂows or extraction rates associated with the sector. This will
reduce the uncertainty of the ﬁnal results (see Section 3.3.4).
• Investigate the use of other modelling tools and characterisation models to achieve environmental
impacts at the level of the energy sector with an increased geographical and temporal coverage.
This is important for avoiding country bias and under- or overestimation of results (see Section
3.3.4).
• Develop an in-depth literature study on suggested environmental thresholds and a classiﬁcation
of the existing deﬁnitions on absolute sustainability. When making an absolute sustainability
assessment, this is important to have a strong basis for selection thresholds and that the potential
diﬀerences between deﬁnitions are highlighted.
• Investigate possibilities of linking energy eﬃciency and potentially other technological indicators
to absolute sustainability by linking it to environmental impacts.
As stressed in Section 3.2
challenges need to be overcome for energy eﬃciency, which would create a valuable insight is the
technical possibilities of guiding energy sectors towards absolute sustainability.
• Investigate the possibility of assessing the social and environmental indicators in synergy in order
to obtain a more harmonised index score. This could include reducing trade-oﬀs by potentially
redeﬁning social sustainability in a way that enable it to co-exist with environmental sustainability.
Or it could include the development of assessing the two dimension in parallel instead of one
combines score.
• Investigate diﬀerent methods of weighting indicators (e.g. principal component analysis, budget
allocation (Gan et al., 2017)) for obtaining reasonable weighting schemes for SDG 7 avoiding
redundancy of some indicator values.
• Identify hotspots in the energy systems by a break-down analysis of the impact results from the
diﬀerent industries within the sector. This would enable the development of speciﬁc recommen-
dation to the energy stakeholder in how they can improve towards becoming more sustainable.
Page 56 of 138
==PAGE:71==
Conclusion and Recommendations
Broader perspective:
• Investigate the current energy quota system and the possibility of integrating quotas based on
absolute sustainability (e.g. within the EU). This would create the opportunity for countries
with more resources to assist other countries in lowering impacts. The quotas would also reﬂect
directly the allowed impacts each country has without reaching potential tipping-points.
• Link absolute threshold with energy modelling with the aim of identifying technical and economic
constraints in the sector. This could provide a valuable insight to the actions that cake be taken
within the sector to mitigate impacts and investigate the possibilities of becoming sustainable in
absolute terms.
Page 57 of 138
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
References
References
Bjørn, A. & Hauschild, M. Z. (2013).
Absolute versus Relative Environmental Sustainability:
What can the Cradle-to-Cradle and Eco-eﬃciency Concepts Learn from Each Other? Bjørn and
Hauschild Cradle to Cradle versus Eco-eﬃciency. J. Ind. Ecol., 17(2), 321–332.
Bjørn, A. & Hauschild, M. Z. (2015). Introducing carrying capacity-based normalisation in LCA:
framework and development of references at midpoint level. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 20(7),
1005–1018.
Bjørn, A., Margni, M., Roy, P. O., Bulle, C., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2016). A proposal to measure
absolute environmental sustainability in life cycle assessment. Ecol. Indic., 63, 1–13.
Boulay, A. M., Bare, J., Benini, L., Berger, M., Lathuilli`ere, M. J., Manzardo, A., Margni, M.,
Motoshita, M., N´u˜nez, M., Pastor, A. V., Ridoutt, B., Oki, T., Worbe, S., & Pﬁster, S. (2018).
The WULCA consensus characterization model for water scarcity footprints: assessing impacts
of water consumption based on available water remaining (AWARE). Int. J. Life Cycle Assess.,
23(2), 368–378.
Boulay, A. M., Benini, L., & Sala, S. (2019). Marginal and non-marginal approaches in character-
ization: how context and scale aﬀect the selection of an adequate characterization model. The
AWARE model example. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess.
Bouwman, A. F., Van Vuuren, D. P., Derwent, R. G., & Posch, M. (2002). A global analysis
of acidiﬁcation and eutrophication of terrestrial ecosystems. Water. Air. Soil Pollut., 141(1-4),
349–382.
Caney, S. (2009). Justice and the distribution of greenhouse gas emissions. 5, 125 –146.
Capion, K., Hasforth, T., Poulsen, K. R., & Grunnet, K. v. h. E. (2019). Renewable Energy Outlook
2019 Renewable Energy Perspectives to 2035. Danish Energy. Technical report.
Carpenter, S. R. & Bennett, E. M. (2011). Reconsideration of the planetary boundary for phosphorus.
Environ. Res. Lett., 6(1).
Chandrakumar, C. & Mclaren, S. J. (2018). Designing Sustainable Technologies, Products and
Policies. Springer International Publishing.
Page 59 of 138
==PAGE:74==
References
Chertow, M. R. (2000). The IPAT Equation and Its Variants. J. Ind. Ecol., 4(4), 13–29.
Ciasullo, R., Simone, C., & Conti, M. E. (2014). The complex issues of carbon sink: A critical
overview. Int. J. Environ. Heal., 7(2), 171–195.
Climate Action Tracker Partners (2018). Temperatures — Climate Action Tracker.
Crutzen, P. J. (2002). Geology of mankind. Nature, 415(6867), 23.
ˇCuˇcek, L., Klemeˇs, J. J., & Kravanja, Z. (2015). Overview of environmental footprints. In Assess.
Meas. Environ. Impact Sustain. (pp. 131–193).
Dale, V. H. & Kline, K. L. (2017). GLOBAL LAND OUTLOOK WORKING PAPER ENERGY AND
LAND USE DISCLAIMER. Biomass Res. Int. Cent. Res. Agrofor.
Daniel, J. S., Velders, G. J. M., Morgenstern, O., Toohey, D. W., Wallington, T. J., Wuebbles,
D. J., Akiyoshi, H., Bais, A. F., Fleming, E. L., Jackman, C. H., Kuijpers, L. J. M., Mcfarland,
M., Montzka, S. A., Ross, M. N., Tilmes, S., & Tully, M. B. (2011). A Focus on Information and
Options for Policymakers. Technical report.
Danzon, M. A., Van Leeuwen, F. X., & Krzyzanowski, M. (2001). Air quality guidelines: For Europe.
Technical Report 91.
De Baan, L., Alkemade, R., Koellner, T., Alkemade, R., & Koellner, T. (2013). GLOBAL LAND
USE IMPACTS ON BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES IN LCA Land use impacts
on biodiversity in LCA: a global approach. Int J Life Cycle Assess, 18, 1216–1230.
De Vries, W., Kros, J., Kroeze, C., & Seitzinger, S. P. (2013). Assessing planetary and regional
nitrogen boundaries related to food security and adverse environmental impacts. Curr. Opin.
Environ. Sustain., 5(3-4), 392–402.
EEA (2005). EN08 Emissions ( CO 2 , SO 2 and NO x ) intensity of public conventional thermal
power ( electricity and heat ) production. (x), 1–8.
ERTRAC, EPoSS, & ETIP SNET (2017). European Roadmap Electriﬁcation of Road Transport
Status: ﬁnal for publication. (June), 48.
European Commission (2012). Characterisation factors of the ILCD Recommended Life Cycle Impact
Assessment methods: database and supporting information.
European Commission-Joint Research Centre - Institute for Environment and Sustainability (2011).
ILCD handbook.
Eurostat (2019). Sustainable development in the European Union — Monitoring report on progress
towards the SDGs in an EU context — 2019 edition. Technical report.
Page 60 of 138
==PAGE:75==
References
Forster, P. M., Thompson Lead, D. W. J., Baldwin, M. P., Chipperﬁeld, M. P., Dameris, M., Haigh,
J. D., Karoly, D. J., Kushner, P. J., Randel, W. J., Rosenlof, K. H., Seidel, D. J., Solomon, S.,
Stenchikov, G. L., Yoden, S., Cordero, E. C., Free, M. P., Jonsson, A. I., Logan, J., & Stevenson,
D. (2010). Chapter 4 Stratospheric Changes and Climate Coordinating Lead Authors: Chapter 4
STRATOSPHERIC CHANGES AND CLIMATE Contents. Technical report.
Fuso Nerini, F., Tomei, J., To, L. S., Bisaga, I., Parikh, P., Black, M., Borrion, A., Spataru, C.,
Cast´an Broto, V., Anandarajah, G., Milligan, B., & Mulugetta, Y. (2018). Mapping synergies and
trade-oﬀs between energy and the Sustainable Development Goals. Nat. Energy, 3(1), 10–15.
Gan, X., Fernandez, I. C., Guo, J., Wilson, M., Zhao, Y., Zhou, B., & Wu, J. (2017). When to use
what: Methods for weighting and aggregating sustainability indicators. Ecol. Indic., 81(January
2018), 491–502.
Gerten, D., Hoﬀ, H., Rockstr¨om, J., J¨agermeyr, J., Kummu, M., & Pastor, A. V. (2013). To-
wards a revised planetary boundary for consumptive freshwater use: Role of environmental ﬂow
requirements. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain., 5(6), 551–558.
Gibert, L. (2018). Review and Assessment of National Indicators for UN Sustainable Development
Goal nr . 12 : ” Responsible consumption and production ” (internal QSA project). Technical
Report August.
Grasso, M. (2012). Sharing the Emission Budget. Polit. Stud., 60(3), 668–686.
Greaker, M., Stoknes, P. E., Alfsen, K. H., & Ericson, T. (2013). A Kantian approach to sustainable
development indicators for climate change. Ecol. Econ., 91, 10–18.
Griggs, D., Staﬀord-Smith, M., Gaﬀney, O., Rockstr¨om, J., ¨Ohman, M. C., Shyamsundar, P.,
Steﬀen, W., Glaswer, G., Kanie, N., & Noble, I. (2013). Sustainable development goals for people
and planet, Supplementary information. Nature, 495, 305–307.
Guinotte, J. M. & Fabry, V. J. (2008). Ocean acidiﬁcation and its potential eﬀects on marine
ecosystems. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1134, 320–342.
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., & Olsen, S. I. (2017). Life Cycle Assessment: Theory and
Practice.
Huijbregts, M., Steinmann, Z., Elshout, P., Stam, G., Verones, F., Vieira, M., Hollander, A.,
Zijp, M., & van Zelm (author), R. U. N. (2016). ReCiPe 2016 A harmonized life cycle impact
assessment method at midpoint and endpoint level Report I: Characterizatio - Mineral resource
scarcity. Technical report.
IAEG-SDG (2016). Global indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Sustainable Development Goal indicators should
Page 61 of 138
==PAGE:76==
References
be disaggregated, where relevant, by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migratory st. Technical
report.
IAEG-SDGs (2016). Metadata for SDG 7. Unitd Nations.
IEA (2020). Countries & Regions - IEA.
International Energy Agency (2017). World Energy Outlook-2017.
Kalbar, P. P., Birkved, M., Karmakar, S., Nygaard, S. E., & Hauschild, M. (2017). Can carbon
footprint serve as proxy of the environmental burden from urban consumption patterns?
Ecol.
Indic., 74, 109–118.
Kitzes, J. (2013). An introduction to environmentally-extended input-output analysis. Resources,
2(4), 489–503.
Koellner, T. & Scholz, R. W. (2008). Assessment of Land Use Impacts on the Natural Environ-ment.
Part 2: Generic Characterization Factors for Local Spe-cies Diversity in Central Europe. Int J
LCA, 13(1), 32–48.
Lassen, C. & Hansen, E. (1998).
Økologisk r˚aderum for brug af ikke-fornybare ressourcer -
Miljøprojekt nr. 387. 12998. Technical report.
Laurent, A. & Espinosa, N. (2015).
Environmental impacts of electricity generation at global,
regional and national scales in 1980-2011: What can we learn for future energy planning? Energy
Environ. Sci., 8(3), 689–701.
Laurent, A., Hauschild, M. Z., Golsteijn, L., Simas, M., Fontes, J., & Wood, R. (2013).
De-
liverable 5.2: Normalisation factors for environmental, economic and socio-economic indicators.
PROSUITE Proj., (October), 54.
Liu, J., Hull, V., Godfray, H. C. J., Tilman, D., Gleick, P., Hoﬀ, H., Pahl-Wostl, C., Xu, Z., Chung,
M. G., Sun, J., & Li, S. (2018). Nexus approaches to global sustainable development. Nat.
Sustain., 1(9), 466–476.
Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., P¨ortner, H.-O., Roberts, D., Skea, J., Shukla, P., Pirani, A.,
Moufouma-Okia, W., P´ean, C., Pidcock, R., Connors, S., Matthews, J., Chen, Y., Zhou, X.,
Gomis, M., Lonnoy, E., Maycock, T., Tignor, M., & Waterﬁeld, T. (2018). Global Warming of
1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial
levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the
global response to the threat of clim. Technical report.
Material, S. O., York, N., & Nw, A. (2007). Change and Ocean Acidiﬁcation. Science (80-. ).,
1737(December 2007), 1737–1743.
Page 62 of 138
==PAGE:77==
References
Mattila, T. J. (2017). Use of input-output analysis in LCA. In Life Cycle Assess. Theory Pract. (pp.
349–372).
McGlade, C. E. (2012). A review of the uncertainties in estimates of global oil resources. Energy,
47(1), 262–270.
Meinshausen, M., Smith, S. J., Calvin, K., Daniel, J. S., Kainuma, M. L. T., Lamarque, J.-F.,
Matsumoto, K., Montzka, S. A., Raper, S. C. B., Riahi, K., Thomson, A., Velders, G. J. M., Van
Vuuren, D. P. P., Meinshausen, M., Calvin, . K., Thomson, . A., Matsumoto, . K., Lamarque,
J.-F., Cate, S. C. B. R., & Metropolitan, M. (2011). The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations
and their extensions from 1765 to 2300. Clim. Change, 109, 213–241.
Miller, R. E. & Blair, P. D. (2009). Input-output analysis : foundations and extensions. Cambridge
University Press.
Mohr, S. H., Wang, J., Ellem, G., Ward, J., & Giurco, D. (2015). Projection of world fossil fuels by
country. Fuel, 141, 120–135.
Nehring, R. (2009). Traversing the mountaintop: World fossil fuel production to 2050. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci., 364(1532), 3067–3079.
Pachauri, R. K., Meyer, L., Hallegatte France, S., Bank, W., Hegerl, G., Brinkman, S., van Kesteren,
L., Leprince-Ringuet, N., & van Boxmeer, F. (2014). IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis
Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Gian-Kasper Plattner.
Rademaekers, K., Yearwood, J., Ferreira, A., Pye, S., Hamilton, I., Agnolucci, P., Grover, D.,
Kar´asek, J., Anisimova, N., Rademaekers, Koen; Yearwood, Jessica; Ferreira, Alipio; Pye, Steve;
Hamilton, Ian; Agnolucci, Paolo; Grover, David; Kar´asek, Jiˇr´ı ; Anisimova, N., Rademaekers, K.,
Yearwood, J., Ferreira, A., Pye, S., Ian Hamilton, P., Agnolucci, D. G., Kar´asek, J., & Anisimova,
N. (2016). Selecting Indicators to Measure Energy Poverty. Technical report.
Raworth, K. (2012). Oxfam Discussion Papers: A safe and just space for humanity.
Raworth, K. (2017). A Doughnut for the Anthropocene: Appendix. Heal. Lancet Planet.
Rita, A. (2019). JRC Statistical Audit of the Sustainable Development Goals Index and Dashboards.
Rockstr¨om, J., Steﬀen, W., Noone, K., Persson, ˚A., III, F. S. C., Lambin, E. F., Lenton, T. M.,
Scheﬀer, M., Folke, C., Schellnhuber, H. J., Nykvist, B., de Wit, C. A., Hughes, T., van der Leeuw,
S., Rodhe, H., S¨orlin, S., Snyder, P. K., Costanza, R., Svedin, U., Falkenmark, M., Karlberg, L.,
Corell, R. W., Fabry, V. J., Hansen, J., Walker, B., Liverman, D., Richardson, K., Crutzen, P., &
Foley, J. A. (2009). A safe operating space for humanity. Nature, 461(September).
Page 63 of 138
==PAGE:78==
References
Rogelj, J., Den Elzen, M., H¨ohne, N., Fransen, T., Fekete, H., Winkler, H., Schaeﬀer, R., Sha, F.,
Riahi, K., & Meinshausen, M. (2016). Paris Agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep
warming well below 2 °c. Nature, 534(7609), 631–639.
Rogelj, J., Popp, A., Calvin, K. V., Luderer, G., Emmerling, J., Gernaat, D., Fujimori, S., Streﬂer,
J., Hasegawa, T., Marangoni, G., Krey, V., Kriegler, E., Riahi, K., Van Vuuren, D. P., Doelman,
J., Drouet, L., Edmonds, J., Fricko, O., Harmsen, M., Havl´ık, P., Humpen¨oder, F., Stehfest, E.,
& Tavoni, M. (2018). Scenarios towards limiting global mean temperature increase below 1.5 °c.
Nat. Clim. Chang., 8(4), 325–332.
Rosenbaum, R. K., Hauschild, M. Z., Boulay, A. M., Fantke, P., Laurent, A., N´u˜nez, M., & Vieira,
M. (2017). Life cycle impact assessment. In Life Cycle Assess. Theory Pract. (pp. 167–270).
Springer.
Ryberg, M. W. (2018). Putting life-cycle indicators on an absolute scale - Integrating Planetary
Boundaries into Life-Cycle Assessment. (May).
Sachs, J., Schmidt-Traub, G., Kroll, C., Durand-Delacre, D., & Teksoz, K. (2016). SDG Index &
Dashboards, A Global Report. Sustain. Dev. Solut. Netw., (July), 58.
Sachs, J., Schmidt-Traub, G., Kroll, C., Lafortune, G., & Fuller, G. (2019). Sustainable Development
Report 2019:. Technical report.
Sala, S. (2011). Draft recommended LCIA methods.
Sandin, G., Peters, G. M., & Svanstr¨om, M. (2015). Using the planetary boundaries framework for
setting impact-reduction targets in LCA contexts. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 20(12), 1684–1700.
Sayre, N. F. (2008). The genesis, history, and limits of carrying capacity. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr.,
98(1), 120–134.
Schmidt-Traub, G., Karoubi, E. d. l. M., & Espey, J. (2015). Indicators and a Monitoring Framework
for the Sustainable Development Goals: Launching a data revolution for the SDGs. A Rep. by
Leadersh. Counc. Sustain. Dev. Solut. Netw., (Version 7).
Smyth, A. & Dumanski, J. (1993). FESLM: an international framework for evaluating sustainable
land management. World Soil Resour. Rep., (pp.˜74).
Stadler, K., Steen-Olsen, K., & Wood, R. (2014). the ’Rest of the World’ - Estimating the Economic
Structure of Missing Regions in Global Multi-Regional Input-Output Tables. Econ. Syst. Res.,
26(3), 303–326.
Stadler, K., Wood, R., Bulavskaya, T., S¨odersten, C. J., Simas, M., Schmidt, S., Usubiaga, A.,
Acosta-Fern´andez, J., Kuenen, J., Bruckner, M., Giljum, S., Lutter, S., Merciai, S., Schmidt,
Page 64 of 138
==PAGE:79==
References
J. H., Theurl, M. C., Plutzar, C., Kastner, T., Eisenmenger, N., Erb, K. H., de Koning, A., &
Tukker, A. (2018). EXIOBASE 3: Developing a Time Series of Detailed Environmentally Extended
Multi-Regional Input-Output Tables. J. Ind. Ecol., 22(3), 502–515.
Steﬀen, W., Richardson, K., Rockstr¨om, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R.,
Carpenter, S. R., Vries, W. D., Wit, C. A. D., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M.,
Persson, L. M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., & S¨orlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries : Guiding
changing planet. Science (80-. )., 347(6223), 1–10.
Steﬀen, W., Rockstr¨om, J., Richardson, K., Lenton, T. M., Folke, C., Liverman, D., Summerhayes,
C. P., Barnosky, A. D., Cornell, S. E., Cruciﬁx, M., Donges, J. F., Fetzer, I., Lade, S. J., Scheﬀer,
M., Winkelmann, R., & Schellnhuber, H. J. (2018). Trajectories of the Earth System in the
Anthropocene.
Taylor, P. G., Abdalla, K., Quadrelli, R., & Vera, I. (2017). Better energy indicators for sustainable
development. Nat. Energy, 2(8), 17117.
The General Assembly of the United Nations (2017). Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 6 July 2017. Technical Report July.
The World Bank Group (2015). Beyond Connections: Energy Access Redeﬁned. World Bank, (pp.
1–244).
Transparency International (2015). Transparency International 2013 Corruption Perceptions Index.
UN DESA (2018). Accelerating Sdg7 Achievement Policy Briefs in Support of the First Sdg7 Review
At the Un High-Level Political Forum 2018. Technical report.
UNCDP (2018). Why leaving no one behind matters. 13(13), 55–64.
UNECE (2017). Global Tracking Framework: UNECE Progress in Sustainable Energy. Technical
report.
UNIDO (2018). Demand for manufacturing: Driving inclusive and sustainable industrial develop-
ment. Technical report.
United Nations (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
United Nations Sustainable knowledge platform. Sustain. Dev. Goals, (pp. 1–40a).
United Nations (2016). Sustainable Development Goal 7: Ensure access to aﬀordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all. United Nations, (pp.˜1).
United Nations (2019a). Annex: Global Indicator Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals
and Targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Work Stat. Comm. Pertain. to
2030 Agenda Sustain. Dev., (pp. 1–21).
Page 65 of 138
==PAGE:80==
References
United Nations (2019b). Annex: Global Indicator Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals
and Targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Work Stat. Comm. Pertain. to
2030 Agenda Sustain. Dev., (pp. 1–21).
United Nations inter-agency technical support team (2014). TST Issues Brief: Means of Implemen-
tation; Global Partnership for achieving sustainable development. Technical report.
van Zelm, R., Preiss, P., van Goethem, T., Van Dingenen, R., & Huijbregts, M. (2016). Regionalized
life cycle impact assessment of air pollution on the global scale: Damage to human health and
vegetation. Atmos. Environ., 134(x), 129–137.
World Economic Forum (2018). Global Competitiveness Index 2017-2018 - Reports - World Economic
Forum. Technical report.
World Health Organization (2005).
WHO Air quality guidelines for particulate matter, ozone,
nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide: Global update 2005. Technical Report 6.
Page 66 of 138
==PAGE:81==
Supporting Information I
Supporting Methods and Results
Caroline Herlev Gebara (s144195)
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Management Engineering
February 2, 2020
67
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
Supporting Information
A.1
Supporting methods
A.1.1
Literature review of SDG7 indicators
Scope of review
Prior to developing a recommended set of indicators in this study, a raw list of proposed indicators
was made.
The focus was put on evaluating the currently applied and proposed indicators for
tracking the SDG 7 targets and to further complement the existing targets with a new target to
better assess environmental sustainability. Firstly, the focus was put on the current UN SGD 7
targets (7.1-7.3), where some additional indicators were added to assist all three targets, with focus
on 7.1 (”By 2030, ensure universal access to aﬀordable, reliable and modern energy services”), which
is more broadly deﬁned compared to 7.2 and 7.3.
Secondly, it was evaluated that the currently deﬁned targets are not fully assisting the goal in
reaching ”...sustainable energy for all” since this is not mentioned in any of the targets. In particular,
the dimension of environmental sustainability is not explicitly mentioned in the targets. Therefore
it was suggested to add an extra target to gauge SDG7 (7.4). This target should directly include
sustainability of energy systems with an emphasis on environmental sustainability since the social
dimension is covered in target 7.1. Inspiration was taken from other SDGs with a higher focus
on environmental issues. The search of indicators was therefore split into two steps: 1) ﬁnding
existing or proposed indicators directly related to SDG 7 targets, 2) ﬁnding indicators that have
been proposed for other SDGs, which could assist in targeting 7.4.
Identiﬁcation of included studies
A literature review was made for collecting the existing and proposed SDG 7 indicators. The indica-
tors were selected iteratively to arrive at the ﬁnal list. The ﬁrst thing which was done was to identify
all existing and proposed indicators for SDG 7 by making a screening through the search engines
”Web of Science” (webofknowledge.com) and ”Google Scholar” (scholar.google.com). Studies were
considered only if written in English and addressing the SDG 7 explicitly. The strings used in both
search engines are as follows: ”SDG7 indicators”, ”energy indicators” + ”sustainable development”,
”energy indicators” + ”sustainability”, ”energy indicators” + ”SDG”, ”sustainable development
goals” + ”indicators” + ”energy”, ”sustainable development goal 7”, ”sustainable development
goal 7” + ”indicators”, ”sustainable development goal 7” + ”energy indicators”. The timespan was
set at 2015 to 2019 due to the infancy of the SDGs. Only one scientiﬁc article from this review
were found to be of relevance to the scope with suggestions to new indicators for SDG 7.
After the screening for scientiﬁc articles another search was made for identifying public reports of
relevance using the Google search engine. Here a number of sources were considered relevant for the
scope and therefore included in this review. All the proposed SDG 7 indicators focusing on the UN
Page 69 of 138
==PAGE:84==
Supporting Information
targets 7.1-7.3 were extracted into one list. The next step was to consider indicators focussing on
environmental sustainability to complement the current targets. This was done by gaining inspiration
from existing and proposed indicators for other SDGs, both in the oﬃcial list of indicators as well as
in the public reports found in the literature screening. A review of indicators for SDG 12 and proposal
of new indicators by L. Gibert Gibert (2018)1 was also used for extracting new indicators. Several
indicators targeting other SDGs involved diﬀerent environmental aspects, which were considered as
potential SDG 7 indicators. The total number of sources considered for the full list of indicators
are listed in Table A.1.1. The indicators extracted from each source were grouped into the SDG7
targets (7.1-7.3) and target 7.4, representing the new SDG 7 target.
Indicators targeting SDG 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 and 15 were included in the list of potential 7.4
indicators. If indicators from diﬀerent sources and SDGs were identical they were listed as one
indicator. In total the number of indicators was 141 (excluding disaggregation) in the entire list of
retrieved indicators, which is found in SI II in an Excel spreadsheet.
Table A.1: Keywords used for literature screening of existing and proposed indicators for SDG7.
Source
Type
Taylor et al. (2017)
Scientiﬁc jounal
United Nations (2019b)
Report
Schmidt-Traub et al. (2015)
Report
Sachs et al. (2019)
Report
UN DESA (2018)
Report
The World Bank Group (2015)
Report
Eurostat (2019)
Report
Gibert (2018)a
Review
a Technical University of Denmark, Department of
Management Engineering.
Classiﬁcation of indicators
To arrive at a more reﬁned list of indicators, a classiﬁcation approach was proposed in order to
evaluate the relevance and the applicability of the indicators. The classiﬁcation was done based on
the following criteria: i) relevance to the scope, ii) representativeness, iii) clarity and simplicity, and
iv) data quality and method robustness. Each criterion is elaborated on in the following. The indica-
tors were, based on these, classiﬁed into the tiers A-E as illustrated by the supporting decision-tree
presented in Figure 2.2.
1Department of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Page 70 of 138
==PAGE:85==
Supporting Information
i) Relevance: This criterion is used to exclude the indicators, which are not relevant to the scope
of being applicable for a global assessment and for the energy system as a whole. Indicators are
excluded if they are not globally harmonised (e.i. being country speciﬁc), if not addressing the whole
energy systems, and if they were too technology-speciﬁc (e.g. focus in end-use appliances).
ii) Representativeness: An indicator fulﬁls this criteria if it represents well the desired output
measure and if it is the best representative among other indicators. The question to be asked is
whether the indicator-output is covered elsewhere in the list. This is such as if the indicator is a
disaggregation of another indicator or if the measure is covered by a more broadly deﬁned indicator
(e.g. emission ﬂows covered by environmental footprints).
iii) Clarity and simplicity: The indicator should be explicitly deﬁned and simple to apply. The
indicator does not fulﬁl this criterion if it is not well deﬁned alongside a measuring metric and if the
measurement is too complex. This is such as composite indices that require complex data collection
and a high number of variables, which increase the intricacy of interpretation and communication.
iv) Data availability and method applicability: The required data needed for the indicator mea-
surement need to be readily available. This refers to data having high coverage of all countries and
a high temporal coverage in order to be able to compare among single countries and to compare
over time. The method and/or data source used for obtaining the requires indicator data should be
mature and from well-established data sources to reduce uncertainties.
In SI II all indicators are classiﬁed according to the tiers A-E together with a brief justiﬁcation.
Subtracting all indicators ranked as tier C, D and E leaves a reﬁned set of indicators consisting of
all the indicators, which are all relevant, representative and clearly communicated and thus would
ideally be included if having a mature method and available data. This reﬁned indicator list is
referred to as the ’ideal set’ and is given in Table 3.1 with indicator developer and appertaining tier.
A more detailed description of the ideal indicators is given in SI I Section A.1.2.
Table A.2 gives an overview of the justiﬁcation made to classify each indicator starting from the
highest tier (A). This justiﬁcation was applied to all indicator in the full list in the Excel spreadsheet.
This arrived at a more reﬁned ﬁrst iteration list of indicators including only tier A-B. These indicators
were further re-evaluated in into the three tiers A, A* and B after the data collection, based on the
three parameters i) country coverage, ii) data quality, and iii) method applicability.
Page 71 of 138
==PAGE:86==
Supporting Information
Table A.2: Description of each indicator tiers A-E. An ’ideal list’ is derived using tier A-B.
Tier
Ideally
included
Justiﬁcation
A
!
The indicator relevant for the scope and deemed the best representative
among similar indicators. It is clearly deﬁned and simple to communicate.
Data is available from a well-established source and if data is computed
it relies on minor or none assumptions. The data has high geographical
representativeness and is being produced regularly.
A*
!
The indicator relevant for the scope and deemed the best representative
among similar indicators. It is clearly deﬁned and simple to communicate.
Data is available from a well-established source but data is computed and
relies on important assumptions (e.g. data acting as a proxy) and/or the
data has a medium geographical and temporal representativeness.
B
!
The indicator relevant for the scope and deemed the best representative
among similar indicators. It is clearly deﬁned and simple to communicate.
Data is not available from a well-established source and/or computed data
suﬀer from high uncertainty and/or the data has a low geographical and
temporal representativeness.
C
The indicator relevant for the scope and deemed the best representative
among similar indicators. The indicator is not coherent with the criterion
of clarity/simplicity. The indicator metric is not explicit from the deﬁnition
and/or the indicator is not simple to measure and communicate. This is
such as composite indicators with several variables and output categories
(e.g. complex multi-tier indicators), which might be more ﬁt for indicators
tracking a limited scope.
D
The indicator is relevant for the scope, but its measured output is covered
by another indicator that is deemed a better representative. This is such
as if the indicator output is similar to those of other indicators or if the
indicator measures an impact which is covered by a broader deﬁned impact
indicator. This tier is used to trim the list and avoid double counting for
the same conclusions.
E
The indicator is not relevant for the scope since they are not relevant for
the energy sector and/or since they are not universal. This could be if the
indicator is only ﬁt in some geographical areas due to diﬀerences in e.g.
climate, policy, resources, economy.
Page 72 of 138
==PAGE:87==
Supporting Information
A.1.2
Indicator metadata
Metadata for all the indicators from the recommended ideal list are presented below. They are
presented by description, developer, and data source.
Indicator 1.1 - Access to electricity
Rationale and
description
Proportion of population with access to electricity. Counts the share of
the population of a country with access to electricity based on national
household surveys.
Proposed for
SDG7
IAEG-SDG 2019 in “Global indicator framework for the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. Accessed 20.09.2019 at
unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indicators-list/ .
Data source
World Bank: data.worldbank.org (accessed 20.09.2019).
Temporal coverage
2015
Geographical
coverage
260 countries
Possible range
0-100
Possible
disaggregation
Urban/rural area. End use sector (transport, residential, industrial)
Tier in this study
A
Indicator 1.2 - Primary reliance on clean fuels and technology
Rationale and
description
Proportion of population with primary reliance on clean fuels and
technology. Counts the number of people in a country primarily relying
on clean fuels and technologies for cooking, heating and lighting divided
by the number of people reporting any of those usages. “Clean” is
deﬁned by recommendations of speciﬁc fuel and emissions rate targets
given in the normative guidance of WHO guidelines for indoor air
quality: household fuel combustion:
who.int/airpollution/guidelines/household-fuel-
combustion/recommendation1/en/ (accessed
20.09.2019).
Page 73 of 138
==PAGE:88==
Supporting Information
Transportation is excluded from this indicator. A reason for this
decision is that in many cases transportation do not need energy,
considering services like bicycles and animal-drawn vehicles. Another
reason is that transportation depends not only on vehicle availability but
also on the infrastructure (i.e. roads, fuel stations). To include
transport, the methodology needs development.
Proposed for
SDG7
IAEG-SDG 2019 in “Global indicator framework for the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. Accessed 20.09.2019 at unstats.un.org. See metadata at
unstats.un.org/sdgs/iaeg-sdgs/metadata-compilation/: go to
“Metadata for Goal 7”.
Data source
UNstats 2019: unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/): Go to
SDG7, target 7.1, indicator 7.1.2, indicator code: “EG EGY CLEAN”.
(accessed 20.09.2019)
Temporal coverage
2015
Geographical
coverage
215 countries
Possible range
0-100
Possible
disaggregation
Urban/rural area. The end-uses: cooking, heating and lighting.
Tier this study
A
Indicator 1.3 - Energy poverty
Rationale and
description
Energy poverty measured as the proportion of the population where
energy costs account for above 10 % of the total household income
(minus taxes). The indicator is simple and uses an absolute value which
is not aﬀected by demographical changes. The absolute value of 10 %
has been used by many researchers, however the number is rather
arbitrary (Rademaekers et al., 2016) (Triconomics 2016 - ”Selecting
Indicators to Measure Energy Poverty”).
Page 74 of 138
==PAGE:89==
Supporting Information
Other common ways of deﬁning energy poverty, is the “low absolute
energy expenditure” that measures the share of households where the
absolute energy expenditure is below half the national median and the
“high share of energy expenditure in income” that measures the share
of households whose share of energy expenditures is more than twice
the national median share (energypoverty.eu/indicators-data). These
indicators do not reﬂect an absolute poverty threshold, however,
inequalities in absolute expenditures and share of energy costs are
reﬂected.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
No data was found. TBD.
Temporal coverage
-
Geographical
coverage
-
Possible range
0-100
Suggested
disaggregation
By income groups. By end-uses (electricity, heat, transport).
Tier this study
B
Indicator 1.4 - Electricity quality
Rationale and
description
Quality of electricity supply. The indicator is measured based on a
ranking scale from 1 to 7, where 1 is not reliable at all and 7 is
extremely reliable. Data is from opinion surveys based on the questions
“In your country, how would you assess the reliability of the electricity
supply (lack of interruptions and lack of voltage ﬂuctuations)?”. The
indicator captures the experienced quality of the electricity supply in a
country. Other indicators such as “number of power outages” or
“available power per day (hours)” can also capture the power supply
availability.
Page 75 of 138
==PAGE:90==
Supporting Information
However, the suggested indicators cover the quality of electricity based
on both interruptions and voltage ﬂuctuations. The indicator is not
taking an absolute measure but is based on national surveys, which
makes the ranking based on more subjective experiences. Developing an
indicator which can take a more quantitative measure covering both
number of disruptions, voltage ﬂuctuations and duration of outages,
this would be preferred. The used data performs as a proxy for this
measurement. World Economic Forum:
weforum.org/global-competitiveness-index-2017-2018 (accessed
22.09.2019)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
World Bank 2019: worldbank.org (accessed 22.09.2019). The data is
based on national surveys and a rather subjective ranking, serving as a
proxy indicator for measuring electricity reliability (reliability and
availability).
Temporal coverage
2007-2017
Geographical
coverage
141 countries
Possible range
0-100
Possible
disaggregation
By income groups. By end-uses (electricity, heat, transport).
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 1.5 - Energy safety
Rationale and
description
Absence of past accidents related to energy services measured as
number of reported accidents by end-users. To ensure reliable energy
supply, the possibility of related accidents should be measured. The
formulation of the indicator is based on the multi-tier framework by The
World Bank Group (2015), where the indicator is disaggregated into
diﬀerent end-uses. In this study, a the indicator was slightly changed to
match a bigger scope.
Page 76 of 138
==PAGE:91==
Supporting Information
In The World Bank Group (2015) the potential risk of future accidents
is also suggested, however, this is left out in the proposed indicator for
this study for the sake of simplicity. However, investigating the potential
if including a risk-based indicator to measure the safety dimension
would be advisable for future indicator development for SDG7. The
indicator data can potentially be obtained through reporting at the
end-use location (e.g. households, industries, public services).
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
No data was found. TBD.
Temporal coverage
-
Geographical
coverage
-
Possible range
≥0
Suggested
disaggregation
By income groups. By type of energy service.
Tier this study
B
Indicator 1.6 - Energy corruption
Rationale and
description
Corruption index associated with PPP energy measured in a scale from
0 to 100 where 0 is highly corrupted and 100 is very clean. Reporting
the degree of corruption in the energy sector can reﬂects the legality,
such as whether the energy bill is paid to the legal operator or
authorised representative. This is relevant since illegal regulation might
impact other indicators such as accessibility, safety, aﬀordability and
reliability. Measuring legal connections directly remains challenging,
which is why the national corruption indices are proposed to reﬂect this
matter.
Proposed for
SDG7
The Global Tracking Framework by UNECE (2017) (suggested as an
area for formulation for SDG7).
Page 77 of 138
==PAGE:92==
Supporting Information
Data source
Transparency International: transparency.org (accessed 22.09.2019).
See ‘The full Data set’ and click ‘Download data set’. The data is
covering the national corruption index and is not disaggregated by
sector. The national index values are used as a proxy for the energy
sector since national corruption can be assumed to reﬂect all sectors.
The corruption index is based on 12 diﬀerent data sources and
standardised to ﬁt into the index 100. Description of the methodology
can be found at transparency.org/downloads (accessed 22.09.2019)
under ‘downloads’.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2018
Geographical
coverage
167 countries (in 2015)
Possible range
0 - 100
Suggested
disaggregation
None
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 2.1 - RE share
Rationale and
description
Share of renewable energy in total ﬁnal energy consumption (TFEC)
measured as % MWh from renewable energy sources.
Proposed for
SDG7
IAEG-SDG 2019 in “Global indicator framework for the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. Accessed 20.09.2019 at unstats.un.org. See metadata at
unstats.un.org/sdgs/iaeg-sdgs/metadata-compilation/: go to
“Metadata for Goal 7”.
Data source
World Bank: data.worldbank.org (accessed 22.09.2019).
Temporal coverage
1990 - 2015
Geographical
coverage
259 (in 2015)
Possible range
0 - 100
Suggested
disaggregation
Electricity, heat, transport
Tier this study
A
Page 78 of 138
==PAGE:93==
Supporting Information
Indicator 2.2 - Share of RE in new installed capacity
Rationale and
description
Share of renewable energy (RE) technologies in total additional installed
energy capacity. This indicator measures how much of the additional
installed energy capacity is assigned to renewable energy each year. The
indicator takes an average annual measure on a period of three years.
The newly installed capacity is measured as the diﬀerence between the
installed MW in year 1 minus the installed MW in year t-1. The
indicator can capture the progress of actions for RE deployment in each
country, where ‘0’ refers to 100 % of the newly installed capacity can
be assigned to non-RE, ‘N.O.’ indicates that no new capacity has been
installed in the country, and ‘N/A’ indicates that data is not available.
Measuring the capacity as a share of total instalments capture the
relative country performance compared to absolute MW, where
countries with big capacity instalments can put up more RE than
low-capacity countries, while still having a lower share of RE in their
new capacity if more non-RE is put up simultaneously.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
Estimated from UNdata at data.un.org as average annual new installed
capacity from 2014-2015 to 2015-2016.
Temporal coverage
1990 - 2017
Geographical
coverage
242 countries
Possible range
0 - 100
Suggested
disaggregation
None
Tier this study
A
Indicator 2.3 - Electricity quality
Rationale and
description
Share of fossil-based energy technologies in total decommissioned
energy capacity. This indicator measures how much of the newly
decommissioned installed energy capacity that is assigned to fossil-based
energy each year. The indicator takes an average annual measure on a
Page 79 of 138
==PAGE:94==
Supporting Information
period of three years. The decommissioned capacity is measured as the
diﬀerence between the decommissioned MW in year 1 minus the
decommissioned MW in year t-1. The indicator is complementary to
indicator 2.2 to capture the progress of actions for RE deployment in
each country. If a country has a high score in indicator 2.2, this
additional indicator can reveal, whether the new installed RE capacity
actually exchanges fossil-based capacity or whether the high RE share in
new installed capacity is solely due to expansion of energy supply.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
Estimated from UNdata at data.un.org as average annual new installed
capacity from 2014-2015 to 2015-2016.
Temporal coverage
1990 - 2017
Geographical
coverage
242 countries
Possible range
0 - 100
Suggested
disaggregation
None
Tier this study
A
Indicator 2.4 - Fossil fuel subsidies
Rationale and
description
Fossil fuel subsidies as a percentage share of GDP of the respective
country. The indicator can measure whether there is a political incentive
for a transition towards RE deployment or not. The indicator is included
since fossil fuel subsidies are currently keeping the fossil fuel prices
artiﬁcially low. Having this indicator allows decision-makers to identify
countries, where fossil-based energy technologies are structurally
favoured or potentially act as an obstacle for a faster RE transition.
Proposed for
SDG7
Schmidt-Traub et al. (2015)
Data source
Estimated from OECDdata at stats.oecd.org in mill. USD in 2015. Go
to ’Environment’, ’Policy Indicators on Trade and Environment’, access
data: ’Support Measures for Fossil Fuels’. To obtain the subsidies in
percentages, GDP data from World Bank at data.worldbank.org in 2015
USD was used.
Temporal coverage
2004 - 2017
Page 80 of 138
==PAGE:95==
Supporting Information
Geographical
coverage
76 countries (in 2015)
Possible range
0 - 100
Suggested
disaggregation
By fuel type
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 3.1 - Energy intensity
Rationale and
description
Energy intensity measured as total primary energy supply (MJ) per
gross domestic product (GDP) in USD 2011 values. The total primary
energy supply is deﬁned by IEA as production + net imports -
international marine and aviation bunkers +/- stock changes. GDP is
measured in purchasing power parity (PPP) in constant terms, here
using 2011 as the base year. The indicator captures the amount of
energy needed to produce one unit of economic output. It is used as a
proxy of measuring energy eﬃciency, where a smaller ratio indicates
higher eﬃciency. The indicator is modiﬁed slightly from the oﬃcial UN
indicator, that measures the compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of
the energy intensity between two years. The original indicator targets a
doubling of this rate to a doubling of the 2000-2010 level globally. The
indicator was kept in absolute terms in this study to assess the actual
performance in each country, since the intensity improvement rate, does
not reﬂect how well each country performs in absolute terms.
Proposed for
SDG7
IAEG-SDG 2019 in “Global indicator framework for the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”. Accessed 20.09.2019 at unstats.un.org. See metadata at
unstats.un.org/sdgs/iaeg-sdgs/metadata-compilation/: go to
“Metadata for Goal 7”.
Data source
UNstats 2019: unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/: Go to SDG7,
target 7.3, indicator 7.3.1, indicator code: “EG EGY CLEAN”.
(accessed 20.09.2019)
Temporal coverage
2000 - 2016
Geographical
coverage
239 countries and regions
Possible value
range
All
Page 81 of 138
==PAGE:96==
Supporting Information
Suggested
disaggregation
By sectors (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A
Indicator 3.2 - Supply side eﬃciency
Rationale and
description
Supply side eﬃciency based on national energy consumption. The
eﬃciency is calculated as the total ﬁnal energy consumption divided by
the total primary energy supply (TPES). The TPES is deﬁned as by IEA
as energy production + net energy imports - minus international
bunkers, then +/- stock changes. This reﬂects the supply needed in the
country whether produced within the country or outside. The ﬁnal
energy consumption reﬂects the end-use consumption in all sectors
within the country. The indicator reveals ineﬃciency of energy
conversion as well as transmission and distribution losses. This indicator
reﬂects eﬃciency issues in the energy sector directly and complements
the more absolute and economic perspective in indicator 3.1. A low
supply side eﬃciency can have big eﬀects on energy intensity.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
Estimated from IEA: www.iea.org: choose ‘Download Headline Energy
Data’ for Excel balance sheet (accessed 22.09.2019.)
Temporal coverage
1971 - 2017
Geographical
coverage
53 countries and regions (in 2015)
Possible value
range
0 - 100
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Page 82 of 138
==PAGE:97==
Supporting Information
Indicator 4.1 - Carbon footprint
Rationale and
description
Carbon footprint measured as kg CO2 equivalent per year. The
indicator describes gaseous emissions associated with the life cycle of an
activity, which is relevant to climate change. These gases are termed as
greenhouse gases (GHGs), which include CO2, CH4, N2O,
hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs), hydro-ﬂuorocarbons (HFCs), and
ozone in the lower atmosphere. The unit is measured as CO2 equivalent
which reﬂects the equivalent amount of GHGs corresponding to
emissions from CO2. (ˇCuˇcek et al., 2015)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.2 - Photochemical ozone formation footprint
Rationale and
description
Photochemical ozone formation footprint measured as kg equivalent of
Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOC) per year.
Photochemical ozone formation is an impact category often considered
in LCA and has negative impacts on both human health and the
environment. The indicator assesses the impacts of ozone and other
Page 83 of 138
==PAGE:98==
Supporting Information
reactive oxygen compounds, which are formed in the troposphere by the
primary contaminants VOCs (CH4, RH) or CO in the presence of NOx
and light. (Rosenbaum et al., 2017). In this assessment, this indicator
is split into two sub-indicators, respectively for impacts on ecosystems
and human health.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.3 - Ozone depletion footprint
Rationale and
description
Ozone depletion footprint measured as kg CFC-11 equivalent per year.
Ozone depletion refers to a declining of stratospheric ozone
concentration, which results in less absorption of solar radiation and
hence an increased UV radiation at Earth’s surface. This increase in UV
intensities has negative impacts on both human health (e.g. skin
diseases, immune system diseases, eye irritation) and to ecosystems by
damage to animals and vegetation. The ozone depletion occurs due to
ozone depleting substances (ODSs), which include chlorine and bromine
compounds: chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs), bromochloromethanes
(BCMs), carbon tetrachloride, hydrobromoﬂuorocarbons (HBFCs),
hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs), tetrachloromethane,
1,1,1-trichloromethane, methyl bromide, methyl chloride, halons, and
CH4, N2O, H2O and halogenated substances. (Rosenbaum et al., 2017)
Page 84 of 138
==PAGE:99==
Supporting Information
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.4 - Particulate matter formation footprint
Rationale and
description
Particulate matter (PM) formation footprint measured in kg PM2.5
(ﬁne particles with diameter < 2.5 µm) equivalent per year. PM has a
negative impact on human health when entering the human body. The
exposure to PMs can happen through indoor household exposure and
outdoor exposure in rural and urban areas. PMs can be directly emitted
from power plants or fuel combustion in road transport. They can also
be formed as secondary PMs from NOx, SOx, NH3, VOCs, and
semi-VOCs. (Rosenbaum et al., 2017)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Page 85 of 138
==PAGE:100==
Supporting Information
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.5 - Terrestrial acidiﬁcation footprint
Rationale and
description
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation footprint measured as mole H+ equivalent per
year. When inorganic substances, such as sulphates, nitrates and
phosphates are emitted to the soil they can alter the acidity of the soil.
Plant species have speciﬁc levels of acidity in which they can thrive, and
hence a substantial change from this level will cause a change in the
occurrence of species. The biggest contributors to acidiﬁcation are
NOx, NH3 and SO2. (Huijbregts et al., 2016)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Page 86 of 138
==PAGE:101==
Supporting Information
Indicator 4.6 - Marine eutrophication footprint
Rationale and
description
Marine eutrophication footprint measured as kg nitrogen equivalent lost
to marine water per year. Rise in levels of nutrients (nitrogen and
phosphorous) in riverine and marine waters onsets planktonic growth,
which can lead to hypoxic waters or the more severe anoxic waters.
(Huijbregts et al., 2016)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.7 - Freshwater eutrophication footprint
Rationale and
description
Freshwater eutrophication measured as kg phosphorous equivalent per
year. It occurs due to a rise in nutrient levels in freshwater bodies from
the discharge of nutrients into the soil or directly into the water body
(Huijbregts et al., 2016). The altering of nutrients can lead to rapid
growth of algae and clogging of waterways is the nutrient level rises
above a certain level. This can further lead to anoxia of the water body,
due to large amounts of oxygen uptake by decomposing plants and
algae, potentially leading to loss of species (Carpenter & Bennett,
2011). Human-induced sources of phosphorous discharge are such as
untreated sewage, agricultural runoﬀ, and mining (Carpenter &
Bennett, 2011).
Page 87 of 138
==PAGE:102==
Supporting Information
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.8 - Land footprint
Rationale and
description
Land footprint measured as m2 cropland equivalent per year. This
includes both land transformation from compared to natural levels and
land occupation (Huijbregts et al., 2016). Land use is the main driver of
biodiversity losses, which occur due to intensive agriculture, forestry,
and increase in infrastructure and urban areas (De Baan et al., 2013;
Koellner & Scholz, 2008).
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Page 88 of 138
==PAGE:103==
Supporting Information
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.9 - Water footprint
Rationale and
description
Water footprint measured as m3 consumptive blue water per year.
Consumptive water refers to water which is no longer available in the
original watershed for neither human nor ecosystems (e.i. evaporated,
disposed to the sea, integrated into products). (Huijbregts et al., 2016).
The indicator reﬂects the scarcity of the water resource answering
”What is the potential to deprive another user (human or ecosystem)
when consuming water in this area?” (Boulay et al., 2018).
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using spatially diﬀerentiated
non-marginal characterisation factors from AWARE available at:
www.wulca-waterlca.org.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Page 89 of 138
==PAGE:104==
Supporting Information
Indicator 4.10 - Fossil resource use footprint
Rationale and
description
Fossil resource use footprint measured as kg oil equivalent per year.
The indicator is included to reﬂect scarcity and dissipation of fossil
resources and not the use as such. Fossil resources are lost ones used
and hence not available for others in the future as the resource it was,
and hence with a limited amount of fossil resource, scarcity becomes a
relevant issue (Rosenbaum et al., 2017). The midpoint indicator is
calculated based on the ratio of the HHV for the respective resource to
oil. (Huijbregts et al., 2016)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.11 - Metal and mineral resource use footprint
Rationale and
description
Metal and mineral resource use footprint measured as kg copper
equivalent. The indicator reﬂects the surplus ore potential (SOP) of a
mineral, which reﬂects the extra amount of ore to be produced in the
future because of the extraction of 1 kg of a certain mineral. The
impact at midpoint is obtained by the absolute surplus ore potential
(ASOP) for the assessed mineral over the ASOP for copper. (Huijbregts
et al., 2016)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Page 90 of 138
==PAGE:105==
Supporting Information
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
A*
Indicator 4.12 - Ionising radiation footprint
Rationale and
description
Ionising radiation footprint measured as kBq Cobalt-60 equivalent per
year. The indicator is relevant due to the power production from
nuclear power plants. Exposure to ionising radiation from radionuclides
can cause damage to DNA and hence human health. In the impact
assessment of ReCiPe, the midpoint impact is calculated as the ionising
radiation potential relative to Cobalt-60 to air, where the potential is
obtained as the ratio of collective dose exposure of the assessed
substance to the dose exposure of Cobalt-60. (Huijbregts et al., 2016)
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
No data was obtained from the Exiobase database. TBD.
Temporal coverage
-
Geographical
coverage
-
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
B
Page 91 of 138
==PAGE:106==
Supporting Information
Indicator 4.13 - Chemical footprint
Rationale and
description
Chemical footprint measured as 1,4-dichlorobenzene (DCB) equivalents.
The indicators reﬂect toxicity in diﬀerent compartments for human
health and ecosystems. (Huijbregts et al., 2016). The indicator is left
out of this assessment due to considerable uncertainties in the impact
assessment models (European Commission-Joint Research Centre -
Institute for Environment and Sustainability, 2011). It is recommended
to develop methods for this impact assessment.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
The data is obtained through EE MRIO tables using input data from
Exiobase 3.4 available at: www.exiobase.eu. The model is run in
Matlab to obtain raw data on emission ﬂows for each country, where
after the impact results were achieved using characterisation factors
from ReCiPe 2016 hierarchist available at: www.rivm.nl.
Temporal coverage
1995 - 2011
Geographical
coverage
44 countries and 5 rest of the world regions
Possible value
range
All
Suggested
disaggregation
By end-user (e.g. industry, residential, agriculture, transport)
Tier this study
B
Indicator 4.14 - Particulate matter exposure exceedance
Rationale and
description
This indicator is proposed as a complementary to indicator 4.4. The
indicator measures the integrated PM2.5 exposure over time across
regions when exposure concentration (kg m–3) exceeds the guidance
level of World Health Organization (2005) of 25 µg m–3.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
No data was found. TBD.
Temporal coverage
-
Geographical
coverage
-
Page 92 of 138
==PAGE:107==
Supporting Information
Possible value
range
≥0
Suggested
disaggregation
None
Tier this study
B
Indicator 4.15 - Metal and mineral recycling rate
Rationale and
description
Metal and mineral recycling rate measured at the percentage share of
recycled material of total consumption of metals and minerals. The
indicator is suggested as a complementary indicator to indicator 4.11 to
reﬂect how much of the use is recycled.
Proposed for
SDG7
This study
Data source
No data was found. TBD.
Temporal coverage
-
Geographical
coverage
-
Possible value
range
≥0
Suggested
disaggregation
None
Tier this study
B
A.1.3
Absolute sustainability assessment
Absolute environmental thresholds
The conventional methods of assessing environmental sustainability such as LCA do not evaluate
the sustainability with regards to environmental boundaries. Instead, these assessments are taken
as relative measures by comparing one system with another system relevant to the investigated
function. By doing so, one can estimate whether system A is better than B, hence overlooking that
neither of the two is sustainable in absolute terms (Chandrakumar & Mclaren, 2018). To address
the limits of measuring relative sustainability the term absolute sustainability has been suggested.
Absolute sustainability covers the ability of human societies to operate within the Earth’s carrying
capacity (Chandrakumar & Mclaren, 2018). The carrying capacity of the Earth system refers to
Page 93 of 138
==PAGE:108==
Supporting Information
”the maximum sustained environmental intervention a natural system can withstand without ex-
periencing negative changes in structure or functioning that are diﬃcult or impossible to revert.”
(Bjørn & Hauschild, 2015). Indicators measuring sustainable development of products and systems
with respect to the Earth’s carrying capacity can be termed as absolute environmental sustainability
indicators according to Bjørn & Hauschild (2015). This is considered absolute because the sustain-
ability references relate to natural systems independent of the investigated study. Using absolute
thresholds enables one to evaluate whether a system is sustainable or not (Bjørn et al., 2016).
A way of deﬁning a threshold for environmental impacts is to use ’budgets’. This is frequently
applied in political mitigation frameworks, such as the Paris Agreement 1.5°C goal (Masson-Delmotte
et al., 2018). Figure A.1 illustrated the concept, where the shaded area is the budget of ’allowed’
emissions over the period from today until the end-year 2100 if aiming for the 1.5°C target. The
trajectory line illustrates the path that society would follow if following business as usual. The Iactual
and Iideal marks the level of impact in a certain year, assuming that BAU is deﬁning the current
situation at that point. The diﬀerence between the two points makes up the ’gap’ for the situation
to respect the impact level of the budget.
Figure A.1: Carbon budget under 2°C scenario. The carbon budget is deﬁned as the cumulative GHG
emissions given in Gt CO2 equivalent per year until 2100. Iactual, Iideal, and Igap are the actual impact in
the assessment year, the ideal impact that is required to respect the assigned budget, and the gap between
the two.
The Planetary Boundaries framework is another example of assessing absolute sustainability. This
framework was proposed by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009) in order to deﬁne a safe operating system for
humanity with respect to the Earth system. This safe operating system is associated with the bio-
physical systems and processes of the planet that keeps the environment within the relatively stable
state, known as the Holocene, which has been characterising the Earth the past 10-12,000 years
Page 94 of 138
==PAGE:109==
Supporting Information
(Crutzen, 2002). Since the industrial revolution, human activities have implied great changes in the
global environment, threatening the stable state of the planet as we know it. A term ’Anthropocene’
has therefore been assigned to this new era induced by large pressures from humans, such as massive
changes in the use of fossil resource and cultivation of land. This change in ecological ﬂows can
lead to disastrous consequences around the world (Rockstr¨om et al., 2009). Rockstr¨om et al. (2009)
deﬁned planetary thresholds for nine such processes: climate change, rate of biodiversity loss, inter-
ference with the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles, stratospheric ozone depletion, ocean acidiﬁcation,
global freshwater use, change in land use, chemical pollution, and atmospheric aerosol loading.
Absolute socio-economic thresholds
The threshold for socio-economic indicators was based on the theory of the social foundation as
described by Raworth (2012). The indicator thresholds were deﬁned by human deprivation, where
societies were only considered sustainable in the case of zero-deprivation to humans. Human depri-
vation is based on deﬁned basic needs, where energy has been mentioned as one of the dimensions
that deﬁne the safe and just space (Raworth, 2017). In this study, this dimension is constituted
by the suggested indicators for tracking energy accessibility (target 7.1). These 7.1 indicators are
considered as social indicators and absolute threshold were therefore deﬁned based on the ’zero-
deprivation’ philosophy. In the energy context, zero deprivation was deﬁned by indicators such as
100 % access to energy, 0 % energy accidents, 0 % power blackouts, 100 % aﬀordable energy etc.
This is based on the ”leave-no-one-behind” principle, which is one of the pillars of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (UNCDP, 2018).
Raworth (2012) combined the social foundation and the PBs into the ’Doughnut model’, where
the limit for the PBs are referred to as the ’environmental ceiling’. This safe and just space for
humanity is illustrated in Figure A.2, where the centre inside the doughnut represents the shortfall of
the social foundation and thereby maximum deprivation, and where everything outside the doughnut
is an overshoot of the ecological ceiling, e.i. transgressing of the PBs (Raworth, 2017). The social
foundation consists of the 11 dimensions depicted inside the doughnut. Both frameworks are can
be deemed normative, yet where the PBs are based on thresholds deﬁned by natural science, the
social foundation is to a higher degree based on norms and ethics.
Absolute ’techno-economic’ thresholds
The indicators assigned to target 7.2 and 7.3 were termed here as ’techno-economic’ indicators.
This group of indicators acts to a higher degree as tools of achieving target 7.1 and 7.4 and are
not reﬂecting social and environmental goals per se. The indicators were kept in this assessment to
comply with the UN SDG 7 targets, however, it can be discussed whether these are necessary for
assessing the overall goal, or whether they should be linked to social and environmental indicators
when deﬁning absolute thresholds. In this assessment, the indicators were linked to absolute thresh-
Page 95 of 138
==PAGE:110==
Supporting Information
Figure A.2: The concept of the doughnut depicting the social foundation and the environmental ceiling.
Adapted from Raworth (2017).
olds following the same principle as for the social indicators, where deprivation means technological
deprivation, being any state where the technological optimum solution not chosen. Deﬁning other
reasonable targets for energy eﬃciency rate (and intensity) is not straightforward. In order to de-
ﬁne absolute boundaries for the eﬃciency indicators, these would need to be linked to social and
environmental thresholds, which is a challenging measure. This could potentially be done by the
help from the IPAT equation (see below), where the environmental perspective is reﬂected by ’I’,
the social by ’P’ and ’A’ and last the technology factor ’T’ can cover eﬃciency.
Impact = Population · Affluence · Technology
(A.1)
Hence, depending on what deﬁnes the threshold, this can be set either as a minimum or a maximum.
Following the concept of zero-deprivation, one could ﬁx the energy consumption at the minimum
amount of energy that is needed to fulﬁl everyone’s energy needs in 2030. This can be problematic, as
it relies on forecasts of population, energy consumption and of rebound eﬀects (Bjørn & Hauschild,
2013). Following instead the concept of environmental impact limits, the boundary could be ﬁxed at
a maximum amount of energy that can be produced while respecting the limit of a certain impact.
The latter one needs clear linkages between energy production and associated impacts, which is
challenging. Yet, what if the technology factor cannot reduce the associated impacts of energy
Page 96 of 138
==PAGE:111==
Supporting Information
consumption enough to respect environmental impacts? One might notice the hint of a trade-oﬀ
between the social and the environmental threshold for deﬁning boundaries for this indicator and it
would leave the decision-maker with a choice of compromise. If the T has a limit for improvements,
she might start considering the possibility of suggesting new patterns for P or A. However, this
question has been discussed before it the technology factor remains the easier factor to change
compared to human behaviour (Chertow, 2000).
A.1.4
Derivation of global thresholds for the proposed indicators
The selection of the thresholds and translating them into the same metrics as used in this study rely
on diﬀerent sources and methods. Three methods of deﬁning thresholds were deﬁned based on a
literature study, which are described in the following.
1) All-or-Nothing:
The ﬁrst method ’%’ is a straightforward percentage measure. This is applied for indicators where
the thresholds are deﬁned based on an all-or-nothing principle, which is relevant for speciﬁcally
socio-economic goals that seek to achieve zero deprivation or full technology deployment.
2) Steady state:
This method reﬂects the steady-state impact pressure, where the sustainable state has been reached.
The method is in line with the deﬁnition of carrying capacity as deﬁned by Sayre (2008): ”a ﬁxed
quantity of X that some encompassing Y should carry in abstraction from time or history”, where
X and Y refer to diﬀerent entities depending on the investigated system, and where deﬁned inde-
pendently of time and status-quo. The method also relies on the deﬁnition of Bjørn & Hauschild
(2015): ”the maximum sustained environmental intervention a natural system can withstand without
experiencing negative changes in structure or functioning that are diﬃcult or impossible to revert.”,
where the ’natural system’ can be deﬁned rather broadly from eco-systems to climate system.
3) Dynamic impact budget:
The ’dynamic budget’ method is applicable to impacts where impacts are considered in a longer
perspective and hence is deﬁned as a cumulative threshold until a certain time in the future. This
is relevant for thresholds that are aimed to be reached in the future if unrealistic in the short-term
or if new technologies or lifestyles are expected to change at a certain time in the long term. The
’budget’ is, therefore, the cumulative amount of impacts, that are allowed to be emitted over a
deﬁned time-horizon, and the threshold is deﬁned as an ’annual average threshold’ from the year of
assessment to the end-year. The ’dynamic’ addition of the method reﬂects how this threshold needs
to be re-obtained each year, as the year of assessment moves towards the end-year. This is illustrated
in Figure 2.6. An important note on this method is that the thresholds are not reﬂecting the state
of sustainability. Instead, it strives to answer: ”what is the constant amount of annual impacts
Page 97 of 138
==PAGE:112==
Supporting Information
that can be exerted if the budget is to be respected in this period?”, where the period is deﬁned
by choosing an end-year where the sustainable state has been reached. This method is favourable
for indicators where the current impacts are far from reaching the state of sustainability since it
will allow for higher impacts compared to the real sustainability thresholds. Since all environmental
indicators are based on data from 2011, this will be the assessment year in this study.
The choice of global thresholds for the environmental thresholds are mainly based on the PBs and
the carrying capacity normalisation references used by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015). For all the STE
indicators, the all-or-nothing method was applied reﬂecting respectively social and technological
deprivation, and hence the thresholds were rather straightforward. For the environmental, a more
detailed description of the handling of each indicator threshold is presented in the following.
STE thresholds
The thresholds for all the STE indicators were based on the all-or-nothing method. And hence,
deﬁning the thresholds were rather straightforward using the deﬁned scale for the possible value
range (e.g. 0-100 %).
Energy intensity
This indicator also relied on the all-or-nothing method, however, since it could obtain all possible
values, the indicator upper and lower bounds had to be adjusted to ﬁt the method. The threshold
was based on the UN target deﬁnition ”By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy
eﬃciency”. Hence, it was decided to choose the global energy intensity in 2030, if the goal is to
be respected. That is the ﬁnal global energy intensity with annual average intensity improvement
of 2.6 % from 2010 to 2030 (a doubling of the rate of 1.3 % in the period from 1990 to 2010).
This was obtained from equation A.2 for the Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR), where EI is
the energy intensity in the denoted years. The CAGR was set to -2.6 % and EI2010 to the global
energy intensity in 2010, and the equation was solved for EI2030 amounting to 3.48 GJ/GDP. This
value was set as the minimum energy intensity to be reached in each country, where every value
above this in deemed unsustainable. To comply with the all-or-nothing method a maximum value
was deﬁned, being the double value of the minimum. Using the absolute intensity in 2030 instead
of the CAGR in each country was decided to reﬂect how each country performs in absolute terms.
Low intensity energy systems, that do not improve by 2.6 % each year, can still perform better than
high intensity energy systems, and using the CAGR as a reference would not be suitable for absolute
assessment.
CAGR =
EI2030
EI2010

1
2030–2010
– 1
(A.2)
Page 98 of 138
==PAGE:113==
Supporting Information
Carbon footprint
The measure of this indicator covers the total emissions of GHGs given in kg CO2 eq per year.
Several thresholds have been proposed for this measure which is described as climate change or
global warming as well as ocean acidiﬁcation. In this study, the proposed thresholds for carbon
footprint are the Paris Agreement goal for 1.5°C and 2°C scenarios (1.5DS and 2DS), the two PBs
for climate change of 1 W/m2 and 350 ppm CO2, and the PB for ocean acidiﬁcation of maximum
80 % of the pre-industrial aragonite saturation state (Steﬀen et al., 2015). For this indicator, both
the dynamic budget and the steady state method is applicable for obtaining thresholds. However,
deriving a reasonable steady state threshold was not obtainable as annual emissions in this study, due
to the long lifetime and to the complexity of the CO2 cycle and its diﬀerent sinks, which creates high
uncertainty in a potential steady state threshold (Ciasullo et al., 2014). Furthermore, the sustainable
level of climate change is currently highly transgressed, which makes it relevant to apply the impact
budget method (Steﬀen et al., 2015). This method was therefore applied, deﬁning the thresholds
as an average annual emission, based on the carbon budget from the 2011 (data reference year)
to the year of reaching a sustainable state. The calculation of the budgets were based on diﬀerent
emission scenarios (e.i the RCPs and extensions beyond 2100) and run by the MAGICC6 climate
model (Meinshausen et al., 2011). Calculations are detailed for the diﬀerent thresholds. This model
can be downloaded free of charge from www.magicc.org.
Paris Agreement 1.5°C goal (2 and 1.5 DS)
This threshold aims at keeping global temperature increase substantially below 2°C compared to
pre-industrial levels. Two thresholds were suggested, respectively for assessing 2 DS and 1.5 DS.
For the 2 DS, the value was obtained by the RCP2.6, also known as RCP3PD, the scenario was
run by the MAGICC model. Choosing the output of temperature development over time shows a
temperature peak in the year 2057 (1.6°C above pre-industrial levels), where after the temperature
starts to decline (see Figure A.3). A temperature increase below 1.5°C is achieved after the year
2125 (rounding to the next ﬁfth year). The budget was hence measured over 115 years in the period
from 2011 to 2125. The total GHG annual emissions were obtained from the output ﬁle of Kyoto
GHG emissions given in CO2 eq. This amounted to a total carbon budget of 2076 Gt, and hence
averaged over the period 2.02 1013 kg CO2/year. This is illustrated in Figure A.4 averaging the
scenario budget over the whole period.
Page 99 of 138
==PAGE:114==
Supporting Information
Figure A.3: Temperature change compared to pre-industrial level using the RCP2.6 scenario when modelled
with MAGICC6 Meinshausen et al. (2011).
Figure A.4: Shaded area = annual GHG emissions in RCP2.6 scenario, ﬂat area = annual emissions
average over the full period. Modelled with MAGICC6 Meinshausen et al. (2011).
A diﬀerent scenario-based budget was applied for the 1.5 DS, which was deemed a more certain
model, however only available for 1.5 DS. Rogelj et al. (2018) suggested climate mitigation scenarios
consistent with an increase of 1.5°C already by 2100. They used the median emissions every ﬁfth
year of 13 diﬀerent scenarios and interpolate the annual emissions until 2100. All scenarios were
limited to a radiative forcing of 1.9 W/m2. Using this scenario over the range from 2011-2100
Page 100 of 138
==PAGE:115==
Supporting Information
amount to a cumulated amount of 1430 Gt CO2 eq or an annual average amount of 1.57 1013 kg
CO2/year.
PB - Radiative forcing
The PB of radiative forcing (RF) suggested a threshold of 1 W/m2, which is a more precautionary
threshold than the previous. None of the RCP scenarios is targeting this goal within the years until
2100, however, the extended pathways reveal that letting the model run until 2500 result in an RF
that approaches 1 W/m2 as shown in Figure A.5. This is deemed a valid end-year for this threshold,
and hence the carbon budget is obtained similarly to the 2 and 1.5 DS thresholds, using a period
of 490 years instead (e.g. 2011-2500). This results in a budget of 3289 Gt CO2 eq and a more
precautionary annual average threshold of 6.71 1013 kg CO2/year.
Figure A.5: Radiative forcing due to GHG emissions in the RCP2.6 scenario reaching a value slightly
above 1 W/m2 in 2500. Data adapted from www.pik-potsdam.de (Meinshausen et al., 2011).
PB - Atmospheric CO2 concentration
This threshold is a secondary PB for measuring climate change, however, it only includes CO2 and
does not consider the global warming eﬀect of other GHGs. Again the RCP2.6 scenario was used.
The global mixing ratios were obtained from www.pik-potsdam.de, where it was found that the
atmospheric CO2 concentration reached a level below 350 ppm in the year 2355 (rounded to nearest
coming ﬁve years). Running the RCP2.6 scenario in the MAGICC6 model the CO2 emissions were
obtained from the output ﬁle ”Datbasket emissions.out”, which cumulated over the period from
2011 to 2355 amounted to 376 Gt CO2 eq and an average of 1.09 10–12 kg CO2/year. This value
is more than 10-fold lower than that of the 1 W/m2 for all GHG, which seems rather low knowing
that CO2 is by far has the highest contributing among GHGs (Laurent et al., 2013). However, it is
observed from the scenarios that the annual CO2 emission are projected to stay negative, beginning
Page 101 of 138
==PAGE:116==
Supporting Information
from the year 2073, and hence the longer the period observed the more negative emission contribute
to lower the total carbon budget. This is a bias of the scenario that targets huge reductions in CO2.
No other GHG is reaching a point of net reduction.
Figure A.6: Atmospheric CO2 concentration over time in the RCP2.6 scenario reaching a value below 350
ppm in 2355. Data retrieved from www.pik-potsdam.de (Meinshausen et al., 2011).
PB - Ocean acidiﬁcation
Another PB, which is also linked to the control variable CO2, is ocean acidiﬁcation (Steﬀen et al.,
2015). A high share of the anthropogenic CO2 emissions is ending up being dissolved in the oceans.
This leads to increasing acidity of the surface water and a reduction in the amount of CO2–
3 , which
is an essential ion to many marine species. Consequently, the rising acidity of the oceans makes it
harder for some organisms to thrive (e.g. corals, some shellﬁsh, plankton) and eventually the loss
of these species potentially leads to drastic changes in ocean ecosystems and the end of other ﬁsh
species (Material et al., 2007). The threshold is set at maximum 80 % below the saturation state
of Aragonite at the pre-industrial level which is 2.75 compared to 3.44. Based on Guinotte & Fabry
(2008), the saturation state was presented at the pre-industrial level and the level of three times
the atmospheric CO2 concentration as the pre-industrial. Assuming linear correlation between the
two, the change in CO2 per change in saturation state was obtained, amounting to 341.1 ppm per
mole of saturated CO2–
3 . Matching CO2 concentration corresponding to the threshold becomes 512
ppm. Hence respecting the suggested threshold for climate change, this threshold will be respected
as well. Translation this threshold into an annual pressure of CO2 emissions, the MAGICC6 model
was run for RCP6
Page 102 of 138
==PAGE:117==
Supporting Information
Ozone depletion footprint
(Rockstr¨om et al., 2009) proposed a PB for stratospheric ozone depletion at maximum 5 % (5-10
% uncertainty range) reduction of ozone concentration, measured in Dubson units (DU), compared
to pre-industrial levels (Steﬀen et al., 2015). The steady state approach was used as the method
for translating the threshold, as done by Bjørn & Hauschild (2015). Bjørn & Hauschild (2015)
translated this threshold into carrying capacity using the average of the uncertainty range at 7.5
% instead of the lower boundary used by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009). Here he calculated the sus-
tained amount of CFC-11 eq emissions that would lead to transgressing the boundary of 7.5 % at
steady-state. The translation was done by the model of (Daniel et al., 2011) using the Equivalent
Eﬀective Stratospheric Chlorine (EESC) concentration change. Since this model was not available,
the result from Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) was used, however, translated into the minimum value of
the uncertainty range (e.i. 5 %) by the numbers available in the supporting information of Bjørn &
Hauschild (2015). This was 3.60 108 kg CFC-11 eq per year.
Photochemical ozone formation footprint
For the ozone formation impacts on vegetation, the threshold was taken from Bjørn & Hauschild
(2015) who obtained the carrying capacity based on the WHO guideline of 3 ppm h AOT40 for
daylight hours during May–July (Danzon et al., 2001). This was turned into NMVOC kg per year
by using fate factors. Since the model he used was not available, the carrying capacity was taken
directly from his paper and translated into NOx eq per year by the ReCiPe 2016 CFs. The ﬁnal
threshold used in this study was 7.70 109 NOx eq per year.
For ozone formation impacts on human health, no translation was found elsewhere in literature.
And hence is was decided to use the WHO guideline of 100 µg/m2 as an 8-h mean concentration
was used as the threshold (World Health Organization, 2005). Here the intake fractions of NOx
of ozone intake were used to translate the threshold into annual amount of emissions. The intake
fraction is here the change in ozone exposure in a region caused by the change of NOx emissions, and
are obtained by equation A.3, where dC is the change in concentration of ozone, N is the number
of people in the assessed region, BR is the breathing rate and dM is the change in amount of NOx
emissions van Zelm et al. (2016). The human breathing rate (4745 m3 per year) and spatially
diﬀerentiated intake fractions were taken from van Zelm et al. (2016) (supplementary data). Since
the intake fraction diﬀers across diﬀerent regions and since this study assesses global factors, an
average intake factor weighted by population in 2011 of each region, was obtained to represent a
global value. This was 2.69 10–8 for NOx emissions. Setting dC to the 100 µg/m2 and adjust to
an annual mean, the dM amounted to 1.35E 1017 kg NOx eq per year. However, it should be noted
that this is based on a global average, where ideally spatially diﬀerentiated thresholds would be
recommended.
Page 103 of 138
==PAGE:118==
Supporting Information
iF = dC · N · BR
dM
(A.3)
Particulate matter formation
The PM footprint was neither assessed by the PB framework or in the normalisation factors by
Bjørn & Hauschild (2015). PM has a great impact on human health and is among others one of
the most aﬀecting pollutants to human health (World Health Organization, 2005). The threshold
was set according to the WHO long-term guideline for PM2.5 with an annual average concentration
of 10 µg/m3. The same approach as used for the ozone formation (human health) was applied
here, following the intake fraction from (van Zelm et al., 2016) (supplementary data) and using the
average global intake fraction across regions of 3.25 10–6. The amount of emissions was 1.02 1011
kg PM2.5 per year.
Particulate matter accumulated exceedance
This indicator can be termed as an environmental accumulated exceedance indicator, and hence the
threshold was set according to the all-or-nothing principle. The exceedance level used in this study
is from World Health Organization (2005) given as a 24-hour mean concentration of 25 µg m–3.
The threshold was then deﬁned as the number of people exposed in excess of the WHO guidance
value expressed as pop · kg · m–3day. Equation A.1.4 counts the time integrated exposure over one
year across all regions above the exceedance level Ci,r,0, where Ci,r is the present concentration on
day i in region r, Nr is the population in region r and Ti is the measured day i, hence the exposure
is only accounted for when Ci,r > Ci,r,0. The threshold is deﬁned as 0 pop · kg · m–3day, where
everything above 0 is not respecting the threshold.
R
X
r=1
365
X
i=1
Nr · (Ci,r – Ci,r,0) · Ti
(A.4)
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
Bjørn & Hauschild (2015) derived the carrying capacity for terrestrial acidiﬁcation based on the
critical load concept.
Here they found that critical load of 1,170 mole H+ eq/ha/year, which
they translated into a global threshold of 1.60 1013 mole H+ eq per year. To ﬁt the metric of
this assessment, this was translated into SO2 equivalent. This was done by dividing with the acid
equivalent of sulphur, e.i. 2 H+/mole S (see equation below) and multiplying with the molar mass
of SO2. This yielded 5.12 1011 kg SO2 equivalent per year.
SO2 + 0.5 O2 + H2O →SO2–
4 + 2 H+
(A.5)
Page 104 of 138
==PAGE:119==
Supporting Information
Since no other thresholds were found from literature, which was applicable to the correct metrics,
the threshold was directly applied in this study.
Freshwater eutrophication
This thresholds was obtained directly from Carpenter & Bennett (2011), who analysed the global P
cycle and estimated PBs for freshwater eutrophication. The value in this study was their proposed PB
for the phosphorous ﬂow from terrestrial ecosystems to freshwater being 8.58 109 kg P equivalent
per year. However, data on subtracting the natural background level for this threshold was not
obtained and should be investigated in future studies.
Marine eutrophication
The PB of the biological nitrogen ﬂows were linked to marine eutrophication. This was set at 62 Tg N
per year for industrial and intentional biological N ﬁxation as the lower bound within the uncertainty
range of 62-82 Tg N per year (Steﬀen et al., 2015). However, since the impact assessment in this
study given as the marine eutrophication potential for dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) emissions
to diﬀerent compartments, based on fate factor and exposure factors weighted to a world average
of N emissions to marine waters, the ﬁxation is not a direct ﬁt to the indicator (Huijbregts et al.,
2016). The PB was based on derived boundaries for nitrogen ﬁxation based on critical values and
losses(leaching or runoﬀ) by De Vries et al. (2013). Where the losses are the amount of nitrogen
lost to marine waters from the emitted compartment and hence a better ﬁt with impact indicator
result obtained from this study. The range of uncertainty of losses to marine waters was 5.4-7.2
Tg N per year (De Vries et al., 2013). Following the same level of precaution as for the PBs the
threshold used in this study is 5.4 Tg N per year.
Land footprint
the impact indicator is obtained in m2 occupied cropland equivalent in the assessed year.
To
assess the threshold for this indicator the non-updated PB from Rockstr¨om et al. (2009) was used,
since this was reﬂecting directly the maximum area of cropland, whereas the updated version was
reﬂecting forest area to be maintained of the ice-free land surface of Earth (Steﬀen et al., 2015).
The proposed PB was originally maximum 15 % of the ice-free land surface converted to cropland,
within the uncertainty range of 15-20 % (Rockstr¨om et al., 2009). The total ice-free land area is
approximately 13,400 mill. ha and hence the maximum cropland area to respect the PB amount to
2,010 mill. ha or 2.01 1013 m2 per year (Smyth & Dumanski, 1993).
Page 105 of 138
==PAGE:120==
Supporting Information
Water footprint
The impact results for water footprint, based on the AWARE water scarcity footprint which is
obtained as m3 consumed water, were scaled to reﬂect the country speciﬁc scarcity compared to the
world average value (Boulay et al., 2018). The threshold used to assess this indicators was taken
from the PB suggested by Rockstr¨om et al. (2009), which reﬂects the amount of consumed blue
water by humans per year. The threshold matches the indicator as the CF for the world average will
be 1. The proposed boundary was set at the lower bound of the uncertainty range of 4,000-6,000
km3 per year, e.i. 4.00 1012 m3 per year (Steﬀen et al., 2015).
Fossil resource use
Two diﬀerent approaches for deﬁning the threshold for fossil resource use have been proposed. The
ﬁrst approach has not been applied in this study but suggested as a conceptual approach in future
studies.
Geological formation rate
This method is not applied in the current study but suggested as a conceptual approach of deﬁning
a threshold for fossil resource use in the view of resource scarcity. The geological formation rate
has been suggested Lassen & Hansen (1998) as a method of deﬁning the threshold for sustainable
use of non-renewable resources. This method deﬁnes the sustainable use as ”the use, which can
be maintained, if the same quantity and quality of resources must be available for our descendants
[translated]” (Lassen & Hansen, 1998). The threshold was therefore governed by the rate at which
the resources can regenerate by geological processes. Lassen & Hansen (1998) present a value for oil
based in this approach which was 0.001 Gj oil per person per year, based on the projected population
in 2050 of 9.8 bill. people. This amounts to 2.34 108 kg oil per year. Reaching this level would lead
to a sustainable use of oil in the view of resource scarcity only, respecting the natural degradation
and generation processes. Such number was not obtained for coal and gas.
Temporal horizon
This indicator is assigned to the long-term impacts group.
Since the resources are treated as
a budget which is expected to decline over a longer time-horizon. Furthermore, the natural re-
generation of fossil resources are extremely low compared to current extraction rates, and hence for
more pragmatic reasons, this threshold does not target the geological formation rate. Instead, the
remaining fossil resource reserves of oil, coal and gas was used as a budget, which was distributed
over a chosen time horizon as an annual average ”allowed” resource use. The remaining reserves
were based on the Ultimate Recoverable Reserve (UUR) minus the cumulative amount of resource
use since humans started its exploitation (see equation A.6). The time horizon was set at 300 years,
which was rather arbitrary than scientiﬁc. It was chosen based on the guidance of Lassen & Hansen
(1998) for non-renewable materials and taken a rather long-term perspective assuming the sector
Page 106 of 138
==PAGE:121==
Supporting Information
will be independence after this time.
FF budget = URR – FFcumulative,2011
(A.6)
The URR for all three fossil fuel types were based on the Best Guess (BG) scenario by Mohr et al.
(2015), who estimated fossil fuel projections for the three scenarios using a Geologic Resources
Supply-Demand Model (GeRS-DeMo).
The cumulative production of fossil resources from the
beginning of exploitation and until 2011 was obtained from historical data adapted from Mohr et al.
(2015) and converted into kg oil equivalent and summed to obtain a ﬁnal number for all fossil
resources. The choice of time horizon used in this study was 300 years, as proposed by Lassen &
Hansen (1998) for ”strong sustainability” for non-renewables resources, this was in accordance with
projected years of ceased production of fossil fuels by Mohr et al. (2015) for the BG scenario. Table
A.30 shows the calculated annual thresholds and the intermediate base values for the calculation.
The ﬁnal annual threshold obtained for this indicator was 4.5 1012 kg oil eq per year.
Table A.30: Key values for calculating remaining fossil resource reserves based on Mohr et al. (2015).
tcf = trillion cubic feet. RR = remaining reserve. Conversion factors: 1.72 108 boe/tcf (natural gas), 140
koe/boe, 0.42 koe/kg coal.
URR
Cum.
(2011)
RR
RR (koe)
Time
(years)
Threshold
(koe/yr)
Oil
4,443 Gb
1,272 Gb
3,171 Gb
4.4 1014
300
1.5 1012
Coal
1,161 Gt
324 Gt
837 Gt
3.5 1014
300
1.2 1012
Gas
26,486 tcf
3,446 tcf
23,040 tcf
5.6 1014
300
1.9 1012
Total
-
-
-
1.4 1015
300
4.5 1012
Metal and mineral resource use
No threshold was obtained for metal and mineral resource use in this study, yet a discussion of
challenges and potential approaches is given.
Firstly, the impact result of this indicator is based on marginal CFs, which describe the average
extra amount of ore that needs to be produced in the future due to extraction of a mineral resource
today (Huijbregts et al., 2016). For having a more direct measure of the scarcity of the resources,
should be investigated whether non-marginal CFs could be applied instead, which could be compared
to the respective reserves. Secondly, the very diverse nature and availability of the diﬀerent minerals
and metals complicates the process of deriving one threshold for this impact. An approach of doing
this could be to weight the diﬀerent resources based on their market price, as a proxy for its scarcity.
A second option would be to keep the minerals separated in a composite indicator. However, this
would require to have all the impact results separated as well.
Page 107 of 138
==PAGE:122==
Supporting Information
A.1.5
Downscaling principles
Several downscaling principles exist for allocating shares at nation, regional, sectoral, corporate or
individual level. The principles used in this study includes a mix of several ethical principles. The
main principles, which are often used are described below.
Egalitarian:
In egalitarianism, being worse oﬀthan others is bad in itself. Most straightforward egalitarian princi-
ple for allocating impacts is ’equal per capita’. Another egalitarian principle also known as the ’equal
burdens’, which suggests that all countries should be given a share of the overall burden of reducing
impacts, which should be equal in all countries. So that the impact reduction includes the ’cost’ of
reducing, and this cost is the one that should be equally distributed. A third egalitarian principle is
called ’equal access’. This principle relies on the fact that people should have equal service access,
even though the services have diﬀerent impacts. Countries where there is a higher need for a service
should have a greater share (e.g. cooling, heating). (Grasso, 2012)
Prioritarian:
(broadly egalitarian), this principle relies on the fact that inequality is not bad in itself, instead, it
focuses on the situation of an individual; the lower her level of impact, the more she should be
beneﬁted. The ﬁrst principle is historical responsibility that distributes based on previous impacts.
Countries that have polluted less, are granted a higher share proportional to their cumulative emis-
sions (polluter pays principle). In this view point, the most advantages countries should have smaller
share since they have greater wealth and capacities.
Suﬃcientarian:
Builds on the idea that all must have a suﬃcient share, so no that everyone has the same, but each
one has enough. Despite its diﬃculties, this principle has gained a privileged role in literature. Idea
is to allow countries below the ”moral limit” to do impacting activities necessary for their people to
pursue a decent life, not limited by emission allowances. A suﬃcient share per person (subjective),
the remaining share is then distributed equally.
Grandfathering:
Distribution should be based on status quo, that is the past shares of emissions at a given date.
This principle has been criticised of being unjust, since it give the high polluting countries a big
advantage. However, it has been suggested as a more pragmatic approach to engage major emitters,
thus rather pragmatic than optimal. (Grasso, 2012)
Page 108 of 138
==PAGE:123==
Supporting Information
A.1.6
Data collection
The data used in this study was targeting global coverage and to aim at having the same baseline year
for all data, data from 2015 was targeted since newer data was scant. The data was retrieved for the
country performance for each indicator, and for downscaling principles. Data for indicator 7.1-7.3
was obtained through open source databases for each indicator suggested in the ideal list. The data
search was targeting globally with the highest possible country coverage. For some indicators, where
data was not available, a proxy of data was used to represent the given indicator. For the indicator
where a suitable proxy of data was not available, these have not been assessed. For 7.4 indicators,
these were not straightforward to obtain from data search. For most of the footprint indicators data
was obtained using the ’environmentally extended multi-regional input-output’ (EE-MRIO) model
with data from the Exiobase v3.4 database. This model links economic consumption-based ﬂows
from diﬀerent regions around the world to environmental impacts and resource depletion.
The
responsibility of environmental impacts is assigned to the end consumer. The model was run in
MATLAB R2019b for the energy industries that represented the whole sector (Kitzes, 2013). The
spatial coverage of data from this database was limited, however, this database deemed the best
option for achieving as many representing results as possible. Exiobase covers 43 countries, which
accounts for approx. 89 % of global GDP and hence represents a high share of all economic activity
(Stadler et al., 2014). The sector resolution of this database was not available for the energy sector
as a whole. Therefore, a selection of the industries included in Exiobase was done to match the
energy sector to the furthest extent.
The data used for calculating the diﬀerent allocation keys for downscaling of thresholds, included
population, GVA, and impact values. Here, data on population and country GVA was obtained from
open source databases. The sectoral GVA and all impact values were obtained from the EE-MRIO
model as for the 7.4 indicators.
EE-MRIO
Multi-regional input-output (MRIO) tables describe the monetary ﬂows of goods and services from
producer to consumer at national and international level. MRIO tables consist of multiple national
input-output (IO) tables, which together built a framework of multiple country trading (Stadler
et al., 2014). Extended Environmental OI (EE-IO) tables link monetary activities and environmental
impacts in the investigated system and works as a top-down approach for obtaining environmental
footprint (Kitzes, 2013; Mattila, 2017). An important assumption is that the relationship between
impacts and production is linear (Hauschild et al., 2017).
An IO table consists of the ﬂows of diﬀerent products that leaves and enters each industrial sector.
All ﬂows are entered into a table of inter-industrial ﬂows, where the rows describe the produced
output from each industry and the columns represent the required inputs to a speciﬁc industry.
These ’intermediate ﬂows’ can be put in a n times n matrix ’Z’, and with the help from the total
Page 109 of 138
==PAGE:124==
Supporting Information
ﬁnal consumption ’x’, the matrix of technical coeﬃcients can be obtained ’A’. A is obtained from
multiplication of the intermediate ﬂows between industries and the inverse of the outputs put in a
diagonal matrix, e.i. A = Z · bX–1. Hence A consists of the relative inputs in each column per unit
of output for each industrial sector. (Miller & Blair, 2009)
A = Z · bX–1 =


z11/x1
z12/x2
...
z1n/xn
z21/x1
z22/x2
...
z2n/xn
...
...
...
...
zn1/x1
zn2/x2
...
znn/xn


The total ﬁnal outputs of goods in a market can be found from Equation A.7, where Y is a vector
of the ﬁnal demand of output from each sector, I is the identity matrix with ones in the diagonal.
Where (I – A)–1 is known as the Leontief Inverse. Table A.31 illustrates a simple IO table consisting
of four sectors, the total ﬁnal output from each sector is obtained by horizontal summation of all
intermediate outputs and the output consumed directly by the ﬁnal demand. Vertically, the inputs
are reﬂected for each of the sectors, the row ’value added’ in the table accounts for other inputs,
such as labour, capital or taxes. Summation of each column results in the total ﬁnal inputs, which
has to balance with the output X vector. (Miller & Blair, 2009)
X = (I – A)–1Y
(A.7)
L = (I – A)–1
(A.8)
Table A.31: Illustration of a IO table for four sectors, representing the outputs from sectors vertically and
the inputs to sectors horizontally. ’z’ indicates the inter-industry commodity, which is used to create other
outputs, ’y’ is the amount of commodity that goes to the end-user, ’v’ is the total value added for each
output sector, and ’x’ is total input and output from each sector, which need to match.
Sector 1
Sector 2
Sector 3
Sector 4
Final
demand
Total
output
Sector 1
z11
z12
z13
z14
y1
x1
Sector 2
z21
z22
z23
z24
y2
x2
Sector 3
z31
z32
z33
z34
y3
x3
Sector 4
z41
z42
z43
z44
y4
x4
Value added
v1
v1
v1
v1
Total output
x1
x1
x1
xn
Satellite accounts
Page 110 of 138
==PAGE:125==
Supporting Information
The grey row in the table is representing ’satellite accounts’, which are extensions to the IO table and
can consist of social or environmental data, e.g. emissions, resource extraction, and labour. Calling
these intermediate ﬂows ’S’ the environmental extended pendant to A, the technical coeﬃcient
matrix for satellite accounts ’B’ can be derived: B = S · bX–1. For emission ﬂows this would be the
total emissions per input of product to each sector. Hence, similar to obtaining X the total ﬁnal
outputs of environmental extension ’G’ can be found (see Equation A.9). In the example the IO
contains ﬂows from a market of four sectors, with MRIO tables, economic activities and satellite
accounts can be assessed for trading within and across countries. Summation of all impact related
to economic inputs to all sectors within the country plus impacts from direct consumption provides
the total impacts within the given country. Summation within sectors can be obtained similarly.
G = B(I – A)–1Y
(A.9)
Exiobase 3.4
Several databases exist for creating MRIO tables, comprising among others Eora, Exiobase, GTAP,
and WIOD (Stadler et al., 2014; Kitzes, 2013). Each database consists of diﬀerent geographical
coverage, sector resolution, and number of impact categories (Stadler et al., 2014; Hauschild et al.,
2017). Exiobase 3.4 is a database that seeks to assess sustainability questions the EU, its major
trading markets with EU, and the biggest global economies, which makes up the regional coverage of
this database accounting for 89 % of the global GDP (Stadler et al., 2014, 2018). Exiobase coveres
49 regions (28 EU countries, 16 non-EU, and ﬁve rest of of the world regions), 163 industries, 200
products, 417 emission categories, and 662 material and resource categories (see www.exiobase.eu).
Modelling approach for environmental impacts
Similar to the example of the four sectors in Section A.1.6, the energy sector has been modelled
using MRIO tables including economic activities across all energy-related industries within a country
as well as across country borders. This was carried out with the Exiobase 3.4 database and modelled
through Matlab (see script in next section).
To model the impact from the energy sector, all the industries that were associated to energy
generation, transmission and distribution, including transportation, was selected and the model was
run with these alone.
As the energy sector was not listed as one industry and as the energy-
related industries were disaggregated into upstream, generation and downstream industries, it was
not straightforward to identify the relevant industries to represent the full energy sector. Since an
upstream industry such as the mining of metals and fossil resources might cover other uses than
energy. The limitation of the sector resolution creates the possibility for uncertainties of the results
in whether all parts if the energy sector is included or not. Included industries were therefore based
on a subjective choice resulting in 29 industries from each country. Upon that all the energy ﬂows
Page 111 of 138
==PAGE:126==
Supporting Information
between these ﬂows and the end-user was added, by subtracting the end-uses from other industries
than the 29 form the total consumption by the end-users. The industries are given in Table A.32.
Table A.32: Energy related industries included in this study. The numbers are referring to the speciﬁc
industry numbers in Exiobase 3.4 (Stadler et al., 2018).
No.
Industry
20
Mining of coal and lignite; extraction of peat (10)
21
Extraction of crude petroleum and services related to crude oil extraction, excluding surveying
22
Extraction of natural gas and services related to natural gas extraction, excluding surveying
23
Extraction, liquefaction, and regasiﬁcation of other petroleum and gaseous materials
24
Mining of uranium and thorium ores (12)
56
Manufacture of coke oven products
57
Petroleum Reﬁnery
58
Processing of nuclear fuel
96
Production of electricity by coal
97
Production of electricity by gas
98
Production of electricity by nuclear
99
Production of electricity by hydro
100
Production of electricity by wind
101
Production of electricity by petroleum and other oil derivatives
102
Production of electricity by biomass and waste
103
Production of electricity by solar photovoltaic
104
Production of electricity by solar thermal
105
Production of electricity by tide, wave, ocean
106
Production of electricity by Geothermal
107
Production of electricity nec
108
Transmission of electricity
109
Distribution and trade of electricity
110
Manufacture of gas; distribution of gaseous fuels through mains
111
Steam and hot water supply
120
Transport via railways
121
Other land transport
122
Transport via pipelines
123
Sea and coastal water transport
124
Inland water transport
125
Air transport (62)
Exiobase 3.4 provided the ﬁve following data inputs, which was loaded in the MatLab script: The
technical coeﬃcient matrix (A), The ﬁnal demand (Y), Impacts from industries (F), Impacts from
households (Fhh), and Names and units for all satellite accounts (Fitem)
Page 112 of 138
==PAGE:127==
Supporting Information
Matlab script for EE-MRIO
1 %% Load EXIOBASE
f i l e s
2
3 A = r e a d t a b l e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ IOT 2011 ixi \A. t x t ” , ’ D e l i m i t e r ’
, ’ tab ’ , ’ ReadVariableNames ’ , true ) ; %Direct
input
requirements
4 Y = r e a d t a b l e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ IOT 2011 ixi \Y. t x t ” , ’
ReadVariableNames ’ , true ) ; % F u l l
f i n a l
demand
5 F = r e a d t a b l e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ IOT 2011 ixi \ s a t e l l i t e \F . t x t ” , ’
ReadVariableNames ’ , true ) ; % I n d u s t r i a l
emissions
6
F hh = r e a d t a b l e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ IOT 2011 ixi \ s a t e l l i t e \F hh .
t x t ” , ’ ReadVariableNames ’ , true ) ; % Emissions
from
households
7
F items = r e a d t a b l e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ IOT 2011 ixi \ s a t e l l i t e \
u n i t . t x t ” , ’ ReadVariableNames ’ , true ) ; % Name of
a l l
the
s a t e l l i t e
v a r i a b l e s ,
i n c l .
u n i t
8
9 % Update the
f i l e
path
to match what
i s
on your computer
10 %% Aggregate
f i n a l
demand
c a t e g o r i e s
i n t o
one
f i n a l
demand per
country
11
12
Y values=s t r 2 d o u b l e ( t a b l e 2 a r r a y (Y( 3 : s i z e (Y, 1 ) ,3: s i z e (Y, 2 ) ) ) ) ;
13 % t a b l e 2 a r r a y :
converts
t a b l e
to
matrix
14 % s i z e (Y, 1 )
r e t u r n s
number of rows ,
and
s i z e (Y, 2 )
r e t u r n s
number of
columns
15 % Y( 3 : s i z e (Y, 1 ) ,3: s i z e (Y, 2 ) )
r e t u r n s
the
t a b l e
from row 3 and column
3 ,
16 % e x c l u d i n g
” category ” and ” country ” etc .
17 % s t r 2 d o u b l e :
removes
the
( ’)
s i g n s
18
19 C = zeros (7∗49 ,49) ; %Matrix
to
aggregate
data by country ,
there
are
49
c o u n t r i e s
and 7
d i f f e r e n t
c a t e g o r i e s
20
f o r
i =1:49
21
C(( i –1) ∗7+1: i ∗7 , i ) =1;
22
end
23
Y values=Y values ∗C; % we aggregate
the
c a t e g o r i e s
in
each
country ,
but keep
a l l
9802
s e c t o r s
24
c l e a r C i
25 %% C a l c u l a t e
L e o n t i e f
i n v e r s e
26
Page 113 of 138
==PAGE:128==
Supporting Information
27
A values = s t r 2 d o u b l e ( t a b l e 2 a r r a y (A( 3 : s i z e (A, 1 ) ,3: s i z e (A, 2 ) ) ) ) ; %
get
the
input / output
matrix A
28 % s t r 2 d o u b l e :
Convert
s t r i n g s
to
double
p r e c i s i o n
v a l u e s
29 % t a b l e 2 a r r a y :
Convert
t a b l e
to homogeneous matrix
30
A items = t a b l e 2 a r r a y (A( 3 : s i z e (A, 1 ) ,1:2) ) ; % p r i n t s
country
code +
s e c t o r name
31 L=inv ( eye (163∗49) – A values ) ; % L e o n t i e f
i n v e r s e = Matrix
of
t o t a l
input
requirements
from
a l l
i n d u s t r i e s
32 %% C a l c u l a t e
t o t a l
output
in
g l o b a l
economy
33
34 X = L∗sum( Y values , 2 ) ;
35 %% C a l c u l a t e
emission
i n t e n s i t i e s
36
37
F values=s t r 2 d o u b l e ( t a b l e 2 a r r a y (F ( 2 : s i z e (F , 1 ) ,2: s i z e (F , 2 ) ) ) ) ;
38 X(X==0)=0.001; %A r b i t r a r y
small
value
to be
able
to
normalize
by the
t o t a l
output
39 B=F values /( diag (X) )
; %diag (X) makes a matrix
with
the X v a l u e s
in
the
diagonal
( Xhat ) ,
40 % B i s
t o t a l
emissions
by
s e c t o r
output
41 %% C a l c u l a t e
consumption – based
f o o t p r i n t s
42
43
F hh values = s t r 2 d o u b l e ( t a b l e 2 a r r a y ( F hh ( 2 : s i z e ( F hh , 1 ) ,2: s i z e ( F hh
, 2 ) ) ) ) ;
44 C = zeros (7∗49 ,49) ; %Matrix
to
aggregate
data by country
45
f o r
i =1:49
46
C(( i –1) ∗7+1: i ∗7 , i ) =1;
47
end
48
F hh values=F hh values ∗C;
49
c l e a r C i
50
51 % Consumption – based
f o o t p r i n t s
with
f u l l
f i n a l
demand
52 E = B∗L∗Y values + F hh values ; % adding F hh
i s
the
impacts
a s s o c i a t e d
to
the end – use
s e c t o r
53
54 % To do a
f o o t p r i n t
f o r
the
energy
sector ,
you need to
c r e a t e a new
f i n a l
55 % demand Y energy
which
i s
a copy
of
Y values ,
but
with 0 f o r
a l l
the
Page 114 of 138
==PAGE:129==
Supporting Information
56 % non– energy
s e c t o r s
57 % You then
use
the same equation
as
before ,
but
r e p l a c e
Y values
with
58 % Y energy
( assuming
here
that
a l l
the
emissions
from
households
are
energy
59 % r e l a t e d )
60 %% Export
the
r e s u l t s
to
Excel
61
62
x l s w r i t e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” ,E , ’
F u l l f i n a l d e m a n d ’ , ’C3 ’ ) ;
63
w r i t e t a b l e ( F items ,”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” , ’
Sheet ’ , ’ F u l l f i n a l d e m a n d ’ , ’ Range ’ , ’A2 ’ ) ;
64
65 % Update the
f i l e
path
to match what
i s
on your computer .
Feel
f r e e
to add
66 % a new spreadsheet
or
c r e a t e a new Excel
f i l e
f o r
the
assessment
of
the
67 % energy
s e c t o r
only .
68 %%
69
Y items = t a b l e 2 a r r a y (Y( 3 : s i z e (Y, 1 ) ,1:2) ) ;
70
w r i t e c e l l ( Y items ,”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” , ’
Sheet ’ , ’ Final demand Y ’ , ’ Range ’ , ’A2 ’ ) ;
71 %% Energy demand
72 %% Create demand matrix
f o r
energy
only
73
74 % We need to
c r e a t e a zero
matrix
of same
s i z e
as Y ( i n d u s t r i e s ∗
c o u n t r i e s ) :
75
Y energy=zeros (7987 ,49) ;
76
e n e r g y s e c t o r s =[20:24 ,56:58 ,96:111 ,120:125];
77
78 % Define
the
rows
of
energy – relevance ,
and loop
through 49
c o u n t r i e s
:
79
f o r
i =1:163;
80
f o r
c =1:49;
81
i f
ismember ( i , e n e r g y s e c t o r s )
82
Y energy (( c –1)∗163+ i , : )=Y values (( c –1)∗163+ i , : ) ;
83
end
84
end
Page 115 of 138
==PAGE:130==
Supporting Information
85
end
86
c l e a r
c
i
87 %% C a l c u l a t e
consumption – based
f o o t p r i n t s
( energy )
88
89 % Consumption – based
f o o t p r i n t s
with
f u l l
f i n a l
energy demand
90
E energy = B∗L∗Y energy + F hh values ; % adding F hh
i s
the
impacts
a s s o c i a t e d
to
the end – use
s e c t o r
91 %% Export
energy
r e s u l t s
to
Excel
92
93
l s w r i t e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” , E energy , ’
F u l l f i n a l e n e r g y d e m a n d ’ , ’C3 ’ ) ;
94
w r i t e t a b l e ( F items ,”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” , ’
Sheet ’ , ’ F u l l f i n a l e n e r g y d e m a n d ’ , ’ Range ’ , ’A2 ’ ) ;
95
96 % Update the
f i l e
path
to match what
i s
on your computer .
Feel
f r e e
to add
97 % a new spreadsheet
or
c r e a t e a new Excel
f i l e
f o r
the
assessment
of
the
98 % energy
s e c t o r
only .
99 %% I n c l u s i o n
of
f u l l
energy
production demand ( production and
t r a n s m i s s i o n )
100
101 %energy production =[96:111]; %The rows
of
the
energy
prod .
i n d u s t r i e s
102 %d energy prod=zeros (7987 ,49) ; %d e f i n e
empty matrix
to
i n s e r t
numbers
103 %d e n e r g y r e s t=zeros (7987 ,49) ; %d e f i n e
empty matrix
to
i n s e r t
numbers
104
E energy tot=zeros (1104 ,49) ; %d e f i n e
empty matrix
to
i n s e r t
numbers
105
106 % For row 1 to row 1104
a l l
v a l u e s
w i l l
be
d i a g o n a l i s e d ,
with
each
row
107 % r e p r e s e n t i n g
an emission
108
f o r
i =1:1104;
109
d=diag (B( i , : ) ) ∗L∗Y values ;
110
de=diag (B( i , : ) ) ∗L∗Y energy ;
111
detot=de ;
112
f o r
j =96:111
Page 116 of 138
==PAGE:131==
Supporting Information
113
f o r
c=1:49
114
detot (( c –1)∗163+j , : )=d (( c –1)∗163+j , : ) ;
115
end
116
end
117
D=sum( detot , 1 ) ;
118 %
f o r
j =1:163;
119 %
f o r
c =1:49;
120 %
i f
ismember ( j , energy production ) ;
121 %
d energy prod (( c –1)∗163+j , : )=d (( c –1)∗163+j , : ) ; %
matrix
of
v a l u e s
only
in
energy
production
122 %
e l s e
123 %
d e n e r g y r e s t (( c –1)∗163+j , : )=de (( c –1)∗163+j , : ) ; %
matrix
of
v a l u e s
not
in
energy
production
124 %
end
125 %
126 %
% sum(d) :
vector
of
each
emission
type
f o r
energy
production – only
127 %
% sum( de ) :
vector
of
each
emission
type
f o r
a l l
other
energy
i n d u s t r i e s
e x c l .
prodcution
128 %
end
129 %
end
130 %
D=sum( d energy prod , 1 )+sum( d e n e r g y r e s t , 1 ) ; % sum of
t o t a l
emission
( per
type )
f o r
each
country
131
E energy tot ( i , : ) = D; %i n s e r t i n g D f o r
every
emission ” i ”
i n t o
f i n a l
emission
r e s u l t s
132
end
133
134
E energy tot = E energy tot + F hh values ;
135
c l e a r
i
j
c
136 %% Export
of
f i n a l
energy
r e s u l t s
with
f u l l
demand to
Excel
137
138
x l s w r i t e (”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” ,
E energy tot , ’ F u l l f i n a l e n e r g y d e m a n d 2 ’ , ’C3 ’ ) ;
139
w r i t e t a b l e ( F items ,”C:\ Users \ . . . \ Exiobase \ EXIOBASE footprint . x l s x ” , ’
Sheet ’ , ’ F u l l f i n a l e n e r g y d e m a n d 2 ’ , ’ Range ’ , ’A2 ’ ) ;
140
141 % Update the
f i l e
path
to match what
i s
on your computer .
Feel
f r e e
to add
Page 117 of 138
==PAGE:132==
Supporting Information
142 % a new spreadsheet
or
c r e a t e a new Excel
f i l e
f o r
the
assessment
of
the
143 % energy
s e c t o r
only .
Page 118 of 138
==PAGE:133==
Supporting Information
A.2
Supporting Tables and ﬁgures
Page 119 of 138
==PAGE:134==
Supporting Information
Table A.33: Indicator results for STE indicators. 1.1 (% capita), 1.2 (% capita), 1.4 (1-7 scale), 1.6
(0-100 scale), 2.1 (% RE), 2.2 (% new capacity), 2.3 (% decommissioned capacity), 2.4 (% GDP), 3.1
(MJ/USD), 3.2 (% of supply).
Country
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
Australia
100.0
95.0
6.2
79.0
9.2
100.0
100.0
0.4
5.0
64.6
Austria
100.0
95.0
6.6
76.0
34.4
100.0
100.0
0.2
3.6
82.3
Belgium
100.0
95.0
6.4
77.0
9.2
100.0
74.7
0.5
4.8
78.6
Brazil
100.0
95.0
4.1
38.0
43.8
79.0
NO
1.0
4.1
77.0
Bulgaria
100.0
89
4.2
41.0
17.7
100.0
98.6
N/A
6.4
52.9
Canada
100.0
95.0
6.5
83.0
22.0
100.0
100.0
0.1
7.6
68.7
China
100.0
57
5.2
37.0
12.4
45.9
NO
0.4
6.7
65.4
Croatia
100.0
92
5.7
51.0
33.1
59.5
NO
N/A
4.0
82.7
Cyprus
100.0
95.0
5.5
61.0
9.9
89.1
NO
N/A
3.3
73.1
Czech Rep.
100.0
95.0
6.4
56.0
14.8
20.3
NO
0.1
3.3
60.7
Denmark
100.0
95.0
6.7
91.0
33.2
84.7
NO
0.1
2.6
82.7
Estonia
100.0
95.0
5.4
70.0
27.5
100.0
100.0
0.3
6.3
51.9
Finland
100.0
95.0
6.8
90.0
43.2
100.0
100.0
0.8
6.4
76.2
France
100.0
95.0
6.5
70.0
13.5
100.0
100.0
0.2
4.1
60.5
Germany
100.0
95.0
6.1
81.0
14.2
100.0
53.8
0.2
3.6
71.4
Greece
100.0
95.0
5.3
46.0
17.2
100.0
100.0
1.2
3.7
70.7
Hungary
100.0
95.0
5.9
51.0
15.6
100.0
100.0
0.4
4.3
75.2
India
100.0
43
3.4
38.0
36.0
38.5
NO
1.0
4.7
66.0
Indonesia
100.0
60
4.3
36.0
36.9
0.0
52.3
2.2
3.5
73.9
Ireland
100.0
95.0
6.4
75.0
9.1
72.0
NO
0.2
1.9
79.1
Italy
100.0
95.0
5.9
44.0
16.5
100.0
100.0
0.7
3.1
77.9
Japan
100.0
95.0
6.3
75.0
6.3
100.0
0.0
0.1
3.7
69.1
Latvia
100.0
95.0
5.5
56.0
38.1
0.0
0.0
0.9
3.9
88.9
Lithuania
100.0
95.0
5.6
59.0
29.0
100.0
100.0
N/A
3.8
84.1
Luxembourg
100.0
95.0
6.6
85.0
9.0
100.0
100.0
0.0
2.9
96.0
Malta
100.0
95.0
4.7
60.0
5.4
100.0
100.0
N/A
1.8
76.3
Mexico
100.0
85
4.6
31.0
9.2
29.1
NO
0.6
3.6
64.8
Netherlands
100.0
95.0
6.6
84.0
5.9
99.1
NO
0.0
3.9
76.8
Norway
100.0
95.0
6.7
88.0
57.8
100.0
100.0
0.8
3.6
71.7
Poland
100.0
95.0
5.5
63.0
11.9
98.9
NO
0.2
4.1
70.1
Portugal
100.0
95.0
6.4
64.0
27.2
100.0
99.2
0.1
3.3
74.0
Romania
100.0
87
4.6
46.0
23.7
0.0
55.7
N/A
3.3
71.2
Russia
100.0
95.0
4.8
29.0
3.3
6.3
0.0
2.5
8.3
N/A
Slovakia
100.0
95.0
6.2
51.0
13.4
100.0
100.0
0.3
9.3
61.2
Slovenia
100.0
95.0
6.2
60.0
20.9
7.3
0.0
0.4
4.6
73.0
South Africa
100.0
83
3.6
44.0
17.2
100.0
99.3
0.9
8.3
N/A
Spain
100.0
95.0
6.3
58.0
16.3
100.0
100.0
0.1
3.3
67.0
Sweden
100.0
95.0
6.3
89.0
53.2
100.0
100.0
0.4
4.3
70.8
Switzerland
100.0
95.0
6.8
86.0
25.3
100.0
100.0
0.4
2.2
77.2
Turkey
100.0
95.0
4.8
42.0
13.4
71.1
NO
0.5
3.0
72.7
United Kingdom
100.0
95.0
6.6
81.0
8.7
100.0
94.9
0.4
5.3
69.4
United States
100.0
95.0
6.3
76.0
8.7
100.0
100.0
0.0
8.4
68.9
Ro. Asia
83.7
86.3
4.2
29.9
28.9
18.4
4.6
4.0
5.0
na
Ro. America
95.7
94.9
4.5
39.6
22.6
83.2
56.8
1.5
4.7
74.6
Ro. Europe
98.2
95.0
4.6
34.7
10.6
19.0
33.6
6.4
8.3
61.9
Ro. Africa
85.3
79.8
3.9
39.4
24.7
54.9
34.8
2.3
5.0
69.0
Ro. Middle East
85.2
80.3
5.0
59.3
15.7
14.5
0.0
0.4
4.6
65.5
Page 120 of 138
==PAGE:135==
Supporting Information
Table A.34: Impact results obtained from the EE-MRIO model and impacts assessment using ReCiPe 2016 for all impact except the water footprint
where spatially diﬀerentiated CFs were used from AWARE.
4.1 kg
4.2a kg
4.2b kg
4.3 kg
4.4 kg
4.5 kg
4.6 kg
4.7 kg
4.8
4.9
4.10 kg
Country
CO2eq
NOxeq
NOxeq
CFC11eq
PM2.5eq
SO2eq
kg Neq
Peq
m2
m3
oileq
Australia
3.6E+11
6.4E+07
2.0E+08
6.1E+04
2.0E+07
3.0E+08
9.2E+05
8.4E+04
1.3E+12
9.6E+09
1.3E+11
Austria
5.7E+10
2.7E+08
1.3E+08
1.8E+04
5.5E+07
2.7E+08
5.0E+05
1.6E+04
1.3E+10
1.5E+08
5.7E+09
Belgium
6.9E+10
8.2E+07
-1.3E+07
1.7E+04
6.7E+07
3.1E+08
9.7E+05
2.0E+04
9.0E+09
2.8E+08
3.5E+09
Brazil
1.9E+11
1.6E+08
4.6E+08
5.2E+04
8.9E+07
6.5E+08
2.5E+06
1.4E+05
1.6E+12
6.6E+09
2.5E+10
Bulgaria
4.5E+10
2.1E+08
8.3E+07
1.8E+04
1.3E+08
5.9E+08
3.3E+05
4.7E+03
2.4E+10
6.5E+08
2.5E+10
Canada
3.1E+11
1.7E+09
3.3E+08
5.1E+04
4.2E+07
2.1E+09
9.7E+05
3.7E+05
2.8E+12
5.3E+09
3.9E+10
China
3.9E+12
2.7E+09
1.7E+10
1.7E+06
2.4E+10
2.4E+10
2.1E+07
5.2E+05
2.3E+12
7.0E+10
7.3E+10
Croatia
1.5E+10
1.3E+08
4.9E+07
2.8E+03
1.7E+07
7.4E+07
1.8E+05
1.4E+03
6.5E+09
7.7E+08
7.8E+08
Cyprus
1.1E+10
3.0E+08
8.7E+07
1.6E+03
3.5E+07
7.0E+07
5.9E+04
1.2E+03
2.3E+09
4.2E+08
3.0E+08
Czech Rep.
8.0E+10
1.6E+08
7.2E+07
2.8E+04
6.7E+07
5.0E+08
4.0E+05
1.1E+04
9.3E+09
4.2E+08
2.7E+10
Denmark
3.5E+10
1.9E+08
7.0E+07
1.4E+04
2.7E+07
2.5E+08
2.1E+05
7.9E+03
5.4E+09
6.1E+08
2.0E+09
Estonia
1.5E+10
3.0E+07
2.7E+07
6.6E+03
3.2E+07
1.5E+08
9.0E+04
1.1E+03
2.9E+09
2.1E+07
1.9E+08
Finland
5.1E+10
1.0E+08
4.0E+07
3.2E+04
1.2E+07
3.4E+08
5.1E+05
3.0E+04
8.3E+10
1.6E+08
4.6E+09
France
2.7E+11
7.1E+08
2.8E+08
7.5E+04
4.1E+08
1.1E+09
3.2E+06
2.6E+04
7.8E+10
2.3E+09
1.6E+10
Germany
6.5E+11
3.0E+09
5.6E+08
2.2E+05
6.8E+08
3.3E+09
3.5E+06
9.2E+04
6.6E+10
1.7E+09
1.8E+11
Greece
1.3E+11
2.6E+09
7.7E+08
1.9E+04
3.6E+08
8.4E+08
5.1E+05
1.3E+04
3.4E+10
1.3E+10
7.4E+10
Hungary
5.4E+10
1.9E+08
8.8E+07
7.7E+03
4.4E+07
1.8E+08
3.3E+05
6.8E+03
1.7E+10
1.8E+08
1.2E+10
India
1.2E+12
1.6E+09
1.2E+10
6.1E+05
2.2E+10
3.8E+09
7.0E+06
1.1E+05
7.9E+11
5.7E+10
7.5E+10
Indonesia
2.4E+11
3.7E+08
5.3E+08
1.2E+05
3.8E+08
3.8E+08
1.1E+06
1.1E+04
3.1E+11
2.0E+10
1.4E+10
Ireland
4.0E+10
9.6E+07
1.4E+07
8.2E+03
3.3E+07
8.8E+07
2.9E+05
1.2E+04
1.4E+10
6.4E+07
5.9E+09
Italy
3.4E+11
2.5E+09
1.1E+09
7.6E+04
4.6E+08
1.0E+09
2.2E+06
5.2E+04
5.7E+10
1.5E+10
3.3E+10
Japan
8.5E+11
1.7E+09
4.8E+08
1.4E+05
5.6E+08
9.8E+08
3.6E+06
4.1E+04
4.3E+10
1.4E+09
3.5E+10
Latvia
8.7E+09
3.6E+07
3.2E+07
3.0E+03
1.7E+07
4.9E+07
2.2E+05
5.0E+02
8.9E+09
3.5E+07
2.6E+08
Lithuania
2.3E+10
6.9E+07
6.4E+07
5.5E+03
2.1E+07
8.2E+07
7.3E+05
7.4E+03
4.8E+09
1.1E+08
2.2E+09
Luxembourg
6.4E+09
9.0E+06
-5.3E+06
1.9E+03
8.4E+06
4.2E+07
9.2E+04
9.5E+02
6.6E+08
1.2E+07
3.5E+08
Malta
2.8E+09
2.3E+07
9.9E+06
5.2E+02
5.0E+06
7.7E+06
3.2E+04
1.6E+03
2.4E+08
1.5E+08
2.1E+08
Mexico
3.6E+11
2.3E+09
1.1E+09
5.5E+04
2.7E+08
7.0E+08
1.2E+06
3.4E+04
6.9E+11
3.2E+10
2.0E+10
Netherlands
1.2E+11
1.6E+08
-1.1E+07
2.7E+04
1.1E+08
4.6E+08
1.2E+06
1.7E+04
9.1E+09
2.9E+08
6.9E+09
Norway
3.6E+10
6.5E+08
2.1E+08
1.0E+04
3.5E+07
4.5E+08
3.4E+05
1.3E+04
9.5E+10
9.5E+07
5.7E+09
Page 121 of 138
==PAGE:136==
Supporting Information
Poland
2.6E+11
6.2E+08
2.7E+08
9.5E+04
2.3E+08
2.3E+09
9.2E+05
1.4E+04
5.0E+10
1.1E+09
1.0E+11
Portugal
3.6E+10
3.8E+08
1.3E+08
1.2E+04
3.3E+07
7.3E+07
2.5E+05
1.0E+03
2.9E+10
9.7E+08
3.1E+09
Romania
6.4E+10
3.8E+08
1.7E+08
2.1E+04
1.7E+08
6.4E+08
3.2E+05
3.4E+03
3.0E+10
7.9E+08
1.9E+10
Russia
1.0E+12
4.3E+09
1.4E+09
9.1E+04
4.8E+08
5.3E+09
4.7E+06
1.1E+05
6.0E+12
2.1E+10
6.5E+10
Slovakia
2.6E+10
5.4E+07
2.5E+07
4.9E+03
2.1E+07
1.6E+08
2.3E+05
5.6E+03
3.6E+09
9.8E+07
5.9E+09
Slovenia
1.5E+10
1.0E+08
4.9E+07
4.5E+03
2.2E+07
8.3E+07
7.4E+04
1.1E+03
2.3E+09
3.7E+07
1.7E+09
South Africa
2.0E+11
4.4E+08
1.5E+08
5.0E+04
1.5E+08
5.9E+08
4.8E+05
1.2E+04
2.8E+11
8.4E+09
1.4E+10
Spain
2.1E+11
2.2E+09
7.7E+08
4.6E+04
1.7E+08
5.2E+08
1.0E+06
3.8E+03
7.9E+10
6.9E+09
1.4E+10
Sweden
4.1E+10
1.8E+08
6.9E+07
2.4E+04
2.2E+07
3.3E+08
4.7E+05
3.3E+04
8.2E+10
6.5E+08
3.4E+09
Switzerland
4.5E+10
1.9E+08
1.2E+08
1.3E+04
7.7E+07
2.8E+08
7.0E+05
1.2E+05
7.9E+09
1.9E+08
2.4E+09
Turkey
2.3E+11
1.6E+09
5.7E+08
4.3E+04
5.7E+08
1.0E+09
1.1E+06
1.0E+05
3.4E+11
8.3E+09
6.0E+10
UK
4.6E+11
1.0E+09
3.8E+07
1.3E+05
3.5E+08
1.8E+09
2.8E+06
1.4E+04
6.6E+10
4.1E+09
5.0E+10
US
4.6E+12
9.1E+09
5.3E+09
8.0E+05
1.1E+09
1.7E+10
1.5E+07
2.7E+06
1.6E+12
9.1E+10
2.9E+11
Ro. Asia
2.1E+13
6.4E+10
5.5E+10
6.0E+06
6.9E+10
9.0E+10
1.2E+08
8.7E+06
3.3E+13
7.2E+11
1.8E+12
Ro. America
1.2E+12
3.0E+09
2.9E+09
3.6E+05
2.2E+09
5.3E+09
7.3E+06
3.1E+05
2.7E+12
1.7E+11
7.6E+10
Ro. Europe
5.3E+11
2.2E+08
5.3E+08
1.2E+05
2.5E+08
1.2E+09
1.9E+06
2.1E+05
2.8E+12
3.9E+10
7.5E+10
Ro. Africa
3.2E+11
1.2E+09
4.9E+08
5.0E+04
4.0E+08
2.3E+09
4.8E+06
4.6E+04
1.9E+11
1.1E+10
6.4E+10
Ro. M.E.
5.0E+11
1.0E+10
3.8E+09
6.2E+05
1.1E+10
2.1E+09
1.4E+07
2.9E+06
7.4E+12
9.6E+10
2.7E+10
Page 122 of 138
==PAGE:137==
Supporting Information
Table A.35: Normalised values for socio- end techno-economic indicators. NO = Not Occurring, N/A =
Not Available.
Country
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
Australia
0.00
0.05
0.11
0.21
0.91
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.44
0.35
Austria
0.00
0.05
0.05
0.24
0.66
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.18
Belgium
0.00
0.05
0.09
0.23
0.91
0.00
0.25
0.00
0.37
0.21
Brazil
0.00
0.05
0.41
0.62
0.56
0.21
NO
0.01
0.17
0.23
Bulgaria
0.00
0.11
0.40
0.59
0.82
0.00
0.01
N/A
0.83
0.47
Canada
0.00
0.05
0.07
0.17
0.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.31
China
0.00
0.43
0.25
0.63
0.88
0.54
NO
0.00
0.94
0.35
Croatia
0.00
0.08
0.19
0.49
0.67
0.41
NO
N/A
0.15
0.17
Cyprus
0.00
0.05
0.21
0.39
0.90
0.11
NO
N/A
0.00
0.27
Czech Republic
0.00
0.05
0.09
0.44
0.85
0.80
NO
0.00
0.00
0.39
Denmark
0.00
0.05
0.04
0.09
0.67
0.15
NO
0.00
0.00
0.17
Estonia
0.00
0.05
0.23
0.30
0.73
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.82
0.48
Finland
0.00
0.05
0.04
0.10
0.57
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.84
0.24
France
0.00
0.05
0.08
0.30
0.87
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.19
0.39
Germany
0.00
0.05
0.12
0.19
0.86
0.00
0.46
0.00
0.03
0.29
Greece
0.00
0.05
0.25
0.54
0.83
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.07
0.29
Hungary
0.00
0.05
0.16
0.49
0.84
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.23
0.25
India
0.12
0.57
0.51
0.62
0.64
0.62
NO
0.01
0.34
0.34
Indonesia
0.02
0.40
0.38
0.64
0.63
1.00
0.48
0.02
0.01
0.26
Ireland
0.00
0.05
0.09
0.25
0.91
0.28
NO
0.00
0.00
0.21
Italy
0.00
0.05
0.15
0.56
0.83
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.22
Japan
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.25
0.94
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.08
0.31
Latvia
0.00
0.05
0.22
0.44
0.62
1.00
1.00
0.01
0.13
0.11
Lithuania
0.00
0.05
0.20
0.41
0.71
0.00
0.00
N/A
0.08
0.16
Luxembourg
0.00
0.05
0.06
0.15
0.91
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
Malta
0.00
0.05
0.32
0.40
0.95
0.00
0.00
N/A
0.00
0.24
Mexico
0.01
0.15
0.35
0.69
0.91
0.71
NO
0.01
0.04
0.35
Netherlands
0.00
0.05
0.05
0.16
0.94
0.01
NO
0.00
0.12
0.23
Norway
0.00
0.05
0.04
0.12
0.42
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.28
Poland
0.00
0.05
0.22
0.37
0.88
0.01
NO
0.00
0.19
0.30
Portugal
0.00
0.05
0.09
0.36
0.73
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.26
Romania
0.00
0.13
0.35
0.54
0.76
1.00
0.44
N/A
0.00
0.29
Russian Federation
0.00
0.05
0.31
0.71
0.97
0.94
1.00
0.03
1.00
N/A
Slovakia
0.00
0.05
0.12
0.49
0.87
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.39
Slovenia
0.00
0.05
0.12
0.40
0.79
0.93
1.00
0.00
0.32
0.27
South Africa
0.15
0.17
0.49
0.56
0.83
0.00
0.01
0.01
1.00
N/A
Spain
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.42
0.84
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.33
Sweden
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.11
0.47
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.22
0.29
Switzerland
0.00
0.05
0.03
0.14
0.75
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.23
Turkey
0.00
0.05
0.31
0.58
0.87
0.29
NO
0.00
0.00
0.27
UK
0.00
0.05
0.06
0.19
0.91
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.52
0.31
US
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.24
0.91
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.31
Asia and Pacidifc
0.16
0.44
0.25
0.57
0.71
0.66
0.40
0.01
0.29
0.00
America
0.04
0.09
0.28
0.38
0.77
0.11
0.25
0.01
0.38
0.01
Europe
0.02
0.09
0.33
0.63
0.89
0.78
0.20
0.04
0.58
0.29
Africa
0.15
0.24
0.24
0.30
0.75
0.34
0.15
0.00
0.34
0.01
Middle East
0.14
0.16
0.24
0.28
0.81
0.67
0.00
0.00
0.21
0.18
Page 123 of 138
==PAGE:138==
Supporting Information
Table A.36: Normalised indicator scores for environmental indicators with allocation principle 1
.
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.2b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Australia
111.32
159.11
363.45
2023.58
55.91
57.02
0.00
1.16
0.96
3.94
1.17
0.07
441.46
16.46
201.54
Austria
32.85
46.96
107.26
599.67
16.57
442.44
0.00
0.63
4.92
6.64
1.17
0.02
7.98
0.47
15.84
Belgium
34.59
49.44
112.94
644.07
17.79
117.60
0.00
0.52
5.30
6.59
1.98
0.03
4.95
0.78
8.49
Brazil
6.53
9.33
21.32
108.97
3.01
15.58
0.00
0.11
0.47
0.94
0.35
0.01
60.06
1.23
4.14
Bulgaria
26.27
37.55
85.77
492.79
13.61
341.25
0.00
0.64
11.69
14.47
0.78
0.01
15.25
2.05
70.65
Canada
74.64
106.69
243.69
1335.29
36.89
1175.74
0.00
0.75
1.60
21.73
0.96
0.23
735.70
7.08
45.41
China
24.30
34.74
79.35
462.41
12.77
48.80
0.00
0.65
23.96
6.55
0.53
0.01
16.10
2.43
2.23
Croatia
14.56
20.81
47.53
255.15
7.05
353.86
0.00
0.17
2.55
3.10
0.74
0.00
6.95
4.18
3.75
Cyprus
42.37
60.56
138.34
813.03
22.46
3237.60
0.00
0.36
20.81
11.41
0.92
0.01
9.46
8.76
5.61
Czech Rep.
30.79
44.02
100.54
570.94
15.77
171.71
0.00
0.66
4.04
8.25
0.62
0.01
3.90
0.88
49.49
Denmark
42.21
60.33
137.81
766.85
21.19
636.54
0.00
1.05
5.02
12.84
1.03
0.02
7.11
4.05
11.94
Estonia
50.38
72.02
164.50
954.63
26.37
294.32
0.00
1.38
16.90
21.25
1.25
0.01
10.82
0.40
3.15
Finland
80.31
114.79
262.21
1407.95
38.90
449.74
0.00
3.07
2.92
22.85
3.26
0.12
142.90
1.42
35.21
France
24.78
35.42
80.90
442.12
12.21
183.56
0.00
0.42
5.86
4.16
1.18
0.01
7.74
1.15
7.13
Germany
39.03
55.79
127.43
727.02
20.09
502.56
0.00
0.80
6.38
8.36
0.85
0.01
4.30
0.57
53.13
Greece
43.67
62.42
142.57
786.41
21.73
2439.24
0.00
0.37
18.12
11.72
0.68
0.01
12.14
22.96
117.52
Hungary
20.12
28.76
65.68
329.98
9.12
204.04
0.00
0.17
2.53
2.84
0.50
0.01
6.90
0.37
21.76
India
3.88
5.54
12.66
68.34
1.89
15.69
0.00
0.12
11.23
0.54
0.09
0.00
2.87
1.04
1.22
Indonesia
6.38
9.11
20.82
110.31
3.05
27.98
0.00
0.20
1.56
0.43
0.12
0.00
8.95
2.87
1.80
Ireland
31.74
45.36
103.62
578.76
15.99
215.67
0.00
0.39
4.06
2.96
0.94
0.02
11.69
0.28
22.71
Italy
35.28
50.42
115.17
613.79
16.96
726.35
0.00
0.48
7.34
4.50
0.91
0.01
6.41
8.36
16.63
Japan
38.67
55.27
126.25
707.93
19.56
225.43
0.00
0.38
4.01
1.91
0.67
0.00
2.13
0.35
7.86
Latvia
20.57
29.40
67.15
364.68
10.07
245.84
0.00
0.44
6.45
4.92
2.13
0.00
23.11
0.46
2.98
Lithuania
23.77
33.97
77.60
378.13
10.45
207.19
0.00
0.35
3.41
3.69
3.10
0.02
5.51
0.65
11.44
Luxembourg
41.02
58.63
133.92
742.82
20.52
164.20
0.00
0.73
8.36
11.44
2.37
0.02
4.60
0.41
11.02
Malta
23.00
32.87
75.08
403.42
11.15
540.24
0.00
0.26
6.35
2.70
1.05
0.03
2.16
6.79
8.44
Mexico
12.31
17.59
40.19
219.48
6.06
222.37
0.00
0.12
1.45
1.02
0.17
0.00
25.95
5.99
3.33
Netherlands
30.31
43.33
98.97
544.01
15.03
112.71
0.00
0.41
4.10
4.88
1.19
0.01
2.47
0.40
8.30
Norway
21.93
31.35
71.61
385.27
10.64
1147.28
0.00
0.38
3.37
11.80
0.85
0.02
63.59
0.32
16.95
Poland
40.44
57.80
132.04
729.48
20.15
280.09
0.00
0.91
5.71
15.69
0.59
0.01
8.57
0.92
78.69
continues on next page
Page 124 of 138
==PAGE:139==
Supporting Information
Table A.36 continued from previous page
Portugal
20.06
28.67
65.49
351.33
9.71
599.34
0.00
0.41
2.81
1.71
0.56
0.00
17.20
2.92
8.40
Romania
10.60
15.15
34.61
185.93
5.14
180.97
0.00
0.22
4.39
4.54
0.21
0.00
5.45
0.72
15.38
Russia
47.79
68.31
156.04
856.18
23.65
563.29
0.00
0.25
3.41
10.31
0.86
0.01
299.11
5.36
14.42
Slovakia
17.22
24.62
56.23
306.58
8.47
100.72
0.00
0.20
2.13
4.38
0.62
0.01
2.62
0.35
18.97
Slovenia
38.55
55.10
125.85
693.28
19.15
740.78
0.00
0.69
8.61
8.80
0.75
0.01
6.22
0.50
21.13
South Africa
23.73
33.92
77.49
453.21
12.52
148.47
0.00
0.36
2.78
2.98
0.23
0.00
35.78
5.44
7.89
Spain
29.08
41.57
94.95
525.75
14.52
886.07
0.00
0.39
3.59
3.07
0.58
0.00
11.96
5.23
9.17
Sweden
32.49
46.45
106.09
591.75
16.35
416.94
0.00
1.17
2.70
11.18
1.52
0.07
71.32
2.82
13.22
Switzerland
35.19
50.30
114.88
645.36
17.83
413.73
0.00
0.60
9.28
9.10
2.20
0.24
6.69
0.81
9.07
Turkey
9.15
13.07
29.86
168.73
4.66
176.42
0.00
0.10
3.52
1.71
0.17
0.01
14.58
1.80
11.45
UK
36.93
52.78
120.56
679.76
18.78
227.56
0.00
0.62
4.33
6.15
0.91
0.00
5.80
1.82
19.66
US
81.02
115.81
264.54
1491.68
41.21
455.37
0.00
0.85
3.04
12.70
1.10
0.12
31.38
8.73
24.61
Ro. Asia
9.08
12.97
29.63
163.06
4.50
65.51
0.00
0.17
2.69
1.75
0.23
0.01
23.23
7.13
2.88
Ro. America
15.63
22.34
51.02
271.72
7.51
18.33
0.00
0.22
1.17
1.53
0.22
0.02
88.70
6.25
10.80
Ro. Europe
16.23
23.19
52.97
267.57
7.39
179.24
0.00
0.15
3.16
5.08
0.99
0.01
10.77
3.17
15.84
Ro. Africa
2.66
3.80
8.68
37.97
1.05
154.38
0.00
0.20
9.46
0.48
0.31
0.04
42.64
2.81
0.70
Ro. M.E.
22.70
32.45
74.11
427.96
11.82
312.20
0.00
0.18
2.72
4.65
0.62
0.03
20.28
2.56
3.79
Page 125 of 138
==PAGE:140==
Supporting Information
Table A.37: Normalised indicator scores for environmental indicators with allocation principle 2
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.2b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Australia
509.5
728.3
1663.6
9344.1
258.1
16.3
0.00
4.34
0.09
2.92
2.80
0.55
4683.0
99.2
2434.4
Austria
75.8
108.4
247.6
1479.1
40.9
1750.5
0.00
1.19
8.57
27.39
2.06
0.01
8.3
0.1
39.6
Belgium
91.8
131.3
299.9
1812.3
50.1
164.7
0.00
1.33
13.85
27.60
5.48
0.01
6.6
0.3
18.2
Brazil
6.8
9.7
22.1
78.3
2.2
4.5
0.00
0.30
0.08
1.04
0.45
0.06
123.5
0.2
2.3
Bulgaria
40.7
58.1
132.8
871.4
24.1
893.4
0.00
0.62
13.50
29.12
0.74
0.00
12.7
0.7
339.8
Canada
246.5
352.4
805.0
4612.7
127.4
8126.9
0.00
2.01
0.42
119.32
2.54
3.50
7557.1
6.3
135.2
China
28.7
41.0
93.7
569.4
15.7
9.6
0.00
0.74
50.44
8.07
0.77
0.00
8.4
1.8
1.8
Croatia
18.6
26.6
60.7
319.3
8.8
1265.8
0.00
0.19
1.56
5.30
1.10
0.00
6.7
3.0
3.1
Cyprus
99.6
142.4
325.3
2260.9
62.5
52255.6
0.00
0.42
41.00
18.16
1.05
0.00
10.7
43.9
8.0
Czech Rep.
67.1
96.0
219.2
1372.4
37.9
300.7
0.00
1.13
4.47
29.79
1.24
0.00
2.7
0.1
269.3
Denmark
109.4
156.4
357.2
2151.6
59.4
4186.7
0.00
2.68
5.28
83.82
2.67
0.01
8.5
2.1
20.0
Estonia
132.3
189.1
432.0
2849.6
78.7
610.5
0.00
2.63
28.19
72.91
2.24
0.00
14.7
0.1
3.2
Finland
245.8
351.3
802.5
4550.0
125.7
1012.3
0.00
7.90
1.44
89.11
8.05
0.21
613.2
0.4
92.2
France
43.5
62.1
141.9
758.4
21.0
247.8
0.00
0.83
6.50
10.24
2.38
0.00
8.0
0.4
8.7
Germany
95.0
135.9
310.3
1942.9
53.7
2141.5
0.00
1.66
10.49
30.86
1.81
0.01
3.8
0.1
265.9
Greece
137.4
196.4
448.6
2848.4
78.7
51605.4
0.00
0.57
48.82
31.46
1.35
0.00
16.3
132.6
1212.7
Hungary
30.1
43.1
98.4
500.1
13.8
394.5
0.00
0.18
1.70
4.30
0.66
0.00
4.7
0.0
44.1
India
1.4
2.0
4.6
20.5
0.6
1.8
0.00
0.06
13.96
0.09
0.06
0.00
0.6
0.9
0.9
Indonesia
3.0
4.3
9.7
41.7
1.2
5.8
0.00
0.08
0.16
0.04
0.07
0.00
3.8
2.2
1.1
Ireland
84.4
120.6
275.5
1536.1
42.4
437.6
0.00
1.12
6.59
4.64
2.71
0.04
14.8
0.0
55.6
Italy
71.0
101.5
231.8
1252.5
34.6
3911.7
0.00
0.77
11.49
10.56
1.53
0.01
6.1
23.0
33.7
Japan
84.0
120.0
274.1
1684.7
46.5
463.9
0.00
0.48
5.40
1.71
0.85
0.00
1.7
0.0
9.2
Latvia
31.9
45.6
104.1
531.0
14.7
504.7
0.00
0.86
6.27
9.03
6.08
0.00
35.5
0.1
2.5
Lithuania
48.5
69.3
158.3
726.6
20.1
442.7
0.00
0.81
3.09
7.95
10.26
0.01
7.6
0.1
16.4
Luxembourg
169.1
241.7
552.0
3116.5
86.1
362.1
0.00
3.16
34.67
91.74
10.76
0.01
12.8
0.2
38.7
Malta
43.6
62.4
142.4
757.0
20.9
2810.5
0.00
0.25
8.78
2.05
1.20
0.02
1.1
18.7
14.5
Mexico
12.5
17.8
40.7
216.2
6.0
524.2
0.00
0.17
0.49
0.61
0.17
0.00
32.0
9.1
1.5
Netherlands
77.1
110.2
251.8
1461.0
40.4
141.3
0.00
0.96
9.25
16.45
2.78
0.00
3.0
0.1
16.0
Norway
68.4
97.8
223.5
1227.1
33.9
19356.2
0.00
1.05
2.63
81.32
2.48
0.02
327.9
0.1
67.1
Poland
75.6
108.0
246.7
1479.3
40.9
518.0
0.00
1.55
4.70
54.62
1.18
0.00
6.1
0.2
309.9
Portugal
29.2
41.7
95.2
514.5
14.2
3196.8
0.00
0.66
1.55
2.03
0.99
0.00
21.6
4.4
8.1
Page 126 of 138
==PAGE:141==
Supporting Information
Romania
10.9
15.6
35.5
188.1
5.2
344.5
0.00
0.28
3.58
8.14
0.35
0.00
4.5
0.1
27.3
Russia
95.8
137.0
312.8
1773.3
49.0
1627.1
0.00
0.29
1.66
17.57
1.19
0.01
1824.3
3.4
31.5
Slovakia
32.3
46.1
105.4
594.5
16.4
139.1
0.00
0.26
2.06
11.46
1.01
0.00
1.8
0.1
57.0
Slovenia
83.6
119.4
272.8
1528.4
42.2
3102.2
0.00
1.30
15.15
32.56
1.45
0.00
6.0
0.1
53.0
South Africa
27.2
38.8
88.7
545.9
15.1
129.4
0.00
0.33
0.67
1.39
0.10
0.00
47.5
5.3
27.4
Spain
47.5
68.0
155.2
872.9
24.1
5335.8
0.00
0.66
2.20
3.96
1.10
0.00
14.6
15.2
11.6
Sweden
59.6
85.2
194.5
1104.8
30.5
1252.8
0.00
2.46
1.39
58.19
3.08
0.10
195.6
1.9
21.8
Switzerland
91.3
130.6
298.2
1768.8
48.9
1848.4
0.00
1.20
41.13
51.73
3.85
0.98
7.8
0.1
21.2
Turkey
9.9
14.1
32.2
184.9
5.1
569.2
0.00
0.11
2.75
1.21
0.28
0.01
16.3
3.2
17.4
UK
77.4
110.6
252.6
1517.1
41.9
356.8
0.00
1.16
4.68
12.30
1.78
0.00
4.8
0.9
36.0
US
310.5
443.9
1013.9
6171.2
170.5
1131.9
0.00
2.29
1.87
52.92
2.64
0.99
62.1
18.2
64.5
Ro. Asia
4.7
6.7
15.3
76.1
2.1
29.1
0.00
0.09
0.79
1.60
0.12
0.00
15.2
8.4
1.5
America
13.6
19.4
44.3
221.8
6.1
6.8
0.00
0.29
0.18
0.86
0.13
0.02
160.9
4.9
9.6
Ro. Europe
18.1
25.8
59.0
305.0
8.4
123.5
0.00
0.20
1.74
5.92
2.01
0.00
7.7
1.1
22.3
Ro. Africa
0.7
1.0
2.2
6.5
0.2
62.4
0.00
0.11
8.37
0.11
0.09
0.03
57.0
3.1
0.1
Ro. M.E.
36.2
51.7
118.0
757.2
20.9
398.0
0.00
0.23
2.49
6.30
0.76
0.07
21.5
9.7
4.5
Page 127 of 138
==PAGE:142==
Supporting Information
Table A.38: Normalised indicator scores for environmental indicators with allocation principle 3
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.2b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Australia
9.57
13.69
31.26
140.45
3.88
5.47
0.00
0.78
0.10
0.58
6.07
1.03
37.24
14.58
18.11
Austria
4.83
6.90
15.76
75.02
2.07
75.73
0.00
0.39
1.95
3.23
4.45
0.07
3.64
0.38
3.74
Belgium
5.55
7.94
18.13
85.58
2.36
26.81
0.00
0.53
2.92
3.28
6.98
0.07
4.69
0.80
3.22
Brazil
2.17
3.10
7.09
21.86
0.60
5.58
0.00
0.57
0.19
0.86
3.29
0.65
7.22
0.37
0.83
Bulgaria
3.24
4.63
10.57
53.78
1.49
50.11
0.00
0.20
1.29
1.58
2.37
0.01
2.93
0.88
7.21
Canada
6.91
9.88
22.56
105.07
2.90
132.30
0.00
0.55
0.29
4.30
6.73
1.89
36.06
2.15
4.46
China
2.47
3.53
8.06
37.45
1.03
3.78
0.00
0.24
2.36
0.96
3.71
0.04
1.82
1.79
1.23
Croatia
2.67
3.82
8.71
38.07
1.05
68.47
0.00
0.23
0.69
1.34
3.77
0.02
3.38
1.74
1.26
Cyprus
4.92
7.03
16.06
84.58
2.34
308.94
0.00
0.24
2.20
1.25
2.91
0.03
3.97
12.11
2.12
Czech Republic
4.56
6.52
14.89
73.11
2.02
33.52
0.00
0.36
1.24
2.83
5.09
0.04
2.41
0.38
8.16
Denmark
5.42
7.75
17.70
85.34
2.36
125.90
0.00
0.53
1.18
5.11
6.54
0.08
4.18
1.26
2.52
Estonia
5.49
7.85
17.93
90.79
2.51
39.71
0.00
0.40
1.87
2.69
4.55
0.04
4.78
0.44
1.54
Finland
6.40
9.15
20.90
98.29
2.72
43.08
0.00
0.53
0.55
3.05
6.24
0.22
15.06
0.70
3.93
France
3.67
5.24
11.98
52.18
1.44
25.84
0.00
0.42
1.24
1.93
5.11
0.02
3.63
0.91
1.84
Germany
5.09
7.28
16.63
81.28
2.25
81.56
0.00
0.43
1.84
2.89
5.39
0.06
3.10
0.53
7.50
Greece
6.58
9.41
21.49
110.17
3.04
404.95
0.00
0.32
3.02
2.10
5.03
0.04
4.72
13.97
15.47
Hungary
3.13
4.48
10.23
46.10
1.27
37.01
0.00
0.22
0.75
1.18
3.31
0.02
2.39
0.18
3.03
India
0.77
1.10
2.50
9.12
0.25
2.15
0.00
0.09
1.39
0.13
1.68
0.01
0.76
2.01
1.08
Indonesia
0.98
1.40
3.19
11.50
0.32
3.97
0.00
0.08
0.11
0.07
1.42
0.00
1.49
1.87
0.93
Ireland
5.56
7.95
18.16
80.73
2.23
38.84
0.00
0.59
1.82
1.23
7.28
0.19
4.45
0.29
3.67
Italy
4.21
6.02
13.74
62.07
1.71
103.08
0.00
0.34
1.75
1.84
4.27
0.05
3.33
6.64
3.04
Japan
4.54
6.49
14.83
72.38
2.00
39.39
0.00
0.26
1.51
0.70
3.20
0.02
2.85
0.31
1.75
Latvia
3.24
4.63
10.58
44.29
1.22
39.30
0.00
0.41
1.09
1.44
7.22
0.02
5.39
0.32
1.23
Lithuania
4.27
6.10
13.93
58.45
1.61
40.89
0.00
0.48
1.02
1.69
8.37
0.06
4.85
0.32
2.15
Luxembourg
8.62
12.32
28.15
127.61
3.53
42.21
0.00
0.89
4.64
6.28
11.45
0.05
9.74
1.25
5.26
Malta
3.97
5.67
12.96
57.07
1.58
99.58
0.00
0.20
1.55
0.60
2.90
0.07
1.82
6.67
2.57
Mexico
2.12
3.03
6.91
29.96
0.83
45.12
0.00
0.31
0.38
0.47
2.61
0.09
4.33
3.66
0.68
Netherlands
5.32
7.61
17.37
81.69
2.26
24.00
0.00
0.49
2.53
2.64
5.91
0.05
4.25
0.64
2.90
Norway
6.53
9.33
21.31
96.88
2.68
322.93
0.00
0.57
0.87
5.39
7.39
0.14
18.10
0.44
5.94
Poland
3.91
5.59
12.76
61.68
1.70
35.40
0.00
0.35
0.92
2.72
5.07
0.03
2.49
0.46
5.90
continues on next page
Page 128 of 138
==PAGE:143==
Supporting Information
Table A.38 continued from previous page
Portugal
3.04
4.35
9.93
44.54
1.23
102.09
0.00
0.33
0.62
0.93
4.49
0.01
4.41
3.67
1.44
Romania
2.15
3.07
7.01
30.77
0.85
36.44
0.00
0.27
0.91
1.40
4.09
0.01
2.92
0.37
2.66
Russia
4.19
5.99
13.69
62.99
1.74
55.29
0.00
0.23
0.55
1.33
3.50
0.07
21.41
1.53
3.27
Slovakia
3.92
5.60
12.80
58.98
1.63
26.43
0.00
0.27
1.08
2.05
4.17
0.04
2.41
0.35
4.50
Slovenia
4.53
6.48
14.80
67.05
1.85
80.16
0.00
0.39
1.97
2.90
4.90
0.04
3.36
0.31
3.76
South Africa
2.40
3.42
7.82
36.64
1.01
16.68
0.00
0.19
0.27
0.36
1.07
0.04
4.66
2.34
5.21
Spain
3.42
4.89
11.17
50.50
1.40
115.26
0.00
0.35
0.69
1.01
4.79
0.01
4.27
7.05
1.90
Sweden
3.84
5.48
12.52
56.79
1.57
57.51
0.00
0.44
0.58
4.07
5.12
0.18
9.63
1.62
2.48
Switzerland
5.43
7.76
17.73
83.36
2.30
85.51
0.00
0.42
4.96
4.45
4.43
0.50
4.07
0.44
3.50
Turkey
2.26
3.23
7.37
33.34
0.92
61.76
0.00
0.21
0.88
0.56
4.03
0.10
3.92
4.30
2.27
UK
4.38
6.26
14.31
67.88
1.88
30.01
0.00
0.39
1.21
1.57
4.92
0.01
2.90
1.23
2.74
US
8.02
11.46
26.17
125.83
3.48
47.58
0.00
0.56
0.69
3.26
6.05
1.04
6.94
5.05
3.93
Asia and Pacidifc
1.08
1.54
3.53
14.20
0.39
8.57
0.00
0.12
0.33
0.72
1.36
0.03
2.30
2.85
0.78
America
1.82
2.60
5.94
24.83
0.69
2.90
0.00
0.28
0.18
0.44
1.43
0.14
6.37
1.91
1.33
Europe
2.33
3.33
7.61
34.67
0.96
33.27
0.00
0.27
0.61
0.91
5.11
0.03
2.52
0.81
2.11
Africa
0.53
0.76
1.74
5.20
0.14
20.70
0.00
0.11
0.99
0.18
0.77
0.10
4.69
2.65
0.21
Middle East
3.33
4.76
10.88
53.82
1.49
63.79
0.00
0.26
1.02
1.06
3.11
0.25
3.73
9.16
1.79
Table A.39: Normalised indicator scores for environmental indicators with allocation principle 4. Due to the grandfathering principle, all
countries obtain the same normalised score, since the shares are allocated based on the current impact level.
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.2a
4.b
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
All assessed countries
2.09
2.99
6.83
30.42
0.84
19.14
0.00
0.21
1.12
0.78
2.53
0.12
3.51
2.42
1.50
Page 129 of 138
==PAGE:144==
Supporting Information
Table A.40: Income groups based on World Bank available at: worldbank.org. Low income (L), lower
middle income (LM), upper middle income (UM), and high income (H). The RoW regions are taken as the
group representing the average of the countries within the region.
Country
Income group
Country
Income group
Australia
H
United Kingdom
H
Austria
H
United States
H
Belgium
H
Ro. Asia
LM
Brazil
UM
Ro. America
UM
Bulgaria
UM
Ro. Europe
LM
Canada
H
Ro. Africa
LM
China
UM
Ro. Middle East
UM
Croatia
H
Cyprus
H
Czech Republic
H
Denmark
H
Estonia
H
Finland
H
France
H
Germany
H
Greece
H
Hungary
H
India
LM
Indonesia
LM
Ireland
H
Italy
H
Japan
H
Latvia
H
Lithuania
H
Luxembourg
H
Malta
H
Mexico
UM
Netherlands
H
Norway
H
Poland
H
Portugal
H
Romania
UM
Russia
UM
Slovakia
H
Slovenia
H
South Africa
UM
Spain
H
Sweden
H
Switzerland
H
Turkey
UM
Page 130 of 138
==PAGE:145==
Supporting Information
Table A.41:
Ranking based on score-based
weighting for STE indicator (1.1-3.2).
Rank
Region
Score
1
Norway
0.19
2
Sweden
0.23
3
Denmark
0.26
4
Austria
0.27
5
Switzerland
0.28
6
Luxembourg
0.31
7
Finland
0.31
8
Portugal
0.31
9
Lithuania
0.32
10
Netherlands
0.36
11
Spain
0.36
12
Brazil
0.37
13
Croatia
0.37
14
Ireland
0.37
15
Italy
0.38
16
Germany
0.38
17
France
0.38
18
Cyprus
0.39
19
Greece
0.40
20
Poland
0.40
21
Hungary
0.40
22
Malta
0.40
23
Australia
0.41
24
Belgium
0.41
25
United Kingdom
0.41
26
Canada
0.42
27
Estonia
0.43
28
Turkey
0.44
29
Czech Republic
0.46
30
Japan
0.47
31
United States
0.47
32
India
0.49
33
America
0.49
34
Latvia
0.49
35
Middle East
0.50
36
South Africa
0.50
37
Slovakia
0.51
38
Indonesia
0.51
39
Romania
0.52
40
Bulgaria
0.52
41
Mexico
0.53
42
Africa
0.55
43
Slovenia
0.56
44
Asia and Pacidifc
0.58
45
China
0.60
46
Europe
0.65
47
Russian Federation
0.73
Table A.42:
Ranking based on score-based
weighting for environmental indicators (4.1-
4.10).
Rank
Region
Score
1
India
12.91
2
Brazil
18.15
3
Indonesia
23.15
4
America
23.70
5
China
41.39
6
Asia and Pacidifc
54.01
7
Slovakia
80.77
8
Netherlands
90.46
9
Belgium
94.79
10
Australia
98.89
11
South Africa
121.01
12
Africa
124.79
13
Luxembourg
131.73
14
Czech Republic
138.42
15
Turkey
140.23
16
Europe
142.72
17
Romania
143.24
18
France
145.96
19
Hungary
162.15
20
Lithuania
164.31
21
Ireland
172.39
22
Mexico
177.01
23
Japan
178.93
24
United Kingdom
181.37
25
Latvia
195.62
26
Poland
225.38
27
Estonia
234.40
28
Middle East
247.34
29
Bulgaria
272.71
30
Croatia
278.23
31
Switzerland
326.50
32
Sweden
334.81
33
Austria
349.11
34
United States
364.50
35
Finland
370.62
36
Germany
397.66
37
Malta
424.17
38
Russia
470.62
39
Portugal
471.47
40
Denmark
501.19
41
Italy
571.06
42
Slovenia
582.70
43
Spain
695.65
44
Norway
904.42
45
Canada
991.45
46
Greece
1915.02
47
Cyprus
2534.04
Page 131 of 138
==PAGE:146==
Supporting Information
Table A.43 and A.44 show the ranking of the SDG7 scores from the SDG Index & Dashboards
ranking by Bertelsmann Stiftung and the SDSN 2016 and 2019 (Sachs et al., 2016, 2019). The
scores are based on a 0-100 scale where 100 is the best and 0 is the worst performance. The
scores displayed in this study are obtained by normalising the SDG 7 indicator values according to
Sachs et al. (2016) and Sachs et al. (2019) and equal weighting of each indicator. The IAEG-SDG
indicator 7.2.1 was excluded from the ﬁnal score of the SDG Index framework due to low country
coverage (Sachs et al., 2016). Since the SDG Index & Dashboards assessment uses data as close
to the assessment year as available, the reference year for a number of indicators reﬂected earlier
years. For SDG7 the indicators in SGD Index 2016 were based on data from 2010-2013 and in SDG
Index 2019 they were based on 2015-2016 data. In this current study, both rankings were included
to reﬂect the ranking of the report targeting 2015 and of the report based on newer data and to
identify potential diﬀerences between the two assessment years.
Page 132 of 138
==PAGE:147==
Supporting Information
Table A.43: Ranking based on SDG7 indicator
performance of Sachs et al. (2016).
Rank
Region
Score
1
Sweden
96.0
2
Norway
95.9
3
France
93.2
4
Switzerland
92.8
5
Finland
92.0
6
Canada
90.8
7
Brazil
90.7
8
Spain
90.6
9
Portugal
90.2
10
Slovenia
90.1
11
Bulgaria
89.4
12
Malta
89.2
13
Austria
89.2
14
Belgium
88.5
15
Denmark
88.2
16
Latvia
88.1
17
Slovakia
88.0
18
Czech Republic
87.7
19
Italy
87.7
20
Turkey
87.6
21
Japan
87.5
22
United States
87.5
23
Greece
87.4
24
Germany
87.3
25
United Kingdom
86.9
26
Croatia
86.5
27
Cyprus
86.5
28
Hungary
86.5
29
Ireland
86.2
30
Russia
85.1
31
Netherlands
84.3
32
Australia
84.2
33
Romania
83.4
34
Estonia
83.3
35
Poland
82.2
36
Mexico
81.1
37
Ro. Europe
79.8
38
China
76.0
39
Lithuania
74.6
40
South Africa
74.4
41
Luxembourg
64.9
42
Indonesia
61.6
43
Ro. America
61.2
44
India
57.8
45
Ro. Middle East
56.1
46
Ro. Asia
44.4
47
Ro. Africa
36.1
Table A.44: Ranking based on SDG7 indicator
performance of Sachs et al. (2019).
Rank
Region
Score
1
Sweden
98.7
2
Norway
98.6
3
France
97.0
4
Switzerland
96.7
5
Finland
96.4
6
Canada
95.3
7
Spain
94.7
8
Portugal
94.6
9
Brazil
94.0
10
Austria
93.8
11
Denmark
93.6
12
Slovenia
93.6
13
Japan
93.4
14
Germany
93.2
15
United States
93.2
16
Italy
93.1
17
United Kingdom
93.0
18
Ireland
92.5
19
Malta
92.4
20
Cyprus
92.2
21
Slovakia
92.2
22
Belgium
91.9
23
Czech Republic
91.8
24
Hungary
91.6
25
Netherlands
91.6
26
Russia
91.2
27
Latvia
91.2
28
Australia
91.0
29
Bulgaria
90.8
30
Greece
90.7
31
Poland
89.7
32
Croatia
89.5
33
Turkey
89.2
34
Romania
89.0
35
Estonia
88.9
36
Mexico
86.5
37
Ro. Europe
86.2
38
Lithuania
83.5
39
South Africa
79.0
40
China
76.9
41
Indonesia
73.4
42
Ro. Middle East
72.2
43
Ro. America
68.5
44
Luxembourg
66.7
45
India
65.4
46
Ro. Africa
60.6
47
Ro. Asia
52.0
Page 133 of 138
==PAGE:148==
Supporting Information
Table A.45: Ranking based on index score for
allocation principle 2 with equal weighting to
indicators.
Rank
Region
Score
1
Hungary
0.36
2
Portugal
0.37
3
France
0.42
4
Netherlands
0.43
5
Turkey
0.44
6
Croatia
0.47
7
Austria
0.47
8
United Kingdom
0.49
9
Ireland
0.49
10
Brazil
0.49
11
Slovakia
0.52
12
Spain
0.53
13
Japan
0.53
14
Malta
0.58
15
Lithuania
0.61
16
Sweden
0.64
17
Belgium
0.67
18
Mexico
0.67
19
Romania
0.69
20
Germany
0.70
21
Poland
0.70
22
Italy
0.71
23
Czech Republic
0.71
24
Denmark
0.75
25
America
0.78
26
Bulgaria
0.87
27
Indonesia
0.92
28
Latvia
0.94
29
Luxembourg
0.98
30
Estonia
0.98
31
Norway
1.02
32
Slovenia
1.04
33
South Africa
1.05
34
Switzerland
1.09
35
Middle East
1.11
36
China
1.18
37
Europe
1.22
38
India
1.25
39
United States
1.31
40
Africa
1.32
41
Finland
1.36
42
Russian Federation
1.45
43
Asia and Pacidifc
1.65
44
Cyprus
2.17
45
Greece
3.05
46
Australia
3.11
47
Canada
3.26
Table A.46: Ranking based on index score for
allocation principle 2 with score-based weight-
ing.
Rank
Region
Score
1
Luxembourg
0.41
2
Brazil
0.43
3
Sweden
0.43
4
Netherlands
0.44
5
Lithuania
0.44
6
France
0.48
7
Ireland
0.50
8
Belgium
0.50
9
Finland
0.51
10
Hungary
0.52
11
United Kingdom
0.53
12
Poland
0.54
13
Austria
0.55
14
Australia
0.55
15
Switzerland
0.57
16
India
0.57
17
America
0.58
18
Czech Republic
0.58
19
Turkey
0.59
20
Estonia
0.59
21
Indonesia
0.60
22
South Africa
0.60
23
Croatia
0.61
24
Japan
0.61
25
Slovak Republic
0.61
26
Middle East
0.64
27
Latvia
0.64
28
Romania
0.65
29
Africa
0.66
30
Asia and Pacidifc
0.68
31
Mexico
0.69
32
China
0.70
33
United States
0.71
34
Germany
0.73
35
Bulgaria
0.73
36
Europe
0.78
37
Portugal
0.80
38
Malta
0.85
39
Denmark
0.86
40
Italy
0.97
41
Slovenia
1.07
42
Russian Federation
1.09
43
Spain
1.14
44
Canada
1.67
45
Norway
2.81
46
Greece
7.36
47
Cyprus
7.44
Page 134 of 138
==PAGE:149==
Supporting Information
Table A.47: Ranking based on index score for
allocation principle 3 with equal weighting to
indicators.
Rank
Region
Score
1
Hungary
0.54
2
France
0.58
3
Portugal
0.60
4
United Kingdom
0.61
5
Netherlands
0.64
6
Austria
0.65
7
Japan
0.68
8
Lithuania
0.68
9
Poland
0.69
10
Croatia
0.70
11
Sweden
0.72
12
Spain
0.72
13
Ireland
0.74
14
Slovak Republic
0.74
15
Turkey
0.77
16
Malta
0.78
17
Belgium
0.79
18
Germany
0.80
19
Denmark
0.81
20
Estonia
0.84
21
Italy
0.84
22
Czech Republic
0.85
23
Brazil
0.88
24
Finland
0.88
25
Bulgaria
0.89
26
Romania
0.90
27
Mexico
0.91
28
Luxembourg
0.93
29
America
0.93
30
Switzerland
0.97
31
Indonesia
1.02
32
Latvia
1.03
33
China
1.10
34
Slovenia
1.13
35
Norway
1.20
36
South Africa
1.23
37
Cyprus
1.24
38
United States
1.24
39
India
1.35
40
Europe
1.39
41
Africa
1.44
42
Russian Federation
1.47
43
Middle East
1.47
44
Greece
1.63
45
Australia
1.67
46
Canada
1.68
47
Asia and Pacidifc
1.77
Table A.48: Ranking based on index score for
allocation principle 3 with score-based weight-
ing.
Rank
Region
Score
1
Australia
0.56
2
Austria
0.87
3
Belgium
0.69
4
Brazil
0.48
5
Bulgaria
0.99
6
Canada
1.49
7
China
0.73
8
Croatia
0.94
9
Cyprus
2.72
10
Czech Republic
0.79
11
Denmark
1.23
12
Estonia
0.80
13
Finland
0.70
14
France
0.64
15
Germany
1.05
16
Greece
3.44
17
Hungary
0.74
18
India
0.59
19
Indonesia
0.63
20
Ireland
0.73
21
Italy
1.20
22
Japan
0.84
23
Latvia
0.87
24
Lithuania
0.69
25
Luxembourg
0.69
26
Malta
1.20
27
Mexico
0.95
28
Netherlands
0.60
29
Norway
2.60
30
Poland
0.73
31
Portugal
1.12
32
Romania
0.88
33
Russian Federation
1.28
34
Slovak Republic
0.79
35
Slovenia
1.25
36
South Africa
0.71
37
Spain
1.28
38
Sweden
0.70
39
Switzerland
0.96
40
Turkey
0.97
41
United Kingdom
0.71
42
United States
0.92
43
Asia and Pacidifc
0.74
44
America
0.60
45
Europe
1.01
46
Africa
0.80
47
Middle East
1.06
Page 135 of 138
==PAGE:150==
Supporting Information
Figure A.7: Boxplot showing the variance of the group scores for STE and environmental indicators after
being indexed by the mean value. It is seen how the environmental scores span a higher variance and hence
this group contributes more to the index score when the two group scores are averaged. Boxplots indicate
25–75 percentile (e.i. Q1 and Q3) with the median indicated by the midline, while whiskers indicate the
minimum and maximum values excluding outliers. The dots indicate the outliers of the data sets, which
are deﬁned as values 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQ) above Q3 or below Q1.
Page 136 of 138
==PAGE:151==
Supporting Information
Figure A.8: Correlation coeﬃcients for all indicator and index score based on allocation principles 2. I1 and I2 represent the ﬁnal index score
of indicators based on equal weighting to indicators and equal weighting to targets respectively. All coeﬃcients above 0.85 are marked in blue, all
negatively correlated indicators in red, and correlation between two indicators that were not statistically signiﬁcant are highlighted in grey.
Page 137 of 138
==PAGE:152==
Supporting Information
Figure A.9: Correlation coeﬃcients for all indicator and index score based on allocation principles 3. I1 and I2 represent the ﬁnal index score
of indicators based on equal weighting to indicators and equal weighting to targets respectively. All coeﬃcients above 0.85 are marked in blue, all
negatively correlated indicators in red, and correlation between two indicators that were not statistically signiﬁcant are highlighted in grey.
Page 138 of 138
==PAGE:153==
Supporting Information
Page 139 of 138
