==PAGE:1==
Brewery Wastewater Treatment and 
Nutrients Recovery by Microalgae 
Miriam Fernández-Ávila Cobo
February 2020
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Education: Master of Science in Environmental Engineering
Master Thesis Project
Project period:
September 2019 – February 2020
ECTS: 30
Supervisor:
Yifeng Zhang
Professor (Associate) in DTU and Ph.D.
Yanyan Su
Postdoctoral Researcher at Carlsberg Research Laboratory
This master thesis is part of  a collaboration project between 
DTU Environment and Carlsberg Research Laboratory
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for graduation in the above education at the
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1
Building 101A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Author: Miriam Fernández-Ávila Cobo
Title: Brewery Wastewater Treatment and 
Nutrients Recovery by Microalgae 
DTU Environment
February 2020
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Microalgae are one of the most ancient organisms on Earth. Their easy adaptability
to different environments makes them visible in the most inhospitable places. Their
harvest and use as food or pigment dates from thousand years ago, but its commercial
interest for production large-scale started just decades ago. Latest research is focused
in their applicability as a means to treat wastewater and the subsequent harvest of
the microalgae produced. Food supplements and cosmetics, fertilizers, cattle food,
pigments or even biofuels are just some of the many applications microalgae have.
In this study a research of the viability of treating Brewery wastewater with microal-
gae was carried out. Various abiotic and biotic parameters such as the algae species,
the addition of different nitrogen sources for N:P ratio regulation, air pumping rate,
symbiosis or not with the wastewater-born bacteria, or different light-dark cycles were
tested.
Best results were found for Chlorella Vulgaris experiments when nitrate was used as
additional nitrogen source and a 12 hours light dark cycle was performed.
Measurements of wastewater characterization revealed a COD, ammonium and ni-
trate removal of 90 to 100 %, and 70 % removal for phosphate, in a period of 5 days.
The maximum biomass production for this time was found to be 1,65 g/L.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis is part of a collaboration project between the department of En-
vironmental Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in Lyngby, and
the Carlsberg Research Laboratory, in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a Master of Science degree in Environmental Engineering. The oficial workload of
this project is 30 ECTS and was conducted mainly in Carlsberg Research Laboratory
during the period between 01/09/2019 to 31/01/2020. The project was supervised
by Post Doc Yanyan SU in Carlsberg Research Laboratory and co-supervised by
Associate Proffesor Yifeng Zhang in DTU.
Carlsberg Research Laboratory and Technical University of Denmark,
January 30, 2020
Miriam Fernández-Ávila Cobo (s172180)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors, both my internal DTU supervisor
Yifeng Zhang as my external supervisor in Carlsberg Yanyan Su, for giving me the
opportunity to carry out this master thesis. It was an incredible opportunity where I
learnt not just academically and even professionally but also personally. Thank you
so much for cheering me up when I was feeling down, when all the experiments seemed
to go wrong and you both had a smile and a solution. But also thank you for giving
me freedom to struggle, stop and think, and figure out things myself. I would also
like to thank all the people I have met in Carlsberg, always very nice, friendly and
willing to help. Finally I would like to dedicate this report to my family and friends.
On one hand the ones that I left in Spain and that have been far but so close at the
same time helping me at every step of this adventure that was moving to Denmark.
And on the other hand, to the ones I have met here that have made Copenhagen feel
like a home to me.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
x
List of Abbreviations
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Microaglae State of Art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Wastewater Treatment and Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Goals of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Materials and Method
13
2.1
Microalgae Strands of Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Cultivation of microalgae
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Experiment operation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results and Discussion
25
3.1
Selection of optimal microalgae species and wastewater pretreatment .
25
3.2
Selection of optimal air flow rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Preferred nitrogen source by Chlorella Vulgaris . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Mixotrophic versus heterotrophic performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Control experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Conclusion
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Future Perspectives
45
Bibliography
47
6
Appendix
53
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Exampes of images of microalgae under the microscope
. . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Examples of open pond microalgae growth systems . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Exampes of photorreactors for microalgae growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1
Images taken with microscope (magnification of 1000X) . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Inoculum of species in cultivation media stored in sterilized bottles . . . .
16
2.3
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
3 port lid, one sampling, one air imput and one air output. The sampling
tube is secured with a metallic clamp and the other ports are topped with
0,45 µm filters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Examples of images taken with cell counter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Harvested cells after freeze and dry procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1
COD Concentration in mg/L. (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged, NANC:Not
Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Centrifuged) 200
rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle and NH4+ as the externally added nitrogen
source. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Ammonium Removal Eﬀiciency in % (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged,
NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Cen-
trifuged) (Initial concentrations, 115,9 mg/L for A and NANC and 190,47
mg/L for NAC) 200 rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle and NH4+ as the exter-
nally added nitrogen source. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Orthophosphate Concentration in mg/L (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged,
NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Cen-
trifuged) 200 rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle and NH4+ as the externally
added nitrogen source. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Nitrate Concentration in mg/L (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged, NANC:Not
Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Centrifuged) 200
rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle, NH4+ as the externally added nitrogen source. 29
3.5
Cell growth for the different species and conditions (A: Autoclaved and
Centrifuged, NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Auto-
claved but Centrifuged) 200 rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle
. . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:12==
3.7
Influence of parameters like air flow rate and kind of pretreatment on the
cell growth for Chlorella Vulgaris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.9
Comparison of biomass production between a media rich in NH4+ and in
NO−
3 expressed in number of cells per µL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.11 Influence of light exposure in cell growth and pH of the wastewater for
Chlorella Vulgaris
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.12 Influence of light exposure in cell pigment for Chlorella Vulgaris
. . . . .
41
List of Tables
2.1
Euglena Gracilis’ medium recipe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Jaworski’s medium recipe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Polytomella’s medium recipe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Maximum biomass production as the difference between the maximum
TSS reached and the theoretical initial TSS (0,4g/L) [g/L] . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:13==
List of Abbreviations
A
Autoclaved and Centrifuged sample
BOD
Biochemical Oxigen Demand
CCAP
Culture Collection of Algae and Protozoa
COD
Chemical Oxygen Demand
CR
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
CV
Chlorella Vulgaris
DO
Dissolved Oxygen
NAC
Not autoclaved but Centrifuged sample
NANC
Neither Autoclaved Nor Centrifuged sample
NH4+
Ammonium
NO−
2
Nitrite
NO−
3
Nitrate
N:P
Nitrogen Phosphorus ratio
PO43−
Ortho-Phosphate
SO
Scenedasmus Obliquous
TN
Total Nitrogen
TSS
Total Suspended Solids
VSS
Volatile Suspended Solids
WWTP
Wastewater Treatment Plant
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The interest for microalgae production has been increasing exponentially in the re-
cent years. Algae can flourish in almost any kind of ecosystem. They are strong
organisms that stand extreme conditions and need no more than sunlight CO2 and
basic nutirents like phosphorus and nitrogen to survive. Moreover, their growth-rate
is much faster than for other plants and they can be harvested anytime, not just
seasonally(Mata, Martins, and Caetano 2010). They have been seen spreading across
freshwater, seawater and wastewater bodies without special care or maintenance (Nur-
dogan and Oswald 1995; Schenk et al. 2008; Mata et al. 2013). Microalgae are rich in
nutrients as nitrates and phosphates, needed by any living thing to thrive. Therefore,
they are interesting products to grow, since they can be commercialized as feedstock
for animals, fertilizers for plants or even pharmaceutical or nutraceutical components
for human beings due to their high levels of fatty acids like DHA and EPA, pro-
teins and enzymes (Rittmann 2008) Moreover, their high levels of lipids make them
a promising source for biodiesel production (Rawat et al. 2011; Kirrolia, Bishnoi, and
Singh 2013; Oswald 2003; Mata et al. 2013)
On the other hand, water consumption is an uprising problem in today’s soci-
ety. Water is essential for all industrial processes, not just as a raw material, but
also for all parallel operations such as cooling or boiling.
The 21st century faces
a global watercrisis due to the increase in population, industrial activity and the
boiling-issue, climate change. 2014 report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) expects a continuous increase in water scarcity as a future perspec-
tive (Pachauri et al. 2014). Besides, according to 2008 report by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the industrial sector is the second largest user of
freshwater worldwide after agriculture (Diop 2002). Not only water demand but also
water pollution, specially inherited by human activities, is of major concern and more
and more researchers are looking into eﬀicient modern technologies to solve this prob-
lem. The need for a sustainable, affordable and optimal technology for wastewater
treatment is a priority in today’s world, not only to avoid pollution but also as a way
to reduce freshwater use.
The traditional methods to treat wastewater such as anaerobic and aerobic reactors
usually have a complex operation and generate big amounts of waste sludge that
must be treated. Moreover, especially in regard to aerobic operation , energy con-
sumption is very high. Wastewater contains high carbon levels that, if discharged
directly to freshwater bodies, will produce an eutrofication of the latter, putting in
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
risk any kind of marine life (Su, Mennerich, and Urban 2012). Organic matter, to-
gether with nitrates, phosphates and ammonium must be removed beforehand.An
eﬀicient carbon removal can be easily done with traditional technologies, however,
nutrient removal is a complex and expensive procedure that requires several stages
and diverse technologies (Ahn 2006; Oehmen et al. 2007; Yeoman et al. 1988). It so
happens, that carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus are the essential macronutrients for
microalgal growth. These, together with many inorganic ions such as SO4−2,Mg2+,
Ca2+, K+, Na+ and Cl−(macronutrients) and iron, manganese, zinc, cobalt, copper,
and molybdenum (micronutrients) compose the ideal microalgae medium (Andersen
2005). Unsurprisingly, a lot of research is being done towards coupling microalgae
breeding with wastewater treatment, creating a mean to biologically remove wastew-
ater pollutants while obtaining biomass growth of a useful by-product. (Mata et al.
2012)
Many papers can be found in the treatment of wastewater with microalgae such
as (Su, Mennerich, and Urban 2011), which focuses on municipal wastewater treat-
ment with wastewaster-born microalgae, (Mata et al. 2012) which grows microalgae
scenedesmus obliquus in brewery wastewater for biodiesel production or (Zheng et al.
2018) which pretends to find an optimal nitrogen phosphate ratio using a mix of
piggery and brewery wastewater to grow microalgae for instance. This study aims to
analize the possibility of treating brewery wastewater, using microalgae.In particular,
this is a collaboration with Carlsberg Research Laboratory. All experiements were
done within Carslberg’s installations and using uniquely brewery wastewater from
Carlsberg’s Brewery.
1.1
Microaglae State of Art
Microalgae are ancient microscopic unicellular organisms found in marine ecosystems.
Even though they are traditionally associated with seaweed, there are two differenti-
ated groups: prokaryitic cells or cyanobacteria, also known as blue-green algae. This
cells have a more simple structure where there is no membrane to separate the genetic
material from the citoplasm. An example of it is arthrospira platensis, commercially
known as spirulina.The other group of algae are eukariotic cells, where the geneti-
cal material is organized in nucleotids.The most important classes are: green algae
(Chlorophyta), red algae (Rhodophyta) and diatoms (Bacillario-phyta). Despite their
very basic cell structure, many different kinds exist, so far 40,000 species have been
identified (Singh and Dhar 2011; Nicoletti 2016).
They can be found all around the world in diverse ecosystems with inhospitable
conditions and grow at a much faster growth rate that any other plant (Mata et al.
2012). As a matter of a fact, they are more and more visible in enclosed coastal ar-
eas and estuaries nowadays. These ecosystems with very little hydrodynamic energy
conditions or with already a lot of suspended organic matter, have naturally enriched
organic conditions. Hence, an over-enrichment of nutrients can lead to eutrophica-
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Microaglae State of Art
3
(a)
Arthrospira
Platensis(Blue-green
Cyanobacteria)
(b) Selenastrum Capricornium (green algae)
(c) Porphyridium Cruentum (Red Algae)
(d) Cyclotella meneghiniana(diatom)
Figure 1.1: Exampes of images of microalgae under the microscope
tion. This phenomena entails an outstanding algae bloom which provokes hypoxia
or oxygen depletion in the deeper levels of the water body, killing thousands of an-
imals. The agricultural, urban and industrial development of the human being, has
affected amongst other things to the nutrient and oxygen equilibrium of the marine
ecosystems. The run-off of artificial fertilizers due to intensive farming, the exponen-
tial growth of human population and therefore organic waste has lead to a human
induced eutrophication (Jonge, Elliott, and Orive 2002). Several studies like O’neil
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
et al. 2012, Dokulil and Teubner 2010 or Paerl and Huisman 2008 relate the sudden
algae bloom experienced in the recent years with climate change. A rise of the ocean’s
temperature is beneficial for an optimal growth of cyanobacteria.
While an uncontrolled spread of microalgae can have a negative impact in ecosys-
tems, they are essential for life in Earth; they contribute to approximately 40% of
the oxygen in the atmosphere (Nicoletti 2016). Prokariotic microalgae are photosyn-
thetic microorganisms (autotrophic), therefore, they fix atmospheric carbon dioxide,
solar radiation and water and convert them into adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
oxygen (Falkowski and Raven 2013; Stewart 1974). This mechanism with their fast
growth rate and enormous adaptation capacity makes them a target for researchers in
the fight against climate change due to microalgaes’ potential technology for carbon
dioxide sequestration (Gaikwad, Gudadhe, and Bhagat 2016; Bilanovic, Holland, and
Armon 2012).
Eucariotic microalgae are heterotrophic, hence, they obtain their carbon source by
absorbing organic matter from their substrate. Some algae can also be mixotrophic,
where they combine autotrophic or heterotrophic behaviour depending on the condi-
tions and limitations of the environment they grow in.
Two main macronutrients are essential for both kinds of growth, nitrogen and phos-
phorus. Nitrogen is the main contributor for the aminoacids formation in microalgae.
A growth media lacking nitrogen, will traduce in the development of microalgae with a
higher percentage of lipids and carbohydrate concentration instead of proteins (Mata
et al. 2012; Lee and Lee 2001). The most frequently forms of nitrogen absorbed by
microalgae are ammonium and nitrate (Lowrey, Brooks, and McGinn 2015; Stew-
art 1974).
Phosphate , usually in the form of orthophosphate, is assimilated but
at lower quantities by microalgae. As a matter of a fact, there is a long-established
nitrogen-to-phosphorus ratio (the Redfield N:P ratio) originally for plankton and now
extended to microalgae organisms. Redfield suggests N:P should not exceed 16. This
bond means that the insuﬀicient availability of one of the sources can limit microalgae
growth (Geider and La Roche 2002).
1.1.1
Applications
Microalgae cellular structure presents a high nutritional content. These cells can syn-
thesize any kind of amino acid, making them an unconventional source of protein.
Moreover their average lipid content varies from 1% to 70% and in some cases as high
as 90% (Metting 1996). Algal main lipids are glycerol, sugars and polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs) such as DHA (an ω3 fatty acid) with high nutritional value. In
addition, different carbohydrates such as starch, glucose and other polysaccharides
can be found in microalgal biomass. All these chemical properties make them an ideal
alternative as food suplement for animal feed for kettle or fish, and even for human
beings. The first proof of use of microalgae by humans has been found to be as far
as 2000 years ago, when the chinese community used Nostoc, a blue-green freshwater
cyanobacteria, to survive in times of famine. Indiginoeus communities have also used
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Microaglae State of Art
5
them directly from nature for thousands of years (Spolaore et al. 2006). However,
their commercial interest and cultivation for food purposes is fairly recent. The most
cultivated and used as food supplement are Arthrospira,Aphanizomenon flos-aquae,
Chlorella and Dunaliella salina. Several studies for Arthrospira, claim its health ben-
efits for the alleviation of hyperlipidemia, suppression of hypertension, protection
against renal failure, growth promotion of intestinal Lactobacillus, and suppression
of elevated serum glucose level (Vilchez et al. 1997; Liang et al. 2004; Yamaguchi
1996). These suplements are sold as tablets or powder that should be combined with
other meals.
In regard to animal feed consumption, back in 1999, microalgae production for aqua-
culture reached 1000 tonnes (62% for molluscs, 21% for shrimps, and 16% for fish)
(Muller-Feuga 2013). Algae are used as a first step larval nutrition for a short pe-
riod of time. They are also a natural source of pigment for fish like salmon or trout
to get their particular skin colour, that, in a captivity culturing diet, they cannot
achieve. This pigment is result from the high levels of carotenoid present in microal-
gaes’ biomass.
Carotenoids are also a reason for the application of microalgae in
cosmetics (Del Campo et al. 2000). The rise in awareness for a more sustainable
and ecological agriculture in order to promote environmental preservation and food
safety has raised interest in organic fertilizers (Kondo, Nakata, Nishihara, et al. 2010).
Microalgae with its significant vitamin content, carotenoids, amino acids, antifungal
nature and slow release of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium seems like the ideal
product for plants requirements (Mulbry, Kondrad, and Pizarro 2007; Coppens et al.
2016).
Finally, the most promising application of all is the use of microalgae for biofuel
production. The potential threat for the effects of climate change is creating aware-
ness in the fuel industry.Fossil fuels are the largest contributor of greenhouse gases
(GHGs) to the biosphere (International carbon dioxide emissions from the consump-
tion of energy 2006). In 2005 fossil fuels contributed to a 78% in shares of the total
European energy consumption. The projected perspective shows that if no changes
to the current energy production are carried out, by 2030 this percentage will still be
69% (Capros et al. 2016). Hence, the production of biofuels in the recent years, has
increased exponentially in the transport sector with potential of competing with fossil
fuels. Subsidies for these kind of fuels have made first generation biofuels economically
feasible and profitable, such as biofuel extracted from food and oil crops including
rapeseed oil, sugar cane, sugar beet, and maize (The state of food and agriculture
2008) as well as vegetable oils and animal fats using traditional technologies (Sustain-
able bioenergy: a framework for decision makers. 2007e). However, the use of these
raw materials confronts another burning issue, the limit of soil to grow crops that
would fulfils the power generation demand and the food consumption expected for
an up-growing population. Currently, about 1% (14 million hectares) of the world’s
available land suitable for farming is used for biofuels production. This production
meets just 1% of the global transport fuel necessity. No matter how much better
first generation biofuels might seem at first glance,compared to fossil fuels, their pro-
duction is not as sustainable as expected, so a second generation of biofuels coming
==PAGE:20==
6
1 Introduction
from agricultural waste or forest harvesting residues is being launched. Then again,
the economic potential and the production eﬀiciency of ideas like using spent coffee
grounds (Caetano et al. 2014) is very low. Microalgae, on the other hand could be a
promising alternative.
Microalgae have a very fast growth rate, doubling their mass in 3,5 hours in some
cases, and the oil content ranges between 20-50% dry weight of biomass (Metting
1996; Chisti 2007; Spolaore et al. 2006). As mentioned before, microalgae are not
seasonable like crops, but they can be cultured all year long, resulting in a much
higher productivity. For example, in Schenk et al. 2008 the yield for biodiesel from
microalgae production in an open pond is of 12000L per hectare, while for rapeseed
oil is of 1190 L per hectare . Moreover, compared to crops, microalgae culturing
does not need the use of fertilizers, reducing this possible source of contamination
(Rodolfi et al. 2009). Also, even though microalgae are grown in aqueous medium,
as a whole, the water consumption for this kind of practice is less than for regular
crops (Dismukes et al. 2008). In addition, this water does not necessarily have to
be freshwater, but can be brackish water or wastewater, promoting a tecnology of
waste recovery (Searchinger et al. 2008; Cantrell et al. 2008). Microalgae production
for biofuels in comparison with fossil fuels not only promotes the reduction of GHG
emmisions but can also promote the reduction of the ones already in the atmosphere
because of its ability to sequester CO2 when doing photosynthesis. (1 kg of dry algal
biomass corresponds to 1,83 kg of CO2 absorbed) (Chisti 2007).
In regard to the economical feasibility, there is still a lot of controbversy in regard
to the profitable production of biodiesel with microalgae. Different scientific articles
claim different points like De Francisci et al. 2018, which points out, that due to the
low market price of biodiesel, it would be the least profitable application. However,
other applications already being comercialized such as pigments like chlorophyllin,
lutein, and ￿-carotene, already show a lot of economic potential.
1.1.2
Microalgae culturing
Large-scale microalgal production has been put in practice more and more in the past
decades. Two main growth systems for mass production have been used in industry
so far, open ponds and photobioreactors.
1.1.2.1
Open Ponds
Figure 1.2 shows different examples of open pond systems. This arrangement is the
closest to a natural growth medium. More often constructed in this oval shape, com-
monly known as “raceway pond”, they can be built of glass, plastic, concrete, bricks
or even compacted earth and covered with thin plastic sheets resembling agriculture
fields (like the one to the left) (Lee and Lee 2001; Pulz 2001; Chisti 2007). They are a
good option in terms of the affordable costs for the construction and operation. Also,
they can be built in barren lands with no agricultural or livestock value (Chen 1996;
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Microaglae State of Art
7
Tredici 2004).
However, this method presents certain disadvantages such as the diﬀiculty for sun-
light to diffuse throughout the depth of the pond. If the culturing is intensive, the
growth of the algae on the top layers can prevent this diffusion even more. Therefore,
ponds must be designed with a swallow depth and a big area, taking large spaces of
land.
Moreover, many factors affecting the growth of algae, like temperature, light inten-
sity, air exchange or algal hervibores are inherently dependant on the environmental
and weather conditions of the place where the ponds are set. Finally, the produc-
tion of microalgae for food, pharmaceutical or cosmetic applications is quite unlikely
with ponds, due to the complexity of keeping an sterilized environment (Chen 1996;
Tredici 2004; Lee and Lee 2001; Pulz 2001).
1.1.2.2
Photobiorreactors
Photobiorreactors can be indoors or outdoors. If they are outdoors, energy can be
saved by using natural sunlight for photosynthesis, however, the microalgae growth
are subjected to weather conditions and more importantly to absence of light at dark
time, which becomes a limitation.
On the other hand, indoor systems allow the control of light duration and intensity.
This is an advantage for culturing but also an increase in operation costs.
Different configurations of photobiorreactors are present in the market, figures 1.3b
and 1.3a, present the most common kind used nowadays, tubular photobiorreactors.
They are made with transparent tubes that can rigid or flexible and can be arranged
in different directions allowing an optimization of space. The ratio between illumi-
nated area and culture volume is higher than for open ponds, leading to a better
biomass production. Problems such as contamination, temperature, light intensity,
ph control, addition of external nutrients and mixing, are resolved with this kind of
technology. However, certain disadvantages also exist such as fouling of the tubes
Figure 1.2: Examples of open pond microalgae growth systems
==PAGE:22==
8
1 Introduction
with microalgae biomass limiting the light dispersion, increasing the temperature in-
side of them, and reducing the dissolved oxygen (Pulz 2001; Chen 1996).
Other configurations are vertical columns, with or without bubbles, and flat panel
photobioreactors.
The former, are largely used in laboratory scale for indoor ex-
periments. They present a simple structure which results in lower assembling and
operation costs than for tubular configuration (see figure 1.3d).
Flat plate reactors are the most compact choice (Posten 2009).
Two transparent
sheets of glass or plastic are glued together leaving mix of microalgae culture within.
See figure 1.3c. Their design promotes space optimization. The biomass productivity
is quite eﬀicienct due to the large area for light diffusion. However problems such as
diﬀiculty for temperature control, relative growth of microalgae on the glass walls and
hydrodynamic stress to some algal strains because of aeration, have been encountered
in these systems (Pulz and Scheibenbogen 1998; Carvalho et al. 2014).
(a) Outdoors tubular photobiorreactor
(b) Indoors tubular photobiorreactor
(c) Flat panel photobiorreactor
(d) Vertical column photobioreactor
Figure 1.3: Exampes of photorreactors for microalgae growth
Microalgae cultivation can also be classified in accordance to the microalgae’s
metabolic pathway. It can be autotrophic, if the microalgae synthesize their own
organic matter; heterotrophic, when the microalgae uptake the carbon sources from
their surroundings; and mixotrophic, a mixture between both techniques.
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Wastewater Treatment and Recovery
9
1.1.2.3
Autotrophic Cultivation
Microalgae has been commercially produced mainly by autotrophic or photosinthetic
culturing. The high eﬀiciency in terms of biomass production is known as been higher
and, as a first glance, it seemed easy to imitate natural environments just growing
microalgae as nature would. This kind of production just needs two very cheap natural
sources,sunlight and CO2, which also makes it interesting for the fight against climate
change. However, the problems faced regarding poor light diffusion, explained in the
open ponds and the derived exponential costs from artificial light in the photoreactors
section, has paved the way to another way of cultivation, heterotrophically (Yang,
Hua, and Shimizu 2000; Mandalam and Palsson 1998; Suh and Lee 2003).
1.1.2.4
Heterotrophic Cultivation
Heterotrphic cultivation can be achieved in dark conditons, therefore, indoor reactors
would be used. On one hand, this kind of production limits operation expenses as
no need for light is needed. However, it introduces a new requirement, an organic
carbon feedstock. In addition, there is, in general, a decrease in biomass pigmentation
due to downregulation of chlorophyll in the absence of light. Pigmentation results in
one of the most interesting and profitable applications of microalgae, phytochemicals
such as ￿-carotene, zeaxanthin, and astaxanthin (Mata, Martins, and Caetano 2010;
Yamane et al. 2001; Bhatnagar et al. 2011).
Moreover, in case of contamination,
a photosynthetic environment is more likely to be dominated by microalgae since
bacteria are not as active under light exposure and prefer darkness. On the other hand,
in heterotrophic conditions, the possibility of outgrowth of bacteria over microalgae
would be more quite certain. The need of sterilization in this culture procedure is
more important (Yang, Hua, and Shimizu 2000; Perez-Garcia et al. 2011). Finally,
the production of CO2 is another throwback of heterotrophic cultivation that reduces
the attention into this kind of methodology.
1.1.2.5
Mixotrophic Cultivation
Mixotrophic cultivation is a combination of both.
Yang, Hua, and Shimizu 2000
assures, that this system can lead to greater cell yields per unit of energy input than
in autotrophic mode ((0.00749 and 0.00177 g cells kJ−1 respectively). In the past
few years, this kind of cultivation is being suggested as method for resource recovery;
the utilization of wastewater as a nutrient media for microalgae, while acting as a
wastewater treatment process.
1.2
Wastewater Treatment and Recovery
The conventional wastewater treatment process follows a series of physical, biologi-
cal and chemical processes. Depending on the further application or disposal of the
==PAGE:24==
10
1 Introduction
treated water, certain steps can be skipped or not. It can be divided into three gen-
eral treatments.
Wastewater treatment starts with a preliminary treatment to remove large materials
and solids found in the water. Wastewater is firstly passed through a screen and then
introduced in a grit removal chamber that facilitates sedimentation of these large
particles.
The primary treatment’s target is the removal of settleable organic and inorganic
solids. It is carried out in primary sedimentation tanks also called clarifiers. These
solids settle at the bottom and are scraped into a well at the center of the tank. They
form what is known as primary sludge. On the surface of the clarifiers, the ”scum”
(oils and grease) floats and is swepted by water jets and pumped to the sludge pro-
cessing units. At this stage, around 25% to 50% of the Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD), 70% of the total suspended solids (TSS) and 65% of the scum are removed.
The objective of the secondary treatment is the removal of biodegradable dissolved
and colloidal organic matter. It is done in aerated tanks in the presence of aerobic
bacteria that metabolize the organic matter while producing inorganic products like
CO2 NH3 and H2O. Two main biological process are used for the secondary treatment,
activated sludge process and trickling filters or biofilters. The activated sludge pro-
cess is carried out in an aeration tank which contains the mixed liquor or wastewater
and suspended bacteria. In the case of the biofilters, the basin where it takes place is
filled with stones or plastic structures, that serve as support for the bacteria forming
a biological film. When the wastewater is in contact, the organic matter diffused into
the film where the bacteria can metabolize it. At this point, typically, over 85% of
BOD and suspended solids are removed.
The tertiary treatment is meant to remove nitrogen, phosphorus, heavy metals, dis-
solved solids and any other suspended solids. This step is not necessary the third stage
since it can be combined with the first or secondary treatment instead (like adding
chemicals to the primary clarifier for phosphate removal). The usual procedure is a
readaptation of the activated sludge process where it is divided into 5 zones:
• A first anaerobic zone with absence of nitrates and very low disolved oxygen.
Here the bacteria responsible for phosphorus removal are stressed under this
low oxidation-reduction conditions releasing the phosphorus within their cells
which sediments to the bottom of the reactor.
• An anoxic zone where there is little dissolved oxigen but presence of nitrates.
This environment is favorable for denitrifying bacteria which transform the
nitrate to nitrogen gas that escapes into the atmosphere. At this point the
ammonia residuals from the wastewater pass to the next zone without any al-
teration.
• The next is an aerobic stage where nitrification (transformation of ammonium
into nitrates and nitrites by nitrifying bacteria) takes place.
The resulting
nitrate mix is recycled to the anoxic zone explained above.
==PAGE:25==
1.2 Wastewater Treatment and Recovery
11
• An extra anoxic zone can be added to reduce the nitrates that escaped from
the recirculation by endogenous bacteria.
• An aerobic stage is the end of the process where the dissolved oxygen concen-
tration is raised to avoid too much denitrification.
Finally a disinfection process is carried to remove any bacteria present in the
wastewater. This can be done by chlorination, the most used, ozone or Ultraviolet
irradiation (Metcalf, Eddy, and Tchobanoglous 1972; Conventional Wastewater Treat-
ment Processes).
1.2.1
Brewery Wastewater Treatment
This proyect will focus on a specific kind of wastewater, brewery wastewater.
It is estimated that for the production of 1 L of beer, 3 to 10 L of waste effluent is
generated. Brewery wastewater is full of environmental pollutants like yeast surplus
and spent grains. Currently, depending on the country and its legislation, it can be
discharged several ways, such as, (1) directly into waterbodies; (2) into the municipal
sewer system; (3)into the municipal sewer system but after a pretreatment at site; (4)
into the brewery’s wastewater treatment plant (Simate et al. 2011).
Up to now, no brewing industry has adopted any kind of wastewater treatment reuse
technology.
However, the upcoming water crisis is not compatible with a line of
production that uses so much water and generates so much waste.Brewery wastewater
presents, in general high chemical oxygen demand (COD), nitrogen and phosphorus
loads which make it a very suitable nutritional media for microalgae growth.
1.2.2
Advantages of using Microalgae as a wastewater
treatment technology
The use of microalgae as a means to treat wastewater could obviously not substitute
all the wastewater treatment process explained in section 1.2. Nevertheless, biological
processes such as the anaerobic digestion step present disadvantages,like the impossi-
bility of removing completely nutrients like ammonia since the bacteria lack enough
autotrophic metabolism to deal with inorganic nitrogen, for example.
They also
require high alkalinity making it diﬀicult to apply oxidation processes since bicarbon-
ate acts like a radical scavenger. Others, like nitrification-denitrification processes,
require the uptake of extra organic carbon loads to be effective (Park et al. 2010). On
the other hand, microalgae are organisms that can uptake Chemical Oxygen Demand
(COD),ammonium, and phosphate in just one step. This would suppose a reduction
in operational costs and investment in operations to treat each contaminant sepa-
rately as done with the current technologies.
Moreover, using microalgae opens a still quite under research path for wastewater
==PAGE:26==
12
1 Introduction
treatment, the possibility of resource recovery. The existing technology nowadays
has achieved, for example, various methods for phosphate recovery. However there is
little industrial-scale experimentation and the cost for recovered phosphate exceeds
the cost of natural rock phosphate (Cornel and Schaum 2009). Whereas microalgae,
as widely explained in section 1.1.1 presents an incredible potential as a by-product
for wastewater treatment itself. It would mean not only treating wastewater at a
more economical way but also giving it a parallel use as a growth media.
1.3
Goals of the Project
In this project, the potential use of a brewery effluent as a nutrient medium for mi-
croalgae growth was evaluated. In collaboration with Carlsberg Research Laboratory,
final discharge wastewater from Carlsberg’s Brewery was studied. An investigation
of different biotic and abiotic parameters and their effect on the treatment of wastew-
ater and microalgae biomass production was carried out. The parameters tested are
the following:
• Screening of three different kinds of microalgae species, Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
(CR) Chlorella Vulgaris (CV), and Scenedasmus Obliquous (SO).
• Performance of microalgae as a unique microorganism, and in collaboration
with endogenous bacteria present naturally in the wastewater.
• Regulation of the nitrogen phosphate ratio by the addition of two different kinds
of nitrogen sources, ammonium NH4+ and nitrate NO−
3 .
• Air flow rate variations of 100, 200 and 400 rpm.
• Autotrophic and heterotrophic performance of microalgae by the variation of
light exposure, with a 12 hours dark-light cycle, 24 hours dark cycle and 24
hours dark first week 24 hours light second week.
An optimal solution to this problem would be a compromise between an eﬀicient
removal of COD, NO−
3 , NH4+ and ortho-phosphate (PO43−) of the wastewater, and
a high microalgae biomass production.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
Materials and Method
This section is a systematic review of all the steps followed during the experimental
procedure of this project as well as a description of the materials, chemicals and
equipment used.
2.1
Microalgae Strands of Study
Three different algae species were studied for this project,Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
Chlorella Vulgaris, and Scenedasmus Obliquous. CV is a green microalgae, quite com-
mercialized as a dietary supplement because of its protein richness. Figure 2.1a shows
a picture of CV taken by microscope with a magnitude of 1000X. CV cells have a
rounded shape and have a size in the range of 2-5 µm. CR is also a green algae,
but larger, about 5-10 µm. It is quite an active microalgae that moves using its two
flagella situated on the front (see figure 2.1b). SO is also a green algae of around 2-5
µm that can be found as a single cell or in a more specific to its species organization,
as a coenobia or a multinucleate cell of four to eight cells inside a parental mother
wall (see figure 2.1c).
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti (strain CCAP 11/32A) and Chlorella Vulgaris (strain
CCAP 211/11B) were obtained from the Culture Collection of Algae and Protozoa
(CCAP). Scenedasmus Obliquous (strain UTEX 2016) was obtained from the Culture
Collection of Algae at University of Texas at Austin.
2.2
Cultivation of microalgae
Before starting the culturing of microalgae in brewery wastewater, an adequate con-
centration of their biomass is needed. Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii and Chlorella Vul-
garis was inoculated in EG-JM medium, recipe obtained from CCAP; while Scenedesmus
Obliquus was grown in Polytomella Medium, recipe from the University of Austin,
Texas.
2.2.1
EG-JM medium
EG-JM medium was prepared mixing equal proportions of two mediums, Euglena
gracilis Medium (EG), and Jawoeski’s Medium (JM).
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Materials and Method
(a) CV
(b) CR
(c) SO
Figure 2.1: Images taken with microscope (magnification of 1000X)
Euglena gracilis’ medium is meant for freshwater microalgae and protozoa. Table 2.1
shows the constituents of the medium per litre. They were combined with deionized
water and the mix was autoclaved at 120 ◦C for 30 minutes.
Table 2.1: Euglena Gracilis’ medium recipe
Components
Amount per litre
Sodium acetate trihydrate
1,0 g
”Lab_Lemco” powder (Oxoid L29)*
1,0g
Tryptone (Oxoid L42)*
2,0g
Yeast extract (Oxoid L21)*
2,0g
CaCl2 stock solution (1.0g/L)
10,0 mL
*Supplied by Unipath Ltd, Wade Road, Basingstoke, Hants RG24 OPW, UK
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Cultivation of microalgae
15
Jaworski’s Medium is designed for freshwater algae. Table 2.2 is a list of all the
stock solutions that comprise the medium. For one litre of medium, 1 mL of each
stock solution was added to deionized water. Subsequently, the solution was auto-
claved at 120 ◦C for 30 minutes.
Table 2.2: Jaworski’s medium recipe
Stocks
per 200 mL
(1) Ca(No3)2.4H2O
4,0 g
(2) KH2PO4
2,48g
(3) MgSO4.7H2O
10,0g
(4) NaHCO3
3,18g
(5) EDTAFeNa
0,45 g
EDTANa2
0,45 g
(6) H3BO3
0,496 g
MnCl2.4H2O
0,278 g
(NH4)6Mo7O24.4H2O
0,20 g
(7) Cyanocobalamin
0,008 g
Thiamine HCl
0,008 g
Biotin
0,008 g
(8) NaNO3
16,0 g
(9) Na2HPO4.12H2O
7,2 g
2.2.2
Polytomella Medium
This medium is suitable for all axenic cultures of Polytoma, Polytomellla and Astasia,
the colourless strains of Euglena and 2016 Scenedesmus Obliquus. Table 2.3 is a list
of the components that were added to 1L of dioinozed water. When ready, it was
autoclaved at 120 ◦C for 30 minutes.
Table 2.3: Polytomella’s medium recipe
Component
Amount
Yeast extract (Bacto, Difco)
1,0 g
Tryptose (Sigma T 9410)
1,0 g
Sodium acetate (Fisher BP 333)
2,0g
Throughout the whole project this procedure was repeated several times for mi-
croalgae maintenance. Minimum once a week each species was recultured in a newly
sterilized container with fresh media. For each container around 60 mL and a few
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Materials and Method
Figure 2.2: Inoculum of species in cultivation media stored in sterilized bottles
drops of microalgae was added. Figure 2.2 shows the sterilized bottles used for the
inoculation process.
2.3
Experimental Setup
2.3.1
Materials and equipment
A list of all the materials and electronic devices utilized during the whole progress of
the experiments is as follows:.
• 2L glass Flasks
• 3 port lid
• Autoclave
• Biological Safety cabinet ScanLaf Mars Labogene
• Cell counter Countess II FL
• Centrifuge, 50 ml tubes HeraeusT M MultifugeT M X3 Centrifuge and 250 mL
Avanti J 30I Beckman Coulter
• Digital Thermostat HT 200S
• Environmental Chamber for a controlled environment Aralab
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Experimental Setup
17
• Freeze Dryer CoolSafe Labogene
• Glass Microfiber filter disks
• Hach Wastewater Analysis Kits
• Metalic clamps
• Microscope 10X + 100X magnification lenses
• Pipetes 10, 5 and 1 mL, 200, 10 µ L
• Precision Balance (4 decimal places)
• Santoprene pump tubing 3,2 x 6,4 mm
• Spectrophotometer Hach DR 3900
• Sterilized falcon tubes, with and without stand of 50, 15 and 4 mL
• Sterilized Filters different diameters, 0,2 and 0,45 µm
• TSS oven Memmert UN30
• Universal Light meter Walz ULM-500
• Vortex Genie 2
• Vacuum desiccator Lab Companion
• Vacuum pump VacSafe Labogene
• Watson Marlow 323 Pumps
• Multi 3630 IDS digital meter for pH, conductivity and dissolved oxygen (DO)
measurements
In regard to the chemicals used, they are the following:
• Chemicals listed in section 2.2 for medium elaboration
• NH3Cl
• NaNO3
Different parameters were tested during the experiment such as hours of light ex-
posure, aeration and nitrogen sources.
The experiments were held in an incubator or biological safety cabinet. The incubator
is divided into 4 shaking platforms with space for up to 4 2L flasks each.The shak-
ing speed can be regulated as necessary. On each plataform there are tubes on the
ceiling to regulate the light intensity. The incubator can be programmed to adjust
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Materials and Method
light intensity and hours of light exposure per day. When using the light lamps, the
light intensity was always set to 100 %. This intensity or Photosynthetic Photon Flux
Density (PPFD) was measured with a light meter resulting in a range throughout the
height of the flask between 121,4 to 567,8 µmol m−2 s−1 ; which corresponds to an
interval of 8983,6 - 42017,2 LUX (Fitoclima 600-1200; Conversion - PPFD to Lux).
Temperature was also monitored and fixed to 25 ◦C during the whole extent of the
experimentation period. Figure 2.3a is a photo of the incubator used.
16 Watson Marlow pumps were placed next to the incubator to supply an airflow
to the microalgae cultures through a system of santoprene tubes (see figure 2.3b).
In regard to the bottles used, these are 2L laboratory flasks with special lids. The
lids have 3 ports or exit perforations, one as an air inlet, another an air outlet and
the final to take measurements(see figure 2.4). Long santoprene (polymer which can
stand high temperatures for autoclaving) tubes were connected to the inlet and the
sampling orifices reaching the bottom of the bottle. On the exterior part of the lid, a
tube for sampling and a tube bringing air from outside the incubator thanks to the
pump were attached.
In order to get sterilized conditions and avoid contamination, both the ports for air
exchange were topped with 0,45 µm filters.
The samples’ tube was secured with
metalic clamps that were opened only when taking measurements. Moreover, all ex-
periments were done using flasks, lids and tubing previously autoclaved at 100 ◦C for
(a) Microalgae incubator
(b) Pumping station
Figure 2.3: Experimental Setup
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Measurements
19
30 minutes.
Figure 2.4: 3 port lid, one sampling, one air imput and one air output. The sampling
tube is secured with a metallic clamp and the other ports are topped with 0,45 µm
filters
2.4
Measurements
A sensitivity analysis of different parameters was performed in order to find the
most eﬀicient combination of microalgae species, sterilization conditions, nitrogen
source, hours of light and aeration rate. To investigate the performance of these tests,
different measurements were carried out.
2.4.1
Cell counting
As a way to overview the microalgae biomass growth, samples of each bottle were
taken everyday (excluding weekends) and the number of cells was measured using the
cell counter Countess II FL. The cell counter counts all the cells in the sample and
identifies the cells with fluorescence, the microalgae cells. Figure 2.5 shows CV and
CR cell images taken with the cell counter.
2.4.2
Total Suspended Solids mesurements
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) corresponds to the amount of dry-weight of suspended
or dissolved particles.
Volatile suspended solids (VSS) represents the amount of
volatile or organic matter present in the sample, which theoretically is the microalgae
mass. An assumption was made in this study, supposing that the inorganic matter
that is present is negligible and therefore, TSS is equal to VSS.
For measurement, TSS filters were first heated in an oven at 105 ◦C for two hours.
This way, the possible moisture due to air contact is removed. The cool down of the
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Materials and Method
(a) CV cells under cell counter microscope
(b) CR cells under cell counter microscope
Figure 2.5: Examples of images taken with cell counter
filters was done in a vacuum desiccator which offers a dry environment to avoid the
remoisturing of the filters. One hour after, the filters were weighted and a sample of 2
mL from each flask was then pipeted into each glass microfiber filter using a vacuum
pump. Finally, the filters with biomass were reintroduced in the oven and heated up
for 2 hours at 105 ◦C. Following a cooling down of an hour in the desiccator filters
were weighed again. TSS is calculated as presented in formula 2.1
TSS(g/L) = Filter with biomass after oven (g) - Filter (g)
Volume of sample (0,002 L)
(2.1)
This measurement was performed twice a week, a total of 4 times per batch.
2.4.3
Wastewater characterization
As a means to follow the water quality enhancement, a wastewater characterization
was done twice a week for each batch. Hach wastewater analysis kits were used. COD,
total nitrogen (TN), nitrate, nitrite, ammonium and orthophosphate were measured.
It is important to point out that, orthophosphate was assumed as the total phosphate
of the sample, since the total phosphate measurements with the kit were showing
unrealistic values, usually lower than the orthophosphate ones. After contacting the
company, it was recommended the orthophosphate kit produced more reliable results.
20 mL samples were taken per bottle, then centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 8 minutes
to remove all microorganisms (microalgae and bacteria biomass) and were analysed
for all the chemical kits following the manufacturer’s procedure outlined.
These
measurements were done at least twice a week per batch. Dissolved oxygen (DO), pH
and conductivity were monitored at the same time.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Measurements
21
2.4.4
Lipids and protein content
In order to analyse the lipid and aminoacids content, microalgae must be harvested
from each batch.
The process consisted of centrifuging separately the suspended
microalgae of each flasks suficient speed such that at least 80% of the microorganisms
present in the sample precipitate to the bottom. The samples were centrifuged at
12500 rpm for 8 minutes. Following this, the supernatant or wastewater suspension
was discarded and the microalgae pellet saved. This process was to be done in several
steps, using 250 mL bottles centrifuge and, later, when the amount of liquid had
been reduced, a 50 mL falcon tubes centrifuge was used. This pellet was then frozen
using liquid nitrogen and as a final step it was stored in a freeze and dryer in order
to obtained the final sample (see figure 2.6). Samples for all the flasks containing
cultured microalgae were prepared.
They were sent to an external laboratory to
measure the lipid and protein content.
However, due to the short length of this
project, the data was not obtained on time to add and comment in this dissertation.
Figure 2.6: Harvested cells after freeze and dry procedure
2.4.5
Microbiology and organic acids analysis
An analysis of the microbiology community and organic acids present in the wastew-
ater at the end of the experiment was also meant to be included in this project. This
information could have cleared up many uncertainties regarding the nutrient removal
or the algae growth. To do so, after each batch, 50 mL falcon tubes of wastewater
with the suspended microalgae and bacteria were collected per reactor. These sam-
ples were sent to another laboratory to obtain results about the microbes present.
Other samples of the wastewater treated with microalgae were centrifuged and fil-
tered through 0,20 µm filters for organic acid measurements. Unfortunately,as for
the lipids and proteins, these results did not arrive on time enough to discuss them
in this project.
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Materials and Method
2.5
Experiment operation
Prior to the start of the experimentation concerning microalgae, a full wastewater
analysis was carried out. Carlsberg’s final discharge wastewater was found to have a
COD of around 6000 mg/L a total nitrogen of 45 mg/L and 19 mg/L for orthophos-
phate. In light of these results the plan was arranged.
The experiments were divided in a total of 4 batches of 12 days each. The total ex-
perimentation time started at the beginning of october and lasted till the third week
of January. For each batch, 16 biological reactors were prepared and tested except
batch 4 which consisted of 10 reactors.
As a first batch, a study of the collaboration between microalgae and bacteria
and its effects on the productivity was considered. In addition, a screening of differ-
ent species was carried out. Therefore, wastewater for half the total of reactors was
centrifuged and autoclaved on one hand, and three different algae species, Chlamy-
damonas Rheinardetti (CR)
Chlorella Vulgaris (CV), and Scenedasmus Obliquous
(SO), were separately inoculated in 1,5 L reactors with this sterilized wastewater; On
the other hand, the other half of wastewater was neither centrifuged, not autoclaved,
to keep all water-born bacteria as well as big particles coexisting with the microalgae
during the length of the experimentation. The autoclave process was set to 100 ◦C
for 30 minutes as done previously for the culture media sterilization.
Initial value for biomass concentration was set to 0,02 g/L and the N:P ratio fixed
to 9 per reactor. In this batch NH4+ in the form of NH4Cl was added to fix the N:P
ratio. However, human error lead to the addition of less NH4Cl than necessary. This,
together with many problems faced with pumps and tubing alongside the realisation
that the initial biomass was too small to see any statistically valid trend lead to the
decision of repeating the batch.
Batch 2 follows the same description as explained above, except for an increase in
the initial biomass, 0,4 mg/L and the correct addition of ammonium, generating an
experimental N:P ratio of 9,84. A fixed light/dark ratio was set to 12h as well as a
shaking frequency of 100 rpm and an air rate of 200 rpm (2,58 mL/s) The evaluation
of the wastewater cleaning eﬀiciency was completed by measuring COD, NH4+, NO−
3
and PO43−concentrations twice a week, and TSS and cell counting for biomass pro-
duction, twice a week and daily respectively.
In batch 3 a study of the interference of large particles suspended in wastewater
was investigated. During batch 2, a sudden increase of nutrients was observed by day
7. The hypothesis posed was the gradual hydrolysis of these particles being effective
by that day. Then, the consequent incorporation into the wastewater analysis would
have caused a rise of COD and nutrient values. Therefore, the same set of experi-
ments for the three different algae species was carried out, but in this case the water
was not autoclaved but centrifuged. The centrifuging velocity had to be below 10000
rpm in order to keep the existing bacteria and remove the large particles. In this case,
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Experiment operation
23
it was set to 4500 rpm for 8 minutes.
Also, an additional group of experiments was performed. Following results from batch
2 it was decided that Chlorella Vulgaris presented the best performance and was cho-
sen for further study. The variation of air pump rate was investigated, comparing one
lower and one higher rate, 100 and 400 rpm respectively. The rest of the parameters
were kept as in batch 2, ( light, shaking, N:P ratio) In this case the real N:P ratio
was measured as somewhat higher than before, 10,97. Two flasks were prepared with
a different kind of nitrogen source, NO−
3 , adding the right amount of NaNO3 to fit
the above N:P ratio.
The last batch was a continuation of the experiments for Chlorella Vulgaris. Results
from batch 3 showed an outstanding removal of NO−
3 , NH4+ and PO43−when NaNO3
was the added nitrogen source. As a way of assuring this conclusion, a repetition of
experiments with CV and NO−
3 addition for 200 rpm air rate, 12h light/dark cycle and
same N:P ratio was performed. Moreover, the light cycle was studied as an additional
parameter, preparing experiments for a 24 h dark cycle of 12 days (heterotrophic per-
formance of algae), and a first week of 24h dark cycle followed by a second week of 24h
light cycle. In all cases air pump rate was kept at 200 rpm and for the sterilization
process it was decided to continue with non-autoclaved but centrifuged samples. The
experimental N:P ratio was measured to be slightly higher than before, 11,35.
Finally it must be considered that the wastewater characteristics for this batch
changed to some extent. The wastewater was stored for weeks in a fridge and af-
ter holiday season COD had reduced to an average of 4700 mg/L and ammonium
had increased from 9 to 16 mg/L.
Control experiments were carried out in all four batches. A control environment con-
sisting of ammonium addition, 12h light cycle, 200 rpm air flow rate and sterilized
versus non-sterilized conditions. However, an absolute non-contamination was not
achieved. More explanation will be described in chapter 3.
The variation of pH was measured during the experiments, however it was not con-
trolled. It was allowed to fluctuate naturally during the whole extent of the experi-
ments. It was just fixed at the start to 7 by addition of HCl and NaNO3.
All experiments were performed in duplicate.
The raw values were studied using
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), to visualize the deviations of the average values. A
summary of the experiments carried out is presented in the appendix (chapter 6).
appendix.
==PAGE:38==
24
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Results and Discussion
This section pretends to be a description of the figures presented as well as a summary
and contrast of the relevant results found. The research carried out in this study is
divided in sections according to the biotic or abiotic parameter screened.
3.1
Selection of optimal microalgae species and
wastewater pretreatment
As a first step, a selection of the most eﬀicient microalgae strand, in terms of wastewa-
ter treatment and biomass production, is discussed in the following lines. Moreover, 2
different wastewater pretreatments and their influence in the microalgae performance
were assessed. For these experiments the air rate was set to 200 rpm and the microal-
gae were exposed to a light cycle of 12h day/light. The N:P ratio was fixed to 9,84
for autoclaved centrifuged samples and for non-autoclaved non-centrifuged samples
and to 10,97 for non-autoclaved centrifuged samples.
3.1.1
Wastewater Analysis
The wastewater treatment eﬀiciency was assesed observing the removal of 5 different
parameters, COD, NO−
3 , NH4+ and PO43−. Nitrite (NO−
2 ) concentration was also
monitored, however the initial levels in this wastewater are almost 0, and this value
is maintained throughout the whole process.
Figure 3.1 is a comparison of the COD removal for different species and differ-
ent pretreatment of the wastewater.
A pretreatment of autoclave and centrifuge
represented with an A and graphically with a circle; without pretreatment (neither
Autoclaved nor Centrifuged) represented with NANC and with a star; and not auto-
claved but centrifuged pretreatment represented with NAC and a triangle. Overall
these findings are in accordance with the theoretical expectations where a consor-
tia between wastewater born bacteria and microalgae facilitates the elimination of
organic matter. The oxygen released by microalgae during photosynthesis is then
used by bacteria to oxidize COD. However, it must be pointed out that,in the long
run, the removal in autoclaved wastewater reaches the one of non-autoclaved. This
is a clear proof of the heterotrophic performance of microalgae, where, although at
==PAGE:40==
26
3 Results and Discussion
a slower rate than bacteria, microalgae can uptake organic matter from the media
they are in. In regard to these findings, it must be considered, that the starting point
for COD to represent the data is taken as an average of all the values obtained at
day 0 for each flask. Nonetheless, initial COD found in the autoclaved samples, was
higher than the one measured in non-autoclaved wastewater. This can be explained
as a break-down of elements into more organic matter due to the high temperature
reached in the autoclave process. Thar is the reason for the peak seen for day 2 in all
autoclaved samples.
Figure 3.1:
COD Concentration in mg/L. (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged,
NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Centrifuged) 200
rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle and NH4+ as the externally added nitrogen source.
Comparing non-autoclaved but centrifuged (NAC) and non-autoclaved nor cen-
trifuged (NANC), results for the experiments done with the raw water saw a faster
COD removal on the first days, until day 7 where NAC reach the same eﬀiciency .
This could be explained since the amount of initial cells for NAC experiments was
lower (see section 3.1.2). With lower amount of cells to do photosynthesis, the re-
moval logically, will lower as well.
The highest removal eﬀiciency is 93,156± 0,031 % for CR after 5 days followed by
scenedasmus. By day 7, all the other species have reached this removal with the
exception of the autoclaved samples (A).
Figure 3.2 represents the ammonium removal eﬀiciency for different conditions.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Selection of optimal microalgae species and wastewater pretreatment
27
Figure 3.2: Ammonium Removal Eﬀiciency in % (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged,
NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Centrifuged) (Ini-
tial concentrations, 115,9 mg/L for A and NANC and 190,47 mg/L for NAC) 200
rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle and NH4+ as the externally added nitrogen source.
Same symbols and representation is used than in the previous graph. Best removal
rates are found for autoclaved samples which, with the exception of SO, achieve re-
movals over 80% for ammonium after 5 days. Best results are for autoclaved CV
with 100% removal after 5 days. Microbiology tests done for Carlsberg’s wastewater
showed the non-existance of nitrifying bacteria. Hence, ammonium removal must be
done by microalgae exclusively. Even though it cannot be assumed that microalgae
remove less ammonium in presence of bacteria, it makes sense to suppose that their
level of activity might be subjected to them. A domination of bacteria could diﬀicult
microalgae’s performance.
Another interesting finding discovered in this batch of results is the appearance of
a peak by day 5 or 7 in the experiments done with non-autoclaved nor centrifuged
wastewater. This peak is specially visible in the concentrations of NH4+ and PO43−
and a little less in NO−
3 (see figure 3.3 ). The main hypothesis proposed, was the hy-
drolisis of particles. In other words, there was a presence of suspended inorganic par-
ticles at the beginning of the experiments that after a week, hydrolysed and dissolved
in the water. Therefore, at the start, measurements of NH4+, NO−
3 and PO43−would
not consider this extra inorganic matter. Instead, they would show an unrealistic de-
==PAGE:42==
28
3 Results and Discussion
crease in concentration that would suddenly rocket by day 7 when the particles were
dissolved and included in the measurements. In order to prove this hypothesis, the
experiments were repeated for the same species and conditions but the non-sterilized
wastewater was centrifuged prior to the experiments. (NAC samples in the graphs).
Figures 3.3 and 3.2 show the persistence of a concentration peak in the case of NAC
experiments. In this case the peaks appear to be smoother; this could suggest that
the assumption of hydrolysis is valid, but the removal of particles was not performed
successfully and some percentage stayed in the water.
Figure 3.3: Orthophosphate Concentration in mg/L (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged,
NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Centrifuged) 200
rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle and NH4+ as the externally added nitrogen source.
Another possibility to explain this phenomenon could be some sort of release of
nutrients in the presence of certain conditions like lack of oxygen or nutrients in the
media, domination of bacteria or simply, the microalgaes’ death. Both in Martınez
et al. 2000 ,Delgadillo-Mirquez et al. 2016 an increase of phosphate in the media
was found after around 6 -7 days of culturing.
In Delgadillo-Mirquez et al. 2016
microscopic analysis revealed a rupture and whitening of cells releasing phosphate
with it. It was related to the culture becoming old.
This theory could match with the results obtained in the current study, since, at day
7 a decrease in cell number is also seen (results will be presented in section 3.1.2).
Moreover, non-autoclaved non-centrifuged (NANC) experiments for CV cells were
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Selection of optimal microalgae species and wastewater pretreatment
29
pre-cultured in growth media for an average of 10,3 days, while NAC just for 6,3
days. Therefore, a potential aging of cells could have caused this rupture and release
of nutrients. However, the microscopic examination of the cells was not carried out
and therefore, it cannot be concluded with 100% certainty that this is the reason
for the nutrient removal trend. Finally, the last possibility not discussed but also
valid is simple human failure.
Every batch consisted on 16 reactors.
Every time
samples were taken for wastewater analysis 16 falcon tubes were filled up with 20mL
of sample. This process is slow since the flasks must be well mix and some tubes must
be removed due to the build up pressure inside the flasks. The longer the time to
take the samples, the longer bacteria and microalgae can be affecting the wastewater
characterization. Also, after centrifugation, the evaluation of the water is done using
wastewater analysis kits, that require adding small amounts of different chemicals
in a systematic way. This method has been done for many years and it is known
as being quite effective, however, the time lapse between the addition of chemicals,
the heating of the cubets, etc., will affect the final result. It is reasonable to think
that in an experiment with so many samples, there might be mistakes. Moreover, it
could also be a bad mixing of the 1,5L reactor before taking the sample leading the
measurement of the wrong concentration. Further studies should be carried out in
this matter.
Figure 3.4:
Nitrate Concentration in mg/L (A: Autoclaved and Centrifuged,
NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved yes Centrifuged) 200
rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle, NH4+ as the externally added nitrogen source.
==PAGE:44==
30
3 Results and Discussion
All in all, phosphate concentration figure 3.3, with the exception of SO autoclaved,
achieves removal rates of the order of 70-80 % by day 5. Therefore,if the experiment
is stopped at this point, there would be no specific advantage for sterilized or non-
sterilized conditions.
Figure 3.4 represents the concentration of nitrate throughout the experiments. The
initial concentration of nitrate in this water is not very high and it just fluctuates
around this value throughout the course of the experiments. A better removal is seen
for NAC reaching a maximum of 40,885 % for SO NAC. The findings are directly in
line with previous studies that suggest the preference of ammonium before nitrate
(García-Fernández, Marsac, and Diez 2004). Further analysis of this mechanism is
explained in section 3.3.
Finally, it seems important to point out the behaviour of SO autoclaved. In all dia-
grams presented previously, it shows a noticeable peak of increase in concentration.
During the experimentation stage, this flask in particular, showed an unhealthy look.
Although this species is naturally yellow, it was more brownish than normal; the
microalgae cells were quite clustered and the wastewater samples showed a lot of
turbidity. These aspects added to a very low cell number, raise concerns about the
possible contamination of the experiment.
3.1.2
Biomass production
In regard to the microalgae growth, figure 3.5, shows the cell growth for the different
species at different conditions.
A cell counter is used for this purpose. It receives the chlorophyll or fluorescence
emitted by each cell, quantifying them.. In some cases, the cells can be conglomerated,
therefore one only beam identified by the cell counter could correspond to hundreds of
cells. All in all except some cases such as CR A at day 2 and 12, CR NANC also at day
12 and CV NAC at day 0, show a reasonable trend, where it is visible a lag-phase that
lasts until day 2, then an exponential growth up to day 7 and a consequent decrease.
This slope means that the cell counter is not receiving fluorescence from the cells,
which could be due to the cells dying or at least, being unhealthy. It is interesting
to note that this decline of cell number appears at the same time as the nutrient
concentration peak. It seems coherent to assume both facts are related. However, as
mentioned before, it is unclear how this decease of microalgae would translate into a
release of nutrients.
It is also visible, that the start of the experiments is not exactly the same for all
species. In theory, a calculated volume of cells was introduced in each reactor with
the objective of having an initial TSS of 0,4 g/L. However, as shown in the graph,
species CV A and NANC have a larger biomass at the beginning of the experiment.
As mentioned in the wastewater results above, this could explain why better removals
are seen for CV NANC compared to NAC.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Selection of optimal microalgae species and wastewater pretreatment
31
Figure 3.5: Cell growth for the different species and conditions (A: Autoclaved and
Centrifuged, NANC:Not Autoclaved nor Centrifuged; NAC: Not Autoclaved but Cen-
trifuged) 200 rpm air rates, 12h D/L cycle
Maximum biomass production was calculated as the difference between the highest
TSS measurement and the theoretical TSS for day 0 (0,4g/L). Results are presented
in table 3.1
SPECIES &
PRETREATMENT
MAX. BIOMASS
PRODUCTION (g/L)
STD
CV A
1,55
0,175
CV NANC
1,225
0,325
CV NAC
0,75
0
SO A
1,125
0,225
SO NaNC
0,875
0,075
SO NAC
0,65
0,1
CR A
1,025
0,125
CR NANC
0,675
0,025
CR NAC
0,725
0,075
Table 3.1: Maximum biomass production as the difference between the maximum
TSS reached and the theoretical initial TSS (0,4g/L) [g/L]
==PAGE:46==
32
3 Results and Discussion
Best biomass productions are for the autoclaved samples and CV shows the best
growth in comparison to the rest of the species with a maximum of 1,55 ± 0,175 g/L
for CV in autoclaved and centrifuged wastewater.
(a) COD Concentration for 12 days of ex-
periment
(b) NH4+ Removal eﬀiciency (Initial concen-
trations, 115,9 mg/L for A and NANC and
190,47 mg/L for NAC
(c) PO4
3−Concentration for 12 days of ex-
periment
(d) NO−
3 Concentration for 12 days of ex-
periment
Figure 3.6: Influence of parameters like air flow rate and kind of pre-treatment on COD
and nutrient removal for Chlorella Vulgaris with NH4+ as additional nitrogen source and a
light cycle of 12h L/D.
3.2
Selection of optimal air flow rate
The results above show, as a general conclusion, a better performance of species CV in
terms of biomass production and wastewater treatment. In regard, to the kind of pre-
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Selection of optimal air flow rate
33
treatment, a sterilization or autoclave of the wastewater results in a better NH4+ re-
moval and biomass production. However, the non-autoclaved but centrifuged wastew-
ater pretreatment achieves better COD removal, and values for phosphate,ammonium
and nitrate as low as sterilized experiments if the experiment is subjected to a du-
ration of 5-7 days. Moreover, the biomass production is at its highest peak by that
time and it is a satisfactory amount. Therefore, a second study using CV species in a
non-sterilized but centrifuged wastewater is performed. This time considering same
light cycle but assessing different flow rates. Figure 3.6 shows a comparison of the
COD and nutrient removal for the new air flows, 100 and 400 rpm and the initial one,
200 rpm.
Figure 3.7: Influence of parameters like air flow rate and kind of pretreatment on the
cell growth for Chlorella Vulgaris
The outcome of pumping air at a higher rate, implies a faster oxidation and re-
moval of COD, obtaining a removal of 89,249 ± 0,5741 % with 400 rpm in 4 days;
however, the same removal is reached for a 200 or 100 rpm air rate if the duration of
the experiment prolongs to 7 days.
In regard to ammonium, a higher aeration promotes a faster removal, however, ster-
ilization of the water, as mentioned in section 3.1.1, seems the best option to obtain
the highest removal, even at a lower air rate. If a sterilization step is unwanted, a
total of 12 days are needed to reach a removal of 70 %. As to phosphate removal,
==PAGE:48==
34
3 Results and Discussion
figure 3.6c, shows that similar eﬀiciencies are obtained no matter the rate. This could
suggest that microalgae’s uptake of phosphate is better in less aerobic environments.
Tang et al. 2016 found a better removal of TP at lower aeration rates. Regarding
to nitrate concentration, aeration does not affect considerably on its removal. None
of the rates would reach better removals than 30-40%. Finally, figure 3.7 shows the
cell growth for the different air flow rates. A higher flow rate implies a faster cell
growth, reaching 4,341E+07 ± 1,305E+06 cells/µL for 400 rpm. This corresponds to
a maximum biomass production of 1 ± 0,05 g/L by day 12 compared to 0,75 for Cv
at 200 rpm.
3.3
Preferred nitrogen source by Chlorella Vulgaris
At this point, an optimal implementation of a wastewater treatment with microalgae,
seems to direct towards the use of CV as the species, non-autoclaved but centrifuged
wastewater as pretreatment, and an air flow rate of 200 or 400 rpm depending on the
application. If the target is a higher biomass production, a 400 rpm air pump rate
would be recommended,although it would also entail higher operational costs. On the
other hand, if the process is more focused on an economical way to treat wastewater,
200 rpm air rate would be enough since not much difference is seen in the nutrient
removal at the different air rates. With this in mind, another set of experiments
was carried out with 200 rpm air rate, CV as species, non-autoclaved but centrifuged
wastewater and a 12h light dark cycle. The new parameter to evaluate in this case
was the nitrogen source, so instead of NH4+, NO−
3 was added.
Figure 3.8 presents the removal of the main wastewater parameters concerning
this research. COD removal is not affected substantially when the nitrogen source
added is modified.
Both for NH4+ and NO−
3 cases, it reaches up to around 90%
(88,536 ± 2,602 % by day 7 and 90,706 ± 0,442 % by day 5 respectively). However,
for the nutrients removal study the results are outstanding when NO−
3 is added. In
regard to NH4+ and NO−
3 , a removal of 100% is reached within the first two days. No
concentration peak is seen whatsoever. In terms of phosphate removal, the maximum
removal is not seen until day 12 with a 77%. Nevertheless the removal by day 5 is
already reaching a value of 72,794 ± 1,974 %, a unit higher than when NH4+ was
added as nitrogen source.
These promising results challenge, what was a priori expected. As mentioned in sec-
tion 3.1.1 literature claims the preferability of microalgae towards the uptake of NH4+
before NO−
3 .
Microalgae can absorb directly the cation ammonium or, in a small percentage, its
gas form, ammonia, can easily diffuse through the membrane’s wall (Boussiba and
Gibson 1991). Either way its directly transformed into aminoacids and used for the
cell’s metabolism (Perez-Garcia et al. 2011).
On the other hand,the process of assimilation of nitrate by microalgae follows various
steps. First, nitrate is absorbed into the cell. Within the cell the reduction of nitrate
to nitrite is carried out by the nitrate reductase enzyme and consequently, the nitrite
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Preferred nitrogen source by Chlorella Vulgaris
35
(a) COD removal eﬀiciency (%) for 12 days
of experiment Initial concentrations, 4745,5
mg/L for purple 5225,2 mg/L for blue
(b) NH4+ Removal eﬀiciency (%) for 12 days
of experiment (Initial concentrations, 16,5
mg/L for purple 190,47 mg/L for blue)
(c) PO4
3−Removal eﬀiciency (%) for 12
days of experiment Initial concentrations,
19,5 mg/L for purple 21,34 mg/L for blue
(d) NO−
3 Removal eﬀiciency (%) for 12 days
of experiment Initial concentrations, 183,8
mg/L for purple 2,216 mg/L for blue
Figure 3.8: Influence of the nitrogen source added NH4+, NO−
3 in wastewater NAC using
CV microalgae at 200 rpm air rate and a 12h L/D cycle.
reductase enzyme transforms it into ammonium. Finally, glutamine synthetase and
glutamate synthetase transform it into aminoacids (Yang, Hua, and Shimizu 2000 ;
Kim, Lee, and Hwang 2013). This pathway is energetically more demanding, whereas
the assimilation of ammonium is much easier (García-Fernández, Marsac, and Diez
2004).
This conclusion is almost unanimously spread throughout the literature found. How-
ever some articles raise certain questions about its absolute truth.
In Ohmori, Ohmori, and Strotmann 1977 a study of the generally known inhibition of
ammonium towards nitrate uptake, found that when relatively high concentrations of
==PAGE:50==
36
3 Results and Discussion
nitrate were added in comparison with the ammonium concentration present in the
media, an inhibition of ammonium uptake happened instead. A similar pattern can
be withdrawn from the results found in the current study. The experiments done with
addition of ammonium, where just a small amount of nitrate was present, showed the
almost exclusive intake of ammonia as nitrogen source. On the other hand, when the
nitrogen source added was nitrate and the ratio between nitrate and ammonium was
11:1 the uptake of nitrate was effective. It is unclear whether the uptake of nitrate
or ammonium was first or both occurred at the same time. Nevertheless it seems to
suggest a possible competition between both processes.
Figure 3.9: Comparison of biomass production between a media rich in NH4+ and in
NO−
3 expressed in number of cells per µL
Another possible explanation commented both in Hellebust and Ahmad 1989 and
Collos 1989 is the influence of environmental conditions such as carbon dioxide avail-
ability, for the inclination to one nitrogen compound or the other.
Both studies
found that a limitation in carbon dioxide reduces the inhibition of nitrate uptake by
ammonium. Unfortunately, carbon dioxide was not monitored in the course of this
research, therefore, no link can be drawn in this matter. All in all, these last studies
mentioned, date from the early 90s and they cannot be used as an absolute argument
for the outcome of the results found. Further research should be done in regard to
the mechanisms of nitrate and ammonium uptake by microalgae.
A similar pattern of results was obtained when looking into the biomass production.
Figure 3.9 compares the number of cells measured for the 12 days of experiment
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Mixotrophic versus heterotrophic performance
37
for the flasks with addition of NH4+ and with NO−
3 . A maximum of 3,65E+07 ±
1,90E+06 cells/µL is seen when using NO−
3 by day 7. This is 30 % more than when
using NH4+. This corresponds to a maximum biomass production of 1,65 ± 0,05
g/L. Certain studies mention a potential negative effect of relatively low concentra-
tions of NH4+ in the growth of microalgae. As explained above, microalgae uptake
ammonium by transportation mechanisms, however, free ammonia can just diffuse
through their membrane walls without control and it has been proved that it can
cause damage in the microalgae’s photosynthetic metabolism.Therefore, if the pH of
the media is above the pka of ammonium (9,25) the dominant form will be ammonia,
affecting negatively in the growth of the microalgae (Park et al. 2010; Markou, Van-
damme, and Muylaert 2014). Nevertheless, pH was measured throughout the process
and it was naturally fluctuating between 7-9 which should be an adequate interval
for microalgae’s growth.
From this standpoint and solely considering the results obtained it can be concluded
that Chlorella Vulgaris shows a better performance in environments rich in nitrate
than in ammonium. Further studies should be carried out to clear the specific expla-
nations for this outcome.
3.4
Mixotrophic versus heterotrophic performance
Finally a screening of different photoperiods (duration of continuous illumination
applied on a 24 hour period) was carried out. Using as fixed parameters the best ones
found in the previous experiments. That is, NO−
3 as additional inorganic nitrogen
source; non-autoclaved but centrifuged pretreatment of wastewater; CV as microalgae
species and finally 200 rpm as air flow rate. Two mixotrophic cultivations were carried
out: 1) 12 hours light 12 hours dark cycle (dark green and sphere shape in figure 3.10);
2) First week of 24 hours darkness so the microalgae would behave heterotrophically
and second week of 24h light for them to act photosinthetically (light green and
triangle shape in figure 3.10). And a just heterotrophic cultivation with 24 hours
darkness (yellow and square shape in figure 3.10).
All in all, the three conditions show outstanding performance. Ammonium and
nitrate are removed completely by day 2 whereas COD reaches an 88-90 % by day
5. By this time values of 60-70 % are obtained in regard to phosphate removal in all
cases.
The excelling COD removal is the most unexpected result. Higher removal values
would have been predicted for the experiments done with 24 hours darkness. This
experiment design requires the microalgae to act exclusively as heterotrophs, hence,
together with bacteria, they would uptake COD at a faster yield than in a mixotrophic
cultivation where just half of the time they need COD to grow. This results could
be explained different ways. Maybe, the aeration together with bacterial activity are
actually responsible for most of the the oxidation of organic matter and microalgae do
not highly contribute. This explanation would suggest that the use of microalgae to
treat wastewater with a COD charge would necessary need the consortia of bacteria.
==PAGE:52==
38
3 Results and Discussion
(a) COD Concentration for 12 days of ex-
periment
(b) NH4+ Removal eﬀiciency. (Initial con-
centration of 16,5 mg/L)
(c) PO4
3−Concentration for 12 days of ex-
periment
(d) NO−
3 Concentration for 12 days of ex-
periment
Figure 3.10: Comparison of 3 kinds of light cycle, 2 mixotrophic (12h light/12h Dark; 1st
week dark 24h/2nd week light 24h) and an heterotrophic with 24h dark. Fixed parameters,
200 rpm air rate, NAC wastewater and NO−
3 as additional source for a N:P ratio of 11,35.
This theory would contradict previous work done at the beginning of this research
where COD removal was seen in autoclaved samples unless the autoclaving was not
done succesfully. This will be further discussed in section 3.5.
Another argumentation for similar COD reduction with mixotrophic and heterotrophic
conditions would be the production of oxygen during the photosynthetic activity of
microalgae in mixotrophic conditions. The more oxygen produced, the more oxygen
available to reduce COD. This argument is found as well in Mata et al. 2012 and Lee
and Lee 2001 found similar COD removal for mixotrophic and autotrophic conditions.
In regard to the influence of the light conditions in ammonium and nitrate uptake,
in general former research has described a quicker uptake in the presence of light like
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Mixotrophic versus heterotrophic performance
39
in Lee and Lee 2001 experiments. This is not the case of the present results where
ammonium and nitrate assimilation is as fast as two days and for all the lighting con-
ditions. Diverse papers like Hellebust and Ahmad 1989, Perez-Garcia et al. 2011 or
Rigano et al. 1998 claim that the nutritional condition of the cell affects its behaviour
and assimilation of nutrients. Meaning that cells which are nitrogen suﬀicient uptake
rapidly nitrogen sources in light environments. However, if there is a situation of ni-
trogen starvation or low nitrogen status, experiments have shown rapid uptake rates
in dark conditions following this starvation period.
Figure 3.11: Influence of light exposure in cell growth and pH of the wastewater for
Chlorella Vulgaris
This theory could be applied to this research assuming that the pre-culturing stage
of microalgae was too long, therefore consuming all nitrogen sources and experiencing
a stage of starvation right before being recultured in the wastewater medium.
Another hypothesis is the microalgae adaptation to a new environment. During the
pre-culturing stage, algae were exposed to a 12h light/dark cycle.
The switch to
heterotrophic metabolism might not be instantaneous. Mata et al. 2012 explains the
direct relation between dark respiration rates and the previous light history, and con-
firms that these rates are higher when algae have had a previous high illumination
exposure.
Phosphate removal is the only one that shows some differences between light condi-
tions. Best removal happens with 12h light/dark period followed by the experiments
done with one week of complete darkness and another week of complete illumination.
==PAGE:54==
40
3 Results and Discussion
In this case, a sharper slope is found during the dark week than during the contin-
uous light week. Dark conditions seem to be favorable for phosphate removal up to
day 5 where the concentration of phosphate increases dramatically. This peak could
be explained as in section 3.1.1, with a rupture of cells and consequent release of
phosphate to the media. Lee and Lee 2001 also carried out experiments comparing
autotrophic and mixotrophic performance and, in relation to phosphate removal, a
better assimilation by microalgae was found in mixotrophic conditions rather than
continuous light. These results could suggest the need of an heterotrophic phase in
phosphate uptake but in a mixotrophic cycle. All in all, more research is necessary
to understand the mechanisms of phosphate uptake and metabolism as well as the
influence of abiotic conditions such as ph, chemical compounds’ concentration, light
duration and intensity, etc.
Finally, an assessment of the biomass production was carried out. Figure 3.11 repre-
sents the number of cells growth throughout the experiments. It compares it directly
with the ph evolution in the media. As it can be seen, the best growth is achieved
alternating light and dark. In Liang, Sarkany, and Cui 2009 similar results are found
for the same species when comparing mixotrophic and heterotrophic performance.
Light stimulated growth but a light dark cycle gives better results than continuous
light. A mixotrophic growth can reduce the impact of biomass loss during respiration.
In this figure is possible to relate pH increase with microalgae growth. It is specially
visible in experiment two, where on week one, the growth is almost stable, just as for
pH, which fluctuates between 7-8. Then, on week 2, the growth abruptly increases at
the same time as the pH shoots up reaching values of 10,2. As explained in Martınez
et al. 2000 microalgal growth can cause an increase in pH due to the uptake of CO2
from the environment, or by the excretion of basic metabolites from biodegradation
of COD.
Moreover, this graph shows proof of a previously explained theory, the acclimatiza-
tion of microalgae. In all lines, a similar growth can be seen in the first two days.
This means that probably algae which are being subjected to a dark experiment still
have not adapted to this environment and continue functioning as photo synthesizers.
After 2 days, the experiments 2 and 3 stabilize and just experiment 1 continuous with
an exponential growth.
In this last part of the discussion would have been interesting to include an analysis
of the lipids and protein formation during mixotrophic and heterotrophic condition
but this data did not arrive on time to be examined. Nevertheless is possible to have
an idea of the impact of the culture method of microalgae for certain applications just
looking at the algae culture itself. Figure 3.12 is a picture taken of the 6 experiments
done in the influence of light exposure. From left to right the first two are samples
from the reactors subjected to a 12h light/dark cycle; the next two are the ones where
there was a first week under 24 hours dark conditions and a second week of 24 hours
of continuous light; And the last two on the right are the ones that experienced exclu-
sively darkness. As it can be seen, the green colour exponentially decreases from left
to right. As explained in Lowrey, Brooks, and McGinn 2015 heterotrophic cultiva-
tion can diminish the pigmentation of the cells. This phenomena as explained during
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Control experiments
41
Figure 3.12: Influence of light exposure in cell pigment for Chlorella Vulgaris
the introduction must be considered when choosing the applications of interest since
many phytochemicals of the microalgae cells depend in this pigmentation and they
are one of the most interesting products from an economical point of view.
3.5
Control experiments
During all the batches carried out in this study a set of control experiments were
done.
Two control reactors with autoclaved water and two control reactors with
non-autoclaved non-centrifuged water.In batches 3 and 4 the wastewater of the non-
autoclaved controls was also centrifuged.
During the first 3 batches, controls were treated as the rest of the reactors. Everyday
measurements of cell number were done to ensure no contamination was happening.
In addition, two times per week a wastewater characterization was done to see that
no major changes in the chemical content of the wastewater for the autoclaved con-
trols had occurred. However, in all first 3 batches, at some point in the experiment,
measurements were found showing a small percentage of algae in at least one of the
control reactors and a noticeable removal of nutrients.
As a result, on the fourth batch, another approach was carried out. Samples of control
batches were taken exclusively at the beginning and the end of the experimentation.
This way any possible contamination would be reduced. In this case, samples for
microalgae cell counting turned out to be negative but there was still a small percent-
age of nutrient removal in the autoclaved bottes. This suggests, that the autoclaving
process did not succeed and certain wastewater born bacteria survived the steriliza-
tion process. A future improvement of this study would be to raise the autoclave
temperature from 100 ◦C to 120 ◦C instead.
==PAGE:56==
42
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
An assessment of certain microalgae species and the viability of using them to treat
brewery wastewater was carried out. The analysis included not just the election of
the most effective strand but also the evaluation of certain biotic and abiotic factors
such as wastewater pretreatment, aeration rate, nitrogen source addition for N:P
ratio fixation and the influence of different photoperiods. From the results of these
experiments a series of conclusions can be withdrawn :
• The use of non-autoclaved wastewater can be a good option in the wastewater
treatment with microalgae since a consortia with bacteria allows to a better
nutrient removal especially with COD. However, the biomass production for
autoclaved wastewater is 20% larger than for non-autoclaved one. The decision
of autoclaving or not should be taken upon the priorities and interests of the
company pursuing this new technology.
On one hand, if the company just
wants to clean their brewery wastewater in the most economically way while
treating it as eﬀiciently as possible, not autoclaving the wastewater would be
the best option. On the other hand, if the company is more interested in the
profit of the new by-product, then autoclaving will ensure not just a higher
biomass production but also, it will open to more lines of sales. Assuring a
sterilized process means the possibility of using the microalgae for cosmetic and
food products which are the most profitable applications of microalgae at the
moment.
•
Chlorella Vulgaris (CV) presents the best results in terms of finding a com-
promise between wastewater treatment and biomass production in comparison
with the other two species studied.
• Higher air rates, seem to be a good option for biomass production optimization.
Nevertheless, the wastewater treatment is not hugely affected by this extra ad-
dition of air. Best results are seen in COD removal. Moreover, the process
operation costs will be increased and the results presented show a similar re-
moval with a medium aeration rate when the process was extended for 7-12
days. Ultimately, is a matter of prioritizing costs or time consumption.
• Regarding the best nitrogen source, nitrate presented the best removal eﬀiciency
for all nutrients and best growth rates. This is not what was a priori expected.
As thoroughly discussed in the results section, ammonium is usually preferred
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Conclusion
by microalgae as the inorganic nitrogen source. However, certain hypothesis
about nutrient competition and dominance of one nitrogen source over another
could explain the outcome of this results. Further study and experimentation
of the nitrogen uptake by microalgae should be carried out.
• In relation with the best culturing method of microalgae Chlorella Vulgaris it
seems that mixotrophic conditions would be the optimal. During this experi-
ments it was also prooved, that microalgae need an acclimatization or adapta-
tion phase everytime the light conditions are modified.
• With a mixotrophic cultivation of 12h light dark cycle and nitrate as nitro-
gen source added, a removal of 90-100% for COD, ammonium and nitrate was
achieved by day 5, while for phosphate it reached up to 70% during the same
period of time. The maximum biomass production was of 1,65 g/L in 5 days,
which corresponds to an increase of 3 times in relation with the initial TSS
concentration.
Comparing these values with previous studies like Farooq et
al. 2013 that cultivated Chlorella Vulgaris in a single stage photoautotrophic
cultivation reaching a biomass of 1.5 g/L or Usha et al. 2016 which cultured
Scenedesmus sp. in a pulp and paper mill effluent reducing nitrate a 65% and
phosphate to 71,3%, it can be concluded that the continuation of this research
could have promising results.
All in all, this study faced some results which cannot be explained with 100%
certainty hence, further research should be carried out to assure the validity of them.
Nevertheless, it can be confirmed, that the production of microalgae with brewery
wastewater and its consequent treatment has a high potential of success.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Future Perspectives
This research was carried out as a master thesis, where a period of only 5 months
was available to carry out all the experiments, treat the data and discuss the results.
Therefore, further work is certainly required to disentangle complexities found on the
way.
• First of all, a completion of the lipids and proteins analysis should be carried
out in order to obtain more specific properties of the microalgae cultured and
their possible applications.
• More studies are necessary to elucidate the mechanisms of nitrogen and phospho-
rus uptake by microalgae. An evaluation of certain external factors that could
affect them, such as chemical compounds, pH, light exposure or temperature
would help to further understand the results found. In addition theories like
microalgae starvation and competition of nutrients should be further studied
and tested.
• Moreover, the microbial analysis of the wastewater after microalgae treatment
could also help in this matter.
• In regard to the extension of the parameters studied, an additional one could
be the experimentation with different N:P ratios in the wastewater and their
preference by microalgae.
• A limitation of the current study was the inability to start the experiments at
exactly the same biomass concentration. This might have affected the perfor-
mance of the cells. As a future improvement, better methods for calculating
the amount of cells to add per reactor should be performed.
• Also, pH influence and monitoring in this experiment would be interesting.
• The final objective would be the adaptation from batch mode to continuous
operation and the progressive upscaling of the experiments.
==PAGE:60==
46
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
Ahn, Young-Ho (2006). “Sustainable nitrogen elimination biotechnologies: a review”.
In: Process Biochemistry 41.8, pp. 1709–1721 (cit. on p. 2).
Andersen, Robert A (2005). Algal culturing techniques. Elsevier (cit. on p. 2).
Bhatnagar, Ashish et al. (2011). “Renewable biomass production by mixotrophic algae
in the presence of various carbon sources and wastewaters”. In: Applied Energy
88.10, pp. 3425–3431 (cit. on p. 9).
Bilanovic, Dragoljub, Mark Holland, and Robert Armon (2012). “Microalgal CO2
sequestering-modeling microalgae production costs”. In: Energy conversion and
management 58, pp. 104–109 (cit. on p. 4).
Boussiba, Sammy and Jane Gibson (1991). “Ammonia translocation in cyanobacteria”.
In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews 8.1, pp. 1–14 (cit. on p. 34).
Caetano, Nídia S et al. (2014). “Spent coffee grounds for biodiesel production and
other applications”. In: Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy 16.7, pp. 1423–
1430 (cit. on p. 6).
Cantrell, Keri B et al. (2008). “Livestock waste-to-bioenergy generation opportuni-
ties”. In: Bioresource technology 99.17, pp. 7941–7953 (cit. on p. 6).
Capros, Pantelis et al. (2016). “EU Reference Scenario 2016-Energy, transport and
GHG emissions Trends to 2050.” In: (cit. on p. 5).
Carvalho, João CM et al. (2014). “Microalgae bioreactors”. In: Algal biorefineries.
Springer, pp. 83–126 (cit. on p. 8).
Chen, Feng (1996). “High cell density culture of microalgae in heterotrophic growth”.
In: Trends in biotechnology 14.11, pp. 421–426 (cit. on pp. 6–8).
Chisti, Yusuf (2007). “Biodiesel from microalgae”. In: Biotechnology advances 25.3,
pp. 294–306 (cit. on p. 6).
Collos, Y (1989). “A linear model of external interactions during uptake of different
forms of inorganic nitrogen by microalgae”. In: Journal of Plankton Research 11.3,
pp. 521–533 (cit. on p. 36).
Conventional Wastewater Treatment Processes. FAO (Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion). url: http://www.fao.org/3/t0551e/t0551e05.htm#3.2%20conventional%
20wastewater%20treatment%20processes (visited on Jan. 18, 2020) (cit. on
p. 11).
Conversion - PPFD to Lux. Apogee Instruments. url: https://www.apogeeinstruments.
com/conversion-ppfd-to-lux/ (visited on Jan. 23, 2020) (cit. on p. 18).
==PAGE:62==
48
Bibliography
Coppens, Joeri et al. (2016). “The use of microalgae as a high-value organic slow-
release fertilizer results in tomatoes with increased carotenoid and sugar levels”.
In: Journal of applied phycology 28.4, pp. 2367–2377 (cit. on p. 5).
Cornel, P and C Schaum (2009). “Phosphorus recovery from wastewater: needs, tech-
nologies and costs”. In: Water Science and Technology 59.6, pp. 1069–1076 (cit. on
p. 12).
De Francisci, Davide et al. (2018). “Evaluation of microalgae production coupled
with wastewater treatment”. In: Environmental technology 39.5, pp. 581–592 (cit.
on p. 6).
Del Campo, José A et al. (2000). “Carotenoid content of chlorophycean microal-
gae: factors determining lutein accumulation in Muriellopsis sp.(Chlorophyta)”.
In: Journal of Biotechnology 76.1, pp. 51–59 (cit. on p. 5).
Delgadillo-Mirquez, Liliana et al. (2016). “Nitrogen and phosphate removal from
wastewater with a mixed microalgae and bacteria culture”. In: Biotechnology Re-
ports 11, pp. 18–26 (cit. on p. 28).
Diop, Salif (2002). Vital water graphics: an overview of the state of the world’s fresh
and marine waters. Vol. 1. UNEP/Earthprint (cit. on p. 1).
Dismukes, G Charles et al. (2008). “Aquatic phototrophs: eﬀicient alternatives to
land-based crops for biofuels”. In: Current opinion in biotechnology 19.3, pp. 235–
240 (cit. on p. 6).
Dokulil, Martin T and Katrin Teubner (2010). “Eutrophication and climate change:
present situation and future scenarios”. In: Eutrophication: causes, consequences
and control. Springer, pp. 1–16 (cit. on p. 4).
Falkowski, Paul G and John A Raven (2013). Aquatic photosynthesis. Princeton Uni-
versity Press (cit. on p. 4).
Farooq, Wasif et al. (2013). “Two-stage cultivation of two Chlorella sp. strains by
simultaneous treatment of brewery wastewater and maximizing lipid productivity”.
In: Bioresource technology 132, pp. 230–238 (cit. on p. 44).
Fitoclima 600-1200. Aralab. url: https://www.aralab.pt/es/produtos/fitoclima-
600-1200/ (visited on Jan. 23, 2020) (cit. on p. 18).
Gaikwad, RW, M Gudadhe, and S Bhagat (2016). “Carbon dioxide capture, toler-
ance and sequestration using microalgae-a review”. In: International Journal of
Pharmaceutical, Chemical and Biological Sciences 6.3, pp. 345–349 (cit. on p. 4).
García-Fernández, Jose Manuel, Nicole Tandeau de Marsac, and Jesús Diez (2004).
“Streamlined regulation and gene loss as adaptive mechanisms in Prochlorococcus
for optimized nitrogen utilization in oligotrophic environments”. In: Microbiol. Mol.
Biol. Rev. 68.4, pp. 630–638 (cit. on pp. 30, 35).
Geider, Richard J and Julie La Roche (2002). “Redfield revisited: variability of C
[ratio] N [ratio] P in marine microalgae and its biochemical basis”. In: European
Journal of Phycology 37.1, pp. 1–17 (cit. on p. 4).
Hellebust, Johan A and Iftikhar Ahmad (1989). “Regulation of nitrogen assimilation
in green microalgae”. In: Biological oceanography 6.3-4, pp. 241–255 (cit. on pp. 36,
39).
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
49
International carbon dioxide emissions from the consumption of energy (2006). EIA
(Energy Information Administration,) url: https://www.eia.gov/ (visited on
Jan. 15, 2020) (cit. on p. 5).
Jonge, Victor N de, M Elliott, and E Orive (2002). “Causes, historical development,
effects and future challenges of a common environmental problem: eutrophication”.
In: Nutrients and eutrophication in estuaries and coastal waters. Springer, pp. 1–
19 (cit. on p. 3).
Kim, Sunjin, Yunhee Lee, and Sun-Jin Hwang (2013). “Removal of nitrogen and
phosphorus by Chlorella sorokiniana cultured heterotrophically in ammonia and
nitrate”. In: International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation 85, pp. 511–516 (cit.
on p. 35).
Kirrolia, Anita, Narsi R Bishnoi, and Rajesh Singh (2013). “Microalgae as a boon for
sustainable energy production and its future research & development aspects”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 20, pp. 642–656 (cit. on p. 1).
Kondo, Kensuke, Noboru Nakata, Eiji Nishihara, et al. (2010). “Effect of the purple
non-sulfur bacterium (Rhodobacter sphaeroides) on the Brix, titratable acidity,
ascorbic acid, organic acid, lycopene and β-carotene in tomato fruit.” In: Journal
of Food, Agriculture & Environment 8.2 part 2, pp. 743–746 (cit. on p. 5).
Lee, Kwangyong and Choul-Gyun Lee (2001). “Effect of light/dark cycles on wastew-
ater treatments by microalgae”. In: Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering 6.3,
pp. 194–199 (cit. on pp. 4, 6, 7, 38–40).
Liang, Shizhong et al. (2004). “Current microalgal health food R & D activities in
China”. In: Asian pacific phycology in the 21st century: prospects and challenges.
Springer, pp. 45–48 (cit. on p. 5).
Liang, Yanna, Nicolas Sarkany, and Yi Cui (2009). “Biomass and lipid productivities
of Chlorella vulgaris under autotrophic, heterotrophic and mixotrophic growth
conditions”. In: Biotechnology letters 31.7, pp. 1043–1049 (cit. on p. 40).
Lowrey, Joshua, Marianne S Brooks, and Patrick J McGinn (2015). “Heterotrophic
and mixotrophic cultivation of microalgae for biodiesel production in agricultural
wastewaters and associated challenges—a critical review”. In: Journal of Applied
Phycology 27.4, pp. 1485–1498 (cit. on pp. 4, 40).
Mandalam, Ramkumar K and Bernhard Palsson (1998). “Elemental balancing of
biomass and medium composition enhances growth capacity in high-density Chlorella
vulgaris cultures”. In: Biotechnology and bioengineering 59.5, pp. 605–611 (cit. on
p. 9).
Markou, Giorgos, Dries Vandamme, and Koenraad Muylaert (2014). “Microalgal and
cyanobacterial cultivation: the supply of nutrients”. In: Water research 65, pp. 186–
202 (cit. on p. 37).
Martınez, ME et al. (2000). “Nitrogen and phosphorus removal from urban wastewater
by the microalga Scenedesmus obliquus”. In: Bioresource technology 73.3, pp. 263–
272 (cit. on pp. 28, 40).
Mata, Teresa M, Antonio A Martins, and Nidia S Caetano (2010). “Microalgae for
biodiesel production and other applications: a review”. In: Renewable and sustain-
able energy reviews 14.1, pp. 217–232 (cit. on pp. 1, 9).
==PAGE:64==
50
Bibliography
Mata, Teresa M et al. (2012). “Parametric study of a brewery effluent treatment by
microalgae Scenedesmus obliquus”. In: Bioresource technology 107, pp. 151–158
(cit. on pp. 2, 4, 38, 39).
Mata, Teresa M et al. (2013). “Potential of microalgae Scenedesmus obliquus grown
in brewery wastewater for biodiesel production”. In: Chemical Engineering Trans-
actions 32.1 (cit. on p. 1).
Metcalf, Leonard, Harrison P Eddy, and Georg Tchobanoglous (1972). Wastewater
engineering: treatment, disposal, and reuse. Vol. 4. McGraw-Hill NewYork (cit. on
p. 11).
Metting, FB (1996). “Biodiversity and application of microalgae”. In: Journal of in-
dustrial microbiology 17.5-6, pp. 477–489 (cit. on pp. 4, 6).
Mulbry, Walter, Shannon Kondrad, and Carolina Pizarro (2007). “Biofertilizers from
algal treatment of dairy and swine manure effluents: characterization of algal
biomass as a slow release fertilizer”. In: Journal of Vegetable Science 12.4, pp. 107–
125 (cit. on p. 5).
Muller-Feuga, Arnaud (2013). “Microalgae for aquaculture: the current global situa-
tion and future trends”. In: Handbook of Microalgal Cultures: Applied Phycology
and Biotechnology. 2nd ed. Wiley Blackwell, West Sussex, pp. 615–627 (cit. on
p. 5).
Nicoletti, Marcello (2016). “Microalgae nutraceuticals”. In: Foods 5.3, p. 54 (cit. on
pp. 2, 4).
Nurdogan, Yakup and William J Oswald (1995). “Enhanced nutrient removal in high-
rate ponds”. In: Water science and technology 31.12, pp. 33–43 (cit. on p. 1).
Oehmen, Adrian et al. (2007). “Advances in enhanced biological phosphorus removal:
from micro to macro scale”. In: Water research 41.11, pp. 2271–2300 (cit. on p. 2).
Ohmori, Masayuki, Kazuko Ohmori, and Heinrich Strotmann (1977). “Inhibition of
nitrate uptake by ammonia in a blue-green alga, Anabaena cylindrica”. In: Archives
of microbiology 114.3, pp. 225–229 (cit. on p. 35).
O’neil, JM et al. (2012). “The rise of harmful cyanobacteria blooms: the potential
roles of eutrophication and climate change”. In: Harmful algae 14, pp. 313–334
(cit. on p. 3).
Oswald, William J (2003). “My sixty years in applied algology”. In: Journal of Applied
Phycology 15.2, pp. 99–106 (cit. on p. 1).
Pachauri, Rajendra K et al. (2014). Climate change 2014: synthesis report. Con-
tribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the fifth assessment report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ipcc (cit. on p. 1).
Paerl, Hans W and Jef Huisman (2008). “Blooms like it hot”. In: Science 320.5872,
pp. 57–58 (cit. on p. 4).
Park, Jongmin et al. (2010). “Ammonia removal from anaerobic digestion effluent
of livestock waste using green alga Scenedesmus sp.” In: Bioresource technology
101.22, pp. 8649–8657 (cit. on pp. 11, 12, 37).
Perez-Garcia, Octavio et al. (2011). “Heterotrophic cultures of microalgae: metabolism
and potential products”. In: Water research 45.1, pp. 11–36 (cit. on pp. 9, 34, 39).
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
51
Posten, Clemens (2009). “Design principles of photo-bioreactors for cultivation of
microalgae”. In: Engineering in Life Sciences 9.3, pp. 165–177 (cit. on p. 8).
Pulz, Otto (2001). “Photobioreactors: production systems for phototrophic microor-
ganisms”. In: Applied microbiology and biotechnology 57.3, pp. 287–293 (cit. on
pp. 6–8).
Pulz, Otto and Karl Scheibenbogen (1998). “Photobioreactors: design and perfor-
mance with respect to light energy input”. In: Bioprocess and algae reactor tech-
nology, apoptosis. Springer, pp. 123–152 (cit. on p. 8).
Rawat, I et al. (2011). “Dual role of microalgae: phycoremediation of domestic wastew-
ater and biomass production for sustainable biofuels production”. In: Applied en-
ergy 88.10, pp. 3411–3424 (cit. on p. 1).
Rigano, Vittoria Di Martino et al. (1998). “The physiological significance of light
and dark NH4+ metabolism in Chlorella sorokiniana”. In: Phytochemistry 47.2,
pp. 177–181 (cit. on p. 39).
Rittmann, Bruce E (2008). “Opportunities for renewable bioenergy using microorgan-
isms”. In: Biotechnology and bioengineering 100.2, pp. 203–212 (cit. on p. 1).
Rodolfi, Liliana et al. (2009). “Microalgae for oil: Strain selection, induction of lipid
synthesis and outdoor mass cultivation in a low-cost photobioreactor”. In: Biotech-
nology and bioengineering 102.1, pp. 100–112 (cit. on p. 6).
Schenk, Peer M et al. (2008). “Second generation biofuels: high-eﬀiciency microalgae
for biodiesel production”. In: Bioenergy research 1.1, pp. 20–43 (cit. on pp. 1, 6).
Searchinger, Timothy et al. (2008). “Use of US croplands for biofuels increases green-
house gases through emissions from land-use change”. In: Science 319.5867, pp. 1238–
1240 (cit. on p. 6).
Simate, Geoffrey S et al. (2011). “The treatment of brewery wastewater for reuse:
State of the art”. In: Desalination 273.2-3, pp. 235–247 (cit. on p. 11).
Singh, Nirbhay Kumar and Dolly Wattal Dhar (2011). “Phylogenetic relatedness
among Spirulina and related cyanobacterial genera”. In: World Journal of Mi-
crobiology and Biotechnology 27.4, pp. 941–951 (cit. on p. 2).
Spolaore, Pauline et al. (2006). “Commercial applications of microalgae”. In: Journal
of bioscience and bioengineering 101.2, pp. 87–96 (cit. on pp. 5, 6).
Stewart, William Duncan Patterson (1974). Algal physiology and biochemistry. Vol. 10.
Univ of California Press (cit. on p. 4).
Su, Yanyan, Artur Mennerich, and Brigitte Urban (2011). “Municipal wastewater
treatment and biomass accumulation with a wastewater-born and settleable algal-
bacterial culture”. In: Water research 45.11, pp. 3351–3358 (cit. on p. 2).
— (2012). “Coupled nutrient removal and biomass production with mixed algal cul-
ture: impact of biotic and abiotic factors”. In: Bioresource Technology 118, pp. 469–
476 (cit. on p. 2).
Suh, In Soo and Choul-Gyun Lee (2003). “Photobioreactor engineering: design and
performance”. In: Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering 8.6, p. 313 (cit. on
p. 9).
==PAGE:66==
52
Bibliography
Sustainable bioenergy: a framework for decision makers. (2007e). United Nations
Energy; url: http://www.fao.org/home/es/ (visited on Jan. 13, 2020) (cit. on
p. 5).
Tang, Cong-Cong et al. (2016). “Effect of aeration rate on performance and stability
of algal-bacterial symbiosis system to treat domestic wastewater in sequencing
batch reactors”. In: Bioresource technology 222, pp. 156–164 (cit. on p. 34).
The state of food and agriculture (2008). FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization).
url: http://www.fao.org/home/es/ (visited on Jan. 13, 2020) (cit. on p. 5).
Tredici, Mario R (2004). “Mass production of microalgae: photobioreactors”. In: Hand-
book of microalgal culture: Biotechnology and applied phycology 1, pp. 178–214 (cit.
on p. 7).
Usha, MT et al. (2016). “Removal of nutrients and organic pollution load from pulp
and paper mill effluent by microalgae in outdoor open pond”. In: Bioresource
technology 214, pp. 856–860 (cit. on p. 44).
Vilchez, Carlos et al. (1997). “Microalgae-mediated chemicals production and wastes
removal”. In: Enzyme and Microbial Technology 20.8, pp. 562–572 (cit. on p. 5).
Yamaguchi, Katsumi (1996). “Recent advances in microalgal bioscience in Japan, with
special reference to utilization of biomass and metabolites: a review”. In: Journal
of applied phycology 8.6, pp. 487–502 (cit. on p. 5).
Yamane, Yu-ichi et al. (2001). “Biomass production in mixotrophic culture of Euglena
gracilis under acidic condition and its growth energetics”. In: Biotechnology Letters
23.15, pp. 1223–1228 (cit. on p. 9).
Yang, Chen, Qiang Hua, and Kazuyuki Shimizu (2000). “Energetics and carbon
metabolism during growth of microalgal cells under photoautotrophic, mixotrophic
and cyclic light-autotrophic/dark-heterotrophic conditions”. In: Biochemical En-
gineering Journal 6.2, pp. 87–102 (cit. on pp. 9, 35).
Yeoman, Stephenson et al. (1988). “The removal of phosphorus during wastewater
treatment: a review”. In: Environmental Pollution 49.3, pp. 183–233 (cit. on p. 2).
Zheng, Hongli et al. (2018). “Balancing carbon/nitrogen ratio to improve nutrients
removal and algal biomass production in piggery and brewery wastewaters”. In:
Bioresource technology 249, pp. 479–486 (cit. on p. 2).
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Appendix
parameters
Batch
Flasks
Species
Initial Biomass (g/L)
Sterilization
Nitrogen Source
Air Flow Rate
Light Ratio
1
1
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,02
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
2
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,02
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
3
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,02
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
4
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,02
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
5
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,02
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
6
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,02
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
7
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,02
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
8
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,02
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
9
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,02
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
10
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,02
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
11
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,02
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
12
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,02
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
13
Control
0
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
14
Control
0
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
15
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
16
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
2
1
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
2
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
3
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
4
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
5
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,4
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
6
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,4
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
7
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
8
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
9
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,4
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
10
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,4
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
11
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
12
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
13
Control
0
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
14
Control
0
Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
15
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
16
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Not Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
3
1
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
2
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
3
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
4
Scenedasmus Obliquous
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
5
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
6
Chlamydamonas Rheinardetti
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
7
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
8
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
9
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
100 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
10
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
100 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
11
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
400 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
12
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
400 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
13
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
14
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
15
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
16
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
4
1
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
2
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
3
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
24h D w1 /24h L w2
4
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
24h D w1/24h L w2
5
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
24h D
6
Chlorella Vulgaris
0,4
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NaNO3
200 rpm
24h D
7
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
8
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
9
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
10
Control
0
Not Autoclaved & Centrifuged
NH3Cl
200 rpm
12h L / 12 h D
==PAGE:68==
