==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Structural Health Monitoring of Wind Turbine Blades 
Without Additional Sensors 
 
 
Louis Simon Bond-Smith 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0346 
February 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Louis Simon Bond-Smith 
Title: Structural Health Monitoring of Wind Turbine Blades without 
Additional Sensors 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03466 
February 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
September 2019 – February 2020 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
David Robert Verelst 
Philipp Ulrich Haselbach 
Malcolm McGugan 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Cameron Sigurd Dryden Brown 
Ørsted A/S 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of the thesis is to investigate methods of performing structural health
monitoring of wind turbine blades. There currently exist a number of methods
with varying levels of sensitivity to damage, requirements for additional sensors
and practicality in application to operating wind farms. As installed wind tur-
bines already have a large number of sensors, it is interesting to determine what
level of blade damage can be detected without any additional sensors.
Two structural health monitoring (SHM) algorithms were selected for further
investigation. The ﬁrst is based on a change in wind turbine whirling modes,
caused by rotor anisotropy due to damage in one of the wind turbine blades,
which can be detected using the tower-top side-to-side acceleration signal. This
technique was demonstrated by Tcherniak et al.
using a simple mass-spring
model [1]. The second is a method adapted from existing research, where the
transmittance function was used to compare spectra of multiple sensors along
the length of a single blade [2]. In this thesis, the adaptation proposed can
be applied using blade load sensors included as standard instrumentation on
modern wind turbines, without additional sensors.
Blade damage is simulated by stiﬀness reductions to beam-element models,
based on results from 3D FEM studies by Berring et al.
[3] and Myrent et
al. [4] on blades with trailing edge cracks and web-foot debonds. These damage
types, in addition to pitch and mass imbalance, are investigated by comparing
aero-elastic simulation of wind turbines with and without blade damage using
HAWC2, using the proposed SHM methods.
In the methodology, the proposed SHM methods are explored in terms of their
sensitivity to the turbulent seed and wind conditions, to design appropriate
==PAGE:4==
ii
simulations for investigating the sensitivity of these methods to diﬀerent blade
damage types. A minimum of 5 seeds was found to reduce the uncertainty of
the produced damage indicators to 17%, used for further simulations. It was
discovered that damage detection was enhanced with low turbulence intensity
at wind speeds near the rated wind speed, and high turbulent intensity at higher
wind speeds, so both of these conditions were investigated further.
The blade load sensor SHM algorithm was found to be less sensitive to blade
damage, and less robust to other types of rotor imbalance, such as mass and
pitch imbalance, making practical application more diﬃcult. The tower-top ac-
celerations algorithm was capable of detecting oﬀ-axis matrix cracks, though
like the blade loads method, was insensitive to trailing edge cracks and web-foot
debonds. The sensitivity of the tower-top accelerations SHM method was in-
vestigated with regards to percentage stiﬀness of each element of the isotropic
stiﬀness matrix, and it was found that only the stiﬀness elements linking the
ﬂapwise and edgewise moments to the ﬂapwise and edgewise curvatures, respec-
tively, had a noticeable impact on the SHM results. The tower-top accelerations
method was investigated for its sensitivity to measurement noise, and it was
found that the tower-top accelerations method was robust to white noise with
a Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) above 5 dB. The method was more sensitive to
periodic noise in the measurement of the azimuth angle, requiring a SNR above
18 dB.
Finally, the tower-top accelerations method was applied to two damage cases
from modern, large oﬀshore wind turbines; one with a trailing edge crack similar
to the simulations previously described, and another with a split tip on one
blade (a crack in the tip of the blade on leading and trailing edge causing the
end of the blade to be open). The SHM algorithm was applied to periods of
constant rotor speed, and compared before and after damage detection and
repair.
Comparisons were done for selected periods with similar mean wind
speed and turbulence intensity.
The SHM algorithm was not able to detect
damage for either case.
It was concluded that SHM of wind turbine blades without additional sensors
is possible, though can only detect severe blade damage, and application to real
turbines, especially in oﬀshore conditions, has not been veriﬁed. The installation
of additional sensors is required for detection of less severe damage, though such
systems have yet to be proven in terms of sensitivity and reliability for real
operating turbines.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Wind Energy in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis investigates structural health monitoring algorithms for detecting
damaged blades on operating wind turbines, both through aeroelastic simulation
and analysis of data from real wind turbines with known blade damage. The
thesis consists of a the following components:
• Review of existing research and methods in the ﬁeld
• Modelling of damaged wind turbine blades by applying stiﬀness reduction
to beam-element blade models.
• Aero-elastic simulation of turbines with damaged blades
• Application of structural health monitoring algorithms to aero-elastic sim-
ulation results and real turbines with damaged blades
Lyngby, 31-January-2020
Louis Bond-Smith
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
As a multi-disciplinary thesis topic involving many technical ﬁelds, this thesis
required eﬀective collaboration between a number of diverse experts, without
whom, this research would not have been possible.
I would like to thank David Verelst for being a great supervisor and mentor
throughout the process, both with technical, practical and emotional support. I
would like to thank Cameron Brown for both his critical eye and positivity, and
for always having a clear direction for the project. I would like to thank Malcolm
McGugan for his can-do attitude, especially when others were doubtful. I would
like to thank Philipp Ulrich Haselbach for his sharp feedback, through which
my work as improved signiﬁcantly.
I would like to thank Dmitri Tcherniak, for providing tools, data, endless en-
thusiasm about the project, and invaluable expert consultations. I would like to
thank Oscar Castor Ardila for his support in providing additional data, helping
me to broaden my results and analysis signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Common types of blade damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Analytical and experimental approaches . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Inspection approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Modelling blade damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
3D brick or shell FEM approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Super-element method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Beam-element method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Review of existing structural health monitoring methods for wind
turbine blades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.1
Introduction to SHM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.2
Types of SHM for wind turbine blades . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.3
Local methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.4
Global methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
2.4.5
Combined global and local approach . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.5
Summary of ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
Basis for study
33
3.1
Description of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
HAWC2 simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
SHM results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Additional materials provided . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Methodology
39
4.1
Damage modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.1
Additional simulation cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Structural health monitoring algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.1
Tower-top acceleration method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.2
Blade loads method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Aeroelastic model: HAWC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.1
Turbulent seed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4.2
Environmental conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.5
Proposed simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.5.1
Sensitivity to beam stiﬀness properties . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.5.2
Sensitivity to measurement noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
Structural health monitoring: aeroelastic simulation
63
5.1
Sensitivity to damage types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.1.1
Comparison of damage indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.2
Sensitivity to anisotropic stiﬀness parameters . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
Sensitivity to noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
73
6.1
Description of damage types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2
Data selection and processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.2.1
Selecting periods of constant rotor speed . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.2.2
Selecting periods based on stationarity . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2.3
Categorising by wind conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.2.4
Re-sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.2.5
Inspection of signal quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2.6
Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.3.1
Graphical results - trailing edge crack
. . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.3.2
Damage indicators - trailing edge crack
. . . . . . . . . .
86
6.4
Damage indicators - split tips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
7
Conclusions
93
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A Structural health monitoring results for operational turbines
with blade damage
97
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Although wind turbine blades are certiﬁed for 20 years of operation, blades
often require repair and maintenance to reach their design life - blade failure
rates from surveying operational wind farms are estimated to be between 0.1
and 0.25 per year [5]. Crabtree et al. combined 3 European surveys of reported
failures from operational wind farms, collating a total of 11,000 turbines for a 13
year period [5, 6]. Blade failure rates were found to be lower than other critical
components in wind turbines, though they result in the longest of downtime per
failure, as seen in Figure 1.1. For oﬀshore wind farms, the cost of component
failure is compounded by the expensive transport and logistics required to access
turbines, and the limited weather availability leading to extended downtime [7].
Blades account for 15%–20% of the total cost of the wind turbine [8], and if
a blade fails completely, there is a signiﬁcant risk of damage to other wind
turbine components. An eﬀective Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) system
for blades has the potential to reduce cost and risk by detecting damage at
an early stage and reducing the severity of repair, as well prevent catastrophic
failure of blades and collateral damage.
Modern wind turbines include a number of sensors in their Supervisory Control
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Failure rates and resulting downtime of wind turbine components
in commercial wind farms [5]
And Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems, many of which are likely to be found
on any large turbine.
These signals are used for operation, monitoring and
control, and include electrical power, rotor speed, pitch angles, temperatures
and accelerations in the tower and nacelle. Some more modern turbines also
include optical load sensors at the root of each blade. In this thesis, these sensors
are referred to as existing sensors. This thesis considers that the only existing
sensors that measure the properties or behaviour of the blades of an operating
wind turbine are the blade root load sensors and any sensors related to the pitch
drives. Further measurement devices installed explicitly for the purpose of blade
SHM, usually located on the blade itself, are referred to as additional sensors.
These include acoustic, strain and acceleration-based sensors, as discussed later
in Chapter 2.
Currently, a number of methods have been proposed for SHM of wind turbine
blades, which are explored in Chapter 2. The focus of much research to date has
been the development of additional sensor systems; these add additional cost,
complexity and potential downtime due to sensor failure. A turbine blade SHM
system based on existing sensors would be signiﬁcantly cheaper to implement,
as well as much faster to roll-out on a large number of already installed and
operating turbines.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Aim
3
1.2
Aim
The aim of this thesis is to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of SHM methods for wind
turbine blade that can be applied without the installation of additional sensors,
with a focus on the ability of said methods to detect diﬀerent damage types and
severity, as well as the applicability of methods to real operating turbines.
Appropriate SHM methods will be selected from existing literature. To evaluate
the types and severity of blade damage that can be successfully detected, selected
SHM methods will be applied to aeroelastic simulation of wind turbines with
damaged blades, where blade damage will be modelled by stiﬀness reductions
to a beam-element model of the blade.
SHM methods that perform well in
simulation will be applied to data from real turbines with damaged blades.
1.3
Hypothesis
It is hypothesised that blade SHM without additional sensors will not be capable
of detecting early stage damage, such as small cracks, though that such meth-
ods may be capable of detecting medium to high severity blade damage, before
critical failure of a blade. Detection of damage at an early stage has a higher
potential for cost reduction through prevention of damage progression, reduc-
tion in downtime and optimising operations and maintenance [7]. Detection of
more severe damage still has the beneﬁts of preventing catastrophic failure and
collateral damage. As later discussed in Chapter 2, methods capable of detect-
ing early stage damage often require a large number of additional sensors to
be installed, and hence such methods are costly to implement. If, for a single
wind farm, a small number of blades are expected to suﬀer damage, it may
be more cost eﬀective to only detect severe blade damage, without installing
additional sensors and hence with minimal additional cost. The cost-beneﬁt
of such a strategy will not be investigated further in this project, which only
aims to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of methods of detecting blade damage without
additional sensors.
1.4
Limitations
There were two key limitations of the work performed in this thesis, which are
described brieﬂy here, and the reader is directed to relevant sections in this
report for further elaboration.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
Firstly, turbines with damaged blades were modelled using a beam-element
method in the aeroelastic software HAWC2. Whilst a beam-element approach
is appropriate for modelling wind turbine blades without damage [9], non-linear
eﬀects such a local buckling at cracks or adhesive failures cannot be captured by
such a model, which use a relatively small number of elements for each of which
stiﬀness properties of the blades are averaged. There are also challenges in esti-
mating the stiﬀness reductions that should be applied to a beam-element model
to approximate damage. These limitations are discussed further in Section 4.1.
A further limitation of this report was the limited number of cases from real
turbines with blade damage that were available for analysis. Both cases had
structural damage, though neither case was suﬃciently critical that the turbine
could not continue operating safely. As SHM methods proposed by this report
are hypothesised to be capable of detecting severe damage, the three available
cases may not be suﬃciently severe for detection using the proposed methods.
1.5
Thesis Outline
The project consists of the following stages:
1.
Literature review:
A review will be carried out of existing research
providing methods for SHM of blades using vibration signals, in the 0-10 Hz
range, such as acceleration or strain gauges. Promising methods that can be
applied to existing sensors and SCADA signals will be elaborated and selected
for testing.
2.
Damage modelling:
Blade damage will be approximated by applying
stiﬀness reductions of a blade in a beam-element model, which will be used as
an input to HAWC2 aero-elastic simulations.
3. HAWC2 modelling:
The DTU 10MW Reference Turbine will be sim-
ulated in HAWC2 for normal operation, in a range of wind conditions. This
will be done for identical simulations for turbines without blade damage, with
various damage types, and with rotor mass and pitch imbalance.
4. Application of SHM methods to HAWC2 data:
Selected SHM meth-
ods will be applied to the simulated HAWC2 data, and the results compared for
undamaged and damaged turbines for identical simulations. The performance of
SHM methods will be evaluated with respect to wind conditions, the turbulent
seed, blade damage type and damage severity.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Thesis Outline
5
5. Application of SHM methods to real turbine with damaged blades:
SHM methods found to be successful when applied to aero-elastic simulation
results will then be applied to data from real turbines with damaged blades.
Three damage cases were made available for analysis; one turbine with a trailing
edge crack and two turbines with a blade split tip. All cases were detected on
modern multi-megawatt oﬀshore turbines.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Literature review
2.1
Introduction
The aim of this thesis is to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of SHM methods for wind
turbine blades that can be applied without the installation of additional sensors.
This thesis focuses on the detection of diﬀerent damage types, sensitivity to
damage severity, and applicability to real operating turbines. In order to do so,
a literature review was conducted in the following key areas:
1. Common types of blade damage - Identify commonly occurring types
of blade damage that can later be modelled in aero-elastic simulation and
used to evaluate blade SHM methods.
2. Modelling blade damage - Review and compare methods for modelling
blade damage in aero-elastic simulations of wind turbines.
3. Blade SHM - Investigate and compare existing methods for performing
blade SHM without additional sensors. Select and propose methods for
further analysis in this thesis.
==PAGE:20==
8
Literature review
2.2
Common types of blade damage
Much of the existing simulation-based research into blade SHM applies stiﬀness
reductions to blades to approximate blade damage, without relating stiﬀness
reductions to realistic blade damage types. In a study demonstrating the ef-
fectiveness of rotor anisotropy (diﬀerence in structural properties of each blade
on a turbine) as a damage indicator, Tcherniak applies a 3% and 5% reduction
in the Young’s modulus of a single blade in HAWC2 [10]. In a later study, he
proposes a method based on the same phenomenon with only the use of tower-
top acceleration measurements, and applies a similar 3% and 5% reduction to
the stiﬀness of one blade using a simple mass spring model. Ou et al. apply
a percentage reduction in stiﬀness at two square patches on the blade surface
when using an 3D Finite Element Method (FEM) model with shell elements
[11]. Wang et al. used a modal analysis approach including experimental and a
3D FEM model with brick elements to analyse a blade with incisions from the
trailing edge towards the leading edge [12]. Whilst these studies are valuable in
demonstrating the eﬀectiveness and sensitivity of the proposed SHM algorithms,
the types of damage being studied are not easily related to real observed blade
damage. This means the value of proposed algorithms is not easily understood
by wind farm operators.
In order to demonstrate the applicability of SHM to real wind farms, they should
be tested with damage that more closely resembles real observed blade damage.
In this section, common types of blade damage are investigated with the goal
of selecting some that can later be modelled and used to evaluate blade SHM
methods in simulation. A later section will tackle the challenge of modelling
such damage types.
In current literature, there are three common approaches used to investigate
causes and types of blade damage. These are the analytical approach, exper-
imental approach and inspection based approach. In the analytical approach,
blade damage and failure types are predicted through analysis of the blade mate-
rials and structure, often using fracture mechanics and/or FEM analysis. In the
experimental approach, blades are exposed to diﬀerent extreme loads or cyclic
loads and the resulting damage to blades is examined. Much research into blade
damage employ a combination of analytical and experimental approaches, using
analytical approaches to make predictions, and experimental results to verify
these. In the inspection based approach, the focus is on damage suﬀered by
blades on real turbines from commercial wind farms, where blades are either
inspected after failure or decommissioning. A review of literature for each of
these approaches is described below, before summarising the most commonly
observed damage types.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Common types of blade damage
9
2.2.1
Analytical and experimental approaches
Sørensen et al. tested a 25 m Vestas blade to failure by loading in the ﬂapwise
direction, after the blade had previously gone through extreme load and cyclic
loading corresponding to a 20-year fatigue life [13]. Post-mortem analysis was
performed on the blade and seven damage types were identiﬁed. Three were also
commonly observed in operational wind turbine blades (described in Section
2.2.2), shown in Figure 2.1 below:
• Type 1 - skin adhesive debonding
• Type 2 - adhesive joint failures such as trailing edge cracks and web/spar
debonds
• Type 5 - ﬁbre failure in tension
Figure 2.1: Illustration of damage types identiﬁed during inspection of ex-
treme life-cycle testing of a 25 m Vestas blade [13]
These failure modes are predicted to have a stronger eﬀect on blade dynam-
ics, and hence may be more suited to detection using SHM without additional
sensors. Other failure types such as cracks in the gel coat are more superﬁcial
and likely have smaller eﬀects on global blade dynamics, and are more suited to
SHM methods employing a larger number of sensors.
The location of damage on the blade is also important; Ciang et al. reviewed
==PAGE:22==
10
Literature review
experimental and simulation based research into blade damage [14] and describes
four hot-spots on the blade where these damage types are most likely to occur:
• At blade root,
• At maximum chord position,
• At 30–35% and 70% blade length from root, and;
• At upper spar cap or ﬂange of the spar.
Ciang et al. describe complex geometry and high buckling loads as the reasons
for these hotpots.
2.2.2
Inspection approach
In addition to simulation and experimental studies of blade damage, other re-
search has focused on damage sustained to wind turbine blades that have failed
in operation or have been retired due to wind farm decommissioning.
Further surveys have estimated the frequency of occurrence of diﬀerent causes
of failure, as shown in Figure 2.2 [15]. The damage types discussed in analytical
and experimental investigations into blade damage only account for part of the
blade failure modes seen in real wind turbines; in addition to turbine fatigue
loading and extreme loads, other factors such as foreign object impact, lightning
and manufacturing errors are also present. Adhesive bond failures and lightning
damage are the most commonly observed failure modes.
Figure 2.2: Distribution of rotor blade failure modes as published in [15]
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Modelling blade damage
11
Attaya et al. conﬁrm some of the key damage types; inspection of blades from
5 turbines (300 kW) and 27 turbines (100 kW) categorised the observed blade
damage into three types: transverse and longitudinal cracks, leading and trailing
edge cracks, and surface and coating damage [16].
The study predicts that
trailing edge de-bonds will become more prevalent due to increasing blade size.
Overall it can be seen that a range of causes and damage types have been
predicted and observed in wind turbine blades through analytical, experimental
and inspection based studies. Adhesive joint failures such as trailing edge cracks
have been predicted and observed most commonly. Surveys of damage observed
in operational wind farms also ﬁnd that lightning damage such as cracks at the
tips of blades is also common. These damage types are proposed for further
analysis in this thesis. Adhesive joint failures will be modelled and simulated,
whilst lightning damage will be investigated through the analysis of operational
wind turbine with lightning damage.
2.3
Modelling blade damage
This section describes the diﬀerent possible approaches for modelling the struc-
ture of a damaged wind turbine blade in aero-elastic simulations. In current
literature, there are three approaches to modelling the structure of a wind tur-
bine blade in aero-elastic simulation:
1. 3D FEM models
2. Super-element methods: the application of order reduction-methods to 3D
FEM models to reduce computational expense
3. A beam-element method, in which a blade is modelled as a series of beams
Each of these is described in more detail below.
2.3.1
3D brick or shell FEM approach
3D FEM models have been used to simulate the aero-elastic response of oper-
ating wind turbines. In one such study, Namiranian et al. simulated a 5 MW
turbine in ANSYS, using a 3D mesh with over 1 million nodes [17]. Such a
high ﬁdelity model is capable of capturing local non-linear deformations such as
==PAGE:24==
12
Literature review
buckling at a trailing edge crack, the presence of which have been demonstrated
by Haselbach et al. [18]. The set-up, calibration and veriﬁcation of such a model
is also signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult due to high model complexity.
Furthermore, such an approach has a very high computational cost, making it
impractical to simulate diﬀerent damage types of diﬀerent severity in a range of
environmental conditions. The aim of this thesis is to determine which damage
types and what severity of blade damage is required for successful detection
without additional sensors, with a focus on applicability of methods to opera-
tional turbines. As a result, a lower computational cost is desired in order to
investigate a larger range of conditions and damage types.
2.3.2
Super-element method
To reduce the computational cost of high ﬁdelity 3D brick or shell FEM mod-
els, super-element methods can be employed. Super-element (or dynamic sub-
structuring) methods were originally proposed in 1968 [19], and are well studied
for structures where loads are applied uniquely at the degrees of freedom of
a structure [20]. This is not the case for wind turbine blades or foundation
structures, where distributed loads between nodes cannot be ignored [20].
The super-element approach involves three main steps:
1. The entire system is split into substructures
2. Each substructure is modeled separately, and when necessary, reduced
using an order reduction method
3. The reduced substructure models are assembled in order to create a model
of the full system
The Craig-Brampton method is one well-studied technique for order reduc-
tion, which is based on mode shape selection and superposition allowing super-
elements to be formed with reduced degrees of freedom [19].
Based on the
superposition principle, this approach assumes linear deﬂections within super-
elements. It has been applied to wind turbine jacket foundations [20], and in one
study, Wang et al. veriﬁed the super-element method by comparing HAWC2
simulations with and without order reduction [21].
Wang et al.
suggest that the Craig-Brampton method is not valid for wind
turbine blades due to large deﬂections violating the assumption of linearity [21].
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Modelling blade damage
13
One solution to this is the the division of the blade into several sub-bodies with a
super-element for each sub-body, although this has not yet been studied. Further
challenges may be faced by applying such a method to a complex structure such
a wind turbine blade, due to a geometrically complex cross-section and the
use of highly anisotropic composite materials, where determining the structural
properties of elements is diﬃcult.
Despite these challenges, super-element methods have been used for modelling
wind turbine blades. Gozcu et al. investigated the eﬀect of bend-twist coupling
on the loads in wind turbines whilst using a super-element blade model. Blade
tip deﬂections were found to be up to 15% higher, and blade damage equivalent
loads 15 and 40% lower in the edgewise and ﬂapwise directions for the super-
element method when compared to the full model [22]. The aim of the study
was not to calibrate the super-element model with high precision, but instead
to investigate bend-twist coupling, though nonetheless this result suggests that
there are challenges in calibration of such a model.
A super-element method for modelling a wind turbine blade in an aero-elastic
simulation has the same advantages of a 3D brick or shell FEM model in that it
may be capable of capturing non-linear eﬀects such as local buckling at a trail-
ing edge crack, depending on the order reduction applied. The super-element
method has the potential to signiﬁcantly reduce computational cost, meaning a
larger number of simulations can be run for diﬀerent damage severity, damage
types and environmental conditions. Such a method would allow the evalua-
tion of blade SHM algorithms with realistic damage cases, without expensive
experiments to real blades, or excessive computational demand. Implementing
a super-element approach was considered outside the scope of this project. An
alternative to implementing a super-element method is to use readily available
beam-element models commonly included in aero-elastic simulation software
such as HAWC2.
2.3.3
Beam-element method
In aero-elastic simulation tools, wind turbine blades are commonly modelled as
a series of beam elements. In HAWC2, Timoshenko beam elements are used.
Timoshenko beam theory, unlike classical Euler-Bernoulli beam theory, includes
shear deformation and rotational deformation eﬀects, which has the eﬀect of
reducing beam stiﬀness and eigen-frequencies, making Timoshenko beam theory
appropriate for modelling thick beams and composite sandwich structures, such
as wind turbine blades [23]. To avoid violating assumptions of small rotations
in linear beam theory, wind turbine blades are modelled by a number of beam
==PAGE:26==
14
Literature review
elements, within each of which, deﬂections are small.
In HAWC2, beam elements have only 1 dimension (length), along which the
structural properties are constant.
These 1-dimensional beam elements can
deﬂect and rotate in three dimensions and hence the node at the start and end
of each element has 6 degrees of freedom. The shear forces, moments, deﬂections
and rotations are coupled using the stiﬀness matrix:


Tx
Ty
Tz
Mx
My
Mz


=


K1,1
K1,2
. . .
K1,6
K2,1
...
...
K6,1
K6,6




τx
τy
τz
κx
κy
κz


(2.1)
Where T is a shear force, M is a moment, τ is a deﬂection and κ is a curvature,
and the x, y and z coordinates are the ﬂapwise, edgewise and longitudinal blade
directions used in this thesis.
Initially, HAWC2 only used isotropic Timoshenko beams, where only the diago-
nal elements of the stiﬀness matrix are deﬁned, and all other elements are zero.
Branner et al. later included anisotropic beams in HAWC2 [24]. Both of these
methods are described below.
2.3.3.1
Isotropic beam elements
In the isotropic Timoshenko beam method, only the diagonal elements of the
stiﬀness matrix are non-zero. Non-linear coupling eﬀects such as bend-twist are
important for wind turbine blades due to the use of highly anisotropic materials
and asymmetric geometry. In HAWC2, these eﬀects are accounted for by the
deﬁnition of the shear centre and elastic centre of the beam elements, which
has the eﬀect of adding a ﬁctitious moment at each beam element due to the
displacement of loads from the shear or elastic centre. When using isotropic
beam elements, HAWC2 requires the structural properties listed in Table 2.1
as inputs, where the x, y and z coordinates are the ﬂapwise, edgewise and
longitudinal blade directions.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Modelling blade damage
15
Table 2.1: Timeshenko beam parameters used in structural model of HAWC2
Parameter
Name
Units
r
Radius
m
m
Mass per unit length
kg/m
xm, ym
Mass center
m
ri,x, ri,y
Radius of gyration
m
xs, ys
Shear center
m
E
Modulus of elasticity
N/m2
G
Shear modulus of elasticity
N/m2
Ix, Iy
Area moment of inertia
m4
K
Torsional stiﬀness constant
-
kx, ky
Shear factor
-
A
Cross sectional area
m2
θz
Structural pitch
deg
xe, ye
Centre of elasticity
m
From the 8 properties related to the beam stiﬀness (E,G,Ix, Iy,K ,kx, ky,xx,
xy and A), 6 beam properties with physical meaning can be found:
1. EA - Longitudinal stiﬀness
2. EIx, EIy - Flapwise and edgewise bending stiﬀness
3. kxGA, kyGA - Flapwise and edgewise shear stiﬀness
4. KG - Torsional stiﬀness
To convert from the 6 beam properties to the 8 beam parameters, two variables
must be set (e.g. the area and shear modulus of elasticity), and the remaining
can be calculated based on relationships between them.
The 6 beam properties can be modiﬁed at any position on the blade.
This
method is interesting for this thesis as it allows modiﬁcation of blade to create
simple models of blade damage, such as modelling a trailing edge crack by
reducing torsional stiﬀness.
2.3.3.2
Anisotropic beam elements
Branner et al. later included an anisotropic beam-element model for wind tur-
bine blades in HAWC2 [24], to allow investigation of the eﬀect of anisotropic
==PAGE:28==
16
Literature review
composite materials on non-linear coupling eﬀects, such as the bend-twist eﬀect
on large wind turbine blades. The method was veriﬁed using a start-up opera-
tion with a HAWC2 model of the NREL 5 MW reference turbine, ﬁnding similar
blade tip displacements to the isotropic beam model. The advancement of the
method is that loads and moments in one axis can be coupled directly with
deﬂections and curvatures in another axis, through the use of the oﬀ-diagonal
elements in the stiﬀness matrix. This was previously only possible indirectly
using the shear and elastic centre of isotropic beam elements.
The anisotropic beam approach is interesting for this thesis as SHM algorithms
can be analysed with respect to the eﬀect of changing to linear bending stiﬀness
parameters in addition to coupling eﬀects such as bend-twist.
2.3.3.3
Limitations of Timoshenko beam elements
Timoshenko beam elements, both isotropic and anisotropic, have limitations.
Firstly, they assume that the structural properties are constant across the length
of a beam.
This is not true for a wind turbine blade, where the composite
material lay-up and thickness and cross-section geometry changes along the
blade length.
Using a suﬃcient number of beam elements to model a wind
turbine blade helps to reduce the eﬀect of averaging structural properties to form
beam elements. This approximation may be further challenged when modelling
a damaged blade where there exists a sharp drop in a structural property (for
example shear stiﬀness).
The simpliﬁcation of a 3D structure to a single 1-dimensional beam has further
implications. For damages such as trailing edge cracks, more complex deforma-
tions such as local buckling at a trailing edge crack [18] cannot be captured by
such a model.
A ﬁnal challenge is presented by the need to obtain structural properties of
the beam elements. For symmetric structures such as wind turbine towers, this
can be easily be done using analytical equations. This is not possible for wind
turbine blades, due to the complex geometry of the cross-section and the use of
anisotropic materials (glass ﬁbre plies with varying orientation). The Technical
University of Denmark has developed Beam Cross Section Analysis Software
(BECAS) for such purposes.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Modelling blade damage
17
2.3.3.4
BECAS
The Beam Cross Section Analysis Software (BECAS) is capable of analysing
wind turbine blade cross sections in order to produce the stiﬀness parameters
required to model the wind turbine blade as a series of beam elements [25].
BECAS is easily interfaced with HAWC2, as blade beam properties can be
exported to a format ready for use in HAWC2 aeroelastic simulations.
BECAS calculates beam properties by modelling each cross-section as an in-
ﬁnitely long beam. This has limitations when simulating damage such as cracks,
which are also simulated as inﬁnitely long. In the case of a trailing edge crack,
this method has the eﬀect of overestimating stiﬀness reductions, as an inﬁnitely
long crack is not contained and supported by the undamaged sections of the
blade at both extremes of the crack. An inﬁnite beam is not a good approxima-
tion for such situations, and hence BECAS is not recommended for simulating
trailing edge cracks. An alternative to BECAS is to obtain blade element stiﬀ-
ness properties of a damaged blade from FEM analysis.
2.3.3.5
Beam properties from FEM
FEM analysis has already been performed on wind turbine blades with trailing
edge cracks [18, 26] and web-foot debonds [4].
Berring et al. compared stiﬀness reductions due to a trailing edge crack when
modelled by BECAS and a 3D brick FEM approach, ﬁnding that BECAS sig-
niﬁcantly overestimates torsional stiﬀness reduction. The FEM model showed
lower torsional stiﬀness reductions that peaked sharply in the middle of the
crack, and reduced towards the crack extremities [3]. This is because when us-
ing the 3D FEM approach, the damaged region of the blade is supported by
undamaged sections on either side, whereas in BECAS, the damaged section is
modelled as an inﬁnitely long beam, and hence an open section, with no sup-
ports at crack extremities. Using the 3D FEM approach, the torsional stiﬀness
reduced by 5% and 27% at the crack centre for a 5m and 10m length trailing
edge crack, respectively [3].
Myrent et al. used ANSYS to model web foot debonds of the NREL 5 MW
Reference Turbine [4]. Using Sandia National Laboratories’ Blade Property Ex-
traction tool, Myrent et al. applied loads in each of the 6 degrees of freedoms
at the tip of the 3D FEM blade model. The calculated displacements along the
length of the blade were used to calculate a 6 by 6 anisotropic beam stiﬀness
matrix at selected positions on the blade, which are taken as the stiﬀness prop-
==PAGE:30==
18
Literature review
erties of a beam-element model of the damaged blade. They found that the
torsional stiﬀness of the blade reduced by between 5 and 35% for a web foot
debonds between 3 and 10 m long, respectively. Flapwise and edgewise bending
stiﬀness and the axial stiﬀness were also aﬀected, but less severely.
Stiﬀness reductions from both these studies can be used in a beam-element
model to test further SHM methods. Another method of modelling damage in
BECAS has been studied using fracture mechanics, by looking at the density of
oﬀ-axis matrix cracks in the blade plies.
2.3.3.6
Oﬀ-axis cracks
Ardila et al. proposed and developed a method for predicting the eﬀect of dam-
age on the structural properties of wind turbine blades [27]. The method uses a
2D ﬁnite-element based cross-section model, which is capable of analysing oﬀ-
axis cracks. Oﬀ-axis cracks are matrix cracks between ﬁbres in plies oriented
away from blade longitudinal axis. The study describes oﬀ-axis matrix cracks
as important due to their early onset as one of the ﬁrst damage mechanisms in
multi-directional composite laminates, from which wind turbine blades are con-
structed. Ardila et al. describe damage progression resulting from the initiation,
then later saturation of oﬀ-axis cracks that lead to a stable state, as shown in
Figure 2.3. After crack saturation is reached, other damage mechanisms, such
as de-lamination and ﬁbre damage, start to take place and reduce the stiﬀness
further.
Oﬀ-axis matrix cracks primarily exist in plies with ﬁbres oriented away from
the blade longitudinal axis, where the matrix material bonding ﬁbres carries
a larger fraction of stresses in the material; hence the plies of interest in a
wind turbine blade are the bi-axial and tri-axial plies. The method of modelling
oﬀ-axis cracks, however, requires only unidirectional laminates. Bi-axial and tri-
axial plies in the lay-up of the blade are modelled as unidirectional plies with
the appropriate ﬁbre orientation and thickness to achieve the same stiﬀness
properties as the original lay-up.
A multi-scale approach is used, coupling material mechanics, macro-scale eﬀects,
sub-component and entire blade analysis.
The method allows prediction of
global blade stiﬀness parameters based on oﬀ-axis crack density in any region of
a given blade cross-section. The results were veriﬁed by experimental deﬂection
results on a fatigue tested blade [27]. Further work by Ardila et al. shows that
the saturation of oﬀ-axis cracks has the eﬀect of reducing bending stiﬀness of
a blade cross-section by between 5 and 20%, and between 10 and 40% for the
torsional stiﬀness, depending on the ﬁbre orientation: for layouts with ﬁbres
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Modelling blade damage
19
Figure 2.3: The eﬀects of oﬀ-axis cracks on global properties of a wind turbine
blade [28]
oriented along the axis of loading, the ﬁbres carry most of the load, and matrix
oﬀ-axis cracks are not as critical [29].
The limitations of this method are the assumptions of uni-directional ﬁbre ma-
terial, which means multi-directional plies must be modelled as separate plies
with a thickness that gives the overall laminate the same structural properties
as the original lay-up. The method also assumes perfect adhesive bonding at
joints. As only oﬀ-axis matrix cracks are considered, no damage to ﬁbres is
considered: only early stage damage can be modelled with this method. Fur-
thermore, this method uses a cross-section based approached, implemented in
BECAS, therefore is also subject to the limitations of modelling each section
as an inﬁnitely long beam; stiﬀness reductions may be overestimated due to
the lack of boundary conditions on inﬁnitely long cracks. Acknowledging these
limitations, SHM algorithms can be tested to see if they can detect a change in
fatigue damage in wind turbine blades, using oﬀ-axis matrix cracks as a proxy
for fatigue damage.
2.3.4
Discussion
Overall, a review of 3 methods for modelling the blade structure in aero-elastic
simulations have been presented, including high ﬁdelity and computationally
==PAGE:32==
20
Literature review
expensive 3D FEM approaches, super-element methods with reduced compu-
tational expense and low ﬁdelity beam-element methods, along with various
methods for calculating beam-element properties.
As this thesis focuses on evaluating SHM algorithms with various damage types,
and in a range of conditions, less computationally demanding methods are de-
sired. As SHM methods without additional sensors are likely to detect only
more severe damage, a high ﬁdelity model may not be required to model blade
structures with such damage.
2.4
Review of existing structural health monitor-
ing methods for wind turbine blades
In this section, an introduction to SHM is presented, the diﬀerent types of SHM
for wind turbine blades are described, and ﬁnally, methods for performing blade
SHM without additional sensors are investigated and compared.
Promising
methods are selected and proposed for further analysis in this thesis.
2.4.1
Introduction to SHM
SHM aims to provide information about damage, strength and remaining life
of a structure through ongoing remote sensing and evaluation. There are four
damage identiﬁcation levels in SHM [30]:
1. Detection
2. Localisation
3. Assessment
4. Consequence
The ﬁrst level is ability to detect damage, whilst the second level allows the
location of damage to be determined. The third level provides information about
the size of damage. The fourth level gives information about how critical damage
is with respect to the safety of the structure [31]. The ﬁrst level is considered a
minimum requirement for a successful SHM system, without which, the following
levels cannot be achieved. The second and third levels allow eﬀective planning
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Review of existing structural health monitoring methods for wind
turbine blades
21
of inspection and maintenance activities, though the fourth level is the most
valuable to wind farm operators, enabling informed decision making regarding
turbine operation and urgency of repair [32, 33].
As no SHM system for wind turbine blades has been adopted widely, blade dam-
age is usually detected after critical failure or by routine inspection. Even with
an installed SHM system, blade inspection would be necessary to conﬁrm the
results of the SHM algorithm after damage is detected, as well as to perform lo-
calisation, assessment and consequence evaluation, depending on the capability
of the SHM system implemented.
Until recent years, blade inspection was done manually by a service operator
with rope access, which is an expensive and time consuming task that exposes
technicians to higher risk, due to working at heights and diﬃcult access. Local-
isation of damage by SHM methods would be crucial in optimising maintenance
due to the cost and time taken to inspect very large blades. Determining which
blade on a turbine is damaged is considered the ﬁrst task of localisation. By
achieving this without further localisation, the time taken for inspection could
be signiﬁcantly reduced, as not all three blades would need inspection. Locali-
sation of damage to a speciﬁc part of the blade further reduces inspection time
and cost. Modern blade inspection techniques do not require rope access, and
instead use much faster and safer techniques, such as remote photography and
drones. Hence the requirement for damage localisation may be less important
than it was historically. Damage localisation will not be a focus of this thesis,
which will instead focus on detection and assessment of severity.
SHM has the goal of monitoring structures, which in the context of wind tur-
bines, are towers, foundations and blades. Condition monitoring is a related
topic, which monitors the health and correct operation of electric, electronic
and mechanical components. Condition monitoring for mechanical components,
particularly rotating machinery (e.g. generators, gearboxes, pitch control sys-
tems), is a well studied ﬁeld, with signiﬁcant research and commercial solutions
that have been widely adopted and matured [34]. Whilst some techniques and
sensor technologies from condition monitoring are applicable to the monitor-
ing of structures, the size of components and frequencies of operation typically
mean that SHM presents a diﬀerent challenge to that presented by condition
monitoring.
In recent years, there has been an increasing focus on detecting severe damage
to large civil structures, such as bridges. Research into SHM applied to large
rotating structures such as wind turbine blades, at a higher sensitivity level
than that seen for civil structures, has also gained attention, though has not
seen successful conversion to commercial solutions and applications.
Cawley
et al.
suggest that the lack of focus of academic research into the business
==PAGE:34==
22
Literature review
cost-beneﬁt of implementation and the lack of veriﬁcation cases on industrial
structures contribute to this [34].
SHM for wind turbine towers and foundations has been studied, and commer-
cially available systems are currently available [35]. For oﬀshore monopiles, the
change in soil conditions, scour, and marine growth play an important role in
the stability of the support structure, and can change signiﬁcantly with time.
The operational dynamics are somewhat simpler for towers and foundations
than for blades, and hence condition monitoring for these structures is more
straightforward, although sensor reliability at depth in saline water is also a key
issue [36]. Some oﬀshore wind farm developers routinely install SHM algorithms
for wind turbine foundations for a small sample of turbines on each wind farm,
to ensure the stability of soil and strength of foundations throughout the wind
farms operating life.
2.4.2
Types of SHM for wind turbine blades
Methods for SHM for wind turbine blades can be split into two categories; local
sensing methods and global sensing methods [37]. Each of these approaches is
described brieﬂy, and some examples presented. More detailed descriptions are
given for selected methods that may be applicable to low-frequency SCADA
signals (1-10 Hz), including tower-top acceleration and blade load sensors.
Local methods are characterised by those aiming to measure local eﬀects in a
speciﬁc part of the blade, for example acoustic emissions from crack progression
[38, 39, 40], or increased strain due to cracks [37, 41].
These methods use
sensors near the location of damage on the blade, usually with sampling rates
much higher than existing SCADA measurements (above 10 Hz). They typically
target areas of the blade that are more prone to damage (e.g. the trailing edge)
and detect speciﬁc damage types (e.g. trailing edge separation), or use a large
number of sensors [42] in order to achieve a higher spatial resolution, allowing
SHM levels 1 and 2; detection and localisation of damage.
Global methods aim to detect phenomenon that eﬀect the entire blade or the
turbine as a whole; these are usually vibration-based, aiming to measure changes
in dynamic properties such as blade modal frequencies or shapes [43, 44, 45].
They can require less sensors than local methods, employing sensors that may
be far away from the damaged parts of blades, although some methods (such as
measuring modal shapes) still require multiple sensors along the blades length.
Local methods have a higher potential to reach higher level classiﬁcation, with
localisation and assessment being key objectives of proposed methods. The key
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Review of existing structural health monitoring methods for wind
turbine blades
23
disadvantage is that they require signiﬁcant extra instrumentation and data
processing, adding cost, both due to hardware and additional maintenance and
downtime as a result of sensor failure. Global methods may use less sensors to
detect a larger range of damage types, with some methods using only existing
sensors already integrated in wind turbine SCADA systems. As they aim to
detect changes in the blade as a whole, they can be insensitive to small dam-
ages. Reduced instrumentation requirements, however, can make these methods
much cheaper to implement. As global methods use sensors that are further
from damaged areas of a blade, it is also generally more diﬃcult to localise
damage. Assessing damage progression can sometimes be easier, depending on
the method employed. False positives can also be caused as the sensors used in
global methods may be aﬀected by damage or degradation in other wind turbine
components.
2.4.3
Local methods
Local sensing methods proposed in literature are based on strain measurement,
most recently with a focus on optic ﬁbre sensors, or on acoustic techniques using
piezo-electric sensors or accelerometers.
Optical methods:
There have been signiﬁcant recent developments in op-
tical strain sensors. Now, a single optical ﬁbre can measure strain over large
distances (around the whole blade perimeter), either at discrete points using
Optical Fibre Bragg Gratings, or continuously over the entire ﬁbre length using
Brillouin optical time-domain analysis. Using integrated sensors, these methods
have been used during laboratory fatigue tests of blades up to 4 m long to detect
and localise damage, both at low and high damage severity [37, 41]. The advan-
tages of optical sensors are their mechanical robustness and ability to measure
at many positions using a single sensor. The key disadvantage of optical meth-
ods is that integration of sensors in blades is still costly, and these techniques
have yet to be proven on large blades and on operating wind turbines.
Many other techniques also propose the use of optical strain measurements,
though as these are based on global vibration eﬀects, these are described later
in Section 2.4.4.
Acoustic emissions:
Both passive and active vibration based methods have
been the focus of recent research. In both the active and passive approaches,
an array of sensors is required to map damage-prone areas, or the entire blade.
==PAGE:36==
24
Literature review
In the passive methods, crack initiation and advancement causes acoustic emis-
sions, which are measured by piezoelectric sensors or accelerometers to track
damage progression in an operating wind turbine [38, 39, 40]. Alternately, in
the active vibration approach, actuators are used to excite the structure, and the
propagation of stress waves through the blade is measured, where damage can
be detected due to cracks and blade damage changing the propagation of stress
waves [46]. Piezoelectric transducers or high frequency (16 kHz) accelerome-
ters are used for measurement, though these sensors may not be suitable for
the oﬀshore wind industry, due to the harsh operating environment and poor
mechanical reliability of the sensors [47].
An active vibration based method using a low power wireless network of ac-
celerometers was proposed to overcome the challenge or reliability and sensor
cost, though localisation and assessment of damage progression was diﬃcult
[48].
In one notable study, an active-vibration based method was implemented on an
operating Vestas V26 turbine, using 12 accelerometers (16 kHz), to successfully
detect and track the progression of an artiﬁcial trailing edge opening, from 15
to 45 cm long [42].
Tests were done over a 3.5 month period with a range
of weather conditions, and allowed progression of damage to be detected by an
unsupervised learning method, which used a co-variance based damage indicator
to compare the current state to the healthy state. The damage indicator also
reduced signiﬁcantly after repair, though some anomalous results were obtained.
One signiﬁcant limitation of passive acoustic measurement is that it requires
continuous measurement in order to detect the initiation and progression of
cracks. If such a system only measures sporadically, crack events may be missed
and damage not successfully detected. This is not true for other techniques,
which measure a property of the blade that is diﬀerent before and after the
blade is damaged, rather than trying to capture the damage event. A high data
availability would be required for useful commercial application, as well as the
ability to detect in a large range of operational conditions.
Reduced sensor basis:
Other methods have explored Kriging and Kalman
ﬁltering to model a continuous spatio-temporal measurement of the blade, with
discrete measurement points used to ﬁnd discrepancies with respect to the mod-
elled data [49]. The proposed method may be used in combination with local
sensing methods for reduction in the number of sensors required.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Review of existing structural health monitoring methods for wind
turbine blades
25
2.4.4
Global methods
Global methods use vibration based measurement, typically from accelerometers
or strain gauges.
These approaches rely on the structural damage of blades
aﬀecting the dynamic properties of the entire blade [7]. As operational blade
dynamics occur at low frequencies, these methods are generally more applicable
to existing SCADA measurement signals.
Vibration methods for SHM are well studied for beam and plate elements in
civil structures (bridges, buildings etc.), though much research has also been
conducted with a speciﬁc focus on wind turbine blades. Vibration methods can
be classiﬁed as model-based methods or response based (output only) methods.
In model-based approaches, a detailed numerical model is available for dam-
age identiﬁcation [43]. Methods that use large numerical models, such as high
ﬁdelity 3D FEM models, are computationally expensive, and more diﬃcult to
verify due to model complexity. Challenges are also presented by further com-
plexity of variable environmental and operational conditions. For these reasons,
it has been suggested that they are inappropriate for online condition monitor-
ing of operational turbines [43]. Model-based approaches will not be discussed
further in this thesis.
For response-based methods, these aim to detect damage by analysing changes
in global dynamics of a wind turbine, such as natural frequencies, mode shapes,
or strain/curvature shapes of structures. Methods found for each of these areas
are discussed in turn.
Natural frequency methods:
A large number of studies have investigated
vibration based methods, looking at the changes in natural frequencies of tur-
bine blades with damage.
Whilst there are limitations of applying classical
Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) to operating wind turbines due to the time-
variant nature of wind turbines [44], some methods have been demonstrated to
improve precision in determining modal parameters of wind turbines [50]. The
OMA procedures used involve complicated signal processing methods, usually
implemented by commercially available software and hardware packages [50].
Even if successfully and accurately implemented, OMA has previously shown
that natural frequencies of operating wind turbines and static blades are very
insensitive to stiﬀness changes: Adams et al. demonstrated a less than a 4%
change in natural frequencies resulting from a 25% reduction in stiﬀness of the
blade near the root, for a single blade [45]. Studies not speciﬁc to wind turbine
blades also state that frequency- based methods for damage detection of beam
==PAGE:38==
26
Literature review
structures are limited due to small variations in natural frequencies due to dam-
age [43]. Environmental and operational noise can mask these small variations,
which are usually smaller than the conﬁdence interval for the instrumentation
being used.
The advantage of using natural frequencies to detect blade damage is that such
a method is easy to apply in a range of conditions, and can be done using
blade load sensors or even using tower-top acceleration signals. This method
is not recommended, due to the lack of sensitivity to blade damage.
Other
methods have been proposed to calculate damage indicators based on blade
natural frequencies; one example is principal component analysis, which Hui et
al. used with blade tip accelerometers to produce damage indicators with higher
sensitivity to changes in natural frequencies due to blade damage; experimental
results on a small operational turbine show damage detection is possible, though
assessment of damage severity was not clear [37].
Mode-shape and curvature-modes:
Whilst mode shapes of a beam struc-
ture are signiﬁcantly less sensitive to environmental conditions [51], these meth-
ods are diﬃcult to apply to wind turbines as a series of sensors are required,
and because mode shapes are hard to measure without noise contamination
[43]. For this reason, recent research has focused on curvature-modes, which are
much more sensitive to damage, especially in the damaged region of a beam,
and hence have a higher potential for damage localisation [52].
One study proposed a combined FEM dynamic response and curvature-mode
method for damage detection of wind turbine blades [12]. The study used ac-
celerometers near to the damaged area to localise and estimate severity of cracks.
Whilst the curvature mode shapes are more sensitive to damage, sensors are re-
quired on blade damage-prone areas, in addition to a numerical FEM model
that is updated based on experimental data. This method has also yet to be
demonstrated on an operating turbine. The study also describes the complexity
in damage modes as well as dynamic and static properties of very large wind
turbine blades; scaling issues to commercial sized wind turbine blades may be
expected.
Simulation-based studies of larger blades using curvature and modal strain en-
ergy methods have also shown higher sensitivity, with good blade damage locali-
sation, but these methods also require a large number of sensors along the length
of the blade [53], with some methods using Fibre Bragg Gratings discussed in
Section 2.4.3 [11]. Camera-based methods have been proposed to measure de-
ﬂection and hence modal shape and curvature eﬀects without an array of sensors
installed on the blades, which may also be promising [54].
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Review of existing structural health monitoring methods for wind
turbine blades
27
Wavelet transforms have also been proposed: one study introduced a trailing
edge de-bond to a 34 m blade on a test rig, and used wavelet transforms for
modal analysis based on 6 tri-axial accelerometers [55]. The study hypothesised
that a larger number of sensors would be needed to successfully detect dam-
age, though again conﬁrming that modal parameters are not very sensitive to
damage.
Transmittance methods:
Transmittance (or transmissibility) analysis has
been widely studied in multi-degree of freedom structures [56], and has more
recently been investigated for monitoring the health of wind turbine blade [2, 57].
Transmittance compares diﬀerent sensors in the frequency domain in order to
produce a single damage indicator. The methods require low computational
eﬀort as are based on Fast Fourier Transforms only. The transmittance damage
indicator is calculated as the spectra ratio of the frequency response of diﬀerent
sensors, either at diﬀerent positions on the same blade, or at the same position
on diﬀerent blades, with one blade as a healthy reference. The transmittance
function is proposed to be independent of loading conditions, depending only
on mass, stiﬀness and damping [2].
One study applied transmittance analysis to compare reference and damaged
blades, ﬁrst with a simple model with an excitement signal in the range of 1
to 20 Hz, and later using the transmittance function to compare results from
6 accelerometers along a blade sampling at 100 Hz, before and after fatigue
and strength testing [2]. The study showed in both numerical and experimental
stages that the transmittance damage indicator can detect and assess severity
of damage on the blade.
A similar study used 9 optical ﬁbre Bragg gratings for measuring strain along the
blade during cyclic loading of a 40 m blade at a 20 Hz sampling rate [57]. Using
a similar transmittance damage indicator, damage was detected and located
well, though the authors also discuss challenges in applying the method to an
operating turbine, as load eﬀects on the condition monitoring results may be
ampliﬁed by non-linearity in the blades.
The advantages of transmittance based methods is that they may capture more
information about blade damage than only looking mode shapes or natural
frequencies, as these methods compare the entire frequency response. Zhang
et al.
propose that the method is independent of environmental conditions
and loads, and only depends on mass, stiﬀness and damping of the structure
[2]. This is an advantage as SHM can be performed without a high certainty of
environmental and operational conditions, though the methods may also require
very severe blade damage in order for blade stiﬀness to be aﬀected.
==PAGE:40==
28
Literature review
Whilst the previously described studies use additional sensors on the blades,
such methods may be applicable to existing sensors that are found on most
modern wind turbines, such as blade load sensors and tower-top accelerations.
Rotor anisotropy
Experimental research into using operational modal anal-
ysis for damage detection in wind turbine blades showed that blade natural
frequencies change little as a result of blade damage [45]. Whilst studying these
eﬀects, it was found that damage in a single blade results in noticeable changes
in wind turbine whirling modes [58]. This is because a change to the structural
properties of a single blade aﬀects the rotational symmetry of the rotor; this
eﬀect is hereon referred to rotor anisotropy.
A method was proposed using operational modal analysis on a whole rotor to
detect anisotropy on an operational Vestas V27 turbine [10].
The proposed
method successfully detects artiﬁcial blade damage, as well as tracking dam-
age progression, though requires blade tip accelerometers and complex signal
processing methods to extract modal parameters. In the same study, it was dis-
covered that rotor anisotropy could also be detected by the rise of the secondary
frequency component of tower side-to-side vibration. The study also notes that
the primary side-to-side component from the forward whirling mode coincides
with the secondary side-to-side component of the backward whirling mode, with
the reverse also true. As both forward and backward whirling modes are present
in an operational turbine, the rise in the secondary component of either whirling
mode may be masked by the primary component of the other.
A further study proposed a method to overcome this issue [1]. A single tower-
top accelerometer is required, in addition to the rotor azimuth position. Simple
signal processing methods are used, in which the tower vibration signal is mod-
ulated, cross-spectra of the modulated and original signals are found, and the
coherence is calculated on the forward and backward modulated cross-spectra.
The coherence plot allows the rise of the whirling mode secondary side-to-side
component to be detected and blade damage tracked. The study uses a simple
mass-spring model to demonstrate the method, though the method was later
demonstrated by Tcherniak et al. on aero-elastic simulations of the DTU 10
MW Reference Turbine in HAWC2 with a trailing edge crack, which forms the
basis of this study, as described in Chapter 3.
The advantage of using rotor anisotropy for SHM of wind turbine blades is
that it can be done without installing additional sensors, and may be more
sensitive to damage than other proposed methods using global dynamics. The
disadvantages of such methods are that it may be sensitive to other forms of
rotor imbalance, such as pitch imbalance, or mass imbalance whose existence are
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Review of existing structural health monitoring methods for wind
turbine blades
29
an unavoidable result of variations in manufacturing. If such a method cannot
distinguish between mass and pitch imbalance, it will not be of practical value,
as wind farm operators will not be able to distinguish between blade damage
that needs inspection and repair, and mass imbalance, which cannot be repaired,
or pitch imbalance, which can be corrected remotely.
Furthermore, as the method aims to detect a change in whirling modes (in
which blades are deﬂecting in the edgewise direction), this method may only
be sensitive to damage that aﬀects the edgewise stiﬀness of the blade. Further
investigation is required to determine the sensitivity of the method.
Existing instrumentation
Some modern wind turbines include optical strain
gauges near the root of each blade. Structural health monitoring approaches us-
ing these sensors have also been proposed: one study used the optical blade load
sensors to estimate root bending moment. The bending moment was taken as
a damage indicator, with alarm limits (three severity levels) that are calculated
based on the blade ultimate loads and safety factors [59].
The alarm limits
are updated every 10-minutes using statistical moments of previous blade root
bending moments. The study accounts for pitch and turbine power to determine
if blade root bending moments are within a normal range on an operational 3
MW turbine. The study showed a robust measurement and data quality control
methodology, eﬀectively ﬁnding and removing corrupted data and preventing
false positives. As there were no blade faults introduced or observed, the sensi-
tivity of the damage indicator to blade faults has yet to be tested. This method
may be interesting for further study and application to simulated damaged tur-
bines.
A study by Myrent et al. used a 3D FEM model in ANSYS to calculate stiﬀ-
ness reduction of a beam-element blade model as a result of web-foot debonds
[4]. They used identical aero-elastic simulations to compare damaged and un-
damaged cases by looking at the root-mean-squared (RMS) value and frequency
response of several signals. The signal that was most aﬀected by blade dam-
age was the tower-top side-side accelerations. The RMS value of the tower-top
side-side accelerations was also, however, highly sensitive to the wind speed:
the relative change in this value for a 10 m web foot debond compared to the
undamaged turbine was 10% at rated wind speed but less than 1% above 22
m/s.
The blade tip accelerations were less sensitive to wind speed, but still sensitive
to damage; Myrent et al. showed that the 1P frequency response of blade tip
accelerations changed by more than 10%, at all wind speeds for all debonds of
length greater than 1 m.
==PAGE:42==
30
Literature review
The blade root moments were much less sensitive to damage, which only changed
by more than 3% for a debond length greater than 10 m. These results conﬁrm
that the tower-top acceleration signal is of interest to blade SHM, though that
detecting blade damage using blade load sensors at blade root may be more
challenging.
Myrent et al. achieved good detection and assessment of severity of the web-foot
debonds by developing a decision tree that ﬁrst requires a 1% change in the RMS
value of the tower-top side-side accelerations, followed by a 5% change in the 1P
frequency response of the blade tip accelerations. Such a method is not robust to
application on real wind turbines for two reasons; ﬁrstly, direct comparisons of
time-series from damaged and undamaged turbines in identical environmental
and operational conditions is not possible, and secondly, changes in the 1P
frequency response of the blade tip accelerations greater than 5% are frequently
observed on undamaged real turbines due to environmental excitation, mass
imbalance and pitch imbalance (see Figure 4.6 and Chapter 6 later).
This
method also requires the installation of blade tip acceleration sensors on each
blade, which is costly and impractical.
2.4.5
Combined global and local approach
Some projects aim to employ a multi-scale strategy, taking advantage of the ben-
eﬁts of both global and local methods and diﬀerent sensor types. One example
of this multi-scale approach was proposed using high-frequency local methods
for the detection of fatigue damage and low-frequency vibration methods for the
assessment of damage progression [60]. The study demonstrated measurements
on a single blade in varying boundary conditions with high frequency modal
analysis, though without introducing additional damage.
The ReliaBlade project at the Technical University of Denmark is another ex-
ample of ongoing research to develop multi-scale wind turbine blade monitoring
methodologies [61]. The ReliaBlade project aims to create a unique digital twin
for each wind turbine blade, based on numerical models of the designed blade,
inspection of as-built imperfections, continuous monitoring during operation
and maintenance (structural health monitoring) and modelling of potential and
actual repair scenarios.
A multi-scale approach is likely to perform better at damage detection, local-
isation and assessment due to improved information. Such a system has the
potential to be more robust due to multiple damage indicators and diagnostic
tools. The key disadvantage is the added cost for multiple sensor systems op-
erating at various scales. With increased instrumentation, the risk of sensor
==PAGE:43==
2.5 Summary of ﬁndings
31
failure and sensor-related downtime and maintenance also increases. A larger
capacity for storing, processing and analysing data is also required.
2.5
Summary of ﬁndings
By investigating research into blade failure modes, some damage types were
found both through experimental and analytical studies, as well as observed in
real turbines - these were adhesive joint failure, most in the form of trailing edge
cracks or web-foot (shell-spar) debonds. In addition, lightning damage was also
commonly observed in operational wind farms, which may result in cracks at
the blade tip, or even loss of part of the tip of the blade. Damage was most
commonly observed at a 1/3 of the blades radius.
These damage types are
proposed for further study.
In order to simulate these damage types, three approaches for modelling the
structure of wind turbine blades were found; high ﬁdelity 3D FEM models with
high accuracy but high complexity and computational cost, super-element meth-
ods with reduced computational cost, and ﬁnally beam-element methods, which
are computationally eﬃcient but have limited resolution to model blade damage
types and capture non-linear eﬀects such as local buckling. As this thesis aims
to investigate the types of damage, damage severity and environmental condi-
tions required for damage detection, a 3D FEM model is not practical due to
computational expense. A beam-element approach, as included in HAWC2, is
selected as this tool is well studied and validated, and the simple blade damage
models can easily be implemented.
A number of SHM methods were explored, including both global and local
methods. Of the local methods, optic ﬁbre sensors were found to be the most
promising, though cost-eﬀective integration of these sensors in blade manufac-
turing has yet to occur. Global sensing methods that rely on natural frequencies,
modal shapes and modal curvatures were either insensitive to blade damage, or
require a large number of sensors for accurate detection of damage.
One novel approach was based on the changing dynamic behaviour of turbine
whirling modes due to rotor anisotropy, using tower top accelerometers, which
was demonstrated using a simple mass spring model of a wind turbine rotor [1],
with a further demonstration of the technique through HAWC2 simulations of
a blade with a trailing edge crack described in Chapter 3. Further investigation
of this method with various damage types and severity will help to determine if
this method is viable for use on operating turbines.
==PAGE:44==
32
Literature review
Another interesting method was the use of the transmittance function on ac-
celerometers along the length of the blade [2, 57]. The transmittance function
was proposed as a way of comparing the frequency spectra of sensors from
a healthy and damaged blade, independently of environmental conditions and
loads, in order to detect damage. It may also be interesting to investigate if this
technique can be used on blade load sensors, to compare spectral changes due
to rotor anisotropy, although Myrent et al. showed that blade root moments
are much less sensitive to blade damage than tower-top accelerations [4]. Blade
load measurements could be compared between blades on a single turbine, or
by comparison against a reference turbine.
The two SHM methods described above, as well as identiﬁcation of key damage
types and methods of modelling, provide a base for further analysis.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3
Basis for study
One promising method for performing SHM for wind turbine blades without
additional sensors was proposed by Tcherniak based on the sensitivity of tur-
bine whirling modes to rotor anisotropy, where rotor anisotropy is deﬁned as a
change in structural properties of a single blade resulting in a loss of rotational
symmetry of the rotor [1]. The method was originally demonstrated using a
simple mass-spring model of a wind turbine, in which the stiﬀness of one of the
blades (modelled by a single spring) was reduced.
Further analysis by Tcherniak used the same method with aero-elastic simula-
tions for a turbine with a trailing edge crack. The aero-elastic simulations used
a super-element method for the structural model of the wind turbine blades in
HAWC2 for the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine was used. The results show
that the proposed SHM algorithm was successful in detecting the blade dam-
age. This result formed the basis for this thesis, and is described in detail in
this chapter, including the model used and the results obtained. The method
applied is described in detail in the publication by Tcherniak [1] and repeated
in Section 4.2 later.
Results from the aero-elastic simulation with trailing edge crack were provided
by Tcherniak for use in this thesis. MatLab code for applying the methodology
was also provided, in addition to the results from the SHM algorithm applied to
the previously mentioned aero-elastic simulations. In this chapter, the method
==PAGE:46==
34
Basis for study
described by Tcherniak is reproduced in Python and applied to the aero-elastic
simulation results provided by Tcherniak. This serves as a veriﬁcation of the
anaylsis done by Tcherniak, a veriﬁcation of a correct implementation of Tch-
erniak’s SHM algorithm by the author of this thesis, and lastly, describes the
basis of this thesis.
3.1
Description of model
The DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine was simulated in the HAWC2 aero-elastic
simulation software. Simulations were done for 30 minutes at a wind speed of
17 m/s with a turbulence intensity of 17%. Identical simulations were repeated
for the same turbulent seed for four cases; an undamaged turbine, and turbines
with a trailing edge crack of length 4, 6, and 8 m. The trailing edge crack was
at 1/3 blade radius, on blade 1 only.
The standard DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine onshore tower was used, with a
fully constrained tower based to simulate an onshore foundation. The structural
model used for the blades was a super-element method using a Craig-Brampton
reduction model, as described in Section 2.3.2.
3.2
HAWC2 simulation results
Firstly, the blade loads and tower-top vibrations were investigated, to verify the
simulation results and compare cases with and without a trailing edge crack,
shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1 below shows that the time-series and power spectral density of the
tower-top accelerations and blade root bending moments are very similar for all
cases. This highlights the diﬃculty in detecting damage in the blades - it is
not immediately apparent by looking at the blade loads or tower-top vibrations,
neither in the time nor frequency domain. The only diﬀerence that was visible
between the undamaged and damaged cases was a small rise in the tower-top
side-side spectra at the ﬁrst rotor harmonic, shown in a zoomed plot in Figure
3.2.
Such a change is too small to be of practical use in detection of blade
damage; diﬀerences in the spectra due to turbulent seed would mask this change.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 SHM results
35
Figure 3.1: Time-series and power spectral density of tower-top accelerations
and blade 1 root bending moments, for HAWC2 super-element
simulations with no damage and a trailing edge crack of varying
length.
3.3
SHM results
Analysis of the HAWC2 super-element simulations using the SHM algorithm
based on tower-top accelerations [1] was previously done by Tcherniak. This
==PAGE:48==
36
Basis for study
Figure 3.2: Time-series and power spectral density of tower-top accelerations
and blade 1 root bending moments, for HAWC2 super-element
simulations with no damage and a trailing edge crack of varying
length.
analysis is reproduced below, to demonstrate the method and illustrate the out-
put from the SHM algorithm.
The reproduction of this anaylsis serves as a
veriﬁcation of the results produced by Tcherniak and a veriﬁcation of the imple-
mentation of the SHM method by the author of this thesis. As explained later
in the methodology (Section 4.2.1), the tower-top side-side signal is modulated
forward and backward by the azimuth signal, the cross-spectra of modulated
and original signal calculated, and the coherence of the two cross-spectra is
found. The paper by Tcherniak that demonstrates the method with a mass-
spring model states that peaks in the modulated coherence plot between rotor
harmonics indicates the rise of rotor anisotropy and hence blade damage [1].
Figure 3.3 shows the modulated coherence for undamaged and damaged tur-
bines.
Figure 3.3 shows peaks between the 5th and 6th rotor harmonic, with increas-
ing size for increasing crack length. When using identical simulations (same
turbulent seed), the trailing edge crack is detectable using this method, whilst
it was not visible on the time-series and frequency response of the tower-top
accelerations and blade loads.
These results indicate that this is a potentially viable method for wind turbine
blade structural health monitoring. Further investigation is needed to deter-
mine how robust the method is to diﬀerent turbulent seeds, wind conditions,
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Additional materials provided
37
Figure 3.3: Modulated coherence plot: Tower-top accelerations SHM method
for HAWC2 super-element simulations with no damage and a trail-
ing edge crack of varying length.
measurement noise, and to investigate what damage types and severity can be
detected.
3.4
Additional materials provided
In addition to the super-element HAWC2 simulation results and analysis per-
formed by Tcherniak, the following data, code and tools were provided for use
in this thesis:
• Model of the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine in HAWC2 [62]
• Percentage change in structural properties of the 34 m blade along the
blade length, as a result of a trailing edge crack, using 3D FEM analysis,
provided by Peter Berring [26]
• Beam element structural properties (HAWC2 ".st" ﬁles) for the DTU 10
MW Reference Turbine blade with oﬀ-axis matrix cracks for diﬀerent crack
densities, provided by Oscar Ardila, as described in [28]
==PAGE:50==
38
Basis for study
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Methodology
In Chapter 2, trailing edge cracks and web foot debonds were selected for further
study, due to their common occurrence in operational farms, experimental and
analytical studies, in addition to the expectation that they will aﬀect the blade
structure and dynamics in a more severe way, and hence be more appropriate
for detection using SHM without additional sensors.
Methods for modelling
damaged blades in aero-elastic simulations were described, and a beam-element
model selected, due to its low computation cost, bearing in mind its simpliﬁ-
cations and limitations. Two SHM algorithms for wind turbine blades without
the use of additional sensors were identiﬁed and proposed for further study, one
using tower-top accelerations, and another using a transmittance function.
In this chapter, the method of applying stiﬀness reductions to beam-elements
of the blade model is elaborated.
Next, the methodologies for applying the
SHM algorithms are presented. The SHM method using tower-top accelerations
and rotor anisotropy is explained, as proposed by Tcherniak [1]. The author
of this thesis proposes methods to calculate damage indicators based on the
output from the tower-top accelerations method. The SHM methods based on
the transmittance function studied by Yang et al. and Zhang et al. use multiple
sensors along the blade length [2, 56] - in this thesis, a modiﬁcation of the
method is proposed in order to use the transmittance function with blade root
load sensors, and hence avoid the installation of additional sensors.
==PAGE:52==
40
Methodology
Finally, the aero-elastic simulation set-up is described. One damage case is used
to investigate the eﬀect of the turbulent seed and environmental conditions on
the SHM algorithms. Based on this, the minimum number of turbulent seeds
required is determined, and environmental conditions are selected for further
analysis. A range of damage types will be investigated based on this experimen-
tal design, for which the results will be presented in Chapter 5.
4.1
Damage modelling
Based on current research reviewed in Chapter 2, the following two damage
cases were selected as the most interesting for testing SHM methods: trailing
edge cracks and web-foot debonds. These two cases are visualised in Figure 4.1
below. A method was also described for simulating oﬀ-axis cracks that occur in
composite material during early stage damage.
Figure 4.1: Diagram showing blade airfoil cross-section with a trailing edge
crack (left) and a web foot debond (right), for a wind turbine
airfoil with 3 shear webs (such as the DTU 10 MW Reference
Turbine). Black is the aerodynamic shell, blue are the shear webs,
and red is the crack/debond (adhesive failure).
The trailing edge crack and web-foot debond were modelled using an isotropic
Timoshenko beam-element model for the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine, at a
radial position of one third of the blade length from root. The blade damage was
modelled by applying stiﬀness reductions to the beam elements. Beam structural
properties for blades with oﬀ-axis matrix cracks were provided by Oscar Ardila
for use in this thesis. All three methods are described in more detail below. For
all damage cases analysed in this thesis, damage is only applied to a single blade
on the turbine, and the other two blades are left intact.
4.1.0.1
Trailing edge crack
Through 3D FEM analysis of the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine blade with a
trailing edge crack, Peter Berring showed a reduction in the torsional stiﬀness
and a change in the shear centre of the blade at the damaged section [3]. These
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Damage modelling
41
stiﬀness reductions were applied to the isotropic Timoshenko beam elements
of the DTU 10 MW blade in order to approximate this damage type using a
beam-element model. Figure 4.2 shows the modiﬁed beam properties for 5 and
10 m trailing edge crack.
Figure 4.2: Change in beam-element properties used to approximate a trailing
edge crack at one third radial position, based on results from [3]
27 nodes were used in the beam-element model of the blades, resulting in 26
beam elements per blade. Over each beam element, the structural properties
are constant, found by averaging over the length of each element. The resulting
distribution of structural properties used in simulations, as a result of the chosen
node distribution, is shown in Figure 4.3 below.
Figure 4.3 shows that the node distribution and number of beam elements used
is appropriate for the proposed damage cases, as averaging over the length of
each beam element does not signiﬁcantly change the distribution of structural
properties along the blade radius. The maximum percentage reduction in stiﬀ-
ness properties is also not aﬀected noticeably.
Even with an appropriate distribution of beam element nodes, there are other
limitation of using a beam-element model for the blade structure. Most im-
portantly, 1D beam-elements cannot capture non-linear and 3D eﬀects, such
as local buckling. This may be signiﬁcant for the proposed damage types; for
large cracks, local buckling can reduce the blade stiﬀness. Buckling may only
occur for deﬂections in one direction; an example of this is for a trailing edge
==PAGE:54==
42
Methodology
Figure 4.3: Structural properties of the sub-bodies used by HAWC2 simula-
tions for the given node distribution.
crack, where local buckling is more likely to happen for edgewise deﬂections
towards the trailing edge than deﬂections in the same plane towards the leading
edge. The asymmetric nature of such eﬀects may have an impact on the turbine
whirling modes and rotor anisotropy, which cannot be modelled by 1D beam
elements, whose stiﬀness does not change with deﬂection (no local buckling),
and whose stiﬀness is identical for positive or negative deﬂections in the same
plane.
Such a model hence has its limitations, though may still allow the eﬀect of the
proposed damage types on global turbine dynamics to be investigated.
4.1.0.2
Web foot debond
3D FEM shell analysis of a blade with a web-foot debonds was performed by
Myrent et al. [4], using the NREL 5 MW Reference Turbine. They applied
loads to the FEM shell model and measured deﬂections to calculate beam prop-
erties at selected positions on the blade, and reported 5% to 35% reductions
in the torsional stiﬀness due to web-foot debonds between 3 and 10 m long.
These results can be used to apply similar stiﬀness reductions to the DTU 10
MW Reference turbine for this thesis. Figure 4.4 shows the applied stiﬀness
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Damage modelling
43
Figure 4.4: Change in beam properties used to approximate a web-foot debond
at one third radial position using Timoshenko beam elements,
based on results from [4]
reductions of a Timoshenko beam for a 3 m and 10 m web-foot debond.
This damage case has the same limitations as the trailing edge crack described
previously, due to the use of beam elements which cannot capture local non-
linear eﬀects such as buckling, which may also be important in the case of
a web-foot debond. These assumptions may be more critical for more severe
damage cases under high deﬂections, the conditions under which buckling is
more likely to occur.
The asymmetric nature of local buckling due to deﬂection also illustrates the
challenge in estimating beam element structural properties - Myrent et al. used
a 3D FEM model and applied deﬂections to estimate the beam element stiﬀness
properties.
Had they applied deﬂections of a large magnitude, the stiﬀness
reduction due to local buckling may have been higher.
Likewise, had they
applied deﬂections with an equal magnitude but in the opposite direction for
each degree of freedom, the stiﬀness reduction due to local buckling may change.
==PAGE:56==
44
Methodology
4.1.0.3
Oﬀ-axis matrix cracks
In Section 2.3, a method was described for modelling stiﬀness reductions in blade
sections due to oﬀ-axis matrix cracks [28]. Oﬀ-axis matrix cracks were simulated
and result provided by Oscar Ardila for the purposes of this study. These were
done for two cases; ﬁrstly, in all laminates at all positions along the blades
length; and secondly, only in laminates in the spar caps. Stiﬀness properties of
the blades were calculated for a given density of oﬀ-axis matrix cracks, described
in units of mm−1. The blade structural properties were provided for anisotopic
beams using a 6 by 6 stiﬀness matrix. For the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine,
tri-axial plies are approximated as uni-directional plies with thickness of 0.0175
mm and orientation -45◦, 0◦, and 45◦.
Crack densities between 2 and 100 mm−1 were considered, where the crack den-
sity is the inverse of the crack spacing. According to experimental observations,
the maximum crack density found in a composite ply is reached when the crack
spacing is equal to the ply thickness [63]. Hence the crack densities of 2 and 100
mm−1 can be understood as crack saturation of 3.3% and 166.7% respectively.
The highest crack density is not a realistic case, as such a high crack density
is not expected to occur in real materials, though this will serve as an extreme
case for analysing the sensitivity of blade SHM algorithms.
For each case, Oscar Ardila applied loads to the blade and found the resulting
the blade tip deﬂections.
The loads chosen were the blade loads for steady
state operation at the rated wind speed of 11 m/s, as included in the publicly
available BECAS model of the DTU 10 MW Turbine [25, 62]. This was chosen
as tip deﬂections are expected to be the largest steady state deﬂection that the
turbine will experience.
The tip deﬂections allow a simple comparison of the resulting stiﬀness changes
to the blade due to the crack density, shown in Table 4.1 below. Oﬀ-axis matrix
cracks have a clear eﬀect on the stiﬀness of the blade when they occur in all
laminates, as the tip deﬂection increases with increasing crack density.
The
same is not true when cracks only occur in spar caps - this is as most of the
laminates are unidirectional oriented along the blade axis.
In unidirectional
laminates, oﬀ-axis matrix cracks between the ﬁbres do no aﬀect the bending
stiﬀness signiﬁcantly, as stresses are carried by the ﬁbres and not by the matrix
bonding them together. As a result, only the oﬀ-axis cracks simulated in all
laminates will be analysed further.
One key limitation of these simulations is that cracks are applied with the same
density at all radial positions on the blade, which is not representative of real
fatigue damage a real turbine would experience; diﬀerent laminates and locations
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Damage modelling
45
Table 4.1: Tip deﬂection for the DTU 10MW Reference Turbine with static
load for various damage cases with oﬀ-axis matrix cracks
Crack density (mm−1)
Tip deﬂection (m)
All laminates
Spar caps
0
9.26
9.26
20
9.54
9.27
50
9.64
9.27
100
9.68
9.27
in the blade will experience diﬀerent levels of fatigue damage depending on
the stresses and strains they experience.
Another limitation is that the oﬀ-
axis matrix cracks are modelled using a cross-section approach, which assumes
inﬁnitely long beams and hence overestimates stiﬀness reductions due to cracks.
For the oﬀ-axis matrix cracks, blades will be modelled by anisotropic Timo-
shenko beam elements in HAWC2. The damping coeﬃcients used for the un-
damaged blade with the anisotropic beam method were tuned so the blade
edgewise and ﬂapwise natural frequencies match those of the undamaged blade
with the isotropic beam model.
4.1.1
Additional simulation cases
In addition to these three damage cases, several other cases will also be inves-
tigated, including mass imbalance along the whole blade (e.g. due to manu-
facturing), mass imbalance at the tip of a blade (e.g. due to icing or lightning
damage), and pitch imbalance. These cases will help determine if SHM algo-
rithms are of practical value; if they cannot distinguish blade structural damage
and pitch or mass imbalance, it will be diﬃcult to make decisions about inspec-
tion, maintenance and operation.
For pitch imbalance, blade 1 was rotated around the pitch axis, to create a 1◦
pitch error that could not be compensated for by the controller, as the DTU
10MW Controller uses collective pitch control. For mass imbalance, two cases
were created; one with a uniform reduction in the distributed mass of 1% along
the entire blade, and a second with a reduction in mass of the tip of the blade,
also achieving a total mass reduction of the blade of 1%. Table 4.2 gives the full
list of damage cases for analysis.
Trailing edge cracks and web foot debonds were implemented at a radial position
of 1/3, whilst oﬀ-axis matrix cracks were simulated at all positions along the
==PAGE:58==
46
Methodology
Table 4.2: List of damage and reference cases for analysis in HAWC2
Type
Severity
Description
Undamaged blade
-
Reference "healthy" case
Trailing edge crack
5 m
Maximum reduction of torsional stiﬀ-
ness of 5%
10 m
Maximum reduction of torsional stiﬀ-
ness of 20%
Web foot debond
3 m
Maximum reduction of torsional stiﬀ-
ness of 10%
Web foot debond
10 m
Maximum reduction of torsional stiﬀ-
ness of 35%
Pitch imbalance
1◦
Blade rotated around pitch axis
Mass imbalance
1%, uniform
Distributed mass along whole blade re-
duced by 1%
1%, tip
Distributed mass at tip reduced to
achieved total mass reduction of blade
of 1%
Oﬀ-axis cracks,
all laminates
2 mm−1
Low crack density
...
100 mm−1
High crack density
blade.
All the diﬀerent damage cases selected can now be simulated in the aero-elastic
software HAWC2, for which the set-up is described below.
4.2
Structural health monitoring algorithms
Two methods were applied to the simulated data generated in 4.3, based on
the review of literature and methods available for SHM of wind turbine blades
without installing additional sensors.
Each of these methods is described in
detail below.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Structural health monitoring algorithms
47
4.2.1
Tower-top acceleration method
A method for damage detection using turbine rotor anisotropy as a damage
indicator was demonstrated using a simple mass-spring model by Tcherniak
[10]. It was found that the secondary tower side-side component of the forward
and backward whirling modes are highly sensitive to rotor anisotropy. These
components are not easily detected, as the primary component of the forward
whirling mode coincides closely with the secondary component of the backwards
whirling mode, and vice versa. Modulation of this signal applies a frequency
shift and allows this component to be detected. The following steps are carried
out to detect damage using this method, as described by Tcherniak [10]:
1. Tower-top side-side acceleration and rotor azimuth are recorded
2. Tower-top side-side acceleration (a) is modulated with the rotor azimuth
angle (θaz), with modulation factor K of 1 and -1 used for forwards (1m)
and backwards (1p) modulation, respectively:
a1m(t) = a(t)e−jKθaz
for K = 1
(4.1)
a1p(t) = a(t)e−jKθaz
for K = −1
(4.2)
3. The cross-spectra C1m,1p, C1m,1m and C1p,1p of the modulated tower-top
accelerations are computed
4. Coherence of modulated signal is found using the cross-spectra:
coh =

C1m,1p 2
C1m,1m · C1p,1p

(4.3)
5. Peaks of the coherence function that do not coincide with rotor harmonics
indicate the rise of the whirling modes’ secondary side-side components,
and the existence of rotor anisotropy
The author of this thesis proposes methods for calculating damage indicators
based on the modulated coherence plot obtained using the above method. First,
a Hanning window is applied to the modulated coherence plot between each
of the rotor harmonics, as shown in Figure 4.5 below. This is done to remove
peaks at rotor harmonics, which occur if there is strong frequency response of the
original signal at any of these harmonics; modulating forward and backwards by
2π means that the frequency components at the 2nd and 4th harmonic will both
be shifted to the 3rd harmonic frequency, and hence have a strong coherence at
this frequency.
==PAGE:60==
48
Methodology
Figure 4.5: Window function and modulated coherence plot before and after
windowing, showing the removal of peaks at rotor harmonics
After removing peaks at the rotor harmonics, damage indicators are proposed
by the author of this thesis for two cases: from 0 Hz to the 8th rotor harmonic,
and between the 5th and 6th rotor harmonic. The ﬁrst case is as the method
proposed by Tcherniak states that peaks between rotor harmonics indicate the
rise of rotor anisotropy, without specifying which harmonics. The second case
is proposed as a peak was observed between the 5th and 6th harmonic in the
basis for this thesis (Chapter 3).
The proposed damage indicators, applied to the windowed modulated coherence
plot, are as follows:
1. Damage indicators, between 0 Hz and the 8th harmonic:
(a) Peak: Maximum value
(b) Area: Integral
2. Damage indicators, between the 5th and 6th harmonic:
(a) Peak: Maximum value
(b) Area: Integral
These damage indicators can be used to compare the performance of the tower-
top accelerations SHM method with diﬀerent damage types and severity, and in
diﬀerent environmental conditions.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Structural health monitoring algorithms
49
4.2.2
Blade loads method
Work by Zhang et al.
[2] and Yang et al.
[57] demonstrated the value of
transmittance (or transmissibility) as a damage indicator by comparing multiple
sensors along the single blade. Their work calculated the spectra ratio between
adjacent sensors, then calculated the correlation of spectra ratios of healthy and
damaged blades to detect damage. The following procedure was used:
1. Use the fast Fourier transform to calculate complex Fourier components
(xi, n) for each signal i:
Xi(ω) =

xi, 1(ω1), xi, 2(ω2), xi, 3(ω3), ..., xi, N(ωN)

(4.4)
2. Calculate spectra ratio (T) by dividing Fourier components of each pair
of neighbouring sensors i and i + 1. For n sensors, there are L = n −1
sensor pairs :
Tl(ω) =
Xi(ω)
Xi+1(ω)
(4.5)
The spectra ratio of all sensor pairs are deﬁned as Γ for later ease of
explanation:
Γ =


T1(ω)
T2(ω)
...
TL(ω)


(4.6)
3. Calculate the transmittance correlation (TC) using the set of spectra ra-
tios for damaged blade (Γl) and healthy blade (bΓl), where the ∗operator
is used to denominate the complex conjugate. This operation is described
by the function f for later use:
TC(ω) = f(Γ, bΓ) =
| PL
l=1 Tl(ω) bTl(ω)∗|2
PL
l=1 Tl(ω) Tl(ω)∗· PL
l=1 bTl(ω) bTl(ω)∗
(4.7)
4. Finally, the transmittance damage indicator (TDI) is calculated as the
sum of the transmittance correlation over all frequencies:
TDI = 1
N
N
X
r=1
TC(ωr)
(4.8)
The transmittance damage indicator is a value between 0 and 1, with a value of 1
indicating a healthy blade, with decreasing values indicating increasing damage
severity.
==PAGE:62==
50
Methodology
As it is expensive and unpractical to install multiple accelerometers along each
blade, this thesis proposes the application of the same method to blade root load
sensors. Several signals are available for analysis; the ﬂapwise bending moment
on suction and pressure side, and the edgewise bending moment on leading and
trailing edge, for each of three blades. In real turbines with blade load sensors
installed, there are 12 sensors in total for a 3-bladed rotor.
For aeroelastic
simulations such as HAWC2, the structural model for a turbine blade is a series
of symmetric beam elements, in which the moment is equal and opposite on
opposing sides of the same blade. Hence the HAWC2 simulation outputs only
have 2 unique outputs for each blade, and 6 for the entire rotor.
This thesis proposes two diﬀerent methods for applying the transmittance ap-
proach to blade load sensors, instead of multiple sensors along a single blade.
The ﬁrst assigns sensor pairs between ﬂapwise and edgewise load sensors be-
tween blades, and calculates the correlation between these sensor pairs on a
damaged turbine and a healthy turbine. The set of all spectra ratio is hence
deﬁned as:
Γ =


T1(ω)
T2(ω)
T3(ω)
T4(ω)
T5(ω)
T6(ω)


=


Tb1f,b2f(ω)
Tb1f,b3f(ω)
Tb2f,b3f(ω)
Tb1e,b2e(ω)
Tb1e,b3e(ω)
Tb2e,b3e(ω)


(4.9)
Where the subscripts b1 indicates sensors on blade 1, and f or e indicate ﬂapwise
or edgewise sensor position on that blade.
The set of all spectra ratio is calculated for a damaged turbine (Γ) and a healthy
turbine (bΓ), then the transmittance correlation (TC) and transmittance damage
indicator (TDI) calculated as a function of the damaged and healthy blade
spectra ratio, previously deﬁned in Equation 4.7:
TC(ω) = f(Γ, bΓ)
(4.10)
TDI = 1
N
N
X
r=1
TC(ω)
(4.11)
It is not practical to require a reference healthy turbine; another approach is
proposed to avoid this. In this approach, blades on an individual turbine are
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Structural health monitoring algorithms
51
compared to each other, and the damaged blade can be detected with reference
to the undamaged blades. First, a single blade is taken, and the sensor pairs
are set for this blade compared to the other two blades:
Γb1 =


T1(ω)
T2(ω)
T3(ω)
T4(ω)

=


Tb1f,b2f(ω)
Tb1f,b3f(ω)
Tb1e,b2e(ω)
Tb1e,b3e(ω)


(4.12)
The same is done for blades 2 and 3, resulting in three sets of spectra ratio,
namely Γb1, Γb2 and Γb3.
Again looking ﬁrst at blade 1, the transmittance
correlation can then be calculated with reference to the other blades:
TCb1,b2(ω) = f(Γb1, Γb2)
(4.13)
TCb1,b3(ω) = f(Γb1, Γb3)
(4.14)
The transmittance damage indicator can be calculated for blade 1 using both
correlation functions:
TDIb1 =
1
2N
N
X
r=1
TCb1,b2(ωr) + 1
2N
N
X
r=1
TCb1,b3(ωr)
(4.15)
The above process is repeated for blade 2 and 3, to calculate a transmittance
damage indicator for each blade. If this method is successful, when a blade
sustains damage, it will have a higher damage indicator than the other two
blades on the same turbine. In this thesis, the damaged blade is always known,
so the damage indicator of the damaged blade can be compared to the other two
blades. A ﬁnal damage indicator is calculated using the average of the relative
diﬀerence between the damage indicator of the damaged blade and undamaged
blades:
DI =

1
2(TDIb1 −TDIb2) + 1
2(TDIb1 −TDIb3)

(4.16)
This damage indicator will only take a high value if the damaged blade (blade 1)
has a diﬀerent transmittance damage indicator to the undamaged blades (blades
2 and 3).
==PAGE:64==
52
Methodology
4.3
Aeroelastic model: HAWC2
In order to evaluate SHM algorithms, turbines with damaged blades were sim-
ulated using the Horizontal Axis Wind turbine simulation Code 2nd generation
(HAWC2) aeroelastic code, developed and distributed by DTU. Version 12.7 of
HAWC2 was used in all cases.
The DTU 10MW Reference Turbine [62] was selected for analysis, due to pub-
licly available models for HAWC2, and its similarity in design and scale to large
oﬀshore turbines currently being installed. One disadvantage of this turbine is
that it is known to have a stiﬀer blade than most commercial designs, which
may make the the turbine dynamics less sensitive to blade damage, and hence
make damage detection more diﬃcult.
Version 9.1 of the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine, as available on the HAWC2
website, was used for all studies. The tower, hub and shaft, modelled by Tim-
oshenko beams, were not modiﬁed. The tower is an onshore tower with a fully
constrained tower base. The DTU Basic Controller [64], for a pitch-regulated
variable-speed turbine, included in this version of the HAWC2 model, was not
modiﬁed for this purpose.
The blades were modelled using Timoshenko beam elements, either isotropic,
or anisotropic, as previously described in Section 4.1. The blades were deﬁned
with 26 beam elements for which structural properties are given. Each blade
was modelled with 10 bodies, within which deﬂections are assumed to be small.
Simulations were done using a Newmark scheme with a time step of 0.01 s.
All output signals were recorded at the same frequency, resulting in a Nyquist
frequency of 50 Hz for all measurements. The ﬁrst 50 seconds of all simulations
were discarded to allow initial numerical transients to die out.
A Mann turbulence box was used to simulate the free wind speed, with grid of
32 by 32 points in the rotor plane (5 m resolution), and a resolution of 0.9 m in
the streamwise direction. A standard length scale of 29.4 was used, with neutral
atmospheric conditions. A constant wind shear of 0.2 was used at all heights.
A potential ﬂow tower shadow model was included.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Experimental design
53
4.4
Experimental design
The eﬀect of the turbulent seed and wind conditions on the SHM algorithms
was investigated in order to create an appropriate experimental design for in-
vestigating the sensitivity of SHM algorithms for diﬀerent damage types.
4.4.1
Turbulent seed
In aero-elastic simulations, turbulence is modelled as a stochastic process. Work
by Natarajan et al.
demonstrated that even though diﬀerent realisations of
turbulence with the same input parameters have similar statistics, the eﬀect on
wind turbine behaviour (especially extreme loads) can vary signiﬁcantly [65].
This phenomenon is described as sensitivity to the turbulent seed, where the
seed is the initial number used to start a stochastic process. In the study by
Natarajan et al. the initial azimuth angle of a wind turbine was changed, and
large variations in the extreme loads on the blades were found [65]. This means
that for calculating extreme loads, a large number of simulations with diﬀerent
turbulent seeds must be done to obtain a robust prediction of the extreme loads,
which will not change signiﬁcantly if diﬀerent seed numbers are used.
The SHM algorithms studied in this thesis may also be sensitive to the turbulent
seed.
To investigate this, undamaged and damaged turbines were simulated
in identical conditions, with the same turbulent seed. The change in damage
indicator between the undamaged and damaged turbine was calculated. This
was repeated for 20 diﬀerent diﬀerent turbulent seeds for 10-minute simulations.
The damage case used for these simulations was oﬀ-axis matrix cracks with a
density of 10 crack/mm. This case was chosen as initial investigations showed
successful detection using this damage type. A wind speed of 16 m/s with a
turbulence intensity of 12% was selected, though the eﬀect of the wind conditions
is later examined.
First, the tower-top side-side frequency response and modulated coherence were
visualised for diﬀerent turbulent realisations, for a damaged turbine. Three were
selected, shown in Figure 4.6 below. The ﬁgure shows that the peak between
the 5th and 6th harmonics in the modulated coherence plot is present for all
turbulent seeds, though the size and shape varies. Other cases also have peaks
at other frequencies.
Damage indicators were calculated for undamaged and damaged turbines using
the same seed, then the relative change in damage indicator was found. This
was repeated for all 20 seeds. Box-plots were produced to show the variation in
==PAGE:66==
54
Methodology
Figure 4.6: Tower-top acceleration power spectral density and modulated co-
herence for a turbine with blade damage, for 3 diﬀerent turbulent
seeds.
the change in damage indicators due to the turbulent seed, shown in Figure 4.7
below.
Of the proposed damage indicators, those calculated using the modulated co-
herence function between 5th and 6th rotor harmonics only were much more
sensitive to blade damage than the damage indicators based on frequencies up
to the 8th harmonic. This is expected as a large peak was previously seen in
the coherence plot in this frequency range; the damage indicators targeting this
peak are more sensitive. The damage indicators using all frequencies up to the
8th harmonic are more generally applicable to any turbine, for which the fre-
quency of the peak of the coherence plot need not be known. Damage indicators
using the area of the coherence plot showed less variability and higher means
than the damage indicators only looking at the height of the peak, and hence
only area-based damage indicators will be considered further.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Experimental design
55
Figure 4.7: Variations in tower-top acceleration SHM results due to diﬀerent
realisation of turbulence, by comparing undamaged and damaged
turbines with identical simulations, repeated with 20 turbulent
seeds.
Figure 4.7 demonstrates that the SHM algorithm using tower-top accelerations
is sensitive to the turbulent seed. For diﬀerent turbulent realisations, the wind
time-series over each blade varies, and hence the whirling modes are excited
to diﬀerent degrees. Several turbulent realisations should be taken to calculate
reliable damage indicators. To determine the number of 10-minute turbulent
realisations that are required to generate reliable results with the tower-top
accelerations method, bootstrap sampling was employed, using the following
steps:
1. The full population from which samples are to be taken are the 20 turbu-
lent realisations previously described. The value of interest is the change
in damage indicator due to blade damage for a single turbulent seed.
2. A sample of a given size is formed by randomly selecting from the pop-
ulation, with repetition allowed. The mean change in damage indicator
is calculated for the sample. The sample size is the number of turbulent
realisations used to calculate the mean change in damage indicator.
3. This is repeated several times, and the standard deviation of the sample
means is found. The standard deviation of the sample means is expressed
==PAGE:68==
56
Methodology
as a percentage of the population mean, and gives an estimation of the
uncertainty of the sample mean for a given sample size.
4. This is repeated for diﬀerent sample sizes, and the eﬀect of sample size on
the estimated uncertainty can be shown.
The results from the bootstrap sampling with 20 turbulent realisations are given
in Figure 4.8 below, showing that the estimated uncertainty reduces signiﬁcantly
when more than 5 turbulent seeds are used. To achieve an uncertainty below
12%, more than 10 seeds are required. To achieve an uncertainty of 18%, only 5
seeds are required. Hence it is proposed that when investigating the sensitivity
of SHM methods to diﬀerent damage types, 5 turbulent seeds should be used,
bearing in mind the estimated uncertainty.
Figure 4.8: Eﬀect of the number of turbulent realisations on tower-top accel-
erations SHM method, using bootstrap sampling.
The dependence of SHM results on environmental conditions was also investi-
gated.
4.4.2
Environmental conditions
Myrent et al. showed that a diﬀerence between the RMS value of the tower-
top accelerations and the 1P frequency response of the blade tip accelerations
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Experimental design
57
was observed when simulating web-foot debonds, but that the change in these
signals due to damage depended heavily on the wind speed [4]. Before testing
the proposed SHM methods in this thesis with various damage types, the eﬀect
of wind speed and turbulence intensity on the selected SHM algorithms will be
investigated.
A similar method was followed as the method used to investigate the eﬀect of
the turbulent seed: a damaged turbine (oﬀ-axis cracks, 10 cracks/mm, in blade
1) and an undamaged turbine were simulated with the same turbulent seed. The
change in the damage indicator between the damaged and undamaged turbine
was calculated. This was repeated for various wind speeds and turbulence in-
tensities. A single turbulent seed was used for all simulations - one was chosen
that gave damage indicators close to the mean result obtained for many seeds
previously in Section 4.4.1.
The tower-top accelerations method requires constant rotor speed to avoid the
spreading of frequencies across rotor harmonics, hence only wind speeds above
11 m/s were selected. Wind speeds above 18 m/s were not selected, as occur
much less frequently on operational sites, reducing the data availability of SHM
algorithms that require such wind speeds.
The "normal turbulence model" from IEC64100-1 is used to estimate the 90%
quartile of the turbulence intensity for a given mean wind speed at hub height
[66]. The DTU 10 MW Turbine is a class IA turbine, and hence has reference
turbulence intensity value of 0.16. The IEC64100-1 standard therefore gives
90% quartile for the turbulence intensity TI as:
TI = 0.16 · (0.75 Vhub + 5.6)
Vhub
(4.17)
Where Vhub is the mean wind speed at hub height. Dmitriov et al. conducted
statistical analysis of common site parameters, including turbulence intensity,
and showed that a spread of turbulence intensities are commonly observed below
the maximum turbulence intensity at any wind speed and above a turbulence
intensity of 5% [67]. Based on this, a medium and low turbulence intensity value
was approximated by reducing the "normal turbulence model" 90% quartile tur-
bulence intensity by 30 and 60% respectively. The environmental conditions to
be investigated are described in Table 4.3. It should be noted that the standard
deviation of wind speed increases with wind speed, though the turbulence inten-
sity goes down. This is expected for an onshore site, though due to increasing
wave roughness with wind speed, this is not true for an oﬀshore site.
The undamaged and undamaged turbine were both simulated for all wind speeds
==PAGE:70==
58
Methodology
Table 4.3: Chosen wind speeds and turbulence intensities for analysis of the
eﬀect of wind conditions on SHM results
Mean wind speed (m/s)
Turbulence intensity
High
Medium
Low
12
0.19
0.14
0.08
14
0.18
0.13
0.07
16
0.18
0.12
0.07
18
0.17
0.12
0.07
at low, medium and high turbulence intensities. First, the tower-top accelera-
tions SHM method was applied, and the relative diﬀerence in damage indicator
between damaged and undamaged turbine calculated for each set of wind con-
ditions. Figure 4.9 below shows the results for one damage indicator - the area
of the coherence plot up to the 8th harmonic was chosen as the most generally
applicable damage indicator, which will also be aﬀected if large peaks appear at
frequencies where they are not expected, for damaged or undamaged cases.
Figure 4.9: Change in damage indicator (coherence windowed area, 0P to 8P)
for various environmental conditions, for a single turbulent seed,
by comparing undamaged and damaged turbines.
Figure 4.9 shows that the damage indicator is sensitive to the environmental
conditions. At wind speeds near rated power, a low turbulence intensity is de-
sirable for damaged detection. At higher wind speeds, high turbulence intensity
is beneﬁcial. The tower-top accelerations SHM method detects an increase in
the excitation of whirling modes. The whirling modes are deﬂections of all three
blades in the rotor plane, and hence will be aﬀected by the blade pitch. At higher
wind speeds, the blades are pitched more heavily, so ﬂapwise deﬂections due to
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Proposed simulations
59
turbulent excitation also contribute to the excitation of the whirling modes. As
the blades are much less stiﬀin the ﬂapwise direction, a higher pitch angle may
explain why at higher wind speeds a higher turbulence intensity aids damage
detection.
Based on these ﬁndings, SHM methods will be tested at wind speeds of 14 m/s
with low turbulence intensity and 18 m/s for high turbulence intensity. This
way, turbine operation with high and low pitch angles will be analysed. Diﬀerent
damage types to the edgewise, ﬂapwise and bend-twist stiﬀness may be more
detectable for each of these conditions.
4.5
Proposed simulations
It has been shown that SHM methods are sensitive to the turbulent seed. To
ensure the stochastic nature of turbulence does not lead to under or overestimat-
ing the sensitivity of damage indicators to diﬀerent damage types, simulations
should be run with at least 5 turbulent seeds. Simulations for each damage type
will instead be run for 50 minutes for a single turbulent seed, giving the same
statistical strength as 5 diﬀerent 10-minute turbulent realisations. Using 5 seeds
was estimated to give an uncertainty on calculated damage indicators of 18%.
The eﬀect of wind speed and turbulence intensity was also signiﬁcant.
The
tower-top accelerations SHM method was more eﬀective for low turbulence in-
tensities at lower wind speeds, and high turbulence intensities at higher wind
speeds. This may be due to pitching of the blades changing the way in which
the whirling modes are excited. It is proposed that further simulations are done
for two conditions: 14 m/s with low turbulence intensity (low pitch angle), and
18 m/s with high turbulence intensity (high pitch angle). The full list of damage
cases will be simulated for these conditions, to determine what damage types
the proposed methods can successfully detect.
As each of the diﬀerent damage types includes a reduction to multiple beam
properties, it is also interesting to investigate the eﬀect of each of the beam
properties individually on the performance of the SHM algorithms.
4.5.1
Sensitivity to beam stiﬀness properties
To determine the sensitivity of SHM methods to individual beam properties,
a percentage stiﬀness reduction was applied to each.
The anisotropic beam
==PAGE:72==
60
Methodology
method was chosen, as it also allows direct investigation of coupling eﬀects such
as bend-twist.
The stiﬀness matrix is described below, where T is shear forces, M is a moment,
τ is a deﬂection and κ is a curvature. In this thesis x, y and z coordinates are
the ﬂapwise, edgewise and longitudinal blade directions.


Tx
Ty
Tz
Mx
My
Mz


=


K1,1
K1,2
. . .
K1,6
K2,1
...
...
K6,1
K6,6




τx
τy
τz
κx
κy
κz


(4.18)
The anisotropic stiﬀness matrix is symmetric about its diagonal, so only half of
the 36 element need describing. Furthermore, many of the forces and deﬂections
are not coupled, so the stiﬀness matrix contains many zero elements. For the
DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine, non-zero elements include all elements on the
diagonal, which couple shear forces and moments to deﬂections and curvatures
in the same axis, in addition to the following oﬀ-diagonal elements:
• K1,2, coupling ﬂapwise shear forces to edgewise deﬂection
• K1,6, coupling ﬂapwise shear forces to longitudinal curvature
• K2,6, coupling the edgewise shear forces and longitudinal curvature
• K3,4 and K3,5, coupling longitudinal shear forces to edgewise and ﬂapwise
curvature
• K4,5, coupling ﬂapwise moments with edgewise curvature
From the oﬀ-diagonal elements, K1,2 and K4,5 are of special interest as describe
bend-twist in the blade.
A percentage stiﬀness reduction from 0 to 40% will be applied to each of the
stiﬀness elements individually, for all beam-elements on the blade. This will
only be done for one set of environmental conditions: 18 m/s wind speed and
17% turbulent intensity, as these conditions were found to enhance detection of
damage when using the blade loads method (see Section 5).
In addition to investigating the types of damage that are required for successful
detection using the proposed SHM methods, the robustness of these methods
to measurement noise will also be evaluated.
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Proposed simulations
61
4.5.2
Sensitivity to measurement noise
If structural health monitoring algorithms are to be applied in the ﬁeld with op-
erating turbines, they must be robust to measurement noise, which is inevitable
present, especially in large rotating machines operating in highly variable envi-
ronmental conditions, such as wind turbines. Here the methodology for applying
noise to the measurement signals used in the SHM methods is described.
Diﬀerent types of noise will be investigated: ﬁrstly, white noise is used to sim-
ulate a random Gaussian measurement error, which is usually present in any
measurement, at some level. Periodic noise will also be investigated; such noise
could be caused by other operating machinery in the turbine, for example, vi-
brations caused by the low speed main bearing or the gearbox. Periodic noise
was simulated by a sine curve, with frequencies at rotor harmonics 1P, 2P and
4P. For both white noise and periodic noise, the amplitude of the noise signal
was varied with respect to the amplitude of the signal of interest.
Figures 4.10 and 4.11 below show two examples - the azimuth signal with white
noise and the tower-top accelerations with periodic noise at the ﬁrst rotor har-
monic frequency (1P).
Figure 4.10: Time-series and spectra for azimuth angle with added white noise
of varying amplitude
==PAGE:74==
62
Methodology
Figure 4.11: Time-series and spectra for tower-top side-side acceleration with
added periodic noise (1P) of varying amplitude
The Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) is an indicator of measurement quality as it
compares the power of the noise to the power of the desired signal. It is usually
measured in a logarithmic scale (dB), given by:
SNRdB = 10 log10
A2
signal
A2
noise

(4.19)
Where A is the Root-Mean-Squared (RMS) amplitude. The SNR in dB can be
understood by the following conversion: an SNR of 0, 10 or 20 dB corresponds
to a measurement were the useful signal has an RMS amplitude of 1, 10 or 100
times greater than the signal noise, respectively.
A single damage case will be analysed - this will the oﬀ-axis matrix cracks with
10 cracks/mm, as previously used to analyse the eﬀect of the turbulent seed
and wind conditions. The tower top accelerations SHM method takes two input
signals; the tower-top side-side acceleration, and the turbine azimuth angle. The
sensitivity of the algorithm to both periodic and white noise in each signal will
be investigated. SNRs of between 0 and 100 dB will be considered.
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5
Structural health
monitoring: aeroelastic
simulation
In this section, aero-elastic simulations of the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine
are analysed using the previously described SHM algorithms. Simulations are
analysed for the following cases:
1. Sensitivity to damage types: various blade damage types, for two sets of
wind conditions
2. Sensitivity to beam stiﬀness properties: percentage reduction of each non-
zero element of the anisotropic stiﬀness matrix
3. Sensitivity to measurement noise
Results for each of these are presented in turn.
==PAGE:76==
64
Structural health monitoring: aeroelastic simulation
5.1
Sensitivity to damage types
All damage cases listed previously in Table 4.2 were simulated for 50 minutes,
for two sets of wind conditions that were previously found to improve SHM
results. First, the relevant signals for each method are investigated graphically
for one set of wind conditions. After, damage indicators are compared for both
methods and both sets of wind conditions.
5.1.0.1
Tower-top modulated coherence method
First, the tower-top side-side accelerations from each damage case was compared
by looking at the power spectral density. Figure 5.1 shows that for pitch and
mass imbalance, there is a large peak in frequency response of the tower-top
side-side spectra at 1P. The 1P peak is not present for the other cases, where
the blade structure is damaged. Diﬀerentiating between pitch/mass imbalance
and blade damage hence may be possible only by looking for the presence of
this peak.
Figure 5.1: Spectra of tower-top side-side accelerations for several damage
cases, for a mean wind speed of 18 m/s and a turbulence intensity
of 17%
The modulated coherence for each damage case was compared, shown in Figure
5.2 below. As previously described, a rise in the peak between the 5P and 6P
==PAGE:77==
5.1 Sensitivity to damage types
65
frequencies indicates rotor anisotropy.
Figure 5.2: Modulated coherence of tower-top side-side accelerations for sev-
eral damage cases, for a mean wind speed of 18 m/s and a turbu-
lence intensity of 17%
Figure 5.2 shows that a peak between 5P and 6P is clearly present for the mass
imbalance where mass is reduced at the blade tip, though is not present for
mass imbalance where the percentage reduction of the blade distributed mass
is uniform along the blade, or for pitch imbalance. A mass imbalance that is
concentrated at the tip is unlikely to be caused by a manufacturing error, but
may be caused by icing or severe damage to the tip, such as by lightning. These
results suggest that the tower-top accelerations method does not detect pitch
imbalance or mass imbalance due to manufacturing. This behaviour is desirable
for a SHM for blades. The trailing edge cracks and web-foot debonds do not
appear detectable using this method, as the modulated coherence plot does not
change appreciably compared to the undamaged case. The oﬀ-axis matrix crack
damage cases are detectable, with an increasing size of peak with higher crack
density.
Both oﬀ-axis matrix cracks and the mass imbalance at the tip of the blade
are detectable using the tower-top accelerations method. Mass imbalance and
structural damage can be distinguished by looking at the 1P component of
the tower-top side-side accelerations, as a large peak is present for the mass
imbalance case, which is not present for the oﬀ-axis matrix cracks.
==PAGE:78==
66
Structural health monitoring: aeroelastic simulation
Next, a visual inspection of the blade loads SHM results are presented, then
damage indicators will be compared for both these methods.
5.1.0.2
Blade load transmittance method
The blade load transmittance method compares spectra from the blade load
sensors in order to calculate damage indicators. Before comparing damage in-
dicators, these spectra are shown here. Figure 5.3 shows the frequency response
for the ﬂapwise root bending moments for blade 1 for each damage case.
Figure 5.3: Spectra of blade 1 root ﬂapwise bending moment for several dam-
age cases, for a mean wind speed of 18 m/s and a turbulence
intensity of 7%
Figure 5.3 shows that the blade root ﬂapwise moments are very similar for
all damage cases as well as for mass and pitch imbalances. This is as blade
ﬂapwise vibrations are heavily aerodynamically damped.
Excitement in the
ﬂapwise direction is dominated by turbulence, which is why when comparing
simulations with the same turbulent seed, no diﬀerences can be seen. Due to
the heavy ﬂapwise damping, more severe damage to the blades is required for
the ﬂapwise accelerations to be aﬀected. Edgewise loads were also compared,
shown in Figure 5.4 below.
Figure 5.4 shows that the edgewise vibrations are more sensitive to blade dam-
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Sensitivity to damage types
67
Figure 5.4: Spectra of blade 1 root edgewise bending moment for several dam-
age cases, for a mean wind speed of 18 m/s and a turbulence
intensity of 7%
age. Of the mass and pitch imbalance cases, only the tip mass imbalance causes
a change in the edgewise excitation, which can be seen as an increase in the
blade’s ﬁrst edgewise natural frequency.
For structural damage, the trailing
edge cracks and web-foot debonds only have a very small eﬀect on the ﬁrst
edgewise natural frequency. The same eﬀect can be seen more clearly for the
oﬀ-axis matrix crack cases.
Damage indicators were calculated for both SHM methods and both sets of wind
conditions.
5.1.1
Comparison of damage indicators
Damage indicators were calculated for each damage case, and the percentage
change in the damage indicator was found compared to the undamaged tur-
bine, using the same turbulent seed and wind conditions for comparison, and
50 minute simulation length for all simulations.
For the damage cases that
used anisotropic Timoshenko beam elements (oﬀ-axis matrix cracks only), the
undamaged reference turbine also used anisotropic beam elements. Figure 5.5
compares the change in damage indicators for the diﬀerent damage types and
==PAGE:80==
68
Structural health monitoring: aeroelastic simulation
SHM algorithms. The windowed area up to 8P is used as the damage indicator
for the tower-top accelerations method. For the blade loads, two cases are in-
cluded, as described in the methodology; the case where transmittance function
compares blade loads from damaged and undamaged turbines, and the more
practical case where no healthy reference turbine is required, and the damaged
blade is compared to the undamaged blades on the same turbine.
Figure 5.5: Percentage change in damage indicator compared to undamaged
turbine, for several damage indicators, and two sets of wind con-
ditions.
From Figure 5.5, several key results can be seen. Firstly, the blade loads method,
when comparing sensors between a damaged and undamaged turbine, was only
responsive to pitch and mass imbalance, and hence is not a useful method for
detection of structural damage. This method is of limited practical value re-
gardless, as an undamaged turbine in the same turbulent wind conditions does
not exist in reality. The method comparing blades on a single turbine is more
sensitive to blade damage. This is likely as damaging blade 1 has an impact
on the loads of blade 1, but little impact on the loads of blades 2 and 3 - for
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Sensitivity to damage types
69
the method comparing blades, the damaged blades are in all sensor pairs used
in the transmittance function, though for the method comparing turbines, the
damaged blades are only in two third of the sensor pairs. This means that the
damaged blade has a larger contribution to the damage indicator for the method
where comparing blades, which might explain its higher sensitivity.
For the oﬀ-axis matrix cracks, both methods are capable of detecting the blade
damage. The tower-top accelerations method is more sensitive, and is capable
of assessing the severity of the damage, seen by the clear progression in the
damage indicator with increasing crack density. The blade loads method shows
higher changes in the damage indicator for the higher wind speed, which may be
due to the higher pitch angle causing ﬂapwise loads to be less aerodynamically
damped. This method is also only capable of assessing damage severity for the
higher wind speed.
The tower-top accelerations method shows similar results for both wind speeds,
both for the structural damage cases and the mass and pitch imbalance cases,
which is useful from a practical point of view, due to improved data availability.
Of the mass and pitch imbalance cases, only the mass imbalance at blade tip was
detectable using tower-top accelerations, though this can be distinguished from
structural damage due to the large rise in the tower-top side-side 1P component.
The blade loads method shows a large change in damage indicators for the mass
imbalance, at tip or uniformly along the blade, depending on the wind speed.
The only SHM method tested that could detect the 10 m trailing edge crack was
the blade loads method, although with a very small change in damage indicator,
and only at one of the chosen wind speeds. On the contrary, only the tower-top
accelerations method could detect the 10 m web-foot debond, also with a very
small change in damage indicator.
Overall, it can be seen that the tower-top accelerations method is more sensitive
to blade damage, and hence more suited for performing blade SHM. It is capable
of assessing the severity of damage for the oﬀ-axis cracks. It was not capable of
detecting the trailing edge cracks, and had a very low sensitivity to the web-foot
debonds. This method could also clearly distinguish blade structural damage
from mass/pitch imbalance, except the mass imbalance at blade tip, which is
easily identiﬁable from the tower-top side-side accelerations at 1P frequency.
It should also be noted that the only structural damage cases that were identi-
ﬁable were the oﬀ-axis matrix cracks, which use anisotropic Timoshenko beam
elements, and have a reduction to the stiﬀness of several of the elements in the
stiﬀness matrix. To determine which of the stiﬀness properties is aﬀecting blade
damage detection, a sensitivity analysis was carried out, described below.
==PAGE:82==
70
Structural health monitoring: aeroelastic simulation
5.2
Sensitivity to anisotropic stiﬀness parameters
Percentage reductions were applied to each of the elements in the anisotropic
stiﬀness matrix individually. This was only done for a wind speed of 18 m/s and
a turbulence intensity of 17%, for which the damage indicators were more sen-
sitive, as shown in the previous section. Damage indicators were calculated for
both SHM methods, though as the damage indicators from the tower-top accel-
erations method were more sensitive to blade damage, only these are discussed
here.
The tower-top accelerations method was not able to detect reductions of up
to 40% of the non-diagonal stiﬀness elements; the resulting change in damage
indicator compared to the undamaged case was below 2% for all cases. The
diagonal stiﬀness elements had a much larger impact on the calculated damage
indicators, as shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Change in damage indicator due to percentage reduction in
anisotropic
stiﬀness
elements,
using
tower-top
accelerations
method.
Figure 5.6 shows that the damage indicator is only sensitive to two of the stiﬀness
elements; K4,4, which couples the ﬂapwise moments and curvatures (ﬂapwise
bending stiﬀness), and K5,5, which couples the edgewise moments and curva-
tures (edgewise bending stiﬀness). The ﬂapwise and edgewise shear stiﬀness
elements K1,1 and K2,2 have very little eﬀect as the majority of loads carried
by the blade are moments rather than shear forces.
It is interesting to note that the oﬀ-diagonal and torsional stiﬀness elements do
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Sensitivity to noise
71
not have an eﬀect on the tower-top acceleration SHM method. This may be due
to the choice of wind turbine. The DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine is very stiﬀ
compared to commercial wind turbine blades. Even after a large percentage
reduction in some stiﬀness elements, the blade may still experience only small
deﬂections in that plane. For less stiﬀblades, the shear and torsional stiﬀness
elements, as well as the oﬀ-diagonal coupling stiﬀness elements, may have a
larger impact on turbine dynamics and the SHM results.
The robustness of the tower-top accelerations method to measurement noise was
also investigated.
5.3
Sensitivity to noise
A single damage case was used for analysis; a turbine with a single blade with
a oﬀ-axis matrix crack density of 10 mm−1, in a wind speed of 18 m/s with
17% turbulence intensity. White noise and periodic noise were added to the
azimuth and tower-top side-side time-series, and the tower-top accelerations
SHM method applied to an undamaged and damaged turbine with noise added.
The damage indicator used was the windowed area up to the 8th harmonic.
Figure 5.7 shows the damage indicators sensitivity to white noise.
Figure 5.7: Relative change in damage indicator of tower-top accelerations
SHM method with white noise.
Figure 5.7 shows that the tower-top SHM algorithm is more sensitive to white
noise in the tower-top acceleration signal, though even for a quite low SNR of
10 dB (white noise with amplitude of 10% of the useful signal), the damage
==PAGE:84==
72
Structural health monitoring: aeroelastic simulation
indicator is still 70% higher than the undamaged turbine. This result suggests
that this method is robust to measurement noise for a SNR of above 10 dB,
for the tower-top accelerations signal. The algorithm is much more robust to
white noise in the azimuth angle, requiring an SNR of only 5 dB for the same
eﬀectiveness.
Figure 5.8 shows the change in damage indicator when periodic noise is added
to the same signals. The SHM algorithm is very robust to periodic noise in
the tower-top acceleration signal - this is expected, as the modulated coherence
method aims to isolate the secondary component of the forward and backward
whirling modes, which does not align with rotor harmonics. Periodic noise in the
tower-top accelerations will cause large peaks in the modulated coherence plot at
rotor harmonics, but not between. The SHM algorithm is much more sensitive
to periodic noise in the azimuth angle, and even a low amplitude periodic signal
has the potential to reduce the damage indicator quite signiﬁcantly. For an SNR
greater than 20 dB the method is robust to periodic noise in the azimuth signal.
Figure 5.8: Relative change in damage indicator of tower-top accelerations
SHM method with periodic noise.
In summary, the tower-top acceleration SHM algorithm requires a minimum
SNR of 5 dB for white noise in the azimuth signal, 10 dB for white noise in
the tower-top accelerations signal, and 20 dB for periodic noise in the azimuth
signal, in order for this method to perform at least 70% as well as it would
without measurement noise. The level of noise will later be analysed for real
turbines, to determine if noise may be a critical factor for successful application
of this method to real wind turbines.
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6
Structural health
monitoring: real turbines
In this chapter, SHM is applied to real turbines with blade damage.
First,
the damage sustained to the turbines is described.
Next, the methodology
for selecting and processing data is explained, before the results of the SHM
algorithm are presented.
It was previously shown that through aero-elastic
simulation, some blade damage could be detected. The objective of this chapter
is to determine if the proposed SHM methods can detect damage in real turbines.
Three turbines with damaged blades were available for analysis. For all three
of these, the blade root bending moment data (blade loads) was not available.
Therefore, of the two proposed methods for blade SHM, only the tower top
accelerations method could be applied. As only more recent turbines have blade
load sensors as part of their standard instrumentation, such turbines have been
operating for fewer years, and hence there are less known damage cases where
blade load data is available.
There are several challenges when working with data from real oﬀshore turbines,
compared to the previous analysis using aeroelastic simulations. Firstly, pre-
vious simulations used an onshore turbine, with a fully constrained tower base
and without modelling the soil or wave interactions. Although the structural
boundary conditions and environmental excitation of the tower due to waves
==PAGE:86==
74
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
will aﬀect the tower damping and resonant frequency, it is expected that these
diﬀerences will not aﬀect the proposed method for SHM using tower-top accel-
erations, which detects a change in the turbine whirling modes caused by rotor
anisotropy.
Even if the tower is being excited by waves at the frequency of
the primary or secondary side-side components of whirling modes, this will not
be visible as peaks on the modulated coherence plot between rotor harmonics,
unless the wave excitation frequencies are pronounced at the whirling mode pri-
mary and secondary side-side component frequencies. Data from a wave buoy,
or accelerometers at the base of the tower could be consulted to conﬁrm the
frequency range of excitation due to waves.
The increased broad spectra excitation due to waves however increased the
general noise level and may make damage detection more diﬃcult. Through
aero-elastic simulations, it was shown that the tower-top accelerations method
is sensitive to measurement noise, especially in the azimuth angle. To see if this
may negatively aﬀect the results of the SHM algorithm, the signal quality of the
azimuth angle will also be investigated.
6.1
Description of damage types
Three damaged turbines were selected for analysis, shown in Figure 6.1. These
were selected from the known damage cases made available to the author for
this study, as the cases with the most severe structural damage to the blades.
The ﬁrst case was a turbine with a trailing edge crack. The second and third
were turbines with very similar damage at the tip of one blade, both located in
the same wind farm. All cases are for modern oﬀshore multi-megawatt turbines
with blades larger than 50 m long.
The ﬁrst case to be analysed was a trailing edge crack with 3 m length, detected
in May 2019, at a radial position of approximately one-third of the blade’s length
(1/3 R). The damage was detected by visual inspection of the blades. Upon in-
spection by rope access, it was noted that the crack and exposed glass-ﬁbre plies
were polluted, suggesting that the crack was not recent. The oﬃcial repair pe-
riod started approximately one month after detection, and lasted approximately
3 months before completion, although this includes initial inspection and scoping
work, as well as ﬁnal inspection and veriﬁcation. The turbine was not operating
for approximately 1.5 months in the middle of the repair period, during which
the structural repair work was completed. Data was available before detection
of the crack, after detection, and after repair.
The second and third cases to be analysed were turbines with a split tip on one
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Description of damage types
75
Figure 6.1: Blade damage cases from real turbines. Left - trailing edge crack
of 3 m length at approximately one-third radial position. Centre
and right - split tip.
blade, in which the pressure side and suction side of the blade became detached
due to a crack, extending from the blade tip towards the root approximately
0.5 m, on both trailing and leading edges. The damage was detected in January
2019, though was not repaired until October 2019, for both turbines.
The
damage was caused by lightning, though the date of the lightning strike was not
known.
Only approximately 1 year of data was available for all cases, and hence the
available data might not include a period before damage onset. Limited data
was available after repair since the repairs occurred quite recently in the middle
of 2019.
This complicates evaluation of the SHM results, as before damage
detection, it is not known exactly when the turbine was undamaged, and after,
little data was available. Damage may only be detectable using such a data set
if progression in the damage indicators can be seen leading up to detection, and
the damage indicators reduce after repair.
The ﬁrst case is very similar to the trailing edge crack modelled in HAWC2
described in this thesis. Trailing edge cracks of 5 and 10 m were considered in
simulation. The real damage case has a crack that is slightly smaller than the
simulation cases, relative to the blade length. The second and third cases are not
expected to cause rotor anisotropy as a result of structural damage to the blade,
==PAGE:88==
76
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
though may cause aerodynamic rotor imbalance, and hence are interesting to
analyse.
6.2
Data selection and processing
The steps for selection and processing of data from real turbines are as follows:
1. Select periods with constant rotor speed of length between 30 and 60
minutes
2. Remove periods with large variation in the mean wind speed and mean
turbulence intensity
3. Categorise periods using wind speed and turbulence intensity bins
4. Down-sampling of data for application of SHM
The motivation and process for each of these steps is described below.
10-
minute statistical data was used for selecting and and ﬁltering data periods, to
reduce the computational burden of processing large quantities of fast (100 Hz)
data. Fast data was loaded for the selected periods and down-sampled to an
appropriate frequency for application of the SHM algorithm.
6.2.1
Selecting periods of constant rotor speed
The tower-top accelerations method aims to detect a rise in the coherence func-
tion between rotor harmonics. The rotor harmonics should take discrete values,
and not be spread across a range of frequencies, so a constant rotor speed is re-
quired. Rotational re-sampling of the required signals based on the azimuth po-
sition may allow the method to be applied at a varying rotor speed, though this
would cause the spreading of natural frequencies that are constant (or change
little) for all rotor speed, such as the tower and blade natural frequencies. For
oﬀshore turbines, this is not necessary as such turbines operate at their rated
speed for a large proportion of the year; the turbines analysed in this thesis
operated at rated rotor speed for more than 35% of each year for which data
was available.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Data selection and processing
77
6.2.2
Selecting periods based on stationarity
Periods of operation will later be compared based on their mean wind speed
and turbulence intensity. Stationarity, deﬁned here as a low change in the mean
behaviour of the wind conditions, is desired, as periods with large variations
cannot be described accurately only by their mean. This is also important as
the eﬀectiveness of SHM algorithms has been seen to depend on the wind speed
and turbulence intensity.
Selecting too short periods increases the uncertainty due to the stochastic na-
ture of turbulence (see Section 4.4.1, sensitivity to turbulent seed), whilst too
long periods increases the uncertainty due to lack of stationarity of environ-
mental conditions. In simulations, a 50-minute period was found to reduce the
uncertainty suﬃciently. For real turbines, periods between 30 minutes and 1
hour were selected, as a high number of periods of constant rotor speed with
this length were available.
Only periods with a small variation in the mean wind speed and mean turbulence
intensity are desired.
Sample statistics were used for further ﬁltering; each
selected period contains between three and six 10-minute samples, for each of
which the turbulence intensity and mean wind speed is known. The variation
between samples in a given period of constant rotor speed can be compared.
The standard deviation of the mean wind speed and the standard deviation
of the turbulence intensity was found, and periods with high variability in the
mean wind speed and the turbulence intensity were removed. The maximum
permitted values were 2.5% for the turbulence intensity and 0.75 m/s for the
mean wind speed, as shown in Figure 6.2.
6.2.3
Categorising by wind conditions
It has also been shown that the environmental conditions aﬀect both the excita-
tion of the tower and the sensitivity of SHM algorithms. To compare the change
in peaks of the coherence function between rotor harmonics, periods with similar
environmental conditions should be selected.
Wind speed and turbulence bins were created, in order to later allow compar-
ison of damage indicators in similar environmental conditions. This was done
using the wind speed as measured by the nacelle anemometer, and which is not
representative of true wind conditions due to signiﬁcant disturbance from the
nacelle structures, as well as high turbulence behind the rotor. However, it is
assumed that this instrument can be used to compare periods of similar mean
==PAGE:90==
78
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
Figure 6.2: Histogram of sample statistics for each selected period of constant
rotor speed, where samples are the 10-minute mean wind speed
and turbulence intensity in each period. Black dashed line shows
chosen threshold for ﬁltering periods with high variability.
wind speed and turbulence conditions, even though the measured mean wind
speed and turbulence intensity may be biased. High precision and accuracy in
wind speed measurement is not required, as wind measurements are only used
to select periods of operation for later analysis. It is only assumed that the
nacelle anemometer data, although biased, will be biased by the same amount
in similar wind conditions at any point in time. Calibration or replacement of
the anemometers or a change to the nacelle transfer function may violate this
assumption. This is not believed to be relevant for the relatively short 1 year
periods of data used in this study. However, if the SHM algorithms proposed
were to be applied to long term data-sets (e.g. multiple years long), changes to
the nacelle anemometer may need to be addressed.
Small bins are beneﬁcial as a smaller range of wind speeds or turbulence in-
tensities will be found in a single bin. Having a large number of small bins is
disadvantageous as reduces the data available in each bin, and also results in a
large number of bins that later must be compared and interpreted. To decide
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Data selection and processing
79
on appropriate bins, a 2D histogram of the wind speed and turbulence intensity
was plotted, after ﬁltering by constant rotor speed and stationarity. This is
shown in Figure 6.3 below.
Figure 6.3: Frequency distribution of wind speed and turbulence intensity
measured by the nacelle anemometer for one turbine, for one year
of operation, after ﬁltering by rotor speed and stationarity.
Figure 6.3 shows the frequency of occurrence of diﬀerent turbulence intensities
at diﬀerent wind speeds.
There was little data available for analysis above
20 m/s, so wind speed bins were selected for wind speeds between 10 and 20
m/s. Based on Figure 6.3, for these wind speeds, the most commonly occurring
turbulence intensities are between 6 and 16%. In these ranges, ﬁve bins were
used for the wind speed and turbulence intensity, with bin widths of 2 m/s and
2% respectively, creating a total of 25 sets of wind conditions.
For each month, one period (of length 30-60 minutes) was selected for each set of
wind conditions, if data was available. More than one period was not selected,
as requiring a larger number of periods each month would result in poor data
availability for each set of wind conditions throughout the year.
Figure 6.4
below shows months where at least one period was available for each set of wind
conditions, as well as the dates at which the turbine damage was detected and
repaired, for one damaged turbine.
As expected, a period of constant rotor
speed was not found for each set of wind conditions for every month of the year.
The turbine continued to operate during the repair period, though the repair
period was not deemed ﬁnished until ﬁnal inspection, which was some time after
the physical repair was complete.
==PAGE:92==
80
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
Figure 6.4: Availability of data for periods of constant rotor speed for diﬀerent
wind conditions. Quoted wind speed and turbulence values are the
bin centres.
6.2.4
Re-sampling
For each month and set of wind conditions, the fast data was loaded, re-sampled
to 20 Hz. Re-sampling of the rotor speed, wind speed and pitch angle were done
by interpolation, as these signals were recorded at 10 Hz, whilst rotor azimuth
angle and tower-top vibration signals with higher sampling frequency above 20
Hz were down-sampled by averaging. Rotational signals were ﬁrst unwrapped
to produce continuously increasing signals (not bounded within 0 and 360◦),
which were re-sampled (by interpolation or averaging), and the modulus taken
to produce signals between 0 and 360◦.
Before application of the SHM methods, the required input signals were in-
spected and the level of noise present was analysed.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Data selection and processing
81
6.2.5
Inspection of signal quality
It was previously seen that the tower-top accelerations SHM method is sensitive
to measurement noise (see Section 4.5.2, also for explanation of SNR and dB
noise scale).
Through simulations, it was found that the method requires a
minimum SNR of 5 dB for white noise in the azimuth signal, 10 dB for white
noise in the tower-top accelerations signal, and 20 dB for periodic noise in the
azimuth signal, in order to perform at least 70% as well as it would without
measurement noise.
The signals from aero-elastic simulations (no noise) are
compared to the real turbine signals to investigate the presence of measurement
noise in the real turbines.
The azimuth angle was ﬁrst unwrapped, to produce a constantly increasing
signal not bounded by 360◦, and without jumps from 360 to 0◦(which corrupt
the frequency spectra). The only remaining frequency content should be low
frequency variations in the rotor speed, which are at low frequencies due to the
large rotational inertia of the rotor, and should be of low amplitude as the rotor
is at rated speed.
Figure 6.5 shows the spectra for the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine with and
without blade damage, as simulated using a beam-model in HAWC2, as well as
a real turbine with split tips. The two turbines are clearly diﬀerent, as the DTU
10 MW Reference Turbine has not been built, and the real turbine is an installed
and operating turbine produced by a commercial wind turbine manufacturer,
with a rated power lower than 10 MW. The real turbine with split tips was
selected as this turbine records an estimate of the free wind speed, allowing a
closer comparison in terms of environmental conditions. A free wind speed of
14 m/s and a turbulence intensity of 14% were selected.
In Figure 6.5 the natural frequencies are slightly diﬀerent, as the the real turbine
is diﬀerent to the DTU 10 MW Reference Turbine. The ﬁgure shows that the
tower-top accelerations are quite similar from the real and simulated turbines,
with similar energy in the spectra at peaks and between them. This suggests that
the measurement noise in the real turbine is likely of a much lower magnitude
than the useful signal.
The azimuth angle however appears to have a much higher noise level for the real
turbine than for the simulation case. For the simulated turbine, the 3P and 6P
components are clearly visible. For this turbine, the azimuth angle is sampled
at a rate of 100 Hz with perfect accuracy and precision, with zero measurement
noise.
For the real turbine, the azimuth angle was recorded at a much lower sample
==PAGE:94==
82
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
Figure 6.5: Power spectral density of tower top side-side accelerations and
azimuth angle (unwrapped) for simulated and real turbine.
rate of only 10 Hz, and the time-series appears less clean on visual inspection,
with slight ﬂuctuations from the linear trend seen regularly. The spectra shows
broadband noise that is not present in the simulations. The higher noise level
may be caused by real turbine behaviour (e.g. more complex and variable con-
troller), other vibrations in the nacelle (gearbox, bearings, generator), or even
directly by poor precision measurement.
It was shown for simulation data that the tower-top accelerations SHM was still
70% as eﬀective when white noise was added to the azimuth angle for an SNR
of 5 dB or above. It was also eﬀective when periodic noise was applied to the
azimuth angle, though was robust to much less noise; an SNR of above 17 dB
was required for the same 70% eﬀectiveness.
Though the noise cannot be directly measured, an estimate of the SNR can
be obtained. Firstly, the azimuth signal is unwrapped to produce a constantly
increasing signal. Next, a linear regression is done using least-squares ﬁt, which
is used as an estimate of the useful part of the azimuth signal, as the rotor speed
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Data selection and processing
83
is approximately constant. The estimated clean signal is subtracted from the
original azimuth signal, which is used as an estimate of the measurement noise.
As the rotor speed is not perfectly constant, the estimation of the measurement
noise also includes ﬂuctuations in the rotor speed. Therefore the power of the
true measurement noise must be less than the power of the estimated measure-
ment noise, and the SNR calculated using the estimated measurement noise will
be lower bound for the true SNR.
The lower bound for the SNR using this method was found to be 19 dB, meaning
that the major azimuth trend from 0 through 360◦is at least 80 times greater
in its RMS amplitude than the ﬂuctuations about this trend.
For an SNR of 19 dB with periodic noise or an SNR of 5 dB for white noise
added to the azimuth angle of simulated data, the damage indicators calculated
from the tower-top accelerations method reduced by less than 20%. Hence it is
suggested that measurement noise will not negatively aﬀect the SHM results.
Next, the tower-top accelerations SHM method was applied to the measured
signals from the real damaged turbines.
6.2.6
Uncertainty
It was previously found that damage indicators from the tower-top accelerations
method had an uncertainty of 18% only due to the turbulent seed for 50-minute
aero-elastic simulations (equivalent to 5 turbulent seeds using 10-minute simu-
lations). For the data from real wind turbines, data periods of 30 to 60 minutes
were used due to availability of data at rated rotor speed. The uncertainty due
to the stochastic nature of turbulence for periods of length 30 and 60 minutes
is estimated to be 26 and 17%, respectively (see Section 4.4.1) however, there
are two additional sources of uncertainty.
Firstly, periods from real turbines are categorised into bins by their mean wind
speed and mean turbulence intensity, so that periods in the same bins can be
compared. As the bins have a non-zero width, a range of mean wind conditions
exists within each bin, which will cause some variation between the tower-top
acceleration spectra that was not seen in aero-elastic simulations using iden-
tical wind conditions. This is compounded by uncertainty in the wind speed
measurement by nacelle anemometer, as previously discussed.
The second cause of increased uncertainty compared to previous simulation
results is due to non-stationary wind conditions - within a single data period for
a real wind turbine, the mean wind speed and mean turbulence intensity may
==PAGE:96==
84
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
change, and hence these periods are not fully described by the mean wind speed
and mean turbulence intensity. Some ﬁltering due to stationarity was applied,
but this cannot be removed completely.
6.3
Results
First, for the turbine with trailing edge crack, a visual inspection of the tower-
top side-side accelerations frequency response and modulated coherence plot is
presented. Then, damage indicators before detection and after repair of the
blade damage are described.
6.3.1
Graphical results - trailing edge crack
The tower-top accelerations method states that a rise in the modulated co-
herence plot between rotor harmonics indicates rotor anisotropy which can be
caused by blade damage. The power spectral density of tower-top side-side ac-
celeration and the modulated coherence were plotted for various wind conditions
before and after blade damage and detection.
Figure 6.6 shows these results for one set of wind conditions. Each line represents
a single period (30 to 60 minutes long) for that month. The results span over a
period including before crack detection, the crack detection and repair period,
and operation after completion of the repair. The crack was detected in May
and fully repaired by October. In April there are several peaks in the modulated
coherence plots between rotor harmonics. These peaks are not present during
other months before damage detection, nor after detection.
For some wind conditions, peaks between the rotor harmonics were observed,
though these were not seen consistently across wind conditions leading up to
repair in October, and in some cases were even seen after the blade was repaired.
Figure 6.7 shows some of modulated coherence plots where small peaks were
observed between rotor harmonics after the blade was repaired. There is no
apparent diﬀerence between the modulated coherence plots before and after
repair of the blade.
Plots for the tower-top side-side spectra and modulated coherence plots for some
other wind conditions are included in Appendix A.
==PAGE:97==
6.3 Results
85
Figure 6.6: Turbine with trailing edge crack: tower-top side-side acceleration
power spectral density and modulated coherence, for wind speed
15 m/s and turbulence intensity 15 %, as measured by the nacelle
anemometer.
Figure 6.7: Turbine with trailing edge crack: modulated coherence for a tur-
bine after repair, for various wind conditions.
The same analysis was done for the turbine with split tips, though the SHM
results were similar to those described for the turbine with a trailing edge crack:
peaks in the modulated coherence function between rotor harmonics were ob-
served sporadically both before and after detection and repair of the blade.
Damage indicators were calculated for both damage cases, to see if a trend
==PAGE:98==
86
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
could be seen with relation to the known condition of the blade.
6.3.2
Damage indicators - trailing edge crack
The damage indicators were calculated for the real turbine with trailing edge
crack, shown in Figure 6.8 below. The ﬁgure shows that there was no clear
relationship between the damage indicators and the known state of the blade.
The damage indicators increase in April before detection, though decrease again
before damage detection. Some damage indicators were very high well before
detection, and some even increase after detection.
Figure 6.8: Turbine with trailing edge crack: damage indicators for one 30-60
minute period per month of the year for selected wind conditions,
for blade damage detection using tower-top acceleration method.
Damage indicators were also calculated for a neighboring turbine that did not
have blade damage. The same individual 30-60 minute periods were selected
were used for application of the SHM algorithm. The resulting damage indi-
cators are shown in Figure 6.9. There are no clear diﬀerences in the damage
indicators between the damaged and undamaged turbine. They both show sim-
ilar trends throughout the year, suggesting that environmental conditions may
be the cause of variations in the damage indicators, rather than blade damage.
The data selection and SHM algorithm may not be eﬀective for operational tur-
==PAGE:99==
6.4 Damage indicators - split tips
87
bines, or it may be that this damage case is not severe enough for detection
with this method.
Figure 6.9: Turbine with no blade damage: selected damage indicators per
month of the year for selected wind conditions, for blade damage
detection using tower-top acceleration method
Aero-elastic simulations estimated that the uncertainty in damage indicators
due to the stochastic nature of turbulence (turbulent seed) was between 17 and
28% for data periods of length between 30 and 60 minutes. For the real turbines,
the uncertainty must be higher, due to additional uncertainty caused by wind
speed and turbulence intensity binning, wind speed measurement uncertainty,
and non-stationary conditions. The damage indicators in Figure 6.9 show peaks
with 300% increases, suggesting that uncertainty due to turbulent seed alone
cannot account for these variations.
6.4
Damage indicators - split tips
The same procedure was applied to the turbines with split tips, though these
turbines had less data availability after repair. First, the tower-top side-side
spectra was investigated, but no clear diﬀerence in the 1P frequency was seen
before and after repair.
Figure 6.10 shows the damage indicators appear to ﬂuctuate signiﬁcantly, but
==PAGE:100==
88
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
generally take high values before detection.
Figure 6.10: Turbine with split tips: damage indicators per month of the year
for selected wind conditions, for blade damage detection using
tower-top acceleration method.
Damage indicators were also calculated for a neighboring wind turbine, without
blade damage, shown in Figure 6.11. The same erratic behaviour of the damage
indicators can be seen, though the damage indicators take lower values on the
undamaged turbine.
The third damaged turbine (also with split tips) was analysed, though the dam-
age indicators were found to have similar magnitudes to the undamaged turbine,
with no clear development of damage indicators before and after detection and
repair. The damage indicators for this turbine are shown in Figure 6.12, with
further results included in Appendix A.
==PAGE:101==
6.4 Damage indicators - split tips
89
Figure 6.11: Turbine with no blade damage: damage indicators per month of
the year for selected wind conditions, for blade damage detection
using tower-top acceleration method.
Figure 6.12: Second turbine with split tips: damage indicators per month of
the year for selected wind conditions, for blade damage detection
using tower-top acceleration method.
==PAGE:102==
90
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
6.5
Discussion
For the turbine with trailing edge crack, using results from the tower-top ac-
celerations SHM method, no clear relationship could be found with the known
state of damage of the wind turbine blades. A rise in the modulated coher-
ence plot between rotor harmonics was seen sporadically, both before damage
detection and after repair.
For the turbines with split tips, the damage indicators were similarly erratic for
the damaged turbines as undamaged neighboring turbines. For both damaged
and undamaged turbines, the damage indicators decreased after the repair date,
suggesting that the variations in the damage indicator are related to environ-
mental conditions rather than blade damage.
For one of the split tips case, the damage indicators took generally higher values
than for the undamaged turbine, suggesting that the damage indicator may have
potential. By comparing undamaged and damaged, variations in the damage
indicators were found to be very similar for neighboring turbines, suggesting
that the damage indicators may be sensitive to environmental conditions. In
aero-elastic simulation, the method was shown to be robust to environmen-
tal conditions, but all simulations were done in an un-waked condition. The
anisotropic rotating wakes due to upstream wind turbines may also have an
eﬀect on the tower-top accelerations SHM method.
There are several other challenges in applying such methods to real turbines
that make damage detection more diﬃcult. Firstly, the chosen damage cases
for real turbines are not severe structural damage that are expected to result
in noticeable reductions in the blade stiﬀness, that may be required for turbine
rotor dynamics to be aﬀected. The trailing edge crack was smaller than the
cases analysed in aero-elastic simulation, which was also not detectable using
the tower-top accelerations method, although the basis for this study shows such
a damage case is detectable using a diﬀerent aero-elastic model. It was seen in
aero-elastic simulations using a beam model that when percentage reductions to
each of the stiﬀness properties was applied, the damage indicators only increased
appreciably for reductions in the edgewise or ﬂapwise bending stiﬀness. The
trailing edge crack sustained by the real turbine is not expected to aﬀect the
edgewise or ﬂapwise stiﬀness signiﬁcantly. Improved modelling of blade damage
may aid understanding of what damage type is required for detection using the
tower-top accelerations SHM method, as later recommended in Section 7.
Some damage types were detectable in aero-elastic simulations when damaged
and undamaged turbines were being compared with identical simulations, and
the exact same turbulent box. No such comparison was possible for the real tur-
==PAGE:103==
6.5 Discussion
91
bines. It was also found that damage indicators vary signiﬁcantly with environ-
mental conditions. Diﬃculties in classiﬁcation of environmental conditions by
using wind speed and turbulence intensity as measured by the nacelle anemome-
ter may also make detection of damage more diﬃcult, due to the uncertainty
within each wind speed and turbulence intensity bin.
The additional damping and excitement due to the support structure, soil and
waves were not analysed in aero-elastic simulation, and may have an impact on
the whirling modes and hence detection of rotor anisotropy. The energy spectra
of waves occurs within a frequency range depending on the wind conditions - this
is typically between 0.05 and 0.4 Hz [68]. The DTU 10 MW Reference turbine
has a rated rotor speed of 0.16 Hz (9.6 RPM), and so wave excitation is expected
to occur mainly at frequencies below the third rotor harmonic frequency. It may
be possible, although is thought to be unlikely, that wave excitation is causing
peaks in the modulated coherence of the tower-top side-side acceleration, and
causing high damage indicators to be calculated due to environmental conditions
and not blade damage.
In aero-elastic simulations for severe blade damage, a coherence value of 0.8 was
found. Such a high value was not found for any of data from real turbines.
This method may still be valuable for detecting very severe damage. As no real
turbines with more severe blade damage were available for analysis, it was not
possible to test such a hypothesis. Furthermore, the value of a SHM monitoring
algorithm that can only detect very severe blade damage is of reduced value to
a wind farm owner and operator. Very severe damage may already cause other
problems for the turbine e.g. severe tower-top vibrations forcing it to shutdown.
==PAGE:104==
92
Structural health monitoring: real turbines
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
Through aero-elastic simulations of wind turbines, using a beam-element model
for blades, trailing edge cracks and web-foot debonds were not detectable using
either of the proposed SHM methods.
Both SHM methods were tested for two sets of wind conditions, for rotors with
pitch and mass imbalance, and ﬁnally for several diﬀerent types of blade damage,
with varying severity.
The tower-top acceleration method was not sensitive to pitch or mass imbalance,
making this method of more practical value, as is not likely to be prone to false
positives from these sources. The tower-top accelerations method also performed
similarly for both sets of wind conditions, suggesting it may be more reliable
and usable in a range of conditions.
The blade loads transmittance method was more sensitive to mass and pitch
imbalance in the rotor, and hence false positives due to these sources may be
expected, which are hard to distinguish from blade damage. The practicality
of this method was further weakened as its performance varied signiﬁcantly
between the two sets of wind conditions tested. The requirement of small ranges
of wind speeds and turbulence intensities is impractical for a real wind farm, due
to data availability, the fact that conditions are always changing and diﬃculty
in precisely estimating the free wind speed using existing sensors such as the
==PAGE:106==
94
Conclusions
nacelle anemometer. A method that is more robust to wind conditions is hence
much more attractive.
Neither method was capable of detecting trailing edge cracks or web-foot debonds.
The tower-top accelerations method performed well for blades with oﬀ-axis ma-
trix cracks, for which, damage detection was possible, as well as the assessment
of damage severity. However, this damage type is not realistic and does not
relate well to commonly observed failure modes in wind turbine blades. The
oﬀ-axis matrix crack damage cases include the same density of oﬀ-axis matrix
cracks at all radial positions on the blades and in all parts of the blade cross-
section, whereas real fatigue damage suﬀered by the blade will not be uniform
across the whole blade.
By applying percentage reductions along the whole blade to each of the stiﬀness
elements in the anisotropic stiﬀness matrix, it was found that the tower-top ac-
celerations method was only sensitive to reductions to the ﬂapwise and edgewise
bending stiﬀness. For trailing edge cracks and web-foot debonds, these proper-
ties were only aﬀected over a limited span of the blade, and by a small amount,
which may explain why such damage cases were not detectable.
One major limitation of the aero-elastic simulations was the use of a beam-
element model, which cannot capture eﬀects such as local buckling with can
occur for trailing edge cracks and web-foot debonds. Due to local buckling, the
stiﬀness of the blade will change with deﬂection, though this occurs non-linearly,
and also depends on the direction of deﬂection (e.g. trailing edge crack opens
for edgewise deﬂection towards trailing edge and causes local buckling, though
buckling won’t occur for edgewise deﬂection towards leading edge). These ef-
fects, which might have aﬀect on rotor anisotropy, are not included in a beam
element model. Whilst the number of beam elements used was shown to be suf-
ﬁcient to model the chosen damage types, the previously described non-linear
eﬀects pose problems for estimating the structural properties of beam-elements.
Using a cross-section based method overestimates stiﬀness reductions due inﬁ-
nite length beams and unsupported cracks. A 3D FEM method that applies
loads and measures deﬂections (as was done by Berring et al. [3] and Myrent et
al. [4] to produce the input data used in this thesis) also has its limitations, as
the estimated stiﬀness properties will depend on the magnitude of the loads ap-
plied and their direction - diﬀerent results may be obtained for higher deﬂections
and deﬂections in the opposite directions, due to non-linear buckling.
Analysis of real turbines with a trailing edge crack and split tips showed that the
damage indicators did not clearly increase during the periods with the known
damages in the blade. There was also no clear diﬀerence between neighbor-
ing damaged and undamaged turbines. Several diﬃculties were described for
the application of the tower-top accelerations method to real turbines. These
==PAGE:107==
7.1 Future work
95
included wave and soil interaction (which was not modelled in aero-elastic sim-
ulation), the possible eﬀect of environmental conditions on damage indicators
and the relatively low severity of the damage cases analysed compared to the
damage that was successfully detected in aero-elastic simulation. Furthermore,
turbine wakes were not considered, neither in aero-elastic simulation or analysis
of real turbines, which may aﬀect the excitation of whirling modes and SHM
results, due to the anisotropic rotating nature of turbine wakes.
The aim of this thesis was to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of SHM methods for wind
turbine blades that can be applied without the installation of additional sensors.
Additionally, the proposed SHM methods’ ability to detect diﬀerent damage
types and severity, as well as the applicability of methods to real operating
turbines was to be investigated. The tower-top accelerations method was the
most eﬀective, and though it was robust to rotor imbalance, measurement noise
and wind conditions, it was only capable of detecting very severe damage, that
is not representative of typical blade failure modes. This method, when applied
to real turbines with a trailing edge crack and a split tip, was not able to
successfully detect the damage.
Overall, this thesis has shown that detection of blade damage without additional
sensors is possible, though that the methods found and analysed were only
capable of detecting severe damage, and these methods were not demonstrated
on real turbines. It is hence recommended that methods of performing blade
SHM using additional sensors are investigated further.
7.1
Future work
The key limitation of this thesis were the use of a beam-element approach used to
model damaged wind turbine blades. Based on this, future work is recommended
using a super-element method for modelling the structure of the blade. Whilst
such analysis has been done (as presented in the basis of this thesis), the model
used has not been veriﬁed and validated. A super-element model may be capable
of capturing local buckling eﬀects and other non-linear eﬀects that may change
turbine dynamics, and improve the detectability of blade damage in simulations.
A comparison of blade dynamics when simulated with beam-element and super-
element approaches could also help to understand the validity of a beam-element
approach for such damage types in such operational conditions.
The second key limitation of this thesis was the lack of available fast data for
turbines with moderate to severe structural damage. It is hence recommended
that, when further severe blade damage is detected, the tower-top accelerations
==PAGE:108==
96
Conclusions
method be applied to see if damage can be detected.
The SHM results for real turbines may depend on environmental conditions, as
the damage indicators ﬂuctuated similarly for damaged and undamaged turbines
throughout the year. Wind turbine wakes may have an eﬀect, due to increased
turbulence and anisotropic rotating wakes. Further analysis is recommended, by
ﬁltering the data depending on waked and un-waked wind directions, and com-
paring damage indicators throughout the year for both conditions. This may
improve the SHM results, although the low severity of damage for the available
cases may still make detection impossible. There may also be signiﬁcant chal-
lenges due to data availability for the un-waked condition, depending on the
wind turbine position in the farm and the prevailing wind direction.
The blade-loads method could not be applied to real turbines due to lack of
data. Since blade load sensors are included in the latest oﬀshore wind turbines,
further investigation of blade load based SHM methods should be performed
once suﬃcient data has been collected from real turbines with blade damages.
The blade load transmission methods investigated in this thesis were not found
to perform well in aero-elastic simulations, hence other methods should be ex-
plored if data becomes available.
Analysis in aero-elastic simulation with a diﬀerent turbine model is also recom-
mended for future work, to see if the proposed methods in this thesis may be
more eﬀective when applied to less stiﬀblades, as the DTU 10 MW Reference
Turbine is known to have much stiﬀer blades than real commercial blades.
==PAGE:109==
Appendix A
Structural health
monitoring results for
operational turbines with
blade damage
==PAGE:110==
98
Structural health monitoring results for operational turbines with blade
damage
Figure A.1: Tower-top side-side acceleration power spectral density and mod-
ulated coherence for a turbine with a trailing edge crack, for wind
conditions class with wind speed 17 m/s and turbulence intensity
15%, as measured by the nacelle anemometer.
Figure A.2: Tower-top side-side acceleration power spectral density and mod-
ulated coherence for a turbine with a trailing edge crack, for wind
conditions class with wind speed 15 m/s and turbulence intensity
11%, as measured by the nacelle anemometer.
==PAGE:111==
99
Figure A.3: Turbine with split tips: histogram of sample statistics for each
selected period of constant rotor speed, where samples are the 10-
minute mean wind speed and turbulence intensity in each period.
Black dashed line shows chosen threshold for ﬁltering periods with
high variability.
Figure A.4: Number of periods with constant rotor speed found over the whole
year in which blade damage (split tip) was detected, for selected
wind and turbulence intensity bins. Wind speeds are estimated
free wind speed from nacelle anemometer using Nacelle Transfer
Function.
==PAGE:112==
100
Structural health monitoring results for operational turbines with blade
damage
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1] Dmitri Tcherniak.
Detection and identiﬁcation of damaged blade with-
out stopping the wind turbine. European Workshop On Structural Health
Monitoring, 8, 2016.
[2] Long Zhang, Ziqiang Lang, and Wen-Xian Yang. Transmissibility damage
indicator for wind turbine blade condition monitoring. In 2015 21st In-
ternational Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC), pages 1–4.
IEEE, 2015.
[3] Personal communication, peter berring and louis bond-smith, October
2018.
[4] Noah Myrent, Douglas E Adams, and D Todd Griﬃth. Wind turbine blade
shear web disbond detection using rotor blade operational sensing and data
analysis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 373(2035):20140345, 2015.
[5] Christopher J Crabtree, Donatella Zappalá, and Peter J Tavner. Survey
of commercially available condition monitoring systems for wind turbines.
Durham Research Online, 2014.
[6] CJ Crabtree, Y Feng, and PJ Tavner. Detecting incipient wind turbine
gearbox failure: a signal analysis method for on-line condition monitor-
ing. In Proceedings of European Wind Energy Conference (EWEC 2010),
Warsaw, Poland, volume 2023, page 154156, 2010.
[7] Peter Tavner. Oﬀshore wind turbines: reliability, availability and mainte-
nance. The Institution of Engineering and Technology, 2012.
==PAGE:114==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] Flemming Moeller Larsen. New lightning qualiﬁcation test procedure for
large wind turbine blades. In International Conference on Lightning and
Static Electricity (ICLOSE), Blackpool, 2003, 2003.
[9] Fabian Vorpahl, Michael Strobel, Jason M Jonkman, Torben J Larsen,
Patrik Passon, and James Nichols. Veriﬁcation of aero-elastic oﬀshore wind
turbine design codes under iea wind task xxiii. Wind Energy, 17(4):519–
547, 2014.
[10] Dmitri Tcherniak. Rotor anisotropy as a blade damage indicator for wind
turbine structural health monitoring systems. Mechanical Systems and Sig-
nal Processing, 74:183–198, 2016.
[11] Yaowen W Ou, Vasilis K Dertimanis, and Eleni N Chatzi. Operational
damage localization of wind turbine blades. In International Conference
on Experimental Vibration Analysis for Civil Engineering Structures, pages
261–272. Springer, 2017.
[12] Yanfeng Wang, Ming Liang, and Jiawei Xiang. Damage detection method
for wind turbine blades based on dynamics analysis and mode shape dif-
ference curvature information. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing,
48(1-2):351–367, 2014.
[13] Bent F Sørensen, Erik Jørgensen, Christian P Debel, Henrik Myhre Jensen,
Torben K Jacobsen, K Halling, et al. Improved design of large wind tur-
bine blade of ﬁbre composites based on studies of scale eﬀects (phase 1).
summary report. Asme Wind Energy Symposium, 2004.
[14] Chia Chen Ciang, Jung-Ryul Lee, and Hyung-Joon Bang. Structural health
monitoring for a wind turbine system: a review of damage detection meth-
ods. Measurement science and technology, 19(12):122001, 2008.
[15] Katharina Fischer and DA Coronado. Condition monitoring of wind tur-
bines: state of the art, user experience and recommendations. Fraunhofer-
IWES, Bremerhaven, 2015.
[16] Sabbah Ataya and Mohamed MZ Ahmed. Forms of discontinuities in 100
kw and 300 kw wind turbine blades. In Proceedings of 10th World Wind
Energy Conference & Renewable Energy Exhibition, 2011.
[17] Abtin Namiranian. 3d simulation of a 5mw wind turbine, 2011.
[18] Philipp Ulrich Haselbach and Kim Branner. Eﬀect of trailing edge damage
on full-scale wind turbine blade failure. In 20th International Conference
on Composite Materials (ICCM20). ICCM20 Secretariat, 2015.
[19] Roy Craig and Mervyn Bampton. Coupling of substructures for dynamic
analyses. 1968.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[20] PLC Van der Valk and SN Voormeeren.
An overview of modeling ap-
proaches for complex oﬀshore wind turbine support structures. Proceedings
of the ISMA2012-USD2012, Leuven, Belgium, Sept, pages 17–19, 2012.
[21] Shaofeng Wang, Torben J Larsen, and Anders Melchior Hansen. Validation
of superelement modelling of complex oﬀshore support structures. In 12th
EAWE PhD seminar on Wind Energy in Europe. European Academy of
Wind Energy, 2016.
[22] Mehmet Ozan Gözcü and A Kayran. Investigation of the eﬀect of bending
twisting coupling on the loads in wind turbines with superelement blade
deﬁnition.
In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 524, page
012040. IOP Publishing, 2014.
[23] Anneke Labuschagne, NF Janse van Rensburg, and AJ Van der Merwe.
Comparison of linear beam theories. Mathematical and Computer Mod-
elling, 49(1-2):20–30, 2009.
[24] Taeseong Kim, Anders M Hansen, and Kim Branner. Development of an
anisotropic beam ﬁnite element for composite wind turbine blades in multi-
body system. Renewable Energy, 59:172–183, 2013.
[25] Jose Pedro Blasques and Mathias Stolpe. Multi-material topology opti-
mization of laminated composite beam cross sections. Composite Struc-
tures, 94(11):3278–3289, 2012.
[26] Gunner Chr Larsen, Peter Berring, Dmitri Tcherniak, Per Hørlyk Nielsen,
and Kim Branner.
Eﬀect of a damage to modal parameters of a wind
turbine blade. 2014.
[27] Oscar Gerardo Castro Ardila. Fatigue strength of composite wind turbine
blade structures. PhD thesis, DTU Wind Energy, 2018.
[28] Branner Kim Ardila, Oscar Gerardo Castro. Eﬀect of matrix cracks on
stiﬀness degradation of laminated composite beams, 2019. Unpublished.
[29] Oscar Castro and Kim Branner. Eﬀect of matrix cracks on stiﬀness degra-
dation of laminated composite beams. In Twenty-second international con-
ference on composite materials. DTU, 2019.
[30] A. Rytter. Vibration based inspection of civil engineering structures. PhD
Thesis, 1993.
[31] Kristoﬀer Ahrens Dickow et al Jonas Falk Skov, Martin Dalgaard Ulriksen.
On structural health monitoring of wind turbine blades. Key Engineering
Materials, pages 628–635, 2013. IISN: 1662-9795.
==PAGE:116==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32] Malcolm McGugan, G Pereira, Bent F Sørensen, H Toftegaard, and Kim
Branner.
Damage tolerance and structural monitoring for wind turbine
blades. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 373(2035):20140077, 2015.
[33] D Todd Griﬃth, Nathanael C Yoder, Brian Resor, Jonathan White, and
Joshua Paquette. Structural health and prognostics management for the
enhancement of oﬀshore wind turbine operations and maintenance strate-
gies. Wind Energy, 17(11):1737–1751, 2014.
[34] Peter Cawley.
Structural health monitoring:
Closing the gap be-
tween research and industrial deployment. Structural Health Monitoring,
17(5):1225–1244, 2018.
[35] Magnus Currie, Mohamed Saaﬁ, Christos Tachtatzis, and Francis Quail.
Structural health monitoring for wind turbine foundations. Proceedings of
the ICE-Energy, 166(4):162–169, 2013.
[36] Mathew L Wymore, Jeremy E Van Dam, Halil Ceylan, and Daji Qiao.
A survey of health monitoring systems for wind turbines. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 52:976–990, 2015.
[37] Wensong Zhou Hui Li and Jinlong Xu. Wind Turbine Control and Montor-
ing, chapter 9, pages 231–266. Springer, Springer Cham Heidelberg New
York Dordrecht London, 2014. Chapter: Structural Health Monitoring of
Wind Turbine Blades.
[38] W Zhou, Y Huang, H Li, K Weaver, and M Fernandez. Damage propaga-
tion monitoring of composite blade under static loading. In MATERIALS
FORUM, volume 33, 2009.
[39] Mark A Rumsey and Joshua A Paquette. Structural health monitoring of
wind turbine blades. In Smart Sensor Phenomena, Technology, Networks,
and Systems 2008, volume 6933, page 69330E. International Society for
Optics and Photonics, 2008.
[40] Goutham R Kirikera, Mark J Schulz, and Mannur J Sundaresan. Multi-
ple damage identiﬁcation on a wind turbine blade using a structural neu-
ral system.
In Sensor Systems and Networks: Phenomena, Technology,
and Applications for NDE and Health Monitoring 2007, volume 6530, page
65300T. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2007.
[41] Tyler J Arsenault, Ajit Achuthan, Pier Marzocca, Chiara Grappasonni, and
Giuliano Coppotelli. Development of a fbg based distributed strain sensor
system for wind turbine structural health monitoring. Smart Materials and
Structures, 22(7):075027, 2013.
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[42] Dmitri Tcherniak and Lasse Lohilahti Mølgaard. Active vibration-based
shm system: demonstration on an operating vestas v27 wind turbine. In
8th European Workshop On Structural Health Monitoring (EWSHM 2016).
NDT. net, 2016.
[43] Wei Fan and Pizhong Qiao. Vibration-based damage identiﬁcation meth-
ods:
a review and comparative study.
Structural health monitoring,
10(1):83–111, 2011.
[44] D Tcherniak, Shashank Chauhan, and Morten Hartvig Hansen. Applica-
bility limits of operational modal analysis to operational wind turbines.
In Structural Dynamics and Renewable Energy, Volume 1, pages 317–327.
Springer, 2011.
[45] Douglas Adams, Jonathan White, Mark Rumsey, and Charles Farrar.
Structural health monitoring of wind turbines: method and application
to a hawt. Wind Energy, 14(4):603–623, 2011.
[46] B Frankenstein, L Schubert, N Meyendorf, H Friedmann, and C Ebert.
Monitoring system of wind turbine rotor blades. In Smart Sensor Phenom-
ena, Technology, Networks, and Systems 2009, volume 7293, page 72930X.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2009.
[47] Inka Mueller and Claus-Peter Fritzen. Failure assessment of piezoelectric
actuators and sensors for increased reliability of shm systems. In Structural
Health Monitoring from Sensing to Processing. IntechOpen, 2018.
[48] Mark Mollineaux, Konstantinos Balafas, Kim Branner, Per Nielsen, Angelo
Tesauro, Anne Kiremidjian, and Ram Rajagopal. Damage detection meth-
ods on wind turbine blade testing with wired and wireless accelerometer
sensors. In European Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring, volume 7,
2014.
[49] Yaowen Ou, Vasilis K Dertimanis, and Eleni N Chatzi. Wind turbine blade
damage detection and localization via spatiotemporal kalman ﬁltering. In
Life-Cycle of Engineering Systems: Emphasis on Sustainable Civil Infras-
tructure: Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium on Life-Cycle
Civil Engineering (IALCCE 2016), 16-19 October 2016, Delft, The Nether-
lands, pages 355–362. CRC Press, 2016.
[50] D Tcherniak, S Yang, and MS Allen. Experimental characterization of op-
erating bladed rotor using harmonic power spectra and stochastic subspace
identiﬁcation. In Proc. International Conference on Noise and Vibration
Engineering (ISMA), 2014.
[51] CR Farrar and GH James III. System identiﬁcation from ambient vibration
measurements on a bridge. Journal of sound and vibration, 205(1):1–18,
1997.
==PAGE:118==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[52] AK Pandey, M Biswas, and MM Samman. Damage detection from changes
in curvature mode shapes. Journal of sound and vibration, 145(2):321–332,
1991.
[53] Mohammad M Rezaei, Mehdi Behzad, Hamed Moradi, and Hassan Had-
dadpour. Modal-based damage identiﬁcation for the nonlinear model of
modern wind turbine blade. Renewable energy, 94:391–409, 2016.
[54] Aral Sarraﬁ, Zhu Mao, Christopher Niezrecki, and Peyman Poozesh.
Vibration-based damage detection in wind turbine blades using phase-based
motion estimation and motion magniﬁcation. Journal of Sound and Vibra-
tion, 421:300–318, 2018.
[55] Martin D Ulriksen, Dmitri Tcherniak, Poul H Kirkegaard, and Lars Damk-
ilde.
Operational modal analysis and wavelet transformation for dam-
age identiﬁcation in wind turbine blades.
Structural Health Monitoring,
15(4):381–388, 2016.
[56] Wang-Ji
Yan,
Meng-Yun
Zhao,
Qian
Sun,
and
Wei-Xin
Ren.
Transmissibility-based system identiﬁcation for structural health monitor-
ing: Fundamentals, approaches, and applications. Mechanical Systems and
Signal Processing, 117:453–482, 2019.
[57] Wenxian Yang, Ziqiang Lang, and Wenye Tian. Condition monitoring and
damage location of wind turbine blades by frequency response transmissi-
bility analysis. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 62(10):6558–
6564, 2015.
[58] Shifei Yang, Dmitri Tcherniak, and Matthew S Allen. Modal analysis of
rotating wind turbine using multiblade coordinate transformation and har-
monic power spectrum. In Topics in Modal Analysis I, Volume 7, pages
77–92. Springer, 2014.
[59] Ki-Yong Oh, Joon-Young Park, Jun-Shin Lee, Bogdan I Epureanu, and Jae-
Kyung Lee. A novel method and its ﬁeld tests for monitoring and diagnosing
blade health for wind turbines. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement, 64(6):1726–1733, 2015.
[60] Samuel J Dyas, Justin Scheidler, Stuart G Taylor, Kevin Farinholt, and
Gyuhae Park. Structural health monitoring of wind turbine blades under
fatigue loads.
In Topics in Experimental Dynamics Substructuring and
Wind Turbine Dynamics, Volume 2, pages 227–245. Springer, 2012.
[61] Department of Wind Energy Technical University of Denmark. Reliablade
project, 2019.
hhttp://www.reliablade.com/about, Last accessed on
2019-10-09.
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[62] Christian Bak, Frederik Zahle, Robert Bitsche, Taeseong Kim, Anders
Yde, Lars Christian Henriksen, Morten Hartvig Hansen, Jose Pedro Al-
bergaria Amaral Blasques, Mac Gaunaa, and Anand Natarajan. The dtu
10-mw reference wind turbine. In Danish Wind Power Research 2013, 2013.
[63] Janis Varna.
Modelling mechanical performance of damaged laminates.
Journal of composite materials, 47(20-21):2443–2474, 2013.
[64] Morten Hartvig Hansen and Lars Christian Henriksen.
Basic dtu wind
energy controller. 2013.
[65] Anand Natarajan and David R Verelst. Outlier robustness for wind turbine
extrapolated extreme loads. Wind Energy, 15(5):679–697, 2012.
[66] International Electrotechnical Comission. International standard iec 64100-
1, wind turbines - part 1: Design requirements, 2005-2008.
[67] Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov, Mark C Kelly, Andrea Vignaroli, and Jacob
Berg. From wind to loads: wind turbine site-speciﬁc load estimation with
surrogate models trained on high-ﬁdelity load databases.
Wind Energy
Science, 3(2):767–790, 2018.
[68] Dan Kallehave, Byron W Byrne, Christian LeBlanc Thilsted, and Kris-
tian Kousgaard Mikkelsen. Optimization of monopiles for oﬀshore wind
turbines. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 373(2035):20140100, 2015.
