==PAGE:1==
Drug discovery from Actinobacteria:
secondary metabolites from Streptomyces
iranensis
Chenai Elizabeth Muchena
S180013
Supervisor: Ling Ding
Natural Product Discovery
DTU Bioengineering
2 February 2020
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
 
Page | 1  
 
  
Preface 
 
This master project "Drug discovery from Actinobacteria: secondary metabolites from 
Streptomyces iranensis." is submitted as the ﬁnal part of the requirements to obtain a 
master’s degree in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering from the Technical University of 
Denmark. The work presented was carried out in The Natural Product Discovery section of 
DTU Bioengineering, under the supervision of Associate Professor Ling Ding.  
 
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor Ling, for giving me the opportunity to 
work on this project and for the guidance and scientific advice during the course of this 
project. I am also deeply grateful to Mohamed Shaaban, for your enthusiasm and for 
introducing me to the ﬁeld of natural product chemistry. This project would not be possible 
without both your patience and support.  
 
In addition, I would like to extend my warmest gratitude to everyone in the Natural Product 
Section, particularly the technicians, for always providing HPLC-MS support when needed and 
the DTU Chemistry for help with the NMR. 
 
Lastly, to all my family and friends from far and wide, who in one way or another shared their 
support morally, financially or physically throughout this entire master’s degree, thank you! 
 
 
 
 
Chenai Elizabeth Muchena 
2 February 2020 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Page | 2  
 
 ABSTRACT 
The Global burden of disease from multi-drug resistant infectious pathogens and tumors has 
increased in the last decade at an alarming rate; a cause of concern for the health workforce 
and the Pharmaceutical industry. At the forefront of drug discovery from natural sources, 
secondary metabolites continue to provide a chemically diverse and untapped source of 
novel compounds. Access to advanced synthetic biology and bioinformatic tools has proven 
successful in solving the complex structures of these Natural products, allowing for faster 
dereplication and discovery of promising lead drug candidates. 
 
A previous bioinformatic investigation using AntiSMASH had revealed 44 individual SM 
clusters, pointing towards the high potential of this strain as a source for novel compounds. 
The purpose of this research was to isolate and investigate the SMs of Actinobacterium 
Streptomyces iranensis using isolation, separation and analytical tools and potentially 
discover new SMs. This project resulted in the isolation of three compounds, which were all 
known and previously reported in literature. To our knowledge, this was the first time that a 
steroidal Saponin had been isolated from this strain, supporting the hypothesis that this strain 
had high biochemical diversity and an untapped source for drug leads. Pteridic acid F and 
Elaiophylin, which had also been isolated in a preliminary study in separate fractions of the 
same strain, highly suggested that S. iranensis produced both SMs in high quantities. 
Elaiophylin had also been reported previously as exhibiting anti-tumor, immunosuppressive 
and anti-bacterial activity in bioactivity studies.  
Purification of Elaiophylin and Pteridic acid led to the study of their biosynthetic origin and 
assembly pathway. It was interesting to note that both compounds originated from the same 
gene cluster and had the same Polyketide backbone in their structures. A closer analysis of 
their assembly revealed that the difference was introduced in the second modular unit, which 
was responsible for their folding.  
The work performed in this study represents the major potential of actinomycetes, 
particularly the strain S. iranensis, as SM producers and shows that novel compounds are still 
to be discovered from lesser known species. Furthermore, the project is an example of how a 
focused collaboration between the bioinformatics, analytical and natural product chemistry 
can be effective when working to discover novel antibiotics. Combining this collaboration 
with molecular biology would provide the missing link to linking genes to compounds and 
unravelling their biosynthetic pathways. 
  
  
  
  
  
   
==PAGE:4==
 
Page | 3  
 
 
Contents 
ABSTRACT .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2 
ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................................................................................. 4 
1. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................................................. 5 
2. METHODOLOGY ............................................................................................................................................................ 16 
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS .................................................................................................................................... 24 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ...................................................................................................................................... 29 
5. CONCLUSION .................................................................................................................................................................. 39 
6. FUTURE WORK .............................................................................................................................................................. 41 
BIBLIOGRAPHY .................................................................................................................................................................. 43 
APPENDIX ............................................................................................................................................................................. 46 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Page | 4  
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
1D  
1 Dimensional  
2D  
2 Dimensional  
A  
Adenylation  
ACN 
Acetonitrile  
ACP 
Acyl Carrier Protein  
AT 
Acyltransferase  
BPC 
Base Peak Chromatogram  
CoA 
Coenzyme A  
COSY Correlation Spectroscopy  
DAD 
Diode Array Detector  
DCM Dichloromethane  
EIC 
Extracted Ion Chromatogram 
ESI 
Electrospray Ionization  
HMBC Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Correlation  
HPLC High Performance Liquid Chromatography  
HSQC Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence  
MeOH Methanol  
MIC 
Minimal Inhibitory Concentration 
MS 
Mass Spectrometry  
MT 
Methyl Transferase  
MTT 
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-Yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide 
MQ 
MilliQ-water  
m/z 
Mass-to-charge ratio  
NMR Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
NPC 
Natural Product Chemistry  
NRP 
Non-Ribosomal Peptide  
NRPS Non-Ribosomal Peptide Synthetase 
OSC 
Oxidosqualene Cyclases  
PCP 
Peptidyl Carrier Protein  
PK 
Polyketide PKS Polyketide Synthase  
PPM 
Parts Per Million  
RP 
Reverse Phase  
RT 
Retention Time 
SEC 
Size Exclusion Chromatography  
SM 
Secondary Metabolite  
SMBGC Secondary Metabolite Biosynthetic Gene Clusters 
Sp. 
Species  
T 
Thiolation  
TLC 
Thin Layer Chromatography 
TE 
Thioesterase  
TOF 
Time Of Flight  
UHPLC Ultra High-Performance Liquid Chromatography  
UV 
Ultraviolet 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
Page | 5  
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
There has been a recent increase in demand for novel pharmaceutical products, due to the 
emergence of drug resistant microbes and increase in the global cancer burden. According to 
Anand et al., Multi-drug resistant microbes on average cause millions of deaths annually, with 
this number expected to reach over 10 million by the year 2050. Natural products continue to 
be an important, untapped source of leads for new medicines, despite reduced interest from 
large pharmaceutical companies. History points towards the large success of Natural Product 
Chemistry (NPC), shown by the commercial success of streptomycin and vancomycin which 
both form the foundation of modern-day medicine and achievement in combatting global 
pandemics such as Tuberculosis (TB) (HILL, 1960; Anand et al., 2019). Earliest known records 
of Natural products being used for their medicinal value, dates back to as early as 2900 B.C, 
with the majority of these coming from plant sources. Undoubtedly, the most well-known 
Natural Product, which gave rise to the study of micro-organisms as sources of medicinal 
drugs, was of Penicillin, a Secondary Metabolite which was isolated from Fungi and gave the 
species a selective advantage in its environment (Anand et al., 2019). 
A large number of biologically active natural compounds are secondary metabolites (SMs), 
organic compounds that have complex structures with high variance between organisms. 
Interestingly, SMs have no cellular/biological role, but are for adaptation and survival to give 
the organism a selective advantage. Though this structural and functional heterogeneity 
offers a wide source of possible novel lead compounds for drug discovery in the 
Pharmaceutical sector, it also means their synthesis or extraction is resource intensive, slow 
and inefficient. The lack of acceptance of natural products as potential drug leads was mostly 
because of low output of active pharmaceutical compounds after purification, and 
consequently, an inability to then elucidate the mechanism of action in a biological cell 
(Bérdy, 2005; Nagpure et al., 2014). 
Prior to drug candidate selection, several parameters such as efficacy, pharmacokinetics and 
safety of both natural and synthetic compounds need to be evaluated and this posed as a 
challenge for smaller biotech facilities. Only a few global companies had the ability and 
capacity to take a new compound from development to market due to the high cost of 
production coupled with the limited knowledge on approaches to discovery on novel, 
bioactive compounds. Moreover, Koehn and Carter cited that the new era of synthetic 
chemical libraries led to quicker drug discovery timeframes and less researchers investing 
resources into Lead drug discovery using Natural Product Chemistry (2005).  However, novel 
culturing and purification techniques, coupled with high-throughput, advanced methods in 
structure prediction and biosynthetic tools and access to compound databases and NP 
libraries, have enabled the resurgence of this research line, and the rapid discovery of new 
compounds. This was also fueled by the increase in drug resistant microbes and emergence of 
new infectious diseases, demanding that Pharmaceutical R&D sections try new approaches in 
the drug discovery process. The advances in dereplication tools has resulted in quicker drug 
discovery and evaluation of the safety and efficacy profile of lead candidates and also allowed 
new drug design and synthesis methods based on natural compounds. Metabolomics and 
==PAGE:7==
 
Page | 6  
 
genome mining now also allow researchers to investigate gene clusters in unknown 
compounds and search for novelty prior to isolation and purification, to prevent redundancy. 
Streptomyces is the type genus of the family Streptomycetaceae and currently covers close to 
576 species with the number increasing every year (Koehn and Carter, 2005; Ganzera and 
Sturm, 2018).  
 
1.2   Actinobacteria and uses 
Actinobacteria are a group of filamentous, Gram positive bacteria, from which over 10 000 
bioactive metabolites have been derived from. Phylogenetically, Actinobacteria represent one 
of the largest taxonomic units in the Domain Bacteria (Appendix 1). Though their 
evolutionary development cannot be traced back, they are widely distributed and adapted to 
the aquatic and terrestrial environments, suggesting a high level of biodiversity in the 
organism. This biodiversity also supported by the high level of heterogeneity in the genomic 
sequence, an evolutionary consequence, made Actinobacteria an interesting group of 
organisms to study in the development of new drug candidates against other pathogenic 
organisms. Structurally, they are composed of higher levels of guanine-cytosine content in 
comparison to adenine-thymine/uracil, thereby meaning they have a relatively higher level of 
stability due to interactions of base stacking (Ventura et al., 2007; Kumar and Jadeja, 2016).  
Actinobacteria are Gram positive bacteria, which means they have a thick cell wall about 20-
80 nm, often referred to as sacculus. This cell wall consists of Peptidoglycan which is 
covalently attached to other polymers, such as teichoic acids and Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
which introduces high variance in the different species and give them their distinct 
characteristic features. For example, streptococcus species contain high levels of 
polysaccharides, whereas s. aureus have high content levels of teichoic acids (Lima et al., 
2017).   
Actinobacteria exhibit morphological characteristics of both bacteria and fungi. Because of 
the complex nature of the biosynthetic regulation of transcription and metabolism of 
metabolites in Actinobacteria, it is often difficult to predict and devise synthetic pathways to 
maximize biosynthetic efficiency. Antigenic variation and introduction of silencing mutations 
present a large barrier in the cases of genome mining and heterologous expression (Salton 
and Kim, 1996). 
1.2.1        Streptomyces Genus 
The Streptomyces genus, belonging to the Actinobacteria group, is the largest antibiotic-
producing genus, producing antibacterial, antifungal, and antiparasitic drugs, and also a wide 
range of other bioactive compounds, such as immunosuppressants  (Anderson and 
Wellington, 2001). They form a complex substrate mycelium that aids in scavenging organic 
compounds from their substrates.  To date, the Streptomyces genus is also the largest 
producers of the antibiotics in the world (over 60%), owing to the large number of bioactive 
SMs they produce. It is understood that in extreme conditions, such as depletion of nutrients 
in the environment,  there is a cascade of cell signalling events that then result in cell 
differentiation from vegetative mycelium to aerial hyphae.(Appendix 2) This is in a two-step 
==PAGE:8==
 
Page | 7  
 
process, with Programmed-Cell Death occurring first to provide a reserve of building blocks 
for the aerial hyphae. This intermediate step also attracts other competing, scavenging 
microbes, which are attracted to this pool of nutrients, and consequently, the Streptomyces 
produce antibiotics as a defence mechanism. Understanding the different phases in the life 
cycle of Streptomyces bacteria, has been a key resource that researchers have manipulated in 
producing antibiotics. (Barka et al., 2016) (Fig. 1.1) 
 
Fig 1.1 Graph illustrating cell growth and viability versus lifetime  
 
1.2.2 Streptomyces iranensis 
S. iranensis is a new species of terrestrial Streptomyces discovered in 2010 by Hamedi et al., 
which was ﬁrst assembled and sequenced in 2014. This species of bacteria is of particular 
interest because when 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis was conducted,  it was found to be 
under the same phylogeny tree as Streptomyces rapamycinicus (99.2%), Streptomyces 
violaceusniger (99.1%), Streptomyces javensis (99.1%) and Streptomyces yogyakartensis 
(99.1%) (Haydock et al., 2004; Chaves et al., 2017). Further investigation also then showed 
that it was closely related to the S. rapamycinicus (with a 72.7% DNA-DNA similarity) and this 
high similarity in the gene bio-clusters was observed between genes SIRAN8002 to SIRAN8065 
in S. Iranensis and that of Rapamycin. Rapamycin was then the first SM product to then be 
detected from S. iranensis (Horn et al., 2014). 
Bioinformatic analysis of the genome identiﬁed 44 secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene 
clusters (SMBGCs) of interest, indicating that S. iranensis could potentially be a source of 
novel, bioactive SMs for drug development. Moreover, targeted gene deletions via knockout 
mutant strain models, have also shown that S. iranensis could be a possible source of 
Rapamycin. One major research question around these biosynthetic clusters would be around 
developing a protocol to activate all methylated, inactive genes encoding SMs, such as 
chromatin remodelling, to transcribe the full array of secondary metabolites. Because of its 
high potential, proven usefulness and unexplored nature, we selected this strain of bacteria 
for the discovery of novel bioactive Secondary metabolites (Hamedi and Poorinmohammad, 
2017; Kjærbølling et al., 2019).  
 
==PAGE:9==
 
Page | 8  
 
1.2.3        Secondary Metabolites and biosynthesis 
As discussed earlier, Secondary metabolites are natural products that give organisms a 
selective advantage in a competitive environment, protect against predators and also act as 
regulatory signalling molecules to maintain its homeostasis. They are produced in during the 
stationary phase in the organism’s life cycle, as a response to environmental stimuli or an 
internal signal. The synthesis pathway of SMs has 5 main possible routes which are: 
i.                    the ribosomal pathway 
ii.                   the polyketide synthase (PKS) pathway 
iii.                 the nonribosomal polypeptide synthase (NRPS) pathway 
iv.                 the hybrid PKS-NRPS pathway 
v.                   shikimate pathway 
vi.                 carbohydrate pathway. 
Each pathway has a set of enzymes signalled and that then determine the activity of the 
SMs produced as illustrated in the Appendix 3. The genes encoding the enzymes that 
produce SMs are usually found in a complex called biosynthetic gene clusters. Of the 44 
SMBGCs identified in the S. Iranensis strain, there were grouped based on their functional 
annotation leaving 11 PKSs, 4 NRPSs, 3 PKS-NRPS hybrids and 8 terpenes which we will 
now look into (Weissman, 2009). 
1.2.3.1   Polyketide (PK) Pathway 
The Polyketide pathway involves the enzyme Polyketide synthase (PKS), which in a similar 
fashion to Fatty Acid Synthase (FAS), is involved in a multi-step reaction in condensation and 
reduction of acetate units. Products from this pathway are usually cyclic compounds that 
contain more hydroxyl and ketone groups, a major difference from the products from FAS 
pathways, due to the reduced number of reduction steps. Polyketides have usually the same 
precursor units but high variance in their structure, owing to the diverse nature of the PKSs 
involved in their biosynthesis. PKSs are divided into 3 major groups, depending on their 
domain’s arrangement and other functional differences. Type I PKSs contain 3 modules which 
have varying numbers of domains. These domains either catalyses decarboxylative 
condensation of malonyl-CoA (KS/AT/ACP domain), carry out reduction and dehydration 
(KR/DH/ER domains) or release the resulting acyl chain (Thioesterase domain). An example of 
an antibiotic produced by Type I PKS is Erythromycin A (Fig. 1.6) characterized by reduced 
polyketides (Staunton and Wilkinson, 1997). 
Type II PKSs are different from Type I in that each module has a specific function because the 
domains are located on only certain proteins; consequently, causing them to be highly 
specified in function and also form multi-enzyme complexes. KS, chain length factor (which 
has a cysteine that is not conserved), ACP, and AT are used in decarboxylative condensation. 
An example of an SM that uses the Type II system would be Tetracinomycin C, and these are 
characterized by aromatic polyketides. Type III PKSs, which are homodimers, synthesize 
aromatic SMs. They are involved in a simple reaction of condensation, cyclization and 
aromatization of free malonyl-CoA. They are also called bacterial PKSs as they were the first 
to be discovered in bacteria and have now been shown to be vastly present in a number of 
microorganisms. The Type III system is also described as an iterative process as there is 
==PAGE:10==
 
Page | 9  
 
recycling and reuse of the active sites of the enzymes in the condensation of Malonyl-CoA. 
The biosynthesis begins with the loading of the starter unit onto the ACP domain. It then 
undergoes iterative extension at the active sites of the KS domains using malonyl-(CoA) as 
extender unit. From here the growing chain can undergo further modiﬁcations via tailoring 
enzymes. The figure below (Fig 1.6)  illustrates  biosynthesis of polyketides via the 3 systems 
(Shen, 2003). 
 
Fig 1.2 Illustration of the biosynthesis of Erythromycin A, Tetracinomycin C and Flavolin via Type I, II 
and III PKS. Adapted from (Shen, 2003). 
  
1.2.3.1.1. Pteridic acid 
Of interest under the PKS family, are an uncommon acetal-spirocyclic Polyketides group 
called Pteridic acids, which were first isolated from the actinomycetes Streptomyces 
hygroscopicus TP‐A0451. These polyketides are of interest because of the presence of their 
biogenetic cluster in S. iranensis, pointing towards their production. Pteridic acids act in the 
same manner as indoleacetic acid, also called auxin, a plant growth hormone that stimulates 
root growth. Regarding their structure, the already reported Pteridic acid (A and B) structures 
show that they are stereoisomers with regards to the spiro-carbon. It is thought that Pteridic 
acids are biosynthesized in a process similar to that for Azalomycin B, an Elaiophylin, because 
of the high structure similarity. These similarities suggest similar folding patterns of the 
secondary structures due to presence of catalytic enzymes like mono-oxygenases that 
==PAGE:11==
 
Page | 10  
 
facilitate this folding process. Another possible suggestion for the folding observed in the 
Azalomycin B would be its folding in response to changes in the environment inside the 
organism. In this case, a nucleophilic attack would result in a loss of water and the resulting 
folded quaternary structure. This knowledge was key when Patterson et al. (2008) developed 
a 12-step synthetic method to produce Pteridic acids. This was achieved through a Boron 
aldol methodology, which ensured that most of the stereo-centres were in the right 
configuration, as illustrated below in Fig. 1.3 (Paterson et al., 2008). 
 
Fig 1.3. Structure of the Pteridic acids A and B and their minimum energy conformation (A) 
alongside the structure of Azalomycin B(B). 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
Page | 11  
 
 
 
  
Fig 1.4 Schematic representation of the synthetic production of Pteridic acid A and B from a 
precursor ketone and via the boron aldol method. adapted from Patterson et al. (2008). 
1.2.3.2   Elaiophylins 
Elaiophylins, which are also known as Azalomycins are SM 16-membered macrodiolides that 
exhibit antibiotic, anthelminthic and antitumor activities. They were first isolated from strains 
of S. melanosporus and were also later isolated from S. hygroscopicus. They have an 
absorbance at UV maxima range between 220-300 nm. Mass spectroscopy and NMR studies 
allowed for the complete structure characterisation of this molecule by chemical degradation 
and X-ray crystallography confirmed its configuration. This group of SMs are characterised by 
their structure that has a cyclic diester moiety, and to date, 19 different analogues isolated 
from different species of Streptomyces are known. Owing to the complex nature of 
Elaiophylin and the high potential it has shown in bioactivity assays, it has become a SM of 
interest in many clinical studies, particularly in antitumor studies (Zhou et al., 2015). 
As mentioned in section 1.2.3.1, biosynthesis and assembly of Elaiophylins is suggested to be 
similar to that of Pteridic acids owing to their high structure similarity. The assembly is via the 
Type I PKS pathway and the mechanism is initiated by the dimerization of two linear 
polyketide precursors which then form a ring structure with a unique C2 symmetry (Appendix 
4). The high variety of analogues of Elaiophylins, which is sometimes accounted for by the 
exchange for different functional groups, is as a result of the lower substrate specificity in the 
PKSs responsible for the assembly (Toshima, Tatsuta and Kinoshita, 1986). 
==PAGE:13==
 
Page | 12  
 
 
 
Fig 1.5 Type I PKS pathway assembly of Elaiophylins (Toshima, Tatsuta and Kinoshita, 1986) 
1.2.3.3   Non-ribosomal polypeptide synthase pathway 
Non-ribosomal peptides (NRPs), which are an essential class of bioactive SMs produced in 
bacteria and Fungi, are synthesized by multi-enzyme complexes called non-ribosomal peptide 
synthetases (NRPSs). Unlike the PK pathway, the catalytic subunits of the NRPSs are non-
iterative meaning they cannot be re-used. One of the first antibiotics to ever been discovered, 
beta-lactam antibiotic penicillin, is synthesized via this pathway naturally in filamentous fungi. 
The synthesis of penicillin via the NRPS pathway is a highly regulated process which requires 
the correct sequential enzyme expression, and this has been achieved. Lipmann was the first 
to show that this process involved addition of a single amino acid at a time, through a ‘thio-
template’ mechanism (Lipmann, 1971). 
Steps in this process starts in the A domain capturing the amino acid and catalysing the ATP-
dependent reaction of i) activation of the carboxylate group in the amino acid followed by 
transfer of this intermediate Aminoacyl to the PCP Domain. The PCP Domain, as the name 
suggests, is a carrier protein which, after a modification step, transports the peptide to the C 
Domain. The PCP Domain forms the aminoacyl thioester intermediate, by a single step which 
involves the terminal thiol group on the PCP domain attacking the Aminoacyl intermediate. 
==PAGE:14==
 
Page | 13  
 
 
Fig. 1.6 NRPS pathway system and some medically relevant products Penicillin G and Cephalosporin 
C with a common intermediate Isopenicillin N (Felnagle et al., 2008) 
The synthesis of NRPS involves multiple steps catalysed by the coordinated actions of three 
core catalytic domains: the adenylation, thiolation (or peptidyl carrier protein), and 
condensation domains. Interestingly, synthesis of NRP(s) is a strictly regulated process, with 
each single modular enzyme determining the precise location of an amino acid. Because of a 
clear understanding of the mechanism in NRP synthesis, as well as a wide range of 
bioinformatic tools, it is now possible to predict the product from the NRPS encoding genes 
(Felnagle et al., 2008; Hughes, 2013). 
  
 
Fig 1.7 Illustration of the 3 major domains in NRPS and their function adenylation (A) domain the 
peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) domain and the condensation (C) domain 
  
1.2.3.4 PK-NRPS pathway 
Evolution has allowed for NRPS modules to interface with polyketide synthase assembly lines, 
resulting in hybrid NRP-PK natural products. This hybrid cluster of enzymes uses complexes of 
==PAGE:15==
 
Page | 14  
 
multifunctional enzyme which are found in modular form and able to activate and add 
substrates to a growing PK or peptide chain. The modules consist of (ACP), (ArCP), or (PCP) 
carrier proteins, which are either integrated or in individual form. 
 
Fig 1.8 Suggested mechanism of PK-NRPS hybrid system to produce the skeleton of equisetin 
 
 
Fig. 1.9 Biosynthesis following the A. NRPS-PKS pathway. B. PKS-NRPS pathway to produce 
Epothilone C and Rapamycin respectively. Adapted from Walsh et al. (2016) 
One can find both possible orientations of NRPs and PKS modules in naturally occurring 
assembly lines. As seen in Fig 1.10(A) synthesis of Epothilone C, aminoacyl-S-T domain is 
identified by and transferred to the first domain of the downstream PKS module when an 
NRPS module is upstream of a PKS module. This is so that they can make C-C bonds by 
decarboxylative Claisen condensations. When the NRPS module is downstream of a PKS 
module, as in rapamycin in Fig. 1.10 B, the C domain of that NRPS module must be able to 
quickly identify upstream polyketidyl-S-T domain. Now the attacking nucleophile is the amino 
group of the aminoacyl-S-T domain in the NRPS module. Bond formation creates an amide 
linkage as the polyketidyl chain is transferred onto the NRPS module (Chen et al., 2001; 
Walsh, 2016). 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
Page | 15  
 
1.2.3.4.1 Saponins 
Saponins are a group of glycoalkaloid secondary metabolites, that exhibit amphipathic traits 
due to the presence of polar sugar molecules and non-polar aglycone backbone. They are 
widely distributed in nature and the majority of the Saponins known were isolated from 
plants and marine ecology. Saponins have been shown to have a role in plant growth and 
development with no significant antimicrobial activity. 
The hydrophobic Aglycone backbone presents itself as either steroidal or triterpenoidal, and 
this is determined by the synthesis pathway. Saponin assembly starts with a common 
precursor, 2, 3-oxidosqualene, which is a linear 30 Carbon molecule and its cyclization by 
oxidosqualene cyclases (OSCs). In the case of the steroidal aglycone, the precursor loses 3 
methyl groups in the intermediate steps, by the action of cycloartenol or lanosterol synthases 
and assemble into the spirostanol or furostanol saponins. The triterpenoidal saponins, are 
assembled by β-amyrin or α-amyrin synthases.  Further modifications on the intermediate 
structures are done by the cytochrome p450s, acyltransferases and UGTs ‘tailoring’ enzymes 
present (Osbourn, Goss and Field, 2011; Lima et al., 2017). 
 
Fig 1.10 (a) Assembly of steroidal and terpenoidal saponins (b) Possible biosynthetic intermediates 
in triterpinoidal saponins assembly. 
  
==PAGE:17==
 
Page | 16  
 
 2. METHODOLOGY 
  
Fig 2.1 Methodology sequence followed during the project 
  
2.1 High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) 
Liquid chromatography (LC) involves the use of several techniques to separate, identify and 
quantify compounds in a complex mixture. A liquid sample is added to a solid stationary 
phase and a liquid solvent (mobile phase) separates the different components when it is 
eluted in the column, the principle behind this being how well the solute distributes itself 
between the 2 phases. A good example and widely used method of the LC is High-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Ganzera & Sturm, 2018). 
HPLC is an analytical tool which involves a high pressure to force the eluting solvent in a 
closed system with small particles, such as silica gel,  to give a high-resolution separation and 
allow for the isolation and identification of compounds based on their rate at which they pass 
through and interact with a column (retention time). Size of the particles inversely affects the 
efficiency of the packed column, and this is in order to increase the rate at which the solute 
(Compound of interest) equilibrates between the stationary and mobile phases. Other 
properties of a compound that can be measured through HPLC, done by the attached 
detector, include the UV absorption, fluorescence, ultraviolet or the refractive index; which 
can then be displayed on a chromatogram. The column type, solvent, resin matrix and 
composition of the mixture, determine the type of chromatogram results obtained. Normal 
phase and reverse phase (RP) are used to describe the polarity of the eluent and of the 
column (Nagy & Vékey, 2008). There are two commonly used resins: 
●        Normal Phase: This is also known as adsorption chromatography where solute 
competes with the solvent for sites on the stationary phase. The stationary phase 
is usually microporous, polar, silica particles and non-polar buffer running through 
the column. The silica normally has a pH below 8, to avoid dissolving in the basic 
==PAGE:18==
 
Page | 17  
 
solvent. Once the sample is passed through the column, depending on polarity and 
size of the molecules, residues will bind to the silica and polar particles will have a 
longer retention time than non-polar particles. Elution of the solutes at different 
times occurs when the solvent is able to displace the solute from the matrix. 
●        Reverse Phase: The column is filled with silica particles with large hydrophobic 
side chains conjugated on their surface, and a polar buffer is used. This results in 
non-polar particles binding to the resin more and be retained longer. This method 
is more common because it is less sensitive to polar impurities as they are eluted 
out first and less likely to adsorb to the matrix (Ganzera and Sturm, 2018) 
The choice for the column, solvent largely depends on the compounds as shown in fig 2.2 in 
the. Small, nonpolar molecules separate better with the reverse phase whilst small, slightly 
polar molecules would separate better with the normal phase. There are several parameters 
in a typical HPLC procedure that you can decide the following variables: 
Table1.1 illustrating HPLC variables and how they affect the separation 
Variable 
What it does 
Flow rate 
With fast flow peaks come out sooner but there’s they’re harder to 
resolve and tend to blend together. For more resolution, run slower. 
Pressure 
Affected by flow rate and solvent 
Solvent Buffers 
The solvent gradient generally controls the speed with which you retain 
your samples. It also determines signal intensity, how quickly the peaks 
come out, signal fidelity 
Column Type 
Determines the type of interaction with the sample. The separation 
efficiency correlates with the column inner diameter, the length of the 
column and the type and particle size of the column packing material. 
Detection 
Parameters 
The detector perceives the change in the composition of the eluent and 
converts this information into an electrical signal which is evaluated by 
the aid of a computer. Changing any one of these parameters can alter 
the resulting chromatogram e.g., If using UV or FLD, you need to set the 
right excitation/emission wavelengths 
==PAGE:19==
 
Page | 18  
 
 
The parameters above also largely influence the resolution of the separation, and an 
increased resolution means better qualitative and quantitative results in the analytical part. 
Resolution can be increased by factors such as a smaller particle size packing, longer columns, 
optimizing selectivity, etc. The selectivity is a highly influential parameter as it involves 
changes in column resin (C18 to phenyl) or the mobile phase, and these changes, determine 
the resolution between the solutes being separated and their purity. 
Separation efficiency is also largely influenced by the Van Deemter curve- which is a plot of 
the plate height, or zone of equilibrium between the 2 phases, as a function of the mobile 
phase. (Appendix 5) This curve illustrates that there is an optimum flow rate in the column 
that will achieve minimum variance throughout the whole column, and this is dependent on 
the mobile phase properties, column diameter, etc. (Agilent, 2012) 
2.1.1 HPLC - Detection methods 
The ideal detector should be sensitive and able to detect analytes in very small quantities or 
concentrations. It should not be affected by a change in the solvent composition or 
temperature. Commonly used detectors in an HPLC system to identify eluents are diode-array 
detector (DAD) and mass spectrometry (MS). DAD, which is composed of multiple 
photodiodes that can diffract white light, has the capability to detect molecules absorbing 
light in the ultraviolet (180-400nm) or visible (400-800nm) spectra. While the UV-VIS diode 
has one light receiving diode, DAD has multiple of them, which means it can obtain 
information over a wide array of wavelengths. The collective signals registered from the 
photodiodes give the spectrum that can then be read on the display screen (Gallo and 
Ferranti, 2016). 
2.1.1.1 Mass Spectrometry 
This is an analytical technique to investigate mass of atoms and molecules, so as to identify 
the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of a molecule in a given mixture and provide details on the 
fragmentation pattern and molecular weight. Due to it only being able to detect charged ions, 
the basic principle behind Mass Spectrometry relies on creating charged gaseous ions 
desorbed from condensed species and can then be isolated by an electric field based on their 
m/z, which is interpreted by a detector that can calculate the mass of the ions and give a 
mass spectrum. The area of each of the peaks recorded is proportional to the relative 
abundance of each isotope. in natural product chemistry, it is widely used in qualitative and 
quantitative applications. 
The mass spectrometer is made up of an ion source (which creates the charged particles), a 
mass ﬁlter and a detector. Molecules that enter the ion source undergo different ionization 
techniques, such as electron ionization and are converted into gaseous ions. These are then 
transferred to a mass analyser which can separate them based on their m/z. TOF mass 
analyser is an example of a mass analyser that separates ions in time after they are given a 
kinetic ‘kick’ in an electric field. The mass analyser is then able to determine the mass based 
on the time it takes for the ions to reach the detector by the law of motion. The biggest 
challenge with Mass Spectrometry (Gallo and Ferranti, 2016; Ganzera and Sturm, 2018) 
==PAGE:20==
 
Page | 19  
 
 
Fig 2.2: Illustration of a Mass Spectrometer path for ions as they are ionized through the electric 
field, then accelerated through TOF tube to separate them and then read on the detector 
2.1.2 HPLC Data analysis 
In HPLC, the most common detector found is a UV detector because many compounds absorb 
UV light. Fluorescence detectors also measure the molecule’s ability to fluoresce after it goes 
under excitement.  The output, each representing a single compound in the mixture as it 
passes through a detector and absorbs UV light. The chromatograms are made when the 
detector the converts the mass or concentration of a solute into an electrical signal, which 
can then be converted into a chromatogram by the system. These are crucial when 
determining key parameters such as retention time and the intensity of a peak. In the event 
that peaks of the pure compounds are already known, the retention time can be obtained by 
analysing the sample mixture and then used to identify all the compounds in the mixture. The 
HPLC-MS tool gives a fragmentation pattern, based on the excited gaseous ions, which can be 
compared against a computer database of known patterns, such as Chemspider, meaning 
that the identity of a huge range of compounds can be found without having to know their 
retention times (Nagy & Vékey, 2008). 
In MS data analysis there are two ways chromatograms can be created. The total ion 
chromatogram (TIC), plots the total amount of detected ions of all the masses recorded 
versus a speciﬁc time. Secondly, the base peak chromatogram (BPC). The BPC only displays 
the intensity of the most intense ion at a certain time thereby removing less prominent 
peaks. BPC is preferred of TIC because it is easier to use in complex extracts e.g. natural 
product extracts containing several different compounds. The extracted ion chromatogram 
(EIC) only displays the intensity of a speciﬁc ion and is useful when working with a compound 
in a mixture with a known mass. The EIC can then be applied to determine the retention time 
of said compound and it can also be observed as the XY-plane of the HPLC-MS dataset. 
As we deduced earlier, because Natural product extracts are complex mixtures of 
compounds, challenges arise when interpreting data as some compounds elute at the same 
==PAGE:21==
 
Page | 20  
 
time resulting in overlapping signals. In the case of a single compound eluting by itself, a 
narrow, sharp and relatively symmetrical peak will be observed, whereas compounds that 
elute at similar times will result in broader and asymmetrical peaks in the chromatogram. 
Deconvolution, which makes use of EIC to identify masses in the spectrum, can be used to 
identify which masses belong to certain compounds. By only plotting the intensity of the 
single ions we can observe if masses belong to the same compound by comparing retention 
times of the maxima of the two EICs. If the observed retention time diﬀer, then it is assumed 
that the masses belong to diﬀerent compounds (Nagy and Vékey, 2008; Agilent, 2012). 
2.1.3 Size Exclusion Chromatography 
Another HPLC technique widely used for complex mixtures with particles with a relatively 
large molecular weight is Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) also referred to as gel 
permeation chromatography.  It is capable of isolating compounds in an aqueous solution 
based on their size and ability to pass through a porous structure.When the mobile phase is a 
hydrophobic solvent as well as the stationary phase, it is called gel permeation 
chromatography, whereas when the mobile phase is hydrophilic with a hydrophilic stationary 
phase, it is called gel filtration chromatography.  The stationary phase has a porous resin 
material, which allows larger molecules to elute at a faster rate than smaller molecules. These 
large molecules go around the porous resin particles, and the smaller ones will pass through 
them. One major challenge that occurs with the particles used for the stationary phase is that 
small particles are difficult to manufacture with large enough pores and they are prone to 
clogging and also are not very robust. As is expected, the pore size is the critical parameter in 
this method as it determines rates of diffusion, retention times and consequently, the 
performance of the separation (Nagy and Vékey, 2008). 
 
Fig. 2.2: Simple annotated diagram of a packed column for Size Exclusion Chromatography, adapted 
from DRGP institute  
 
==PAGE:22==
 
Page | 21  
 
2.1.4 Thin-layer chromatography 
Thin layer chromatography, a simple quantitative analytical tool used to assess the 
performance of a separation, separates compounds based on how well they bind to the 
mobile and stationary phase. In our project, this tool was used to assess purity of our 
compounds following other chromatography steps, to identify the polarity of our mixture and 
therefore the ideal solvent for use in the other chromatography steps. The solutes in the 
mixture are driven by capillary action on the mobile phase. The rate with which molecules 
move, depends on their affinity to the silica gel stationery phase and those that bind with a 
higher affinity move slower (Nagy and Vékey, 2008; Gallo and Ferranti, 2016). 
2.2 Dereplication 
One major challenge arising from Natural product chemistry is redundancy and isolation of 
already known compounds. In order to prevent this, a quick and efficient tool was needed to 
identify known compounds in the early stages of screening so that efforts could be focused 
on discovery of novel compounds. Advances in analytical technology, as well as the presence 
of large databases online, has made the dereplication process possible (Ganzera and Sturm, 
2018). The most widely used dereplication technique, which we will use in our project is LC-
UV-MS.  The UV/Vis spectra profiles, obtained from the LC chromatogram, have the maxima 
(λmax) and give details on the compoundʼs chromophores. The UV maxima information can 
be found in databases such as the DMNP or MarinLit. The MS profile identifies compounds 
based on the molecular weight. This tool is found in a lot of the available databases, with one 
of the most common ones being Chemspider. MS data is not completely reliable in 
identification of a compound and so it is common to search for the monoisotopic mass of the 
pseudo-molecular ion e.g. [M+H]+ in positive ionization. Other commonly used adducts to 
confirm a compound’s MW found in positive ionization are the [M+NH4]+, [M+Na]+ [M+K]+ 
adducts (Hubert, Nuzillard and Renault, 2017). 
2.3 NMR spectroscopy 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance is a qualitative tool to characterizes and elucidate the structure 
based on the signal they return at a specific frequency when pulsed with a radio wave. NMR 
spectrometer pulses the radio wave and is able to identify Carbon-Hydrogen conformation in 
space and the functional groups. The theory around this proposes that atoms with an odd 
Mass number, such as 1H and 13C, have a nuclear spin and the nucleus behaves as a magnet. 
Those with an even Mass number, have equal numbers of protons and neutrons and so their 
magnetic fields cancel each other. For the odd ones, they generally prefer a lower energy 
state in a random orientation in space. When a magnetic field is applied, the nuclei will ‘align’ 
or ‘oppose’ their spin with the magnetic field, so that they are either in the low or higher 
energy states. Electromagnetic radiation is then applied, flipping the alignment of the nuclei 
in the lower energy state to move to the higher energy state and in this state are referred to 
as being in resonance. The percentage change in energy for the nuclei from the lower energy 
level to the high energy level is the chemical shift (Murali and Baum, 2010). 
==PAGE:23==
 
Page | 22  
 
 
 
Fig 1.13 Illustration of the nuclear spin before and after a magnetic field is applied. Adapted from 
NMR basics. 
  
2.3.1 1H NMR 
1H NMR measures the resonance frequency of all 1H present in the solution. The resonance 
frequency is converted into a chemical shift (ppm) and integration is used to provide 
information on the relative number of protons producing each signal. The number of protons 
in a signal is related to the signal intensity. (Murali and Baum, 2010). The Proton NMR gives 
details about the: 
i.                    the number of different types of hydrogens present in a compound 
ii.                   the relative numbers of the different types of hydrogens 
iii.                 the electronic environment of the different types of hydrogens 
iv.                 the number of hydrogen "neighbours" a hydrogen has. 
   
2.3.2 13C-NMR 
This provides the chemical shift of all carbons present in a molecule. The range of the 
chemical shifts in carbon NMR range from over about 220 ppm e.g. aldehydes (190-200ppm) 
from ketones (205-220 ppm). In comparison, proton NMR range of chemical shifts is at 12 
ppm, thereby making it easier to distinguish carbons in similar chemical environments for 
Carbon NMR.  Unlike proton NMR the number of carbons producing a signal cannot be 
determined by integration. Only 1.1 % of all Carbons naturally make up the 13C composition, 
and most of the carbon atoms exist as 12C. This is an advantage because less coupling occurs 
and therefore give a better read out. The NMR theory for carbon, is only applicable to an 
individual carbon. However, in reality, these carbons exist in structures, and therefore are 
surrounded by electrons. These electrons shield how strongly the C feels the magnetic field 
when it is applied. The type of atom attached also determines the resonance and 
consequently, how strong the magnetic field needs to be for the carbon to be brought to 
resonance. The more electronegative the attached atom, the lower the magnetic fielded 
needed to be applied to bring the Carbon into resonance. Electronegative compounds have a 
lower shielding effect and so, small changes in electronegativity can cause changes in the 
resonance and the chemical shift observed (Murali and Baum, 2010). 
==PAGE:24==
 
Page | 23  
 
i.                    The number of signals tell us how many different carbons or set of 
equivalent carbons 
ii.                   The splitting of a signal tells us how many hydrogens are attached to each 
carbon. (N+1 rule) 
iii.                 The chemical shift tells us the hybridization (sp3, sp2, sp) of each carbon. 
2.4 2Dimensional NMR 
2.4.1 Heteronuclear single-quantum correlation 
Due to the general low abundance of 13C in nature, large amounts of sample are required to 
obtain the chemical shifts of Carbon. Hetero-nuclear single-quantum correlation (HSQC) can 
be applied which makes use of the information of the attached proton, by relating its shift to 
the carbon atom. In HSQC the y-axis will display the 13C shifts and will be plotted against the 
x-axis, which consists of the 1H spectrum. Meaning any peak observed in the spectrum will 
account for every protonated carbon. The HSQC measures the 13C shifts with a higher 
sensitivity than that of the 1D 13C -NMR, however quaternary carbons cannot be detected 
(Castañar and Parella, 2015). 
2.4.2 Correlated spectroscopy 
Data about the proton-proton collaborations can be acquired from the 1H-1H Corresponded 
spectroscopy (COSY) is utilized to give data through scalar couplings. Since the resonances are 
shown on two axes the capacity to determine coupling and cover issues is improved. The two 
axes of the COSY range are the 1H -NMR spectra with the intensities pointing up of the paper 
plane. This implies a diagonal line can be drawn through the range containing all the diﬀerent 
shifts, free of whether they couple to other cores or not. In the event that a proton couples, it 
will be shown by a cross peak in the range. The cross peaks would then be able to be followed 
to decide the correlation between the diﬀerent protons (Murali and Baum, 2010). 
 2.4.3 Heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) 
In Heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) the coupling of protons and adjacent 
carbons is identiﬁed. Moreover, it is possible to recognize the relationships of quaternary 
carbons. The HMBC spectrum comprises of the 1H shifts on the x-axis and the 13C shifts on the 
y-axis. To decipher this spectrum, it can be helpful to draw a vertical line through each 1H 
shift. The peaks on this line will represent carbons which have two-, three or four-bond 
correlations to the proton. The HMBC is very helpful for assembly of the building blocks and 
interpretations made from the COSY and HSQC (Castañar and Parella, 2015). 
 2.5 X-ray Crystallography 
 X-ray crystallography is a confirmatory technique used to determine the 3D molecular 
structure of a compound based on its crystals. This method is ideal and works best for pure 
and highly concentrated samples that has been crystallized and is then exposed to an X-ray 
beam. Information obtained from the diffraction pattern can be used to determine the 
packing of the crystal lattice, size of the repeat unit from which the compound is formed from 
and its conformation in space (Smyth and Martin, 2000). 
==PAGE:25==
 
Page | 24  
 
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
3.1 Microbial culturing: Media, growth conditions and fermentation 
S. iranensis HM 35(T) culturing and growth was done on a solid media with the following 
conditions (ISP medium 3): 
Table 3.1 ISP 3 medium preparation 
 
38 g of the prepared dry solid media as suspended in 1 litre distilled water. It was heated to 
boiling point to dissolve it completely then autoclaved at 121°C at a pressure of 15mB for 
15mins. The solution was then rapidly cooled to 45-50°C and poured into petri dishes which 
were stored up to 2 weeks. S. Iranensis HM 35(T) mycelia and spores were prepared and 
inoculated in a liquid organic ISP medium 1 also called Tryptone-Yeast broth medium:  
Table 3.2 ISP medium 2 preparation  
 
Mannitol 
20.0 g 
Coconut flour 
20.0 g 
Trace salt solution (FeSO4·7 H2O 0.1g, MnCl2·4H2O 0.1g, ZnSO4· 7 H2O 
0.1g) 
  
Final pH (at 25°C) 
7.3 +/- 0.2 
Dextrose 
10g 
bactopeptone 
10g 
Casamino acids 
1g 
Yeast extract 
2g 
NaCl 
6g 
==PAGE:26==
 
Page | 25  
 
Dehydrated solid media was dissolved in 1Litre distilled deionized water and transferred to 
two 100 mL ﬂasks and grown for 48 h on a rotary shaker at 28 °C. 
The culture was then transferred to 3200 mL of ISP medium 2 distributed into 8 flasks and 
incubated at 28 °C on a shaker for 48 h yielding the prefermentation culture. The 
prefermentation culture was poured into a 300 L-scale fermenter ﬁlled with 200 L of medium 
2 and fermented for 14 days. An illustration of this microbial culturing conducted during this 
project is shown in Appendix 9 (Difco, 2017). 
3.2 Downstream processing 
Further downstream processing which was dereplication guided was done on the fractions 
are illustrated below in Fig 3.3. Fractions selection was based on their LC-MS profile, those 
showing interesting signals in the fractions were chosen. 
 
Fig 3.3 Current status of project and scope 
3.3 Extraction and Puriﬁcation 
Eluted fractions were collected into test tubes with between 2 and 4mL, and analysis was first 
conducted by TLC with a silica gel plate with MeOH (0%, 2.5%, 5% and 10%) in DCM solvent. 
The TLC analysis was used as a quick tool to assess the purity of the separated fractions and 
which fractions had similar compounds before LC-MS. A drop from each fraction was applied 
to a marked TLC plate and the plate was allowed to run in the solvent system then dried. 
Following this, the TLC plates were viewed under UV light and then stained in Anisaldehyde 
and heated.  Subfractions were grouped according to their separation profile as illustrated 
below. 
==PAGE:27==
 
Page | 26  
 
 
 
Fig 3.4 TLC plate under UV light illustration. Staggered bands indicate different compounds whilst 
faint spots indicate presence of impurities. Subfractions were then taken for semi-preparative HPLC 
for further separation before analytical LC-MS. 
 The subfractions from the SEC mostly required further purification as observed by the 
presence of impure compounds and ‘slow’ movement on the TLC plate. These fractions were 
subjected to semi-preparative HPLC in an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) 
equipped with an Ultimate 3000 DAD or a Gilson 322 Controller connected to a 172 DAD, 819 
Injection Module and a 215 Liquid Handler (Gilson, Middleton, WI, USA). Separation was 
achieved using a Discovery® C18 25 cm x 10 mm, 5 mm (Supelco Analytical) column. 
Due to the possible high polarity of the fractions, this method was preferred as it could purify 
polar compounds easily. And the solvents used were Acetonitrile (HPLC grade) and deionized, 
distilled water. Formic acid 20mM was added to both solvents. The following table illustrates 
the general setup and solvent gradient of the Dionex. The parameters were set depending on 
the sub-fraction profile. 
Table 3.4 Summary of LC steps taken with the different fractions 
 
 
3.4 Chemical Analysis 
Following this fractionation, compounds were analysed chemically on the Agilent Infinity 
1290 UHPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) or maXis 3G QTOF (Bruker 
Daltonics). Both systems allowed for detailed dereplication using LC-MS-UV profiles. 
Analysis performed on a chromatographic system comprised of an Agilent 6550 QTOF 
coupled to a 1290 Infinity UHPLC system. High resolution accurate mass data were acquired 
==PAGE:28==
 
Page | 27  
 
in the All Ions mode and exported into Mass Hunter Quantitative software for quantitation 
and identification using qualifier fragment ions. 
Table 3.5 Comparison between Agilent Infinity 1290 UHPLC and maXis 3G QTOF (Agilent, 
2012) 
 
 
2.4 Bioactivity assays and toxicity evaluation 
Following compound extraction, purification and characterization, the next step will be to 
conduct bioactivity assays with these compounds. The purpose of developing the bioactivity 
assays will be to screen compounds for significant clinical efficiency and assess the toxicity at 
cellular levels. We conducted antimicrobial assays and anti-cellular cytotoxicity assays. 
2.4.1 Antimicrobial Assays 
For this assessment we will use the Kirby-Bauer method, which will evaluate pharmacological 
effect by investigating the zone of inhibition. The Kirby-Bauer method is a standard disk 
diffusion protocol that measures the bacterial susceptibility to antimicrobials.  It is a method 
that can be used to determine the sensitivity bacteria have to a compound of interest, 
thereby confirming if this compound could be used in a clinical setting. Parameters that can 
be measured are the the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of an antimicrobial to inhibit 
or kill the bacteria, or the minimum dose with which 50% of the cells will die (LC50). Our 
==PAGE:29==
 
Page | 28  
 
compounds of interest in this project were tested against cultured strains of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, a gram negative strain of bacteria which recently was reported to have 
developed multidrug resistance, Staphylococcus Aureus and Bacillus Subtilis (Hudzicki, 2012). 
2.4.2 Cellular Cytotoxicity assays 
 Cellular assays are based on cytotoxicity assays and morphological assays. These assays 
evaluate the IC50 of a given compound, which is the 50% growth inhibitory concentration 
against a single cell line. The MTT cytotoxicity assay, which was used in this project, tests for 
cell viability which is determined by the ability of NADPH Dehydrogenase enzymes present in 
viable cells, to reduce the Tetrazolium dye to a purple Formazan form. A sample of cells 
treated with the compound of interest are then tested for cytotoxicity by measuring the 
proliferation rate. Viable cells are able to cleave the MTT dye and the results from this can be 
compared to those from control cells which were not treated with our compound (Appendix 
10) (Montalvão, Singh and Haque, 2014). 
 
Fig 3.6 Illustration of conversion of MTT to Formazan in the presence of viable cells 
 
  
  
   
 
==PAGE:30==
 
Page | 29  
 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
4.1 Bioinformatic investigation 
The main aim of this project was a continuation into the discovery on novel secondary 
metabolites from S. iranensis. An initial Anti-SMASH bioinformatic investigation into the 
biogene clusters present identified 11 PKSs, 4 NRPSs, 3 PKS-NRPS hybrids and 8 terpenes 
based on functional annotations. From the literature, we deduced that secondary metabolites 
produced would correspond with their gene cluster. Results revealed over 82% similarity 
between the Rapamycin gene cluster, further suggesting that Rapamycin is a secondary 
metabolite that could potentially be produced from S. iranensis (Hamedi et al., 2010). Other 
PKs also showed similarities (58%) with Elaiophylins, which are macrolides that exhibit anti-
tumour activity. This dereplication guided approach allowed us to better target the potential 
SMs during the separation and purification based on the gene cluster information, which 
revealed their chemical profiles and helped develop the LC protocol. We could also quickly 
screen and exclude already characterized compounds and focus on identification of new 
compounds (Kjærbølling et al., 2019). 
Table 4.1 Most common gene clusters in S. iranensis and their distribution 
Type of cluster 
No. 
Percentage 
PKSs 
11 
25% 
NRPSs 
4 
9% 
PKS-NRPSs 
3 
7% 
Terpenes 
8 
18% 
 
4.2 Separation and Purification strategy 
As mentioned in section 4.1, the SM gene cluster information helped develop a separation 
and purification protocol based on the chemical profiles of the compounds we know from 
Literature. We performed initial separation and purification steps with SEC to isolate fractions 
that had compounds of interest. Crude extracts were run in a Sephadex column, analysed by 
TLC and analytical HPLC, then collected with preparative HPLC. Fig. 4.1 shows how 
subsequent separations of the crude then resulted in a single compound of interest. 
==PAGE:31==
 
Page | 30  
 
 
Fig 4.2 UV chromatogram during repeated separation steps  
 
4.2.1 Detection of Pteridic acid 
For the fraction CM14, a compound of interest which had a UV maximum at 226nm was 
detected. It had a reported m/z [M+H]+  at 389.2505 and was identified by its adduct, [M+Na-
2H]- at 367.2686 and found to have a chemical formula of C22H34O6. This compound’s MS 
profile resembled the profile of Pteridic acid F (5-Alkenyl-3,3(2H)-furanone E-492), which was 
one of the hits on Chemspider. Pteridic acid had been identified in the preliminary 
biosynthesis gene cluster analysis and so its isolation was expected, however, further analysis 
was conducted to confirm whether this was a novel derivative of Pteridic acid that had not 
previously been reported. 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
Page | 31  
 
 
Fig 4.3 UV/MS data indicating possible Pteridic acid F. 
This was further confirmed after elucidating the structure using 1D 1H and 13C NMR and 
comparing this to the NMR profile of Pteridic acid F previously reported. The proton NMR 
spectrum and predicted structure of our compound of interest (Appendix 6a-b) suggested 
that it was Pteridic acid F.  
1H NMR (800 MHz, Methanol-d4) 
δ 5.40 (dd, J = 5.3, 2.7 Hz, 1H) 
 
 
δ 5.21 (d, J = 1.7 Hz, 1H)  
δ 4.50 (d, J = 7.8 Hz, 1H)  
δ 4.42 (td, J = 7.7, 6.1 Hz, 1H)  
δ 4.16 (dq, J = 9.5, 6.2 Hz, 1H) 
3.93 (dd, J = 3.4, 1.8 Hz, 1H)  
3.86 (d, J = 2.0 Hz, 0H)  
3.70 – 3.58 (m, 4H) 
3.58 – 3.46 (m, 1H)  
3.46 – 3.35 (m, 3H)  
3.33 – 3.23 (m, 15H)  
2.49 – 2.45 (m, 1H)  
2.32 (t, J = 12.4 Hz, 1H) 
0.84 (d, J = 4.2 Hz, 3H). 
 
Fig 4.4 Observed δH (ppm) for 1H NMR and predicted structure of Pteridic acid F. 
These results of the 1 H NMR spectrum and assigned structure, supported our UV-MS 
prediction that this compound was Pteridic acid F. Unfortunately, the sample amount of the 
compound was too little to proceed for further analysis with 2D NMR and so we could not 
provide these results with this project. 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
Page | 32  
 
Igarashi et al. isolated and identified Pteridic acid A and B from S. hygroscopicus ( Igarashi et 
al., 2002; Paterson et al., 2008). As discussed earlier, Pteridic acids are a group of spirocyclic 
polyketides which exhibit plant growth activity, working in a similar manner as auxin, a plant 
growth hormone. To date, there are 7 derivatives known, with Pteridic acids C-G which were 
isolated and characterized by Nong et. al  but did not exhibit any bioactivity when tested 
(Nong, Wei and Qi, 2017). The compound we isolated was Pteridic acid F, and this was 
determined by dereplicative methods. It is known to be synthesized by modular PKS I 
pathway. The structure of Pteridic acid reported in literature is illustrated below in (Fig. 4.5a) 
which supports our predicted structure. Further to this, the sample was run under X-ray 
crystallography and the crystal structure and conformation in space of the Pteridic acid F was 
confirmed (Fig 4.5b). 
 
Fig 4.5a/b crystal structure of Pteridic acid F from X-ray crystallography 
4.2.2 Detection of Elaiophylin 
The initial AntiSMASH investigation on the biosynthetic gene clusters revealed that our strain, 
S. iranensis had a cluster that had an 87% similarity to a cluster in Streptomyces sp. DSM4137 
(Haydock et al., 2004). This then led us to believe that Elaiophylin could be a potential 
compound that could be isolated from our fractions. As we suspected, in our initial 
fractionation and isolation, Elaiophylin had been isolated.  Elaiophylin has also been reported 
to have functional derivatives which we hoped to isolate in our fractions. 
The compound, as it is already known, had a molecular formula and UV maxima available in 
literature. The m/z was calculated from the reported molecular formula of C54H88O18 and UV 
λmax of 252nm. This was then used to search for Elaiophylin in our fractions. The literature 
was consistent with the fraction CM143 which had an m/z [M+H]+ of 1025.5994 and also 
identified by its m/z [M+H+K]2+ at 1045.5994. The UV λmax was between 258nm which 
corresponded to that of Elaiophylin, but reported no hits in the database, indicating that this 
could be a derivative of Elaiophylin. The UV-MS profile of fraction CM142 was also similar to 
CM143 and both were sent for NMR. 
==PAGE:34==
 
Page | 33  
 
 
Fig 4.6 UV/MS spectra of fraction 143 
Results from NMR suggested that fractions 143 and 142 were identical so for the purpose of 
this project, both will be referred to as CM143 as only one was analyzed. The 1H and 13C NMR 
data of CM143 compound matched the data of the previously reported NMR data for 
Elaiophylin (Appendix 7a-g).  The 4 secondary methyl groups reported previously were 
observed in our spectrum, 3.07 (s, 1H), 2.61 (tq, J = 10.0, 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.37 (dt, J = 12.5, 4.8 Hz, 
2H), 1.99 – 1.88 (m, 4H), 1.77 – 1.67 (m, 3H). Additionally, eight protons were observed in the 
oleﬁnic region: 8.57 (s, 2H), 7.00 – 6.91 (m, 2H), 6.23 – 6.16 (m, 2H), 5.77 (dd, J = 15.4, 5.7 Hz, 
2H). 
Our 13C NMR data showed a signal Characteristic signals were observed for four methyl 
groups. δC 20.57, δC 18.42, δC 16.53, δC 15.34, δC 13.54. The oleﬁne protons observed in the 
proton NMR were supported by the observations of 10 aromatic methines at δC 79.57, 77.97, 
77.22, 76.73, 76.52, 73.67, 70.98, 70.83, 70.01, 68.34. With this knowledge, and by comparing 
it with the reported NMR results, we were able to assign the rest of the compound’s 
structure. The 1H and 13C NMR (unassigned) of our structure is reported below: 
1H NMR (800 MHz, Methanol-d4) δ:  
8.57 (s, 2H) 
 
 
 
 
 
7.00 – 6.91 (m, 2H) 
6.23 – 6.16 (m, 2H)  
 
5.77 (dd, J = 15.4, 5.7 Hz, 2H) 
5.73 – 5.67 (m, 2H) 
5.11 – 5.04 (m, 4H)  
4.05 (dd, J = 10.1, 1.6 Hz, 2H)  
4.00 – 3.85 (m, 6H) 
3.58 – 3.51 (m, 3H)  
3.07 (s, 1H) 
==PAGE:35==
 
Page | 34  
 
2.61 (tq, J = 10.0, 6.5 Hz, 2H)  
2.37 (dt, J = 12.5, 4.8 Hz, 2H) 
1.99 – 1.88 (m, 4H), 1.77 – 1.67 (m, 3H) 
1.65 (dd, J = 12.6, 5.0 Hz, 2H) 
1.50 (ddt, J = 11.4, 7.3, 3.9 Hz, 1H) 
1.37 – 1.25 (m, 1H) 
1.25 – 1.10 (m, 16H) 
1.07 (dd, J = 6.6, 3.8 Hz, 7H) 
1.00 (d, J = 7.1 Hz, 6H) 
0.97 (s, 0H), 0.96 (s, 1H) 
0.96 – 0.90 (m, 1H) 
0.90 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 11H). 
 
13C NMR (201 MHz, Methanol-d4) δ:  
103.24, 99.01, 81.05, 79.57, 77.97, 77.22, 76.73, 76.52, 73.67, 70.98, 70.83, 70.01, 68.34, 
62.45, 61.08, 60.50, 50.30, 47.91, 47.81, 47.70, 47.59, 47.49, 47.38, 47.27, 41.48, 39.50, 
38.15, 36.64, 32.24, 31.78, 31.41, 29.35, 25.02, 20.57, 18.42, 16.53, 15.34, 13.54. 
 
Fig 4.7 Elucidated structure of Elaiophylin based on 1H and 13C NMR data 
 
As already mentioned in section 1.2.3.2, Elaiophylin is a macrodiolide which exhibits high 
structural diversity due to the low substrate specificity of the PKSs involved in their assembly 
(fig. 4.5). This structural diversity also provides it with a wide array of bioactivity, having 
previously been reported to have antihelminthic, antimicrobial, cytotoxic and 
immunosuppressive activity. Of note, is the high cytotoxic activity Elaiophylin has, having 
been observed to induce anti/tumor activity in cells. (Zhao et al., 2015; Lima et al., 2017) 
==PAGE:36==
 
Page | 35  
 
 
Fig 4.8 Structure of Elaiophylin (Lima et al., 2017) 
Biosynthesis of Pteridic acid and Elaiophylin 
The large similarities between the MS-MS-UV profiles of Elaiophylin and Pteridic acid, and 
their common occurrence in the fractions made their biosynthesis and gene clusters involved 
in the synthesis, interesting to investigate. Therefore, the next step was to identify which 
gene cluster was responsible for their production. The structure of CM143, which was 
proposed to be Pteridic acid F, could be said to have been assembled via the modular type I 
PKS pathway. By identifying the original PK chain, one could determine the number of AT 
domains present in the PKS as the modular type of biosynthesis works in a step-by-step 
manner.  The structure, which is a 16-membered polyketide, undergoes the PK Type I 
pathway, which results in 2 carbons being added to the growing chain, and so the PKS would 
require 8 AT domains. 
In our earlier research, we had proven as well that Elaiophylins and Pteridic acids were 
assembled by PKSs that were closely related and that the biosynthetic gene clusters encoding 
them had over 87% similarity. The only difference between the two secondary metabolite 
groups was the hydroxyl group found in Elaiophylin would be replaced by a keto group in 
Pteridic acid. The module responsible for this difference was also confirmed to be the second 
module, whereby deletions or inactivity of the KR domain during synthesis would cause the 
differentiation whilst products are still attached. Otherwise this diﬀerence could be explained 
by a post release modiﬁcation oxidation that would restore the keto-group. Differences 
between the molecule can be also accounted for by different cyclization patterns or addition 
of different functional groups to the carboxylic terminal. The figure below illustrates how 
Pteridic acid and Elaiophylin are assembled by  similar PKSs and differentiated downstream by 
different domains and molecules (Haydock et al., 2004). 
==PAGE:37==
 
Page | 36  
 
  
Fig 4.9 Proposed Type I PKS pathway assembly of Elaiophylin and Pteridic acid 
  
4.2.3 Detection of Saponin 
Interestingly, another Compound of interest was detected from fraction CM 187 which had a 
UV maxima at 228nm. The compound had a m/z at 738.8993, which confirmed by the adduct 
[M+ 2Na-H]-. From the literature, this compound was comparable with the Saponin, which 
has an average molecular mass 738.9012 and it was deduced from the m/z [M+H]+ 737.5002. 
A quick search on ChemSpider produced several hits, hence, our isolated compound proposed 
chemical formula from the database search was C39H62O13.  
    
Fig 4.10 UV-MS spectrum of Saponin 
==PAGE:38==
 
Page | 37  
 
Since this compound had been reported previously in literature, the 13C NMR and 1H NMR of 
the isolated CM187 compound was compared to the 13C NMR and 1H NMR of the reported 
Saponins in literature as shown in in Table 4.2 below. The observed 13C NMR spectrum was 
consistent with the reported 13C NMR indicating that our compound was a steroidal aglycone.  
 
 
Table 4.11 13C NMR comparison between known Saponins and CM18.7 Saponin 
Further to this, the 2D NMR analysis was used to identify the planar structure of the Saponin 
and confirm the spiroketal pattern. Analysis of the compound by HSQC (Appendix 8a-i) 
provided more in-depth information on the relationship between the carbons and the 
protons in the compound. The unsaturated methylene (CH2-) groups were denoted by the 
blue spots which whereas the CH and CH3 groups were denoted by the color red. Firstly, the 
methyl groups observed in the HSQC spectrum were only 5. By integrating, these 
corresponded with the 1H NMR and 13C NMR: H35/H58/H59/H60/H61 and 
C14/C15/C16/C18/C25. Another indicator of our molecule was the presence of sugar moieties 
H4/H30/H15/ which were consistent with the observed 13C with δC at 38.1, 78 and 100 in the 
acetal region. Further analysis was conducted with HMBC and the observed H,H COSY and 
HMBC connectivities are illustrated below. 
==PAGE:39==
 
Page | 38  
 
 
Fig 4.12 H,H COSY (
) and HMBC (
) connectivities of structure CM187 
 
Fig 4.13 Elucidated structure of compound CM187 
4.3 Bioactivity assays 
All isolated compounds were previously tested and reported for antimicrobial activity using 
The Kirby-Bauer method as illustrated above. The Pteridic acid showed no bioactivity, 
however, had been shown to work in a similar manner to Auxin, a natural plant growth 
hormone, and illicit a response just as effective as Auxin. For this project the 3 isolated 
compounds could not be tested for cellular cytotoxicity due to the low sample amount, 
however, Elaiophylins have previously been reported to exhibit antitumor activity, by 
inhibiting formation of new blood vessels in tumors. Results from that MTT colorimetry study 
(Appendix 9 and 10) showed how Elaiophylin caused  cellular cytotoxicity in human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) (Lim et al., 2018). Saponins generally exhibit low antimicrobial 
activity, with some previous studies reporting that they showed anti-inflammatory activity 
(Rao and Gurfinkel, 2000). 
==PAGE:40==
 
Page | 39  
 
 
 
 
Fig 4.14   Illustration of antimicrobial assay using Kirby-Bauer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
Page | 40  
 
5. CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this project was to investigate and isolate SMs produced by S. iranensis. Based 
on the initial bioinformatic analysis, we were able identify gene clusters of interest. A 
preliminary study conducted had successfully isolated novel derivatives of Hygrocins and 
Pteridic acid from some of the fractions. Our study targeted isolating other novel derivatives 
of Elaiophylins and Pteridic acids from the other fractions.  
Targeted puriﬁcation of Elaiophylin resulted in the detection and isolation of CM142/3. 
Structure elucidation by 1D and 2D NMR which enabled us  to conﬁrm it to be Elaiophylin was 
investigated, however, assignment was not completed at the end of this project. However, 
based on the UV-MS data and the minor assignment with the 1D NMR, we were able to 
conclude that this molecule was indeed Elaiophylin. 
Interestingly, in one of our fractions, CM14, we were able to isolate Pteridic acid F. Though no 
other novel Pteridic acid derivative was isolated, it was interesting to note how the fraction of 
SMs produced by this strain were largely composed of Pteridic acid and Elaiophylin 
derivatives. The crystal structure of Pteridic acid F was obtained through X-ray 
crystallography. Further to this, our interest was also in the structural similarities and the 
assembly of these two classes of compounds. It is suggested that the backbone structure of 
both is produced from the same precursor molecules, and the PKS modules involved in the 
biosynthesis pathway are the same. The structural differences between Pteridic acid and 
Elaiophylin was also discussed, highlighting the modules and steps that accounted for their 
differences. 
Lastly, in this project we detected and isolated Saponin, which was reported in Literature with 
a mass of 738.902 and a UV λmax 210nm.  However, this was the first time that Saponin was 
isolated from S. iranensis. Through 1D and 2D NMR, the structure of this compound was 
compared and confirmed to be a steroidal Saponin. Saponins have been shown to have no 
antimicrobial activity, instead, function in a similar manner to auxin, a plant growth hormone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
Page | 41  
 
 
 
6. FUTURE WORK 
Our project set out to isolate novel compounds that could potentially exhibit bioactivity 
against microbes and tumors. Three compounds were isolated and purified from the 
supernatant fractions, and they were already reported in Literature. Though we could not 
successfully isolate a novel compound, from our findings, this was the first reported isolation 
of Saponins from the strain S. iranensis.  It was also interesting to note that we were able to 
isolate Pteridic acid F and Elaiophylin from these fractions as they had been isolated in other 
fractions. This suggests that both SMs are highly produced SMs in S. iranensis. The full 
potential SM repertoire of this strain is yet to be explored, as there were still fractions that 
had not been purified and analyzed at the time this project ended.   
 
One avenue that could be exploited to advance this research of Natural Products would be 
the use of synthetic biology and bioinformatics tools in manipulating biosynthetic pathways 
involved in SM production. Computational tools could also be used to predict the bioactivity, 
binding affinity, sensitivity and toxicity of isolated SMs. By quickly understanding the potential 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile of a compound earlier in the research, 
researchers can devise structural modifications that would improve the bioactivity of the 
novel SMs in comparison to already existing SMs in drug manufacturing.  
 
Moreover, this field of research presents opportunities to promote gene modifications and 
gene targeting that would favor expression of gene clusters encoding SMs of interest. A step 
that could be taken to confirm our assumptions in this project would be to create knockout 
models to better understand the specific relationship between the genes and the biosynthetic 
pathways. Involvement of other co-factors and enzymes in the biosynthesis could be 
investigated by this as an example. This could also be coupled with tests exploring gene 
activation and silencing by investigating how alterations to the associated histones could 
have. For example, investigating whether chromatin modification would result in activation of 
biosynthetic pathways of SMs that have not been isolated yet.  
 
PKs and NRPs constitute a large percentage of the Natural Products known and well-
researched to date, which leaves out other SMs. It was interesting to note that we could not 
manage to identify and isolate any Terpenes in our fractions, nor the fractions isolated in an 
earlier investigation though a potential reason for this could be the detection methods used 
in this project which limit the discovery of Terpenes. Terpenes are difficult to detect using MS 
because they are hydrocarbons and do not contain heteroatoms and are unlikely to form 
chromophores despite their large, complex structures and so would be difficult to detect with 
==PAGE:43==
 
Page | 42  
 
UV analysis. One approach that could be adapted for separation of Terpenes would be use of 
more organic solvents like cyclohexane and chloroform on Silica gel 60 F plates. 
 
An evaluation of the bioactivity of the isolated compounds against wider spectrum of 
microbes and measurement of the cytotoxicity with a larger sample size would be an ideal 
follow up step. Due to the low amounts of our samples, some could not be tested for their 
bioactivity. For the SMs that were reported in the Literature as exhibiting no or little 
bioactivity, they could be tested as potential candidates as adjuvants. For example, some 
plant Saponins have been reported to work as adjuvants and worked well to illicit an immune 
response in the host. Further to this, combinatorial bioactivity could be assessed by 
investigating whether the isolated compounds, when used in combination with another SM 
or drug, would have any antimicrobial, antifungal or anti-tumor activity. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
Page | 43  
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1.Abe, I., 2007. Enzymatic synthesis of cyclic triterpenes.. Natural product reports, 12, 24(6), 
pp. 1311-31. 
2. Agilent, 2012. Agilent 1290 Infinity LC System. pp. 1-143. 
3. Anand, U., Jacobo-Herrera, N., Altemimi, A. & Lakhssassi, N., 2019. A Comprehensive     
Review on Medicinal Plants as Antimicrobial Therapeutics: Potential Avenues of 
Biocompatible Drug Discovery. Metabolites, 1 11, 9(11), p. 258. 
4. Anderson, A. S. & Wellington, E., 2001. The taxonomy of Streptomyces and related genera. 
International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 1 5, 51(3), pp. 797-814. 
5. Augustin, J. M., Kuzina, V., Andersen, S. B. & Bak, S., 2011. Molecular activities, 
biosynthesis and evolution of triterpenoid saponins.. Phytochemistry, 4, 72(6), pp. 435-57. 
6. Barka, E. A. et al., 2016. Correction for Barka et al., Taxonomy, Physiology, and Natural 
Products of Actinobacteria. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 80(4), pp. iii-iii. 
7. Bérdy, J., 2005. Bioactive Microbial Metabolites. The Journal of Antibiotics. 
8. Castañar, L. & Parella, T., 2015. Recent advances in small molecule NMR: Improved 
HSQC and HSQMBC experiments. Annual Reports on NMR Spectroscopy, Volume 84, pp. 
163-232. 
9. Chaves, J. V., Ojeda, C. P. O., Silva, I. R. d. & Procopio, R. E. d. L., 2017. Identification and 
Phylogeny of Streptomyces Based on Gene Sequences. Research Journal of Microbiology, 
13(1), pp. 13-20. 
10. Chen, H., O'Connor, S., Cane, D. E. & Walsh, C. T., 2001. Epothilone biosynthesis: 
Assembly of the methylthiazolylcarboxy starter unit on the EpoB subunit. Chemistry and 
Biology. 
11. Difco, 2017. ISP Medium 1 • ISP Medium 2 • ISP Medium 4. Difco™ & BBL™ Manual, pp. 
2-3. 
12. Evans, D. A. & Fitch, D. M., 1997. Enantioselective synthesis of the elaiophylin aglycon. 
Journal of Organic Chemistry, 62(3), pp. 454-455. 
13. Felnagle, E. A. et al., 2008. Nonribosomal Peptide Synthetases Involved in the Production 
of Medically Relevant Natural Products. Molecular Pharmaceutics, 1 4, 5(2), pp. 191-211. 
14. Gallo, M. & Ferranti, P., 2016. The evolution of analytical chemistry methods in foodomics. 
Journal of Chromatography A, 8 1, Volume 1428, pp. 3-15. 
15. Ganzera, M. & Sturm, S., 2018. Recent advances on HPLC/MS in medicinal plant 
analysis—An update covering 2011–2016. s.l.:s.n. 
16. Garai, S., 2014. Natural Products Chemistry & Research Triterpenoid Saponins. 2(6). 
Gui, M., Zhang, M.-x., Wu, W.-h. & Sun, P., 2019. Natural Occurrence, Bioactivity and 
Biosynthesis of Elaiophylin Analogues. Molecules, 25 10, 24(21), p. 3840. 
17. Hamedi, J. et al., 2010. Streptomyces iranensis sp. nov., isolated from soil. International 
Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 1 7, 60(7), pp. 1504-1509. 
18. Hamedi, J. & Poorinmohammad, N., 2017. The Cellular Structure of Actinobacteria. In: J. 
Wink, F. Mohammadipanah & J. Hamedi, eds. Biology and Biotechnology of Actinobacteria. 
Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 5-28. 
==PAGE:45==
 
Page | 44  
 
19. Haydock, S. F., Mironenko, T., Ghoorahoo, H. I. & Leadlay, P. F., 2004. The putative 
elaiophylin biosynthetic gene cluster in Streptomyces sp. DSM4137 is adjacent to genes 
encoding adenosylcobalamin-dependent methylmalonyl CoA mutase and to genes for 
synthesis of cobalamin. s.l., s.n. 
20. Hill, S., 1960. The conquest of tuberculosis.. The American review of respiratory disease, 
Volume 82, pp. 291-294. 
21. Horn, F. et al., 2014. Draft Genome Sequence of Streptomyces iranensis. Genome 
Announcements, 17 7.2(4). 
22. Hubert, J., Nuzillard, J.-M. & Renault, J.-H., 2017. Dereplication strategies in natural 
product research: How many tools and methodologies behind the same concept?. 
Phytochemistry Reviews, 16(1), pp. 55-95. 
23. Hudzicki, J., 2012. Kirby-Bauer Disk Diffusion Susceptibility Test Protocol Author 
Information. American Society For Microbiology, Issue December 2009, pp. 1-13. 
24. Hughes, A. L., 2013. Me, My Genome, and 23andMe. The New Atlantis, 40(2), pp. 3-18. 
25. Kjærbølling, I., Mortensen, U. H., Vesth, T. & Andersen, M. R., 2019. Strategies to 
establish the link between biosynthetic gene clusters and secondary metabolites. Fungal 
Genetics and Biology, Volume 130, pp. 107-121. 
26. Koehn, F. E. & Carter, G. T., 2005. The evolving role of natural products in drug discovery. 
s.l.:s.n. 
27. Krokida, A. et al., 2013. A metabolic gene cluster in Lotus japonicus discloses novel 
enzyme functions and products in triterpene biosynthesis. New Phytologist, 200(3), pp. 675-
690. 
28. Kumar, R. R. & Jadeja, V. J., 2016. Isolation of Actinomycetes: A Complete Approach. 
International Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences, 5(5), pp. 606-618. 
29. Ley, S. V., Neuhaus, D. & Williams, D. J., 1982. A conformational study of elaiophylin by 
X-ray crystallography and difference 1H NMR methods; observation of a selective sign 
reversal of the nuclear overhauser effect. Tetrahedron Letters, 23(11), pp. 1207-1210. 
30. Lima, S. M. et al., 2017. Characterization of the biochemical, physiological, and medicinal 
properties of Streptomyces hygroscopicus ACTMS-9H isolated from the Amazon (Brazil). 
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology. 
31. Lim, H. N. et al., 2018. Antiangiogenic potential of microbial metabolite elaiophylin for 
targeting tumor angiogenesis. Molecules. 
32. Lipmann, F., 1971. Attempts to Map a Process Evolution of Peptide Biosynthesis. 
Science, 3 9, 173(4000), pp. 875 LP - 884. 
33. Luo, J. et al., 2013. Isolation and Identification of Algicidal Compound from Streptomyces 
and Algicidal Mechanism to Microcystis aeruginosa. PLoS ONE, 8(10), pp. 1-14. 
34. Montalvão, S. I. G., Singh, V. & Haque, S., 2014. Bioassays for Bioactivity Screening. 
Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry, 1 1, Volume 65, pp. 79-114. 
35. Moses, T., Papadopoulou, K. K. & Osbourn, A., 2014. Metabolic and functional diversity of 
saponins, biosynthetic intermediates and semi-synthetic derivatives.. Critical reviews in 
biochemistry and molecular biology, 49(6), pp. 439-462. 
36. Moses, T. et al., 2014. Combinatorial biosynthesis of sapogenins and saponins in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a C-16α hydroxylase from Bupleurum falcatum. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 28 1, 111(4), pp. 1634-
9. 
37. Murali, N. & Baum, J., 2010. NMR Spectroscopy: Principles and Applications. s.l.:s.n. 
38. Nagpure, A., Choudhary, B., Kumar, S. & Gupta, R. K., 2014. Bioactive microbial 
metabolites.. Annals of microbiology.. 
==PAGE:46==
 
Page | 45  
 
39. Nagy, K. & Vékey, K., 2008. Separation methods. Medical Applications of Mass 
Spectrometry, pp. 61-92. 
40. Osbourn, A., Goss, R. & Field, R., n.d. The saponins: polar isoprenoids with important and 
diverse biological activities.. Natural product reports, 28(7), pp. 1261-1268. 
41. Paterson, I., Anderson, E. A., Findlay, A. D. & Knappy, C. S., 2008. Total synthesis of 
pteridic acids A and B. Tetrahedron, 64(21), pp. 4768-4777. 
42. Quirós, L. M., Carbajo, R. J., Braña, A. F. & Salas, J. A., 2000. Glycosylation of macrolide 
antibiotics. Purification and kinetic studies of a macrolide glycosyltransferase from 
Streptomyces antibioticus. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 275(16), pp. 11713-11720. 
43. Rao, V. & Gurfinkel, D. M., 2000. The Bioactivity of Saponins: Triterpenoid and Steroidal 
Glycosides. Drug metabolism and drug interactions, 1 2, Volume 17, pp. 211-235. 
44. Salton, M. R. J. & Kim, K.-S., 1996. Structure. In: S. Baron, ed. s.l.:s.n. 
Seifert, H. S. & So, M., 1988. Genetic mechanisms of bacterial antigenic variation. 
Microbiological Reviews, 52(3), pp. 327-336. 
45. Shen, B., 2003. Polyketide biosynthesis beyond the type I, II and III polyketide synthase 
paradigms. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 7(2), pp. 285-295. 
46. Smyth, M. S. & Martin, J. H., 2000. x ray crystallography. Molecular pathology : MP, 2, 
53(1), pp. 8-14. 
47. Sokolic´, M., Pokorni, V. & Johannsen, F. H., 1992. Liquid chromatographic method for 
separation and determination of elaiophylin in biotechnology processes of salinomycin 
production. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 10, 10(10-12), pp. 989-994. 
48. Staunton, J. & Wilkinson, B., 1997. Biosynthesis of erythromycin and rapamycin. Chemical 
Reviews. 
49. Staunton, J. & Wilkinson, B., 2001. Combinatorial biosynthesis of polyketides and 
nonribosomal peptides. s.l.:s.n. 
50. Tan, G.-Y. & Liu, T., 2017. Rational synthetic pathway refactoring of natural products 
biosynthesis in actinobacteria. Metabolic Engineering, 1 1, Volume 39, pp. 228-236. 
51. Toshima, K., Tatsuta, K. & Kinoshita, M., 1986. Total synthesis of elaiophylin (azalomycin 
B). Tetrahedron Letters, 1, 27(39), pp. 4741-4744. 
52. Ventura, M. et al., 2007. Genomics of Actinobacteria: Tracing the Evolutionary History of 
an Ancient Phylum. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 71(3), pp. 495-548. 
53. Walsh, C. T., 2016. Insights into the chemical logic and enzymatic machinery of NRPS 
assembly lines. s.l.:s.n. 
54. Weissman, K. J., 2009. Chapter 1 Introduction to Polyketide Biosynthesis. Methods in 
Enzymology, 1 1, Volume 459, pp. 3-16. 
55. Yu, S. et al., 2019. Integrated liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectra for the comprehensive characterization of various components in 
the Shuxuening injection. Journal of Chromatography A, Volume 1599, pp. 125-135. 
56. Zhao, X. et al., 2015. Elaiophylin, a novel autophagy inhibitor, exerts antitumor activity as 
a single agent in ovarian cancer cells. Autophagy. 
57. Zhou, Y. et al., 2015. Macrodiolide formation by the thioesterase of a modular polyketide 
synthase. Angewandte Chemie - International Edition. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
Page | 46  
 
APPENDIX 
Appendix 1 Taxonomy: Phylogenetic relationships between Streptomyces strains 
(Chaves et al., 2017) 
 
 
 
Fig Appendix 2 Life cycle of the Streptomyces genus 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
Page | 47  
 
 
Appendix 3 Biosynthetic pathways in production of SMs 
 
 
 
Appendix 4 Biosynthetic mechanism of assembly of Elaiophylins via the PKs pathway 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
Page | 48  
 
Appendix 5 A hypothetical Van Deemter curve determining the optimum flow rate 
for an efficient separation in an HPLC column. 
 
 
 
Appendix 6a-b 1H NMR data for Pteridic acid F 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
Page | 49  
 
 
 
Appendix 7a-g 1D and 2D NMR data for Elaiophylin 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
Page | 50  
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
Page | 51  
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
Page | 52  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
Page | 53  
 
Appendix 8a-i NMR data for Saponin 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
Page | 54  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
Page | 55  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
Page | 56  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
Page | 57  
 
Appendix 9 Microbial culturing in 3200mL flask. S. iranensis presents itself as 
yellow–brownish substrate mycelia and beige, grey aerial mycelia with good growth 
(Hamedi et al., 2010) 
 
 
 
Appendix 10 MTT cellular cytotoxicity assay for Elaiophylins 
 
 
  
==PAGE:59==
 
Page | 58  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
