==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Metal-Organic Framework MIL-100(Fe) as a Novel Moisture Bu’¼Ćer
Material for Indoor Climate Control in European Climates
Master Thesis
by Mads Kampmann Petersen s143927
Submission date
02.02.2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
i
Title
Metal-Organic Framework MIL-100(Fe) as a Novel Moisture
Bu’¼Ćer Material for Indoor Climate Control in European Climates
Type
Master Thesis
Credits
30 ECTS
Period
September 3rd 2019 - February 2nd 2020
University
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Department
Department of Civil Engineering
Student
Mads Kampmann Petersen
Supervisor
Prof. Menghao Qin
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
iii
Abstract
Air humidity is related to both air quality and thermal comfort, and its in’¼éuence on an indoor
environment is notable. In hot and humid climates, the latent load of ventilation systems takes up
a considerable share of their total energy demand, implying a tremendous energy saving potential
of air humidity as well. In this study, a moisture bu’¼Ćer material for indoor climate control has been
studied. The objective was to investigate, by which means a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel made of the
metal-organic framework MIL-100(Fe) can be used to passively control indoor air humidity. The
study focus on dehumidi’¼ücation. An attempt to study how certain physical phenomena in’¼éuence
the moisture bu’¼Ćering performance of the material has been carried out as well.
Three European locations were chosen for this study; Copenhagen (Denmark), Rome (Italy) and
Madrid (Spain) to study the e’¼Ćect on moisture bu’¼Ćering of the outdoor conditions. The speci’¼üc
locations were chosen to see, which type of climate may bene’¼üt the most from a passive indoor
dehumidi’¼ücation strategy. The premise of the dynamic simulations was to derive the amount of
moisture bu’¼Ćer panel needed to lower the indoor relative humidity to a maximum of 60%.
The results show that, in Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid, a panel size of 1.5 m2, 5.6 m2 and 1.0
m2 respectively is enough to keep the indoor relative humidity below 60% at all times. In this case,
the panels do not need any heat exposure to regenerate. If regenerated with heat, the panel sizes
may be reduced to 0.6 m2, 1.7 m2 and 0.7 m2 respectively. It is expected that full regeneration
can be achieved with low-grade energy such as solar heat, because the regeneration temperature is
only around 60ŌŚ”C.
Concerning energy saving potentials, Rome accounts for the highest potential of the three. The
Mediterranean climate of Rome is characterised by being both warm and humid, which implies
a rather high latent load. Here, the energy saving potential is assessed to be as high as 1585
kWh during the cooling season. Contrarily, the cold Marine climate of Copenhagen and the dry
Semi-arid climate of Madrid causes the latent load to be minimal, which diminishes the need for
dehumidi’¼ücation. Here, though quite little e’¼Ćort is required to obtain a good indoor climate, it
is conceivable that the need for dehumidi’¼ücation is limited to the most intense summer period only.
Prior to the simulations, experimental work was conducted to reveal certain heat and moisture
transfer characteristics of the material in use.
The studies showed how the moisture transfer
mechanisms are di’¼ācult to measure and, therefore, to predict upon. This induces a rather high
uncertainty of the results. The moisture transfer mechanisms are suggested to be a crucial topic
of future research on the area.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
v
Preface
This thesis was carried out in the months between September 2019 and February 2020 at the
Department of Civil Engineering at DTU, Lyngby. It accounts for 30 ECTS credits and has been
carried out under the supervision of Professor Menghao Qin.
I would like to profoundly thank my supervisor as well as the Ph.d. students Pumin Hou and Kan
Zu from the same department, for their help and guidance during the whole process. It has been
an interesting and educational experience.
I would also like to thank Bo Christensen for his guidance and for several interesting discussions
about the topic as well as indoor climate control in general.
The numerical models used in the thesis as well as some measurement data is handed in on an
enclosed USB.
Signature
Mads Kampmann Petersen s143927
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
vii
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Air humidity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Metal-organic frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Heat and moisture transfer
7
3.1
Heat transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Transient heat transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
Moisture in’¼éuence on heat transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Moisture transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Moisture concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Transient moisture transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Micro- and macroscopic moisture transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Moisture balance in a room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Characterisation of MIL-100(Fe)
17
4.1
Material background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
N2 adsorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Intercrystalline porosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Moisture sorption iso-therm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Vapor permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Inter- and intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.7
Thermal characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.8
Heat of adsorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Numerical simulation of heat and moisture transfer in MIL-100(Fe)
29
5.1
Numerical simulation with Comsol Multiphysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Domain and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
Time-stepping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7.1
Step function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.7.2
Meteorological data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.8
Case study for dynamic simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.9
European climates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:10==
viii
6
Results and discussions
37
6.1
Heat and moisture transfer mechanisms in MIL-100(Fe)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Model accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Moisture transfer in a macroscopic view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4
Dynamic case study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.5
Conclusive discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Conclusion
57
List of Figures
60
List of Tables
60
References
61
A Measurement results
65
A.1 N2 adsorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Sorption Iso-therm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.3 Thermal characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
==PAGE:11==
1
1
Introduction
People in many parts of Europe spend the vast majority of their lives indoors. This necessitates
good indoor environments to promote health and well-being. To ensure a good indoor climate,
technical control of the air quality as well as the thermal climate is important.
This requires
well-functioning climatic systems that may be related to high energy demands and considerable
economic costs for installation and operation. For this reason, developing energy-e’¼ācient solutions
to ensuring quality indoor environments is one of the highest priorities in the building sector that
accounts for a signi’¼ücant share of EuropeŌĆÖs total energy consumption today [1].
Improved living standards induces an augmenting need for high air quality and thermal comfort.
Many parameters in’¼éuence such perception. Traditionally, much attention has been paid to air
temperature and concentrations of CO2, whereas air humidity has been given minimal focus. How-
ever, air humidity is related to both air quality and thermal comfort, and its in’¼éuence on an indoor
environment is notable. In hot and humid climates, the latent load of ventilation systems takes
up a considerable share of their total energy demand [3], implying a tremendous energy saving
potential of air humidity as well.
The main scope of this study is to investigate how a moisture bu’¼Ćer material can be used to pas-
sively control air humidity and, hence, an indoor climate. This is done by studying a moisture
bu’¼Ćer panel made of the metal-organic framework MIL-100(Fe). In the study, the panel is put
into an o’¼āce space with a high speci’¼üc occupancy. Here, the air humidity is expected to be high.
The objective is to study, by which means moisture bu’¼Ćering of microporous materials leads to an
improved indoor climate, and which parameters may in’¼éuence such performance. An assessment
of potential energy savings is carried out as well.
Three European locations are chosen for this study; Copenhagen (Denmark), Rome (Italy) and
Madrid (Spain). The reason for choosing di’¼Ćerent locations is to analyse how the performance of
a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel is a’¼Ćected by the outdoor climate. The three locations are chosen, since
their climates di’¼Ćer in temperature and humidity. The study is carried out through numerical
integration using the software Comsol Multiphysics. To do so, a numerical model is designed to
represent the material in use. Both static and dynamic simulations are carried out. In the latter
case, the three di’¼Ćerent locations are represented by dynamic weather data. Prior to the numer-
ical simulations, the material in use is characterised. The characterisation is based on reference
literature as well as experimental work conducted in laboratories at DTU, Lyngby with a small
sample of the material. The transition from laboratory to computer is considered crucial and will
be discussed.
The numerical model is based on relevant heat and moisture transfer theory, presented as a chapter
in the present paper. The chapter follows an introduction of background information about air
humidity and a literature review on microporous metal-organic frameworks. The study, in general,
is not expected to solve the entire issue of passive air humidity control, but rather supplement the
existing, interesting research on the area.
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
3
2
Background
ŌĆó De’¼ünition of air humidity as an indoor climate parameter
ŌĆó Literature review on metal-organic frameworks
Figure 1: Condensation on window. Photograph taken from the internet.
2.1
Air humidity
The perception of an indoor climate is subjective. In order to ensure good indoor climates, agree-
ments have to be made on what this means. This has led to extensive studies, showing an immense
variety of parameters in’¼éuencing such perception including daylight levels, acoustical conditions,
air quality and several calorimetric factors such as air temperature. Another important param-
eter in’¼éuencing our perception of an indoor climate is the amount of water vapor present in the air.
Both low and high levels of air humidity contribute negatively to an indoor climate. Dry air is
related to a number of sick building syndromes such as eye and throat irritation [5] as well as for-
mation of static electricity. Humidity also in’¼éuences our perception of heat. Water vapor carries
considerable amounts of latent heat, which in hot and humid climates may take up a signi’¼ücant
part of the total heat load. Furthermore, humid air prevents the process of cooling down through
perspiration and thereby causes a sensation of overheating. Humid air may also a’¼Ćect the damp-
ness of building materials, increasing the risk of mold and material deterioration. Consequently,
ensuring a good indoor climate in terms of air humidity means keeping air in a tolerable range
where air is neither too dry nor too humid.
When air temperature increases, the air expands and the vapor pressure drops. This implies that
the limit of how much water vapor that the air is capable of holding increases with temperature.
The vapor pressure at this limit is often termed the saturation vapor pressure, which indicates that
any added water from here on will condensate. A relation between saturation vapor pressure and
==PAGE:14==
4
air temperature is, in the temperature range of interest, approximated as follows:
Pv,sat = 288.68Pa(1.098 + T
100)8.02
(2.1)
Here, the saturation vapor pressure is expressed in Pascals where T (in ŌŚ”C) is the air temperature.
The level of humidity can be referred to in di’¼Ćerent ways; As either the volumetric or gravimetric
vapor content or simply as the vapor pressure relative to the saturated vapor pressure:
╬” =
Pv
Pv,sat
(2.2)
This notion, termed relative humidity, is used hence forward when addressing the vapor concentra-
tion of air. According to European standards [6], the relative humidity of indoor air should be held
within certain limits (table 1) to obtain certain levels of occupancy satisfaction. In the example of
category II, 20% of the occupants may be expected to think of the air quality as unsatisfactory.
Table 1: European standards design criteria for indoor relative humidity in occupied spaces if humidi’¼ücation or
dehumidi’¼ücation systems are installed.
Category
Humidi’¼ücation
Dehumidi’¼ücation
I
30%
50%
II
25%
60%
III
20%
70%
IV
<20%
>70%
As the above relationship between air humidity and temperature indicates, lowering the relative
humidity can be achieved by heating up the air. This makes sense in places, where the outside
temperature is low. However, when the air outside is hot and humid, it needs to be dehumidi’¼üed
in order to lower the humidity. This implies removing latent heat from the air as well
In general, latent energy is the energy absorbed or released by a substance during its phase change.
Such phase change takes place at constant temperature. For instance, when water evaporates, en-
ergy is exchanged between the water and its surroundings, though this is not causing a change of
temperature (’¼ügure 2). Consequently, dry and humid air may have completely di’¼Ćerent energy
contents, even though their temperature is the same. In hot and humid climates, mechanical ven-
tilation systems are exposed to signi’¼ücantly large amounts of latent energy [3]. A cooling strategy
may therefore bene’¼üt from dehumidi’¼ücation of the incoming air.
==PAGE:15==
5
Figure 2: Latent and sensible heat principle diagram. The ’¼ügure is borrowed from a friend.
2.2
Metal-organic frameworks
A way to dehumidify air is with the use of highly hygroscopic materials, also termed desiccants. In
general, desiccants can be divided into two types: Liquids and solids. The most commonly known
desiccants used for dehumidi’¼ücation are the solid desiccants zeolite and silica gel. Both materials
have been known for many years and are produced synthetically in a large scale for various indus-
trial purposes [7]. What makes them seem well-’¼ütted for the purpose of dehumidi’¼ücation is their
high water uptake capacities. However, on one important parameter, conventional solid desiccants
fail to be adequate for indoor climate control; They only regenerate at very high temperatures
[8]-[9], which counteracts achieving energy-e’¼ācient solutions.
In the 1990ies, crystal engineering research led to a whole new class of materials termed metal
organic frameworks (MOFs) [10]-[12]. In its composition, a MOF is characterised by metal moi-
eties linked by organic bonds. This sort of chemistry may result in uniform, zeolite-type crystallic
structures (’¼ügure 3) leading to organic solids with very high surface areas per unit weight. The
crystals of MOFs are typically clustered together to a great variety of crystal sizes. In a macro-
scopic view, they often appear to be powders. Given the metal node and organic ligand, a MOF
has its own unique framework and, hence, its own speci’¼üc properties such as pore size. Within the
latest twenty years, many thousand di’¼Ćerent MOFs have been synthesised [13].
Figure 3: MOF morphology principle. The ’¼ügure is an out-cut from a scienti’¼üc paper [20]
MOFs are applicable for various purposes. Most commonly, they are used for gas storage or gas
==PAGE:16==
6
separation [14]-[17], since their ’¼üxed pore size volumes makes them suited for capturing and car-
rying molecules of speci’¼üc sizes. This same material property is exploited in other ’¼üelds as well,
where MOFs are being used e.g. in drug delivery [18] and potentially in waste water treatment
to ’¼ülter out heavy metals, pesticides or other unwanted substances [19]. In many applications of
MOF, hydro-stability plays a signi’¼ücant role [20]. Many MOFs are unstable towards water, which
causes problems when applied under humid conditions. However, some MOFs show hydrophilic
behavior. This has led to research in novel applications of MOFs including fresh water production
in dry areas [21] as well as dehumidi’¼ücation in built environments [22]-[24]. Some distinct features
of certain MOFs make these better candidates for indoor climate control than conventional solid
desiccants. Mostly, this is due to a higher water uptake capacity and a much lower regeneration
temperature. For some MOFs, regeneration occurs naturally without the use of heat, if the ambient
conditions allow it.
Within the recent years, a group of scientists has succeeded in measuring some promising advan-
tages when using MOFs for dehumidi’¼ücation in built environments. In their studies, MOF is used
in two ways: As a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel inside an o’¼āce room [25] and as a coating directly applied
to the heat exchangers of a vapor compression air conditioning (VCAC) system [26]. Both studies
show good results in terms of indoor climate control as well as increasing energy-e’¼āciency of the
systems in which they are implemented. In the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel case, a 5 m2 panel shows
to su’¼āciently remove all the latent heat present in an o’¼āce in the dry and moderate climates of
Phoenix, Salt Lake City and San Francisco. Here, the panel shows to be easily regenerated by
enhanced night ventilation. In the case of VCAC, the COP of the system shows to improve sig-
ni’¼ücantly with a resulting energy saving of more than 1/3 of the energy use for traditional VCAC
systems.
==PAGE:17==
7
3
Heat and moisture transfer
ŌĆó Heat transfer theory
ŌĆó Moisture transfer theory
ŌĆó Moisture balance in a room
Figure 4: Equalisation principle illustration (image taken from the internet).
Understanding how MOFs may be used for dehumidi’¼ücation requires a general understanding of
heat and, especially, moisture transfer theory. In this chapter, the relevant theory is presented.
First, some basic transport equations governing heat and moisture transfer inside porous materials
are derived. These equations are then extended in the attempt to account for the physical phe-
nomena that characterise MOFs. Next, some equations are presented to describe how a moisture
bu’¼Ćer material will a’¼Ćect moisture concentration and, hence, the relative humidity of indoor air.
Throughout the chapter, the primary reference literature used is the lecture note "Transient trans-
port equations for combined heat and moisture transport" [27] from the DTU course "11122 Heat
and mass transfer in buildings" and a scienti’¼üc paper on "Optimization of adsorption processes for
climate control and thermal energy storage" [28] from 2013 by E. N. Wang et al..
3.1
Heat transfer
Heat transfer through a conventional building material is mainly a result of heat conduction. Heat
conduction is a process of equalisation driven by a di’¼Ćerence in temperature. Heat travels from the
higher temperature to the lower one. Conduction of heat obeys FourierŌĆÖs law, which states that a
heat ’¼éux is equal to the product of the temperature gradient and the conductivity of the material.
In a one-dimensional case, a heat ’¼éux may be described as follows, where x is the spatial coordinate:
q = ŌłÆk dT
dx
(3.1)
==PAGE:18==
8
Here, k (in W/mK) is the coe’¼ācient of thermal conductivity indicating the materialŌĆÖs ability to
conduct heat due to a temperature gradient. The notion d indicates an in’¼ünitesimal change.
3.1.1
Transient heat transfer
A temperature gradient in a material induces a transient change in its internal energy (enthalpy).
This is illustrated in ’¼ügure 5, where the heat ’¼éux is one-dimensional in an in’¼ünitesimal volume.
Figure 5: Transient heat transfer illustration. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from the lecture note [27].
Conservation of energy ensures that the change in enthalpy is equal to the di’¼Ćerence in the heat
that enters and leaves the material. In a one-dimensional case, the continuity may be expressed as
follows:
mdh
dt = Aq ŌłÆA(q + Ōłéq
Ōłéxdx) = ŌłÆA Ōłéq
Ōłéxdx
(3.2)
Here, m (in kg) is the mass of the material, h (in J/kg) denotes the speci’¼üc enthalpy of the material
and A (in m2) is the surface area of the material perpendicular to the ’¼éux direction. By applying
FourierŌĆÖs law and dividing with the volume, Adx, on both sides in equation 3.2, the following
formulation is derived:
ŽüŌłéh
Ōłét = Ōłé
Ōłéx(k ŌłéT
Ōłéx )
(3.3)
==PAGE:19==
9
Here, Žü (in kg/m3) is the material density. For convenience, since the relationship between en-
thalpy and temperature is given as:
dh = cpdT
(3.4)
equation 3.3 may be rewritten to take into account only the temperature of the material:
Žücp
ŌłéT
Ōłét = Ōłé
Ōłéx(k ŌłéT
Ōłéx )
(3.5)
Here, cp denotes the speci’¼üc heat capacity of the material. It is noted that the change in the
internal energy of a material depends on both outer circumstances (temperature) as well as some
material properties.
Whereas the coe’¼ācient of thermal conductivity determines the materialŌĆÖs
ability to conduct heat, the density and speci’¼üc heat capacity of the material are indicators of
its ability to store heat. The latter partial di’¼Ćerential equation states the relationship between
transient heat storage and spatial heat conductance inside a material during heat conduction.
3.1.2
Moisture in’¼éuence on heat transfer
In a hygroscopic material, such as a MOF, heat conductance is not the only mean of heat trans-
portation.
In general, heat is released as well, when water vapor is adsorbed.
The dominant
part of this heat is latent heat stored in the vapor. It is released, because the vapor condensates
inside the pores. This value is approximately 2260 kJ/kg (or 40.7 kJ/mol). Additional heat is
released as well due to reactions caused by the contact between liquid water and the material.
Hence, this extra amount of heat depends on the adsorbent. In physical adsorption, where the ad-
sorption process does not cause a chemical change in the adsorbent, this additional heat is minimal.
In 2013, E. N. Wang et al. studied moisture adsorption for climate control and thermal energy
storage of a microporous zeolite X13.
In their study, heat from adsorption was accounted for
mathematically as a heat source within the crystals of the material. Their hypothesis is that heat
transfer in a microporous material can be described as follows:
Žücp
ŌłéT
Ōłét = Ōłé
Ōłéx(k ŌłéT
Ōłéx ) + (1 ŌłÆ╬Ą)had
ŌłéC┬Ą
Ōłét
(3.6)
==PAGE:20==
10
Here, had (in J/kg) denotes the heat of adsorption.
Moisture a’¼Ćects heat transfer in other ways as well. Most importantly, the presence of water will
a’¼Ćect the thermal conductivity and heat capacity of a material. This is because water has its own
thermal properties. It may be accounted for mathematically by taking a mean of the physical
properties of both the material and of water, given the content of water inside the material. How-
ever, if the water content of the material is continuously changing, these properties are di’¼ācult to
account for.
3.2
Moisture transfer
Moisture transport in a conventional, porous material is either a result of di’¼Ćusion, capillary suc-
tion or convection. For this study, di’¼Ćusion may be regarded as the dominant mean of moisture
transport. This is because convective moisture transfer is negligible in microporous structures and
because any potential capillary suction takes place outside the humidity range of interest.
Analogously to heat conduction, moisture di’¼Ćusion is a process of equalisation caused by a vapor
pressure gradient. Due to such di’¼Ćerence in pressure, water molecules di’¼Ćuse through the material
from the higher pressure to the lower one. General moisture di’¼Ćusion obeys FickŌĆÖs law, which
states that the moisture ’¼éow through a material is equal to the product of the pressure gradient
and the vapor permeability of the speci’¼üc material. In a one-dimensional case, the ’¼éow may be
described as follows, where x is the spatial coordinate:
gv = ŌłÆ╬┤ dPv
dx
(3.7)
Here, ╬┤ (in kg/msPa) denotes the vapor di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient indicating the materialŌĆÖs ability to
allow moisture to or prevent moisture from travelling through the material due to a vapor pressure
gradient. Again, d denotes an in’¼ünitesimal change.
3.2.1
Moisture concentration
The amount of water vapor di’¼Ćusing into a hygroscopic material depends on the surrounding va-
por pressure. At low vapor pressures, adsorption is mainly driven by forces between the water
molecules and the surface of the material inside the pores. At higher vapor pressures, attraction
between the water molecules becomes more dominant, because the surface area is vacated by other
water molecules. The relationship between moisture content of a material and its surrounding
vapor pressure is often visualised in a sorption curve. It shows the moisture content of a mate-
rial in equilibrium with the surrounding relative humidity during both adsorption and desorption.
These curves may often look di’¼Ćerent, since many materials tend to have a higher moisture content
==PAGE:21==
11
during desorption than during adsorption. A phenomenon which is termed hysteresis.
The relationship between moisture content and relative humidity is temperature dependent. How-
ever, at iso-thermal conditions, the pressure gradient in the material may conveniently be rewritten
to take into account the moisture content:
dPv
dx = Pv,sat
dŽå
dx = Pv,sat
╬Č
dC
dx
(3.8)
Here, Žå denotes the relative humidity, C (in kg/m3) refers to moisture content and ╬Č (in kg/m3)
is the speci’¼üc moisture capacity at any given relative humidity. Under these circumstances, FickŌĆÖs
law may also be written in terms of moisture content:
gv = ŌłÆDv
dC
dx
(3.9)
Here, Dv (in m2/s) denotes the moisture di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient in terms of moisture content and is
given as:
Dv = Pv,sat╬┤
╬Č
(3.10)
Since moisture capacity changes with relative humidity, the moisture di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient is highly
moisture dependent.
3.2.2
Transient moisture transfer
If a porous material is exposed to a vapor pressure gradient, the moisture content of the material
evolves over time. This is illustrated in ’¼ügure 6, where the ’¼éow is one-dimensional in an in’¼ünites-
imal volume.
Mass conservation ensures that any change of moisture content in the material is equal to a dif-
ference in the amount of moisture that enters and leaves the material. The continuity may be
formulated mathematically as follows:
dmw
dt
= Agv ŌłÆA(gv + Ōłégv
Ōłéx dx) = ŌłÆAŌłégv
Ōłéx dx
(3.11)
==PAGE:22==
12
Figure 6: Moisture transfer illustration. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from the lecture note [27].
Here, mw (in kg) denotes the mass of water inside the material. Applying FickŌĆÖs law and dividing
both sides of equation 3.11 with the volume, Adx, it may be rewritten to the following transport
equation:
ŌłéC
Ōłét = Ōłé
Ōłéx(Dv
ŌłéC
Ōłéx )
(3.12)
This partial di’¼Ćerential equation states a general relationship between transient moisture storage
and spatial moisture di’¼Ćusion in a porous material under iso-thermal conditions.
3.2.3
Micro- and macroscopic moisture transfer
Some speci’¼üc characteristics of MOFs make moisture di’¼Ćusion a complicated phenomenon to de-
scribe physically.
Obviously, their high storage capacity must be accounted for.
However, a
reduction of moisture capacity may be expected as well due to gaps of air present in the material,
when crystals are clustered together. Whereas some of the crystals are directly exposed to humid
air, other crystals may be completely surrounded, which is likely to reduce the uptake properties
of the material even further.
It is broadly accepted that moisture storage inside a single crystal may be governed by the linear
driving force (LDF) model [29]-[31]. It states that the rate of adsorption converges linearly towards
==PAGE:23==
13
0, as the moisture concentration approaches a steady state:
ŌłéC┬Ą
Ōłét
= 15
r2c
D┬Ą(Ce ŌłÆC┬Ą)
(3.13)
Here, rc (in m) denotes the crystal size, D┬Ą (in m2/s) is the crystal moisture di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient
and the concentration indices ┬Ą and e indicates ŌĆÖin the crystalsŌĆÖ and ŌĆÖequilibriumŌĆÖ respectively.
Where the LDF model describes an ideal situation of moisture uptake, it is not ensured that the
model is su’¼āciently describing what takes place on a macroscopic level. In the before-mentioned
study by E. N. Wang et al., the microporous material, which they investigated, formed a brick.
Consequently, the crystals of the material were considered randomly packed leaving void spaces
around the crystals. This situation possibly represents a more realistic scenario of MOF in use,
since MOFs may need shaping before use.
E. N. Wang et al. distinguishes between inter- and intracrystalline phenomena inside the material.
The intracrystalline phenomenon relates to the crystals themselves whereas the intercrystalline phe-
nomenon considers the void spaces around the packed crystals. In their study, crystal adsorption
is de’¼üned as a moisture sink in the governing equation for moisture transfer. The hypothesis is
that moisture transfer in the voids in a single layer of randomly packed crystals is described as
follows:
╬ĄŌłéC
Ōłét = ╬Ą Ōłé
Ōłéx(Dv
ŌłéC
Ōłéx ) ŌłÆ(1 ŌłÆ╬Ą)dC┬Ą
dt
(3.14)
Here, Dv (in m2/s) is the intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient and ╬Ą is the volume ratio between the
void space and the total space. As the formulation may be a more comprehensive way of describing
a real scenario, it is important to remember that it is not a description of moisture transfer on a
macroscopic level.
3.3
Moisture balance in a room
The moisture concentration in a room depends primarily on its air exchange with the outside of
the room as well as on internal moisture sources and sinks (’¼ügure 7). Air is exchanged both as
natural or mechanical ventilation and as in’¼ültration through leakages in the building envelope. If
the room is occupied by people, these are examples of moisture sources, whereas a moisture bu’¼Ćer
material will act as a moisture sink during its adsorption phase.
Considering a room in which the air is well mixed. In a steady state condition, mass balance
ensures that the vapor ’¼éow out of the room is equal to the vapor ’¼éow into the room:
==PAGE:24==
14
Figure 7: Moisture balance diagram. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from a scienti’¼üc paper [25].
Gv,vent,out = Gv,vent,in + Gv,int
(3.15)
Here, Gv,vent (in kgw/h) is the combined ventilation and in’¼ültration ’¼éow of water vapor and Gv,int
(in kgw/h) is the total internal moisture production. This may be rewritten to take into account
the moisture concentration of the air:
V nxi = V nxe + Gv,int
(3.16)
Here, V (in m3) is the room volume, n (in hŌłÆ1) is the air change rate and x is the moisture
content (in kgw/m3) of which the indices i and e represents ŌĆÖinteriorŌĆÖ and ŌĆÖexteriorŌĆÖ respectively.
A relationship between moisture concentration and vapor pressure of air is given as:
Pv = RvTx
(3.17)
Here, Rv = 461.5 J/kgK is the universal gas constant for water vapor and T (in K) is the air tem-
perature. This makes it possible to derive an expression for the indoor relative humidity, which
was de’¼üned in equation 2.2:
IRH = RvTi(xe + Gv,int
V n )
Pv,sat(Ti)
(3.18)
It is noted that a higher ventilation air change rate will decrease the impact of the internal moisture
production. A moisture bu’¼Ćer material in a room will also have an impact on the air humidity.
==PAGE:25==
15
Considering again the above example, though now with a steady moisture uptake by the MOF of
Gmof (in kgw/h), the indoor relative humidity is a’¼Ćected as follows:
IRH = RvTi(xe + GintŌłÆGmof
V n
)
Pv,sat(Ti)
(3.19)
==PAGE:26==
==PAGE:27==
17
4
Characterisation of MIL-100(Fe)
ŌĆó Material choice and background information
ŌĆó Speci’¼üc surface area and porosity
ŌĆó Moisture transfer characterisation
ŌĆó Heat transfer characterisation
Figure 8: Photograph of MIL-100(Fe) in laboratory.
MIL-100(Fe) is a MOF originally synthesised in 2007 by Serre et al. at Institut Lavoisier in Ver-
saille, France [32]. It is known for its permanent porosity and exceptionally high cell volume and
speci’¼üc surface area. Another important characteristic of MIL-100(Fe) is its hydro-thermal sta-
bility and its ability to adsorb a lot of moisture. The water uptake capacity of MIL-100(Fe) is
one of the highest ever recorded. At room temperature, adsorption/desorption takes place mainly
in a relative humidity range of 25%-60%. Above 50ŌŚ”C, the MOF starts to lose its ability to hold
water, and desorption occurs at almost any ambient relative humidity level. All of which makes
MIL-100(Fe) a good candidate for moisture bu’¼Ćering and why the MOF is chosen for the present
study.
In this chapter, MIL-100(Fe) is characterised to the extent possible. The characterisation is based
on both reference values found in literature and a physical characterisation based on experimental
work. The experiments are conducted with a compound of the material prepared at DTU, Lyn-
gby with the aim of revealing certain important properties regarding MIL-100(Fe) in a moisture
bu’¼Ćering context. The material compound is not synthesised by the author.
4.1
Material background
MIL-100(Fe) is an iron carboxylate formed by iron trimers that are linked by benzene-1,3,5-
tricarboxylic (or trimesic acid) (’¼ügure 9).
Each iron trimer is connected to six carboxylates,
two water molecules and one anion, which leads to the formation of two types of three-dimensional
supertetrahedra cages. The cage diameters are 25 ├ģ and 29 ├ģ, making MIL-100(Fe) a so-called
==PAGE:28==
18
mesoporous material. The cages are accessible through windows of approximately 5.5 ├ģ and 8.6
├ģ respectively. They are clustered together to an average resulting crystal size of approximately 2
┬Ąm. On a macroscopic level, the material is a powder (’¼ügure 8.
Figure 9: MIL-100(Fe) morphology illustration. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from [32].
After the ’¼ürst synthesis of MIL-100(Fe), Serre et al. reported a nitrogen sorption curve. The
curve shows how adsorption in MIL-100(Fe) is characterised by the two types of cages. The results
indicated that the smaller cage adsorbs at lower pressures than the large cage, which leads to two
separate steep steps of its sorption curve. The corresponding surface area was measured to be more
than 2800 m2/g, which today is the second largest ever measured next after a somewhat similar
MOF, MIL-101(Cr) [33].
The hydro-thermal properties of MIL-100(Fe) were not explored until later on. In 2011, F. Jeremias
et al. reported a study of using MIL-100(Fe) as a water adsorbent for heat transformation purposes
[34]. Simultaneously, these same properties were explored by a large group of Korea- and France-
based scientists for its energy e’¼ācient dehumidi’¼ücation properties [33]. Both studies showed that
MIL-100(Fe) is able to adsorb almost 0.8 grams of water per gram of dry material with a high spe-
ci’¼üc moisture capacity at relative humidities between 25%-35% (small cage ’¼ülling) and 45%-60%
(large cage ’¼ülling). The hydro-thermal resistance of MIL-100(Fe) was tested by boiling a sample
of the material in water for 7 days. Its water adsorption capacity did not change.
The synthesis of MIL-100(Fe) was originally based on the use of ’¼éuoresic acid (HF). Being a rather
toxic compound, it was since its ’¼ürst synthesis of interest to replace ’¼éuoresic acid with something
non-toxic. In 2012, Y.-K. Seo et al. succeeded in synthesising a large-scale MIL-100(Fe) compound
without the use of ’¼éuoresic acid [35]. Instead, they used the non-toxic nitric acid (HNO3). By
doing so, the ’¼ünal product yielded almost the same porosity and stability as the F-containing
compound.
==PAGE:29==
19
The synthesis procedure of Y.-K. Seo et al. takes certain steps; First, the material is made by
dissolving iron nitrate in water and then adding trimesic acid. Next, the compound is puri’¼üed.
This is done by treating it with hot water and ethanol and next, chemically, with an aqueous NH4F
solution. This same synthesis procedure is followed to prepare the MIL-100(Fe) compound used
throughout this study.
4.2
N2 adsorption
When synthesising the material in a large quantity, complete puri’¼ücation is di’¼ācult to achieve.
Y.-K. Seo et al. reported a surface area of 1800-1970 m2/g for the F-free MIL-100(Fe) when syn-
thesised in a 15 g quantity. The purity of the compound used in this study has been examined as
well. To do so, a similar N2 adsorption experiment is conducted, as what was reported by Serre
et al. in 2007. The intention with the experiment is to reveal the speci’¼üc surface area of the
compound by exposing a small sample of the material to increasingly larger pressure levels in a N2
atmosphere. The specimen will then adsorb gradually more N2 per pressure increase. When the
entire surface of the material sample is covered by N2 molecules, the speci’¼üc surface area is derived.
The experiment is conducted with a Quantachrome Autosorp iQ equipment (’¼ügure 10). It takes
the following steps:
ŌĆó Weighing a sample
ŌĆó Outgassing
ŌĆó Choosing pressure step increase
ŌĆó Filling analysis ’¼éask with N2
ŌĆó Pressure drop inside chamber
ŌĆó Step-wise pressure increase (adsorption) and decrease (desorption)
ŌĆó Deriving results
Procedure: A sample of 0.19 g was ’¼ürst put into a tube, which was then attached to the outgassing
station. Outgassing was performed under vacuum conditions for 8 hours until the specimen was
completely outgassed. Next, the tube was attached to the analysis station, and the analysis ’¼éask
was ’¼ülled with N2. The pressure inside the chamber was reduced, so the temperature dropped to
77.35K. The pressure step increase/decrease was set to 0.05 P/P0, and analysis was initiated. Af-
ter approximately 2 hours, the results were processed (’¼ügure 11). The test yielded a speci’¼üc surface
area of 860 m2/g.
There may be two reasons for the low result. The sample quantity was high compared to what
is usually recommended when analysing microporous materials. It makes the outgassing process
==PAGE:30==
20
Figure 10: Quantachrome Autosorp iQ equipment.
Figure 11: Nitrogen sorption curve of MIL-100(Fe) derived from measurements.
more complicated, since some of the surface may therefore already be occupied, when the anal-
ysis begins. It may, however, also indicate impurity of the compound. The same test was again
performed, but on a sample of MIL-100(Fe) synthesised earlier in a lesser quantity. This time, a
smaller sample of 10.6 mg was used. The surface area yielded 1560 m2/g.
Based on the two N2 adsorption experiments, the MIL-100(Fe) compound made in a large quantity
does not appear to be puri’¼üed to the same level as in earlier reference studies. It is, however, not
completely clear, since the quantities of the two specimens were di’¼Ćerent. In any further experi-
mental work, the large quantity material is the only compound present in a large enough quantity.
==PAGE:31==
21
Therefore, the compound is used regardless of its purity.
4.3
Intercrystalline porosity
Being a powder, the use of MIL-100(Fe) may require some kind of shaping when used in a built
environment. In this study, the powder is shaped into a brick (’¼ügure 12). This makes it easier to
use for experimental work, and it also creates a perhaps more realistic situation of the material
in use. The brick is 4.5 cm thick with a diameter of 1.9 cm. It has an average density of 0.71
g/cm31. It is made by pressing a mixture of dry material and de-ionised water in a milk powder
pill presser, which was bought for the purpose. Afterwards, the brick is dried at 70ŌŚ”C for half a day.
Figure 12: Photograph of the brick and the pressing device.
Shaping the material induces new complications, and the moisture transfer characteristics of the
brick are, as indicated already, potentially a’¼Ćected. An SEM-image (’¼ügure 13) of the compound
shows how the many di’¼Ćerent crystal shapes hinder the crystals in being tightly packed, and gaps
of air are unavoidably present when crystals are clustered together. In the brick, the amount of air
present is not possible to measure and therefore di’¼ācult to estimate. An intercrystalline porosity
of 0.5 (cm3 void space per cm3 dry material) serves as a reference value.
1Calculated simply as mass per volume ratio of the brick
==PAGE:32==
22
Figure 13: An SEM image of the MIL-100(Fe) compound used for lab tests. The image is borrowed.
4.4
Moisture sorption iso-therm
Moisture uptake capacity is one of the most important properties regarding moisture bu’¼Ćering.
As discussed in the previous chapter, moisture uptake capacity is visualised in sorption curves. A
sorption curve is identi’¼üed by exposing a material to increasing steps of humidity levels at con-
stant temperatures. Hence, they may also be termed sorption iso-therms, which is the common
terminology.
At every humidity step, the material must stabilise in an equilibrium state of moisture content.
The resulting sorption iso-therm is then the mass increase per dry mass in an equilibrium state of
moisture content at every step of humidity level measured. The more steps measured, the more
detailed is the sorption iso-therm.
Figure 14: Sorption iso-therm of MIL-100(Fe) measured at Lund University.
In this study, such an experiment has been conducted. Since it was not possible for DTU to facili-
==PAGE:33==
23
tate the test, a specimen was sent to Lund University, Sweden, where it was tested (’¼ügure 14). The
humidity increase at each step was set to ŌłåRH = 0.15 Pv/Pv,sat. The sorption curve clearly shows
a high uptake capacity when the relative humidity is between 15%-60%. The test also shows the
before-mentioned two cage phenomenon. However, the test neither shows at which humidity level
adsorption initiates nor the desorption behavior of the material. A potential hysteresis is therefore
not considered in the present paper.
Only one sorption iso-therm is measured (at 25ŌŚ”C). However, at room temperatures, the tempera-
ture dependency of the uptake capacity of MIL-100(Fe) is negligible [26], and iso-thermal conditions
is therefore a reasonable assumption. The maximum water uptake of the powder is found to be
0.43 weight-%. This value is signi’¼ücantly lower than what has been reported in reference studies.
It may again indicate the impurity of the compound. It is, though, still higher than the moisture
capacity of conventional solid desiccants.
4.5
Vapor permeability
Another important property is vapor permeability. A climate chamber experiment is conducted to
reveal the vapor permeability coe’¼ācient of the material. Inside the climate chamber, temperature
and relative humidity may be kept constant (’¼ügure 15). The experiment takes the following steps:
ŌĆó Fill glass bottle with saturated salt solution (RH: 94%)
ŌĆó Fix brick on top of glass bottle
ŌĆó Set temperature and humidity conditions inside climate chamber (T: 23.75ŌŚ”C, RH:64%)
ŌĆó Place glass bottle inside climate chamber on a scale
ŌĆó Collect mass data with computer
ŌĆó Calculate the vapor permeability coe’¼ācient and, hence, the moisture di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient
Procedure: A glass bottle is ’¼ülled with a saturated salt solution of 94% relative humidity. The
brick is then ’¼üxed to the bottle with a plastic cover (’¼ügure 16). The climate chamber is set to a
temperature of 23.75ŌŚ”C and a relative humidity of 64% in which the bottle is placed on a scale. Due
to a constant di’¼Ćerence in vapor pressure on the inside and outside of the bottle, vapor di’¼Ćuses
naturally through the brick at a constant rate. The mass of the bottle is continuously weighed, and
the data is saved on a computer.
The vapor permeability coe’¼ācient of the brick is calculated as:
╬┤ = (mi ŌłÆmt)d
tAŌłåP
(4.1)
==PAGE:34==
24
Figure 15: Photograph of the climate chamber used for vapor permeability measurements.
Here, d is the thickness of the brick, t is the time frame of which the weight loss occurs, A is the
surface area from where the vapor is exchanged between the brick and the atmosphere and ŌłåP
is the di’¼Ćerence in vapor pressure on the two sides of the brick. Since some of the surface area is
covered by plastic, the actual area is calculated with an online area grid calculator2 to be 2.02 cm4.
Figure 16: Photograph of brick on top of glass bottle used for vapor permeability measurements.
The same
photograph appears on the title page.
2From https://www.sketchandcalc.com/area-calculator
==PAGE:35==
25
The moisture di’¼Ćusion through the brick is not steady in the beginning, because the brick is not
in equilibrium (’¼ügure 17). Therefore, the data measured in the beginning of the experiment is
extracted from the data collection. The data used is collected in the time frame between 55.000
seconds to 77.000 seconds, i.e. during 6 hours. The vapor permeability coe’¼ācient is identi’¼üed to
be ╬┤ = 6.37 10ŌłÆ11 kg/smPa.
Figure 17: Mass of bottle during vapor permeability measurements. The red color indicates the time period used
for the following calculations.
The value implies a moisture e’¼Ćusivity of the brick of 3.7e-6 kg/m2s1/2Pa3. To put this number in
perspective, it is more than 12 times higher than the moisture e’¼Ćusivity of gypsum (which is around
3e-7 kg/m2s1/2Pa). It means that the brick stores moisture more than 12 times better than gypsum.
Using equation 3.10, the moisture di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient is now calculated to be Dv = 6.13 10ŌłÆ10
m2/s. As stated, a di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient may be highly dependent on moisture content of the mate-
rial, which the empirically found value is not taking into account. An assessment of this could have
been carried out by also measuring di’¼Ćusion at lower relative humidities. This is not found relevant.
4.6
Inter- and intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion
Moisture di’¼Ćusion in the brick will take place either in the voids around the crystals or inside the
crystals. The empirically identi’¼üed di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient above is only considering the overall mois-
ture transfer. Therefore, a di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient describing either inter- or intracrystalline di’¼Ćusivity
is necessarily based upon assumptions.
In the before-mentioned (chapter 3) study by E.N.Wang et al., ways to calculate both the inter- and
3Moisture e’¼Ćusivity is calculated as bm =
q
╬┤╬Č
Pv,sat
==PAGE:36==
26
intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient are proposed. Regarding intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion, the value is
derived as follows:
Dv = (dp/3)(8RT/ŽĆM)1/2
(4.2)
Here, dp denotes the average diameter of the voids around the randomly packed crystals and R
and M are the universal gas constant and molar weight of water respectively. E.N.Wang et al.
propose a general relationship between crystal radius, intercrystalline porosity and pore size radius.
Depending on porosity, the pore size radius of the intercrystalline voids is expected in a size range
around 10ŌłÆ7 m. This leads to an intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient of around 10ŌłÆ5 m2/s, which
is much faster than the empirically measured value above.
Regarding intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion, E.N.Wang et al. propose the following di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient:
D┬Ą = D┬Ą,0eE┬Ą/RT0(1ŌłÆT/T0)
(4.3)
Here, D┬Ą,0 = 5.0 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ16 m2/s is the intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient at temperature T0 = 300
K and E┬Ą = 2.8035 ┬Ę 104 J/mol is the activation energy for crystal surface di’¼Ćusion. This value is
in a range much lower than the empirically found value.
Since the empirically found value is a combination of intra- and intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion, the above
calculated di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācients make sense. They imply that moisture di’¼Ćuses rapidly through the
void spaces and slowly through the crystals. Though the two di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācients are not speci’¼ü-
cally concerning MIL-100(Fe), they will serve as reference values.
4.7
Thermal characteristics
An experiment is conducted to reveal the thermal characteristics of the brick. To do so, the brick
is exposed to electrical impulses of which the response can be measured by a sensor. This is done
with a C-Therm TCi thermal analyser (’¼ügure 18). The experiment takes the following steps:
ŌĆó Place brick on sensor (and ensure good thermal contact)
ŌĆó Let controller send electrical signal into the brick and measure the response
ŌĆó Calculate thermal conductivity and e’¼Ćusivity
The thermal conductivity is measured directly as electrical signal resistance. The e’¼Ćusivity, in
principle, is derived from the following equation:
==PAGE:37==
27
ŌłåV = 1.1284IAGt1/2
b1 + b2
(4.4)
Here, ŌłåV is the change in voltage, I is the current, A is a constant related to the thermal resistance
of the material, G is the power ’¼éux and b1 and b2 are the thermal e’¼Ćusivity of the sensor and the
material respectively.
Procedure: The dry brick is lubricated on one side with a highly conductive grease to prevent any
contact resistance to impact the results. The brick is then placed on top of the sensor (’¼ügure 19),
and a small weight is put on top to ensure complete contact. The controller then sends electrical
signals (37V) through the perimeter of the sensor into the material, and the sensor measures the
response signal. After 10 measurements, the materialŌĆÖs thermal conductivity is identi’¼üed as 0.4165
W/mK and the thermal e’¼Ćusivity as 800 J/m2Ks1/2. The average deviation per measurement is
very small (<2%).
Figure 18: C-Therm TCi thermal analyser equipment.
The electrical signal that enters the material is not penetrating it deeply. Therefore, to generalise
the results to account for the entire brick implies an assumption of the brick being homogeneous
with few variations in its thermal characteristics. The speci’¼üc heat capacity of the material is now
derived from the following equation to be 2.17 kJ/kgK:
b = (╬╗Žücp)1/2
(4.5)
==PAGE:38==
28
Figure 19: Close-up of C-Therm TCi sensor.
4.8
Heat of adsorption
As part of the before-mentioned study by F. Jeremias et al., the heat of adsorption of MIL-100(Fe)
was quanti’¼üed in the temperature range of 25ŌŚ”C to 40ŌŚ”C. They found that the heat from moisture
adsorption is rather high (as high as 90 kJ/mol), when low quantities are adsorbed,. This is due
to intermolecular forces between the water molecules and the surface of the material inside the
pores. The value quickly drops to an almost constant value of 44.4 kJ/mol, when higher amounts
of water are adsorbed. This value is very close to the heat of vaporisation.
==PAGE:39==
29
5
Numerical simulation of heat and moisture transfer in MIL-
100(Fe)
ŌĆó Software description
ŌĆó Model description
Figure 20: Time schedule example (screenshot from the software Comsol Multiphysics).
There are di’¼Ćerent ways of solving partial di’¼Ćerential equations. In cases, such as this, where
the evolution of heat and moisture changes through time and space, and where the coe’¼ācients
may be variables as well, analytical solutions are practically impossible to derive. Alternatively,
coupled heat and moisture transfer may be approximated by numerical integration with the use of
a computer, which is the approach in this study. In order to investigate the use of MIL-100(Fe) as
a moisture bu’¼Ćer material, the physical characteristics found in the previous chapter are now used
to design a numerical model.
5.1
Numerical simulation with Comsol Multiphysics
Comsol Multiphysics is a simulation software tool providing numerical solving of coupled physical
phenomena. It is easy to use and the physics are easy to manipulate, which makes the program
suited for the purpose. Using the software follows ’¼üve general steps:
ŌĆó Creating domain
ŌĆó De’¼üning the physics
ŌĆó De’¼üning the solver method
ŌĆó Solving
ŌĆó Processing the results (visualisation)
==PAGE:40==
30
First, a domain is generated, which implies creating a geometry with speci’¼üc properties needed for
the calculations. It is possible to de’¼üne these properties with variables and functions e.g. to make
a parameter temperature-dependent.
Next, the physics describing the situation is de’¼üned. The most well-known physics are already
programmed in the software. The heat and moisture transfer in MOFs, however, is still relatively
undiscovered territory. Therefore, the physics are programmed manually in the software. The
step also includes de’¼üning the circumstances of the calculations (such as boundary conditions and
initial states of the domain).
Next, the method of calculation is chosen. This includes discretising the volume (de’¼üning the mesh)
and setting the length of the time steps, which the solver is going to take. The di’¼Ćerent numeri-
cal methods of solving di’¼Ćerential equations are pre-programmed and available within the software.
Next, the problem is solved according to the chosen settings. It includes de’¼üning the length of the
simulation (e.g. how many seconds or hours) and how often during the simulation, results need
to be generated (e.g. every second or hour). Finally, visualisation and interpretation of the result
data is carried out.
The method of solving partial di’¼Ćerential equations is in this case chosen to be the so-called Back-
ward Di’¼Ćerential Formula (BDF) of ’¼ürst order. This method is also termed the backward Euler
method, which is the default method when solving problems regarding heat and moisture transport
in Comsol Multiphysics. It is outside the scope of this study to outline a complete description of
the mathematics behind this solver. Only the principle idea is outlined here.
The process of deriving a numerical solution is iterative. It means, in principle, that the solution
at every spatial coordinate (at time t) makes ground for calculating the next solution (at time
t + dt). In the backward Euler method, the solution is derived backwards. This means that a
solution at every spatial coordinate (at time t) makes ground for calculating the previous solution
(at time tŌłÆ1). For a given function y of e.g. time t, this may be described mathematically as follows:
dy(t)
dt
= yn ŌłÆynŌłÆ1
Ōłåt
(5.1)
which essentially means that the derivatives are considered as changes during ’¼ünite time steps.
This induces an error to the solution, which becomes smaller with a smaller time step. If the time
step is chosen small enough, the solution approaches the true value enough to become a reasonable
approximation.
In Comsol Multiphysics, to save computational time, the solver is able to operate freely in terms of
choosing the length of its time steps. Instead, a tolerance limit of error may be de’¼üned. It means
==PAGE:41==
31
that the solver will take long time steps, if there are no sudden changes in the physical model.
If suddenly, the circumstances in or outside the domain changes, the solver automatically takes
smaller time steps to account for the high risk of error around this point.
5.2
Domain and scope
To study the heat and moisture transfer mechanisms of MIL-100(Fe), a representation of the ma-
terial is modelled. This is done by creating a domain with the characteristics of MIL-100(Fe) that
were found in chapter 4. In one end, the domain can freely exchange moisture with its surround-
ings. In the other end, an alumina sheet is placed as a highly heat conductive vapor barrier to
prevent moisture exchange. Moisture will then penetrate or desorb from the material, if there is a
vapor pressure gradient from the outside to the inside.
Figure 21: Numerical model geometry.
The model geometry is throughout the study as simple as possible. The case is one-dimensional
and the thickness of the domain is set to 1 cm with a sheet of 0.01 cm alumina on the right end
’¼ügure. This geometry is chosen, since a thickness of 1 cm re’¼éects a somewhat realistic scenario of
MIL-100(Fe) used as a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel. A point is placed in the middle of the MOF from
where result data is collected. During simulations, the initial state of moisture concentration is
either an equilibrium state with the surroundings (naturally regenerated) or completely dry (re-
generated with heat).
Regarding temperature, the domain is always initially in equilibrium with the room temperature,
which throughout the study is kept constant. This is an unfortunate assumption, but time lim-
itations has led to narrowing the scope of the study. Whereas the initial intention was to take
into account both latent and sensible heat in the dynamic simulations, only latent heat will be
considered in this assessment. In this scope, constant room temperature is a reasonable assumption.
==PAGE:42==
32
Four main studies are carried out:
ŌĆó Assessment of heat and moisture transfer mechanisms in MIL-100(Fe)
ŌĆó Model accuracy assessment
ŌĆó Assessment of the aspects of moisture transfer mechanisms in MIL-100(Fe) on a macroscopic
scale
ŌĆó A dynamic case study of MIL-100(Fe) used as a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel in an o’¼āce in di’¼Ćerent
European climates.
In the latter case, the objective is to determine, if the use of MIL-100(Fe) as a moisture bu’¼Ćer
material leads to an improved indoor climate as well as energy savings. Regarding indoor climate
control, it is determined how much material is needed to lower the relative humidity to 60% at all
times, which is the maximum level of humidity to obtain a category II indoor climate according to
European standards. Regarding energy savings, since sensible heat is disregarded, only the latent
energy is addressed. Here, the cooling e’¼Ćect of the moisture bu’¼Ćer material is regarded as an energy
saving, only if there is a cooling demand in the o’¼āce. Since temperature inside is kept constant,
and since neither heat losses nor gains are considered, the cooling demand is based solely on the
outdoor conditions. The assumption is that there is a cooling demand inside the o’¼āce, if the out-
side temperature is above 20ŌŚ”C. On this ground, the annual energy saving caused by the moisture
bu’¼Ćer material is calculated as the cooling e’¼Ćect during the total time of cooling demand as follows:
E = hvapmwn
8 ┬Ę 602s
(5.2)
Here, hvap=2260 kJ/kg is the heat of vaporisation, mw is the average hourly moisture uptake by
the panel and n is the number of hours above 20ŌŚ”C.
5.3
Parameters
The parameters needed for the calculations are summarised in table 2. They are determined ei-
ther experimentally or as reference values found in literature. The ambient temperature is set to
24.5ŌŚ”C, which is the optimal indoor temperature during the cooling season according to European
standards. Though the thermal properties are likely to be moisture dependent, this is no longer
found relevant. Therefore, these values stay ’¼üxed throughout the study.
The equilibrium moisture content Ce is set to correspond the identi’¼üed sorption iso-therm. In
Comsol Multiphysics, the sorption curve is built as a piecewise function using linear regression on
the measured data (’¼ügure 22).
==PAGE:43==
33
Table 2: Summary of the parameters used in numerical simulations.
Symbol
Value
Unit
Origin
MIL-100(Fe)
Density
Žü
0.71
g/cm3
Measurement
Thermal conductivity
k
0.4165
W/mK
Measurement
Speci’¼üc heat capacity
cp
2.17
kJ/kgK
Measurement
Heat of adsorption
had
2260
kJ/kg
Reference
Intercrystalline porosity
╬Ą
0.5
-
Reference
Intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion
Dv
4 10ŌłÆ5
m2/s
Reference
Intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion
D┬Ą
5 10ŌłÆ16
m2/s
Reference
Crystal radius of adsorbent
rc
2
┬Ąm
Reference
Alumina
Density
Žüa
0.98
g/cm3
Reference
Thermal conductivity
ka
60
W/mK
Reference
Speci’¼üc heat capacity
cp,a
1.00
kJ/kgK
Reference
Constants
Gas constant of water vapor
Rv
461.5
J/kgK
Reference
Ambient temperature
Ti
24.5
ŌŚ”C
Reference
Figure 22: Sorption iso-therm of MIL-100(Fe) made in Comsol Multiphysics with linear regression.
5.4
Physics
The equations that are set to de’¼üne heat and moisture transfer in MIL-100(Fe) are presented in
chapter 3. The equations used throughout the study are the following:
ŌĆó Heat and moisture transfer mechanisms equation 3.6 + equation 3.13
ŌĆó Model accuracy equation 3.6
ŌĆó Macroscopic moisture transfer phenomena equation 3.13 + equation 3.14
==PAGE:44==
34
ŌĆó Dynamic case study equation 3.13
When the aspects of macroscopic moisture transfer is assessed, di’¼Ćerent values of both the inter-
and intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācients are used. In the case, where moisture concentration in
the voids is represented by equation 3.14, the total moisture concentration is set to be:
Ctot = ╬ĄC + (1 ŌłÆ╬Ą)C┬Ą
(5.3)
5.5
Mesh
The mesh is de’¼üned as equally sized elements. The base reference length of each element is 0.01
mm. When assessing the accuracy of the model, the mesh quality is enhanced by decreasing the
element size in steps by a factor of 0.1 until the solution no longer changes.
5.6
Time-stepping
The BDF-solver of ’¼ürst order is chosen with the option of freely taken time steps. The error tol-
erance is set to be in an order of 10ŌłÆ2. When assessing the accuracy of the model, the tolerance
is lowered in steps by a factor of 0.1 until the solution no longer changes.
5.7
Boundary conditions
During simulations, the moisture concentration at the left boundary of the geometry may change
in two ways; Either by ’¼üxed step changes between two relative humidity levels or it may change
dynamically according to meteorological data given as an input in the software. All other boundary
inputs are set to be in an equilibrium state with the surroundings.
5.7.1
Step function
In the static cases, the boundary moisture concentration is changed step-wise. For instance, it may
change between two ’¼üxed relative humidity levels such as:
RHb = 0.33 + 0.42 ŌłŚ(t > 1500s)
(5.4)
Here, RHb is the boundary relative humidity. In this case, the relative humidity is 33% at t = 0.
When t = 1500s, the relative humidity increases instantly to 75%. This may be extended to a
periodical function by setting an upper time limit of e.g. 3000 seconds. In such case, adsorption
and desorption alternates for every 1500 seconds.
==PAGE:45==
35
5.7.2
Meteorological data
In Comsol, humidity-related weather data is not available on an hourly basis. Therefore, weather
data from Energy Plus 4 is downloaded and the hourly measured data is imported to the model as
interpolation functions.
Energy Plus is an open source building energy simulation tool. It o’¼Ćers a variety of weather data
from many thousand locations around the world. The data is derived from 20 di’¼Ćerent sources. In
this model, data is used from two di’¼Ćerent sources:
ŌĆó IWEC (ASHREA weather’¼üle database)
ŌĆó IGDG (Italian climatic data collection)
The ASHREA research project ŌĆÖInternational Weather for Energy CalculationsŌĆÖ is a database of
weather data collected from 227 locations world wide. The data consists, in their own words, of the
most typical measurements between 1982-1999. The Italian Climatic Data collection ŌĆÖGianni De
GiorgioŌĆÖ is a database of weather ’¼üles collected from station all around Italy. Data from the Italian
database consists of the most typical measurements between 1951-1970. Standard deviations are
not available within the weather ’¼üles. Instead, a deviation of ┬▒5ŌŚ”C is used for temperature and
┬▒10% for relative humidity to achieve more versatile results in the end.
5.8
Case study for dynamic simulations
The Building Energy Simulation Test (BESTEST) is an o’¼āce room case study by the International
Energy Agency5. The o’¼āce room can be used to make studies comparable. It has a ’¼éoor area of
8x6 m2 and a room height of 2.7 m (’¼ügure 23). The ventilation air change rate is 0.5 hŌłÆ1 and in
the working hours (between 8h-16h) there is an internal moisture gain of 5 g/m3h. The in’¼ültration
of air is included in the ventilation rate.
Figure 23: BESTEST reference o’¼āce. The ’¼ügure is an out-cut from a scienti’¼üc paper [25]
4From https://energyplus.net/weather
5IEA ECBCS annex 21
==PAGE:46==
36
The relative humidity in the o’¼āce is calculated using equation 3.18, when no moisture bu’¼Ćer panel
is used, and equation 3.19, when a MIL-100(Fe) moisture bu’¼Ćer panel is used.
5.9
European climates
The climates on the European continent are very di’¼Ćerent. It is not the scope of this study to
outline the e’¼Ćect of moisture bu’¼Ćering on the entire continent. During simulations, meteorological
data is used from the following three weather log stations:
ŌĆó Copenhagen - Kastrup airport (IWEC)
ŌĆó Rome - Leonardo da Vinci airport (IGDG)
ŌĆó Madrid - Barajas airport (IWEC)
The three weather stations are chosen, because their climates are interesting in a moisture bu’¼Ćer
context. The marine climate of Copenhagen is characterised by humid and relatively cold air,
whereas in the Mediterranean climate of Rome, the air is humid and relatively warm.
In the
semi-arid climate of Madrid, the air is warm as in Rome, but more dry and with larger diurnal
’¼éuctuations. In all three cases, the simulation time is set to 2 weeks of July, which is where the
moisture content of the air and, hence, the indoor relative humidity is expected to be highest. Due
to time limitations, other seasons of the year are not taken into account.
==PAGE:47==
37
6
Results and discussions
ŌĆó Heat and moisture transfer mechanisms in MIL-100(Fe)
ŌĆó Model accuracy
ŌĆó Aspects of macroscopic moisture transfer mechanisms in MIL-100(Fe)
ŌĆó MIL-100(Fe) used as a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel in an o’¼āce space in di’¼Ćerent European climates.
6.1
Heat and moisture transfer mechanisms in MIL-100(Fe)
On ’¼ügure 24, the moisture concentration inside MIL-100(Fe) is shown.
Here, the surrounding
relative humidity alternates between 33% and 75% for every 1500 seconds. At the given adsorp-
tion/desorption rate and boundary condition, the moisture concentration of the material ’¼éuctu-
ates between approximately 0.16 and 0.29 grams per cm3 of the material. The rate of adsorp-
tion/desorption decreases as the material approaches equilibrium.
Equilibrium is not reached
within the given time schedule.
Figure 24: Moisture concentration inside MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes in relative humidity (RH = 33%/75%).
==PAGE:48==
38
On ’¼ügure 25, The temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) is shown.
Again, the surrounding relative
humidity alternates between 33% and 75% for every 1500 seconds.
The ’¼ügure shows how the
temperature of the material ’¼éuctuates around the initial temperature of 24.5ŌŚ”C. During adsorption,
the temperature rises quickly to approximately 33ŌŚ”C, after which the temperature drops slowly
toward the ambient temperature.
During desorption, the opposite process takes place.
Here,
temperature drops quickly to approximately 18ŌŚ”C, after which the temperature rises slowly towards
equilibrium. The temperature curve matches well what is expected. Under the given circumstances,
moisture adsorption seems to have a momentary impact on the temperature of the system.
Figure 25: Temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes of relative humidity (RH = 33%/75%).
==PAGE:49==
39
6.2
Model accuracy
The model accuracy due to the element size is tested, which is shown on ’¼ügure 26. The ’¼ügure
shows a temperature plot of MIL-100(Fe) during a step change of the surrounding relative humidity
from 33% to 75%. An increasing accuracy is noted at every reduction step. However, the compu-
tational time increases heavily after 1e-3 mm, which prevents the study of mesh quality to go on
any further. For this study, the inaccuracy is considered to be small and insigni’¼ücant compared
to the need for making fast simulations. The green curve is chosen as a good enough approximation.
Figure 26: Temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) during adsorption.
Blue represents an element size of 0.01 mm,
green represents an element size of 1e-3 mm and red represents an element size of 1e-4 mm.
==PAGE:50==
40
The model accuracy due to the order of error tolerance is tested, which is shown on ’¼ügure 27.
The ’¼ügure shows a temperature plot during a step change of the surrounding relative humidity
from 33% to 75%. The error tolerance shows to not a’¼Ćect the results as much as the discreti-
sation step. It is noted that an error tolerance in the order of 1e-3 and 1e-4 is almost identical.
The green curve is therefore considered su’¼āciently accurate and is chosen for further investigations.
Figure 27: Temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) during adsorption. Blue represents an error tolerance of 0.01, green
represents a tolerance of 1e-3 and red represents a tolerance of 1e-4.
==PAGE:51==
41
6.3
Moisture transfer in a macroscopic view
In the before-mentioned (chapter 2) study by X.Feng et al., an MBV test was conducted. Here,
a small sample of MIL-100(Fe) is exposed to the alternating relative humidity levels in a climate
chamber [25]. Letting the relative humidity alternate between 33% and 75%, the test yielded a
mass increase/decrease of approximately 3% of the sample mass during adsorption/desorption.
When using the LDF model on the same ambient conditions, the moisture adsorption/desorption
implies a mass increase/decrease of around 18% (’¼ügure 24). This indicates that the LDF model is
an overestimation of the moisture uptake capacity of the material on a macroscopic scale.
The moisture concentration inside MIL-100(Fe) is calculated, which is shown on ’¼ügure 28. Again,
the surrounding relative humidity alternates between 33% and 75% for every 1500 seconds. The
’¼ügure shows a comparison between the moisture uptake according to the LDF model and the model
derived from the study by E.N.Wang et al..
Figure 28: Moisture uptake by MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes in relative humidity (RH = 33%/75%). Blue
represents the model derived from the study by E.N.Wang et al. and green represents the LDF model.
The ’¼ügure shows how the rate of moisture di’¼Ćusion in the void spaces of the panel has negligible
e’¼Ćect. The moisture uptake according to the model derived from E.N.Wang et al. is approximately
half the value of the LDF model, which is because the porosity is set to be 0.5. The value of
intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion proposed by E.N.Wang et al.
is very large, so di’¼Ćusion in the voids
takes place at too fast a pace to have any damping e’¼Ćect on the moisture uptake and release.
However, according to this model, the intercrystalline porosity has a huge impact.
The mass
increase/decrease is around 9% during adsorption/desorption for the model derived from E.N.Wang
et al. Though it is still high, it is closer to the value measured by X.Feng et al.. In this model, an
intercrystalline porosity of ╬Ą = 0.8 results in a mass increase/decrease of approximately 3%.
==PAGE:52==
42
Again, moisture concentration inside MIL-100(Fe) is calculated, which is shown on ’¼ügure 29. The
surrounding relative humidity alternates between 33% and 75% for every 1500 seconds. The ’¼üg-
ure shows how the intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient a’¼Ćects the moisture uptake, when moisture
transfer is described according to the model derived from the study by E.N.Wang et al.. The
’¼ügure shows a signi’¼ücant change in the moisture uptake behavior of the panel, when the rate of
intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion decreases from 10ŌłÆ7 m2/s to 10ŌłÆ8 m2/s. Until 10ŌłÆ7 m2/s, the moisture
uptake is not nearly changing that much. The mass increase/decrease, when the intercrystalline
di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient is set to 10ŌłÆ8 (the red curve) is approximately 3%.
Figure 29: Moisture uptake by MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes in relative humidity (RH = 33%/75%). Blue
represents moisture uptake with an intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient of Dv = 10ŌłÆ5, green represents
moisture uptake for Dv = 10ŌłÆ7 and red represents moisture uptake for Dv = 10ŌłÆ8
==PAGE:53==
43
Throughout the rest of the study, MIL-100(Fe) is considered in the shape of a moisture bu’¼Ćer
panel, and the LDF model is set to describe its moisture uptake behavior.
On ’¼ügure 30, the mass of the panel is shown. The mass change is caused by moisture adsorption
due to a step change of relative humidity from 33% to 75% at the panel surface. The ’¼ügure shows
how the intracrystalline di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient a’¼Ćects the moisture uptake by the panel. The dry
mass of the panel is 7.1 kg.
Figure 30: Mass of mof panel during adsorption. Green represents adsorption with the reference crystal di’¼Ćusion
coe’¼ācient D┬Ą, blue represents adsorption for 0.5D┬Ą and red represents adsorption for 0.1D┬Ą.
Using the reference adsorption rate, the panel reaches an equilibrium state of moisture concentra-
tion rapidly. This is undesirable, when using the panel as a moisture bu’¼Ćer in a built environment.
The panel must take up moisture at a constant rate throughout the use phase to perform optimally.
However, the LDF model that is describing the adsorption rate is not taking into account that the
packed crystals are stacked in layers. It is likely that moisture di’¼Ćusion slows down, the deeper
into the material moisture is di’¼Ćused. This is an advantage.
With the LDF model as the governing mathematical description, a di’¼Ćusion rate of 1/10 of the
reference rate ensures that the panel reaches an equilibrium state after approximately 8 hours. For
this reason, this value is used in the following dynamic simulations.
==PAGE:54==
44
6.4
Dynamic case study
In the following simulations, the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel is put into an o’¼āce room and is then exposed
to dynamic changes of relative humidity at its surface. The changes occur since meteorological
data is now given as an input. On ’¼ügures 31-32, the average ambient temperature and relative
humidity is shown for Copenhagen. The time period is two weeks from July 15th to July 28th,
which is within the warmest period of the year. Temperature goes down to 10ŌŚ”C at night (average:
14ŌŚ”C) and up to 25ŌŚ”C during the day (average: 20ŌŚ”C). Relative humidity goes up to 90% during
the night (average: 85%) and down to 35% during the day (average: 50%).
Figure 31: Ambient temperature pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen.
Figure 32: Ambient relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen.
==PAGE:55==
45
The moisture uptake by the MIL-100(Fe) moisture bu’¼Ćer panel in a Copenhagen o’¼āce is shown on
’¼ügure 33. It shows the moisture concentration inside the panel during the two weeks of simulation.
The panel is naturally adsorbing/desorbing moisture due to the indoor relative humidity conditions
in the o’¼āce.
The ’¼ügure shows that the panel desorbs most of its moisture content naturally outside the working
hours. This is because the relative humidity drops due to the sudden stop in internal moisture
production. On average, the moisture uptake per day in the working hours is 2 kg/m2.
Figure 33: Moisture content of mof panel: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen.
==PAGE:56==
46
The indoor relative humidity in an o’¼āce in Copenhagen is shown on ’¼ügure 34. It shows the relative
humidity with and without a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel during the two weeks of simulations. The panel
is naturally desorbing outside the working hours. In this model, the moisture desorbed from the
panel is not led back into the o’¼āce. If this was the case, the indoor relative humidity outside the
working hours would increase accordingly.
In most cases, the relative humidity drops below 20% during the night and increases to above
60% during the day. Since this is the optimum working range of MIL-100(Fe), it optimises the
natural adsorption/desorption process. The ’¼ügure shows that a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel of 1.5 m2
a’¼Ćects the indoor relative humidity to not pass the limit of 60% during the two weeks of simulations.
Figure 34: Indoor relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen. Red represents the IRH without
mof and black represents the IRH with a 1.5 m2 mof panel which is naturally desorbing outside the
working hours.
==PAGE:57==
47
On ’¼ügures 35-36, the average ambient temperature and relative humidity is shown for Rome. The
time period is two weeks from July 15th to July 28th, which is within the warmest period of the
year. Temperature goes down to 16ŌŚ”C at night (average: 19ŌŚ”C) and up to 29ŌŚ”C during the day
(average: 28ŌŚ”C). Relative humidity goes up to 100% during the night (average: 85%) and down to
40% during the day (average: 50%).
Figure 35: Ambient temperature pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Rome.
Figure 36: Ambient relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Rome.
==PAGE:58==
48
The moisture uptake by the MIL-100(Fe) moisture bu’¼Ćer panel in an o’¼āce in Rome is shown on
’¼ügure 37. It shows the moisture concentration inside the panel during the two weeks of simula-
tions. The panel is naturally adsorbing and desorbing moisture due to the indoor relative humidity
conditions in the o’¼āce.
The ’¼ügure shows how the desorption process is limited compared to the same process in Copen-
hagen. This is because the indoor relative humidity during the night is higher, due to a higher
outdoor temperature. On average, the moisture uptake per working day is 1.5 kg.
Figure 37: Moisture content of mof panel: 2 weeks of July in Rome.
==PAGE:59==
49
The indoor relative humidity in an o’¼āce in Rome is shown on ’¼ügure 38. It shows the relative
humidity with and without a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel during the two weeks of simulation. The panel
is naturally desorbing during the night. In this model, the moisture desorbed from the panel is
not led back into the o’¼āce.
The ’¼ügure shows that, at night, the relative humidity only drops to 30%-40% implying that the
total capacity of the panel is not exploited. This prevents the panel from desorbing naturally. The
’¼ügure shows that a panel of 5.6 m2 is su’¼āciently keeping the indoor relative humidity below 60%
at all times during the two weeks of simulations.
Figure 38: Indoor relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Rome. Red represents the IRH without mof and
black represents the IRH with a 5.6 m2 mof panel which is naturally desorbing outside the working
hours.
==PAGE:60==
50
On ’¼ügures 39-40, the average ambient temperature and relative humidity is shown for Madrid.
The time period is two weeks from July 15th to July 28th, which is within the warmest period of
the year. Temperature goes down to 10ŌŚ”C at night (average: 18ŌŚ”C) and up to 39ŌŚ”C during the
day (average: 31ŌŚ”C). Relative humidity goes up to 90% during the night (average: 60%) and down
to 15% during the day (average: 25%).
Figure 39: Ambient temperature pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Madrid.
Figure 40: Ambient relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Madrid.
==PAGE:61==
51
The moisture uptake by the MIL-100(Fe) moisture bu’¼Ćer panel in an o’¼āce in Madrid is shown on
’¼ügure 41. It shows the moisture concentration of the panel during the two weeks of simulations.
The panel is naturally adsorbing and desorbing moisture due to the indoor relative humidity con-
ditions in the o’¼āce.
The ’¼ügure shows that the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel is working better than in the other two cases. On
average, the moisture uptake per working day is 2.2 kg.
Figure 41: Moisture content of mof panel: 2 weeks of July in Madrid.
==PAGE:62==
52
The indoor relative humidity in an o’¼āce in Madrid is shown on ’¼ügure 42. It shows the relative
humidity with and without a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel during the two weeks of simulation. The panel
is naturally desorbing during the night. In this model, the moisture desorbed from the panel is
not led back into the o’¼āce.
In all cases, the relative humidity drops below 20% during the night and increases to above 60%
during the day. Since this is the optimum working range of MIL-100(Fe), it optimises the natural
adsorption/desorption process. The ’¼ügure shows that the indoor relative humidity may be kept
below 60% at all times during the two weeks of simulations with only 1 m2 of moisture bu’¼Ćer panel.
Figure 42: Indoor relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Madrid. Red represents the IRH without mof and
black represents the IRH with a 1.0 m2 mof panel which is naturally desorbing outside the working
hours.
==PAGE:63==
53
In table 3, the amount of moisture bu’¼Ćer panel needed to keep the relative humidity below 60%
is shown. The calculations cover both natural desorption and desorption due to heat exposure
(complete regeneration). Furthermore, the calculations cover both high and low deviations of am-
bient temperature and humidity to show in which size range, the panel may be expected to work
adequately.
Table 3: Number of m2 of MIL-100(Fe) moisture bu’¼Ćer panel needed to lower the indoor relative humidity to 60%
in an o’¼āce space in Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid. (nv = natural regeneration, reg = regenerated with
heat).
Cph
Rome
Madrid
nv
reg
nv
reg
nv
reg
Low deviation
1.1
0.5
3.2
1.1
0.8
0.6
Average
1.5
0.6
5.6
1.4
1.0
0.7
High deviation
3.1
0.9
14.6
2.0
1.7
0.9
The table shows that the panel works optimally in both Copenhagen and Madrid. In Copenhagen,
though the humidity is quite high, the outside temperature is a bit colder than the indoor tem-
perature, which means that the relative humidity does not increase, when air is introduced to the
indoor climate. In Madrid, the ambient relative humidity is low which means that the relative
humidity inside matches well the working range of MIL-100(Fe). In both cases, it is realistic to
consider the use of a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel during the summer, which does not need heat regener-
ation.
In Rome, where the climate is both hot and humid, the relative humidity inside is also quite high.
In this case, it means that the panel does not work optimally, unless it is regenerated during the
night. In this light, though a relatively low temperature (of approximately 60ŌŚ”C) is needed for
regeneration, the process is still energy costly and, hence, less attractive.
An attempt to estimate the energy savings due to the cooling e’¼Ćect of the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel
is carried out as well. In table 4, the number of hours, when the temperature is above 20ŌŚ”C, is
counted for each of the three locations for the entire year. The total energy saving is then calcu-
lated as the latent load removal within these hours based on the average daily moisture uptake
calculated for the three scenarios.
Table 4: Number of hours with temperature above 20ŌŚ”C in Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid on a yearly basis and
the corresponding energy savings.
Cph
Rome
Madrid
No. of hours above 20ŌŚ”C
285
2404
2284
Energy saving (kWh/m2 panel)
45
283
394
Total energy saving (kWh)
68
1585
394
==PAGE:64==
54
The table shows that the energy related e’¼Ćect of the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel is much higher in Rome
compared to Copenhagen and Madrid. This is expected, since both temperature and humidity
is high in Rome, which induces a higher latent load. In Copenhagen, cooling is unnecessary in
most of the year, whereas the cooling season of Rome and Madrid, under the given assumptions, is
around half the year. In Madrid, due to the high moisture uptake by the panel, the energy saving
per panel is the highest one of the three. However, in Rome, since the latent load is higher than
in Madrid, there is a potential to achieve the largest total energy saving of the two.
The dynamic simulations are only considering the most intense summer period and does not take
into account the rest of the year. Though this may lead to the highest possible humidity levels,
it also indicates a very promising indoor humidity behavior in Copenhagen and Madrid.
It is
not given that this behavior would be as pro’¼ütable at other times of year, where, perhaps, the
conditions in Rome would be better.
6.5
Conclusive discussion
What has throughout the study been the intention, is to predict the moisture bu’¼Ćer potential on
a macroscopic level of a material, which characteristics are only recognised on a microscopic level.
This is problematic. As already indicated, it is unknown how moisture di’¼Ćusion takes place inside
the material, when its crystals are randomly packed and stacked in layers. This will leave gaps of air
in the material and isolate most of the crystals in layers away from direct contact with the moist air.
Numerical simulations show how both inter- and intracrystalline di’¼Ćusivity a’¼Ćects moisture trans-
fer inside the material. However, since these phenomena have not been investigated empirically,
the actual moisture adsorption behavior is uncertain and cannot be predicted upon. If damping is
in fact happening on a macroscopic scale, the derived moisture concentrations are overestimated.
This will essentially lead to higher amounts of moisture bu’¼Ćer material needed and, hence, lower
energy savings per panel area. An investigation of the speci’¼üc moisture di’¼Ćusion characteristics of
MIL-100(Fe) is essential when studying its moisture bu’¼Ćer potential in the future. The di’¼āculties
neither lie within the mathematics nor the numerical model. What is di’¼ācult is to ’¼ügure out, what
is actually happening inside the material.
There is, nonetheless, reason to believe that MIL-100(Fe) is adequate for passive indoor climate
control. The results show that desirable levels of relative humidity can be obtained with relatively
little of the material. Even if the panel sizes eventually show to be underestimated. Though the
results show an improved e’¼Ćect in Copenhagen and Madrid, it is possible that the best results
are in fact achieved in the Mediterranean climate in Rome. Here, the use time is longer and the
potential energy savings are signi’¼ücantly bigger.
Without the prospect of energy savings, which especially is the case in Copenhagen, the incentive
of implementation weakens and the interest in the product falls. Though the solution may have
an improving e’¼Ćect on the indoor climate, dehumidi’¼ücation is rarely necessary and is not directly
==PAGE:65==
55
pro’¼ütable. Furthermore, the BESTEST ventilation rate is relatively small, and the moisture pro-
duction amounts to a rather high speci’¼üc occupancy (approximately 5 m2/person). Consequently,
the use of moisture bu’¼Ćering is even less pro’¼ütable.
Instead, if the product could be used for both dehumidi’¼ücation and humidi’¼ücation purposes, the
interest would increase. This is not an unimaginable scenario. Another potential use of the panel is
to use it for passive air humidity control in buildings with very strict humidity level requirements.
Examples of these are museums and libraries. These potential uses would be an interesting scope
of some future studies.
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
57
Conclusion
In this study, a moisture bu’¼Ćer material for indoor climate control has been studied. The objective
was to investigate, by which means a moisture bu’¼Ćer panel made of the metal-organic framework
MIL-100(Fe) can be used to passively control indoor air humidity. Moreover, an attempt to study
how certain physical phenomena in’¼éuence the moisture bu’¼Ćering performance of the material has
been carried out as well. To narrow the scope, the panel was placed in an o’¼āce space (BESTEST
case study), where it was used for dehumidi’¼ücation. This way, an assessment of both air humidity
control as well as potential energy savings could be carried out. In the latter case, the assessment
is solely based on how latent heat removal contributes to cooling.
Three European locations were chosen for this study; Copenhagen (Denmark), Rome (Italy) and
Madrid (Spain) to study the e’¼Ćect on moisture bu’¼Ćering of the outdoor conditions. The speci’¼üc
locations were chosen to see, which type of climate may bene’¼üt the most from a passive dehumidi-
’¼ücation strategy. The study has been carried out through numerical integration using the software
Comsol Multiphysics. Two types of simulation has been carried out; Static cases, where the heat
and moisture transfer mechanisms of MIL-100(Fe) has been studied, and dynamic cases, where
the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel was put into an o’¼āce space in Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid based on
dynamic weather data. Since the panel was only used for dehumidi’¼ücation, the time period was
set to be the last two weeks of July, which is within the warmest weeks of the year in all three
locations. This is where the indoor relative humidity is expected to peak. The premise of the
dynamic simulations was to derive the amount of moisture bu’¼Ćer panel needed to lower the indoor
relative humidity to a maximum of 60% at all times within the two weeks.
The results are promising and show how the indoor relative humidity can be lowered su’¼āciently
with relatively little material. In Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid, a panel size of 1.5 m2, 5.6 m2
and 1.0 m2 respectively is enough to keep the indoor relative humidity below 60%. In this case,
the panels do not need any heat exposure to regenerate. If regenerated with heat, the panel sizes
may be reduced to 0.6 m2, 1.7 m2 and 0.7 m2 respectively. It is expected that full regeneration
can be achieved with low-grade energy such as solar heat, because the regeneration temperature is
only around 60ŌŚ”C.
In general, the outdoor climate plays a signi’¼ücant role in the performance of the moisture bu’¼Ćer
panel. Whereas the internal moisture production in a room is independent of its outdoor con-
ditions, the outside climate determines between which relative humidity levels, the air humidity
’¼éuctuates during the day. This is crucial, because the moisture bu’¼Ćer panel material has a very
speci’¼üc working range. In the case of MIL-100(Fe), it is found that the optimal working range is
between 15% and 60%. In the summer period of Copenhagen and Madrid, the indoor air humidity
passes exactly this range when the o’¼āce is exposed to internal moisture production. This quality,
though not investigated, is expected to change with the seasons of the year.
Concerning energy saving potentials, Rome accounts for the highest potential of the three. The
Mediterranean climate of Rome is characterised by being both warm and humid, which implies
==PAGE:68==
58
a rather high latent load. Here, the energy saving potential is assessed to be as high as 1585
kWh during the cooling season. Contrarily, the cold Marine climate of Copenhagen and the dry
Semi-arid climate of Madrid causes the latent load to be minimal, which diminishes the need for
dehumidi’¼ücation. Here, though quite little e’¼Ćort is required to obtain a good indoor climate, it
is conceivable that the need for dehumidi’¼ücation is limited to the most intense summer period
only.
Instead, in these areas, the indoor climate control potentials could perhaps be used for
other purposes such as for humidi’¼ücation or in buildings with very strict demands for air humid-
ity (museums, libraries etc.). Investigating these potentials would be an interesting follow-up study.
Prior to the simulations, experimental work was conducted to reveal certain heat and moisture
transfer characteristics of the material in use. The studies showed how the moisture transfer mech-
anisms are di’¼ācult to measure and, therefore, to predict upon. Whereas the microscopic moisture
transfer mechanisms are generally agreed upon, the transition to a macroscopic view is unclear
and, yet, important. Results of static simulations show how both inter- and intracrystalline mois-
ture di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācients may impact moisture transfer in the material quite heavily and may
also lead to a damping e’¼Ćect of the moisture uptake. In such case, the results of the dynamic
simulation must be considered overestimated. A comparison with previous studies indicates that
this may be the case.
The author of this paper wishes to have spent more time investigating
these phenomena experimentally and less time with the numerical model, which took up most of
the work load. The moisture transfer mechanisms are a crucial topic of future research on the area.
==PAGE:69==
59
List of Figures
1
Condensation on window. Photograph taken from the internet. . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Latent and sensible heat principle diagram. The ’¼ügure is borrowed from a friend. .
5
3
MOF morphology principle. The ’¼ügure is an out-cut from a scienti’¼üc paper [20] . .
5
4
Equalisation principle illustration (image taken from the internet). . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Transient heat transfer illustration. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from the lecture
note [27].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6
Moisture transfer illustration. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from the lecture note
[27].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
7
Moisture balance diagram. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from a scienti’¼üc paper [25]. 14
8
Photograph of MIL-100(Fe) in laboratory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
9
MIL-100(Fe) morphology illustration. The ’¼ügure is an edited out-cut from [32]. . .
18
10
Quantachrome Autosorp iQ equipment.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
11
Nitrogen sorption curve of MIL-100(Fe) derived from measurements. . . . . . . . .
20
12
Photograph of the brick and the pressing device.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
13
An SEM image of the MIL-100(Fe) compound used for lab tests.
The image is
borrowed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
14
Sorption iso-therm of MIL-100(Fe) measured at Lund University. . . . . . . . . . .
22
15
Photograph of the climate chamber used for vapor permeability measurements. . .
24
16
Photograph of brick on top of glass bottle used for vapor permeability measurements.
The same photograph appears on the title page.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
17
Mass of bottle during vapor permeability measurements. The red color indicates
the time period used for the following calculations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
18
C-Therm TCi thermal analyser equipment.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
19
Close-up of C-Therm TCi sensor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
20
Time schedule example (screenshot from the software Comsol Multiphysics). . . . .
29
21
Numerical model geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
22
Sorption iso-therm of MIL-100(Fe) made in Comsol Multiphysics with linear regression. 33
23
BESTEST reference o’¼āce. The ’¼ügure is an out-cut from a scienti’¼üc paper [25]
. .
35
24
Moisture concentration inside MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes in relative humidity
(RH = 33%/75%). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
25
Temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes of relative humidity (RH =
33%/75%).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
26
Temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) during adsorption. Blue represents an element
size of 0.01 mm, green represents an element size of 1e-3 mm and red represents
an element size of 1e-4 mm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
27
Temperature inside MIL-100(Fe) during adsorption. Blue represents an error tol-
erance of 0.01, green represents a tolerance of 1e-3 and red represents a tolerance
of 1e-4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
28
Moisture uptake by MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes in relative humidity (RH =
33%/75%). Blue represents the model derived from the study by E.N.Wang et al.
and green represents the LDF model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:70==
60
29
Moisture uptake by MIL-100(Fe) due to step changes in relative humidity (RH
= 33%/75%). Blue represents moisture uptake with an intercrystalline di’¼Ćusion
coe’¼ācient of Dv = 10ŌłÆ5, green represents moisture uptake for Dv = 10ŌłÆ7 and red
represents moisture uptake for Dv = 10ŌłÆ8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
30
Mass of mof panel during adsorption. Green represents adsorption with the refer-
ence crystal di’¼Ćusion coe’¼ācient D┬Ą, blue represents adsorption for 0.5D┬Ą and red
represents adsorption for 0.1D┬Ą.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
31
Ambient temperature pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
32
Ambient relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . .
44
33
Moisture content of mof panel: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
34
Indoor relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Copenhagen. Red represents
the IRH without mof and black represents the IRH with a 1.5 m2 mof panel which
is naturally desorbing outside the working hours. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
35
Ambient temperature pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Rome.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
36
Ambient relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
37
Moisture content of mof panel: 2 weeks of July in Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
38
Indoor relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Rome.
Red represents the
IRH without mof and black represents the IRH with a 5.6 m2 mof panel which is
naturally desorbing outside the working hours.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
39
Ambient temperature pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Madrid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
40
Ambient relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Madrid. . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
41
Moisture content of mof panel: 2 weeks of July in Madrid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
42
Indoor relative humidity pro’¼üle: 2 weeks of July in Madrid. Red represents the
IRH without mof and black represents the IRH with a 1.0 m2 mof panel which is
naturally desorbing outside the working hours.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
List of Tables
1
European standards design criteria for indoor relative humidity in occupied spaces
if humidi’¼ücation or dehumidi’¼ücation systems are installed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Summary of the parameters used in numerical simulations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3
Number of m2 of MIL-100(Fe) moisture bu’¼Ćer panel needed to lower the indoor
relative humidity to 60% in an o’¼āce space in Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid. (nv
= natural regeneration, reg = regenerated with heat).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4
Number of hours with temperature above 20ŌŚ”C in Copenhagen, Rome and Madrid
on a yearly basis and the corresponding energy savings.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
==PAGE:71==
61
References
[1] Energy consumption and energy e’¼āciency trends in the EU-28 for the period 2000-2016
2018
EUR Scienti’¼üc and Technical Research Report.
European Commission.
[2] Air conditioning use emerges as one of the key drivers of global electricity-demand growth
2018
https://www.iea.org/news/air-conditioning-use-emerges-as-one-of-the-key-drivers-of-global-
electricity-demand-growth
News article.
International Energy Agency.
[3] Achieving better energy-e’¼ācient air conditioning ŌĆō A review of technologies and strategies
2013
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: K.J.Chua et al.
[4] Healthy Homes Barometer
2017
Report.
VELUX Group.
[5] Sick Building Syndrome
n.d.
https://www.wondermakers.com/Portals/0/docs/Sick%20building%20syndrome%20by%20WHO.pdf
Report.
World Health Organisation.
[6] DS/EN 15251: Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy
performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and
acoustics
2007
European Standard.
European Committee for Standardisation.
[7] Large Volume Inorganic Chemicals - Solids and Others
2007
Report.
European Commission.
[8] E’¼Ćect of regeneration temperature on adsorption equilibria and mass di’¼Ćusivity of zeolite 13x-
water pair
2016
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: ┼×.├ć.Say─▒lgan et al.
==PAGE:72==
62
[9] Preparation of High-Silica Zeolite Beads From Silica Gel
2007
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: S.Konde
[10] Crystal engineering: the design of organic solids
1989
Book.
Author: G.R.Desiraju
[11] Spontaneous assembly of a hinged coordination network
1995 Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: G.B.Gardner et al.
[12] Hydrothermal synthesis of a metal-organic framework containing large rectangular channels
1995
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: O.Yaghi and H.L.Li
[13] Synthesis and applications of MOF-derived porous nanostructures
2017
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: G.Z.Chen et al.
[14] Industrial applications of metalŌĆōorganic frameworks
2009
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: A.U.Czaja
[15] Porous metal-organic frameworks for fuel storage
2017
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: Y.He et al.
[16] Beyond pristine metal-organic frameworks: Preparation and application of nanostructured,
nanosized, and analogous MOFs
2018
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: N.A.Khan et al.
[17] Recent advances in gas storage and separation using metal-organic frameworks
2017
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: H.C.Zhou et al.
[18] Metal organic frameworks for drug delivery
2018
==PAGE:73==
63
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: R.Singh and Geetanjali
[19] Metal-organic framework membranes for wastewater treatment and water regeneration
2019
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: H.Wang et al.
[20] Water stability and adsorption in metal-organic frameworks
2014
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: K.S.Walton et al.
[21] Metal-organic frameworks with high working capacities and cyclic hydrothermal stabilities for
fresh water production
2015
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: Y.S.Bae et al.
[22] An overview of adsorbents in the rotary desiccant dehumidi’¼üer for air dehumidi’¼ücation
2013
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: J.Xiao et al.
[23] Performance prediction of a two-bed solar adsorption chiller with adaptive cycle timeusing a
MIL-100(Fe)/water working pair - in’¼éuence of solar collector con’¼üguration
2017
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: S.A.M.Said et al.
[24] Characterisation of metal organic frameworks for adsorption cooling
2017
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: A.Rezk et al.
[25] Metal-organic framework MIL-100(Fe) as a novel moisture bu’¼Ćer material for energy-e’¼ācient
indoor humidity control
2017
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: X.Feng et al.
[26] Metal-Organic Frameworks as advanced moisture sorbents for energy-e’¼ācient high tempera-
ture cooling
2018
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: S.Cui et al.
==PAGE:74==
64
[27] Transient transport equations for combined heat and moisture transport
1995 (rv. 2001 and 2005)
Lecture note for co. 11122 Heat and mass transfer in buildings, DTU.
Author: Carsten Rode
[28] Optimization of adsorption processes for climate control and thermal energy storage
2013
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: E.N.Wang et al.
[29] Why does the linear driving force model for adsorption kinetics work?
2000
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: S.Sircar and J.R.Hufton
[30] Fundamental study on solar powered adsorption cooling system
1983
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: A.Sakoda and M.Suzuki
[31] Performance predictions for a new zeolite 13X/CaCl2 composite adsorbent for adsorption
cooling systems
2012
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: C.Y.H.Chao et al.
[32] Synthesis and catalytic properties of MIL-100(Fe), an iron(III) carboxylate with large pores
2007
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: Serre et al.
[33] Energy-e’¼ācient dehumidi’¼ücation over hierachically porous metal-organic frameworks as ad-
vanced water adsorbents 2011 Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: J.S.Chang et al.
[34] MIL-100(Al, Fe) as water adsorbents for heat transformation purposes - a promising applica-
tion 2011 Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: F.Jeremias et al.
[35] Large scale ’¼éuorine-free synthesis of hierarchically porous iron(III) trimesate MIL-100(Fe)
with zeolite MTN topology
2012
Scienti’¼üc paper.
Author: Y.K.Seo et al.
==PAGE:75==
65
A
Measurement results
A.1
N2 adsorption
==PAGE:76==
                        Quantachrome┬« ASiQwinŌäó- Automated Gas Sorption Data
                                     Acquisition and Reduction
                               ┬® 1994-2016, Quantachrome Instruments
                                            version 5.0
Analysis                                          Report
Operator:      JCTR           Date:2019/09/19     Operator: JCTR                
Date:2019/09/23
Sample ID:     mads3               Filename:      190919-01.qps
Sample Desc:                       Comment:       _20 Point isotherm            
    
Sample Weight: 0.0106 g            Instrument:    Autosorb iQ Station 1         
    
Approx. Outgas Time:3.1 hrs        Final Outgas Temp.:60 ┬░C           Extended 
info: Available
Analysis gas:  Nitrogen            Non-ideality:  6.58e-05 1/Torr     CellType: 
    9mm
Analysis Time: 2:10 hr:min         Bath temp.:    77.35 K                       
    
Analysis Mode: Standard                                               VoidVol 
Remeasure:off
VoidVol. Mode: He Measure          Cold Zone V:   5.80685 cc          Warm Zone 
V:   7.45734 cc
      Press            P0         Volume @ STP        Time             Tol      
      Equ
                                                                                
        
      Torr            Torr             cc              min                      
        
      39.3133        774.61            4.08109         5.8             3        
      2
      77.5132        774.54            4.6833          9.2             3        
      2
     118.368         774.58            5.15318        12.7             3        
      2
     156.624         774.56            5.25646        15.2             3        
      2
     195.582         774.59            5.3372         17.7             3        
      2
     234.654         774.63            5.40315        20.3             3        
      2
     273.388         774.63            5.46054        22.9             3        
      2
     312.272         774.65            5.51149        25.4             3        
      2
     351.06          774.66            5.55809        27.9             3        
      2
     389.765         774.61            5.60117        30.4             3        
      2
     428.394         774.64            5.64049        33.0             3        
      2
     467.177         774.59            5.68225        35.5             3        
==PAGE:77==
      2
     505.602         774.64            5.72678        38.1             3        
      2
     544.508         774.65            5.76907        40.7             3        
      2
     583.195         774.77            5.80751        43.3             3        
      2
     621.981         774.73            5.84832        46.2             3        
      2
     660.505         774.60            5.89165        48.8             3        
      2
     699.009         774.55            5.94583        51.6             3        
      2
     736.95          774.53            6.04062        54.3             3        
      2
     769.687         774.51            6.6532         61.8             3        
      2
     767.623         774.56            6.58873        65.0             3        
      2
     734.945         774.61            6.07712        69.2             3        
      2
     699.945         774.54            5.98679        71.8             3        
      2
     656.304         774.56            5.91916        74.9             3        
      2
     620.328         774.59            5.87882        77.7             3        
      2
     577.928         774.57            5.83419        80.8             3        
      2
     541.598         774.53            5.79832        83.5             3        
      2
     505.072         774.63            5.76802        86.2             3        
      2
     462.032         774.61            5.72941        89.3             3        
      2
     425.514         774.59            5.69358        91.9             3        
      2
     388.917         774.62            5.65546        94.5             3        
      2
     346.011         774.73            5.59553        97.6             3        
      2
     309.562         774.75            5.54202       100.2             3        
      2
     272.922         774.68            5.49307       102.9             3        
      2
     229.53          774.70            5.42401       106.0             3        
      2
     193.145         774.65            5.35814       109.3             3        
      2
     156.779         774.73            5.27844       111.9             3        
      2
     114.015         774.75            5.15236       115.0             3        
      2
      77.2983        774.71            4.69116       121.8             3        
==PAGE:78==
68
A.2
Sorption Iso-therm
==PAGE:79==
RH
w-%
0
0
15
6.5446
30
19.8718
45
26.1657
60
40.869
75
42.003
90
43.0572
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
Mass increase (%)
Relative humidity (%)
w-%
==PAGE:80==
70
A.3
Thermal characteristics
==PAGE:81==
Sheet1
#
Sensor
Valid
k (W/mK)
1/m
R2
Start
1 H478
True
0.4178
28.8643
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:37:12
2 H478
True
0.4215
28.9292
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:38:21
3 H478
True
0.4176
28.8590
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:39:29
4 H478
True
0.4189
28.8826
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:40:38
5 H478
True
0.4173
28.8529
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:41:46
6 H478
True
0.4176
28.8574
0.9991 2019/09/17 15:42:54
7 H478
True
0.4122
28.7496
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:44:03
8 H478
True
0.4132
28.7775
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:45:12
9 H478
True
0.4126
28.7676
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:46:20
10 H478
True
0.4165
28.8369
0.9992 2019/09/17 15:47:28
Average
0.4165
28.8377
0.9992
density
0.71 g/cm3
Heat capacity
2.165 kJ/kgK
V0 (mV)
VMax (mV)
DeltaV (mV)
Ambient (┬░C) DeltaT (┬░C)
Effusivity (Ws┬Į/m┬▓K)
4886.529
4909.313
22.78423
23.2429
1.3662
801.4214
4886.03
4908.779
22.74847
23.2321
1.3641
805.2307
4886.042
4908.775
22.73273
23.2054
1.3631
801.2296
4885.666
4908.324
22.65835
23.2116
1.3587
802.5803
4885.749
4908.385
22.63594
23.2065
1.3572
800.8707
4885.577
4908.193
22.61591
23.1894
1.3560
801.1828
4884.849
4907.527
22.67885
22.9691
1.3598
795.5779
4885.325
4907.949
22.62449
23.1523
1.3565
796.6448
4885.259
4907.91
22.65072
23.1566
1.3581
796.0541
4885.168
4907.779
22.61114
23.1463
1.3557
800.1209
4885.6194
4908.2934
22.6741
23.1712
1.3595
800.0913
Page 1
