==PAGE:1==
February 2, 2020
The impact of precautionary allergen labelling in
relation to coeliac disease
Master thesis
30 ECTS
Sisse Nygaard Rasmussen (s144529)
Supervisors:
Charlotte Bernhard Madsen
Håkan Vigre
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Preface
This master thesis is made as a completion of my Master of Science in Engineering, Food
Technology. It is a product of a 30 ECTS credit project conducted at the National Food
Institute in the research group Food Allergy, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The
project period was from September 2019 to February 2020. The thesis is made in collaboration
with the Swedish National Food Agency and samples of food products have been collected
at Meyers, The American Pie Company and La Glace. The work was supported by Dansk
Cøliaki Forening.
Page 1 of 82
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Acknowledgements
Throughout the work with this thesis several persons have been supportive, both academically
and practically. I would like to give a special thanks to my supervisor Charlotte B. Madsen
for her guidance and great support during this thesis. Next, I would like to thank Håkan
Vigre for great supervision particularly with the risk assessment. A big thanks to the Swedish
Food Agency, especially Mia Hallgren for introducing me to ELISA and professional back-
and-forth.
Thanks to Juliane M. Gregersen and Sarah G. Simonsen for guidance in the
laboratory and to all from the Food Allergy group.
A great thanks to Freja A. Fabricius and Sebrina Thyssen for proofreading.
Thanks to
Maud Bering Andersen from the Research Group for Analytical Food Chemistry for lending
equipment.
Thanks for great collaboration to COOP, Meyers, The American Pie Company and La glace.
Thanks to Tue Christensen from the National Food Institute and Lisbet V. Nordly from
Danish Veterinary and Food Administration for providing data.
A big thanks is given to Dansk Cøliaki Forening and Food diagnostic for ﬁnancial support.
Page 2 of 82
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Abstract
Wheat has been consumed for 10,000 years and counts for a staple food worldwide. Even
tough, many people suﬀer from wheat sensitivity. The most prevalent wheat sensitivity is
coeliac disease, a chronic condition caused by an immune response towards gluten. Gluten
is found in the related cereals wheat, rye, and barley and their crossbred varieties. The
only treatment of coeliac disease is adhering to a gluten-free diet, which includes naturally
gluten-free foods and products labelled gluten-free. Another labelling concerning the allergen
gluten is precautionary allergen labelling. This type of labelling is voluntary and is used by
the industry to communicate to consumers that the product might not be safe for sensitive
persons. Since the labelling is voluntary no regulation or action levels is in force, resulting in
uncertainties about if a product with precautionary allergen labelling is ﬁt for consumption
for individuals with coeliac disease.
The aim of this thesis was to make a foundation making it possible to advice persons with
coeliac disease how they should act upon precautionary allergen labelling.
Besides, the
thesis should address if it poses a risk if products without gluten ingredients are produced
in environments where gluten containing products are produced as well. To meet the aim
quantitative analysis of gluten concentration in a snapshot of products were performed. Risk
assessments with emphasis on the risk of individuals with coeliac disease were used to analyse
the results.
Based on the results it was found that there was no correlation between gluten contamination
and the use of PAL. The risk assessment revealed a higher risk when only consuming products
without PAL, though the higher risk was driven by one product with high concentration.
Even so, the risk were low for both with and without PAL. In addition, no great concern
were found of producing products without gluten ingredients in areas where gluten containing
products are produced as well.
Page 3 of 82
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Abbreviations
CD
Coeliac disease
d
day
ELISA Enzyme-linked immunoassay
FSA
Food Standards Agency
GFD Gluten-free diet
HLA Human leukocyte antigen
HMW High-molecular-weight
LMW Low-molecular-weight
LOAEL Lowest observed adverse eﬀect level
NCWS Non-celiac wheat sensitivity
NOAEL No observed adverse eﬀect level
PAL
Precautionary allergen labelling
P75
Percentile 75
std
Standard
sd
Standard deviation
TDI
Tolerable daily intake
UAP Unintended allergen presence
UF
Uncertainty factors
VITAL Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen Labelling
Page 4 of 82
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Contents
1
Background
7
2
Aim & study design
8
3
Theory
9
3.1
Wheat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Wheat and gluten sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Labelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
ELISA for testing gluten content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Materials & methods
24
4.1
Sampling strategy of pre-packed food products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Actual collected and included products of pre-packed food
. . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Sampling strategy in bakeries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Actual collected samples from bakeries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
The R5 ELISA Ridascreen® Gliadin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Positive and negative products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Deterministic risk assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Probabilistic risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Supplementary data
37
6
Results
38
6.1
Validation of ELISA kits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Number of tested pre-packed food products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Prevalence and concentration of gluten in pre-packed products . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Use of PAL and gluten contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5
Deterministic risk assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.6
Probabilistic risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.7
Results from the Bakeries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Discussion
58
7.1
ELISA method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2
Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.3
Prevalence of contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
Page 5 of 82
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
7.4
Use of PAL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.5
Tolerable daily intake of gluten in CD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.6
Risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.7
The impact of precautionary allergen labelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.8
Contamination in bakeries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bibliography
69
Appendix A: Flowcharts in bakeries
74
Appendix B: Questions to the bakeries
75
Appendix C: Protocol for Ridascreen gliadin ELISA
76
Appendix D: Quality Assurance Certiﬁcate
77
Appendix E: Histogram of the gluten exposure
78
Appendix F: Ingredients
79
Appendix G: All results of ELISA tests
80
Page 6 of 82
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
1
Background
Wheat has been consumed for about 10,000 years. It is a staple food which takes up about
20 % of the global dietary protein. Even though, some people are sensitive to gluten [1, 2, 3].
Wheat sensitivity includes wheat allergy (WA), non-coeliac wheat sensitivity (NCWS), and
coeliac disease (CD). CD aﬀects about 1 % of the world’s population, which makes it one of
the most frequent food sensitives worldwide. Furthermore, a 2- to 4-fold increase of CD has
been seen over the last 50 years [1, 3, 4].
CD is a chronic immune-mediated response towards gluten found in wheat and related pro-
teins in rye and barley, causing inﬂammation of the small intestine. Several of the symptoms
are associated with malabsorption of nutrients. The only successful treatment is lifelong
adherence to a gluten-free diet (GFD) [2, 3, 5]. When following GFD two categories of food
can be consumed, naturally gluten-free products and food products labelled “gluten-free”.
Products labelled “gluten-free” cannot exceed a gluten concentration of 20 mg/kg to be in
compliance with the regulation. Another labelling often seen is precautionary allergen la-
belling (PAL) often known as "may contain" labelling. By using PAL the manufactures can
communicate to the consumers that products without gluten added as an ingredient may
contain gluten due to cross contamination. This type of labelling is voluntary and no regu-
lations applies [6, 7]. Since no regulation is in force, the use of PAL is inconsistent, which
had led to confusion and diﬃculties when advising individuals with CD about these types of
products [8].
In 2016 Nordic co-operation [9] examined non-declared allergens in food products.
The
survey included products with PAL. Of products with PAL 3.3 % was contaminated and 4.4
% without PAL. In Denmark chocolate products were mainly investigated, which is a food
category not posing a major concern. In addition, the Food Standards Agency (FSA) [10]
made a survey of PAL and allergen content in pre-packed food products. The survey included
products with and without PAL. Gluten was detected in 2.8 % of the products with PAL
and 3.3% of products without PAL. Gluten was found in a concentration range of 17.5-262.5
ppm [10, 11]. The above was the basis for a broader investigation of these kinds of products
in Denmark.
Page 7 of 82
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
2
Aim & study design
The aim of this thesis is to investigate the prevalence and concentration of gluten in a
snapshot of food products without gluten containing ingredients with and without PAL.
Thereby, giving an indication of how individuals with CD should act upon this labelling.
Furthermore, products without gluten ingredients produced in environments where gluten
is present is examined.
This will give an insight of the risk of cross contamination and
the concentration of gluten in the products without gluten added as an ingredient. This is
investigated by:
• Testing the prevalence and concentration of gluten in pre-packed food products without
gluten as an ingredient, with and without PAL.
• Testing gluten-free products from non-industrial bakeries where a possible risk of con-
tamination is communicated verbally to the consumers.
• Risk assessments of the results obtained with emphasis on coeliac disease.
Study design
The methods used to meet the aim of the project were a literature study, tests of the gluten
concentration in the food products and risk assessments. Food products without gluten con-
taining ingredients with and without PAL were obtained from Danish supermarkets. Food
products baked in environments with gluten present were obtained from Meyers, The Amer-
ican Pie Company and La Glace. The concentrations were determined by Enzyme-linked
Immunoassay (ELISA) R5 Mendez Method, Ridascreen® Gliadin.
Results were discussed with emphasis on the risk of individuals with CD, since the aim is to
form a foundation for guiding the population with CD. Results of the tests in the bakeries
will be communicated to the bakeries in an understandably way. In addition, the ﬁndings
will be communicated to consumers with CD (Dansk Cøliaki Forening). The investigation
will provide a snapshot of the prevalence and concentration of gluten in food products in
Denmark. Testing products both with and without PAL makes it possible to compare the
risk related to the two diﬀerent labelling. Test of gluten-free products in non-industrial bak-
eries, with gluten present, will give an insight in the occurrence of cross contamination in the
bakeries. Giving an indication of the risk of products without gluten as ingredients produced
where gluten is present.
Page 8 of 82
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
3
Theory
3.1
Wheat
The farming of cereals has been going on for about 10,000 years. Wheat, maize, and rice take
up about 60 % of the cultivated land in the world. Wheat especially is a dominant crop in
the temperate countries, both due to its’ adaptability and high yield but also because of its’
properties. The properties of dough formed from wheat makes it possible to process a whole
range of breads, pasta, noodles, and other processed foods. Wheat accounts for a staple food
worldwide and is therefore a very important food source [3, 12].
Wheat especially is suitably in bread-making due to the properties which can be ascribed
to the major storage proteins. The storage proteins take up 70-80 % of the protein content
of the grains, which in wheat is found to be 8-15 %. The storage protein, when mixed with
water forms the cohesive mass, gluten [3, 12].
Gluten
Gluten proteins determine the unique properties of wheat by conferring water absorption
capacity, cohesivity, viscosity, and elasticity. The properties depend on the structure and
interaction between the storage proteins, which together form gluten [12, 13].
The term gluten is used in numerous ways, but gluten is commonly referred to as the speciﬁc
storage proteins in the related cereals wheat, rye, and barley and their crossbred varieties
[14]. By the Codex Alimentarius gluten is deﬁned as “a protein fraction from wheat, rye,
barley, oats or their crossbred varieties and derivatives thereof, to which some persons are
intolerant..." [6]. Based on data of the amino acid sequences of the storage proteins of wheat,
rye, and barley they are closely related, where oat is partly related. Together they all diﬀer
from other types of cereals. Although, oats are partly related to wheat, barley and rye there
are some uncertainties about the immunogenicity of oats for individuals with CD and oats
are therefore excluded in this thesis. So, in this thesis gluten includes the storage proteins of
wheat, rye, and barley [3, 15].
Besides that the term gluten is used in various ways, confusing nomenclature and classiﬁcation
of the chemistry of gluten have developed. In this thesis the nomenclature made by Osborne
(1924) will be used. The proteins are classiﬁed based on solubility [16]. Gluten proteins are
divided into the two main fractions gliadin and glutenins, based on the solubility in aqueous
Page 9 of 82
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
alcohol (ﬁgure 1). Gliadins are soluble and glutenins are insoluble in aqueous alcohol. Gliadin
is sometimes also referred to as prolamins, but it is a general nomenclature for protein soluble
in aqueous alcohol. The speciﬁc nomenclature of the prolamins in barley and rye are hordeins
and secalins, respectively. To simplify, in this project the soluble fraction of wheat, rye and
barley will be referred to as gliadin.
The two fractions, gliadin and glutenin, are both
characterised by high content of proline and glutamine. The two fractions are associated
by strong colavent and non-covalent forces and are present in roughly equal amounts. Both
glutenins and gliadins are important for the properties of dough [13, 16, 17].
Gluten
Soluble fraction
Gliadin
Insoluble fraction
Glutenin
α-gliadin
β-gliadin
ω-gliadin
γ-gliadin
LMW
HMW
Figure 1.
Overview of the classiﬁcation of gluten proteins.
Gluten is divided into gliadin and
glutenin based on solubility. Gliadin is further divided into α-, β-, ω-, and γ-gliadins. Glutnin is divided into
low molecular weight (LMW) and high molecular weight (HMW).
Gliadin
Gliadins are less cohesive and elastic compared to glutenins, and contribute mainly to the
viscosity and extensibility of gluten.
Most gliadins are monomers.
These monomers are
associated by hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions. Gliadins can be divided into
α-, β-, ω-, and γ-gliadins in order of decreasing mobility at low pH gel electrophoresis (ﬁgure
1). ω-gliadins have a large proportion of the three amino acids of proline, glutamine, and
phenylalanine. Whereas, the content of these amino acids are lower in α-, β- and γ-gliadins.
α-, β- and γ-gliadins contain cysteine, which is absent in ω-gliadins [13, 16].
Page 10 of 82
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Glutenin
Hydrated glutenins are cohesive and elastic, giving gluten strength and elasticity. In con-
trast to gliadins being mostly monomers, glutenins are mostly found as polymers. Fractions
of glutenins are aggregated proteins linked by interchain disulphide bonds, ranging in size
from 500,000 to more than 10 million. The distribution of molecular weight of the glutenins
is important for the properties. Glutenins are divided into low molecular weight (LMW)
and high molecular weight (HMW) (ﬁgure 1). LMW are similar to α-, β-, and γ-gliadins
in relation to MW and amino acids composition. LMW glutenins takes up about 20 % of
the total gluten proteins. HMW is a minor component of gluten proteins and takes up only
around 10 % [13, 16].
3.2
Wheat and gluten sensitivity
Even though, cereals such as wheat, rye, and barley have been consumed for 10,000 years,
some individuals are sensitive to these cereals. Wheat is one of the "big eight" food aller-
gens which accounts for 90 % of all allergic responses. In general, sensitivity towards both
wheat, rye, and barley are referred to as gluten or wheat sensitivity. Wheat sensitivity can
be expressed as wheat allergy (WA), coeliac disease (CD) and Non-celiac wheat sensitivity
(NCWS) [1, 12].
Non-celiac wheat sensitivity
NCWS is a range of adverse reactions towards wheat, which diﬀer from WA and CD. NCWS
is wheat dependent, but the role of wheat and gluten is still unclear. The disorder show
similar symptoms as CD, but with lack of villous atrophy and CD speciﬁc antibodies. The
onset of symptoms is hours to days and is characterised as gastrointestinal complaints such
as bloating and diarrhoea. The prevalence of NCWS is unknown, but it is estimated that
0.6-6 % of the world population is aﬀected. Treatment of NCWS is a wheat and gluten-free
or gluten reduced diet [1, 3].
Wheat allergy
Food allergy, including WA, is an adverse immunologic reaction towards food proteins. Indi-
viduals with WA have a higher amount of immunoglobulin E (IgE) towards wheat proteins.
If an allergic person ingest wheat, the proteins bind to the IgE present on the mast cells
Page 11 of 82
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
or basophils. Binding of the proteins triggers the mast cells and basophils to release his-
tamine and other chemicals, which leads to an immediate allergic reaction. It can be exhibit
as asthma, rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, uriticaira and anaphylaxis. The symptoms appears
within minutes to hours and symptoms appears on the skin, in the respiratory and gastroin-
testinal tract. It is estimated that 0.4 % of the world population is aﬀected by IgE-mediated
reactions towards wheat, more frequently in children where up to 1 % of children is aﬀected
[1, 3, 12].
Tolerable amount of wheat
For an allergic reaction towards wheat, most sensitised children needs to be exposed to 1-2
g of wheat protein, but some react to less than 10 mg wheat protein. In the adult allergic
population an exposure of at least 1 g is needed to induce a reaction and half of the population
require more than 6 g. In contrast to CD, individuals with wheat allergy can, in general,
tolerate larger amounts of wheat proteins [1, 3]. Though, when considering the risk of an
allergen, ED01 are used. ED01 is the concentration which will cause an reaction in 1 % of
the allergic population. The Allergen Bureau have found ED01 to be 0.7 mg based on 99
individual challenge studies [18].
Coeliac disease
A more prevalent sensitivity towards wheat, or more speciﬁc gluten, is CD. It is estimated
that about 1 % of the world population is aﬀected by CD, which makes it one of the most
frequent food sensitivities worldwide [2, 3]. The prevalence of CD varies between countries
and the prevalence of 1 % worldwide is a crude estimation. In 1999-2001 the prevalence was
as low as 0.3 % in Germany, whereas a prevalence of CD in Saharawi children of 5.6 % was
reported in Algeria in 1998. Lately an increase of individuals suﬀering from CD in several
Western population is seen [14]. In Denmark the recorded prevalence of CD is ∼50/100,000
persons (0.05 %), this is lower than the prevalence in other Nordic countries, and the low
prevalence is suspected to be a result of underdiagnosis [19].
The prevalence of CD has
been investigated by Horwitz et al. (2015), by screening a total of 2279 persons for CD
[15]. Out of the 2279 persons, 11 persons were diagnosed with CD and only one had been
diagnosed with CD before the trial. Based on the study ∼500/100,000 persons (0.5 %) were
estimated to be aﬀected by CD in Denmark, which is ten times higher than the registered [19].
CD is a chronic condition caused by an immune response towards gluten. CD can be deﬁned
Page 12 of 82
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
as "... an immune-mediated systemic disorder elicited by gluten and related prolamines in
genetically susceptible individuals, characterized by the presence of a variable combination of
gluten-dependent clinical manifestations, CD speciﬁc antibodies, Human Leukocyte Antigen
(HLA)-DQ2 and DQ8 haplotypes and enteropathy [14].
CD is sometimes described as an autoimmune disease due to the response to the autoantigen
tissue transglutaminase 2 (TG2) [2, 19]. Since a gluten-free diet will lead to lack of autoan-
tibodies against TG2 and thereby lack response towards the self-antigen TG2, CD is not a
true autoimmune disease [20, 21].
Normally immune response against food proteins, such as gluten, would be prevented by de-
veloping oral tolerance. This tolerance is not developed or broken in individuals aﬀected by
CD. Individuals at all ages can be aﬀected by CD, but females are more commonly aﬀected
and the risk increases with increasing age. CD can develop in genetically predisposed individ-
uals and the risk is 10-15 % higher in ﬁrst-degree relatives of CD patients. The development
of CD is aﬀected both by strong genetic and environmental risk factors [2, 14, 21].
Genetic risk factors
CD is associated with the speciﬁc human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II, either HLA-DQ2
or HLA-DQ8 at the major histocompatibility complex. Approximately 95 % of CD patients
are HLA-DQ2 positive, while the rest are HLA-DQ8 positive. HLA-DQ molecules found on
either dendritic cells or macrophages bind short peptides, and the peptides are presented
to the T cells. HLA-DQ molecules bind both peptides from self-proteins and pathogens.
The peptides from the self-proteins are ignored by the T cells, but peptides from pathogens
causes a protective response by the T cells. In CD patients the harmless gluten proteins
in food are recognised as a pathogen and harmful. This takes place since CD individuals
have pro-inﬂammatory gluten-speciﬁc CD4+ T cells present at the lamina propria of the
aﬀected duodenum, which recognise the gluten protein when presented by the CD associated
HLA-DQ molecules [2, 3, 14, 20]. The expression of HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 is found to
be determining for development of CD, but contribution of other non-HLA genes are also
important for the development of CD. In addition, abnormalities in the immune system and
certain genetic-based syndromes might also have an inﬂuence [2, 20, 22].
The major environmental risk factor gluten
Besides the genetically factors, environmental factors are crucial for the occurrence of CD.
The major environmental factor is gluten, but other factors have been suggested such as,
Page 13 of 82
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
breast-feeding, infections, timing of gluten introduction into infants’ diet, birth by ceasarian
section, and standard of hygiene [2, 3].
Gluten is crucial both in the initiation of CD and the following immune response. Gluten has
to be present to develop the gluten speciﬁc T cell response, which will lead to immunological
memory.
When the memory is established, ingestion of gluten is needed to trigger the
hypersensitivity reaction [2, 3, 22]. Gluten is rich in proline, which makes it resistant to
degradation by the enzymes in the gastrointestinal tracts. This results in relative long gluten
peptides reaching the brush border of the small intestine. Here gluten peptides can pass the
epithelial barrier either by trans- or paracellular pathway and then reach the lamina propria
[3, 20].
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of CD is still only partly known and will brieﬂy be descried in the following
and a simpliﬁed overview of the pathogenesis of CD is found in ﬁgure 2.
After gluten has reached the lamina propria, the gluten speciﬁc CD4+ T cells recognise spe-
ciﬁc epitopes derived from α-, γ-, and ω-gliadins and HMW- and LMW-glutenins. Highly
homologous or even identical epitopes, which also causes the same reaction, are found in
hordeins and secalins from barley and rye, respectively [20, 21].
Before the T cells recognise the epitopes, the peptides have to be bound to the CD speciﬁc
HLA molecules. For high aﬃnity binding of the peptides to HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 one or
more negatively charged amino acids need to be present. Native gluten derived peptides do
not comprises negatively charged amino acids, but the activity of the enzyme tissue TG2
in the gastrointestinal tract introduce the negative charged amino acid(s), by converting
glutamine residues to glutamic acid. TG2 deamidates glutamine in residues sequences in
Q-X-P (where Q is glutamine, X is any amino acid and P is proline). This results in the
immunogenic gluten derived peptides usually found in proline rich regions containing the
motif Q-X-P. Examples of such peptides are PFPQQLPY and PQPQLPYPQ (L = leucine,
Y = tyrosine) which are present in α-gliadin, and compromises an immunodominant T cell
epitope. The negatively charged amino acids are introduced by TG2 in the QLPY sequence
in both peptides [20, 21, 23].
When the negatively charged amino acids are present, the peptide can bind with increased
aﬃnity and a peptide:HLA-DQ complex is formed. This complex activates the antigen spe-
ciﬁc CD4+ T cells. When the gluten speciﬁc CD4+ T cells are activated, they accumulate
in the lamina propria. The T cells then produce cytokines, IFN-γ and interleukin 21, which
Page 14 of 82
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
leads to CD8+ T cell cytotoxic activity resulting in intestinal mucosal damage. In addition,
IFN-γ promote CD4+ T cells to a TH1 cytokine proﬁle. This inhibits the TH2 immune
response and the survival of T regulatory cells. The TH1 cells also maintain and enhance
the cytotoxic response of CD8+ T cells, activate phagocyte dependent inﬂammatory status,
promotes B cell class switch and HLA presentation. Furthermore, TG2 can cross-bind gluten
peptides, making a TG2:gluten complex which is recognised by TG2 speciﬁc B cells leading
to TG2 auto-antibodies [20, 21, 23].
Figure 2. Simpliﬁed overview of the pathogenesis of coeliac disease. Gluten present in e.g. bread
is consumed and digested to gluten peptides. The peptides pass the epithelial barrier either by trans- or
paracellular pathway and reach the lamina propria. Tissue transglutaminase 2 (TG2) deamidates the gluten
peptides. The deamidated gluten peptides binds to HLA-DQ molecules and the epitopes are presented to
the CD4+ T cells by antigen presenting cells. This lead to secretion of cytokines, promoting CD8+ T cells
and B cells class switch. Besides, TG2 cross-bind gluten peptides, the TG2:gluten complex is recognised by
TG2 speciﬁc B cells and TG2 autoantibodies is produced. Figure made in BioRender [24].
Page 15 of 82
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Symptoms
CD individuals ingesting gluten will have an immune reaction initiated by T cells and anti-
bodies. It is mainly the mucosa of the upper small intestine, counting the duodenum and the
proximal jejunum, which is aﬀected. The lesions distally along the small intestine become
less severe, but for some individuals it might progress, and the abnormalities can aﬀect more
or even the entire small intestine. The lesions associated with CD are abnormal morphology
such as inﬂammatory cells inﬁltrating the lamina cells, inﬂux of lymphocytes in the epithe-
lium, ﬂattened or irregular epithelial cells, hyperplasia of crypts, stunted and disorganised
microvilli, and ultimately a signiﬁcant degree of villous atrophy [1, 3, 22].
Untreated CD individuals may experience several and varying symptoms over a period of
time. The symptoms are both intra- and extraintestinal. The classic intraintestinal symp-
toms are chronic diarrhoea, steatorrhoea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, but other symptoms
such as constipation, weight gain, and gastroesophageal reﬂux disease may also occur. The
extraintestinal symptoms include anemia, decreased bone mineral density, bone pain and
fractures, dental enamel defects and night blindness, which general are caused by malab-
sorption of nutrients. Children and adolescents developing CD may also have slow growth
rate and delayed sexual maturation. In women menstrual and reproductive health might be
implicated [3, 14, 20, 22].
Diagnosis
To diagnose CD a histological evaluation of the small intestine biopsy is performed and sero-
logical testing is conducted to support the diagnosis when testing in adults. The serological
tests include blood tests determining TG2 auto-antibodies. If there is a doubt, HLA-DQ
genotyping can be used to exclude the existence of CD [2, 3, 13, 23].
Treatment
If a gluten speciﬁc T cell response is developed it leads to immunological memory and expo-
sure will lead to reactivation of the gluten reactive T cells and inﬂammation. Since immuno-
logical memory is established, the immune system will always recognise gluten as harmful
[20]. At the moment the only eﬀective treatment of CD is lifelong adherence to a GFD. This
include avoiding products containing wheat, rye, barley, and their cross breads. Following
a GFD, the symptoms will subside within days or weeks and normalisation of the villous
atrophy will occur. Two categories of food can be consumed when following a GFD. One is
the naturally gluten-free products such as ﬁsh, meat, vegetables, and fruit. The second one
Page 16 of 82
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
is dietetic foods labelled gluten-free [2, 3, 22]. Although, there are gluten-free products it is
really diﬃcult to avoid gluten in a GFD totally, as it is impossible to avoid gluten contami-
nation completely. Even though, there might be unintentional contamination of gluten and
not total absence of gluten, gluten-free products are generally accepted as harmless to CD
individual [6, 25].
The limited of 20 mg/kg for gluten-free dietetic food was investigated by Gibert et al. (2006),
who conducted a study to gather information on the consumption of gluten-free products in-
tended for people following a gluten-free diet [26]. They found the daily intake of gluten-free
products in Norway to be 411.6 g/day for the 90th percentile. This amount was compared
with the current regulation of 20 ppm resulting in a exposure of 8.2 mg per day from the
gluten-free products [26]. Another study which investigated the exposure of gluten by gluten-
free products is Catassi et al. (2007) [27]. They analysed the daily consumption of gluten-free
products in 46 adults with CD and randomly sampled 42 of the gluten-free products con-
sumed. The average consumption was 332 ± 98 g. The gluten concentration ranged from
0-50 mg/kg and the median gluten concentration of the products was 5.2 mg/kg. Based on
the results it was estimated that the exposure of gluten by gluten-free products was less than
5 mg/d [27]. These studies were conducted before the regulation of gluten-free was changed
from 200 ppm to 20 ppm in 2008. In 2019, the Nordic co-operation tested the concentration
of gluten in gluten-free products. Background data from the project was gained from the
Danish Veterinary and Food Administration [28]. The concentration was ranging from 0-
74.32 mg/kg, but only two products exceeded the 20 ppm. The average of the concentrations
was 1.35 mg/kg. Compared to Catassi et al. (2007) this was even lower and it must be
assumed that the exposure of gluten by gluten-free products is even less at present moment
[28, 29].
Tolerable amount of gluten
The regulation of gluten-free products by the Codex Alimentarius was established to meet
the special dietary needs of people intolerant to gluten [6]. Even so, the exact amount of
gluten tolerable for people with CD is still not clearly established. In 2011 FDA [22] con-
ducted a health hazard assessment for gluten exposure in individuals with CD, including a
safety assessment to establish a tolerable daily intake (TDI) of gluten. They found the TDI
of adverse morphological acute, sub chronic and chronic eﬀects to be 12.5 mg/d, 0.4 mg/d
and 7.0 mg/d, respectively. For clinical adverse eﬀects the TDI was found to be 0.015 mg
Page 17 of 82
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
gluten per day for both acute, sub chronic and chronic eﬀects. When determining the TDI,
the level of No observed adverse eﬀect level (NOAEL) and lowest observed adverse eﬀect
level (LOAEL) was used together with uncertainty factors (UF) of 10 and 100, respectively
[22].
In a systematic review by Akobeng et al. (2008) the tolerable amount of gluten for people
with CD was examined [25]. It was suggested that the amount consumed is determining for
developing symptoms and not the exact concentration of gluten within a product, therefore
both the concentration and the volume of the food should be considered. Akobeng [25] in-
vestigated 13 studies and found high variations of the TDI of gluten in the diﬀerent studies.
Some patients tolerated an average daily intake of 34-36 mg, while some patients developed
histological changes or showed symptoms when ingesting about 10 mg per day. Based on
their ﬁndings Akobeng [25] concluded that a daily intake below 10 mg would unlikely cause
signiﬁcant histological abnormalities.
Another more up-to-date review accessing the tolerable daily intake of gluten is "Gluten in
Celiac Disease—More or Less?" by Cohen et al. (2019) [17]. This review include among
several studies the study by Akobeng [25] described above. Cohen [17] also found great va-
riety between studies which might be caused by diﬀerences between individuals, method of
gluten intake assessment, and diﬀerences in methodology between the diﬀerent studies. Even
though, Cohen [17] conclude that it seems to be safe for most CD individuals to consume less
than 50 mg gluten per day, but it should be noted that some individual responded to 10 mg/d.
Both Akonberg [25] and Cohen [17] refer to a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial conducted by Catassi et al. (2007) [27]. Catassi [27] included 49 adults with CD in
the trial. All patients included had been following a GFD for at least two years [27]. To
determine a gluten threshold the patients were given 0, 10 or 50 mg gluten in a capsule
per day for 90 days. The patients followed a GFD, which they had estimated to contribute
with <5 mg/d as elaborated in section 3.2. The patients were evaluated at day 0 and day
90 by clinical, serological and histological tests. In total 39 patients completed the study
protocol. After being challenged with 10 mg/d some of the patients showed worsening of
the small intestine architecture, while other showed improvement when ingesting 50 mg/d.
One patient showed clinical symptoms after ingesting 10 mg/d after a few weeks. None of
the patients ingesting 50 mg/d had clinical evidence of relapse. Though, Catassi [27] showed
that 50 mg/d for 90 days were suﬃcient to cause signiﬁcant decrease in villous height/crypt
depth index. It is clear that the study showed wide individual variability, which should be
Page 18 of 82
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
considered when establishing a threshold. The study conclude that ingestion of gluten due
to contamination should be kept under 50 mg/d [27].
Even if a TDI of gluten for individuals with CD is deﬁned, the diﬀerences between indi-
viduals cause further complications. Factors such as the body weight, muscle mass, gender,
growth and physical activity plays a roll, since it aﬀects the energy requirements. If the
energy requirements are high a larger quantity of food is needed, and it could possible lead
to more gluten ingested, even though the threshold of concentration is met [14].
3.3
Labelling
Labelling of food products should be in compliance with the Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011.
The regulation states that all intended ingredients should be listed, meaning if it is used in
the manufacturing or preparation of the product and still is present in the ﬁnal product.
Allergens should be highlighted e.g. by writing in bold or capital letters [30].
Gluten free labelling
Contrary, products can be labelled gluten-free if the products are naturally gluten-free or
formulated, processed, and prepared to meet the special dietary needs of individuals intolerant
to gluten, and are in compliance with the standard set by the Codex Alimentarius [6]. The
Codex Alimentarius has set the cutoﬀconcentration for a product to be labelled gluten-free at
20 ppm (mg/kg) and thereby an action level of the presence of cross-contamination of gluten
was set. The standard was afterwards implemented in many countries and the European
Union (EU) published in 2009 legislation (EU) No 828/2014, concerning gluten-free food
products [31]. By these regulations and action levels it was decided when a product can
have a gluten-free claim and at what levels of cross contamination should result in a recall
or withdrawal [6, 7, 17, 31, 32].
In addition to the gluten-free claim, products without gluten containing ingredients can be
labelled with PAL.
Precautionary allergen labelling (PAL)
PAL is used if there is a risk of a product containing an allergen not intentionally added as an
ingredient. PAL was introduced by the industry, making it possible for them to communicate
Page 19 of 82
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
to the consumers that the products may not be suitable for them, due to unintended allergen
presence (UAP). Cross contamination can occur due to shared facilities and equipment. In
theory a product can be labelled both gluten-free and stating PAL to communicate a poten-
tial risk of gluten contamination [8, 11, 14, 33].
PAL is voluntary and no regulation is in force as with intended ingredients, except the
more general food law. All food products placed on the market should be in compliance with
the General Food Law (EC) No 178/2002. The regulation states, "Food shall not be placed
on the market if it is unsafe" and further explains "(b) to the information provided to the
consumer, including information on the label, or other information generally available to the
consumer concerning the avoidance of speciﬁc adverse health eﬀects from a particular food or
category of foods. In addition, it is also elaborated that measures should be based on a risk
assessment [34]. If PAL is used and not based on an appropriate risk assessment, it could be
said to be in inconsistency with the general food law. In addition, it can be misleading for the
consumer if a PAL is stated without an actual risk of UAP. It will thereby be contradictory
with Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 which states that a label cannot be misleading to the
consumer [30].
In practise it can be diﬃcult to conduct a risk assessment of allergens, since it is compli-
cated to determine the risk of allergens due to absent information about allergen thresholds,
among other things. In addition, no level of UAP is set for when to apply PAL. The lack of
harmonised procedures for PAL have created great uncertainty both for the industry and the
consumers. To stamp out these uncertainties, appropriate, and consistent risk assessments
are needed. In addition, it is important to communicate to the consumers that PAL is used
as a clear indication of a potential risk [14, 32].
One example of harmonised procedure, is the program VITAL (Voluntary Incidental Trace
Allergen Labelling) developed by the Allergen Bureau. VITAL provides consistent infor-
mation to the food industry in Australia and New Zealand. It features a standardised risk
assessment protocol of how to determine potential allergen cross contamination and set pa-
rameters of acceptable levels, and levels of when to use PAL [11, 14, 18].
Risk assessment of when to use PAL
In Denmark the Danish Veterinary and Food administration have made a guidance of the
use of PAL, but it does not state a quantitative level of the risk for when to apply PAL [7].
It guides the manufactures responsible to plan the production in such a way that UAP is
Page 20 of 82
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
eliminated and that it should be speciﬁed in their own-check program how they avoid con-
tamination. The risk assessment should consider the amount of the food normally consumed.
It should be based on national dietary data, where the average and 95th percentile of the in-
take are used. The amount should then considered together with the concentration of UAPs
and compared with the dose causing an reaction in 1 % of individuals with allergy. If all the
reasonable measurements are implemented to avoid contamination and a risk is unavoidable,
PAL should be applied [7].
In 2019 Blom et al. conducted a sensitivity analysis to ﬁnd optimal food consumption es-
timate for deterministic food allergy risk assessment [35]. The sensitivity analysis showed
when 75th percentile (P75) point estimate is used for allergy risk assessment, 100 % of the
deterministic risk assessments results are equal to the probabilistic risk assessments, which
is seen as the most accurate approach for food allergy [35]. The P75 point estimate of food
consumption should therefore be used in allergy risk assessment.
Diﬀerent scenarios and statements
When considering the application of PAL diﬀerent scenarios are possible. One of the obvious
is the diﬀerence in using PAL or not. Where no PAL is stated it is unclear whether or not
a risk assessment has been conducted. Absence of PAL can be a result of a risk assessment
where no risk or no signiﬁcant risk is found or that no risk assessment has been conducted.
iFAAM found during two workshops in 2016 and 2018 that a signiﬁcant number of allergic
persons, consider a products without PAL as safe to eat [33].
Another scenario is a product with PAL but gluten or wheat is not stated within the PAL.
This might give the impression that risk assessment of allergens have been conducted, but it
is uncertain if gluten has been considered. In addition, diﬀerent wording are used which can
give the consumer an impression of how high the risk is, but no correlation is found between
the wording and the actual allergen concentration [10, 14]. The diﬀerent statements applied
have made it diﬃcult for consumers to identify the basis of the PAL and it has resulted in
confusion and mistrust from the consumers [14].
3.4
ELISA for testing gluten content
When food products are labelled gluten-free, EU legislation requires that "it shall, where
appropriate, be based on the relevant scientiﬁc data" [6].
To provide data of the gluten
concentration within a food product and prove that it is in compliance with the regulation,
Page 21 of 82
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Enzyme-linked Immunoassay (ELISA) R5 Mendez Method can be used.
This method is
approved by Codex Alimentarius to determine gluten concentration. The Ridascreen® Gliadin
is of the ELISA R5 Mendez Method and thereby a Codex Alimentarius Method (Type 1) [36].
For the tests to comply with Codex Alimentarius the following outlines should be followed:
• The quantitative determination of gluten in foods and ingredients shall be based on an
immunologic method or other method providing at least equal sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
• The antibody used should react with the cereal protein fractions that are toxic for per-
sons intolerant to gluten and should not cross-react with other cereal proteins or other
constituents of the foods or ingredients.
• Methods used for determination should be validated and calibrated against a certiﬁed
reference material, if available.
• The detection limit has to be appropriate according to the state of the art and the
technical standard. It should be 10 mg gluten/kg or below.
• The qualitative analysis that indicates the presence of gluten shall be based on relevant
methods (e.g. ELISA-based) [6].
The Ridascreen® Gliadin is an enzyme immunoassay which quantitative determines gliadins
and corresponding prolamins. Thereby, the ﬁrst, second, and last point is met. The detection
limit for the Ridascreen® Gliadin is 0.5 mg/kg gliadin or 1 mg/kg gluten and by that the
fourth outline is also met. It is calibrated to the standard of the Prolamin Working Group
[36]. The Ridascreen® Gliadin ELISA method was chosen to use in this thesis, since it is was
used in the study by Nordic co-operation [9] making it possible to include and compare the
data.
As mentioned, the Ridascreen® Gliadin is an enzyme immunoassay intended to test for
gliadin. It can be used for quantitative analysis of contamination by gliadin in ﬂour, spices,
and processed food can be performed. The test is a sandwich ELISA with the principle
antibody-antigen-antibody complex, shown in ﬁgure 3. The antibody is a monoclonal R5
antibody raised against secalin extract. The R5 antibody recognises the consensus amino
acid sequence Q-X-P-W/F-P, which corresponds to immuno-reactive epitope repeats found
in α- γ- and ω- gliadin, hordeins and secalins. Due to multiple reactive epitopes, the R5
antibody can be used both as coating and detection antibody [37].
The coating R5 antibody recognises immuno-reactive epitopes present in gliadin from the
Page 22 of 82
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
food samples or standards. The bound gliadin is detected by detection R5 antibody. The
detection R5 antibody is conjugated to peroxidase. Colourless chromogen binds the conju-
gate and convert it to a blue colour, which turns yellow when the stop solution is added. The
absorbance of the yellow colour is proportional to the concentration of gliadin in the sample,
making it possible to determine the gliadin concentration. Since it is gliadin concentration
detected, the results are multiplied by two to obtain the total gluten concentration [36].
Figure 3.
Enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) R5 Mendez Method. The brown antibody is
speciﬁc R5 antibody. Brown dot is the gliadin in the food product or standard. Orange antibody with pink
dot is R5 antibody conjugated to peroxide. The yellow star is chromogen and enzyme substrate. Figure
made in BioRender [24].
Page 23 of 82
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
4
Materials & methods
4.1
Sampling strategy of pre-packed food products
At the moment no harmonised protocol for sampling for analysing food allergens has been
established.
A sampling plan was therefore conducted prior sampling of products.
This
was done based on results from The Nordic co-operation’s report Undeclared allergens in
food – Food control, analyses and risk assessment and UK Food Standards Agency (FSA)
report Survey of Allergen precautionary allergen Labelling [9, 10]. Remington et al. (2015)
performed a risk analysis of the products tested positive in the FSA report [11]. This was
used supplementary to the FSA report.
Food categories
When deciding which types of products should be tested a thorough assessment of the prod-
ucts tested and the results from the studies by Nordic co-operation [9] and FSA [10] was
conducted.
FSA had tested pre-packed products in the categories Cereal & cereal products, Confec-
tionery, Chilled & frozen desserts, Meat, Fish, Ready Meals, Processed fruit, vegetables,
pulses, Jams & Spreads, Oils, vinegar & dressings, Dried sauces, gravies & mixes, Snacks,
and Yoghurt & cheese. These categories were chosen due to high risk of cross contamination
of allergens. FSA tested for both milk, hazelnut, peanut and gluten, so only categories with
relevance and detected gluten were included in the present study [10].
The report from the Nordic co-operation determined the number and percentage of products
tested positive within a food category, but did not describe the speciﬁc products. The prod-
ucts with detected gluten were bakery products, chocolate/candy, soya steak and pâté [9].
Access to the Danish results were gained, which gave insight in which product had already
been tested in Denmark, giving a better foundation for a sampling plan that could give new
information. The products positive from Nordic co-operation [9] were all covered by relevant
categories from the study by FSA [10]. Besides, it was decided to add spices as a category,
due to it being a production line where it can be diﬃcult to avoid cross contamination. The
ﬁnal food categories chosen for this thesis were as followed:
• Cereal & cereal products
• Confectionery
• Ready meals
• Jams & spreads
Page 24 of 82
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
• Dried sauces, gravies & mixes
• Snacks
• Spices
In the category of confectionery the Nordic co-operation[9] 14 products from Denmark were
tested, but gluten were not detect in any of them. In the study from FSA [10] one product of
milk chocolate had detectable gluten. Even though, only one product of the category Con-
fectionery in the two studies were contaminated with gluten, the category was still included.
This was decided since only chocolate and not other types of candy were tested. It was as-
sumed that mainly chocolate was tested since it posses a great risk of cross contamination of
milk, peanuts and hazelnuts [10, 11]. In the present study the products within the category
Confectionery should therefore include candy and sweets.
Number of samples and sample size
Since no harmonised sampling plan exits, the number of samples suﬃcient is not deﬁned. The
Nordic co-operation [9] decided a number of 300 products when testing for contamination of
both milk protein, egg, peanut, hazelnut, and/or gluten was suﬃcient. In total, they tested
167 products for gluten, 30 with PAL and 137 without PAL. FSA [10] tested 271 products for
gluten contamination . Based on these numbers, it was decided to collect 10 products with
and without PAL within the seven food categories, giving a total of 140 products. The la-
belling “may contain wheat”, “may contain barley”, “may contain rye”, “may contain gluten”
and similar were considered equivalent in this thesis. Products labelled gluten-free were not
included.
The Nordic co-operation [9] tested one of each product, with sample size of at least 30 g.
For products of less than 30 g, more samples were collected to constitute one sample of 30
g. FSA [10] tested products in duplicates. For the products with detected allergen in both
duplicates, the variation between the duplicates was 20 % or less, expect for one product with
a diﬀerence of 63.4 % [10]. Based on the sample size, the low variation between duplicates
and limitations of number of tests possible to run, it was chosen to only collect one of each
product and perform two extraction of 30 g of the products [9, 10]. For products less than
60 g, the product was collected in duplicates.
All products should be pre-packed within the seven food categories. Flour and oats were not
included since these products pose a problematic of itself in regard to gluten.
Page 25 of 82
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
4.2
Actual collected and included products of pre-packed food
Based on the sampling plan, pre-packed food products were found in four Danish supermar-
kets, Netto, Fakta, Rema 1000, and Super Brugsen. A total of 155 diﬀerent products of 41
diﬀerent brands were found. Products were found by visual inspection. The products did
not contain gluten ingredients and were found with and without PAL for the food categories.
The planned and found products are listed in table 1.
Included products
An evaluation of the found products were performed. Only similar products found with and
without PAL were included, with exception of three products of "kokostoppe". "Kokostoppe"
was included since it was assumed that there could be of great risk of contamination due to
the production process. Besides, the category Jams & spreads was excluded since only one
product was found with PAL. In total 23 products were excluded. From the 132 selected
products four were additionally excluded due to changes of the labelling.
Table 1. Total products planned, found and included by category. The number of products planned
based on the sampling plan, number found and the actual number of tested products divided by food category
and without (No PAL) or with PAL (PAL).
Product category
No PAL
PAL
Planned Found Included Planned Found Included
Jams & spreads
10
4
0
10
1
0
Spices
10
13
11
10
23
22
Ready meals
10
5
5
10
9
9
Snacks
10
12
12
10
15
14
Cereal & cereal products
10
11
5
10
12
11
Dried sauces, gravies & mixes
10
19
10
11
15
13
Confectionery
10
8
8
10
8
8
Total
70
72
51
70
83
77
4.3
Sampling strategy in bakeries
Besides the sampling plan for pre-packed food, a sampling plan of products from three
diﬀerent bakeries with non-industry production was conducted. The three bakeries chosen
for this thesis all made products without gluten containing ingredients in production areas
where gluten containing products were made. The bakeries included were:
Page 26 of 82
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
• Meyers, glutenfri bageskole
• The American Pie Company
• La Glace
Ahead of selecting where in the production samples should be collected, a risk assessment
of cross contamination of gluten during production was conducted. The risk assessment was
performed based on considerations from the project Integrated Approaches to Food Allergen
and Allergy Risk Management, literature and basic knowledge [38]. Based on the sampling
strategy from the Nordic co-operation report [9] it was chosen to collect samples in duplicates
of at least 30 g of the ﬁnal product and of samples during the process. Since the bakeries
have diﬀerent processes three independent risk assessment were conducted.
Risk assessment Meyers
Meyers host gluten-free baking classes where the participants learn to bake breads and cakes
with gluten-free ingredients. It was made clear to the participant that there was a potential
risk of contamination of gluten, since it was produced in areas where gluten containing
products were produced as well. Dough was prepared the day before by a baker and rising
until the next day. The preparations took place in facilities where gluten containing products
were produced concurrently. The processes with and without gluten containing ingredients
were separated and cleaning was performed prior to the baking gluten-free class.
Based on a recipe of bread from the book "Meyers glutenfri bageskole" a risk assessment was
conducted [39]. Steps with possible cross contamination were identiﬁed to be the mixing of
ingredients, rising, and baking step. The main sources of cross contamination were assumed
to be from the air, equipment, and personnel. The ﬂowchart and identiﬁed possible entries
of gluten are outlined in Appendix A. It was chosen to collect samples of the mixed dry
ingredients, the dough, and the ﬁnal products after baking. During the baking class the
following ﬁve breads were made, Klementin klister, Havreboller, Hirsebrød, Kernebrød, and
Fødsesldagsboller.
Risk assessment The American Pie Company
The American Pie Company website states that gluten-free options are available for special
orders. They provide two types of pie, key lime and pumpkin pie. The risk assessment was
based on their recipe and instructions for preparation of the two pies and visit in the pro-
duction area. The pies were baked in production areas and with use of the same kitchenware
as gluten containing pies. Possible cross contamination for both pies were found to be in
Page 27 of 82
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
the step of grinding the cookies and mixing the ingredients for the crust. Besides, contam-
ination with gluten might occur at baking and cooling of the pies. The main sources of
cross contamination were assumed to be from the air, equipment, personnel, and ingredients.
The ﬂowchart and identiﬁed possible entries of gluten are outlined in Appendix A. Samples
should be collected after grinding of cookies, ﬁnal crust, and after baking and cooling down.
Risk assessment La Glace
The risk assessment of La Glace was conducted based on a visit in the production area and
communication with La Glace before hand. La Glace referrers to their products as "gluten
reduced" both online and in the confectionery. The gluten reduced products were produced
concurrently with gluten containing products in a shared production area using the same
kitchenware. A general production ﬂow, based on general knowledge of baking, is outlined
in Appendix A. Possible entry of gluten in the production was found to be in the step of
mixing of ingredients, roll out of dough, baking, and cooling. The main sources of cross
contamination were assumed to be from the air, equipment, ingredients, and personnel. The
possible entries of gluten are also outlined in Appendix A. Samples were chosen to be collected
of the dough, after the dough was rolled out or placed in a form, and after baking. Besides,
samples of diﬀerent mousses, used together with the cake bottoms should be collected.
Procedure at the bakeries
Before the visits in the bakeries a template with important observations and questions to
get a better insight in the management of gluten-free production was made (Appendix B).
This included which measures they conducted to limit cross contamination, information to
employees, processes, and the ingredients used.
4.4
Actual collected samples from bakeries
Meyers
The sampling plan for the gluten-free baking class was followed and all samples were collected
in duplicates of at least 30 g. Mixed dry ingredients of Havreboller, Hirsebrød, Kernebrød,
and Fødsesldagsboller were collected the day before. During the baking class samples of the
dry ingredients of Klementin klister were collected together with the dough and ﬁnal product
of all ﬁve products. An overview of the collected ﬁnal products is shown in table 2.
Page 28 of 82
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
The American Pie Company
The samples collected at The American Pie company followed the sampling plan and samples
of the grounded cookies, the crust, and the ﬁnal pies with topping were collected. All samples
were in duplicates of at least 30 g. An overview of the collected ﬁnal products is shown in
table 2.
La Glace
The actual sampling at La Glace was not in totally accordance with the sampling plan. It
was only possible to take samples of the dough before and after baking. Besides, no samples
of the mousses were taken, but samples of ﬁnal cakes were collected instead. A total of
ﬁve samples in duplicates were collected during production, the dough and after baking of
Margrethebund and Makronbund and two samples of Mandelbund after baking. In addition,
four samples of ﬁnal cakes from the showcase were collected. All samples were collected in
duplicates of at least 30 g except Magrethebund, Margethekage and Chocolette. Only one
sample of Margrethebund was collected and the samples of Margrethekage and Chocolette
were only of 25 g. An overview of the collected ﬁnal cakes is shown in table 2.
Table 2. The collected products from bakeries and confectionery. The ﬁnal products collected at
Meyers, The American Pie Company and La Glace.
Bakery
Products collected
Meyers
Hirsebrød
Kernebrød
Havreboller
Fødsesdagsboller
Klementin klister
The American Pie Company
Key Lime Pie
Pumpkin Pie
La Glace
Valnøddekage
Lucky you
Chocolette
Margrethekage
4.5
The R5 ELISA Ridascreen® Gliadin
After collection of the pre-packed foods and samples from the bakeries, all samples were
tested for gluten contamination and the gluten concentration was determined by R5 ELISA
Ridascreen® Gliadin.
Page 29 of 82
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Sample preparation
Before determining gluten concentration, the samples were prepared by homogenisation and
extraction. The extractions were performed in duplicates of each sample. Two times 30 g
of each product were homogenised and two individual extractions were made. Samples were
extracted with the Cocktail (patented) (R7006 /R7016, oﬃcial AOAC method). An overview
of the process is seen in ﬁgure 4. Since the extraction procedure depends on the food matrix,
diﬀerent procedures were followed.
Spices and spice mixes, 30 g was homogenised by grinding. 0.25 ± 0.03 g of the sample
and 0.25 ± 0.03 g of skimmed milk powder was mixed well with 2.5 ml cocktail (patented).
Skimmed milk powder was added to bind tannin and polyphenols.
Other food samples, 30 g was homogenised by grinding. 0.25 ± 0.03 g of the sample
was mixed well with 2.5 ml of the cocktail (patented).
Positive control, 0.25 ± 0.03 g of the positive sample, L93, was mixed well with 2.5 ml of
the cocktail (patented).
Samples were extracted 40 min at 50 °C. Cooled down before adding 7.5 ml 80 % ethanol
and extracted while shaken up side down for 1 h at room temperature. Centrifuged at 2500
g for 10 min. One ml of the supernatents were transferred to a screw top vial and stored in
dark at room temperature until ELISA was performed.
Page 30 of 82
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Figure 4. Schematic overview of the method of testing gluten concentration in food products.
Two individual extraction of each food products are performed. Two times 30 g of each food sample are
homogenised and thereafter extracted. The supernatants are transferred to screw top vials. The gluten
concentration is then determined by R5 ELISA Ridascreen® gliadin. Figure made in BioRender [24].
Reagents
All reagents were included in the R5 ELISA Ridascreen® Gliadin kit (table 3). When per-
forming the ELISA all reagents were room temperature.
The buﬀer was provided in 5x
concentration, and was diluted 1:5 in distilled water before added to the samples. The con-
jugate was diluted 1:11 in distilled water, just before use. The washing buﬀer was diluted
1:10 in distilled water as well. The chromogen and substrate were mixed 50:50 just before
use.
Page 31 of 82
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Table 3. Reagents included in R5 ELISA RIDASCREEN® Gliadin kit. The reagents included in
the kit, the format, concentration and volume [36].
Component
Format
Concentration
Volume
Microtiter plate
Ready to use
96 wells
Buﬀer
Concentrate
5x
60 ml
Standard 1
Ready to use
0 ng /ml gliadin
1.3 ml
Standard 2
Ready to use
5 ng /ml gliadin
1.3 ml
Standard 3
Ready to use
10 ng /ml gliadin
1.3 ml
Standard 4
Ready to use
20 ng /ml gliadin
1.3 ml
Standard 5
Ready to use
40 ng /ml gliadin
1.3 ml
Standard 6
Ready to use
80 ng /ml gliadin
1.3 ml
Was buﬀer
Concentrate
10x
100 ml
Conjugate
Concentrate
11x
1.2 ml
Subtrate
Ready to use
7 ml
Chromogen
Ready to use
7 ml
Stop Solution
Ready to use
14 ml
R5 ELISA Ridascreen Gliadin
To keep track on samples and which kit were used the protocol in Apppendix C were ﬁlled
out. The supernatants were diluted 1:12.5 in buﬀer. After dilution, 200 µl of each sample
was pipetted into each well of an uncoated microtiter plate. Standards were pippetted in
duplicates. Immediately after, samples and standards were added to the R5 antibody coated
microtiter plate with a 8-channel pipette. Microtiter plate was incubated for 30 min at room
temperature. Liquid was poured out of the wells and microtiter plate washed with 250 µl
washing buﬀer three times and tapped up side down to ensure complete removal of the liquid
from the wells. Diluted conjugate was added, 100 µl in each well and incubated for 30 min at
room temperature. After 30 min the microtiter plate were washed again three times with 250
µl washing buﬀer and tapped up side down to ensure complete removal of the liquid from the
wells. Following 100 µl of the mixed chromogen and substrate was added to each well, and
shaken manually to mix the substrate and chromogen. The microtiter plate was incubated
for 30 min at room temperature in dark. After 30 min, 100 µl stop solution was added to
each well and the absorbance was measured at 450 nm.
Samples from bakeries All samples from the three bakeries were extracted, but due to
Page 32 of 82
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
limitation of ELISA kits the ﬁnal products were tested ﬁrst. If gluten were detected above
20 mg/kg or other interesting ﬁndings was shown, samples collected during the process was
tested afterwards.
Evaluation
The software RIDA®SOFT Win/ RIDA®SOFT Win.net (Art.
Nr.
Z9996) was used to
evaluate the absorbance and for calculations. The concentration (ng/ml) of gliadin within
the samples was read from RIDA®SOFT Win calibration curve. The concentration of gliadin
was then multiplied with the dilution factor and multiplied by two to obtain the gluten
concentration. The software both give the concentration of gliadin and gluten in mg/kg.
Validation
For validation of the results the standard curve should be comparable with the standard
curve shown in the Quality Assurance Certiﬁcate enclosed in the kit (Appendix D). The
absorbance, especially the absorbance of standard (std.) 0 should be comparable with those
in the certiﬁcate. Absorbance above the absorbance of std. 6 was diluted and detected again
to gain valid results. The limit of detection for the assay was 1 mg/kg gluten and the limit
of quantiﬁcation was 5 mg/kg gluten. However, it was possible, by the software, to calculate
concentrations out of range [36]. A positive control was used to control that the ELISA was
performed correctly. The positive control L93 was received from the Swedish National Food
Agency. According to the Swedish National Food Agency, the positive control L93 should
comply with the following requirements:
• Mean (m) 8.8 mg/kg gliadin.
• The standard deviation (sd): 1.137
• Lower limit of action (m-3sd): 5.39 mg/kg and lower warning limit (m-2sd): 6.53 mg/kg
• Upper limit of action (m+3sd): 12.21 mg/kg and upper warning limit (m+2sd): 11.07
mg/kg
Control values between 6.53 and 11.07 mg/kg are considered acceptable. A value between
the action limit and the warning limit is accepted if the value of the next analysis is within
the acceptance limits (6.53-11.07) [40].
Page 33 of 82
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
4.6
Positive and negative products
As described in section 4.5 two individual extractions were performed, resulting in two con-
centrations from each product. A product was addressed as positive if one or two of the
concentrations were above LOQ (5mg/kg) and negative if both concentrations were below
LOQ (5mg/kg), when analysing the prevalence of contamination and in the deterministic
risk assessment.
4.7
Deterministic risk assessment
A deterministic risk assessment was used to determine if the positive product were a risk for
persons with WA or CD.
Risk assessment for wheat allergy
In the deterministic risk assessment for WA individuals the protocol from VITAL [18, 41]
was used. The transition levels were calculated using equation 1. If the concentration of
cross contamination was below the transition level, PAL was not required (equation 2). If
the concentration was equal or above the transition level, PAL was required (equation 3)
[41].
The reference dose ED01 at 0.7 mg from VITAL was used [18], which is the amount of gluten
causing an allergic reaction in 1 % of the population with WA. The reference amount was
the amount normally eaten at one occasion [41, 18]. In this thesis it was chosen to use the
consumption data from Birot et al. (2017), since the consumption data has been grouped for
use in food allergen risk assessment [42]. The 75th percentile of the data was used based on
the ﬁndings in Blom et al. (2019) [35]. Based on the reference dose and the reference amount
the transition levels were calculated for the six food categories of food products tested, based
on the best describing food group from Birot [42].
Transition = Reference dose (mg) ·
1000
Reference amount (g)
(1)
Concentration of cross contamination (mg/kg) < Transition level = No PAL
(2)
Concentration of cross contamination (mg/kg) ≥Transition level = PAL
(3)
Page 34 of 82
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Risk assessment for coeliac disease
The protocol from VITAL applies for WA, so the deterministic risk assessment for CD could
therefore not be conducted using the same approach. The risk assessment for CD individ-
uals was based on the exposure calculated by equation 4. Gluten concentration data was
obtained in the present study and P75 consumption data was found in Birot [42] as in the
risk assessment for WA. There is no reference dose for the risk of CD individual as the one
at 0.7 mg for the risk of individuals with WA. So, in this thesis the dose at 10 mg/d was
chosen to evaluate the risk, since 10 mg/d was found to cause response in some individuals,
leading to equation 5 and 6.
Exposure (mg) = gluten concentration (mg/kg) · consumption (kg)
(4)
Exposure < 10 mg/d = no risk
(5)
Exposure ≥10 mg/d = risk
(6)
By this risk assessment only one product was considered at a time. Since the daily intake of
gluten is determining for CD individuals a probabilistic risk assessment including all products
was performed.
4.8
Probabilistic risk assessment
A probabilistic risk assessment was conducted to evaluate the percentage of CD patients who
would develop symptoms due to consumption of products without gluten containing ingre-
dients with and without PAL.
The probabilistic risk assessment was conducted in the program ModelRisk, an add-in pro-
gram for Excel [43]. For the risk assessment three input values were needed:
• Consumption data (kg)
• Concentration of gluten within the products (mg/kg)
• Tolerable daily intake (TDI) of gluten (mg/d)
Consumption data were assumed to be normally distributed. The normal distribution
was based on the mean and sd consumption data from Birot [42] instead of P75 used in the
deterministic risk assessment. All tested products from the present study and the Nordic
Page 35 of 82
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
co-operation study [9] were divided into the best describing groups from Birot [42] to ﬁnd
the best describing consumption data for the risk assessment. Besides assuming a normal
distribution, it was further assumed that negative consumption was unrealistic, and negative
consumption data was therefore treated as zero.
Concentration of gluten was based on the results from the present study and data from
the Danish part of Nordic co-operation study [9]. An uniform distribution was assumed, and
formed based on the minimum and maximum concentration of gluten. Not all products were
contaminated, so a binomial distribution of the prevalence of contamination was used. The
two distributions were combined into a zeroinfalted uniform distribution of the contamination.
The TDI was based on the method used in Gibert et al. (2013) where TDI was assumed
as normal distribution with mean of 30 mg/d and sd of 10 mg/d based on the results from
Catassi et al. (2007) [27, 44]. A normal distribution contributes with the same problem with
negative values as in the consumption data. In this study a cutoﬀat 5 mg/d was used, so
all exposures below 5 mg/d were set to zero. This was decided since Catassi [27] found that
some individuals are aﬀected by 10 mg/d and that the background intake of gluten from
gluten-free products is 5 mg/d. The cutoﬀat 5 mg/d take the background gluten intake
into account, since the exposure from the products without gluten containing ingredients at
5 mg/d from the cutoﬀvalue and gluten-free products adds up to the 10 mg/d.
A point estimate at 30 mg/d was also used for TDI. By this approach all individuals will
tolerate under 30 mg/d and react to all exposure of 30 mg/d and above.
The distributions of the consumption and concentration formed the exposure of gluten and
the TDI established the sensitivity of CD individuals. The probabilistic approach compared
the distribution of gluten exposure with the distribution of the TDI, thereby determining
the probability of an adverse reaction. For each iterations, which represent an individual, an
exposure and sensitivity to gluten were drawn for the distributions. The comparison resulted
in either a reaction or not. A total of 100,000 iterations were used, giving that the compar-
ison was done 100,000 times and the mean probability of reaction was found of the 100,000
iterations.
The probabilistic risk assessment was performed in total six times, two times for three sce-
narios. Scenario one was with all products, counting both with and without PAL. Scenario
two was only products with PAL and scenario three included only products without PAL. All
Page 36 of 82
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
three scenarios was conducted twice. One using minimum concentration at 5 mg/kg together
with the prevalence of positive product being all above 5 mg/kg and another including values
between LOD at 1 mg/kg and LOQ at 5mg/kg. Including values between LOD and LOQ
resulted in a higher percentage of positive products and thereby an increased prevalence of
contamination.
5
Supplementary data
Data from the Nordic co-operation study [9] and study of Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-
2013 [45, 46] was gained and used in the probabilistic risk assessment.
Nordic co-operation Danish data
Data of the products tested in Denmark from the Nordic co-operation study was gained
(table 4) [9]. The data was divided into the best describing food group from Birot et al.
(2017) [42]. Only one product from the group Cookies had detectable gluten contamination
of 6.4 mg/kg.
Table 4. Data from the Nordic co-operation study. Number indicated the number of product tested
with the result of contamination.
Food group
Number
Contamination (mg/kg)
Composite food
2
<5.00
Meat products - mean concumption 65 g
4
<5.00
Meat products - mean concumption 105g
2
<5.00
Small sweets
1
<5.00
Breakfast products eaten unprocessed
1
<5.00
Chocolate an chocolate products
14
<5.00
Cookies
2
<5.00
Cookies
1
6.4
Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-2013
Data from the study Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-2013 was gained. The mean con-
sumption of solid food per persons over 18 years was found to be 1.17 ± 0.38 kg [45, 46].
Page 37 of 82
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
6
Results
6.1
Validation of ELISA kits
As described in section 4.5 the results should be validated based on a positive control and
the calibration curve.
Calibration curve
The standard curves for all four kits are shown in ﬁgure 5. A comparison of the standard
curves and the standard curve for quality assurance in Appendix D showed comparability
with standard curve a, b, and c. Standard curve d was not as comparable because std. 5
and 6 were lower. Though, std. 6 was still above 0.8 which is an indication of instability of
deterioration of the reagents [36]. A correspondence with the Swedish National Food Agency
who has lots of experience with the R5 ELISA Ridascreen gliadin, approved the quality of
the calibration curve d [40].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5. Calibration curves from the four ELISA kits. (a) kit one, (b) kit two, (c) kit three and (d)
kit four.
Page 38 of 82
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Positive control
According to the the Swedish National Food Agency requirements of the positive control,
L93, the concentrations should be between 5.39 - 12.21 mg/kg. All concentrations of positive
controls were within the range, expect L93 B for plate 4 (table 5). Though, the results were
discussed with the Swedish National Food Agency who approved all positive controls [40].
Table 5.
Gluten concentration of positive control of the four kits. Plate 1-4 refers to the four
diﬀerent kits. L93 A and L93 B are duplicates of the positive control.
Concentration (mg/kg)
Plate
L93 A
L93 B
1
8.8
12.20
2
7.8
11.19
3
10.6
11.5
4
11.37
12.28
6.2
Number of tested pre-packed food products
In total 128 pre-packed food products were tested for gluten contamination by R5 ELISA
Ridascreen gliadin. Spices accounted for the largest part of tested products with 33 products,
then Snacks 26, Dried sauces, gravies & mixes 23, Cereal & cereal products 16, Confectionery
16 and Ready meals 14.
Each category included both products with and without PAL. The percentage of products
tested with PAL (50 % - 69 %) was higher than without PAL (31 % - 50 %). The distribution
of all food categories and PAL is shown in ﬁgure 6.
Page 39 of 82
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Cereal & cereal
products
Confectionery
Ready meals
Dried sauces,
gravies & mixes
Snacks
Spices
11
8
9
13
14
22
5
8
5
10
12
11
Number
Products with and without Precautionary Allergen Labelling (PAL) by category
No PAL
PAL
Figure 6.
Number of products by category with and without PAL. The y-axis indicates the
number of products tested and is indicated by the whole column.
The yellow part indicates number of
products without PAL and the orange indicates with PAL.
6.3
Prevalence and concentration of gluten in pre-packed products
Products were considered as positive if one or both extraction had concentration >5 mg/kg
(LOQ). Consequently, products with one positive extraction was weighted equally to prod-
ucts with two positive extractions. The percentage of products with both extractions being
positive were only seven out of the 30 positive products, corresponding to 23 %.
Since some products were not of 60 g, two products were collected and tested. To get an
insight if the low percentage of both extraction being positive was because two samples of the
same products were tested the number of positive products tested in duplicates was found
(table 6). To summarise, eight out of the 23 products with one positive extractions were
in duplicates, 12 were the same product and three were of the same products but packed
separately in smaller quantity, e.g. bouillon cubes.
Table 6. Number of positive products with one extraction being positive divided in the three
scenarios, collected in duplicates, same products or same products packed separately.
Scenario
Number
Two products
8
Same product
12
Same product, packed separately
3
Page 40 of 82
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Distribution and prevalence of the positive test by category
Thirty products corresponding to 23.4 % of all products were tested positive. Out of the
30 products, 24 products had a concentration between 5-20 mg/kg and six products had a
concentration >20 mg/kg. This corresponds to 18.8 % of all products having a concentration
between 5-20 mg/kg gluten and 4.7 % having a concentration >20 mg/kg gluten. Thereby,
76.6 % of all tested products had a gluten concentration <5 mg/kg (LOQ).
The number of positive products within the diﬀerent categories ranged from 1-8 products.
The category with most positive products was Spices with 8/33 products, then Snacks 7/16,
Ready meals 6/14, Cereal & cereal products 5/16, Dried sauces, gravies & mixes 3/23 and
Confectionery 1/16 positive product.
Since the number of products tested in the six categories varies, the percentage of positive
products within the categories is a more accurate way to describe the diﬀerences.
The
prevalence of positive products ranged from 6.3 - 42.9 %. The percentage of negative products
(<5 mg/kg), positive at 5-20 mg/kg and positive >20 mg/kg products are shown in ﬁgure
7. The highest prevalence of positive products was Ready meals with 43 % of the products
having a gluten concentration above 5 mg/kg. The prevalence within the other categories
were Snacks 42 %, Cereal &ceral products 31 %, Spices 27 %, Dried sauces, gravies &mixes
13 % and the lowest prevalence Confectionery with 6 %.
Confectionery, Ready meals and Dried sauces, gravies & mixes had no products with a
concentration >20 mg/kg. Spices had 3 % with a concentration >20 mg/kg, Cereal & cereal
products 6 % and Snacks with the highest percentage of products >20 mg/kg at 15 %.
Page 41 of 82
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
00
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Cereal & cereal
products
Confectionery
Ready meals
Dried sauces,
gravies & mixes
Snacks
Spices
69
94
57
87
73
76
25
6
43
13
12
21
6
0
0
0
15
3
Percentage (%)
Percentage of negative, > 5ppm, and >20 ppm by category
Negative %
>5ppm %
> 20ppm %
Figure 7. Number of products tested negative, >5 mg/kg and >20 mg/kg by category.
The
yellow column indicates the percentage of products tested negative within a category, orange indicates the
percentage of products with a concentration >5 mg/kg within a category and the brown columns indicates
the percentage of products with a concentration >20 mg/kg within a category.
6.4
Use of PAL and gluten contamination
In ﬁgure 7 the percentage of products with concentrations between 5-20 mg/kg and >20
mg/kg is displayed. It provides only limited information of the concentration. Therefore,
ﬁgure 8 and 9 were made to illustrate the variation of concentrations. All positive test results
were included, giving that a product can appear twice if both extractions were positive.
In ﬁgure 8 it is clearly seen that two test results stands outs with concentrations around 420
mg/kg and 260 mg/kg. These two results were positive test from the same product. To get a
better insight of the variation of the other products the two results with high concentrations
were excluded and the rest is shown in ﬁgure 9. Most products were below 20 mg/kg and
a great part do not reach 15 mg/kg or even 10 mg/kg. The average concentration of all
positive tests, including the two concentrations 420 mg/kg and 260 mg/kg, was 30.4 mg/kg
and 12.8 mg/kg when excluding the high concentrations.
Page 42 of 82
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
420
440
mg/kg
Concentration of all results >5ppm
No PAL
PAL
Figure 8. Concentration of all results above 5 mg/kg. Y-axis indicates the concentration (mg/kg).
The yellow colour are products without PAL and orange are products with PAL. The red line indicates 20
mg/kg.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
mg/kg
Concentration of results >5ppm
No PAL
PAL
Figure 9. Concentration of results above 5 mg/kg, excluding concentrations. Y-axis indicates the
concentration in ppm (mg/kg). The yellow colour are products without PAL and orange are products with
PAL. The red lines indicates 20 mg/kg.
Correlation of gluten contamination and PAL
Out of 30 products tested positive 16 % stated a PAL and 8 % did not state a PAL. Of the 98
negative products 42 % had no PAL and 58 % had a PAL. To test if it was signiﬁcantly more
Page 43 of 82
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
common that PAL products had a concentration >5 mg/kg (LOQ), a χ2-test was performed
based on the matrix in table 7a and null hypothesis (a). p < 0.05 was considered a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence. The χ2-test gave a p-value of 0.54. This is above 0.05, consequently, there was no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in gluten occurrence between products labelled with or without PAL.
It indicates that there was a 54 % probability that there was no correlation between positive
products and the use of PAL.
Of the 30 positive products with and without PAL both accounted for 10 % each.
To
test if it was signiﬁcantly more common that PAL products had concentration >20 mg/kg, a
χ2-test was performed based on the matrix in table 7b and null hypothesis (b). p < 0.05 was
considered a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. The χ2-test gave a p-value of 0.93. This is above 0.05,
consequently, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in presence of concentrations > 20 mg/kg
between products labelled with or without PAL. It indicates a 93 % probability that there
was no correlation between products >20 mg/kg and the use of PAL. Since the number of
products with a concentration >20 mg/kg were very low, a Fisher test was also performed.
This resulted in a p-value of 0.68, so still a great probability that there was no correlation.
Table 7.
Matrix used for χ2-tests.
Matrix (a) used to test correlation between PAL and positive
products. Matrix (b) used to test correlation between PAL and concentration above 20 mg/kg.
(a)
Positive
Negative
Total
PAL
20
57
77
No PAL
10
41
51
Total
30
98
128
(b)
>20 ppm
Negative
Total
PAL
3
74
77
No PAL
3
48
51
Total
6
122
128
(a) H0 = Gluten contamination and label are independent of one another
(b) H0 = Concentration of gluten contamination and label are independent of one another
6.5
Deterministic risk assessment
At this point all data has been evaluated in relation to contamination and the use of PAL.
But what is even more important is the risk a product poses.
Page 44 of 82
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Risk assessment for wheat allergy
In the following it was examined if PAL was used in the proper way in relation to the protocol
from VITAL and thereby in relation to the risk for persons with WA. As described in section
3.3 VITAL have developed a standardised risk assessment protocol, including action levels
of when to use PAL based on ED 01 at 0.7 mg. The calculated transition levels are shown in
table 8. It was clear that the recommendation of when to use PAL takes the consumption into
account, since the products with a high reference amount had a lower transition level. This
was seen e.g. with soups, which had a reference amount of 500 g and a level at 1.4 mg/kg,
whereas herbs and spices mixes, bouillon cubes, and yeast extract only had a reference amount
of 20 g and a transition level of 35 mg/kg.
Table 8. Transition between action levels for food groups.The category is how the products were
divided in the sampling plan. Food groups is the groups found in Birot [42]. Reference amount is the P75
food consumption in g and level is the concentration the transition level determining PAL or not.
Category
Food group
Reference amount (g)
Level (ppm)
Cereal & cereal
products
Cereal bars
25
28.0
Legumes
130.8
5.4
Peanuts, nuts and dried fruit
40
17.5
Confectionery
Small sweets
60
11.7
Ready meals
Composite dishes
237
3.00
Soups
500
1.4
Mashed potato powder
212
3.3
Dried sauces, gravies
& mixes
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes, yeast extract
20
35.0
Snacks
Potato and other starch based
chips (including salty sticks)
50
14.0
Cookies
48
14.6
Peanuts, nuts and dried fruit
40
17.5
Cereal bars
25
28.0
Spices
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes, yeast extract
20
35.0
In table 9-12 the recommended use of PAL based on VITAL is shown for the 30 positive
products. Table 9 displays nine products stating PAL, where PAL was recommended. Table
10 shows six products which did not state PAL and where PAL was not recommended. All
six products were within the food group herbs and spices mixes, bouillon cubes, and yeast
extracts. Table 11 shows four products which did not stated PAL, but where PAL was rec-
ommended. Table 12 shows 11 products which did state a PAL, but where PAL was not
Page 45 of 82
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
recommended to use.
Table 9. The product tested positive which had a PAL and where PAL was recommended by
VITAL. PAL refers to a PAL was stated on the product. Gluten (mg/kg) is the test result. <5.00 is stated
if concentration was below LOQ. √PAL was recommended by VITAL.
Trade name
Food group
Label
Gluten
(mg/kg)
PAL
(VITAL)
Asparagus
- Cup a Soup
Soups
PAL
5.57
√
13.36
Kartofelmos
Mashed potato powder
PAL
6.73
√
<5.00
Potato snack pot
- Bacon & onion
Mashed potato powder
PAL
7.37
√
6.44
Mexi veggie burger
Composite dishes
PAL
5.77
√
<5.00
Indian Rice
Composite dishes
PAL
<5.00
√
6.48
Cashewnødder
Peanuts. nuts and dried fruit
PAL
<5.00
√
25.41
Grønne linser
Legumes
PAL
9.35
√
<5.00
Grønne linser
Legumes
PAL
24.6
√
<5.00
Kikærter
Legumes
PAL
14.61
√
<5.00
Beluga linser
Legumes
PAL
<5.00
√
6.64
Page 46 of 82
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Table 10. Positive products with no PAL where no PAL was recommended. No PAL refers to the
product did not state a PAL. Gluten (mg/kg) is the test result. <5.00 is stated if concentration was below
LOQ. ÷ no PAL was recommended by VITAL.
Trade name
Food group
Label
Gluten
(mg/kg)
PAL
(VITAL)
Basilikum
Herbs and spices mixes.
bouillon cubes yeast extract
No PAL
<5.00
÷
12.5
Knust Spidskommen
Herbs and spices mixes.
bouillon cubes yeast extract
No PAL
18.43
÷
<5.00
Timian
Herbs and spices mixes.
bouillon cubes yeast extract
No PAL
18.38
÷
<5.00
Oksebouillon
Herbs and spices mixes.
bouillon cubes yeast extract
No PAL
<5.00
÷
8.26
Spice mix for Taco original
- organic
Herbs and spices mixes.
bouillon cubes yeast extract
No PAL
<5.00
÷
6.33
Classic dip mix
Herbs and spices mixes.
bouillon cubes yeast extract
No PAL
10.85
÷
<5.00
Table 11. The product tested positive which had no PAL and where PAL was recommended
by VITAL. No PAL refers to the product did not state a PAL. Gluten (mg/kg) is the test result. <5.00 is
stated if concentration was below LOQ. √PAL was recommended by VITAL.
Trade name
Food group
Label
Gluten
(mg/kg)
PAL
(VITAL)
Karrysuppe med
grøntsager, kokosmælk og ﬂøde
Soups
No PAL
<5,00
√
5.74
Pariser chips
Potato and other starch based
chips (including salty sticks)
No PAL
17.28
√
21.23
Kokostoppe
Cookies
No PAL
39.82
√
37.83
Kokosstjerner
Cookies
No PAL
421.24
√
257.78
Page 47 of 82
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Table 12. The product tested positive which had a PAL and where PAL was not recommended
by VITAL. No PAL refers to the product did not state a PAL. Gluten (mg/kg) is the test result. <5.00 is
stated if concentration was below LOQ. ÷ no PAL was recommended by VITAL.
Trade name
Food group
Label
Gluten
(mg/kg)
PAL
(VITAL)
Sort Peber - stødt
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract
PAL
<5,00
÷
7.04
Medium stærk karry
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract
PAL
9
÷
7.4
Peber mix
- hele peberkron kværn
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract
PAL
<5,00
÷
13.21
Stødt koriander
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract
PAL
<5,00
÷
20.5
Koriander - stødt
Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract
PAL
<5,00
÷
9.98
Chips paprika
Potato and other starch based
chips (including salty sticks)
PAL
<5,00
÷
7.57
Mini Müslibar
apricot
Cereal bars
PAL
<5,00
÷
6.48
Crunchy caramel
Cereal bars
PAL
13.15
÷
11.36
Solsikkekerner
Peanuts, nuts and dried fruit
PAL
6.53
÷
<5,00
Fizzy cola
Small sweets
PAL
5.2
÷
<5,00
Six out of the 11 products in table 12 were within the food group Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract. All the products within the food group Herbs and spices mixes,
bouillon cubes yeast extract should not state a PAL based on VITALs protocol. In contrast
all products within the food groups Composite dishes, Soups, Mashed potato powder and
legumes, except one product of legumes should all state a PAL. Equal for these four food
groups was that the reference amount was high ranging from 130.8 - 500 g compared to the
other food groups which range from 20 - 50 g.
From the groups with low reference amount one product from the group Peanuts, nuts and
dried fruit, one from Potato and other starch based chips (including salty sticks) and two from
Cookies should state a PAL. The product from Peanuts, nuts and dried fruit was Cashew nuts
which had one negative test and one at 25.41 mg/kg. The product from Potato and other
Page 48 of 82
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
starch based chips (including salty sticks) was chips which had two positive test at 17.23 and
21.23 mg/kg. The two products from Cookies were both tested with a high concentration
in both duplicates, with concentrations at 39.82 and 37.83 mg/kg, and 421.24 and 257.78
mg/kg, respectively. These two products corresponds to the four outliers in ﬁgure 8 and 9.
Risk assessment for coeliac disease
The exposure by the positive products was calculated. For each product the highest con-
centration was used. The results are shown in ﬁgure 10 and 11. Figure 10 shows all results
whereas the exposure from "Kokosstjerne" was removed in ﬁgure 11 to get a better view of
the lower exposures.
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
2.9
6.7
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.1
1.9
20.2
0.4
0.2
0.3
1.0
0.3
1.2
3.2
1.9
0.9
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
13.0
14.0
15.0
16.0
17.0
18.0
19.0
20.0
21.0
22.0
Basilikum
Knust Spidskommen
Timian
Sort Peber - stødt
Medium stærk karry
Peber mix - hele peberkron kværn
Stødt koriander
Koriander - stødt
Karrysuppe med grøntsager, kokosmælk og fløde
Asparagus - Cup a Soup
Kartofelmos
Potato snack pot - Bacon & onion
Mexi veggie burger
Indian Rice
Pariser chips
Kokostoppe
Kokosstjerner
Chips paprika
Mini Müslibar apricot
Crunchy caramel
Cashewnødder
Solsikkekerner
Grønne linser
Grønne linser
Kikærter
Beluga
Oksebouillon
Spice mix for Taco original - organic
Classic dip mix
Fizzy cola
mg
Amount (mg)
Figure 10. Gluten exposure of the products >5 mg/kg. The columns shows the exposure of gluten
based consumption of the products of P75 from Birot et al. (2017) [42].
Page 49 of 82
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
2.9
6.7
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.1
1.9
0.4
0.2
0.3
1.0
0.3
1.2
3.2
1.9
0.9
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
Basilikum
Knust Spidskommen
Timian
Sort Peber - stødt
Medium stærk karry
Peber mix - hele peberkron kværn
Stødt koriander
Koriander - stødt
Karrysuppe med grøntsager, kokosmælk og fløde
Asparagus - Cup a Soup
Kartofelmos
Potato snack pot - Bacon & onion
Mexi veggie burger
Indian Rice
Pariser chips
Kokostoppe
Chips paprika
Mini Müslibar apricot
Crunchy caramel
Cashewnødder
Solsikkekerner
Grønne linser
Grønne linser
Kikærter
Beluga
Oksebouillon
Spice mix for Taco original - organic
Classic dip mix
Fizzy cola
mg
Amount (mg)
Figure 11. Gluten exposure of the products >5 mg/kg. The columns shows the exposure of gluten
based consumption of the products of P75 from Birot et al. (2017) [42]. Excluding "kokosstjerner".
Only one product, "Kokosstjerne", was found to exceed the 10 mg/d, which was the limit
based on the ﬁndings in Catassi et al.(2007) [27]. Eating this one product could cause an
response in some CD individuals. Since it is the exposure of gluten during a whole day which
is determined for CD individuals, the other products below an exposure of 10 mg could
be a risk when consumed together with other gluten contaminated products. Consumption
of e.g. "Karrysuppe med grøntsager, kokosmælk og ﬂøde", " Aspargus - Cup a Soup" and
"Kartofelmos" at one day would also exceed the TDI at 10 mg/d. The consumption of the
tested products together was investigated in a probabilistic risk assessment and the results
are described in the following.
6.6
Probabilistic risk assessment
A probabilistic risk assessment was performed for all three scenarios counting all products,
PAL and without PAL. The products included were the tested products in the present study
and the products tested in Denmark from the Nordic co-operation study (section 5). The
consumption amount was found by the best describing groups in Birot et al. (2017) using
mean and sd [35, 42]. The mean percentage of CD individual at risk from eating the products
without gluten ingredients for the three scenarios are shown in 13.
Page 50 of 82
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Using a distribution around a TDI of 30 mg/d and only using concentration above LOQ, 5.5
% of persons with CD would have a response eating products both with and without PAL.
The percentage was lower when consuming either PAL or without PAL 0.4 % and 4.4 %,
respectively. If a point estimate of TDI at 30 mg/d was used, 2.1 % of persons with CD
would have an reaction if eating all products and 1.4 % eating only products without PAL.
No individuals would react if only consuming products with PAL.
Including the detected concentrations below LOQ for TDI 30 ±10 mg/d, 9.6 % of persons
with CD would develop a response eating products with and without PAL. Eating either with
or without PAL 0.7 % and 7.7% would have an response, respectively. For the point estimate
of TDI 30 mg/d 3.8 % of persons with CD would have an response if eating all products
and 2.7 % if only eating products without PAL. No individuals would react consuming only
products with PAL.
Table 13. Percentage of population with coeliac disease at risk of reaction due to consumption
of the tested products. The results from three diﬀerent scenarios ALL, PAL and No PAL are shown. The
results from using minimum at 5 mg/kg and 1 mg/kg shown. Besides, results from risk assessment excluding
the concentrations 257.78 and 421.24 mg/kg are shown for all products and without PAL. The probabilistic
risk assessment was performed with 100,000 iterations.
Excluding 421.24 mg/kg
100.000 iterations
All
PAL
No PAL
All
No PAL
Mean %
Mean %
Mean %
Mean %
Mean %
Minimum 5 mg/kg
Distribution
30 +/- 10 mg/d
5.5
0.4
4.4
0.6
0.1
Point estimate
30 mg/d
2.1
0.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
Minimum 1 mg/kg
Distribution
30 +/- 10 mg/d
9.6
0.7
7.7
0.8
0.3
Point estimate
30 mg/d
3.8
0.0
2.7
0.0
0.0
Page 51 of 82
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Sensitivity
The risk from the probabilistic risk assessment showed higher risk for persons with CD con-
suming products without PAL compared to products with PAL. The higher risk was assumed
to be caused by the one product with gluten concentrations at 257.78 and 421.24 mg/kg.
To test how sensitive the probabilistic risk assessment was if one high concentration was
included, risk assessments for the two scenarios including all products and without PAL ex-
cluding the high concentration were conducted. The risk of persons with CD was 0.6 % for
all products and 0.1 % for products without PAL using TDI of 30 ±10 mg/kg and no risk
for both scenarios for TDI at 30 mg/kg (table 13). Using a minimum at 1 mg/kg instead of
5 mg/kg resulted in an increased risk, 0.8 % for all products and 0.3 % for products without
PAL (table 13).
When including the concentrations below LOQ the prevalence of persons who would have
a response increases. The percentage increase was 73 % for all products, PAL 68 %, and
without 75 %.
Histograms in ﬁgure 12 and 13 shows distribution of the probability of diﬀerent intake of
gluten in mg/d. In ﬁgure 12 products with a minimum at 5 mg/kg are included and in 13
with a minimum 1 mg/kg was used. From the two histograms it is seen that using a mini-
mum at 1 mg/kg instead of 5 mg/kg resulted in diﬀerent distribution, since the probability
of consuming 1 mg/d - 4.9 mg/d was included. Giving higher probability of an gluten intake,
since the exposure between 1 - 4.9 mg/d was set to zero when using 5 mg/d as the minimum
value. The same were seen for the other scenarios. Exposure histograms for PAL and without
PAL is found in Appendix E.
Page 52 of 82
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Figure 12. Histogram of the probability of gluten intake in mg with minimum concentration
at 5 mg/kg.
Figure 13. Histogram of the probability of gluten intake in mg with minimum concentration
at 1 mg/kg.
Mean consumption from probabilistic risk assessment
As all investigated food groups were included in the probabilistic risk assessment the total
mean consumption per day was estimated. The mean consumption was found to be around
1.31 ± 0.25 kg for all three scenarios. The exact mean consumption and sd is stated in table
14. Comparing the mean consumption from the probabilistic risk assessment with the mean
Page 53 of 82
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
consumption from the study Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-2013 (section 5), the mean
consumption showed an overestimation of 0.14 kg.
Table 14. Mean consumption in kg. The mean consumption from three diﬀerent scenarios ALL, PAL
and No PAL are shown. The consumption from using minimum at 5 mg/kg and 1 mg/kg shown. Besides,
results from risk assessment excluding the concentrations 257.78 and 421.24 mg/kg are shown for all products
and without PAL. The probabilistic risk assessment was performed with 100,000 iterations.
100.000 iterations
All
PAL
No PAL
All
No PAL
Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean
kg
kg
kg
kg
kg
Minimum 5 mg/kg
Mean
1.31
1.31
1.31
1.30
1.31
SD
0.26
0.26
0.25
0.25
0.25
Minimum 1 mg/kg
Mean
1.31
1.31
1.31
1.30
1.31
SD
0.26
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.25
6.7
Results from the Bakeries
Meyers
The preparations for the gluten free baking class took place in a kitchen where gluten was
present and gluten containing products were produced concurrent. Though, the preparations
was limited to an area where only gluten-free products were prepared. The preparations in-
cluded weighing out the dry ingredients, roasting nuts and mixing the dough which rested
until the day after. The gluten-free ingredients were stored in air sealed containers or in the
original packaging.
The baking class took place in another kitchen where only gluten-free products were baked
during the class. Before the class the kitchen was cleaned and ovens were cleaned if they were
obvious dirty. The gluten-free ingredients were stored in open containers during the class.
Even though, only gluten-free products were made, gluten was present since preparations of
gluten containing bread took place before the class and after cleaning.
Diﬀerent procedures were used for the diﬀerent types of breads. Hirsebrød was rising in bread
prooﬁng basket covered with a tea towel and baked in a pot. Havreboller was rising in a
airconcealed container. Kernebrød and Fødsesldagsboller were rising and baked in a baking
tin. Klemtin klister was baked in silicone forms. The ingredients for all breads are listed in
Page 54 of 82
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix F.
Samples tested included the dry ingredients and ﬁnal product of Hirsebrød, Havreboller,
Kernebrød, Fødsesldagsboller and Klementin klister (table 15). The ﬁnal products of Hirse-
brød, Kernebrød and Klementin klister had concentrations above LOQ. The two samples of
Hirsebrød was similar with concentrations of 12.62 and 12.24 mg/kg. Kernebrød had two
positive tests as well, but one was remarkable higher at 37.22 mg/kg. Klementin klister had
one positive at 13.36 mg/kg.
The concentration of gluten in the dry ingredients were in generel low ranging from 0-6.32
mg/kg, expect one sample from fødselsdagsboller which had a concentration of 18.3 mg/kg.
All results including the concentrations out of range are shown in table 15.
Table 15.
Gluten concentration in breads and raw material from Meyers. Red indicates that
concentrations was below LOQ. Concentrations in columns <LOQ was calculated out of range.
Product
Dry ingredients
Final Product
mg/kg
mg/kg (<LOQ )
mg/kg
mg/kg (<LOQ)
Hirsebrød
<5.00
2.93
12.62
<5.00
3.71
12.24
Havreboller
6.25
<5.00
3.08
<5.00
3.57
<5.00
4.02
Kernebrød
5.91
9.11
<5.00
1.22
37.22
Fødselsdagsboller
5.83
<5.00
2.09
18.30
<5.00
3.28
Klementin klister
<5.00
3.28
<5.00
2.24
6.32
13.36
The American Pie Company
During the visit and sampling at The American Pie Company observations were obtained.
Gluten-free pies were not scheduled and no particular procedure was followed. All ingredi-
ents were either labelled gluten-free or naturally free of gluten and no ingredients had PAL.
Ingredients were stored in air sealed containers or original packaging. Equipment was cleaned
in the dishwasher, except the food processor used to grind the cookies which was cleaned by
hand. Final products were stored together with gluten containing products. The crust for
Page 55 of 82
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
both gluten-free pies was prepared in one batch. The ingredients used in the two pies are
listed in Appendix F.
At The American Pie Company the ﬁnal pies, Pumpkin pie and Key lime pie were tested.
Both samples of Pumpkin pie were below LOQ at 1.09 and 0.96 mg/kg. One of the samples
of Key lime pie had a concentration at 6.99 mg/kg whereas the other sample was below LOQ
and had a 0.94 mg/kg (table 16). Since low concentrations of gluten in the two pies were
determined, the ingredients were not tested.
Table 16. Gluten concentration in pies from The American Pie Company. Red indicates that
concentrations was below LOQ. Concentrations in columns <LOQ was calculated out of range.
Product
mg/kg
mg/kg <LOQ
Pumpkin pie
<5.00
1.09
<5.00
0.96
Key lime pie
6.99
<5.00
0.94
La Glace
From the visit at La Glace several observations were obtained. The production of gluten
reduced products was not scheduled before the gluten containing products and it was pro-
cessed concurrently with the other products. In the morning all ingredients for both gluten
reduced and gluten containing ingredients were weighed out. No speciﬁc protocol was fol-
lowed, besides gluten reduced products were not baked in the oven at the same time as gluten
containing products. The baked and ﬁnal products were cooling down in the same areas as
the other products. Ingredients were all stored in the production area in airtight containers.
The ingredients in the sampled products did not have a PAL. Equipment was wet cleaned by
hand, but no speciﬁc cleaning procedure for the gluten reduced products. The ﬁnal products
were not separated from the other products in the production area or in the confectioner’s
shop. The ingredients for all three cake bottoms were mixed in a large food mixer, which
did not have a lid. Mandelbund and Makronbund were poured on baking tray before baking.
Margrethebund was rolled out on the table, cooled, and cut into pieces at the table before
baking. The ingredients for the cake bottoms is listed in Appendix F.
The four ﬁnal cakes, Valnøddekage, Lucky you, Chocolette, and Margrethekage were tested.
Page 56 of 82
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Only one sample of the ﬁnal cakes, Chocolette, had a concentration above LOQ at 10.02
mg/kg.
Three cake bottoms were also tested.
Mandelbund and Makronbund both had
concentration above LOQ for all samples.
Contrary, both samples were below LOQ for
Margrethebund. The Mandelbund was used in Valnøddekage and Margrethebund was used
in Margrethekage (table 17).
Because samples of the mouses were not collected, gluten
concentration of the ingredients other than the tested cake bottoms were not determined.
Table 17. Gluten concentration in cakes and cake bottoms from La Glace. Red indicates that
concentrations was below LOQ. Concentrations in columns <LOQ was calculated out of range.
Product
Cake bottom
Final Product
mg/kg
mg/kg (<LOQ )
mg/kg
mg/kg (<LOQ)
Valnøddekage
8.2
<5.00
1.1
7.47
<5.00
1.2
Lucky you
<5.00
1.64
<5.00
1.47
Chocolette
10.02
<5.00
3.41
Margrethekage
<5.00
3.69
<5.00
3.41
<5.00
2.32
<5.00
3.41
12.01
6.71
Page 57 of 82
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
7
Discussion
7.1
ELISA method
The ELISA method used in this study was the R5 ELISA Ridascreen® Gliadin. It is of
the type approved by Codex Alimentarius for detection of gluten in food products [36].
There is a great understanding of the performance of the R5 method. Therefore, limitations
of this method are also well described. A limitation is the factor of two used to convert
from gliadin to total gluten. The distribution of 50:50 gliadin and glutenin does often not
reﬂect the reality. The method also overestimates gluten concentration when testing products
containing rye or barley. These two limitations tends to give a higher concentration than
the true contamination. In general it is in favour of CD and WA individuals when using the
method for quality control. For this thesis, the overestimation will reﬂect a higher risk. Yet
it is better than an underestimation, which might not reveal if there is a risk [47].
Extraction
Two times 30 g was homogenised, giving a total of 60 g of each product being tested. Though,
if the contamination was particular or non-uniform in the product, it is uncertain if the
contaminated part has been sampled. In addition, only a small part, 0.25 ± 0.03 g, of the
30 g was extracted. This could explain the low percentage of both extractions being positive
for a product. Only 5.5 % of all products, corresponding to 23.3 % of the positive products,
had a gluten concentration above 5 mg/kg in both extractions. In a study by Rzychon et al.
(2017) one of the most dominant components of variability within ELISA kits was found to
be the extraction [48]. The low percentage of both extractions being positive for a product
could to some extend be explained by some products being collected and tested in duplicates.
Table 6 in section 6.3 shows the numbers, and 8/23 products were collected and tested in
duplicates. On the other hand 15/23 of the products with only one positive extraction were
extraction from the same product. It can therefore not be concluded that the low percentage
is only due to the extractions were from duplicates of a product.
7.2
Sampling
Due to lack of a harmonised protocol for sampling products for allergen analysis, a sampling
plan was made based on the Nordic co-operation study and FSA study [9, 10]. In total 128
products were collected within the six food categories used in the FSA study [10]. Since
Page 58 of 82
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
the risk assessments were conducted based on the food groups from Birot [42], some of the
food groups only counted a very limited number of products. The food group Cookies in-
cluded only three products and all without PAL. If the sampling plan had been based on
the groups from Birot [42] instead of the FSA [10], the number of products could have been
better distributed between groups. Giving a better indication and less uncertainty of the
concentration and prevalence within these groups. Even though, the number products in a
food group and the number of products with or without PAL was a result of the available
products and thereby represent the market. The low number of cookies was a reﬂection of
the low number of cookies available without gluten containing ingredients.
Furthermore, the products were personally collected in the Super markets, biasing how ran-
dom the collection was. However, this study was performed to give a snapshot of the preva-
lence and concentration of contamination and not represent the entire Danish retail market.
7.3
Prevalence of contamination
The number of positive products in the present study was 30/128 (23.4%) of all products,
20/77 (26.0%) of products with PAL and 10/51 (19.6%) of products without PAL. In the
study by the Nordic co-operation [9] only 3.6% of all products were contaminated, hereof 1/30
(3.3%) with PAL and 5/137 (4.4%) without PAL. In the study by FSA [10] 33/542 (6.1%)
samples were positive, 15 had a PAL and 18 did not have a PAL. From the report the number
of tested products with and without was unclear. Though, the prevalence of contaminated
products are remarkable lower compared to the ﬁndings in this thesis. It could be explained
by the sampling plan for the present study being more directed to gluten contamination than
the two studies from FSA and Nordic co-operation who tested for several allergen [9, 10].
In section 6.3 the prevalence in percentage of positive products within each groups was
found. This gave a better indication of the prevalence than just the number, since number
of tested products varied. Nevertheless, there is a greater uncertainty of the true prevalence
with only a few products tested, as in the Ready meal category compared to Spices.
The prevalence within the categories were not comparable with those found by FSA [10].
There was a great diﬀerence in the Ready meal category, in the present study 45 % was
positive and in FSA it was only 5.3 %. 42 % of snacks was tested positive which was 11.8
% in FSA. Dried sauces, gravies & mixes had a lower prevalence of 13 % compared to 26.5
% in FSA. For confectionery 6 % was tested positive and only 1.2 % from FSA was positive.
The category Cereals & cereals products was more comparable with 31 % and 26.7 % in
Page 59 of 82
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
the present study and FSA, respectively. The diﬀerence could again be explained by the
sampling plan being more focused on gluten contamination. Products with expected risk of
gluten contamination was namely collected in the present study.
7.4
Use of PAL
In Denmark no harmonised protocol for the use of PAL exist. Even so, the Danish Veterinary
and Food administration have a guidance of the use of PAL aimed at food allergy. This states
that a risk assessment should be conducted. This can be diﬃcult in relation to CD, since the
impact of trace amounts of gluten and a TDI is not established for CD individuals. Especially
the lack of knowledge on the TDI and the symptoms makes it complicated. The amount to
induce a reaction in WA individuals was found to be 0.7 mg for ED01, this is lower than
the 10 mg/d found for individuals with CD. So based on this it could be assumed that the
industry uses PAL in relation to risk of persons with WA, since the most sensitive population
should be considered.
Correlation of PAL and contamination
From the 30 positive products, 14 should state a PAL when following the VITAL protocol
[18, 41]. Out of these ten was stating a PAL and four should add PAL. Contrary, 16 should
not state a PAL but ten of 16 did state a PAL. Of the 16 products 12 were within the category
Herbs and spices mixes, bouillon cubes, yeast extract. This food group included food which
is expected to be consumption in low quantities and a relative high quantity of 20 g was even
used in this thesis. In addition, all products recommended removing PAL had a reference
amount of 20-50 g. Leading to the idea that the industry consider the concentration and not
the amount consumed when conducting a risk assessment and deciding if products should
state a PAL.
FSA [10] found 81 % not contaminated but stating a PAL, in this thesis it was 58 %. The
Nordic co-operation [9] found that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in detected gluten be-
tween products labelled with and without PAL. This thesis found similar results. Though, it
should be kept in mind that PAL might indicate a sporadic prevalence of contamination and
that, as discussed earlier, some products might be particular or heterogeneous contaminated.
This leads to uncertainties about the true prevalence of contaminated products. Since all
three studies only included a limited number of products, it is only a snapshot of the market.
Thereby it probably does not represent the true prevalence of gluten contamination [9, 10].
Page 60 of 82
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Positive and negative products
In relation to particular or heterogeneous contamination the low percentage of products with
both extractions being positive could be explained by this. Though, it was not considered
when using the approach of a product addressed as positive if just one test was positive. Given
that it was not taken into account that a product with two positive tests most likely poses a
higher risk than a product with only one positive test. Moreover, a product was addressed
as negative if the concentration was below LOQ (5 mg/kg). Since the LOD was 1 mg/kg all
products with a detected concentration between 1 and 4.9 mg/kg were not considered in the
deterministic risk assessment, even though they could be a risk. From table 8 in section 6.5 it
is seen that products in the Ready meal category would be a risk for WA individual if there
were detectable gluten below LOQ. In appendix G all results with a detected concentration
below LOQ are indicated in red and it is obvious that numerous products had detectable
gluten below LOQ. All these products could add up to a daily consumption of gluten and
be a risk for persons with CD. Although, detectable concentrations below LOQ cannot be
included in the assessment since the concentration cannot be quantiﬁed. But it is important
to be aware of the low trace amounts.
7.5
Tolerable daily intake of gluten in CD
The daily consumption of gluten is determining for CD individuals and not single expo-
sure. Since CD is chronic condition and ﬁnding TDI can be very diﬃcult. Symptoms and
histological changes might occur in the long term making it demanding to detect the long
term eﬀect of the ingested amount of gluten, resulting in comprehensive trials. In addition,
challenging CD persons with gluten might cause chronic impact so for ethical reasons these
studies cannot prolong. Another factor, complicating establishing a TDI is that the quality
of the ingested aﬀects the response [27].
The FDA used a safety assessment approach, which included using UF, resulting in the
low TDI compared to the results in Catassi et al. (2007). In food allergy risk assessments
UFs are normally not applied. Though, it is uncertain if the most sensitive individuals are
included in the studies which is taken into account when using UFs.
The two reviews Akobeng et al. (2008) and Cohen et al. (2019) based the conclusion on the
study by Catassi et al. (2007) [17, 25, 27]. Catassi [27] found that the daily gluten intake
from contamination for persons with CD should be kept under 50 mg/d. A speciﬁc TDI was
Page 61 of 82
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
therefore not established, but only found to be below 50 mg/d. A TDI should reﬂect the
total consumption of gluten during a day and not only gluten from contamination. Catassi
[27] found the background intake from the GFD to be below 5 mg/d based on testing of 42
random products. Tested products had a concentration ranging from 0-50 mg/kg and the
consumption of the gluten-free products ranged from 177-574 g. The assumption of the back-
ground intake being 5 mg/kg gives rise to uncertainties, since the distribution of exposure
was not considered. Some individuals could have consumed high amounts and some very
small amounts. A more exact exposure for each individual would have given a better insight
in the total gluten consumed per day. It could explain why some reacted to challenge of 10
mg/d and others had improvements at the challenge of 50 mg/d [27]. Though, this might
just be explained by the diversity in sensitivity between persons with CD [27]. Furthermore,
the challenge of either 10 mg or 50 mg were given in one capsule each day. Thereby, a high
concentration of gluten was given at one point, and not distributed over the whole day. In
addition Catassi [27] refers to a long term follow up study by Kuakinen et al. (1990) who
found CD individuals consuming 5-150 mg gluten/d (mean 34 mg gluten/d) for about eight
years did not develop histological abnormalities [49]. The daily intake of gluten was not mea-
sured but calculated based on the assumption that it did not exceed the Codex Alimentarius
standard. Resulting in it being impossible to access the true gluten consumption. The con-
trol group was of persons not suﬀering from CD. This put together makes it diﬃcult to make
well-based conclusion. This illustrates how diﬃcult it is to ﬁnd well documented studies of
TDI for CD persons. No similar studies to the one conducted by Catassi et al. (2007) was
found, giving the results from Catassi [27] to be the state of the art.
Based on the above we chose to use 10 mg/d for analysing the risk of consumption of one
product, which is also in line with the conclusion from Akobeng et al. (2007) that a daily
intake <10 mg is unlikely to cause signiﬁcant histological eﬀects [25]. No deﬁnite threshold
is yet found and the distribution of sensitive is unknown, so a TDI of 30 ± 10 mg/d when
conducting the risk of the daily intake of gluten was chosen. This was chosen despite it
would most likely cause an overestimation, since a overestimation of a risk is better than not
revealing a true risk.
7.6
Risk assessment
A deterministic and a probabilistic risk assessment of CD was conducted in this thesis. The
deterministic risk assessment did not consider the probability of a product being contami-
nated or the variation of the contamination. It only provide limited information of the actual
Page 62 of 82
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
risk. A probabilistic risk assessment was therefore performed, since this approach consider
the probability of a products being contaminated and consumed. Besides, it is the approach
which is considered to be the most promising to use in population risk assessment [32, 44].
Valid for both approaches is that the results of the risk assessment is only as true as the
input data. Limitations and uncertainties of the input data and the impact should therefor
be addressed.
Deterministic
Besides the limited information of the actual risk, other limitations of the approach is also
present. Due to limited knowledge of eﬀects of low doses for CD individuals, it is unknown
if products containing low trace amounts would pose a risk for CD patients [27]. Contrary,
it is very conservative to use 10 mg/d since many CD individuals tolerates higher amounts
[27]. However, the most sensitive individuals should be considered when conducting a risk
assessment. Despite that, the 10 mg/d was used to evaluate just a single product and not
the consumption of a whole day. We found that only one product exceed 10 mg/d, when
considering the consumption at P75 based on Blom [35] and consumption data from Birot
[42].
Probabilistic
The probabilistic risk assessment considered the probability of consuming a contaminated
product and the concentration, based on the prevalence of positive products, taking into
account that both positive and negative products will be consumed. The risk assessment only
considering products without PAL showed remarkable higher risk than for only including
PAL. This must be ascribed to the product, kokosstjerne, which had a concentration of
421.24 mg/kg. The concentration is almost 17 times higher than the highest concentration
of 25.41 with PAL. Besides, this product was in the group of Cookies which did not include
any products with PAL. Thereby no similar product contributes to the risk in the products
with PAL. This assumption was tested by risk assessments where the high concentration
421.24 mg/kg was excluded.
This resulted that 0.6 % of persons with CD would be in
risk if consuming all products and 0.1 % consuming products without PAL, conﬁrming the
assumption.
Since the number of products tested only gives a snapshot of the prevalence of positive
products, it is not representative for all products without gluten containing ingredients on
the market. In addition, it could be questioned how good the product represent a daily
Page 63 of 82
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
diet. To address this, the mean consumption was compared with the mean consumption
from the Danish adult population from the Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-2013 [45, 46].
The mean consumption from the probabilistic risk assessment was 0.14 kg higher than the
mean consumption from the Danish dietary study. In addition, it must be assumed that
CD individuals dietary also consist of gluten-free products and naturally gluten-free foods.
Catassi [27] found the consumption of gluten-free products to be 332 ± 98 g. The mean
consumption from the probabilistic risk assessment was therefore overestimated compared to
the Danish dietary study. Resulting in a overestimated risk. Furthermore, the use of TDI
at 30 ± 10 mg/d was a very conservative choice, as the TDI used in the deterministic risk
assessment. This will lead to an overestimation of the risk, based on the assumption that
most CD individuals tolerates 30 mg/d.
Tolerable risk
The two risk assessments give a risk of consuming the tested products with and without
PAL if you have CD. Prerequisite to the application of such risk assessment is deﬁning a
tolerable level of risk. It is unrealistic to have zero risk, as with all other risk in society [32].
When implementing the regulation of gluten-free products at 20 ppm a risk concerning CD
persons was accepted. The same is needed if regulation of PAL should apply, but deﬁning
a tolerable risk is a policy decision [32]. It can be very diﬃcult to agree on what level is
safe since the sensitives towards allergens varies between individuals [33]. Based on commu-
nication with COOP it was obviously that the industry do not want to make this decision [50].
7.7
The impact of precautionary allergen labelling
Based on the ﬁndings in this thesis, it must be assumed that the industry applies PAL based
on risk assessments in relation to WA. Insight in the use of PAL in COOP revealed and
conﬁrmed that they use PAL in relation to WA. It was also communicated that it is often
due to the suppliers state PAL on the raw materials [50]. Another reason why the industry
applies PAL is due to lack of information to do a scientiﬁc risk assessment [32].
Since the tolerable amount for WA individuals is lower than for CD individuals, it could be
assumed that products without PAL would be safe for CD individuals. Though, products
stating a PAL could still be safe for consumption by persons with CD. Since a PAL do not
provide information on the upper limit, it is diﬃcult to advice CD persons if they can consume
products with PAL. Additionally, it has been shown both in the present study and the study
Page 64 of 82
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
by Nordic co-operation [9], that there is no correlation between the use of PAL and gluten
contamination. In addition, several products without quantiﬁed contamination stated a PAL.
This ﬁnding contributes to the mistrust among the consumers, which is already described [8].
From the 128 products tested only six products had concentrations exceeding the gluten-
free limit of 20 ppm, which in general is found as safe for persons with CD [6].
Considering the uncertainties of the input data, this risk found in the probabilistic risk as-
sessment are most likely overestimated. The risk was found that 5.5 % individuals with CD
would be in risk if consuming products both with an without PAL. The risk for persons with
CD consuming PAL was even lower at 0.4% and taking the overestimation into account the
risk of PAL products based on this study is almost nonexistent.
7.8
Contamination in bakeries
The results from the three bakeries, Meyers, The American Pie Company and La Glace were
non consistent and therefore diﬃcult to generalise. Even though, all ﬁnal products except
one sample were below 20 mg/kg which is the limit of gluten-free. Based on that, only the
safety of Kernebrød could be questioned due to the concentration of 37.22 mg/kg. The dry
ingredients were tested, to ﬁnd the source of gluten. The two samples had low concentrations
at 5.83 and 1.22 mg/kg, and this would further be diluted in the ﬁnal product due to wet
ingredients. Thus, the gluten found could be caused by contamination during the production
of the products. However, Havreboller and Fødsesldagsboller had concentrations below 5
mg/kg so production without contamination was possible. Despite that, contamination dur-
ing the process cannot be eliminated as the source, since contamination could be sporadic.
Another explanation of the diverse levels of gluten could be the heterogeneous Kernebrød
dough, which could cause heterogeneous contamination if the contamination was from the
raw materials.
The two pies from The American Pie company had low or non-quantiﬁable concentration.
These products do not pose a risk.
In addition, it shows that it is possible to produce
gluten-free and gluten containing products in the same bakery/kitchen without high levels
of contamination.
Only one of the ﬁnal products, Chocolette, from La Glace had concentration >5 mg/kg.
This products contained puﬀed rice, which could be assumed to be processed where gluten
Page 65 of 82
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
containing products were processed as well. Even so, Chocolette had a concentration of 10
mg/kg and is assumed to be consumed in low quantities and therefore not posing a risk.
Two of the three cake bottoms had quantiﬁable gluten concentrations. The cake bottoms
only constituted a small part of the cakes and was not concerning, since the concentration
was diluted by the other parts of the cakes. This was seen with Valnøddekagen, which only
had very low concentrations even though it contained Mandelbund.
Page 66 of 82
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
8
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to form a foundation for advising persons with CD how they should
act upon PAL and products produced where gluten is present. The aim was met by pro-
viding data of the prevalence and concentration of gluten of a snapshot of products without
gluten containing ingredients with and without PAL. Besides, the inﬂuence of baking without
gluten containing ingredients in same facilities as gluten containing products was addressed.
Quantitative analysis of the gluten contamination in pre-packed food products and products
from bakeries were conducted and the results were analysed by applying deterministic and
probabilistic risk assessment with emphasis on CD.
Based on the snapshot of products, it was shown that there is no correlation between gluten
contamination and the use of PAL. This was in line with the ﬁndings in the study by Nordic
co-operation. Despite of that, the probabilistic risk assessment showed higher risk of con-
suming products without PAL compared to products with PAL. Though, the higher risk was
driven by just one product with high gluten concentration. Taking the uncertainties of the
approach into account the risk was found to be overestimated, mainly due to overestimated
consumption and a conservative choice of TDI. Consumption of products without gluten
containing ingredients with and without PAL, based on the ﬁndings in this thesis, pose a
low risk for individuals with CD. Even so, when advising CD individuals it should be kept
in mind that one product without PAL showed great levels of contamination.
The thesis also revealed requirement for harmonised standards of when to apply PAL, since
no compliance between PAL and contamination was found. Numerous products stated PAL
without quantiﬁable gluten concentration.
Products produced in non-industrial bakeries were not found to be a risk for CD individuals,
expect one products which showed inconclusive results. Based on these results it was shown
that with proper cleaning it is possible to make gluten-free bread and cakes in areas where
gluten containing food is prepared as well.
Page 67 of 82
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
9
Future perspective
Future work on this thesis should look into the mean consumption from the probabilistic
risk assessment, since more realistic consumption data is needed. This could be obtained by
looking more into detail of data from the study Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-2013, and
adjust the consumption.
The thesis also showed that there is a lack of scientiﬁc knowledge of the tolerable daily
intake of gluten for CD individuals. Besides, insight in the dietary habits of CD individuals
are needed. At the moment only studies of consumption of gluten-free products have been
conducted.
Future work might, for example, look into:
• Similar dose-response studies as Catassi et al. (2007) for a more scientiﬁcally proved
tolerable daily intake of gluten for individuals with CD.
• Studies of the consumption products without gluten containing products, beyond gluten-
free products.
• Establishment of actions levels regarding precautionary labelling both in relation to
wheat allergy and coeliac disease.
Page 68 of 82
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Bibliography
[1] Kucek, L. K., Veenstra, L. D., Amnuaycheewa, P. and Sorrells, M. E. A grounded guide
to gluten how modern genotypes and processing impact wheat sensitivity. Comprehensive
Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 14:285–302, 2015.
[2] Lebwohl, B., Sanders, D. S., and Green, P. H.R. Coeliac disease. The Lancet, 391:70–81,
2017.
[3] Scherf, K. A. and Koehler, P. and Wieser, H.
Gluten and wheat sensitivities - an
overview. Journal of Cereal Science, 67:2–11, 2016.
[4] Horstmann, S. W., Lynch, K. M., and Arendt, E. K. Starch Characteristics Linked to
Gluten-Free Products. Foods, 6:29, 2017.
[5] Gujral, N., Freeman, H. J., and Thomson, A. B. R. Celiac disease: Prevalence, diagnosis,
pathogenesis and treatment. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 18:6036–6059, 2012.
[6] Joint Food, Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and World Health Orga-
nization.
Codex Alimentarius standard for foods for special dietary use for persons
intolerant to gluten. Standard 118-1979. Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome, 1999.
[7] Ministry of Enviroment, Food Danish Veterinary, and Food administration.
18.
allergener.
https://www.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Selvbetjening/Vejledninger/
Maerkningsvejledning/Sider/18_Allergener.aspx. Accessed on 2019-10-24.
[8] Sherlock, R., Taylor, S. L., Pfaﬀ, S., Grinter, K., and Crevel, R.W.R. May Contain -
To Use or Not? ed. Madsen, C. B. and Crevel, R. W. R and Mill, C. and Taylor, S. L.
Risk Management for Food Allergy, pages 261–272, 2013. Madsen, C. B. and Crevel, R.
W. R and Mill, C. and Taylor, S. L.
[9] Bolin, Y. S and Lindeberg, I. Undeclared allergens in food - Food control, analyses and
risk assessment. Nordic Council of Ministers, Nordic Council of Ministers Secretariat,
2016.
[10] Hirst B. Survey of allergen advisory labelling and allergen content of UK retail pre-
packed processed foods. Project Code FS241038 (T07067) Project. FSA, 241038, 2014.
[11] Remington, B. C., Baumert, J. L., Blom, W. M. and Houben, G. F., Taylor, S. L.,
and Kruizinga, A. G. Unintended allergens in precautionary labelled and unlabelled
Page 69 of 82
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
products pose signiﬁcant risks to UK allergic consumers. Allergy: European Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 70:813–819, 2015.
[12] P. R. Shewry. Darwin Review Wheat. Journal of experimental botany, 60:1537–1553,
2009.
[13] H. Wieser. Chemistry of gluten proteins. Food Microbiology, 24:115–119, 2007.
[14] Husby, S., Olsson, C. and Ivarsson, A. Celiac Disease and Risk Management of Gluten.
ed. Madsen, C. B. and Crevel, R. W. R and Mill, C. and Taylor, S. L. Risk Management
for Food Allergy, pages 129–152, 2013.
[15] Hochegger, R., Mayer, W. and Prochaska, M. Comparison of R5 and G12 Antibody-
Based ELISA Used for the Determination of the Gluten Content in Oﬃcial Food Sam-
ples. Foods, 4:654–664, 2015.
[16] Shewry, P. R., Tatham, A. S., Forde, J., Kreis, M. and Miﬂin, B. J. The classiﬁcation
and nomenclature of wheat gluten proteins: A reassessment. Journal of Cereal Science,
4:97–106, 1986.
[17] Cohen, I. S., Day, A. S. and Shaoul, R.
Gluten in Celiac Disease—More or Less?
Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal, 10, 2019.
[18] Allergen Bureau. Vital 2.0 - what you need to know.”. http://allergenbureau.net/
wp-content/uploads/2014/03/VITAL-what-you-need-to-know1.pdf/. Accessed on
2020-09-01.
[19] Horwitz, A., Skaaby, T., Kårhus, L. L. and Schwarz, P. , Jorgensen, T., Rumessen, J. J.,
and Linneberg, A. Screening for celiac disease in Danish adults. Scandinavian Journal
of Gastroenterology, 50:824–831, 2015.
[20] Naegeli, H., Birch, A. N., Casacuberta, J., De Schrijver, A., Gralak, M. A., Guerche, P.,
Jones, H., Manachini, B., Messéan, A., Nielsen, E. E., Nogué, F., Robaglia, C., Rostoks,
N., Sweet, J., Tebbe, C., Visioli, F., Wal, J., Eigenmann, P., Epstein, M., Hoﬀmann-
Sommergruber, K., Koning, F., Lovik, M., Mills, C., Moreno, F. J., van Loveren, H. and
Selb, R., and Fernandez Dumont, A. Guidance on allergenicity assessment of genetically
modiﬁed plants. EFSA Journal, 15, 2017.
[21] Murphy, K. and C. Weaver.
Janeway’s Immunobiology.
Garland Science, Taylor &
Francis Group, LLC, 9. edition, 2017. Zayetz, E.
Page 70 of 82
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
[22] Food and Drug Administration.
Health Hazard Assessment for Gluten Exposure in
Individuals with Celiac Disease : Determination of Tolerable Daily Intake Levels and
Levels of Concern for Gluten. 2011.
[23] De Re, V., Magris, R., and Cannizzaro, R. New insights into the pathogenesis of celiac
disease. Frontiers in Medicine, 4:137, 2017.
[24] BioRender. BioRender - about us. Visited 2020-29-01.
[25] Akobeng, A. K. and Thomas, A. G. Systematic review: Tolerable amount of gluten for
people with coeliac disease. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 27:1044–1052,
2008.
[26] Gibert, A., Espadaler, M., Canela, M. A., Sánchez, A., Vaqué, C., and Rafecas, M.
Consumption of gluten-free products: Should the threshold value for trace amounts
of gluten be at 20, 100 or 200 p.p.m.?
European Journal of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, 18:1187–1195, 2006.
[27] Catassi, C., Fabiani, E., Iacono, G., D’Agate, C., Francavilla, R., Biagi, F., Volta, U.,
Accomando, S., Picarelli, A., De Vitis, I., Pianelli, G., Gesuita, R., Carle, F. , Mandolesi,
A., Bearzi, I. and Fasano, A. A prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to
establish a safe gluten threshold for patients with celiac disease. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 85:160–166, 2007.
[28] Nordly, L. V. Personal communication. The Danish Veterinary and Food Administration,
2019-10-10.
[29] Nordic co operation and Danish Veterinary & Food administration.
Slutrapport for
Nordisk projekt om kontrol af glutenfri produkter. pages 1–24, 2019.
[30] European Parliament and of the Council. Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council. Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union, 2011.
[31] Regulation (EU) No. 828/2014.
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No.
828/2014 of 30 July 2014 on the requirements for the provision of information to con-
sumers on the absence or reduced presence of gluten in food. Oﬃcial Journal of the
European Union, 2014.
[32] Madsen, C. B., Hattersley, S., Allen, K. J. and Beyer, K., Chan, C. H., Godefroy, S. B.,
Hodgson, R., Mills, E. N.C., Muñoz-Furlong, A., Schnadt, S., Ward, R., Wickman, M.
Page 71 of 82
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
and Crevel, R. Can we deﬁne a tolerable level of risk in food allergy? Report from a
EuroPrevall/UK Food Standards Agency workshop. Clinical and Experimental Allergy,
42:30–37, 2012.
[33] DunnGalvin, A., Roberts, G., Schnadt, S., Astley, S., Austin, M., Blom, W. M.,
Baumert. J., Chan, C., Crevel, R. W. R., Grimshaw, K. E. C., Kruizinga, A. G., Re-
gent, L., Taylor, S., Walker, M., and Clare Mills, E. N. C. Evidence-based approaches to
the application of precautionary allergen labelling: Report from two iFAAM workshops.
Clinical and Experimental Allergy, 49:1191–1200, 2019.
[34] European Parliament and of the Council. Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European
Parliament and of the Council. Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union, 2002.
[35] Blom, W. M., Remington, B. C., Baumert, J. L., Bucchini, L., Crépet, A., Crevel, R.
W. R., Madsen, C. B., Taylor, S. L., Houben, G. F. and Kruizinga, A. G. Sensitivity
analysis to derive a food consumption point estimate for deterministic food allergy risk
assessment. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 125:413–421, 2019.
[36] r biopharm.
Ridascreen® gliadin, art. nr. r7001.
https://food.r-biopharm.com/
wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/05/R7001-Gliadin-15-10-09.pdf. Accessed on
2019-09-10.
[37] Valdés, I., García, E., Llorente, M. and Méndez, E. Innovative approach to low-level
gluten determination in foods using a novel sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay protocol. European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 15:465–474, 2003.
[38] iFAAM Deliverable. Contamination models to be used in risk assessment [month 36].
Integrated Approaches to Food Allergen and Allergy Risk Management, iFAAM, 2016.
[39] Meyers.
Glutenfri havreboller med surdej.
https://meyers.dk/opskrifter/
glutenfri-havreboller-med-surdej/p/71996. Accessed on 2019-10-04.
[40] Hallgrenn, M. Personal communication. Swedish National Food Agency, 2020-07-01.
[41] Allergen Bureau. Summary of the 2019 VITAL Scientiﬁc Expert Panel Recommenda-
tions. 2019.
[42] Birot, S., Madsen, C. B., Kruizinga, A. G. and Christensen, T., Crépet, A. and Brock-
hoﬀ, P. B. A procedure for grouping food consumption data for use in food allergen risk
assessment. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 59:111–123, 2017.
Page 72 of 82
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
[43] VOVSE. Modelrisk - spreadsheet risk modeling within microsoft excel. https://www.
vosesoftware.com/products/modelrisk/. Accessed on 2020-21-01.
[44] Gibert, A., Kruizinga, A. G., Neuhold, S., Houben, G. F., Canela, M. A., Fasano, A.
and Catassi, C. Might gluten traces in wheat substitutes pose a risk in patients with
celiac disease? a population-based probabilistic approach to risk estimation. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 97:109–116, 2013.
[45] Christensen, T. Personal communication. The Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
2020-16-01.
[46] Pedersen, A. N., Christensen, T., Matthiessen, J., Knudsen, V. K., Rosenlund-Sørensen,
M., Biltoft-Jensen, A., Hinsch, H., Ygil, K. H., Kørup, K., Saxholt, E., Trollem, E.,
Søndergaard, A. B., and Fragt, S. Dietary Habits in Denmark 2011-2013. Main results.
2015.
[47] Weiss T. Wehling P. Arlinghaus M. Lacorn, M. and K. Scherf. Quantiﬁcation of Wheat,
Rye, and Barley Gluten in Oat and Oat Products by ELISA RIDASCREEN® Total
Gluten: Collaborative Study, First Action 2018.15. Journal of AOAC International,
102:1535–1543, 2019.
[48] Rzychon, M., Brohée, M., Cordeiro, F., Haraszi, R., Ulberth, F. and O’Connor, G. The
feasibility of harmonizing gluten ELISA measurements. Food Chemistry, 234:144–154,
2017.
[49] Kaukinen, K. Collin, P., Holm, K. and Rantala, I., Vuolteenaho, N., Reunala, T., and
Mäki, M. Wheat starch-containing gluten-free ﬂour products in the treatment of coeliac
disease and dermatitis herpetiformis: A long-term follow-up study. Scandinavian Jour-
nal of Gastroenterology, 34:163–169, 1999.
[50] COOP. Personal communication. 2020-20-01.
Page 73 of 82
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix A: Flowcharts in bakeries
Black boxes and fully drawn arrows describes the production ﬂow. Red boxes and dotted arrows describes
the possible sources and entry of gluten contamination.
Meyers
Storage of ingredients
Mix ingredients
Rising in room
temperature
Rising in fridge
Baking
Air, and equipment
Air
Equipment
The American Pie Company
Storage of ingredients
Grinding of cookies
Mix ingredients
for crust
Crust in pie pan
Blend ingredients
for ﬁlling
Baking
Air, equipment
and ingredients
Air and equipment
Equipment
La Glace
Storage of ingredients
Mixing ingredients
Roll out dough
Baking
Air and equipment
Air and equipment
Equipment
Page 74 of 82
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix B: Questions to the bakeries
Table 18. Template with questions and observations. For use at visits in the bakeries.
How do you schedule the production of gluten reduced and gluten products?
How do you inform the employees?
Storage of ingredients?
Storage of ﬁnal products?
Any protocols for producing gluten reduced products?
HACCP plan of gluten reduced products?
How do you clean between processes (wet cleaning, dry cleaning)
Reduction measures (cleaning, separation, color coding, air extraction, dedicated areas etc)
Detectability factor (extent of a contamination being noticed when procedures that, if followed
correctly, will alert responsible personnel to react)
Equipment, easy to clean ?
Any considerations about ingredients with UAP or PAL?
Can I use the company name in the report?
Page 75 of 82
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix C: Protocol for Ridascreen gliadin ELISA
Figure 14. Protocol to fulﬁl for each ELISA kits.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
A
Std. 1
Std. 5
B
Std. 1
Std. 5 
C
Std. 2
Std. 6 
D
Std. 2
Std. 6 
E
Std. 3
Positive 
 A
F
Std. 3 Positive 
 B
G
Std. 4
H
Std. 4
ELISA 
Ridascreen Gliadin 
Date: 
Init: 
Platetype: 
Lotnr: 
Coating: Specific R5 antibodies against gliadin
Positiv control: L93 (Livsmedelsverket) 100 µ/wll, conc: 1:500 
Sample: 100 µl/well, conc: 1:500 (approx 20 ppm)
Expire date: 
Opened: 
Cocktail: 
Lotnr: 
Expire date: 
Opened: 
Page 76 of 82
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix D: Quality Assurance Certiﬁcate
Figure 15. Quality Assurance Certiﬁcate enclosed in the kit. Picture of the standard curve from
the kit Ridascrren Gliadin.
Page 77 of 82
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix E: Histogram of the gluten exposure
(a)
(b)
Figure 16. Histogram of the probability of gluten intake 5 mg/kg (a) and 0.5mg/kg (b) for
products with PAL
(a)
(b)
Figure 17. Histogram of the probability of gluten intake 5 mg/kg (a) and 0.5mg/kg (b) for
products without PAL
Page 78 of 82
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix F: Ingredients
Table 19. Ingredients in products baked at Meyers gluten-free baking class.
Products
Hirsebrød
Kernebrød
Havrebrød
Fødsesldagsboller
Klementin klister
Ingredients
Hirsemel
Hasselnøddekerner
Glutenfri havremel
Glutenfri havremel
Glutenfri havremel
Fuldkornsrismel
Glutenfri havregryn
Boghvedemel
Rismel
Rismel
Boghvedeﬂager
Solsikkekerner
Majsmel
Sødmælk
Sødmælk
Maizena
Græskarkerner
Glutenfri gær
Smør
Smør
Glutenfri gær
Hørfrø
Gutenfri surdej
Sukker
Sukker
Vand
Chiafrø
Vand
Salt
Salt
Loppefrøskaller
Vand
Salt
Kardemomme
Kardemomme
Salt
Salt
Loppefrøskaller
Glutenfri gær
Honning
Glutenfri surdej
Loppefrøskaller
Æggehvide
Loppefrøskaller
Æg
Melasse
Olivenolie
Table 20. Ingredients in products baked at La Glace.
Products
Makronbund
Margrethebund
Mandelbund
Ingredients
Sukker
Sukker
Sukker
Kranse XX
Smør
Bitter 00
Glutenfri mel
Glukose
Æg
Æggehvide
Mandelsplitter
Glutenfri mel
Mandelmel
Æggehvider
Table 21. Ingredients in products baked at The American Pie Company.
Products
Pimped out pumpkin
Kiss me quick! Key lime
Ingredients
Gluten-free digestive
Gluten-free digestive
Pumpkin pure
Lime juice
Eggs
Egg yolk
Creame cheese
Condensed milk
Cinamon
Lime peel
Sugar
Egg white
Powdered ginger
Sugar
Nutmeg
Clove
Modiﬁed corn starch
cream
Page 79 of 82
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Appendix G: All results of ELISA tests
Table 22. All results from the four ELISA kits. Results in red are concentration below LOQ but were
a concentration were calculated out of range. Products are indicated by sample ID. M = Meyers, P = The
American Pie Company and G= La Glace. S = Spices, R = Ready meals, N = Snacks, C = Cereal & cereal
products, O = Confectionery, D = Dried sauces, gravies & mixes.
Plate 1
Plate 2
Plate 3
Plate 4
Positive A
8.83
Positive A
7.64
Positive A
10.68
Positive A
11.37
Positive B
12.20
Positive B
11.49
Positive B
11.22
Positive B
12.28
M1A
12.62
S33A
4.83
N28A
<1
O1A
<1
M1B
12.24
S33B
20.50
N28B
2.79
O1B
<1
M2A
3.08
S34A
3.64
C1A
<1
O2A
2.04
M2B
4.02
S34B
9.98
C1B
3.07
O2B
1.29
M3A
9.11
R1A
<1
C2A
<1
O3A
<1
M3B
37.22
R1B
<1
C2B
<1
O3B
<1
M4A
2.09
R2A
4.40
C3A
4.70
O4A
<1
M4B
3.28
R2B
5.74
C3B
1.98
O4B
<1
M5A
2.24
R3A
<1
C4A
<1
O5A
1.35
M5B
13.36
R3B
2.62
C4B
1.41
O5B
1.07
P1A
1.09
R4A
1.32
C5A
2.01
O6A
<1
P1B
0.958
R4B
1.45
C5B
<1
O6B
<1
P2A
6.99
R5A
2.99
C6A
6.53
O7A
<1
P2B
0.940
R5B
<1
C6B
<1
O7B
1.26
G1A
1.10
R6A
5.57
C8A
<1
O8A
1.08
G1B
1.20
R6B
13.36
C8B
2.04
O8B
<1
G2A
1.64
R7A
2.91
C9A
<1
O9A
<1
G2B
1.47
R7B
2.84
C9B
<1
O9B
<1
G3A
10.02
R8A
6.73
C10A
9.35
O10A
1.24
G3B
3.41
R8B
<1
C10B
<1
O10B
3.25
G4A
1.16
R9A
<1
C11A
<1
O11A
<1
G4B
0.934
R9B
<1
C11B
<1
O11B
<1
S1A
1.05
R10A
7.37
C12A
<1
O12A
<1
S1B
12.50
R10B
6.44
C12B
<1
O12B
<1
S2A
0.880
R11A
3.16
C13A
2.38
O13A
<1
S2B
0.928
R11B
<1
C13B
<1
O13B
<1
S3A
0.989
R12A
5.77
C14A
24.60
O14A
<1
S3B
0.989
R12B
1.15
C14B
<1
O14B
<1
S4A
18.43
R13A
<1
C15A
14.61
O15A
<1
S4B
3.09
R13B
<1
C15B
<1
O15B
<1
S5A
0.886
R14A
1.75
C16A
<1
O16A
5.20
S5B
0.898
R14B
6.48
C16B
1.45
O16B
<1
Page 80 of 82
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Continuation of Table 22
Plate 1
Plate 2
Plate 3
Plate 4
S6A
0.921
N1A
1.11
C17A
1.81
M3A
9.49
S6B
0.964
N1B
<1
C17B
6.64
M3B
35.33
S7A
1.05
N2A
<1
D1A
<1
M6A
2.93
S7B
0.940
N2B
<1
D1B
8.26
M6B
3.71
S8A
2.99
N3A
<1
D2A
<1
M7A
6.25
S8B
1.03
N3B
<1
D2B
<1
M7B
3.57
S9A
1.58
N4A
1.32
D3A
<1
M8A
5.83
S9B
1.60
N4B
1.17
D3B
<1
M8B
18.30
S10A
18.38
N5A
<1
D4A
1.49
M9A
3.28
S10B
<1
N5B
<1
D4B
1.44
M9B
6.32
S11A
1.06
N6A
<1
D5A
1.57
M10A
5.91
S11B
0.983
N6B
2.01
D5B
2.04
M10B
1.22
S12A
0.952
N7A
<1
D6A
<1
G5A
12.01
S12B
2.09
N7B
2.74
D6B
6.33
G5B
6.71
S13A
1.03
N8A
17.28
D7A
4.67
G6A
3.69
S13B
1.09
N8B
21.23
D7B
4.34
G6B
2.32
S14A
0.952
N9A
<1
D8A
1.48
G7A
8.20
S14B
0.928
N9B
<1
D8B
<1
G7B
7.47
S15A
1.12
N11A
39.82
D9A
10.85
N12A
1010.88
S15B
1.16
N11B
37.83
D9B
<1
N12B
679.99
S16A
0.940
N12A
166.46
D10A
1.36
N12A
581.39
S16B
0.983
N12B
160.94
D10B
<1
N12B
180.14
S17A
1.22
N13A
<1
D11A
<1
N12A
42.12
S17B
1.05
N13B
2.50
D11B
1.55
N12B
25.78
S18A
2.94
N14A
<1
D12A
<1
S18B
2.04
N14B
1.34
D12B
1.60
S19A
1.72
N15A
<1
D13A
<1
S19B
1.69
N15B
<1
D13B
<1
S20A
<1
N16A
<1
D14A
<1
S20B
0.880
N16B
<1
D14B
<1
S21A
1.20
N18A
<1
D15A
1.91
S21B
1.08
N18B
7.57
D15B
1.74
S23A
1.07
N19A
<1
D16A
<1
S23B
1.24
N19B
1.77
D16B
<1
S24A
0.958
N20A
<1
D17A
1.38
S24B
0.940
N20B
6.48
D17B
2.12
S25A
1.07
N21A
<1
D18A
1.48
S25B
7.04
N21B
<1
D18B
2.38
S26A
0.970
N22A
13.15
D19A
3.03
S26B
0.983
N22B
11.36
D19B
3.72
Page 81 of 82
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis, MSc. Eng. Food Technology
DTU
Continuation of Table 22
Plate 1
Plate 2
Plate 3
Plate 4
S27A
9.00
N23A
<1
D10A
2.04
S27B
7.40
N23B
<1
D20B
2.11
S28A
1.53
N24A
<1
D21A
1.72
S28B
1.47
N24B
25.41
D21B
3.75
S29A
0.983
N25A
<1
D22A
3.40
S29B
1.04
N25B
<1
D22B
2.57
S30A
1.45
N26A
2.10
D24A
1.82
S30B
13.21
N26B
<1
D24B
<1
S31A
0.983
N27A
<1
S32A
1.94
S31B
1.05
N27B
<1
S32B
1.42
End of Table 22
Page 82 of 82
