==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Surrogate Models for Load Estimations on Wind Turbines 
Operating in Wakes 
 
 
Rasmus Sode Lund 
Jens Peter Schøler 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0347 
February 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Rasmus Sode Lund/Jens Peter Schøler Christiansen 
Title: Surrogate Models for Load Estimations on Wind Turbines 
Operating in Wakes 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03477 
February 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
September 2019 – February 2020 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Søren Juhl Andersen 
Pierre-Elouan Réthoré 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As wind energy begins to compete on equal terms with conventional means of energy
production, optimization of various aspects of wind farms have gained increased interest.
The levelized cost of energy is now considered during the optimization of the wind turbine
layouts in wind farms, by introducing the fatigue loads as part of the objective. This
however presents a problem, as accurate estimates of the loads of turbines in wake
conditions require slow and expensive simulations. Surrogate models have recently been
introduced to circumvent the need for simulations during the optimization.
The aim of this thesis is, to investigate if a benefit in terms of accuracy is attainable,
if a higher order resolution of the flow parameters are considered for surrogate calibra-
tion. Concurrent databases containing 2D resolved 10 min mean flow, and the resulting
damage equivalent loads and power were constructed on the basis of large eddy simula-
tions of a single turbine wake. A wake flow surrogate was developed using an artificial
neural network, and was calibrated to predict the mean flow and turbulence intensity
distributions within an error of |−2.1%| and |−15%| respectively. In order to estimate
loads, the wake flow surrogate was used to calibrate the flow field in a Mann turbulence
box to generate time series for load prediction. The results of the analysis showed that
the power could be estimated reasonably well, while the target loads from the large eddy
simulation were not captured. An analysis of the turbulent time scales led to the pre-
liminary conclusion, that only scaling the mean wind speed and the turbulence intensity
does not provide an accurate time series of the wake flow. A wake load surrogate was
developed in extension of the wake flow surrogate using an artificial neural network. The
wake load surrogate provided promising results of increased accuracy compared to the
surrogates published in recent literature, suggesting that there might be some benefit in
increasing the resolution of the flow field.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical
University of Denmark as partial fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science degree.
The authors of this thesis would first of all like to thank our two supervisors, Søren
Juhl Andersen and Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, not only for the weekly meetings, but also
for taking the time to help and guide the process in a right direction in times of crisis.
We would also like to give thanks to the department of Wind Energy as a whole, for
making an office space available, and to our fellow students within the office for creating
a nice and welcoming atmosphere. Finally we would like to thank our family and friends,
for supporting us throughout our time as students, especially during the final months of
writing the thesis.
Rasmus Sode Lund, Jens Peter Schøler
Kongens Lyngby, February 2, 2020
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Current state of wake modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Wake physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Coupled aeroelastic simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Introduction to machine learning for surrogate wake modelling . . . . . .
10
3
Data sets & pre-processing
17
3.1
Flow simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Turbine characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Flow database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Loads database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Flow discretization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Wake Modelling
31
4.1
Wake Plane ANN flow surrogate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Surrogate performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Superimposed wake transfer function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
Wake flow surrogate - partial conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Load Modelling
55
5.1
Modelling wake time series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
ANN response surrogates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
ANN load model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.4
Load surrogate - partial conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6
Conclusion
83
Bibliography
86
A Area based weighting function
93
B Model discretization
95
C Flow model - Residuals
97
C.1 U-model residuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.2 TI-model residuals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
D Additional U flow plane samples
101
E Additional TI flow plane samples
111
F TI-surrogate as superimposed wake transfer function
121
G Results of the Mann-box modelled time series
125
H Response surrogates - ME
129
I
Response surrogates - RMSE
133
J
Response surrogates, discretization study
137
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
As wind energy is becoming price competitive with conventional means of energy
production, subsidies are gradually being rolled back, see Danish Energy Agency [1]
about experiences in offshore wind development. Historically, subsidies allowed wind
turbine operators to lower power production during periods of low demand and be
reimbursed by the government for lost revenue. Without subsidies, wind farm operators
have to adjust and consider real time energy costs in order to minimize the levelized cost
of energy (LCOE). LCOE is the ratio between the wind farm cost and the sum of the
energy produced over its lifetime. Ideally, the cost of production should be decreased
during low demand periods to stay competitive, and production should increase during
high demand periods to maximize revenue. Increasing the production increases the loads
on the turbines, lowering the expected life time. Decreasing production lowers the loads
on the turbines, thereby increasing their life time. Thus, the expected loads and power
will be an essential part of increasing earnings.
During the writing of this thesis, the Danish energy company Ørsted’s stock dropped
10% [2], due to their models’ overestimating the expected energy production.
The
overestimation was caused by underestimating negative effects of wakes and blockage.
Accurate modeling of these effects can be done with high fidelity numerical models,
but are computationally costly. Instead of relying on these costly models, surrogate
models can be applied. Surrogates are models based on data, capable of capturing the
essential parts of a complex phenomenon, often with a reduced but focused scope. By
calibrating surrogates with data from a high accuracy model to predict a few integrated
quantities, there is a potential to achieve similar accuracy as a given numerical model.
Since surrogates are generally many times faster than numerical models, surrogates are
a desirable alternative.
Minimizing LCOE requires new strategies. Therefore wind farm layout optimization
begins to include objectives where loads are featured, as in the DTU project TOPFARM,
Réthoré et al. [3]. Surrogates can be designed to be differentiable, which makes them
attractive in layout optimization, because efficient optimization algorithms rely on ana-
lytical gradients.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Current state of wake modelling
In this section, an overview of current efforts in wake modelling will be presented.
This includes engineering wake deficit models, a turbulence scaling model and the state
of the art multi purpose DWM model. Numerical models are introduced, and strides in
developing surrogates is evaluated.
Engineering wake models
Simple and early engineering models for estimating the wake behavior, such as the
ones devised by Jensen [4] and Ainslie [5] can be used for calculating the mean velocity
field behind an operating turbine. The Jensen model is quite useful due to its simplicity,
as the power can be derived directly from the mean wind speed and a power curve
of the wake effected turbine.
These models calculates the development of the wake
deficit by means of a wake expansion or decay parameter. This parameter relates the
width of the wake to the velocity by conservation of momentum. The Jensen model
has been extended multiple times to include more parameters and features such as a
thrust coefficient, CT, dependence in the park model by Katic et al. [6], wake-to-wake
interaction by Rathmann et al. [7] and Gaussian wake profile by Bastankah and Porte-
Agel [8]. These models treat the velocity in the wake by means of mean velocity scaling,
and do not reflect the turbulence generated in the wake. They are therefore mainly
concerned with power production and are still used in industry today. An example of
this is the 2014 report by Nygaard on wake effects on the power production in very
large wind farms [9], where the Jensen model, to his account, performs in quite good
agreement with SCADA data.
To determine wake induced turbine loads, the IEC-64100 standard proposes two
engineering models [10]. The first option is, Wake added turbulence in accordance with
Frandsen [11].
The Frandsen model is based on the correlation between turbulence
intensity and the fatigue loads experienced by the turbine over a given time period.
The turbulence produced by the upstream turbine is added to the ambient turbulence
using a Wöhler exponent, equivalent to how fatigue loads are superimposed. The effects
decrease asymptotically to the ambient level of turbulence intensity in the incoming flow
down stream of the first turbine. The model uses CT to determine the added turbulence,
and the turbulence is calculated as an integrated value over the rotor area of the turbine.
In the standard, no reduction of the wind speed is assumed. Alternatively, the Dynamic
Wake Meandering model (DWM) by Larsen et al. [12] may be used. The model attempts
to unify the load and wake deficit models. The DWM is summarized by Larsen et al. [13].
The wake is modelled as a passive tracer, advected by the mean flow, while being shifted
orthogonally to the operating turbine rotor by large scale turbulence over time. This
model allows for a temporal resolution of the wake deficit in space. The model assumes an
axis symmetric turbulenceas and wake deficit distribution in the advected wake. These
distributions are often calibrated to the results of a high accuracy numerical model, as
done by Madsen et al. [14]. Although useful these wake load engineering models do have
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Current state of wake modelling
3
limitations, e.g. both require running an aeroelastic code, which is sub-optimal for farm
layout optimization.
Aeroelastic tools couple the aerodynamic and structural response of a turbine. The
dynamic response of a wind turbine is an essential part of calculating the fatigue loading
and important for designing control systems. Wake engineering models can be used to
approximate the conditions in a wake, and an aeroelastic tool can then be applied to
obtain time series of the response. Although not as precise as fully coupled numerical
simulations, this method can be calibrated to a level of accuracy deemed sufficient by
industry. Popular aeroelastic tools include, HAWC2 [15], OpenFast [16] and Flex5 [17].
Flex5 is the aeroelastic tool used in this project, and has been validated with field
measurements by Zierath et al. [18], showing conservative estimates of the blade root
loads. The wind input for these models are usually generated to reflect the turbulent
statistics at a given site, and is generated using a turbulence model that addresses the
spatio-temporal nature of atmospheric turbulence., e.g. the Mann turbulence model
[19,20] or the Sandia model by Veers [21].
Numerical wake models
Engineering models are approximate, although typically derived from physical phe-
nomenons they do not precisely recreate them. Therefore, they are calibrated and val-
idated using either measurements or simulations from a mathematically derived model
such as Large Eddy Simulation (LES) by Smagorinsky [22]. The surrogates produced
in this thesis are based on LES data, a short introduction to LES will be given in sec-
tion 2.2. Recently, numerical analyses have been performed to characterize the wake
field behind a wind turbine. A popular practice of late is using a coupled actuator disc
(AD), presented by Mikkelsen [23], or actuator line (AL), by Sørensen and Shen [24], to
circumvent the need for modelling the boundary layer on the blades. The AD method
offers a mean annular interaction between the blades and the flow, while AL resolves
the blades and yields an individual coupling of the blades. AL can be coupled with LES.
LES is used to calculate the flow around the turbine, while AL and an aeroelastic code
is used to couple the aeroelastic response of the turbine back to the flow. Examples of
such analyses are offered by Storey et al. [25] and Sørensen et al. [26].
The AL/LES pairing has been validated with experimental results in the MEXICO
experiment [27], showing good agreement between the two in the investigated near wake
range. The same numerical methods are used by Andersen and Sørensen [28] to investi-
gate the performance and loads on turbines operating in deep wake conditions. The re-
sults presented here suggest a significant deviation from the established Frandsen model.
An oscillating behavior of the equivalent loads is observed, compared to the relatively
steady level of turbulence experienced by the wind turbines. Furthermore, a compara-
tive study of the Frandsen- and Jensen wake models with CFD, made by Andersen et
al. [29] shows that especially in the initial far wake, the wake center wake velocities are
at best overestimated by 20%. This deficiency emphasizes the physical simplification of
the Frandsen model, and perhaps the need for a more accurate description of the wake.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Surrogate wake modelling
High fidelity, high accuracy models such as LES are computationally expensive. In
some cases fast results are needed e.g, for optimization problems. In fluid mechanics
optimization is usually performed with a linearized model such as FUGA by Ott [30] or
a lookup table, as the nonlinear nature of the physics would require full simulations at
each iteration to analytically evaluate the flow field. This is currently unfeasible. A new
approach in wake modelling is to construct surrogates to approximate these non-linear
responses. Surrogate models are fundamentally different from the traditional models,
as they do not rely on physical principles, but instead purely on the observations of an
experiment or a simulation. An example of this is a recent study by Mahulja et al. [31]
from 2018, in which surrogates are used to approximate loads and power to achieve a
wind farm layout of the highest Net Present Value (NPV). Surrogate modelling is a new
practice in wind energy research, and due to its seemingly large potential, the interest
is high even in industry. The interest has in no small part been fuelled by recent strides
in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), in particular the sub-field Machine Learning
(ML). The simultaneous increase in computational performance has made LES more
accessible, facilitating the calibration of surrogates to the results of this high accuracy
numerical model.
Recent publications by Dimitrov [32,33] in 2018 and 2019 presents different methods
of applying surrogate models. Both a site-specific study with no consideration to possible
preceding turbines and a parameterized study of wake-induced loads are established on
the basis of full farm DWM simulations. Among others, a polynomial chaos expansion
(PCE) and an artificial neural network (ANN) are calibrated to the target loads from
the simulations. The parameters are based on primary flow characteristics such as shear,
wind speed and turbulence intensity. From this comparative study of different surrogate
modelling techniques, the ANN appears superior to the PCE in terms of accuracy in
the estimation of the target damage equivalent loads (DEL) suggested by DWM. PCE
is based on prior knowledge or assumptions of the probability distribution of the input
variables. This makes PCE a good tool for producing site specific surrogates. A site
specific PCE model based on AD/LES for power control by Ciri et. al [34] from 2019,
shows promise and a much better fit than a Jensen based PCE alternative. Recently,
there has been a surge in publications studying different surrogate techniques, calibrated
to different types of data and with different objectives. Yet, no overall superior technique
have emerged.
The surrogates in this thesis are based on data from coupled AL/LES covering the
wake of a single turbine. This data can be assumed to be of higher accuracy than DWM,
which both Mahulja et al. [31] and Dimitrov [33] uses. Additionally, both studies con-
cerns themselves with wakes inside a wind farm. Dimitrov has constructed a surrogate
for two wind turbines located in a farm, while Mahulja et al. [31] is focused on layout
optimization. Furthermore, the surrogates produced in these two studies only use scalar
values to characterize the incoming wind speed and turbulence intensity. The inflow in
this thesis will be characterized in 2D across the rotor plane. Effects of atmospheric
stability and wind shear are not considered to emulate site-independence. Turbine inde-
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Problem Statement
5
pendence is emulated by considering CT in the wake modelling, in a normalized spatial
coordinate. Only one Mann turbulence box with only one level of turbulence intensity
was used in the AL/LES.
1.3
Problem Statement
Previous efforts have used scalar values to characterize the flow. In this thesis the
overall goal is to construct a new wake load surrogate based on 2D flow planes. Our
hypothesis is, that the loads can be estimated more accurately if the resolution of the
observed flow field is increased. In order to test this hypothesis, two main questions have
been formulated. Additionally, sub questions encapsulating the essential components
that needs to be considered to answer the main questions.
1. Can a surrogate wake engineering model provide time series for accurate load and
power prediction?
a) What effects are considered in the existing models?
b) What parts of current engineering models can be improved by a 2D scaling?
c) How is the success of a proposed engineering model evaluated?
2. Can the current accuracy of load surrogates be improved by increasing the dimen-
sionality of the considered flow?
a) What metrics should be considered regarding surrogate accuracy?
b) What is the accuracy of existing wake load surrogates?
c) How accurate can a surrogate of increased dimensionality predict loads?
1.4
Thesis outline
Before surrogates can be produced some fundamentals must be established. In chap-
ter 2, the relevant theory necessary to construct surrogates with the desired qualities
is presented. This is followed by chapter 3, wherein a description of the available LES
is provided, a turbine characteristic, flow discretization, pre-processing of a flow data
set and the calculation of a loads data set. The flow data set is used to construct two
separate intermediate flow surrogates, capable of predicting 10 min mean wind speed
and turbulence intensity 2D wake planes, these are presented in chapter 4. The flow sur-
rogates are used to calibrate a Mann-box for time series approximation, loosely inspired
by the Frandsen and DWM engineering models. As an alternative, predictions from the
flow surrogates are used as input in a load surrogate, to by-pass the need for a time-
series and an aeroelastic tool. Theese efforts are described in chapter 5. Additionally,
in chapters 4 and 5, partial conclusions are presented to highlight the most important
findings. Finally, a collective conclusion is found in chapter 6.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
The code developed in connection with this thesis can be accessed at the GitLab
server of DTU Wind Energy: https://gitlab.windenergy.dtu.dk/MasterProjects/
rasmus-jens-peter
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In this chapter the central parts of the theory for modelling flow around a wind
turbine, and the development of surrogate models are presented. Firstly a summary
of the methods used to simulate flow and loads are presented, including sections on
Large Eddy Simulation, Actuator Line, ElipSys3D and Flex5. Secondly an introduction
to Machine Learning consisting of the central elements utilized while producing the
surrogate models reported in this thesis. Lastly an example case of an Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) is provided for readers with a background in engineering.
2.1
Wake physics
As the flow interacts with a turbine, the flow field is changed significantly. In the
region upstream, close to the turbine, the velocity of the flow is reduced. This region
is referred to as the induction zone. This reduction in flow velocity is a reaction to the
thrust produced by the wind turbine, often characterized by the non-dimensional CT.
CT helps generalize the results for similar turbines. The range of this effect is studied
through numerical simulations by Troldborg and Forsting in [35], where it is shown to
be visible several rotor radii upstream of the turbine.
As the flow passes the turbine, energy is extracted from the flow, and the flow is
slowed. The airfoils that make up the blades generate vortex structures from both the
tips and roots. These vortices arise due to the pressure difference of the suction and
pressure side of the airfoil, which curls the flow around the tip and root of the blade. The
region of the wake where these vortices dominate the characteristics is usually termed the
near wake. The stability of the vortices have been studied experimentally by Nemes [36].
The results of these studies show that these distinct vortices tend to break down as a
vortex pairing occurs. As this happens, the wake transitions and the wake deficit profile
becomes Gaussian, and dominated by turbulence rather than coherent vortex structures.
In atmospheric conditions, the tip vortices are unconditionally unstable. An analytical
expression for the distance downstream of the operating turbine at which the pairing
occurs is, through stability analysis, found by Sørensen et al. [26] to be dependent on the
inflow turbulence, the tip speed ratio λ, CT and the inflow velocity. In the far wake of
the coupled turbine, when the deficit profile is Gaussian, the thrust governs the velocity
distribution, and the wake becomes self similar. In the far wake, CT governs the behavior
of the wake, and is often used to scale experimental models of turbines for aerodynamic
wake studies [37,38].
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Theory
2.2
Coupled aeroelastic simulation
The Navier-Stokes equations (N-S) (2.1) are the governing equations for fluid prob-
lems. N-S are in their purest form only solveable for a few special cases. Therefore
simplifications based on valid assumptions are often necessary.
In wind farm appli-
cations incompressibility is assumed (2.2), due to the Mach number (Ma) in the flow
generally being below 0.3.
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂p
∂xi
+ 2ν ∂
∂xj
(Sij) + fi
(2.1)
where
∂ui
∂xi
= 0
(2.2)
In (2.1), the non-linearity of the convective term makes the equations very difficult to
solve analytically, which is why the equation is usually solved numerically. Using direct
numerical simulation (DNS), the flow is modelled in its entirety. However, as Reynolds
numbers increase so does the computational time, since the smallest turbulent length
scales must be considered in the mesh, leading to very large problems. The relatively
high Reynolds numbers present in flows surrounding wind turbines, O(1 · 108), makes
this approach currently impossible. Instead, other methods are used to simplify the
equations. For the purpose of this report LES is considered.
Large Eddy Simulation - LES
In LES, N-S are averaged over a small volume with side length ∆lx i.e. a finite
volume approach. This operation filters out the scales smaller than the side length ∆lx.
The spatially averaged equations take the form given in (2.3), where τij is the sub-grid
scale stresses (SGS), or filtered stresses, u the velocities, Sij the stress-strain tensor, p
the pressure, ρ the density of the medium, and ν the kinematic viscosity of the medium.
The over-bars indicate the filtered quantities.
∂¯ui
∂t + ∂
xj
(¯ui¯uj) = −1
ρ
∂¯p
∂xi
+ 2ν ∂
∂xj
( ¯Sij
)
−∂τij
∂xj
+ ¯fi
(2.3)
The SGS are estimated using a turbulent viscosity νt, simililarly to the Boussinesq
approximation, as (2.4).
τij = 2νtSij
(2.4)
Several closure models exist for the calculation of νt, and in the present work, a mixed
scale model developed by Ta Phuoc, [39] based on vorticity is used. The model is further
explained in the works of Sørensen et al. [26] and Troldborg [40] . Body forces can be
explicitly introduced to the filtered NS through the term ¯fi.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Coupled aeroelastic simulation
9
Ellipsys3D
The flow solver used to compute the flow field, and the turbulence behavior is Ellip-
sys3D - the in house flow solver at DTU Wind energy developed by Michelsen [41, 42]
and Sørensen [43]. Ellipsys3D uses LES. Ellipsys3D solves the incompressible N-S for-
mulated in primitive coordinates: pressure and velocity. Pressure coupling is preserved
using Rhie-Chow interpolation [44], and the discretization of the grid is performed using
a hybrid of the third order QUICK scheme and the fourth order CDS to avoid numerical
instabilities, Troldborg [40].
The input turbulence to the flow field is generated using the method outlined by
Mann [19, 20]. This method of turbulence generation is adopted into the IEC 61400
standard for turbulence simulation on wind turbines [45].
The method is based on
Fourier simulation, and produces a turbulent velocity field with spatial and temporal
coherence resembling that observed in atmospheric turbulence. The parameters used
to determine the characteristics are obtained by fitting measurements of the three di-
mensional turbulence spectrum to the Mann spectral tensor. The parameters are the
length scale LM, an anisotropy parameter Γ, the spectral Kolmogorov constant α, and
the specific rate of turbulent energy dissipation ε. The turbulence is added as body
forces
¯
fturb at the inlet of the domain, Sørensen [26].
Interaction of flow and turbine
In Ellipsys3D, the interaction between the flow and a wind turbine can be modelled
using AL. This technique reduces the aerodynamics on the blades from 3D to 2D, and
effectively removes the smallest length scales from the LES modelling considerations
allowing for a coarser mesh. This makes it a significantly less expensive problem to
solve. Along these lines in the rotating field, the local velocities are used to calculate
the velocity triangle, and thus the relative velocity experienced by the blade.
This
velocity generates the local lift and drag forces. The aeroelastic response of the blade is
calculated using Flex5. The resulting lift and drag forces on the blade is projected into
the coordinate system of Ellipsys3D, and distributed back to the flow as body forces ¯fAL
at each time-step using a Gaussian smearing [26]. This prevents discontinuities of the
resulting forces related to the discretization of the blades in Flex5.
Flex5 developed by Øye [17] is the aeroelastic tool used to calculate the aeroelastic
response of the wind turbine. The dynamic system is made up of 28 degrees of freedom
(DOF), Branlard [46].
Flex5 uses a modal formulation rather than a finite element
(FE) formulations such as HAWC2 [15]. The modal formulation reduces the number of
degrees of freedom compared to the FE based tools, increasing the computational speed,
Branlard [46]. A blade element momentum model (BEM) is used, where the blades are
discretized into radial sections, with constant airfoil properties. BEM uses the relative
velocity of each blade element to calculate the aerodynamic force distribution along the
blade. The forces on the blades are used as input to the dynamic model, and imposed
by calculating the inner product of the forcing and the coordinates of each of the modes.
Transient effects, such as the dynamic wake, dynamic stall and yaw misalignment are
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Theory
considered in the calculations of the resulting forces on the blades. These models are
described by Hansen in [47].
2.3
Introduction to machine learning for
surrogate wake modelling
During the last couple of years heightened interest in Machine Learning has brought
many publications both in science and popular science. With promises of self driving
cars and a fourth industrial revolution, the field may seem unapproachable for an outside
observer. In the following section an overview of ML is presented to provide context for
application in regards to surrogate wake modelling.
ML is a multidiscipline based on computer-science, statistics and engineering, and
as such the same concepts occurs under different names in the literature. The purpose
of this section is not to map all these different definitions, rather it is to describe the
concepts which are applicable in the context of wake modelling and establishing a con-
sistent definition within this report. In the media words such as artificial intelligence,
machine learning and artificial neural networks (ANN) are often used interchangeably,
here a more precise definition is needed. AI can be defined as the construction of intel-
ligent machines, typically inspired by biological intelligence, wherein ML is a subfield,
Raschka and Mirjalili [48]. ML allows for computers to perform tasks where explicit
human instructions i.e. coding the programs are impractical. ML uses mathematics and
statistics to pattern, recognise, and construct its own rule set. This is fundamentally
a different way of applying computer science. The concept is summarized in figure 2.1.
ML is the development of algorithms that allow machines to learn by setting its own
Traditional
Programming
Data
Rules
Answers
a
Machine
Learning
Rules
Answers
Data
b
Figure 2.1: Conceptual understanding of traditional programming vs. machine learning,
recreated from learning material by Ng [49]
rules based on previous observations. In ML there is a distinction between supervised
and unsupervised learning. In supervised learning the input data is of a known type
e.g. load measurements. Supervised learning is used for classification and regression
problems. In unsupervised learning the data types are unknown and ML is applied to
find structures in the data, Raschka and Mirjalili [48]. For the purpose of this report
supervised learning is of the greatest interest, since the data is of known types and the
problem is regression like. It should be mentioned that semi-unsupervised models do
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Introduction to machine learning for surrogate wake modelling
11
exist and are used for regression problems as well, which could be of interest but are
beyond the scope of this thesis.
Artificial Neural Networks
One of the ways a machine can learn is through the use of artificial neural networks,
which is a model inspired by how the human brain operates. In an ANN artificial neurons,
or simply neurons, are interconnected through weights much like synapses in biological
brains. The values of these weights are referred to as rules in figure 2.1. One of the most
famous types of artificial neurons is the Perceptron, conceived in 1963 by Rosenblatt [50].
The working principle of the Perceptron is to sum the product of weights and inputs
depending on whether the product meets a certain threshold the output goes to either
0 or 1. Below, in figure 2.2, a schematic drawing of the perceptron can be seen. Next
to it in equation 2.5 a mathematical explanation is shown.
y
x1
x2
x3
w3
w2
w1
Figure 2.2: Rosenblatt Perceptron
y =



0 if
∑
j xjwj ≤threshold
1 if ∑
j xjwj > threshold
(2.5)
In the Rosenblatt perceptron a threshold function is used to evaluate whether the
neuron should activate. A function used in this fashion is referred to as an activation
function. The step function only allows two outputs either 0 or 1, this can be useful
specifically in classification problems. In regression problems, a continuous activation
function is usually a better approach. Choosing an appropriate activation function can
be cumbersome since a vast amount exist. Some of the most common activation functions
include: Linear, Sigmoid, Tanh, Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) and derivatives of these
such as Softmax [48]. In figure 2.3 four of the most common activation functions are
shown graphically - of the included activation functions the step function and ReLU are
not differentiable.
5.00
0.25
5.00
0
1
a Step function
5
0
5
0
1
b Sigmoid
5
0
5
1
0
1
c Tanh
1
0
1
0
1
d ReLU
Figure 2.3: Common activation functions found in Artificial neural networks
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Theory
As previously mentioned a neural network is comprised of multiple neurons, these
are typically structured in layers. Firstly, an input layer consisting of the chosen inputs,
a sequence of hidden layers, and finally an output layer containing desired output(s), see
figure 2.4. The input layer is not activated, but similarly to the perceptron it is connected
Input
layer
Hidden layer
Output
layer
x1
x2
x3
xn
...
...
ϕ1
ϕ1
ϕ1
...
ϕ2
ϕ2
ϕ2
y
Figure 2.4: Example of artificial neural network; feed forward fully connected ANN
where ϕ refers to the activation function.
through weights to the first layer of neurons. In a fully connected feed-forward network,
each input is connected to every neuron in the following layer. In a hidden layer the
neurons use activation functions to alter the value passed on, i.e. when a neuron is
activated. Once the last hidden layer is activated, the product of the activation and
weight are summed into one or more outputs. The activation of a neuron (a) is found
from the product of weights and prior activations;
z =
∑
j
ajwj + b,
(2.6)
a = ϕ (z)
(2.7)
where ϕ is an arbitrary activation function, aj the input activations, b a bias unit offset-
ting the activation and a the activation of the designated neuron.
More advanced ANN methods exists building on top of the simple ANN, e.g. Re-
current Neural Networks (RNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for an in
depth review consult Raschka and Mirjalili [48] or Mørup et. al 2019 [51]. These types
of networks can be used with a feed forward ANN. These methods are often found in
deep learning problems, which can be defined as a special branch of ANNs. One popular
definition of deep learning is ANNs where the complexity has reached a level of intricacy
too high to fully grasp.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Introduction to machine learning for surrogate wake modelling
13
Training an Artificial Neural Network
For an ANN to perform well it is necessary to have well calibrated weights. In ML
the calibration of weights is termed training. From an initial state the error is estimated
and a correction is applied, this process is iterative and continues until either a threshold
is met or a maximum number of steps is reached. The function which is used to estimate
the error is commonly called the loss function. A large variety of loss functions exist but
the most popular include Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE),
MSE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −y∗
i )2 ,
MAE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
|yi −y∗
i |
(2.8)
where yi is the current prediction, y∗
i is the correct or target value and N is the number
of outputs.
Once a loss function is chosen, it is necessary to apply a optimization
scheme/algorithm to find the lowest feasible loss. It is important to make a distinction
between lowest feasible and lowest possible since it is impossible to guarantee the solution
is the global minimum using a numerical scheme. Before training; the data set is split
into two parts. One for training and one for testing, the training set is then passed
through an optimization algorithm. During training the model has access to both the
inputs refered to as features, and the correct outputs refered to as targets. Passing the
same training data through an optimization algorithm multiple times can produce better
losses, the number of times data is passed is referred to as the number of epochs. A
common optimization algorithm is stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which differs from
regular gradient descent by updating the weights between each sample instead of every
epoch. A benefit of this is a significant speed improvement particularly for large data sets.
Additionally in some cases regular gradient descent will find a local minima and stop,
while SGD produces more noise in the error response and can get lucky and move past
such local minima, Mørup et al. [51]. Another option is the Adam algorithm by Kingma
and Ba [52]. Adam is based on SGD but includes a range of additions most notably an
adaptive learning rate, which is a relaxation parameter on weight changes controlling
the length of steps during one update. Both SGD and Adam has been considered during
modeling.
When training a ML model overtraining should be taken into consideration. If the
amount of parameters are large compared to the number of samples in the training set,
then the model can be calibrated to give the exact response of the training target, much
like how a polynomial of order N may be fitted exactly to N + 1 number of data points.
Overtraining usually occurs when a model is trained on the same data for a large amount
of epochs, resulting in a near perfect model of the training data. Overtraining becomes
apparent, when the model is evaluated with test data, and the predictions become very
poor.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Theory
Neural networks; an example
In relation to the development of activation functions for ANNs, Cybenko proved
that any continuous function may be approximated by a finite linear combination of sig-
moid functions [53]. This conclusion establishes sigmoid functions as a good first choice
of activation function in an ANN. It also brings to mind the conclusions of Fourier
regarding the approximation of periodic signals. According to the theories of Fourier,
any integrable periodic signal can be approximated by the finite sum of degree N given
in (2.9). The signal is reconstructed as an finite linear combination of sinusoid basis
functions. Using Fourier series, the process of reconstructing the signal becomes a task
of determining the coefficients ai and bi. This task is very clearly defined, as the coef-
ficients are determined from the inner product of the basis functions over a period of
the signal, equivalent to the activation functions in an ANN. The activation functions
must be defined in the domain (−∞, ∞), and, if they are to be used for optimization
purposes, have a defined gradient in the entire domain. This is also important because
the weights of each of the basis functions is calculated using an optimization algorithm,
where analytical gradients greatly improves the performance of the operation. Analytic
gradients allows for much fewer function evaluations compared to the alternative finite
difference gradients, where multiple function evaluations are required to estimate a gra-
dient. The basis functions are summed in the output layer of the network, where a
constant is added to shift the model vertically so that it fits the data.
sN(x) = a0
2 +
N
∑
n=1
(an cos (nx) + bn sin (nx))
(2.9)
To illustrate the similarities between these two techniques in practice, an ANN with
a single layer is studied. In the spirit of wind energy, a steady state power curve of a
wind turbine is taken as the target function for this case study. For reference, the power
curve used in the example is the one shown in figure 2.7. This is a non-linear function,
and is thus great for showcasing the capabilities of an ANN.
Some basic parameters and terms must be defined prior to the model training process.
A single layer ANN with 4 neurons, with the activation function ϕ(z) = tanh(z), z is
defined as in (2.6) is chosen as the ANN structure. The resulting structure is shown in
figure 2.5.
The number of neurons is analogous to the degree of the Fourier expansion N, as the
output of each neuron is combined in the output layer for the output of the ANN. The
activation function in each of the neurons are adjusted with a weight and a bias. The
bias shifts the function along the input axis, and the weights amplifies the gradient of
the activation function around the bias, this is shown in figure 2.6. This is analogous
to how the weights ai and bi change the influence of a sinusoid at a given frequency in
Fourier series expansion.
In the output layer a linear combination of the activation functions are calculated to
give a single output from a single input to the model. This is analogous to the summation
operation given in (2.9). The output layer itself has a bias too, which corresponds to
the constant term in (2.9).
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Introduction to machine learning for surrogate wake modelling
15
x
y
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
w6
w7
w8
Figure 2.5: ANN topology of the considered model for power curve estimation.
2
1
0
1
2
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
tanh(z)
+w
a Weights
2
1
0
1
2
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
+b
b Biases
Figure 2.6: The effect of different weights and biases on a tanh(x) activation function.
The ANN will now be trained to calibrate the weights and biases using ∼300 data
points.
The data is acquired from a steady-state aeroelastic simulation using Flex5,
with a sweep of velocities from 4 m/s to 25 m/s. This range of velocities covers the
working range of many modern wind turbines. The model is trained for 20.000 epochs,
to ensure complete convergence. When training a model for so many epochs, there is an
inherent risk of overtraining. In this case however, since the entire domain is well defined,
and the data is without any uncertainties, this is not an issue. Instead of calibrating
the weights using the inner product of the original signal and the basis function, an
optimization algorithm is used to minimize the sum of the squared residuals between
the known observations and the model estimates. As the gradient of basis functions is
well defined, this can be done quite efficiently. The resulting model is shown in figure 2.7.
The prediction and the actual values of the test data are almost identical, supported by
the MSE of the model, which is evaluated to MSE = 0.000. Along with the test of the
model, a figure showing the principle of super-positioning the output of the neurons is
shown. The sum of the four neurons is shown as the dashed black line, while the output
of each of the neurons is shown as a colored line.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Theory
a Model testing
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
U0/Ucutout
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P/Prated
MSE = 0.000
Target
Prediction
b Superposition of neurons
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
ˆP
Figure 2.7: Single layer ANN power curve test results.
As more and more layers are added on to the network, the output of each layer be-
comes the input to the next, making it quite difficult to determine the exact contribution
or effect of each node in the previous layers. The output thus becomes a superposition
of non-linear functionals. This give ANNs the ability of modelling highly non-linear
phenomena rather accurately.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Data sets & pre-processing
This chapter includes an introduction to the simulated data available for this project,
as well as a description of how the data sets for modelling purposes are created.
3.1
Flow simulation
In order to make a surrogate models of a wind turbine operating in wake conditions,
data from a coupled AL/LES is used. The simulations available for this project, repur-
posed from a study on wake superposition, consist of two different geometries: one with
a single coupled wind turbine, and one with three coupled wind turbines aligned with
the flow direction. The turbines are coupled using AL with Flex5. The simulations do
not include the hub, nor the tower. The three rotor blades are thus suspended within
the simulation domain. The turbine used for these simulations is the Vestas (previously
NEG Micon) NM80, with rotor radius R = 40m. The rotor radius is henceforth used as a
length scale to normalize the coordinates in the simulation domain. The simulations were
performed at three different bulk inflow velocities, U0 = [8.55m/s, 11.16m/s, 14.00m/s].
All of the simulations have an ambient level of turbulence intensity of TI = 0.03 as
defined by (3.1), where u′ is the velocity fluctuations, ¯u is the mean velocity and σ the
standard deviation operator.
TI = σ(u′)
¯u
(3.1)
At the inlet, a turbulent inflow condition is applied using the Mann turbulence model,
superimposing turbulent fluctuations as body forces. The parameters of the Mann box
is shown in table 3.1. A far-field, or constant velocity, boundary condition is applied at
the top and the bottom of the domain, and cyclic boundary conditions are applied at
the sides of the domain. Cyclic boundary conditions work as a mirror, such that the
flow exiting from one side of the domain enters though the other. This emulates the
effect of having an infinite row of turbines aligned perpendicular to the flow.
The mesh of the LES is non-uniform, such that the cells become larger towards the
boundaries of the domain. The center of the domain has a uniform mesh, with a cell
side length of ∆lx = 0.1R. The domain is shown in 3.1.
The outputs of the simulations are recorded as the three velocity components in flow
planes parallel to the operating coupled rotor. The geometry of such a flow plane is
shown in 3.2, along with the coordinate system used to describe positions relative to
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Data sets & pre-processing
a Front view
5
0
5
Y, [R]
5
0
5
Z, [R]
b Top-down
10
0
10
20
30
40
X, [R]
5
0
5
Y, [R]
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the simulated domain. The green rectangle indicates the part
of the domain with uniform discretization. The position of the coupled wind turbine is
marked in red. The blue rectangle indicates the sub-domain used for modelling, denoted
the wake domain.
nx
ny
nz
XM
YM
ZM
terrain
αε2/3
LM
Γ
seed
16384
128
128
32 768 m
2048 m
2048 m
basic
0.055
55.7
3.81
-5
Table 3.1: Mann-box parameters used to generate the incoming flow of the LES simula-
tions.
the coupled turbine. These flow planes are available at every 2R in the flow direction,
starting at X = −10R down to X = 38R. The velocity components are ordered in
a cartesian coordinate system. Due to the discretization of the domain, the positions
X > 34R towards the end of the domain, do not contain usable results. The initial
conditions of the simulation results in a transient phase, a run-in period, in which the
turbulence is advected from the inlet to the outlet. The length of the run-in period is
calculated using (3.2). For the lowest bulk inflow velocity U0 = 8.55m/s this is evaluated
to 258s. To be conservative, the first 300 seconds of the simulations are discarded to
remove the run-in period. The remaining length and sampling frequency of each of the
simulations is given in table 3.2, where ˆCT is the bulk CT of the coupled turbine, and
U0 the bulk wind speed.
trun−in = LX
U0
(3.2)
3.2
Turbine characteristics
The turbine used in this project is as mentioned the NM80. It is a three bladed,
upwind, variable speed, pitch regulated (VSPR) wind turbine, with a rotor diameter
of 80 m. A steady state operational reference of the turbine is developed using Flex5.
The turbine is exposed to inflow velocities from 4m/s to 25m/s with increments of 0.5
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Turbine characteristics
19
ˆCT
U0 [m/s]
T [s]
fs [Hz]
0.43
14.0
1500
10.0
0.61
11.16
2000
9.3
0.75
8.55
3000
8.9
Table 3.2: Length of the individual LES time series, after the run-in period has been
discarded.
Y
Z
X
o
U
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the turbine setup, and the planes extracted from the flow field:
The blue planes show the X-position, and the red circles shows the extend of the flow
plane extracted. The sketch shows the coordinate system employed in the database.
m/s. The inflow is uniform, and the wind speed is kept constant for 660 seconds at each
velocity. The first 60 seconds are used to stabilize the turbine output, by allowing the
control systems of the turbine to reach a steady state. The outputs of the final 10 min
of the simulation at the given wind speed are averaged, and six quantities are calculated:
blade pitch ϕ, electric power P, thrust T, tip speed ratio λ, thrust coefficient CT, and
power coefficient CP.
CT =
T
1
2ρAU 2
CP =
P
1
2ρAU 3
(3.3)
Some of these quantities are directly available from the output of Flex5, however the
power- and thrust coefficients are calculated according to (3.3). The results of the sweep
is shown in figure 3.3. The sweep is performed both with and without gravity. The
addition of the gravitational loads did not show any significant changes from the purely
aeroelastic simulation. It was therefore excluded from further considerations.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Data sets & pre-processing
a Pitch curve
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed, Uhub, [m/s]
0
10
20
30
Wing pitch, blade 1, [°]
ˆCT = 0.43
ˆCT = 0.61
ˆCT = 0.75
b Tip Speed ratio
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed, Uhub, [m/s]
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Tip speed ratio, λ [-]
c Power curve
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed, Uhub, [m/s]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Electric power, P/Prated
d Thrust curve
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed, Uhub, [m/s]
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Thrust, T/Tmax
e Power coefficient
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed, Uhub, [m/s]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Power coefficient, CP [-]
f Thrust coefficient
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed, Uhub, [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Thrust coefficient, CT [-]
Figure 3.3: Turbine performance characteristics. The mean operating points are shown
with markers in the plots.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Flow database
21
From these figures, the three control regions are clearly visible. Initially, in the first
region, λ is controlled for CP optimization, until the rotational speed (ω) of the turbine
reaches a maximum allowed value ωmax. In the second region, the ω is controlled to
not exceed ωmax. As the rated power (Prated) is reached, the blades of the turbine are
pitched to not exceed Prated, while maintaining constant ω.
As previously discussed, the wake dynamics are in large parts governed by CT. The
use of CT as a modelling parameter should generalize the wake characteristics across
multiple turbine types. A look-up table of the aeroelastic CT has been generated to
lookup CT from P. The power is indicative of the integrated flow over the rotor area,
and is readily available as an output from Flex5. The relationship between these two
quantities is not a function, as is shown by the vertical line for P = Prated in figure 3.4.
For wind speeds above rated, the power is constant, and CT continues to vary in this
range. The look-up table is therefore set to return CT observed at rated wind speeds for
all observations of rated power. This simplification is assumed valid, since the highest
bulk wind speed is very close to the rated wind speed of the turbine.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P/Prated
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
CT
ˆCT = 0.43
ˆCT = 0.61
ˆCT = 0.75
Figure 3.4: Relationship between CT and P. The relationship is not a function, which
is shown by the vertical line for P = Prated.
3.3
Flow database
The flow database refers to a collection of flow planes in Flex5 format extracted from
the LES in by means of linear interpolation. The details on the format is presented later.
The extent of these flow planes are shown in the areas marked with red dashed lines of
figure 3.2. The planes are designated by their center position in the coordinate system
defined in figure 3.2. The discretization of the LES in the XY -domain (figure 3.1 b) limits
the lateral range in which the flow field is resolved uniformly to Y = [−4R : 4R]. The
data is only extracted from this zone in a range of rotor center positions Y = [−2R : 2R]
in increments of ∆Y = 0.25R. In the upward facing Z-direction, only the hub height of
the coupled turbine is considered. In the LES data, X-range with uniform grid spacing
limited to X = [−10R : 36R]. A plane upstream at X = −2R, Y = 0R is extracted, and
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Data sets & pre-processing
down stream, planes in a range of X = [4R : 32R] are extracted with an increment of
∆X = 2R.
The flow-planes are included in their full simulated length, and extracted for all
values of ˆCT. The variable space covered in the flow database is shown in table 3.3. The
total number of LES time series in this variable space is 1020. The spatial distribution
of these coordinates is shown in figure 3.5. The flow-plane at X = −2R is designated as
the input plane, and the rotor center position of the flow planes in the wake is designated
as the ghost turbine position. A overview of the spatial coordinates in the flow data set
is shown in figure 3.5. The figure shows the boundaries of the modelled domain as a blue
rectangle. The confines of this rectangle defines the what will henceforth be referred to
as the wake domain. When a coordinate in the wake domain is referenced, this implies
the position of the rotor center in the flow plane.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
X, [R]
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Y, [R]
U
Ghost turbines
Input plane
Coupled turbine
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the position of the coupled turbine and the rotor center
positions of flow planes extracted from the LES.
Due to some technical difficulties at run-time of these simulations, the lateral and
vertical velocity components V and W, are missing for some of the down stream positions.
It was decided to discard the remaining V and W components from further consideration,
to use all the available flow data under the same circumstances. Some examples of the
flow time series are shown in figure 3.6. From these time series, recorded at Y = 0.5R,
the general behavior of the flow in a wake can be observed. At X = −2R, the flow
is disturbed by the induction of the operating turbine, however the velocity deficit is
almost unnoticeable since the data is recorded away from the rotor center of the coupled
turbine. After the turbine, at positive values of X, a deficit is observed more clearly.
Moving down stream, away from the coupled turbine, the velocity deficit diminishes,
and the flow regenerates. A change in the turbulence can also clearly be seen. The flow
is relatively steady before the turbine, and as it passes the turbine, turbulence is added.
Moving further downstream from the coupled turbine, the flow appears more turbulent.
The flow database is intended to be used in connection with Flex5, which uses a
polar grid, to produce a concurrent flow and loads database. The Cartesian organized
flow data is interpolated into a polar grid in the Flex5 format. The details of the polar
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Flow database
23
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
time, [s]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Wind speed, U/U0
X=-2
X=8
X=16
X=24
Figure 3.6: An example of a time series from LES. The time series are recorded at a
lateral position of Y = 0.5R from the rotor center of the coupled turbine. The time
series are recorded at hub height.
discretization is discussed later, in section 3.5. The mean wind speed and turbulence
intensity is calculated in 10 min windows for all the coordinates in the flow planes with a
stride of 1 minute. Two neighboring samples will therefore share 9 minutes of flow data
before the mean wind speed and turbulence intensity are calculated. The selection of a
suitable stride length, is a trade-off between obtaining many highly identical observations
of the 10-min statistics, or few less identical observations. A detailed investigation of
the optimal stride has not been conducted.
The use of 10 min quantities is the de
facto standard practice in wind energy. This is due to the nature of the atmospheric
turbulence, where a gap in the turbulent energy spectrum occurs between ∼5min and
10 hours, see Hoven [54]. The 10 min period thus covers the atmospheric turbulence,
and using shorter time windows would result in significant variance in the loads.
Dimension
Values
Unique values
Unit
ˆCT
{0.43, 0.61, 0.75}
3
−
(U0
{14.00, 11.16, 8.55}
3
m/s)
X
{−4.0, −2.0, 0.0, . . . 34.0}
20
R
Y
{−2.0, −1.75, −1.5, . . . 2.0}
17
R
Table 3.3: Variable space covered by the flow database. ˆCT is derived from U0, which is
included in parentheses.
Training/Test split
In order of saving data for surrogate validation, it is necessary to split the data in
two. The most common practise is to randomly shuffle the data, and perform the split
afterwards. This practice is to minimize the risk of encountering periodic behaviours,
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Data sets & pre-processing
which is undesirable since the weights are updated multiple times during an epoch.
Meaning the surrogate could be trained to view a random sequence as something intrinsic
to the problem. The underlying assumption when such a split is performed is that the
data is uncorrelated, which is not the case for this data set.
Therefore the split is
performed after the rolling mean operation, prior to shuffling the data. The ratio in the
split is 75% for training and 25% for testing. Even though some of the test data is still
correlated due to the stride being 1 minute. Under these circumstances this approach
results in the least correlated test set. Resulting sample sizes (n) and uncorrelated time
of the training and test sets are summarized in table 3.4.
ˆCT
tts [s]
ttrain [s]
ttest [s]
ntrain
ntest
0.43
1500
1125
375
12
4
0.61
2000
1500
500
18
6
0.75
3000
2250
750
30
10
Table 3.4: Length of unique time in the training- and test data sets after the train/test
split. The number of 10 min mean samples in each part of the set is given by n.
3.4
Loads database
The flow time series recorded from the LES, are used as input to aeroelastic simula-
tions in Flex5, which calculates the aeroelastic response. The results of the aeroelastic
simulations are saved as time series. Similarly to the LES, Flex5 also has a transient
run-in period. Though the length of this run-in period is not investigated in detail, the
first 35 seconds of the time series are discarded based on visual inspection, see figure
3.7. The outputs are separated according to the same time windows as the flow. In each
of these windows, the mean electric power P, along with the 1Hz damage equivalent
load (DEL) for the flapwise bending moment of blade no. 1 M ∗
F, and the tower bottom
bending moments in fore-aft M ∗
T,Y and side-side M ∗
T,X are calculated and stored. The
superscript ∗, indicates the DEL, while the ommitance of this superscript indicates the
instantaneous quantity, the varaibles are summarized in table 3.5.
Description
Variable
10 min. mean electrical power
P
Blade flap-wise root bending moment 10 min. DEL
M ∗
F
Tower side-side bottom bending moment 10 min. DEL
M ∗
T,X
Tower fore-aft bottom bending moment 10 min. DEL
M ∗
T,Y
Table 3.5: List of modeled variables
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Loads database
25
These specific load sensors were chosen, since the blades and the tower are the largest
components of the turbine. Only the flapwise bending moment on the blade is included
as it is much more sensitive to the inflow conditions than the edgewise moment. The
DEL of the egdewise bending moment is primarily governed by the gravity loads, and
therefore mainly the rotational speed and the weight of the blade. It is therefore omitted
from this study.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time, [s]
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Normalized response, [-]
P
MF
MT, Y
MT, X
Figure 3.7: An example time series of the output from a Flex5 simulation, for ˆCT. The
transient period related to the start of the simulation can be observed in the beginning
of the time series.
P: Power, MF: Blade root flap bending moment, MT,Y : Tower
bottom fore-aft bending moment, MT,X: Tower bottom side-side bending moment. The
responses are normalized with the largest observed value in the observed range for the
respective variables.
The DEL on the components are calculated as S0 using (3.4), requiring the total
time of the sample T, the number of load cycles Ni, at a given load range Si, and the
Wöhler exponent of the given material mW. This equation is derived using Miner’s rule
for superimposing fatigue loads. The load range and number of cycles they appear on
a component are counted using a rainflow counting algorithm [55]. The methodology of
rainflow counting is based on stress-strain hysteresis paths. Closed or complete paths
are counted as one cycle, and open or incomplete paths are counted as half a cycle. The
implementation used for this purpose is developed by Janiszewski [56], and complies with
the ASTM E1049-85: Standard Practices for Cycle Counting in Fatigue Analysis [57].
For the remainder of the report, DEL is calculated using the the Wöhler exponent
mW = 6. It should be noted that when DEL is estimated using (3.4), only the cyclic
loads are taken into account. The static loading on the blades and tower is not accounted
for in the rainflow counting algorithm, and these will be of interest when estimating the
actual lifetime of a component.
S0 =
( 1
T
∑
i
NiSmW
i
)1/mW
(3.4)
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Data sets & pre-processing
As the results of the loads and power production were inspected, it was observed
that the output power of the ghost turbine placed in the immediate wake of the coupled
turbine at some points dropped to 0. This happens when U0 = 8.55m/s, where the
turbine operates at a relatively high thrust coefficient of ˆCT = 0.75. In these wake
conditions, the deficit is enough to trigger the control system programmed into Flex5
to stop the turbine. This could potentially limit the accuracy of the final model, as the
region of the power curve around cut-in wind speeds is discontinuous. With this in mind,
the results of the load database for ˆCT = 0.75, and X = [4R, 6R, 8R] are discarded. A
box-plot of the instantaneous power output for all the included ˆCT is shown in figure
3.8.
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
22.0
24.0
26.0
28.0
30.0
32.0
34.0
X,[R]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P/Prated
ˆCT
0.43
0.61
0.75
Figure 3.8: Box-plots of the power production of the ghost turbines down stream from
the coupled turbine.
3.5
Flow discretization
As mentioned previously, the discretization of the flow planes stored in the database
are saved in the Flex5 format. This format has the grid-points arranged in a uniformly
distributed polar layout as shown in figure 3.9.
The parameters NS and NA define
the resolution of the input turbulent wind field, describing the number of radial- and
azimuthal stations respectively. The number of grid-points should be as low as possible,
while still yielding acceptable results. The exact number of grid-points is determined in
the following section.
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Flow discretization
27
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Y [R]
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Z [R]
Figure 3.9: The polar discretization layout of the point values given to Flex5.
The
number of radial stations NS = 10, and the number of azimuthal stations NA = 41,
yielding a total of m = 411 grid-points, including the center point.
Flex5 sensitivity analysis
The sensitivity of the aeroelastic tool on the number and distribution on the grid-
points is investigated using a brute force method.
The parameters NS and NA are
investigated in the range NS = [2, 4, ..., 50] and NA = [3, 5, ..., 53] respectively. The
analysis is performed at three different positions in the wake, at X = [8R, 16R, 24R],
and for all bulk ˆCT = [0.43, 0.61, 0.75]. For each combination, a 10 min time series
is simulated.
M ∗
F, M ∗
T,X and M ∗
T,Y , and the mean power P for each time series is
calculated. The resulting quantities are normalized with the results of the simulation
with the highest number of grid-points, NS = 50 and NA = 53, for the given ˆCT and
X. The root-mean-square of the relative error (RMSE) is calculated for each quantity
in each combination of NA and NS. RMSE is defined in (3.5), where µ is the mean
operator, y is the results of the Flex5 simulation with the given discretization, and y∗
is the results of the target simulation with the highest number of grid-points, NA = 53
and NS = 51. The results of this analysis is shown in figure 3.10.
RMSE =
v
u
u
u
tµ


(y −y∗
y∗
)2

(3.5)
For all of the quantities investigated in this sensitivity analysis, the general trend
is that the accuracy of the result seems to be less sensitive towards the number of
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Data sets & pre-processing
a P
2
14
26
38
50
NS
3
11
19
27
35
43
51
NA
0.34
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.00
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
RMSE, [%]
b M ∗
F
2
14
26
38
50
NS
3
11
19
27
35
43
51
NA
1.31
0.50
1.00
4.00
5.00
10.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
4.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
RMSE, [%]
c M ∗
T,X
2
14
26
38
50
NS
3
11
19
27
35
43
51
NA
2.61
1.00
5.00
10.00
25.00
0
1
5
10
25
50
RMSE, [%]
d M ∗
T,Y
2
14
26
38
50
NS
3
11
19
27
35
43
51
NA
2.16
1.00
5.00
10.00
10.00
0
1
5
10
25
50
RMSE, [%]
Figure 3.10: RMSE of Flex5 aeroelastic simulations relative to the results from the
highest number of grid-points.
azimuthal-, rather than the number of radial stations. Intuitively this should not come
as a surprise, as the distance around the perimeter is 2π larger than the radius of the
rotor plane. We also see that the DEL are generally more sensitive toward the flow
discretization than the power is. The power can be estimated with an RMSE of around
1% with a relatively coarse flow discretization of only NS = 4 and NA = 13. This same
discretization yields an RMSE value of M ∗
T,Y of approximately 10%, the side-side bending
DEL of 8.8% and for M ∗
F approximately 5%. M ∗
F is directly linked to the aerodynamics
on the local blade. This means that the deviation from the reference is directly linked
to the flow conditions applied in the tested cases. As more grid-points are added to
the flow field, a more accurate load distribution can be calculated, finally resulting in a
more accurate bending moment. The larger deviation from the reference in M ∗
T,X and
M ∗
T,Y on the other hand is likely linked to the multi-body dynamics system of Flex5 [46].
The blades are rigidly attached to the hub, which is attached to the tower. The tower
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Flow discretization
29
is thus the parent of all the three blades. The tower feels the compound reaction force
of all the three blades, and thereby also the associated errors.
An interesting feature of the results for the power is that the number of grid-points
are generally minimized under a given error constraint by having a ratio between NA
and NS of ∼3. This can be observed from the position of the contour lines, where the
number of grid-points are minimized at the position closes to the bottom left corner of
the plots. The minimal number of grid-points that keeps the RMSE of the power below
0.01% is NS = 4 and NA = 13. This gives a ratio of NA/NS = 3.25. A similar ratio is
observed if the RMSE is constrained to 0.005%, as NA = 27,NS = 8 which yields a ratio
of 3.38. The RMSE of M ∗
F behaves similarly to that of the power, where the contour
levels are distributed monotonously, from low accuracy in the bottom left corner of the
plot to high accuracy at the top right corner of the plot. For M ∗
T,X and M ∗
T,Y , this
behavior is a little more complex. Here, the error is no longer a monotonous function of
the discretization parameters. A discretization of NA = 41 and NS = 10 is chosen for
the flow database, yielding a total number of grid-points of 411. This limits the RMSE
of M ∗
T,Y and M ∗
T,X, M ∗
F and the P to 2.2%, 2.6% 1.3%, and 0.3% respectively.
==PAGE:38==
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Wake Modelling
The overall goal of this project is to produce and assess surrogates for load and power
prediction for wind turbines operating under wake conditions. To achieve the end goal,
an intermediate step to arrive at such a surrogates is taken, a surrogate for prediction
of wake flow is constructed. This intermediate flow surrogate is intended to provide the
load surrogates with accurate estimates of the inflow conditions, while allowing scrutiny
of the intermediate results.
The flow surrogate should be able to predict downstream wake planes, given the in-
flow plane, the thrust coefficient CT of the coupled turbine and wake domain coordinates
(X, Y ) of a downstream ghost turbine, see figure 3.5. The inflow plane, or feature plane,
considered is located at (X, Y ) = (−2R, 0R), see figure 3.5. This position is considered
because it is possible to obtain experimental data from this area, using a top mounted
lidar. No such data is considered here, but could be implemented in future work. At this
position, close to the coupled turbine, the effects of the induction zone should be visible.
For the inflow to the turbines operating at the highest value of CT, it is expected to
see a deficit in the incoming velocity of around 4% in the center line [35], see figure 4.1.
At lower values of CT, the observed induction should be less. The flow surrogate uses
the Flex5 formatted, polar flow planes, described previously in section 3.5, as both the
input and output. Furthermore, flow planes in the same 2D structure is used as both
input and output, which means the flow surrogate can be viewed as a transfer function
of 10-min flow planes over the coupled turbine.
For ease of implementation, the flow surrogate is split into two separate models: one
for predicting the distribution of the mean wind speed, referred to as the U-surrogate,
and one for predicting the distribution of the turbulence intensity referred to as the
TI-surrogate. These models are very similar, therefore the overall structure of them are
presented as a single category of flow surrogates. To better understand the scope of
the flow surrogates, in figure 4.1 an arbitrary result from the U-surrogate is presented,
the figure shows an inflow feature-, wake target- and wake prediction plane, the reader
should note that the colorbars are not shared when plots of wake planes are included.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Wake Modelling
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
1.00
Feature [U/U0]
a Feature
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
Prediction [U/U0]
b Prediction
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
Target [U/U0]
c Target
Figure 4.1: U-surrogate feature, prediction and target planes with randomly chosen
realization plane at: X = 12R, Y = 0R and ˆCT = 0.75
4.1
Wake Plane ANN flow surrogate
The flow surrogates are modelled using fully connected feed forward ANNs consisting
of three sub-models, see figure 4.2. Each of these sub-models contains their own ANN.
In sub-models 1 and 2, the inputs to the surrogate are connected; the inflow planes (xi),
and the meta-parameters (xj) respectively. The meta-parameters are defined as CT of
the coupled turbine and the position of the ghost turbine in the wake domain (X, Y ).
These two inputs are processed in separate sub-models, after which the outputs of the
sub-models are concatenated. The sub-model outputs are processed in a final sub-model
and an output is found. Separating the two types of input is done under the assumption
that they might not benefit from having the exact same model topology. In sub-model
1 the flow interacts, in sub-model 2, the meta-parameters interact, and in sub-model 3
the outputs of the first two sub-models interact.
The surrogates are implemented using the TensorFlow 2.0.0 Python API [58]. Ten-
sorFlow handles data in rectangular arrays. To accommodate this, the Flex5 formatted
flow planes needs to be flattened because of the center point in the polar grid. The flow
planes are arranged into one dimensional arrays, where the ordering of the values are
representative of their position in the grid.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Wake Plane ANN flow surrogate
33
xj
xi
Flow sub model 1
Flow sub model 2
Flow sub model 3
yi
Concatenation
Figure 4.2: Flow surrogate topology
Loss function adjustment
The Flex5 format used in the flow database distributes the grid-points in a uniformly
distributed polar grid. This grid is not uniformly distributed in Cartesian space, as can
be seen in figure 3.9. From this figure, we see that the concentration of grid-points
is highest towards the center of the plane.
The model training process is based on
minimizing a loss function, here MSE. At each update of the model, the weights are
adjusted towards reducing the loss. If each grid point is considered of equal importance,
quality of predictions towards the perimeter of the plane will be sacrificed, to increase
the quality of predictions in the center of the plane. In order to minimize this effect, the
error at each point should correspond to the area its associated with. It can be shown
that the area ascribed to each point scales linearly with the radial distance from the
center, if the center point is neglected. The details of the derivation can be found in
appendix A. This means, that in order to achieve spatial accuracy in estimates of the
flow planes, the errors should be scaled with their radial distance from the center of the
flow plane.
Though the points on the perimeter of the flow plane covers the largest area, the flow
here is not necessarily the most important for predicting loads and power. In aeroelastic
codes the lift forces on the blades are scaled with Prandtl’s tip loss correction [47]. This
corrects the force distribution to the effects of the tip vortices reducing the lift at the tip
of the blade. As a combined solution to these two problems, a loss adjustment factor was
chosen as the product of r and Prandtl’s tip-loss correction for a flow angle of ϕa = 5°,
with a prescribed minimum value of 0.1. The prescribed minimum value ensures that
the loss of certain points are not completely neglected.
MSEPR = µ
(
[(y −y∗) · αPR (r)]2)
(4.1)
PR = 2
π arccos
(
exp
(Nb
2
(1 −r
ϕar
)))
r
(4.2)
αPR (r) =



PR
if PR ≥0.1
0.1
if PR < 0.1
(4.3)
The expression for the adjustment factor (αPR (r)) is presented in (4.3) where µ is a
mean operator and Nb = 3 is the number of blades. The weighting function was chosen to
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Wake Modelling
resemble a load distribution, and a minimum value added to make sure no point has zero
impact on the loss. Figure 4.3 shows the chosen adjustment factor and its components
as function of radial position (r). This adjustment factor has been implemented into
the TensorFlow API. Adjusting the loss with an emphasis on blade loading, means it is
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Loss weighting, [-]
Prandtl tip-loss (φ = 5°)
r
Prandtl-radial
Figure 4.3: ML loss correction factor based on r and the Prandtl tip-loss, where ϕ
denotes flow angle
expected to see a larger point-wise error at the perimeter and center compared to a case
without the adjustment. This is deemed acceptable since the goal is to produce good
load and power estimates, but should be kept in mind during flow model evaluation.
No study of the loss adjustment’s effect is provided, and it should be noted that one
such should be performed to assess the method. Additionally, effort should be put into
ensuring that the mean of the scaling distribution is 1 for performance evaluation.
Feature scaling
The velocities in the flow planes are normalized with the bulk velocity U0 of the
simulations in both the feature and the target sets. This scaling should help the model
generalize the patterns in the development of the wake down stream from the coupled
turbine, as the order of the features and targets is the same for all three simulations.
The TI is already a normalized quantity, and therefore this is not scaled further. The
coordinates in the wake domain have until now been described in units of the rotor radii,
and no further scaling of these coordinates is applied. The thrust coefficient CT is a non-
dimensional quantity ranging from 0 to 1, and this is also not scaled further. In general
terms, optimization algorithms work best if all the inputs are scaled evenly. Though the
coordinates (X, Y ) have values exceeding 1, this was not deemed problematic, later this
will prove erroneous.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Wake Plane ANN flow surrogate
35
Flow surrogate training
The overall topology of the flow surrogate is defined as in figure 4.2, with the three
separate sub-models 1, 2 and 3. The activation function of all neurons is ϕ (z) = tanh (z),
which has been chosen since it is differentiable and a good first estimate. Endless com-
binations exist within the overall topology, therefore a large hyperparameter search is
performed. To condense information a shorthand is created for describing considered
layer compositions,
Layer Comp = {L1, L2, L3...Lc}
where subscript c is the hidden layer number and Lc is the number of neurons in said
layer. Besides layer composition it is necessary to pick a learning rate, a number of
epochs and an optimization algorithm. A non-exhaustive hyperparameter study has
been performed to find a suitable surrogate topology. In table 4.1 the considered model
hyperparameters are listed, for the U- and TI-surrogate.
U-surrogate
Epochs
LR
Algorithm
50
1 × 10−4
SGD
Adam
sub-model 1
{128, 128, 64}
{128, 128, 128, 64}
{128, 128, 128, 128, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
{248, 248, 128}
{248, 248, 248, 128}
sub-model 2
{4, 4}
{8, 8}
{16, 16}
{32, 32}
{64, 64}
{16, 16, 16}
sub-model 3
{64}
{128}
{248}
{64, 64}
{128, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
TI-surrogate
Epochs
LR
Algorithm
100
1 × 10−4
SGD
Adam
sub-model 1
{128, 64}
{128, 128, 64}
{128, 128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{64, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
sub-model 2
{32, 32}
{64, 64}
{128, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{64, 64, 32}
sub-model 3
{128, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
{128, 128, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
Table 4.1: Non-exhaustive search hyperparameters as set during test with 432 resulting
combinations for the U model and 240 for the TI model. The curly brackets ({}) indicate
a hidden layer neuron composition.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Wake Modelling
The tested hyperparameters documented here are limited in epochs and learning
rates for the models to be comparable, but are based on a preliminary test case, later for
the load surrogates a refinement in rating has allowed for the inclusion of different epochs.
The amount of epochs were chosen to make overtraining unlikely, but a controlled study
should be performed to determine how many epochs can be allowed. Similarly, lowering
the learning rate has been previously found to not increase the surrogates accuracy
significantly but remains undocumented due to time constraints. From the documented
investigation the ten best results are listed in table 4.2, rated by the validation loss.
U-surrogate
V. Loss
Sub-Model 1
S-M 2
S-M 3
Epochs
Alg
7.81E-03
{128, 128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
50
SGD
7.86E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
50
SGD
8.05E-03
{128, 128, 128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
50
SGD
8.13E-03
{128, 128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
50
Adam
8.15E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{64, 64}
50
SGD
8.16E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64}
50
Adam
8.18E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{128, 64}
50
SGD
8.22E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248}
50
Adam
8.22E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 64}
{128}
50
Adam
8.23E-03
{128, 128, 128, 64}
{32, 32}
{248, 128, 64}
50
Adam
TI-surrogate
V. Loss
Sub-Model 1
S-M 2
S-M 3
Epochs
Alg
4.94E-03
{64, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
SGD
4.95E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
Adam
4.96E-03
{128, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
Adam
5.01E-03
{64, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
Adam
5.04E-03
{128, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
SGD
5.06E-03
{128, 64}
{128, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
Adam
5.07E-03
{128, 128, 128, 64}
{128, 64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
Adam
5.07E-03
{64, 64, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
SGD
5.11E-03
{128, 64}
{64, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
SGD
5.12E-03
{128, 128, 64}
{128, 64}
{248, 128, 64, 32}
100
SGD
Table 4.2: Ten lowest validation loss U- and TI-surrogates with the chosen model high-
lighted in gray.
For the U-surrogate, the layer compositions of sub-model 1 in the best performing
models lies within the boundaries of the search domain. No models with 248 neurons in
any of the layers appear in the list, suggesting that such high number of neurons over
complicates the model. For the TI-surrogate, a trend is not visible for the topology of
sub-model 1. The list includes models of two to four layers, and with varying number
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Surrogate performance
37
of neurons across the models. The lack of a clear trend shows that performance of the
model is almost indifferent to the topology of sub-model 1.
The best performing layer compositions of sub-model 2 are likely on the boundaries of
the search domain for both surrogates. The layer composition of the best U-surrogates is
primarily {64, 64}. This is the largest number of neurons in the two layer compositions
of sub-model 2.
The TI-surrogate also tend to favor the most complex topology of
sub-model 2, as 6 of the 10 best models are on the boundary.
For both surrogates, the layer compositions in sub-model 3 are simultaneously on two
boundaries, they are the two most complex layer compositions and simultaneously the
ones with the lowest amount of neurons in the last layer. It should be expected that high
complexity in sub-model 3 is important since it is where the interaction between the flow
planes and the meta-parameters occurs. This interaction is responsible for predicting
the development of the wake in space and as function of CT.
Since the best layer
compositions in sub-model 3 for both the U- and TI-surrogates are on the boundaries
of their respective search domains, it is unlikely that an optimal model topology is
obtained.
4.2
Surrogate performance
As the surrogates covers quite a large space of variables, two metrics are developed
to evaluate the performance of the surrogates. When evaluating accuracy the ISO 5725-
1 [59] definitions of trueness, precision and accuracy are used, graphically illustrated
in figure 4.4.
Developing surrogate performance metrics is not a trivial task, since
information is lost, when data is reduced in dimensionality. To develop metrics of the two
flow models’ accuracy, the point-wise relative error in the flow plane is considered. The
errors are weighted with a function wA, correcting the grid-point clustering in the center.
wA is a linear function of the radial coordinate r with a mean value of 1, neglecting
the center point. wA is given in (4.6). The operation of weighting the flow-plane with
wA and applying a spatial average, will hereafter be referred to as rotor averaging. The
performance metric MEw,A, is the sample mean of the rotor averaged errors at each
Probability
density
Trueness
Precision
Value
Reference value
Figure 4.4: ISO 5725-1 components of accuracy: Trueness and precision, figure by:
SV1XV licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Wake Modelling
position in the wake domain. This metric estimates the trueness of the surrogates. A
low absolute value of MEw,A indicates high trueness of the surrogate. The equation
for calculating this metric is shown in (4.4). A variation of the RMSE is considered to
describe the accuracy of the surrogates, RMSEw,A. RMSE is calculated for the weighted
relative errors, and averaged over the number of samples available at each position
in the wake domain, see (4.5). Similarly to MEw,A, low values of RMSEw,A indicates
high accuracy of the surrogate. The same metrics were applied to the residuals of the
surrogate training, the results of which can be found in appendix C.
MEw,A = µn
(
µm
([(y −y∗)
y∗
]
wA (r)
))
(4.4)
RMSEw,A = µn



v
u
u
u
tµm


([y −y∗
y∗
]
wA (r)
)2




(4.5)
wA (r) = 2r
(4.6)
In (4.4) and (4.5) µn is a mean operator over number of samples n, µm is a mean operator
over flow plane grid-points (m), and wA (r) an area based weighting.
To better understand the surrogates, it is practical to have an estimate of which
wake structures are present. Sørensen et al. [26] provides an analytical expression for
estimating the length of the vortex breakdown zone and the length of the transition
zone.
Lbreakdown = −16 · eU 3
C
NbλCT
ln (C1TI)
⇒







4.55R
for ˆCT = 0.43
2.58R
for ˆCT = 0.61
1.53R
for ˆCT = 0.75
(4.7)
Lnearwake = −
(16 · eU 3
C
NbλCT
ln (C1TI) + 5.5 ln (TI)
)
⇒







23.83R
for ˆCT = 0.43
21.87R
for ˆCT = 0.61
20.82R
for ˆCT = 0.75
(4.8)
Sørensen et al. has estimated the normalized vortex convective propagation velocity
eUC = 0.73. Similarly a proportionality constant C1 = 0.3 is provided. Both are derived
for a turbine operating at optimum, while CT = 0.76, λ = 6 and U0 = 10m/s. Even
though the operational conditions are different, these constants are used to evaluate the
equations. This is an approximate method, and therefore the predictions and targets
should be investigated as well. The evaluation of (4.7) and (4.8) show that most of the
data is likely in the transition zone. The breakdown of the tip vortices is predicted to
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Surrogate performance
39
occur at X ≤4.55R, and the fully developed, Gaussian wake from X ≤20.82. It is
therefore expected to see the development of a Gaussian wake profile in this range.
4.2.1
U-surrogate performance
The U-surrogate produces results in the form of wake-planes. These are not well
suited for reporting, therefore rotor averaged quantities are reported. Occasionally select
wake-planes are included to show areas of interest, for the interested reader a more
complete set of wake-planes are included in appendix D.
In figure 4.5 rotor averaged predictions, targets and MEw,A are shown. The ranges of
the targets and predictions are plotted on the same color map to ensure comparability.
Due to the way the colorbar is implemented, it will only show the bounds of the values
present in the figure. This causes the extrema on the colorbar to be different for some
of the figures. When predictions and targets are compared directly they appear very
similar. The wake deficit is clearly present, and the CT dependency of the wake has
broadly been captured. The relative error shows an overall tendency for over estimation
in the top part of the domain, while under estimating in the lower part. Additionally
there is a tendency for the max absolute errors to be located close to the coupled turbine.
The largest absolute error is observed in the case of ˆCT = 0.43 at (X, Y ) = (6R, 0R).
This may be explained by the location of the vortex breakdown occurring approximately
at this position, according to (4.7). The nature of the vortex breakdown is highly non-
linear, and therefore larger errors can be expected in this local region.
To elaborate further on the errors, heat maps of MEw,A and RMSEw,A for collapsed
ˆCT are shown in the wake domain, in figures 4.6 and 4.8. In figure 4.6 it remains apparent
that the distribution of errors is not symmetric across the X-axis, which might be an
artifact of asymmetrical training data. Asymmetry in the training data is likely caused
by the cyclic boundary conditions applied in the LES, where flow is allowed to exit the
domain on one side and enter through the other.
The mean error in figure 4.6 shows a maximum absolute MEw,A of | −2.1%|, located
at the edge of the wake domain at (X, Y ) = (4R, −2R). Intuitively, it is expected that
the model will perform poorly in this area, because the wake effect is low when the
ghost turbine is positioned at an upstream extremum. At this position the rotor areas
of the ghost turbine and the coupled turbine do not overlap, and thus the only wake
effects we expect to see, are those related to the wake expansion and meandering. As
the distance downstream is at a minimum, the lowest wake expansion in the entire X
range is seen here, and explains the poor results at this position. In figure 4.7 a random
realisation at (X, Y ) = (4R, −2R) for ˆCT = 0.43 is shown. The wake-planes show the
surrogate struggling, as the effect of the wake is overestimated and the blockage effect
is missing. This is not a general error as can be seen in figure 4.5, where the blockage
effect is present.
The distribution of RMSEw,A in the wake domain is shown in figure 4.8. Compared
to figure 4.6 which showed the trueness of the surrogate, figure 4.8 shows the accuracy.
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Wake Modelling
a Prediction
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
1.04
1.08
1.12
µn(Uw, A/U0)[−] 
b Target
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
1.04
1.08
1.12
µn(Uw, A/U0)[−] 
c Error
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
4.0
3.2
2.4
1.6
0.8
0.0
0.8
1.6
2.4
ME (Uw, A)[%]
ˆCT = 0.43
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
1.08
µn(Uw, A/U0)[−] 
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
1.08
1.14
µn(Uw, A/U0)[−] 
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.8
2.4
ME (Uw, A)[%]
ˆCT = 0.61
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
0.80
0.88
0.96
1.04
1.12
µn(Uw, A/U0)[−] 
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
0.80
0.88
0.96
1.04
1.12
µn(Uw, A/U0)[−] 
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
2.4
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.8
2.4
ME (Uw, A)[%]
ˆCT = 0.75
Figure 4.5: U surrogate predictions for ˆCT = [0.43, 0.61, 0.75] with n = [4, 6, 10]
When these two metrics are brought together the precision of the surrogate can be
estimated. In areas where the trueness is high, but the accuracy is low, the precision
of the surrogate must be low. Applying this deduction, some areas stand out. Areas of
low precision are found at X = [6R : 10R] while Y = [−1.5R : 1.5R]. The low precision
in this area indicates that the surrogate is capable of estimating an approximate mean
of the target. However, distinct targets are not estimated accurately. Areas where both
accuracy and trueness are low can be considered poor in general, which means more
aggressive changes are necessary for the model to perform well in such areas. These
areas are clustered at the lower boundary in the X range.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Surrogate performance
41
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-0.73 0.15
0.6
0.82
0.9
0.95 0.91 0.84 0.75 0.69 0.61 0.55 0.52
0.5
0.43
-0.1
0.12 0.81
1.1
1.1
0.98
0.9
0.83 0.77 0.73 0.67 0.62 0.58 0.56 0.49
-0.82
0.6
1.2
1.3
1.2
0.95
0.9
0.85 0.78 0.76
0.7
0.65 0.62
0.6
0.53
-0.51 0.43
1.3
1.4
1.1
0.94 0.89 0.82 0.76 0.73 0.68 0.66 0.63 0.61 0.55
0.47 0.21
1.1
1.2
0.98 0.79 0.75 0.72 0.69 0.67 0.64 0.62
0.6
0.59 0.53
0.8
0.5
0.68 0.61 0.59 0.57 0.66 0.66 0.63 0.61 0.59 0.56 0.54 0.52 0.46
1.5
0.17 0.12 0.16
0.4
0.53 0.66 0.64 0.59 0.52 0.49 0.46 0.42
0.4
0.34
1.8
-0.13 -0.17 0.07 0.42 0.52 0.63 0.56 0.47 0.39 0.33 0.29 0.24 0.21 0.18
1.4
-0.52 -0.48 -0.01 0.41 0.42 0.43 0.31 0.22 0.14 0.09 0.05 0.02
0
-0.02
1.6
-0.84 -0.51 -0.07 0.24 0.18
0.1
-0.05 -0.1 -0.18 -0.2 -0.21 -0.2 -0.19 -0.19
1.6
-0.11 -0.03 0.06 0.04 -0.14 -0.33 -0.45 -0.45 -0.47 -0.45 -0.42 -0.38 -0.34 -0.31
0.8
0.14 0.37 0.27
-0
-0.36 -0.62 -0.74 -0.71 -0.69 -0.63 -0.57 -0.51 -0.44 -0.37
0.08 0.33 0.58 0.34 0.03 -0.38 -0.66 -0.81 -0.81 -0.78 -0.72 -0.64 -0.55 -0.45 -0.36
-0.7
0.14 0.33 0.19 -0.11 -0.37 -0.59 -0.72 -0.74 -0.73 -0.68 -0.61 -0.51 -0.41 -0.31
-1.5 -0.47 -0.25 -0.17 -0.28 -0.42 -0.52 -0.59 -0.6
-0.6 -0.58 -0.54 -0.46 -0.36 -0.27
-1
-1.2 -0.75 -0.54 -0.4 -0.44 -0.52 -0.52 -0.51 -0.51 -0.51 -0.49 -0.43 -0.34 -0.27
-2.1
-1.5 -0.98 -0.69 -0.63 -0.55 -0.58 -0.57 -0.54 -0.52 -0.52 -0.5 -0.46 -0.39 -0.33
Figure 4.6: U-surrogate MEw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
a Prediction
0.91
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
1.02
Target [U/U0]
b Target
Figure 4.7: Random U wake-plane realisation at the worst performing X = 4R, Y =
−2R position in the wake domain for ˆCT = 0.43
An area of low accuracy is observed for X ≤10. This area is where the wake deficit
is largest, therefore absolute errors of a given magnitude will have the largest impact
on the relative error here. The MSE loss function used in the training of the surrogate
measures absolute errors, therefore large relative errors may be observed in regions where
the targets are low.
Close to the turbine the wake deficit resembles a double Gaussian shape, while further
down stream, the deficit will be Gaussian. As seen in (4.7) and (4.8) the tip vortices are
expected to break down soon after the coupled turbine and the transition is expected to
end at X ∼22. Where exactly the Gaussian shape starts to be dominant is of interest,
since it estimates how much of the data can be considered far wake and how much can
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Wake Modelling
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
3
2.1
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
4.1
3.1
2.4
2.2
2
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
3.6
3.4
3.5
2.8
2.1
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
3.8
3.6
3.6
2.8
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.2
4.3
3.9
3.8
2.9
2.3
2
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.2
4.4
3.9
3.9
2.9
2.4
2.1
2
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
5.4
4.2
4
3
2.5
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
6
4.3
4.1
3.1
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
5.6
4.4
4.2
3.4
2.9
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
5.8
4.6
4.5
3.6
3.2
3
2.7
2.4
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
5.3
4.2
4.5
3.6
3.1
2.9
2.6
2.4
2.1
1.9
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
4.7
4.2
4.4
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.4
2.2
2
1.9
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
5
4.6
4.4
3.2
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.1
2
1.8
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
5.5
4.3
3.7
2.9
2.4
2.1
2
1.9
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
5.1
4
3.6
2.7
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
5.6
2.9
2.4
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
4.1
2.5
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
Figure 4.8: U-surrogate RMSEw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
be considered transition zone. If there is a large discrepancy between the number of
observations of the two shapes, it could lead to the surrogate being biased towards one
over the other.
By inspecting wake planes for ˆCT = 0.43, it was found that the latest the double
Gaussian shape is notably present is for X ≤10R, see figure 4.9. Further downstream
the shape is not exactly Gaussian but is closer in resemblance to the far wake than
the near wake. Because more wake data is available resembling the far wake, the near
wake can be said to be underrepresented. During training there will be more realisations
with a Gaussian wake structure, which means a bias against the area with the highest
variance, as the near wake is more chaotic than the far wake. Ideally a complex surrogate
topology could alleviate the problem, but a large amount of data is necessary to make
the training of a highly complex surrogate possible without over training. Alternatively
other measures can be applied to mitigate this effect, some of these are included in
section 4.4.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Surrogate performance
43
0.68
0.70
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
Prediction [U/U0]
a Prediction X = 4R
0.70
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
Target [U/U0]
b Target X = 4R
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
Prediction [U/U0]
c Prediction X = 10R
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
Target [U/U0]
d Target X = 10R
0.79
0.81
0.82
0.84
0.85
0.87
0.88
0.90
Prediction [U/U0]
e Prediction X = 14R
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
Target [U/U0]
f Target X = 14R
Figure 4.9: Downstream U wake-planes showing wake deficit distributions for ˆCT = 0.43
and Y = 0R
TI-surrogate performance
Similarly to the U-surrogate the results of the TI-surrogate are presented as rotor
averaged quantities. Sample meaned rotor averaged predictions, targets and relative
errors are calculated in the wake domain and shown in figure 4.10. From these figures
it is tempting to conclude that the TI-surrogate is performing much worse than the
U-surrogate. However it should be kept in mind that the values of TI range from ∼0.03
to ∼0.30 while the U-surrogate operates in a range of ∼0.5 to ∼1. This means that
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Wake Modelling
the larger relative errors in the TI-surrogate could stem from the same order of absolute
errors as seen in the U-surrogate.
a Prediction
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
µn(TIw, A)[−]
b Target
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
µn(TIw, A)[−]
c Error
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
ME(TIw, A)[%]
ˆCT = 0.43
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
µn(TIw, A)[−]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
µn(TIw, A)[−]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
12
9
6
3
0
3
6
9
12
ME(TIw, A)[%]
ˆCT = 0.61
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.27
µn(TIw, A)[−]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.27
0.30
µn(TIw, A)[−]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
20
16
12
8
4
0
4
8
12
ME(TIw, A)[%]
ˆCT = 0.75
Figure 4.10: TI surrogate predictions for ˆCT = [0.43, 0.61, 0.75] with n = [4, 6, 10]
The ANN structure should ideally be able to describe all of the complexities in
the observations for all combinations of meta-parameters, this is not the case. At low
values of X the absolute errors are large but not in the same direction. The sign of the
error changes multiple times across the lateral coordinate (Y ). A contributing factor is
the non-linearity close to the coupled turbine, which makes this area generally harder
to make accurate predictions in.
For the remainder of the wake domain, the errors
resemble coherent structures. The presence of coherent structures may have multiple
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Surrogate performance
45
causes. The most likely causes are that, either the training or the model structure are
insufficient. The training can be insufficient in that either the data amount is too small
or the model has not been trained long enough. The structure can be either too complex
or not complex enough stemming from too narrow a hyperparameter search.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-13
-8.5
-3
-2.4
-4
-4.2
-2.7 -0.08
2.5
4
5.5
6.1
6.8
7.5
8.4
-2.9
-4.3
-1.7
-2.3
-3.5
-2.5 -0.22
2.5
4.6
5.3
5.9
6
6.6
7.1
7.8
6.1
-0.7
-2.8
-4.3
-3.7 -0.71
2
4
4.9
4.9
5.1
5.2
5.7
6.2
6.8
-2.1
-5
-6.6
-5.5
-2
1.2
2.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
3.5
3.7
4.3
5
5.7
-15
-10
-7.2
-3.5 -0.08
1.5
1.8
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.8
2.2
3.1
4
4.7
-15
-9.6
-4.7
-1.1
0.23 0.63 0.62 0.47 0.47
0.5
0.98
1.7
2.7
3.6
4.4
-0.51 -2.9
-2.3
-1.1 -0.33 -0.11 -0.25 -0.26 -0.08 0.15 0.77
1.5
2.6
3.5
4.2
-5.5
-3.3
-2.2
-1.5 -0.92 -0.26 -0.36 -0.26 0.02 0.24
1.1
1.9
3
3.8
4.3
-7.1
-3.8
-2
-1.6
-1.3 -0.55 -0.33 -0.13 0.03 0.47
1.2
2.1
3.1
3.9
4.5
-3.6
-1.1 -0.75 -1.3
-1.3 -0.59 -0.09
0.1
0.03 0.56
1.1
2.2
3
3.8
4.4
5.4
0.61 -0.59 -1.4
-1.3 -0.63 0.34 0.36 0.17 0.43 0.73
1.5
2.3
3
3.6
-6.9
-3.7
-2.6
-2.5
-1.4 -0.46 0.86 0.82 0.52 0.55
0.6
1.1
1.7
2.3
2.7
-1.5
-2.5
-3.4
-3.6
-2
-0.3
0.8
1.1
0.81 0.71 0.57 0.77 0.97
1.4
1.8
5.1
-0.13 -2.4
-3.4
-2.7 -0.69 0.82
1.4
1.2
1.2
0.94 0.97
1
1.2
1.5
8.2
2.4
0.1
-1.3
-1.7 -0.79 0.53
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.6
5.4
0.99
1
1.8
1.1
0.52 0.68 0.82 0.96
1.1
1.4
1.7
1.9
1.9
1.8
5.2
1.2
0.98
3.4
4.4
3.6
2.5
1.6
1.3
1.1
1.2
1.7
2.3
2.2
2.3
Figure 4.11: TI-model MEw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
If a comparison between MEw,A of the TI-surrogate to the same metric with regards
to residuals (MRw,A), some of the same observations can be made, see figure 4.12 (or
appendix C for additional plots). In the residuals an arrow shaped structure of larger
positive residuals can be seen, developing from (X, Y ) = (4, 0), down to (X, Y ) =
(26, ±2). The same arrow shape is somewhat visible in the errors as well, figure 4.11. As
the structure is present in both, it is an indication that the surrogate is not over trained.
Because a larger discrepancy between the residuals and errors, would be expected if the
surrogate was overtrained.
At extrema of Y the wake is barely present, therefore a low correlation to the feature-
plane is expected. This is a contributing factor to higher error in the zone close to the
inflow. This was visible in the U-surrogate and is also notable in the TI-surrogate, in
figure 4.13 it is exemplified by RMSEw,A being high outside the wake effected zone.
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Wake Modelling
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-5.9
-1.5
3.8
4.1
2
0.3
0.29
1.2
2.2
2.9
3.1
3.1
3.4
3.9
4.4
3.8
2.1
4.3
3.5
1.9
1.3
2.2
3.2
3.9
3.8
3.4
3.2
3.4
3.7
4.2
13
5.7
3
1.4
1.5
2.5
3.7
4.2
4
3.4
3
2.6
2.8
3.2
3.7
5.2
2
0.04 0.77
2.9
3.8
3.8
3.7
2.9
2.3
1.8
1.7
1.9
2.5
3.1
-3.7
-1.1
0.25
2.7
4.1
3.8
2.9
2.2
1.5
1.2
0.79 0.93
1.4
1.9
2.6
-1.4
-0.1
1.9
3.6
3.8
3
2
1.2
0.78 0.77 0.56 0.94
1.4
2
2.8
12
4.7
2.4
2.8
2.5
1.8
1.1
0.66 0.49 0.71 0.75
1.2
1.6
2.4
3.2
3.5
2.7
1.2
1.9
1.6
1.2
0.85 0.81 0.72
1.1
1.2
1.6
2.1
2.9
3.7
1
1.5
1.1
1.8
1.5
1
0.85 0.89
0.9
1.4
1.5
1.8
2.2
3
3.8
3.8
3.9
2.5
2.5
2
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.3
3
3.8
9.3
3.9
2.2
2.7
2.3
1.6
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.5
2
2.6
3.3
-5.2
-1.3 -0.33
1.5
2
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.2
1.1
0.95
1.2
1.6
2.2
2.8
-1.6
-1.9
-2.1 -0.28 0.98
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.3
1.2
0.89
1.1
1.2
1.7
2.3
2.7
-0.89 -2.3
-1.6 -0.38 0.27 0.72
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.4
1.6
1.9
4.1
0.12
-1
-0.93 -0.74 -0.63 -0.26 0.47
1
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.8
0.1
-3
-1.9 -0.04 0.28 -0.43 -0.92 -0.64 -0.1
0.66
1.2
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.7
-1.8
-4.9
-4.4 -0.88
1.2
0.69
-0.6
-1.4
-1.4 -0.71 -0.04 0.52
1
1.4
1.4
Figure 4.12: TI-model MRw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
45
39
26
22
21
19
18
18
17
17
17
17
16
16
17
37
24
21
20
18
17
16
15
15
15
15
14
14
14
14
42
27
21
19
17
14
13
14
14
14
13
13
13
13
13
44
23
18
17
13
12
13
13
13
12
11
11
11
11
12
46
25
18
13
11
11
11
10
9.8
9.1
9.2
8.8
9.1
9.5
10
54
28
16
11
10
9.1
9
8.7
8.5
8.2
8.1
8
8.5
8.9
9.5
40
19
12
9.8
8.7
8
8.1
7.8
7.7
7.4
7.6
7.8
8.5
8.9
9.5
25
13
11
9.5
8.3
7.7
7.8
7.4
7.1
6.8
7.2
7.9
8.6
9.4
9.9
27
15
11
9.4
8.6
8
8.1
7.3
6.9
6.9
7.1
7.8
8.8
9.7
10
23
15
11
9.5
9.1
8.9
9
8.2
7.5
7.5
7.9
8.4
9.2
10
11
43
23
15
11
10
10
10
9.3
8.5
8.3
8.4
8.6
9.2
9.9
10
45
22
18
13
12
11
11
10
9.6
9.2
9.2
9.4
9.9
10
11
37
22
19
17
14
12
11
11
10
10
9.8
10
10
10
11
41
23
17
18
16
15
12
11
11
10
11
11
11
11
10
36
23
17
17
17
17
15
13
12
11
11
11
11
11
11
30
23
19
19
18
19
18
15
14
13
12
12
12
12
11
38
31
23
21
21
20
20
18
17
16
15
14
14
13
13
Figure 4.13: TI-model RMSEw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Surrogate performance
47
Flowplane discretization
Originally the grid discretization of the flow plane was chosen to accommodate the
Flex5 format. In section 3.5 a discretization level was determined based on the perfor-
mance of Flex5. To extend on that analysis, the sensitivity of rotor averages with regards
to flowplane discretization (m) is investigated. To estimate this, the flow database has
been reduced to five different, lower order discretizations, with m = [19, 34, 56, 106, 211]
respectively. The discretization layouts can be seen in appendix B. For each discretiza-
tion, a surrogate is trained, with the same ANN-topology as the top performing sur-
rogates in table 4.2. As the evaluation metric, the rotor averaged predictions of order
m are compared to the rotor averaged targets of the highest order flow discretization,
m = 411. This metric is similar, but not equal to MEw,A, as the predictions ym and
targets y∗
411 no longer have an equal number of points.
MEw,A,411 = µn
([(µp (ymwA) −µp (y∗
411wA))
µp (y∗
411wA)
]
wA (r)
)
(4.9)
In figure 4.14 and 4.15 the results of the analysis are shown.
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
MEw, A [%]
19
34
56
106
211
411
m
Figure 4.14: U-surrogate discretization investigation
30
20
10
0
10
MEw, A [%]
19
34
56
106
211
411
m
Figure 4.15: TI-surrogate discretization investigation
The general trend of these results shows that as the discretization is reduced, the
surrogates tend to underestimate both the wind speed and the turbulence intensity.
For the U-surrogate, reducing the discretization to m = 211 does not deteriorate the
predictions significantly compared to m = 411, as the distribution of the errors becomes
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Wake Modelling
narrower.
For surrogates with lower discretizations the interquantile range remains
approximately the same size, while outliers become more prevalent, shown by the discrete
points in the plot. For the TI-surrogate the effect of the distretization is almost identical
to that of the U-surrogate. The lower order discretizations initially do not seem to move
the median error much away from 0, however as the discretization becomes lower than
m = 106, the median tends to drift towards negative values.
This study used a fixed surrogate topology for different discretizations of the flow-
planes. Therefore the results from lower order discretizations are not necessarily the
best they could be. Given the results, it can be concluded that using m = 411 is very
likely an excessive discretization, for both the U- and the TI-surrogates. The results
show that reducing the amount of grid points may produce similar or even better results.
The discretization of m = 411 is inherited from the sensitivity analysis of Flex5. Since
Flex5 is used to calculate instantaneous quantaties and the ANN is used to predict 10
min means, it is not surprising the large amount of grid-points are excessive.
This study will be continued in section 5.3 after load surrogates have been introduced.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Superimposed wake transfer function
49
4.3
Superimposed wake transfer function
Wind turbines operating in a wind farm will often be affected by multiple wakes at
once. Therefore it is of interest to develop a surrogate capable of making predictions
in the wake of multiple turbines. In that regard it is tested if the flow surrogates can
be used as a wake effect transfer function across more than one turbine, even though it
was trained on single wake data. To that end a LES data set with three coupled wind
turbines have been used to evaluate the model as a transfer function, see figure 4.16.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
X, [R]
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Y, [R]
U
Turbine 1
Turbine 2
Ghost turbines
Input plane
Coupled turbines
Figure 4.16: Schematic of the LES setup with three coupled wind turbines.
To test the U-surrogate as a transfer function, the surrogate is applied twice: First
on an upstream feature plane, to predict a wake-plane behind turbine 1, then the pre-
dicted wake-plane is used as a feature plane observed by turbine 2, and a prediction is
made downstream of turbine 2. When making the first prediction the following meta
parameters were considered: (X, Y ) = (14.84R, 0R) and a sample dependent CT from
the 3 turbine data set. Then the predicted planes are evaluated by the surrogate once
more with updated meta parameters: (X, Y ) = (26R −14.84R, ±2R). CT is extracted
at X = 12R similarly to how the CT is calculated during training. In the figure 4.17 the
first feature-plane for turbine 2 is shown, with targets and predictions after turbine 2
at two lateral positions. The wake-plane predictions resembles, what would have been
expected had there been only one wake. Targets of both lateral positions show more
disorder, than the surrogate predicts. From these results alone, it is apparent the surro-
gate has to be trained with data from multiple wakes for the approach to be successful.
However it might still be that the approach can estimate rotor averaged velocities. To
evaluate if this is the case, a study across the lateral span Y is conducted. The rotor
averaged wind speeds are collected in prediction- and target boxplots for each considered
Y position, see figure 4.18. The study shows that the predictions are much narrower
than the targets, thereby it can be concluded that some averaging is going on. Further-
more the model has a tendency to overestimate the wind speed outside the center of
the wake domain, except for ˆCT = 0.43 where lateral positions away from the center are
captured best. There is a large difference in how the surrogate responds to different ˆCT,
specifically ˆCT = 0.75 has a low accuracy but it seems to be caused by a static error,
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Wake Modelling
0.77
0.78
0.80
0.81
0.82
0.84
0.85
0.87
Prediction 1 [U/U0]
a Prediction 1 X = 14.84R, Y = 0R
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
Prediction 2 [U/U0]
b Prediction 2 X = 26R, Y = 0R
0.69
0.70
0.72
0.73
0.75
0.76
0.78
0.79
0.81
Target 2 [U/U0]
c Target X = 26R, Y = 0R
0.68
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
Prediction 2 [U/U0]
d Prediction 2 X = 26R, Y = 1R
0.72
0.75
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.87
0.90
0.93
0.96
Target 2 [U/U0]
e Target X = 26R, Y = 1R
Figure 4.17: Transfer function prediction on turbine 1, 2 and target plane with randomly
chosen sample planes at position of turbine 2
this is interesting as it could possibly be corrected with a factor. The TI-surrogate did
not show a lot of promise, most likely due to the feature-plane being of an entirely dif-
ferent magnitude compared to the feature-plane in the wake. The ambient TI is roughly
0.03 while in the wake it goes to a max of ∼0.3, which means the extrapolation of
the surrogate is rather large. The results of using the TI-surrogate as a superimpos-
ing wake transfer function are included in appendix F. Overall the conclusions must be
that the approach does not work. If this approach were to work it would require data
from multiple wakes and possibly an additional meta-parameter indicating the number
of preceding turbines.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Superimposed wake transfer function
51
-2.0 -1.75 -1.5 -1.25 -1.0 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Y [R]
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
UW, A/U0 [-]
Type:
Prediction
Target
a ˆCT = 0.43
-2.0 -1.75 -1.5 -1.25 -1.0 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Y [R]
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
UW, A/U0 [-]
Type:
Prediction
Target
b ˆCT = 0.61
-2.0 -1.75 -1.5 -1.25 -1.0 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Y [R]
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
UW, A/U0 [-]
Type:
Prediction
Target
c ˆCT = 0.75
Figure 4.18: Transfer function: Rotor meaned windspeed predictions and targets at
X = 26R as boxplots
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Wake Modelling
4.4
Wake flow surrogate - partial conclusion
From the results of an initial hyperparameter search, a topology for the U- and TI-
surrogates were found. During the evaluation of the wake surrogates, the analysis led
to a range of partial conclusions, hypotheses and educated guesses. In this section a
summary of these are presented, including ideas for potential improvements.
The U-surrogate is capable of predicting the mean flow plane, downstream from
the coupled turbine within an absolutte mean error of |−2.1%|, while the TI-surrogate
predicts within an absolutte mean error of |−15%|. From visual inspection, the models
seem to capture the overall nature of the wake. Both of the surrogates, however, have
issues accurately predicting the flow in the wake immediately after the coupled turbine.
This is likely due to the physical nature of the wake, and the loss function used to
calibrate the ANN. The inaccuracy issues identified with the flow surrogates could be
mended by increasing the complexity of the model. However, increasing the number
of weights in the model, inherently increases the risk of overtraining the model, and
any such efforts should be done with careful attention to the model residuals and the
prediction errors. The flow surrogates were rated on a basis of validation loss. This is a
good measure for model performance, however it does not include information about the
residuals of the model. For such a measure a comparisons between loss and validation
loss should be considered.
A sensitivity study on the discretization of the flow planes was conducted.
The
results of this study showed that the current discretization of flowplanes is finer than
need-be. To achieve an optimal discretization in terms of a high surrogate trueness,
unsurprisingly does not require the same discretization as an aeroelastic tool.
During the evaluation of the flow surrogates some problems were identified. Therefore
some improvements are suggested to achieve a better overall performance.
• Splitting the wake domain into smaller areas and training different surrogates
for the near-wake zone and the far-wake zone.
This would alleviate the need
for complexity otherwise needed to model the large difference in near and far
downstream behaviour.
• Mirroring of data set across Y = 0R axis, to force symmetry in wake domain.
Effectively doubling the relative amount of positional data by considering lateral
changes in absolutes |Y |.
• Loss adjustment based on the (X, Y ) coordinates in the wake domain. This could
achieve a surrogate unbiased towards a gaussian deficit profile, improving predic-
tion in near wake at the cost of the far wake.
• Include other differentiable activation functions as hyper parameters or testing
mixed activation function surrogate. This would extent the search in a new dimen-
sion to perhaps find improvements.
• Addition of advanced ANN layers:
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Wake flow surrogate - partial conclusion
53
– CNN layers. Convolutional layers provide the potential benefit of calibration
to more complex flow correlations by increasing input data sizes.
– RNN layers. Recurrent layers can be used for time series to potentially in-
crease accuracy.
An elaboration on the advantages of adding more advanced ANN layers is presented
here. CNNs can handle large data sets using only a few weights, and can include a
learnable filter. Including a convolutional layer would allow for the introduction of a more
complex input, without compromising computational cost. For example, the dimensions
of the input flow plane could be increased to hold a reduced representation of the actual
time series, from which the filter would learn to perform the feature detection to give
a more accurate prediction.
RNNs offer similar options in regards to the inclusion
of a temporally resolved input.
RNNs remember previous activations, and they are
often effective in problems with a sequential nature, such as the flow time series. To
benefit from the strengths of these more advanced layers, the scope of the surrogate
would have to be significantly altered. This would also require a restructuring of the
data sets. They are therefore left as proposals for an alternative surrogate. It should
conclusively be noted that using the fully connected feed-forward ANN, does provide
reasonably accurate results, and therefore this simple approach should not be discarded
immediately, in favor of the more complex ANN structures.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
Load Modelling
To predict Damage Equivalent Loads (DEL’s) some further modeling is necessary.
Two approaches have been taken to this end. The first approach is analogous to the cur-
rent engineering models, where time series are generated according to the mean flow and
turbulence intensity in the wake, and the loads are calculated in aeroelastic simulations.
The wake surrogates described in the previous chapter, will be used to scale a Mann
turbulence box, which will then be used to calculate loads and power in Flex5. The
second approach is an additional ANN, from which the loads will be predicted based on
the output of the wake surrogates.
5.1
Modelling wake time series
As previously stated, accurate time series of the wake flow field are in some cases
necessary. In this section, the first main question of the thesis problem statement is
discussed, which was ”Can a surrogate wake engineering model provide time series for
accurate load and power prediction?” In the engineering model for load prediction by
Frandsen [11], and in the DWM [12], the spatial distribution of the turbulence is as-
sumed to be constant, and axis-symmetric respectively. In the wake surrogate presented
previously, no such assumption has been made, and the 10-min mean TI and wind speed
distributions are predicted in 2D. In order to answer the question posed above, it is hy-
pothesized that the wake surrogates can be used to scale a turbulent times series to
accurately predict the response of a turbine operating in wake conditions. Furthermore,
reduced orders of the surrogate results are considered, to evaluate the benefits of using
higher resolution wind speed and TI planes.
Engineering model principles
According to the IEC-61400 standard [45], the Frandsen model calculates an increase
in turbulence intensity from (5.1), where Ieff is the effective wake turbulence intensity
and σa is the ambient turbulent fluctuations. In (5.1) the probability of the turbine to be
in a wake is set to p = 1, and therefore it differs slightly from the expression given in the
standard, and in Frandsen’s initial study [11]. According to the standard, the effective
turbulence intensity is used to scale a turbulent time series, from which the loads are
available through aeroelastic simulation. The velocity used for these simulations should
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Load Modelling
be the bulk inflow velocity, and not an approximation of the wake velocity.
Ieff = 1
U0


v
u
u
u
t
U 2
0
(
1.5 + 1.6X
√CT
)2 + σ2
a
mW


1/mW
(5.1)
The turbulence model used in the DWM model assumes an axis-symmetric distri-
bution of both the velocity and the turbulence intensity. The initial velocity- and tur-
bulence intensity profiles are calibrated from a higher fidelity simulation such as 3D
AD model [12]. A thin shear layer model is used to calculate the velocity field in the
advected wake. The added turbulence intensity in the meandering frame of reference
wake is calculated as a superposition from the factor kmt, given in (5.2), and the ambient
turbulence, as done by Madsen [14].
kmt(r) = km1|1 −Udef(r)| +

∂Udef(r)
∂r

(5.2)
The added turbulence intensity is here a function of the wake velocity, and the gradient
of the wake velocity in the radial coordinate r. As the distance down stream of the
operating turbine is increased, the wake velocity profile changes, and thus the scaling
becomes a function of the down stream distance as well as r. The parameters km1 and
km2 are calibrated for the NM80 turbine to km1 = 0.6 and km2 = 0.35 respectively [14].
Similarly to the method suggested by Frandsen, kmt is here used to scale the turbulence
field in a Mann-box to generate the turbulence in the meandering frame of reference.
Since the scaling suggested here is not uniform, this process breaks the spatial coherence
of the turbulence, and makes it inhomogeneous. The resulting flow field will therefore not
be equivalent to the turbulence generated according to method prescribed by Mann [20].
Mann turbulence box
Ambient turbulence flow fields are generated using the Mann model with parameters
obtained from measurements recorded at the test site in Østerild. The measurements
were recorded under neutral stratification with normalized Obukhov length in the range
−0.05 < LO < 0.05, and at a height above ground of 103 m reported by Peña et al. [60].
The Mann turbulence parameters from Østerild are given in table 5.1.
nx
ny
nz
XM
YM
ZM
terrain
αϵ2/3
L
Γ
seed
65536
128
128
65 536 m
128 m
128 m
basic
0.115
55.857
3.527
-5
Table 5.1: Mann-box parameters for flow at a height of 103 m in Østerild.
The Mann-box contains turbulent velocity fluctuations in a three dimensional grid,
defined in cartesian coordinates. The XM coordinate is transformed to a temporal coor-
dinate using Taylor’s frozen field hypothesis using the bulk inflow velocity U0. Random
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Modelling wake time series
57
time series are extracted from the Mann-box, with starting points picked from a uni-
form probability distribution. These points are picked such that a full 10-min time series
remains in the turbulence box after discarding a Flex5 transient run-in period. The posi-
tion of the rotor center coordinate in the spatial YM and ZM dimensions is likewise picked
at random, and picked such that the boundaries of the rotor coordinates do not violate
the boundaries of the Mann box. As Flex5 uses a polar grid for aeroelastic simulation,
the cartesian coordinates of the box are interpolated linearly to fit the coordinates of
the discretization used to generate the flow database, see figure 3.9.
Mann box filtering
As mentioned previously in the introduction of LES, the cell size applies a low-pass
filtration of the turbulence in the simulation.
In the sub-domain of the simulation
illustrated in figure 3.1, the cells are cubic and have a side length of ∆lx = 4 m. The
highest resolvable frequency is determined by the grid size and the bulk velocity of the
flow from (5.3) - a spatial equivalent of the Nyquist criterion [61]. In order to exclude
flow scales of higher frequencies in the Mann box, the signal is low-pass filtered using
a 5th order digital Butterworth filter [62], with a cutoff frequency determined by the
LES cutoff frequency, fco. A Bode-plot of the applied filter is shown in figure 5.1, and
an example of a single-point time series from an unscaled Mann-box before and after
filtration is shown in figure 5.2.
fs =
U0
(XM
nx
)
fco = fs
2
(5.3)
10-1
100
Frequency [Hz]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Gain
Response
fco
Figure 5.1: Bode-plot of the applied low-pass Butterworth filter, with U0 = 8.55m/s,
resulting in a cut-off frequency of fco = 4.27Hz
The Butterworth filter is maximally flat in the pass-band, scaling the wanted frequen-
cies uniformly. The order of the filter applies a phase shift, or delay, to the signal as it is
filtered. This delay is visible in the example time series shown in 5.2. The added delay
==PAGE:66==
58
5 Load Modelling
0
5
10
15
20
Time [s]
2
1
0
1
2
Wind speed, u′ [m/s]
Data
Filtered data
Figure 5.2: Example of a filtered time series.
introduces a small transient period of the signal as the filter is initialized. The time lag
is approximately the same length as the order of the filter divided by the sampling fre-
quency fs. This gives a delay of about half a second, as the sample frequency is between
8.55Hz and 14Hz. The influence of the delay is negligible, as the initial transient period
is removed from Flex5.
Imposing the turbulence and velocity distributions
Four different approaches for calculating the wind speed- and turbulence distributions
are used. The methods are described below.
• 0D turbulence: The 2D wind speed and TI distributions are rotor averaged using
the area weighting function defined in (4.6).
The integrated level of both the
wind speed and TI across the rotor area remains the same. This results in scalar
values for both the wind speed and TI. This is not exactly equivalent to the scaling
applied in the Frandsen model. In the Frandsen model, the bulk velocity is used
for aeroelastic simulaion, and as such the wake deficit is not approximated.
• 1D turbulence: The 2D wind speed and TI distributions are averaged over the
azimuthal coordinate. The wind speed is averaged equivalently to TI. The turbu-
lence and wind speed thereby becomes axis symmetric and only a function of the
radial coordinate. This is similar to the turbulence scaling suggested in the DWM,
apart from the meandering effect, which in this study has been excluded.
• 2D turbulence: The full 2D wind speed and TI distributions from the surrogate
predictions are used. No averaging is applied.
• Reference Mann-box: A Mann-box is scaled with the observations from the LES,
such that the 10 min mean velocity- and turbulence intensity distributions are
identical. This defines a reference for the three surrogate derivatives, and as a test
case of the method itself.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Modelling wake time series
59
The wake surrogate predictions are made from an input feature plane, based on
the average wind speed and TI distributions in an arbitrary 10 min window in the
LES time series at (X, Y ) = (−2R, 0R). Predictions are made for each of the three
ˆCT = [0.43, 0.61, 0.73], and at three down stream distances X = [8R, 16R, 24R]. The
surrogate predicted wind speed and turbulence intensity for a given ˆCT and X, are
imposed onto the filtered and truncated Mann-box on a coordinate basis using (5.4). In
this equation, u′ is the point-wise fluctuations, u is the point-wise instantaneous wind
speed, and ¯u is the mean point-wise wind speed. The subscript indicates the origin of
the quantities. For the 0D and 1D case, the surrogate prediction is reduced according
to the descriptions above before imposing the surrogate predicted wind speed and TI on
the Mann-box. As mentioned in relation to the DWM turbulence scaling method, this
process breaks the homogeneity of the turbulence in the Y and Z directions for both
the 1D and 2D case.
The U and TI distributions applied in the case of ˆCT = 0.43 are shown in figure 5.3.
For the full 2D distributions, the mean value along the radial coordinate is shown along
with the minimum and maximum values in the azimuthal coordinate by the shaded area.
a 0D
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
TI, [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
X = 8R
X = 16R
X = 24R
b 1D
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
TI, [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
X = 8R
X = 16R
X = 24R
c 2D
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
TI, [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
X = 8R
X = 16R
X = 24R
Figure 5.3: Visualization of the three different turbulence intensity distributions.
u′
scaled = u′
Mann
TImodel
TIMann
uscaled = uMann −¯uMann + ¯umodel
(5.4)
The time series are used as input to a Flex5 aeroelastic simulation. The simulations are
performed at each of the three down stream distances X = [8R, 16R, 24R], and bulk
inflow thrust coefficients ˆCT = [0.43, 0.61, 0.71]. The modeled variables are the ones
listed in table 3.5: P, M ∗
F, M ∗
T,X and M ∗
T,Y . A total of 50 samples are recorded for each
variable, along with 50 10-minute references of a ghost turbine in the LES simulated
flow.
==PAGE:68==
60
5 Load Modelling
a 0D
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
U/U0, [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
X = 8R
X = 16R
X = 24R
b 1D
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
U/U0, [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
X = 8R
X = 16R
X = 24R
c 2D
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
U/U0, [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
r, [R]
X = 8R
X = 16R
X = 24R
Figure 5.4: Visualization of the three different wind speed distributions.
5.1.1
Results of the simulations
The distributions of the mean power and the loads across the 50 samples for the
scaled Mann-box and the surrogate derivatives (0D,1D and 2D) for ˆCT = 0.43 is shown in
figures 5.5 through 5.7. The DEL are shown as normalized quantities, where M ∗
F0, M ∗
T,X0
and M ∗
T,Y 0 are the DEL observed on the turbine in the position (X, Y ) = (−2R, 0R).
The full results of the simulations may be found in appendix G. First, an analysis of the
individual turbulence resolutions is given, and conclusively a evaluation of the method
will be provided.
Mean power
Overall, the effects of reducing the order of the surrogate predictions does not seem
to give a wider distribution of the calculated power. All the surrogate derivatives show
approximately the same distribution as the reference Mann-box, though they are shifted
vertically. The most notable discrepancy between the śurrogate derivatives is at the
position X = 8R, where the reduction of the resolution results in an increased estimate of
the power. The 1D resolution captures the distribution of the Mann-box quite well, while
the 2D resolution underestimates the power. The effect may stem from the distributions
of the mean velocities along r, as the 0D resolution has a larger velocity for r <∼0.75R.
The effects of the Prandtl’s tip-loss correction reduces the forces from the incoming
wind near the tips of the blade, which may be enough to neutralize the effects of the
1D and 2D velocity distributions, which are larger than the 0D for r >∼0.75R. This
also also be consequence of the performance of the flow surrogates.
Analysis of the
model performance in presented in chapter 4 showed that the model predictions have
low precision for low values of X, while having a high trueness. Reducing the resolution
of the turbulence to a rotor averaged quantity reduces the error on average. As the 1D
turbulence results are in better compliance with the reference Mann-box, this could be
indicative that the errors of the surrogate prediction in this position might be related to
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Modelling wake time series
61
the distribution of the flow along the azimuthal coordinate.
As the distance down stream is increased, the results of the three different resolutions
of the model approach the results of the reference Mann-box, and the trend observed
at X = 8R is gone. At X = 24R, the results of the 0D, 1D and 2D cases are almost
identical to the reference Mann-box. The method of scaling a Mann-box with the wind
speed and TI seems to capture the overall trend in the power production observed in the
LES, however, the distributions of the predictions are noticeably wider. This effect may
be attributed to the turbulence having a different distribution in the frequency space.
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
P/Prated
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure 5.5: P/Prated of the aeroelastic simulation with different resolutions of turbulence:
A Mann-box scaled to match the observations in LES, and model predictions of varied
order.
Blade root flapwise bending moment - M ∗
F
M ∗
F recorded in the simulations is shown in figure 5.6. Similarly to the calculations of
the power, the spread of the distributions of the reference Mann-box are captured overall.
For X = 8R and X = 16R, we see that reducing the resolution of the surrogate causes the
estimate of M ∗
F to decrease. This effect is likely caused by the higher levels of TI towards
the tips of the blades, where the aerodynamic forces generate the largest moments on the
blade. These effects are neglected in the 0D resolution. Furthermore, the variation of TI
in the azimuthal coordinate between the 1D and the 2D turbulence further enhances this
effect. This trend diminishes as the distance down stream is increased, and is no longer
present at X = 24R where the median of all the surrogate derivatives are approximately
the same. Both the distribution of the U and TI tend to become more uniform down
stream, which could explain, why the tendency seem to diminish as X is increased. The
results of the Mann-box simulations consistently overestimates M ∗
F from the LES, and
show an almost linear dependency with the distance. This dependency cannot solely be
accounted for by the TI scaling, as the imposed level of turbulence is almost identical for
X = 8R and X = 16R. The results of the LES do not show the same tendency. In the
loads observed from the LES, M ∗
F/M ∗
F0 ∼1 until X = 24R, where it decreases slightly.
The explanation of the discrepancy between the Mann-box and the LES must therefore
be, that something is missing in the method.
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Load Modelling
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
M ∗
F/M ∗
F0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure 5.6: Results of M ∗
F from the surrogate generated time series.
Tower bottom bending moments
For the tower bottom bending side-side DEL M ∗
T,X, no consistent trend between
the results of the surrogate derivatives over the entire range of X is visible. However,
at X = 16R it seems that the reduction of the surrogate resolution has the effect of
decreasing the loads. For M ∗
T,Y , the trend is more pronounced, and clearly visible from
the median loads observed at X = 8R and X = 16R. MT,Y is directly related to the
thrust of the turbine, and therefore the blades. A similar explanation offered to describe
the same trend in M ∗
F may be offered here. In the results of the tower bottom bending
moments, it becomes very evident that the method of naively scaling a Mann-box, is not
an adequate description of what is happening in the wake flow. The ref. Mann-boxes
struggle to capture the spatial dependence of the loads. For M ∗
T,X, the ref. Mann-boxes
for X = 8.0 overestimates the loads by a factor of ∼30%, while further down stream
underestimating the load by ∼20%. For M ∗
T,Y , the ref. Mann-box suggests a decrease
in the load as the distance is increased, however, the loads from the LES has a more
non-linear development, increasing from X = 8R to X = 16R, and decreasing again
from X = 16R to X = 24R.
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
M ∗
T, X/M ∗
T, X0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure 5.7: Results of M ∗
T,X from the surrogate generated time series.
From the differences observed between the surrogate derivatives, it is difficult to
come to a conclusion regarding the effects of reducing the order of the surrogate from
2D to 1D or 0D. The results of the simulations did in some cases show that reducing
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Modelling wake time series
63
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure 5.8: Results of M ∗
T,Y from the surrogate generated time series.
the resolution from 2D provided a higher value of the power, and lower values of the
loads. These observations could also be false positives, arising from the fact that the
Mann-box is scaled with surrogate predictions. These predictions, though reasonably
accurate, contain errors, and as the the azimuthal- and rotor averaging is applied, the
effects of these errors become difficult to track and quantify. Using the wake surrogates
to generate time series provides reasonably accurate estimates of the power in the entire
X range investigated, while more crude estimates are made of the loads. M ∗
F is con-
sistently overestimated, while the tower bottom bending moments are not captured at
all. Furthermore it should be noted that only a single Mann-box has been used for the
simulations. This means that the effect of different seeds and length scales are neglected
from the analysis. According to standard IEC-61400 [10] aeroelastic simulations should
be run for 1 hour with the same seed, or for 10 min with at least six different seeds
to give an accurate load description. This recommendation is made, since only using
a single seed may lead to biased results in the loads. However, since all the LES time
series are shorter than an hour, the decision to only run the simulations for 10 minutes
were made to make the results comparable.
The difference in the observed loads and power between the LES and the Mann-
boxes indicate that one or more essential aspects of the flow modelling are wrong or
missing. Two major effects have been identified, the wake meandering effect, and the
changes in the turbulence spectrum. The wake meandering effect would move the wake
deficit in space, such that the turbine is not in direct wake conditions at all times. This
would make the turbulence intensity along the perimeter of the rotor area decrease in
amplitude, and could thereby lower M ∗
F. Additionally, the wake deficit would also be
moved around, likely introducing a cyclic loading related to the rotational frequency
of the turbine, as the blade rotates in and out of the wake affected zone. These two
effects have opposite effects on M ∗
F, and may in part can explain the poor performance
regarding the tower loads compared to LES.
As the coherence is preserved in the temporal dimension when the Mann-box is
scaled, so is the shape of the turbulent energy spectrum. This means that this method
for generating time series neglect possible changes in the spectrum, as the flow interacts
with the turbine.
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Load Modelling
Turbulent length scales
To identify a cause of this discrepancy, the turbulent length scales down stream of
the operating turbine are investigated. The turbulent macro scale is derived from the
integral time scale using Taylor’s frozen field hypothesis. Equation (5.5) defines this
transformation. The integral time scale in (5.6) is defined as the improper integral of
the auto-correlation (RE) in Eulerian space.
Λf = ¯uTE
(5.5)
TE =
∫∞
0
RE(τ)dτ
(5.6)
The auto-correlation of the flow velocity at hub height is calculated for the LES time
series at X = [−2R, 0R...32R] and Y = 0R for all three ˆCT. Three points in the flow
are investigated, corresponding to the rotor center, the middle of the blade, and the tip
of the blade of the coupled turbine, r = [0.0R, 0.5R, 1.0R]. The distribution of these
points in the rotor plane is shown in figure 5.9. The results of this investigation is shown
in figures 5.10 through 5.12. Along with the Λf obtained from the LES time series, ΛM
from the Mann-box used to generate the time series for the surrogates is shown as a
black dashed line. This length scale varies slightly for each of the random samples from
the Mann-box, but on average it was estimated to be ΛM ∼195m.
1
0
1
r, [R]
1
0
1
r, [R]
Figure 5.9: The distribution of the points where the turbulent macro scales are evaluated
in the rotor plane.
Before the coupled turbine Λf ∼250 m for all the three ˆCT and r, slightly larger
than λM. Downstream of the coupled turbine, the length scales decay, at different rates
depending on ˆCT of the coupled turbine and the r coordinate. The length scales decay
faster for higher ˆCT, indicating the shorter near wake length.
This ˆCT dependence
is in overall agreement with (4.7) [26], though the exact length of neither the vortex
breakdown nor the total near wake cannot be identified exactly. At r = 1R, in figure
5.12 the length scale decays faster than at r = 0R, in figure 5.10, perhaps showing
the effect of the tip-vortices.
This might also be an artifact of the AL/LES, which
did not contain a hub, and therefore the flow can pass through the center of the rotor
unobstructed. At r = 0.5R, the largest difference between the different ˆCT is observed.
The integral scales for ˆCT = 0.43 and ˆCT = 0.61 show an increase immediately after
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Modelling wake time series
65
0
10
20
30
X, [R]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Integral length scale, TE [m]
ˆCT = 0.75
ˆCT = 0.61
ˆCT = 0.43
Figure 5.10: Development of the turbulent macro scale downstream of the coupled tur-
bine at position of the rotor center, (0R), of the coupled turbine. The turbine position
is shown as the red dashed line, and the integral length scale of the Mann-box, ΛM, is
shown as the black dashed line.
0
10
20
30
X, [R]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Integral length scale, TE [m]
ˆCT = 0.75
ˆCT = 0.61
ˆCT = 0.43
Figure 5.11: Development of the turbulent macro scale downstream of the coupled tur-
bine at the position 0.5R from the rotor center. The turbine position is shown as the red
dashed line, and the integral length scale of the Mann-box, ΛM, is shown as the black
dashed line.
the coupled turbine, whereas for ˆCT = 0.75, the integral scale immediately drops to the
lowest level in the range. At both r = 0.5R and r = 1R, the scales begin to increase
slightly after X ∼20R. The increase is caused by the re-energization of the wake as it
breaks up completely. All of these effects are not present in the turbulent time series of
the Mann-box, and the integral length scale remains the same across all coordinates of
X.
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Load Modelling
0
10
20
30
X, [R]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Integral length scale, TE [m]
ˆCT = 0.75
ˆCT = 0.61
ˆCT = 0.43
Figure 5.12: Development of the turbulent macro scale downstream of the coupled tur-
bine at the position 1R from the rotor center. The turbine position is shown as the red
dashed line, and the integral length scale of the Mann-box, ΛM, is shown as the black
dashed line.
The change in the turbulent length scale implies a change in the turbulent energy
spectrum. As the length scales diminish in size, the energy is shifted towards higher
frequencies in the spectrum. This means, that the turbulent energy spectrum in the wake
of a turbine not only is a function of the downstream distance, but also a function of the
radial coordinate of the turbine. The changes in the spectrum consequently changes the
temporal aerodynamic loading, and thereby directly affects the DEL calculated on the
turbine components. If these effects are to be taken into account, the process of scaling
a Mann-box becomes significantly more difficult,
The wake surrogates only provide information about the expected wind speed and
turbulence intensity at a given position in the wake. These quantities may be modelled
perfectly, however no information about the temporal nature of the flow is available
from this model. The spectrum of the imposed turbulence is an important parameter,
especially if the loads are to be extrapolated from the wake surrogate. Both loads and the
power output of a turbine are non-linear functions of the incoming wind, and therefore
these higher order statistics help to make more accurate estimates of loads and power.
To circumvent consideration of the changes in the turbulence, modelling the loads can
instead be done using a surrogate.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 ANN response surrogates
67
5.2
ANN response surrogates
Using a surrogate to model the loads and power of a turbine offers several advantages
over the solution of the scaled Mann-box. A surrogate model can be calibrated directly
to the target loads observed by the ghost turbines in the wake. This circumvents the need
for detailed turbulence modelling in the wake, since the effects of the spatial changes in
the turbulent spectrum will inherently be present in the load and power time series. A
surrogate will be significantly faster than running a 10 min simulation of an aeroelastic
code, and can be designed to have analytic gradients. The method does however have
the drawback, that time-series of the loads are no longer available - only the target
variables will be modelled. The surrogate will therefore be narrower in scope.
The loads and power output of the ghost turbine in the wake is modelled using ANNs,
similarly to the wake surrogate. The modelling is split into four separate surrogates, one
for each of the stored target variables in the loads data set. The target variables are
listed in table 3.5. The resulting wind turbine response surrogates will collectively be
referred to as response surrogates, surrogates concerning loads will be referred to as load
surrogates. Building on top of the wake surrogates, the response surrogates take meta-
parameters and the flow predictions of both wind speed and TI as input, and predicts the
value of the target variables. When the two wake surrogates and a response surrogate is
combined, the global inputs are the meta-parameters and the inflow wind speed and TI
distributions, and the output the target variable of the given response surrogate. The
response surrogates are structured in a similar fashion to the wake surrogates, since the
input still consists of flow planes and meta-parameters. An overview of the proposed
surrogate structure is shown in figure 5.13, where meta-parameters are written xj, input
flow planes from the U- and TI-surrogates as xL,2×i, and outputs as yL,k.
xL,2×i = {yU,i, yTI,i}
xj = {CT, X, Y }
yL,k =
{
P, M ∗
F, M ∗
T,X, M ∗
T,Y
}
U-surrogate
Trained flow surrogates
Load surrogate
Load surrogate
 inputs
TI-surrogate
L,k
Load surrogate
 output
Figure 5.13: Collective ANN overview with emphasis on the ANN load surrogate.
==PAGE:76==
68
5 Load Modelling
5.2.1
Training data
The response surrogates are trained and evaluated with the loads data set described
in chapter 3. The loads- and flow data sets share the same test/training split. The
decision to use the same split was made due to pragmatic reasons, as the amount of
data available is limited. This means that the predictions from the wake surrogates
used for training of the response surrogates stem from the training set of the wake
surrogates.
Consequently the training inputs are of higher accuracy than should be
expected from the wake surrogates.
This is illustrated by the residuals of the wake
surrogates being lower than the errors, see figures 4.6, 4.8, 4.11, 4.13 and appendix C.
Reusing the training set from the wake surrogates, is expected to cause the response
surrogate to perform worse in the test since the input for the response surrogate has a
lower accuracy.
Similar to the wake surrogates, the ANNs used to model the target variables all use
ϕ(z) = tanh (z) as activation function. To find suited surrogates for each variable, a non
exhaustive search for ANN hyperparameters has been performed. The hyperparameters
investigated are shown in table 5.2, written in the same shorthand as described previ-
ously. All the possible combinations are run for each of the four modelled variables i.e
960 combinations for each target variable. Although some performance increase might
be attainable without changing the overall topology, the modelling space is considered
investigated thoroughly enough to observe a performance close to the overall topology’s
capabilities. The results of the hyperparameter search are listed in table 5.3 rated by test
Load model
LR
Algorithm
1 × 10−4
SGD
Adam
Epochs
20
75
100
200
500
750
Sub model 1
{32, 16}
{128, 64}
{128, 128, 64}
{64, 128, 64, 32}
Sub model 2
{16, 8}
{32, 16, 4}
{32, 16, 8}
{16, 64, 16}
Sub model 3
{16, 8}
{32, 16, 4}
{64, 64, 16}
{128, 128, 64}
{128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4}
Table 5.2: Non-exhaustive search parameters as set during test with 960 resulting com-
binations for the Load model. The curly brackets ({}) indicate a hidden layer neuron
composition
set validation loss (MSE). No clear preference between 500 and 750 epochs is observed,
==PAGE:77==
5.2 ANN response surrogates
69
which indicates that the models will not improve significantly by increasing training
time alone. The coherence between the top performing surrogates are high, except for
the M ∗
T,X-surrogate. The best topologies for the remaining target variables all share
the same sub-model 1 and 2 layer compositions. The complexity for both of these sub-
models are on the boundaries of their respective search domains in terms of complexity.
The composition of sub-model 3 varies a lot between the different target variable surro-
gates. The best M∗
F surrogate has a two layer composition with {16, 8} neurons, while
the M∗
T,Y has a much more complex 6 layer composition.
P model
V. Loss
Sub-Model 1
S-M 2
S-M 3
Epochs
Alg
7.32E+02
{64, 128, 64, 32}
{16, 64, 16}
{64, 64, 16}
750
SGD
7.46E+02
{64, 128, 64, 32}
{16, 64, 16}
{128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4}
500
Adam
7.64E+02
{128, 128, 64}
{16, 64, 16}
{128, 128, 64}
750
SGD
7.79E+02
{128, 128, 64}
{32, 16, 8}
{128, 128, 64}
500
Adam
7.85E+02
{32, 16}
{16, 64, 16}
{64, 64, 16}
500
Adam
M∗
F model
V. Loss
Sub-Model 1
S-M 2
S-M 3
Epochs
Alg
7.10E+02
{64, 128, 64, 32}
{16, 64, 16}
{16, 8}
750
Adam
7.20E+02
{32, 16}
{8, 16, 8}
{64, 64, 16}
750
SGD
7.22E+02
{64, 64}
{32, 32}
{128, 128, 64}
500
SGD
7.27E+02
{32, 16}
{16, 64, 16}
{128, 128, 64}
750
Adam
7.35E+02
{248, 128}
{32, 32}
{64, 64}
500
Adam
M∗
T,X model
V. Loss
Sub-Model 1
S-M 2
S-M 3
Epochs
Alg
3.68E+05
{248, 128, 64}
{8, 8, 8}
{128, 128, 64}
500
SGD
3.69E+05
{128, 64}
{8, 16, 8}
{128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4}
750
Adam
3.69E+05
{128, 128, 64}
{32, 16, 8}
{128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4}
750
Adam
3.73E+05
{64, 128, 64, 32}
{32, 16, 8}
{64, 64, 16}
750
Adam
3.77E+05
{128, 128, 64}
{32, 32}
{128, 64, 32}
500
Adam
M∗
T,Y model
V. Loss
Sub-Model 1
S-M 2
S-M 3
Epochs
Alg
7.54E+04
{64, 128, 64, 32}
{16, 64, 16}
{128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4}
750
SGD
7.57E+04
{64, 128, 64, 32}
{16, 64, 16}
{128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4}
500
SGD
7.59E+04
{248, 128, 64}
{16, 16}
{64, 64}
500
SGD
7.61E+04
{128, 64}
{8, 8, 8}
{128, 64, 32}
500
Adam
7.64E+04
{128, 128, 64}
{16, 64, 16}
{128, 128, 64}
500
SGD
Table 5.3: Five lowest validation loss surrogates for each target variable with the chosen
model highlighted in gray.
==PAGE:78==
70
5 Load Modelling
5.3
ANN load model performance
Since the response surrogate predicts scalar values in the wake domain, less condensed
performance metrics are used to evaluate the results of the test.
MEk = µn
(yk −y∗
k
y∗
k
)
(5.7)
RMSEk =
v
u
u
u
tµn


(yk −y∗
k
y∗
k
)2

(5.8)
For each target variable, MEk and RMSEk are considered. MEk gives an estimate of
the trueness and the RMSEk of the overall accuracy. MEk and RMSEk are calculated
for all the samples in the test set at each coordinate in the wake domain. Currently
in the litterature surrogate results are often presented condesed to scalars, such results
are presented in table 5.4, the table shows good performance for the power model and
varying success with regards to loads. In Dimitrov’s study of surrogates [33] M ∗
T,X is
Measure
P
M∗
F
M∗
T,X
M∗
T,Y
Mean Relative Error [%]
-0.02
0.62
2.02
0.41
Maximum Relative Error [%]
3.35
9.94
21.52
12.48
Mean Relative RMSE [%]
2.25
6.92
13.26
6.45
Maximum Relative RMSE [%]
3.97
17.86
35.74
17.45
Table 5.4: Load model performance metrics.
left out, and M ∗
T,Y is consistently the worst performing target.
Dimitrov achieves a
mean normalised RMSE of 12.4% for M ∗
T,Y . Dimitrov normalises the RMSE after errror
estimation, whereas the RMSEk measure used in this thesis is normalised prior to the
sample mean. This is a harder criteria and therefore the RMSEk = 6.45% can be said
to be an improvement compared to Dimitrov. The worst performing result reported
in this study is for M ∗
T,X, which is not entirely unexpected. In [31] Mahulja et al. has
constructed a site-specific surrogate in the form of a gaussian radial basis fucntion, based
on the input mean wind-speed, distance and inflow angle from DWM data. Mahulja et
al. predicts M ∗
T,X with a mean relative error of 11 % and a maximum relative error of 45
%. M ∗
T,X is the only modeled variable that doesn’t meet their 5 % or below mean relative
error success criteria. Though the modelled M ∗
T,X presented in this report does meet
that criteria, the success criteria should be scrutinized. The criteria measures trueness
and not accuracy as stated in [31]. Most likely the authors do not consider the two as
separate concepts, which may be a matter of semantics. Unfortunately it has the effect
that precision is not taken into account, and errors of similar magnitude and opposite
signs cancel as they are averaged. This could lead to a false negative that the model
does not have any errors. For that reason when evaluating the model it’s necessary to
consider error as a spatially and ˆCT dependent quantity.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 ANN load model performance
71
a Prediction
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
µn(P/Prated)
b Target
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
µn(P/Prated)
c MEk
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
ME (P) [%]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
µn(M ∗
F /M ∗
F0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
µn(M ∗
F /M ∗
F0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
ME (M ∗
F ) [%]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.80
1.20
1.60
2.00
2.40
2.80
3.20
3.60
4.00
4.40
µn(M ∗
T, X/MT, X0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
µn(M ∗
T, X/MT, X0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
45
30
15
0
15
30
45
60
ME (M ∗
T, X) [%]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
1.35
1.50
1.65
µn(M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
1.35
1.50
1.65
µn(M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
24
18
12
6
0
6
12
18
24
ME (M ∗
T, Y) [%]
Figure 5.14: Load model predictions for ˆCT = 0.43 with n = 4
==PAGE:80==
72
5 Load Modelling
a Prediction
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.08
0.16
0.24
0.32
0.40
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
µn(P/Prated)
b Target
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.08
0.16
0.24
0.32
0.40
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
µn(P/Prated)
c MEk
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
6.0
4.5
3.0
1.5
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
ME (P) [%]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
2.20
µn(M ∗
F /M ∗
F0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
2.20
µn(M ∗
F /M ∗
F0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
20
16
12
8
4
0
4
8
12
16
ME (M ∗
F ) [%]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
4.80
5.60
6.40
µn(M ∗
T, X/MT, X0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
4.80
5.60
6.40
µn(M ∗
T, X/MT, X0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
32
24
16
8
0
8
16
24
32
40
ME (M ∗
T, X) [%]
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
µn(M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
µn(M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0)
4
12
22
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
16
12
8
4
0
4
8
12
16
20
ME (M ∗
T, Y) [%]
Figure 5.15: Load model predictions for ˆCT = 0.61 with n = 6
==PAGE:81==
5.3 ANN load model performance
73
a Prediction
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
0.25
0.28
0.30
0.33
µn(P/Prated)
b Target
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
0.25
0.28
0.30
0.33
µn(P/Prated)
c MEk
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
ME (P) [%]
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
2.20
2.40
µn(M ∗
F /M ∗
F0)
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
2.20
2.40
2.60
µn(M ∗
F /M ∗
F0)
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
ME (M ∗
F ) [%]
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
1.60
2.00
2.40
2.80
3.20
3.60
4.00
4.40
4.80
µn(M ∗
T, X/MT, X0)
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
5.50
µn(M ∗
T, X/MT, X0)
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
40
30
20
100
10
20
30
40
50
ME (M ∗
T, X) [%]
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
µn(M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0)
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
µn(M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0)
10
16
24
32
X [R]
2
0
2
Y [R]
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
ME (M ∗
T, Y) [%]
Figure 5.16: Load model predictions for ˆCT = 0.75 with n = 10. note: 10R ≤X ≤32
due to the truncated data X range.
==PAGE:82==
74
5 Load Modelling
In figures 5.14, 5.15 and 5.16 sample meaned-predictions, -targets and MEk are shown
in the wake coordinate system. The figures are split into the three different cases of ˆCT,
to allow independent inspection. As with the evaluation of the wake surrogate, the colors
of the contours mark the same levels in the prediction- and target plot, and the extrema
on the colorbar show the extreme observations in the respective plots.
Looking at the contour plots of targets, predictions and MEk, the results shown in
table 5.4 are reaffirmed, i.e. power is easier to predict than loads, and M ∗
T,X is the most
difficult. In MEk for the power, an issue already described during the assessment of the
wake surrogate is present again. MEk is asymmetrical over the x-axis, causing zones of
over- and underestimation to appear in the wake domain. The tendency to overestimate
the quantity for Y > 0 is seen, similarly to how the wind speed is overestimated by the
wake surrogate. The trend is visible across all values of ˆCT, however most pronounced
for ˆCT = 0.75. It should come as no surprise that the errors are distributed almost
equally to ME for the U-surrogate, since the steady state power is a function of U. The
emphasized errors therefore stems from the relation between the quantities. As P ∝U 3
for U < Urated, errors propagate non-linearly, causing them to be amplified. The mean
predictions and targets coincide very well, and show the same extrema. This is visible
from the extremas on the colorbar. Across the values of ˆCT, the range of MEk remains
approximately the same, with extremas at around ∼±5%.
For the response surrogates, the largest absolute MEk tend to appear as single coordi-
nates for all three ˆCT, and there does not seem to be a connection to the values of |MEk|
and ˆCT. The spatial biases are not as systematic and clearly defined as seen with the
power. The biases are scattered as longitudinal pockets in the X direction of over- and
underestimation respectively. Due to their shape, these biases are likely a representation
of turbulent structures passing through the domain during the time covered by the test
set. Since only few observations were available to train and evaluate the performance of
the surrogates, the most likely explanation is the lack of data in general.
It is well established that the wake position is correlated to CT of the coupled turbine.
Therefore, even though a fixed wake domain grid is used, the effect of varying CT will
smoothen the 10 min DEL. Given such an effect, a well defined dependency of the
DEL on CT can be expected at each (X, Y ) position for a given ˆCT. Due to the low
simulation time, the amount of CT realisations is also low, therefore the dependency of
the 10 min DEL is ill defined. Hence when a peak is present in the test set, it is most
likely previously unseen, and the surrogate cannot represent it correctly since such a
peak has not occurred at that specific position during training. The highest number
of observations available for any ˆCT is n = 10, covering a time of only 1140s, and
therefore the mean value of the point-wise error is a crude estimate at best. Increasing
the number of observations would therefore likely smoothen out some of the peaks seen
in the distributions of MEk.
From looking at the values of the predictions and targets, a curious behavior in the
loads is noticed. For ˆCT = 0.61 and ˆCT = 0.43, there are regions in both the prediction
and target plots of all the loads where the normalized load is below 1. This is especially
visible for M ∗
F when ˆCT = 0.43 and Y < −1R, and when ˆCT = 0.61 and X < 12R. The
reason these lower loads are observed in the wake is due to the calculation of the DEL.
==PAGE:83==
5.3 ANN load model performance
75
The Wöhler exponent implicitly sets a bias towards larger load cycles. As the Wöhler
exponent increases the DEL has a tendency to filter out the smaller scales of the load
time series. If a load series contains a large amplitude low frequency component, this
effect becomes apparent. In the Rainflow counting algorithm, the difference between the
low frequency extrema are counted as a cycle, with a much larger amplitude than the
low frequency part of the signal. An example of two such time series is shown in figure
5.17.
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
Time, [s]
0.6
0.8
1.0
MF/max(MF), [-]
X=-2R
X= 8R
Figure 5.17: Time series observed at (X, Y ) = (−2R, 0R) and at (X, Y ) = (4R, −1R).
A low frequency component is clearly visible in the up stream signal. The loads are
normalized to the maximum observed value in the time series.
The lower frequency component of the signal is clearly visible in the time series used
for normalization observed at (X, Y ) = (−2, 0). This may explain why M ∗
F appear to be
lower in the wake. The sensitivity towards low frequency components in the time signals
may be lowered by reducing the Wöhler coefficient. The DEL of the signal without
the low frequency component is 40% of the DEL of the signal with the low frequency
component.
Another noteworthy observation is made for M ∗
T,Y at ˆCT = 0.61, which looks to be
rounded to 0.00 in (X, Y ) = (4R, 0R). This observation is made in both the prediction
and in the target. As the time series were inspected, the normalized DEL of the entire
time series in this position is calculated to M ∗
T,Y /M ∗
T,Y 0 = 0.4. This suggests that the
point may simply be an error. The root cause of this error has not been identified. The
time series of the signal used to calculate M ∗
T,Y in (X, Y ) = (4R, 0R) as well as the time
series used for the normalization is shown in figure 5.18.
The heat-maps of MEk and RMSEk for power are shown in figures 5.19 and 5.20
combined allows for an analysis of the accuracy prediction and trueness of the power
surrogate. The distribution of RMSEk generally resembles that of MEk, showing areas
of low accuracy in the top and bottom of the wake domain. Furthermore, an area of
low accuracy is seen for low values X and low absolute values of Y , close to the coupled
turbine.
Here, the trueness of the model is relatively high, which suggests that the
precision of the model is lowest in this area. This is in agreement with the observations
made for the U surrogate, with the exception of the coordinate X = 4R. Here, the power
==PAGE:84==
76
5 Load Modelling
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Time, [s]
0.0
0.5
1.0
MT, X/max(MT, X), [-]
X=-2R
X= 4R
Figure 5.18: Time series observed at (X, Y ) = (−2R, 0R) and at (X, Y ) = (4R, 0R).
The loads are normalized to the maximum observed value in the time series.
surrogate shows high trueness, while having a low accuracy, whereas the U surrogate
showed both low accuracy and trueness. From the box-plot of MEk, we observe that the
median MEk is only −0.18%, and for 50% of the positions in the wake domain, |MEk|
is less than 1.5%.
The heat-maps of MEk and RMSEk are shown for M ∗
F in figure 5.20. MEk shows
the same sporadic tendencies of the spatial bias to be located in small pockets scattered
in the wake domain, as mentioned in relation to the observations split on ˆCT. RMSEk
on the other hand shows a streak of low accuracy spanning from (X, Y ) = (4R, −0.75R)
to (X, Y ) = (18R, −2R). With a few exceptions, the trueness in this area is generally
high. This indicates that the model precision is low here. Since no interesting systematic
tendencies were identified, the heat-maps of the tower bottom bending moments have
been omitted from the main part of the thesis and can be found in appendix H and I.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 ANN load model performance
77
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-0.27 0.91
1.1
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.88 0.92
1
1.3
1.7
2
2.3
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.3
1.1
0.98
1
1.1
1.2
2.6
2.7
3
3.1
3
2.5
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1
2.2
2
2.3
3.4
2.9
2.3
2.1
2.1
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.4
1.2
1.1
0.84
-0.66 0.55
1.5
2.7
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
0.87 0.58
-0.73 0.26
1.3
1.9
1.5
2.1
2.5
2.1
1.9
1.5
1.3
1.2
0.87 0.57 0.32
-0.23 -0.34 0.78 0.59 0.95
1.7
1.9
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.1
0.86 0.63 0.35 0.14
0.77 0.88 -0.29 0.44 0.03
1
1.4
0.85 0.65 0.81 0.86 0.65 0.35 0.08 0.04
1.1
-0.91 -1.8 -0.75 -1.5
0.22 0.51 0.21 0.11 0.21 0.41 0.23 -0.05 -0.23 -0.47
-1.3
-1.3
-2.1
-1.1
-2.1 -0.74 -0.36 -0.85 -0.71 -0.58 -0.31 -0.32 -0.41 -0.61 -0.82
0.06 -0.57 -0.93 -1.3
-1.1 -0.98 -0.92 -0.84 -0.57 -0.67 -0.69 -0.83 -0.88 -0.77 -0.94
-0.18 -0.65 -0.28 -1.2
-0.9
-1.4
-1.1 -0.92 -0.57 -0.93
-1
-1.3
-1.3
-1.2
-1.1
0.33 -0.08 -0.05 -0.77 -0.9
-1.2
-1.6
-1.4
-1.3
-1.3
-1.5
-1.6
-1.7
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2 -0.98 -0.93 -0.97 -1.5
-1.9
-2.2
-2.5
-2.3
-2.2
-2.1
-2
-2
-1.9
-1.7
-2.1
-1.6
-1.4
-2.1
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.7
-2.5
-2.5
-2.4
-2.3
-2
-1.7
-1.6
-1.5
-1.4
-1.3
-2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.6
-2.5
-2.3
-2.3
-2.3
-2.2
-2
-1.7
-1.5
-1.3
-1.1
-1.2
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-2
-2
-2
-1.8
-1.6
-1.3
2.73
1.34
0.18
1.25
3.35
a MEk
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
0.47
1.2
1.3
2.8
2.3
2.1
2
1.9
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.6
1.9
2.2
2.5
3.4
3
2.6
2.5
2
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.5
2.9
2.9
3.2
3.3
3.2
2.8
2.5
2
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
2.4
2.3
2.6
3.7
3.2
2.6
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.2
2
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.3
2.3
1.8
2
3.2
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.2
1.9
1.4
1.3
3
2.6
2
2.6
1.9
2.4
2.7
2.3
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.3
1.2
3.4
3.9
3.3
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.2
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.1
3.9
3.6
3.8
3
2.4
2
1.9
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.1
3.4
3.8
4
3.4
2.5
2.1
1.6
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.1
3.6
3.1
3.2
3.9
2.9
2.6
2.1
2
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.3
3
3.1
2.6
3.5
2.7
2.6
2.6
2.3
2.1
2
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.5
3.6
3.1
2.3
3.2
2.8
3
2.7
2.3
2.2
2.1
2
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.7
2.6
2.2
1.7
3.3
3
2.6
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2
1.7
1.4
1.3
2.9
3
3
3
3.2
3
2.9
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.3
1.8
1.6
2.9
3.3
3.4
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.3
3.1
2.9
2.6
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.6
2.6
3
3.2
3.5
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.9
2.7
2.4
2.1
1.5
1.3
1.5
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.2
1.9
0.47
1.61
2.24
2.78
3.97
b RMSEk
Figure 5.19: Power (P) - Heatmap of test data relative error, sample size (n = 20) varies
with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:86==
78
5 Load Modelling
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
1.3
-3.7
-4
-6.2
-6.7
-5.1
2
-1
0.83
3.8
5
3.5
2.8
4.3
3.4
-0.76 -6.1
-3.4
-3.4
-3.9
-5.4
0.23 -0.33 0.53
2.5
4.3
4.9
5.3
5.4
4.4
-0.8
-1.6 -0.87 -1.2
0.21
-2
0.33 0.63 0.38
5.6
7.9
6.4
3.2
4.6
5.9
3
3.3
1.2
2.8
0.51
1.7
4.2
-0.09 0.75
2.2
4.9
3.9
4.4
1.9
3.6
7.1
5.1
-1.5
1.3
-3.2
1.1
1.2
-1.3
1.1
1.7
-0.52
5
4.5
4.3
5.8
3
-2.5
-4.7
-3.8
-2.8
1.1
-2.7
2.2
-1.4
2.8
1.2
4.4
3.4
3.9
3
-1.5
-6.3
-2.8
-6.1 -0.69 -1.5
-3.2
-2.8
3.3
2.6
5.8
4.2
4.1
3.5
0.64
5
5
6.8
-2.6 -0.58
-2
3.5
1.4
-1.9
-3.3 -0.74 -0.4
3.8
0.95 -0.17
-1
4.1
-3
-4
-0.8
-2.4
1.1
-3.5
-4
-2
-3
-5
-4.7
-5.5
-4.6
2.9
-2.5
-6.7
-2.6
3.2
2.4
0.39
-3
-4.3 -0.38 -3.3
-4.8
-4.4
-4
-4.2
4
1.1
-3.8
-7.1
-0.3
-2.1
-3.1
-1.2 -0.63 -0.33 -3.3
-2.6
-3.2 -0.14
1
7.9
3.4
4.9
-7.8
-9
0.01
-3.1
-4.9
-2.3
-1.1
-2.8
-3.5
-3
0.12
-1.1
-3.6
1.6
-2.5
-7.3
-7
-5.2 -0.92 0.46 -0.25 0.12 -0.83 -2.5
-3.1 -0.65
1.9
6.2
8.6
-2.4
-2.8
0.43
-1.9
-2.9
0.24 0.35 -0.04
1.9
1.4
0.04 0.75 -0.34
8.9
8
2.3
9.9
2.3
-2.7
2.3
2.2
3.3
1.1
2.8
4.2
0.52
3.9
1.9
2.7
6
2.9
8.4
7.2
-0.48 -1.7
2.9
3.6
1.2
3.8
4.7
4.5
4.9
1.9
6.2
5.2
3.3
1.8
7.9
6
1
0.89
5.5
7.5
6.9
4.5
2.4
3.3
2.3
9.04
2.46
0.63
3.38
9.94
a MEk
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
3.7
5.6
7.3
7.2
8.2
6.3
5.7
7
5.2
5.3
7.6
6.4
6.1
6.5
8.4
7
8.4
8.2
8
7.3
6.6
7.4
5.2
3.3
3.9
7.2
10
8
7.7
6.5
7.7
9.3
9.7
4.7
3.1
4.2
5.5
8.2
4.8
6.8
11
8.9
7.6
11
9.8
5.7
4.8
5.8
6
5.2
8.5
10
8.1
6.2
6.9
8.8
6
7.5
4.7
6.6
11
7.3
4.8
7.9
5.3
7.8
7
5.7
5.9
6.8
5.5
8.6
6.6
7
9.1
7
7.4
5.5
5.3
4.2
6
5.4
6.8
8.8
6.6
8.4
8.1
6.9
7.3
7.3
2.8
6.8
4
7.8
6.7
6.1
5.3
5.1
7.5
6.8
8.7
6.3
6.9
6.6
5.3
10
5.7
9.4
3.4
8.1
4.1
5.8
4.1
3.2
6
4.5
5.5
5.9
2.7
2.8
3.3
4.3
4.6
7.8
8.2
5.5
3.1
4.9
4.8
5
4
6.8
8.1
6
8
3.5
5
8.7
5.8
5.1
7.2
3.9
6.7
5.8
5.8
4
8.4
8.8
8.4
8.1
8.1
2.4
4.9
7.7
4.1
6
5.9
4
3.3
2.3
3.7
5.2
6.8
6.9
6.6
18
13
9.4
9.7
12
7.1
6.1
5.6
3.7
3
3.7
4.9
3.5
4.4
4.3
8.4
17
16
14
9.7
9.1
5.2
3.8
3.1
3.6
2.4
3.5
4.5
3
3.4
6.4
9.6
14
10
6.8
10
12
2.8
3.4
2.8
5.5
4.4
6
4.8
3.1
9.5
9.2
3.4
17
13
15
14
9
7.6
6
7.1
6
4.6
4.9
3.3
3.3
8.8
7.4
12
11
10
15
11
11
7.6
9.4
9.5
7.8
7.8
4.4
6.8
5.5
3.8
5.3
11
9.6
8.6
13
12
11
11
8
6.2
8.5
7
2.29
2.29
4.92
6.63
8.30
12.82
17.86
b RMSEk
Figure 5.20: Blade flap-wise (M ∗
F) - Heatmap of test data relative error, sample size
(n = 20) varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 ANN load model performance
79
5.3.1
Load surrogate disctretization, and model stability
Previously, in section 3.5, it was found, that the resolution of the input flow planes
to the wake surrogates were likely too high.
A similar study was performed on the
sensitivity of the response surrogates’ trueness on the discretization of the input. How-
ever, instead of a conclusion regarding the discretization, the results brought to light an
important flaw in the methodology, and therefore only the results of the discretization
sensitivity of the power is shown. The response surrogates are a direct extension of the
wake surrogates, and the lower order surrogates were therefore trained with the training
sets of the lower order wake surrogates presented in section 3.5. The hyperparameters
of the best performing models in table 5.3 were used for the model training. MEk of
the of the different order power surrogates is shown in figure 5.21.
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
ME [%]
19
34
56
106
211
411
m
Figure 5.21: Power dependency on inflow plane disctretization levels, ngrid = 255
2.73
1.34
0.18
1.25
3.35
Figure 5.22: ME of the power surrogate trained in section 5.2.1
It is noted that the error distribution is shifted when the original model (m = 411)
was re-trained, which shows that a seed-to-seed uncertainty is present. The results of
the original training is shown in figure 5.22 for reference. This issue probably brought
on by a lack of proper feature scaling, which can cause sensitivity with regards to weight
initialization, as mentioned by Raschka and Mirjalili [48]. The lack of proper feature
scaling is an oversight, caused by only rating the models based on validation loss. The
validation loss only rates if the model is good at predicting the targets in the test set, and
does not say anything about the reproducibility or stability of the model itself. Though
no two neural networks are the exact same, the instability of the power surrogate is
cause for concern. Even though the results of the discretization levels cannot be said to
be accurate, it is note worthy that the original model out-performs the lower levels of
discretization. Due to the lack of feature scaling the results of the load study has been
excluded from the main part of the thesis, but can be seen in appendix J. The lack of
feature scaling means that during the hyperparameter search variable control was not
performed, which draws the results of the hyperparameter search into question.
==PAGE:88==
80
5 Load Modelling
5.4
Load surrogate - partial conclusion
This section summarises the important findings in regards to the load surrogates
developed.
It is meant to help the reader contextualize what was found during the
chapter, before a conclusion is made on a broader level in the final chapter.
Wake time series modelling
In the first section of this chapter, a proposed method of applying the wake surro-
gates to improve upon existing engineering models was presented. By using the flow
surrogates’ predictions as scaling parameters, it was hypothesised that a potential in-
crease in the accuracy could be attained. To test the hypothesis the flow surrogates’
predicted 2D wake-planes were reduced in dimensionality to 1D and 0D. The different
order dimmensionality scalings were enforced on a Mann-box, to simulate a wake time
series. Flex5 was used to calculate the aeroelastic response of the time series, and the 10
min mean power and DEL were obtained. The test showed that increasing the dimen-
sionality, could not be said to increase the accuracy of the turbine response under the
given conditions. However the hypothesis cannot yet be discarded, as some key effects
were missing during testing. Most notably the effects of changing turbulent scales and
wake meandering. The use of only a single Mann-box seed further complicates the con-
clusion, as simulations with at least 6 different seeds is recommended by the standard
to obtain reliable loads. In order to evaluate if the existing engineering load models can
be improved by the current wake surrogates, a more direct comparative study is needed.
Especially if comparisons against the DWM model are to be made, the meandering effect
should be approximated in the time series.
ANN load surrogates
In the second section of this chapter, the need for a time-series was bypassed by
implementing a fully-connected feed-forward neural network. A hyperparameter search
was conducted, to establish the best performing ANN structures. However, the model
stability was brought into question in an analysis regarding the sensitivity of the model
towards the discretization of the flow planes. Feature scaling was cited as the most
probable root cause of this instability. The top performing surrogates from the hyperpa-
rameter search can therefore not be reproduced to make predictions in the same range.
The saving grace for the load surrogates comes in the form of a fairly large hyperpa-
rameter search. This means that the chance of a lucky initialization of the weights are
heightened. It is thus assumed that the top performing surrogates do not have the opti-
mal ANN structure, and that there might be a better suited structure, even within the
limits of the hyperparameter search. This is, and remains for now, a conjecture, as it
cannot be tested without repeating the study.
Along the edges of the wake domain large errors can in part be explained by the
wake effect being relatively small. While in the center where the error should be low
==PAGE:89==
5.4 Load surrogate - partial conclusion
81
two explanations are considered; firstly test/training split for the same reasons as dis-
cussed previously. Secondly the phenomenon causing variations in the loads may be
more complicated than the model is suited to predict. For example the tower bending
moments might be more sensitive to meandering than assumed, and some measure of
the meandering may be required e.g. a standard deviation of the wake position during
ten minutes. Since generally this is a metric unavailable prior to simulation it would
have to be included in the target set or a separate model be constructed for this purpose.
A different approach could be to have inputs more closely related to the turbine such as
eigenmodes, power-curve, control strategies etc. This could result in better predictions
but at the cost of the general purpose nature of the current model.
==PAGE:90==
82
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In chapter 1 a hypothesis, two questions and corresponding sub questions were pre-
sented. During this thesis analysis and tests have been performed, to help answer these
questions. In this chapter a summary of the important details outlined in the thesis,
will be presented and evaluated as a whole.
Main question 1 - Concerning time series
In order to investigate whether a surrogate wake model can be used for time series
generation, wake flow surrogates were developed using results from AL/LES. Indepen-
dent surrogates for the distributions of both the mean wind speed and the turbulence
intensity were developed using a fully-connected feedforward ANN. The surrogates pre-
dict the distributions of the mean wind speed and the TI within a rotor averaged error
of |2.1%| and |15.1%| respectively. Though the results of the surrogates were initially
deemed satisfactory, the pre-processing of the data did not include a proper feature
scaling, and therefore the results of the preliminary hyperparameter search should be
used cautiously. Time series were generated on the basis of the wake surrogate predic-
tions, however only with minor success in terms of accurately estimating the loads and
power of a turbine operating in wake conditions. The power was approximated quite
accurately, while the blade flapwise load was consistently overestimated. The tower bot-
tom bending moments were crudely estimated, and the time series generated from the
surrogate were not able to capture the trends observed in the LES. No clear distinction
between using a 0D, 1D or 2D model was observed, suggesting that the dimensionality
of the current surrogates only has a small, if any, effect on the resulting loads and power.
It was furthermore concluded that the main parts missing from the current time series
scaling were frequency scaling and the meandering effect.
Main question 2 - Concerning load surrogate accuracy
Four separate response surrogates were developed on the basis of the wake flow
surrogates, in order to estimate the power and the loads on turbines operating in wake
conditions. On the basis of a similar hyperparameter study as for the wake surrogate,
a model structure was found and evaluated. It was found that the power is easier to
predict than DEL, and the most difficult DEL to predict was the tower bottom bending
side-side. Predictions of power were made with a mean relative RMSE over the positions
in the wake domain of 2.25%, while the tower side-side bending moment was predicted
==PAGE:92==
84
6 Conclusion
with a mean relative RMSE of 13.26%. The errors of the load surrogates presented in this
report are lower than the errors of the load surrogates presented in recent publications
by Mahulja [31] and Dimitrov [33]. A sensitivity study on the discretization of the inflow
resolution did reveal a significant flaw in the methodology used to develop the models.
Proper feature scaling was omitted, which yielded an unstable ANN. Therefore, it is not
unlikely that even more accurate load surrogates could be developed using the current
data set.
Main hypothesis
Our hypothesis was, that the loads can be estimated more accurately if the reso-
lution of the observed flow field is increased. In this thesis surrogate models capable
of outperforming the existing scalar based surrogates have been developed. The exact
reason for the performance increase has eluded us, therefore the hypothesis can neither
be accepted nor rejected, and further studies are needed. This rather vague conclusion
stems from a lack of test data, this problem is related to the choice of 10 min. windows
when only a limited LES data set was available. The methods’ potential has not been
fully realised in this work, but they remain appealing, as even under bad conditions the
results are promising.
Further research
• Comparative study with the current wake engineering models: In order to evaluate
whether an increase in performance is obtained compared to the full engineering
models, a dedicated comparative study should be conducted. Of main interest are
the models proposed in the standard for load estimation (Frandsen and DWM),
and the Jensen derived models for a comparison of the power production.
• Calibration of the Mann-box length scale for time series evaluation: It was ob-
served during the study of the integral length scales of the AL/LES, that it was
significantly lowered after the coupled turbine, and stayed relatively constant be-
yond X = 10R. The Mann-box used to generate the time series had a length scale
similar to that of the undisturbed flow in the AL/LES. An interesting study would
be to scale the length of the Mann-box in the flow direction to effectively change
the length scales of the generated time series. This study would help narrow down
the possible causes for the differences between the surrogate derived time series,
and the observed LES targets.
• Direct load surrogate approach: In this thesis an intermediate surrogate was devel-
oped showcasing it is possible to predict 10 min flow statistics, within reasonable
accuracy. When the load surrogates were developed they were based on these flow
surrogates. This approach does not allow the weights to be altered in the flow
surrogate, during the load surrogate training. The initial inaccuracies of the wake
==PAGE:93==
6 Conclusion
85
surrogate may be bypassed by predicting the loads and power directly from the
inflow parameters.
• Multiple wakes: A proposed use case for the current wake surrogate was presented
in chapter 4, where the wake surrogates’ ability to predict the flow field behind a
second turbine was tested. The results of these tests showed that the surrogate
trained on single wake data was not sufficient for predicting multiple wake flows.
Including multiple wake data in the surrogate training, would allow for a focused
study on the prospects of a surrogate predicting on itself.
• Temporal approach: Departure from the 10 min timely windows would allow for
fundamentally different approaches. Increased performance might be attainable
even with the simple ANN. By breaking the 10 min mean into separate windows
of shorter time, thereby increasing the information available for the predictions.
Better results are expected if advanced ANN techniques were applied. Both the
CNNs and RNNs seems promising.
==PAGE:94==
86
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
Danish Energy Agency.
Danish Experiences from Offshore Wind Development,
2017.
[2]
Ørsted-aktien
brager
ned
efter
nedjustering
af
langsigtede
mål.
https:
//finans.dk/erhverv/ECE11719123/oerstedaktien-brager-ned-efter-
nedjustering-af-langsigtede-maal/. Accessed 09-January-2020.
[3]
T. J. Larsen, P.E. Réthoré, T. Buhl, P. Fuglsang, and G. C. Larsen. TOPFARM
wind farm optimizationtool. Technical report, Risø National Laboratory for Sus-
tainable Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2011.
[4]
N.O. Jensen. A note on wind generator interaction. Risø-M-2411 Risø National
Laboratory Roskilde, pages 1–16, 1983.
[5]
J.F. Ainslie. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 27 (1988)
213-224. Journal of Wind Engineering, 27(1-3):213–224, 1988.
[6]
I. Katic, J. Højstrup, and N.O. Jensen.
A simple model for cluster efficiency.
Ewec’86. Proceedings. Vol. 1, pages 407–410, 1987.
[7]
O.S. Rathmann, B. Ohrbeck, K. Schaldemose, N.S. Gylling, and J. P. Murcia. The
Park2 Wake Model - Documentation and Validation. Technical report, DTU, 2018.
[8]
M. Bastankhah and F. Porté-Agel. A new analytical model for wind-turbine wakes.
Renewable Energy, 70:116–123, 2014.
[9]
N.G. Nygaard. Wakes in very large wind farms and the effect of neighbouring wind
farms. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 524(1), 2014.
[10] Dansk Standard and IEC. IEC-61400, 2009.
[11] S. Frandsen. Turbulence and turbulence generated structural loading in wind turbine
clusters. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2007.
[12] G.C. Larsen, H.Aa. Madsen, F. Bingöl, J. Mann, S. Ott, J.N. Sørensen, V Okulov,
N Troldborg, N.M. Nielsen, K. Thomsen, T.J. Larsen, and R Mikkelsen. Dynamic
wake meandering modeling. Technical report, Risø National Laboratory, 2007.
[13] G.C. Larsen, H.Aa. Madsen, K. Thomsen, and T. J. Larsen. Wake meandering: A
pragmatic approach. Wind Energy, 11(4):377–395, 2008.
==PAGE:96==
88
Bibliography
[14] H. Aa Madsen, G. C. Larsen, T. J. Larsen, N. Troldborg, and R. Mikkelsen. Cali-
bration and validation of the dynamic wake meandering model for implementation
in an aeroelastic code. Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, Transactions of the
ASME, 132(4):1–14, 2010.
[15] Hawc2 aeroelastic simulation of wind turbines. http://www.hawc2.dk/. Accessed
08-January-2020.
[16] Nwtc information portal (openfast).
https://nwtc.nrel.gov/OpenFAST.
Last
modified 05-January-2018 ; Accessed 08-January-2020.
[17] S. Øye. Flex4 simulation of wind turbine dynamics., 1996.
[18] J. Zierath, R. Rachholz, and W. Woernle.
Field test validation of Flex5,
MSC.Adams, alaska/Wind and SIMPACK for load calculations on wind turbines.
Wind Energy, 1(19):1201–1222, 2016.
[19] Jakob Mann. The Spatial Structure of Neutral Atmospheric Surface-Layer Turbu-
lence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 273:141–168, 1994.
[20] J. Mann. Wind field simulation. Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, 13(4):269–
282, 1998.
[21] P.S. Veers. Three-dimensional wind simulation. American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Solar Energy Division (publication) Sed, 7:23–31, 1988.
[22] J. Smagorinsky. General Circulation Experiments With the Primitive Equations.
Monthly Weather Review, 91(3):99–164, 1963.
[23] R.F. Mikkelsen.
Actuator Disc Methods Applied to Wind Turbines by Robert
Mikkelsen Dissertation submitted to the Technical University of Denmark in partial
fulfillment of PhD. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2003.
[24] J.N. Sørensen and W.Z. Shen. Numerical modeling of wind turbine wakes. Journal
of Fluids Engineering, Transactions of the ASME, 124(2):393–399, 2002.
[25] R.C. Storey, S.E. Norris, K.A. Stol, and J.E. Cater.
Large eddy simulation of
dynamically controlled wind turbines in an offshore environment. Wind Energy,
16(July 2012):845–864, 2013.
[26] J.N. Sørensen, R.F. Mikkelsen, D.S. Henningson, S. Ivanell, S. Sarmast, and S.J.
Andersen.
Simulation of wind turbine wakes using the actuator line technique.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 373(2035), 2015.
[27] J. Nathan, A.R. Meyer Forsting, N. Troldborg, and C. Masson. Comparison of
OpenFOAM and EllipSys3D actuator line methods with (NEW) Mexico results.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 854(1), 2017.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
89
[28] S.J. Andersen and J.N. Sørensen. Instantaneous Response and Mutual Interaction
between Wind Turbine and Flow. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1037(7),
2018.
[29] S.J. Andersen, J.N. Sørensen, S. Ivanell, and R.F. Mikkelsen. Comparison of engi-
neering wake models with CFD simulations. Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
524(1), 2014.
[30] S. Ott, M. Nielsen, J. Berg, and H. Ejsing Jørgensen. Fuga - a linearised cfd model
tool for offshore wind farm wakes. Proceedings, 2011.
[31] S. Mahulja, G.C. Larsen, and A. Elham. Engineering an optimal wind farm using
surrogate models. Wind Energy, 21(12):1296–1308, 2018.
[32] N. Dimitrov, M. Kelly, A. Vignaroli, and J. Berg. From wind to loads: wind tur-
bine site-specific load estimation using databases with high-fidelity load simulations.
Wind Energy Science Discussions, pages 1–39, 2018.
[33] N. Dimitrov. Surrogate models for parameterized representation of wake‐induced
loads in wind farms. Wind Energy, 22(10):1371–1389, 2019.
[34] U. Ciri, C. Santoni, F. Bernardoni, M.V. Salvetti, and S. Leonardi. Development
of a surrogate model for wind farm control. Proceedings of the American Control
Conference, 2019-July:2849–2854, 2019.
[35] N. Troldborg and A. R. Meyer Forsting.
A simple model of the wind turbine
induction zone derived from numerical simulations. Wind Energy, 20:2011–2020,
2017.
[36] A. Nemes, M. Sherry, D. Lo Jacono, H.M. Blackburn, and J. Sheridan. Evolution
and breakdown of helical vortex wakes behind a wind turbine. Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 555(1), 2014.
[37] F. Cuzzola, S. Aubrun, and B. Leitl. Characterization of a wind turbine model for
wake aerodynamics studies. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 555(1), 2014.
[38] D.E. Neff, R.N. Meroney, E. McCarthy, and E. Davis. Upstream and lateral wind
turbine wake effects on nearby wind turbine performance. Journal of Wind Engi-
neering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 36(PART 2):1405–1414, 1990.
[39] L. Ta Phuoc, R. Lardat, M. Coutanceau, and G. Pineau. Rechereche et analyse
de modeles de turbulence de sous maille adaptes aux ecoulements instationnaires
decolles., 1994.
[40] N. Troldborg. Actuator Line Modeling of Wind Turbine Wakes. PhD thesis, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, 2009.
[41] J.A. Michelsen and Technical University of Denmark. Basis3D - a Platform for
Development of Multiblock PDE Solvers, volume 92-05. DTU, 1992.
==PAGE:98==
90
Bibliography
[42] J.A. Michelsen and Technical University of Denmark. Block structured multigrid
solution of 2D and 3D elliptic PDE’s, volume 94-06. DTU, 1994.
[43] N.N. Sørensen. General purpose flow solver applied to flow over hills. PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 1995.
[44] S. Zhang, X. Zhao, and S. Bayyuk.
Generalized formulations for the rhie-chow
interpolation. Journal of Computational Physics, 258:880–914, 2014.
[45] D S En. Dansk standard Elproducerende vindmøller – Del 3 : Konstruktionskrav
til offshorevindmøller, 2011.
[46] E.S.P. Branlard.
Flexible multibody dynamics using joint coordinates and the
Rayleigh-Ritz approximation: The general framework behind and beyond Flex.
Wind Energy, 22(7):877–893, 2019.
[47] M.O.L. Hansen. Aerodynamics of wind turbines. Routledge, 2015.
[48] S. Raschka and V. Mirjalili. Python Machine Learning and Deep Learning with
Python, scikit-learn, and TensorFlow. Packt, 2 edition, 2017.
[49] A. Ng. Neural networks and deep learning. https://www.coursera.org/learn/
neural-networks-deep-learning. Accessed: 23-1-2020.
[50] A. A. Mullin and F. Rosenblatt.
Principles of Neurodynamics.
The American
Mathematical Monthly, 70(5):586, 1963.
[51] T. Herlau, M.N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining. Unpublished, 2019.
[52] D.P. Kingma and J.L. Ba.
Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
3rd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference
Track Proceedings, pages 1–15, 2015.
[53] G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics
of Control, Signals, and Systems, 2(4):303–14, 303–314, 1989.
[54] I. Van der Hoven. Power spectrum of horizontal wind speed in the frequency range
from 0.0007 to 900 cycles per hour. Journal of Meteorology, 14(2):160–164, 1957.
[55] S.D. Downing and D.F. Socie. Simple rainflow counting algorithms. International
Journal of Fatigue, 4(1):31–40, 1982.
[56] P. Janiszewski. Rainflow. https://github.com/iamlikeme/rainflow/, 2019.
[57] American Society for Testing. E1049-85: Standard practices for cycle counting in
fatigue analysis, 1985, (Reapproved 2017).
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
91
[58] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G.S. Corrado,
A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Is-
ard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Mané, R. Monga,
S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever,
K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan, F. Viégas, O. Vinyals, P. War-
den, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale
machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015. Software available from tensor-
flow.org.
[59] DS, ISO. Nøjagtighed ( korrekthed og præcision ) af målemetoder og resultater –
Del 1 : Generelle principper og definitioner Accuracy ( trueness and precision ) of.
ISO, page Part 1, 1995.
[60] A. Peña, J. Berg, and S.J. Andersen. Analysis of sonic anemometer measurements
from the 250-m south lightning mast at Østerild, 2019.
[61] E. Robinson and D. Clark. Sampling and the nyquist frequency. Leading Edge,
10(3):51–53, 1991.
[62] SciPy. SciPy v0.14.0 Reference Guide. Accessed Dec 15 2019, Last updated on May
11, 2014.
==PAGE:100==
92
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A
Area based weighting
function
Since the mesh is a laid out in a polar grid, the points cover an increasing area as
the radial coordinate is increased. In the following, an expression for the area covered
by a grid point as a function of the radial coordinate of the grid points is derived. The
area covered by each grid point is defined as the swept area of the line connecting the
grid point with radial coordinate ns and the neighbour point towards the center, one
azimuthal coordinate counter clockwise. The radial coordinate of the outermost point
is given by NS.
Figure A.1: Schematic of the area a single node in the mesh is covering.
The area AE is then given by (A.2), as a scaled area of the annulus.
AE = α
2ππ
(( ns
NS
)2
−
(ns −1
NS
)2)
(A.1)
AE =α
2
(2ns −1
NS2
)
(A.2)
The result shows that the area scales linearly with the radial coordinate. For NS =
10, the discrete values of the area is shown along with a polynomial least square regression
of order 1 in figure A.2
==PAGE:102==
94
A Area based weighting function
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.005
0.010
0.015
AE = 1.745e −02r −8.727e −04
Polyfit
Analytic values
Figure A.2: Comparison of analytically evaluated expression and the linear polynomial
fit.
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX B
Model discretization
1
0
1
x, R
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y, R
a n =
1
0
1
x, R
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y, R
b n =
1
0
1
x, R
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y, R
c n =
1
0
1
x, R
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y, R
d n =
1
0
1
x, R
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y, R
e n =
1
0
1
x, R
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y, R
f n = 411
Figure B.1: Considered discretization level during discretization test
==PAGE:104==
96
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX C
Flow model - Residuals
To evaluate the residuals of the flow models, the data is reduced corresponding to
the error estimates: Mean Residual (MR) and Root Mean Square Residual (RMSR) are
considered;
MRw,A = µn
(
µp
([(yr −y∗
r)
y∗
]
wA (r)
))
(C.1)
RMSRw,A = µn



v
u
u
u
tµp


([yr −y∗
r
y∗
r
]
wA (r)
)2




(C.2)
(C.3)
where yr and y∗
r are predictions and targets based on the training set.
==PAGE:106==
98
C Flow model - Residuals
C.1
U-model residuals
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-1.7 -0.93 -0.49 -0.24 -0.07 0.09 0.13 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.13 0.12 0.07
-1.2
-1
-0.41 -0.07 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.06
0.1
0.13 0.15 0.16 0.15 0.13 0.07
-2.1 -0.48 0.04 0.14 0.04 -0.03 -0.03
0
0.05 0.09 0.12 0.13 0.12
0.1
0.03
-1.9 -0.59
0.3
0.33 0.12 -0.02 -0.06 -0.06 -0.03
0
0.05 0.07 0.06 0.04 -0.02
-1
-0.77 0.26 0.36 0.08 -0.12 -0.15 -0.14 -0.09 -0.06 -0.01 0.01 0.02
0
-0.06
-0.81 -0.45 0.02 -0.08 -0.2 -0.24 -0.16 -0.12 -0.07 -0.05 -0.01
-0
0.01 -0.02 -0.09
-0.11 -0.67 -0.37 -0.37 -0.17 -0.08 0.02 0.04 0.05 0.02 0.05 0.02 0.01 -0.03 -0.11
0.38 -0.63 -0.35 -0.18 0.15 0.23 0.26 0.19 0.16
0.1
0.09 0.04 0.02 -0.04 -0.12
0.32 -0.64 -0.34 0.02 0.39
0.4
0.35 0.24 0.19
0.1
0.09 0.04 0.02 -0.02 -0.09
0.81 -0.86 -0.26 0.08 0.36 0.34 0.28 0.17 0.11 0.05 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.01 -0.03
0.96 -0.25 0.16 0.18 0.27 0.17 0.09
0
-0.02 -0.06 -0.02
0
0.03 0.06 0.05
0.44 -0.09 0.42 0.31 0.26 0.09 -0.02 -0.13 -0.14 -0.13 -0.05
-0
0.07 0.13 0.16
0.01 0.22 0.55 0.34 0.31 0.15 0.01 -0.11 -0.14 -0.12 -0.03 0.05 0.14 0.23 0.28
-0.52 0.21 0.41 0.32 0.26 0.21 0.12
0
-0.04 -0.04 0.03 0.11 0.21 0.33 0.41
-1.2 -0.21 0.01 0.12 0.14 0.14 0.16 0.11 0.08 0.07 0.12 0.19 0.28
0.4
0.49
-0.6
-0.8 -0.37 -0.12 0.05 0.09 0.12 0.15 0.15 0.16 0.19 0.25 0.33 0.44 0.53
-1.6 -0.97 -0.47 -0.16 -0.1
0.03 0.08
0.1
0.14 0.18 0.21 0.27 0.34 0.44 0.51
Figure C.1: U-model MRw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
3.6
2.1
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1
1
1
4.1
2.8
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1
1
4.2
3.5
3.3
2.6
2
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1
4.1
3.3
3.6
2.7
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
4.4
4.1
3.8
2.8
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.1
4.2
4.2
4
3
2.5
2.3
2.1
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
5.1
4.3
4.3
3.3
2.8
2.4
2.1
1.9
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
5.9
4.5
4.4
3.4
2.8
2.4
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.1
1
5.2
4.5
4.3
3.4
2.7
2.3
2
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
5.4
4.6
4.5
3.4
2.8
2.4
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.1
4.7
4.3
4.3
3.3
2.8
2.4
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
4.4
4.2
4.2
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
5
4.4
4.2
3.1
2.5
2.2
2
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
5.4
4
3.5
2.8
2.3
2
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
5.1
3.7
3.3
2.5
2
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
5.7
2.9
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.4
4
2.3
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3
Figure C.2: U-model RMSRw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
==PAGE:107==
C.2 TI-model residuals
99
C.2
TI-model residuals
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-5.9
-1.5
3.8
4.1
2
0.3
0.29
1.2
2.2
2.9
3.1
3.1
3.4
3.9
4.4
3.8
2.1
4.3
3.5
1.9
1.3
2.2
3.2
3.9
3.8
3.4
3.2
3.4
3.7
4.2
13
5.7
3
1.4
1.5
2.5
3.7
4.2
4
3.4
3
2.6
2.8
3.2
3.7
5.2
2
0.04 0.77
2.9
3.8
3.8
3.7
2.9
2.3
1.8
1.7
1.9
2.5
3.1
-3.7
-1.1
0.25
2.7
4.1
3.8
2.9
2.2
1.5
1.2
0.79 0.93
1.4
1.9
2.6
-1.4
-0.1
1.9
3.6
3.8
3
2
1.2
0.78 0.77 0.56 0.94
1.4
2
2.8
12
4.7
2.4
2.8
2.5
1.8
1.1
0.66 0.49 0.71 0.75
1.2
1.6
2.4
3.2
3.5
2.7
1.2
1.9
1.6
1.2
0.85 0.81 0.72
1.1
1.2
1.6
2.1
2.9
3.7
1
1.5
1.1
1.8
1.5
1
0.85 0.89
0.9
1.4
1.5
1.8
2.2
3
3.8
3.8
3.9
2.5
2.5
2
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.3
3
3.8
9.3
3.9
2.2
2.7
2.3
1.6
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.5
2
2.6
3.3
-5.2
-1.3 -0.33
1.5
2
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.2
1.1
0.95
1.2
1.6
2.2
2.8
-1.6
-1.9
-2.1 -0.28 0.98
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.3
1.2
0.89
1.1
1.2
1.7
2.3
2.7
-0.89 -2.3
-1.6 -0.38 0.27 0.72
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.4
1.6
1.9
4.1
0.12
-1
-0.93 -0.74 -0.63 -0.26 0.47
1
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.8
0.1
-3
-1.9 -0.04 0.28 -0.43 -0.92 -0.64 -0.1
0.66
1.2
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.7
-1.8
-4.9
-4.4 -0.88
1.2
0.69
-0.6
-1.4
-1.4 -0.71 -0.04 0.52
1
1.4
1.4
Figure C.3: TI-model MRw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
40
32
20
17
17
15
14
13
12
12
12
11
11
11
11
37
21
17
16
14
13
12
12
11
11
11
11
10
10
10
43
26
17
14
13
12
11
12
12
11
11
9.9
9.8
9.8
9.8
40
20
15
13
11
11
12
11
11
9.9
9.1
8.8
8.8
8.8
9.1
46
23
15
12
11
11
10
9.6
8.8
8.2
7.6
7.5
7.7
8
8.1
52
24
13
11
10
9.3
8.9
8.4
7.6
7.3
7
7
7.2
7.5
7.8
48
20
12
9.3
8.2
7.5
7.5
7.2
6.9
6.8
6.6
6.8
7.1
7.5
8
26
13
9.4
8.2
7.1
6.7
6.8
6.7
6.6
6.7
6.6
6.7
7.1
7.7
8.1
29
14
9.7
8.5
7.4
6.8
6.8
6.7
6.7
6.9
7
7.1
7.5
8
8.5
27
14
11
9.1
8.4
7.7
7.5
7.1
7.1
7.2
7.2
7.5
7.8
8.3
8.9
42
21
12
10
9.2
8.8
8.6
7.9
7.5
7.5
7.3
7.5
7.9
8.3
8.6
49
20
14
11
9.3
9.3
9.1
8.8
8.1
7.9
7.8
7.9
8.1
8.4
8.6
37
21
15
13
10
9.4
9.2
9.1
8.7
8.2
8.1
8.2
8.6
8.9
8.9
39
23
16
14
12
11
10
9.6
9.5
9
8.8
8.8
8.9
9.3
9.5
35
22
14
13
12
12
11
10
9.8
9.6
9.5
9.4
9.3
9.4
9.8
30
20
15
13
13
12
12
11
11
10
10
9.9
9.7
9.7
9.9
39
30
21
17
15
14
13
13
12
12
11
11
11
11
11
Figure C.4: TI-model RMSRw,A [%] heat map (n = 20)
==PAGE:108==
100
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D
Additional U flow plane
samples
In addition to the flow planes presented in the report some additional are shown here
in a larger range. Five X values are shown X = X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] for each case ˆCT
and three chosen Y values Y = [0, 1, 2]. All the shown flow plane plots are randomly
chosen realisations from the test set and include prediction, target and relative error in
percentages.
==PAGE:110==
102
D Additional U flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 8.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 10.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 16.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 24.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
0.68
0.70
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
Prediction [U/U0]
0.70
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
Target [U/U0]
-12.00
-10.50
-9.00
-7.50
-6.00
-4.50
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
Relative error [%]
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
Prediction [U/U0]
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
Target [U/U0]
-12.00
-10.50
-9.00
-7.50
-6.00
-4.50
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
Relative error [%]
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
Prediction [U/U0]
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
Target [U/U0]
-7.50
-6.00
-4.50
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
Relative error [%]
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.91
Prediction [U/U0]
0.81
0.82
0.84
0.85
0.87
0.88
0.90
0.91
0.93
Target [U/U0]
-5.00
-4.00
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
Relative error [%]
0.89
0.89
0.90
0.90
0.91
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.93
0.93
Prediction [U/U0]
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
Target [U/U0]
-3.00
-2.40
-1.80
-1.20
-0.60
0.00
0.60
1.20
1.80
2.40
Relative error [%]
Figure D.1: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.43, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 0R
==PAGE:111==
D Additional U flow plane samples
103
X = 6.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 8.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 10.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 16.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 24.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
0.54
0.57
0.60
0.63
0.66
0.69
0.72
0.75
0.78
Prediction [U/U0]
0.54
0.57
0.60
0.63
0.66
0.69
0.72
0.75
0.78
Target [U/U0]
-12.00
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
Relative error [%]
0.62
0.65
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.82
Prediction [U/U0]
0.60
0.63
0.65
0.68
0.70
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
Target [U/U0]
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
Relative error [%]
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
Prediction [U/U0]
0.65
0.68
0.70
0.73
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
Target [U/U0]
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
3.00
4.50
6.00
7.50
Relative error [%]
0.80
0.81
0.82
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
Prediction [U/U0]
0.78
0.80
0.81
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.87
0.89
Target [U/U0]
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
4.80
Relative error [%]
0.88
0.88
0.89
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.91
0.92
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.90
0.91
0.92
Target [U/U0]
-2.00
-1.50
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
Relative error [%]
Figure D.2: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.61, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 0R
==PAGE:112==
104
D Additional U flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 8.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 10.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 16.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 24.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
0.44
0.48
0.52
0.56
0.60
0.64
0.68
0.72
Prediction [U/U0]
0.44
0.48
0.52
0.56
0.60
0.64
0.68
0.72
Target [U/U0]
-10.00
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
10.00
12.50
Relative error [%]
0.54
0.57
0.60
0.63
0.66
0.69
0.72
0.75
0.78
Prediction [U/U0]
0.54
0.57
0.60
0.63
0.66
0.69
0.72
0.75
0.78
Target [U/U0]
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
10.00
Relative error [%]
0.62
0.65
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.82
Prediction [U/U0]
0.62
0.65
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.75
0.78
0.80
0.82
Target [U/U0]
-7.50
-6.00
-4.50
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
3.00
4.50
Relative error [%]
0.78
0.80
0.81
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.87
0.89
Prediction [U/U0]
0.78
0.80
0.81
0.83
0.84
0.85
0.87
0.89
0.90
Target [U/U0]
-4.50
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
3.00
4.50
6.00
Relative error [%]
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.88
0.89
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.91
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.93
Target [U/U0]
-4.00
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Relative error [%]
Figure D.3: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.75, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 0R
==PAGE:113==
D Additional U flow plane samples
105
X = 6.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 8.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 10.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 16.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 24.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
0.68
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
1.04
Target [U/U0]
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
Relative error [%]
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
1.04
Target [U/U0]
-12.50
-10.00
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
Relative error [%]
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
1.04
Target [U/U0]
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
Relative error [%]
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-3.20
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
Prediction [U/U0]
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
Target [U/U0]
-2.50
-2.00
-1.50
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
Relative error [%]
Figure D.4: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.43, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 1R
==PAGE:114==
106
D Additional U flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 8.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 10.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 16.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 24.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
Prediction [U/U0]
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-15.00
-12.50
-10.00
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
Relative error [%]
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Target [U/U0]
-10.00
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
10.00
Relative error [%]
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
3.00
4.50
6.00
7.50
Relative error [%]
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.87
0.90
0.93
0.96
0.99
Target [U/U0]
-3.20
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
Prediction [U/U0]
0.85
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
Target [U/U0]
-2.40
-1.80
-1.20
-0.60
0.00
0.60
1.20
1.80
2.40
Relative error [%]
Figure D.5: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.61, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 1R
==PAGE:115==
D Additional U flow plane samples
107
X = 6.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 8.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 10.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 16.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 24.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
0.40
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
0.80
0.88
0.96
1.04
Prediction [U/U0]
0.40
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
0.80
0.88
0.96
1.04
Target [U/U0]
-12.50
-10.00
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
Relative error [%]
0.48
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
Prediction [U/U0]
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.90
0.96
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
Relative error [%]
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-6.00
-4.50
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
3.00
4.50
Relative error [%]
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
Prediction [U/U0]
0.78
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-4.00
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.85
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
Prediction [U/U0]
0.85
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
Target [U/U0]
-3.20
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
Relative error [%]
Figure D.6: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.75, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 1R
==PAGE:116==
108
D Additional U flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 8.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 10.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 16.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 24.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-1.80
-1.20
-0.60
0.00
0.60
1.20
1.80
2.40
3.00
Relative error [%]
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-1.60
-1.20
-0.80
-0.40
0.00
0.40
0.80
1.20
Relative error [%]
0.90
0.91
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-1.50
-1.20
-0.90
-0.60
-0.30
0.00
0.30
0.60
0.90
Relative error [%]
Figure D.7: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.43, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 2R
==PAGE:117==
D Additional U flow plane samples
109
X = 6.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 8.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 10.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 16.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 24.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.87
0.90
0.93
0.96
0.99
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-3.20
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.80
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
1.03
Target [U/U0]
-1.50
-1.20
-0.90
-0.60
-0.30
0.00
0.30
0.60
0.90
1.20
Relative error [%]
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.83
0.85
0.88
0.90
0.93
0.95
0.98
1.00
1.03
Target [U/U0]
-1.60
-1.20
-0.80
-0.40
0.00
0.40
0.80
1.20
Relative error [%]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-1.20
-0.90
-0.60
-0.30
0.00
0.30
0.60
0.90
1.20
Relative error [%]
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.90
0.91
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-1.60
-1.20
-0.80
-0.40
0.00
0.40
0.80
1.20
Relative error [%]
Figure D.8: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.61, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 2R
==PAGE:118==
110
D Additional U flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 8.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 10.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 16.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 24.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
0.68
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Target [U/U0]
-3.00
-1.50
0.00
1.50
3.00
4.50
6.00
7.50
9.00
Relative error [%]
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.72
0.76
0.80
0.84
0.88
0.92
0.96
1.00
1.04
Target [U/U0]
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
Relative error [%]
0.75
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.87
0.90
0.93
0.96
0.99
1.02
Prediction [U/U0]
0.75
0.78
0.81
0.84
0.87
0.90
0.93
0.96
0.99
1.02
Target [U/U0]
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
4.00
Relative error [%]
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-3.20
-2.40
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
3.20
Relative error [%]
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Prediction [U/U0]
0.87
0.89
0.90
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.96
0.97
0.99
1.00
Target [U/U0]
-2.00
-1.50
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
Relative error [%]
Figure D.9: U flow planes at ˆCT = 0.75, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 2R
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX E
Additional TI flow plane
samples
In addition to the flow planes presented in the report some additional are shown
here in a larger range. Five X values are shown X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R for each case ˆCT
and three chosen Y values Y = [0, 1, 2] R. All the shown flow plane plots are randomly
chosen realisations from the test set and include prediction, target and relative error in
percentages.
==PAGE:120==
112
E Additional TI flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 8.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 10.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 16.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
X = 24.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.43
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Prediction [TI]
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Target [TI]
-40.00
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Prediction [TI]
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.16
Target [TI]
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
Relative error [%]
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.14
0.15
Prediction [TI]
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
Target [TI]
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
48.00
Relative error [%]
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
Prediction [TI]
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.12
Target [TI]
-12.00
-6.00
0.00
6.00
12.00
18.00
24.00
30.00
36.00
Relative error [%]
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
Prediction [TI]
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
Target [TI]
-10.00
-7.50
-5.00
-2.50
0.00
2.50
5.00
7.50
10.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.1: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.43, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 0R
==PAGE:121==
E Additional TI flow plane samples
113
X = 6.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 8.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 10.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 16.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
X = 24.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.61
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
Prediction [TI]
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
Target [TI]
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
75.00
Relative error [%]
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.21
0.22
Prediction [TI]
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.21
0.22
Target [TI]
-20.00
-15.00
-10.00
-5.00
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
Relative error [%]
0.13
0.14
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.17
0.18
0.19
Prediction [TI]
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.20
Target [TI]
-16.00
-12.00
-8.00
-4.00
0.00
4.00
8.00
12.00
16.00
Relative error [%]
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.13
Prediction [TI]
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.14
0.14
Target [TI]
-15.00
-12.00
-9.00
-6.00
-3.00
0.00
3.00
6.00
9.00
12.00
Relative error [%]
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
Prediction [TI]
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
Target [TI]
-16.00
-12.00
-8.00
-4.00
0.00
4.00
8.00
12.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.2: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.61, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 0R
==PAGE:122==
114
E Additional TI flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 8.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 10.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 16.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
X = 24.0, Y = 0.0, CT = 0.75
0.20
0.21
0.23
0.24
0.26
0.27
0.29
0.30
Prediction [TI]
0.18
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.30
0.32
Target [TI]
-24.00
-18.00
-12.00
-6.00
0.00
6.00
12.00
18.00
24.00
30.00
Relative error [%]
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.22
0.23
0.24
0.25
Prediction [TI]
0.15
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.27
Target [TI]
-18.00
-12.00
-6.00
0.00
6.00
12.00
18.00
24.00
30.00
Relative error [%]
0.17
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.20
0.21
0.22
Prediction [TI]
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.22
Target [TI]
-16.00
-12.00
-8.00
-4.00
0.00
4.00
8.00
12.00
16.00
Relative error [%]
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.15
Prediction [TI]
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.14
0.14
0.15
0.16
Target [TI]
-16.00
-12.00
-8.00
-4.00
0.00
4.00
8.00
12.00
16.00
20.00
Relative error [%]
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
Prediction [TI]
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
Target [TI]
-16.00
-12.00
-8.00
-4.00
0.00
4.00
8.00
12.00
16.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.3: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.75, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 0R
==PAGE:123==
E Additional TI flow plane samples
115
X = 6.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 8.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 10.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 16.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
X = 24.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.43
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Target [TI]
-100.00
-80.00
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Target [TI]
-60.00
-45.00
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Prediction [TI]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Target [TI]
-40.00
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
Target [TI]
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
48.00
56.00
Relative error [%]
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
Prediction [TI]
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
Target [TI]
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.4: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.43, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 1R
==PAGE:124==
116
E Additional TI flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 8.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 10.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 16.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
X = 24.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.61
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
Prediction [TI]
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
Target [TI]
-80.00
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
Target [TI]
-60.00
-45.00
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
Relative error [%]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Target [TI]
-32.00
-24.00
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
Relative error [%]
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
Prediction [TI]
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Target [TI]
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.10
Prediction [TI]
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.10
Target [TI]
-18.00
-12.00
-6.00
0.00
6.00
12.00
18.00
24.00
30.00
36.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.5: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.61, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 1R
==PAGE:125==
E Additional TI flow plane samples
117
X = 6.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 8.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 10.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 16.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
X = 24.0, Y = 1.0, CT = 0.75
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.24
0.28
Prediction [TI]
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.24
0.28
0.32
Target [TI]
-60.00
-45.00
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.27
Target [TI]
-50.00
-40.00
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
Target [TI]
-40.00
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Prediction [TI]
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.15
Target [TI]
-24.00
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
Prediction [TI]
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.10
Target [TI]
-18.00
-12.00
-6.00
0.00
6.00
12.00
18.00
24.00
30.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.6: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.75, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 1R
==PAGE:126==
118
E Additional TI flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 8.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 10.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 16.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
X = 24.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.43
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Prediction [TI]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
Target [TI]
-120.00
-90.00
-60.00
-30.00
0.00
30.00
60.00
90.00
120.00
150.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
Prediction [TI]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
Target [TI]
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
Prediction [TI]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
Target [TI]
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
Relative error [%]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
Target [TI]
-50.00
-40.00
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
Target [TI]
-40.00
-30.00
-20.00
-10.00
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.7: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.43, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 2R
==PAGE:127==
E Additional TI flow plane samples
119
X = 6.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 8.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 10.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 16.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
X = 24.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.61
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
Prediction [TI]
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
Target [TI]
-100.00
-75.00
-50.00
-25.00
0.00
25.00
50.00
75.00
100.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
Target [TI]
-45.00
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
75.00
Relative error [%]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Target [TI]
-45.00
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
75.00
Relative error [%]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
Target [TI]
-32.00
-24.00
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
Relative error [%]
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
Target [TI]
-24.00
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.8: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.61, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 2R
==PAGE:128==
120
E Additional TI flow plane samples
X = 6.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 8.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 10.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 16.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
X = 24.0, Y = 2.0, CT = 0.75
-0.03
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
Prediction [TI]
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.20
0.24
0.28
0.32
Target [TI]
-120.00
-90.00
-60.00
-30.00
0.00
30.00
60.00
90.00
120.00
Relative error [%]
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
Prediction [TI]
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
Target [TI]
-80.00
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
Relative error [%]
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
Prediction [TI]
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.20
0.23
Target [TI]
-45.00
-30.00
-15.00
0.00
15.00
30.00
45.00
60.00
75.00
Relative error [%]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
Prediction [TI]
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.14
Target [TI]
-24.00
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
Prediction [TI]
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
Target [TI]
-24.00
-16.00
-8.00
0.00
8.00
16.00
24.00
32.00
40.00
Relative error [%]
Figure E.9: TI flow planes at ˆCT = 0.75, X = [6, 8, 10, 16, 24] R, Y = 2R
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX F
TI-surrogate as
superimposed wake
transfer function
Plots showing the unsatisfactory results of the TI-surrogate applied as a multi turbine
transfer function.
==PAGE:130==
122
F TI-surrogate as superimposed wake transfer function
a Prediction 1 X = 14.84R, Y = 0R
b Prediction 2 X = 26R, Y = 0R
c Target X = 26R, Y = 0R
d Prediction 2 X = 26R, Y = 1R
e Target X = 26R, Y = 1R
Figure F.1: Transfer function prediction on turbine 1, 2 and target plane with randomly
chosen sample planes at position of turbine 2
==PAGE:131==
F TI-surrogate as superimposed wake transfer function
123
-2.0 -1.75 -1.5 -1.25 -1.0 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Y [R]
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
TIW, A [-]
Type:
Prediction
Target
a CT = 0.43
-2.0 -1.75 -1.5 -1.25 -1.0 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Y [R]
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
TIW, A [-]
Type:
Prediction
Target
b CT = 0.61
-2.0 -1.75 -1.5 -1.25 -1.0 -0.75 -0.5 -0.25
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
2.0
Y [R]
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
TIW, A [-]
Type:
Prediction
Target
c CT = 0.75
Figure F.2: Transfer function: Rotor meaned TI predictions and targets at X = 26R as
boxplots
==PAGE:132==
124
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX G
Results of the Mann-box
modelled time series
In this appendix the results of the DEL and power calculated using the Mann-box
for ˆCT = 0.61 and ˆCT = 0.75 are presented.
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
P/Prated
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.1: Results of P from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.61
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
M ∗
F/M ∗
F0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.2: Results of M ∗
F from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.61
==PAGE:134==
126
G Results of the Mann-box modelled time series
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
2
3
4
M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.3: Results of M ∗
T,Y from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.61
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
2
3
4
5
M ∗
T, X/M ∗
T, X0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.4: Results of M ∗
T,X from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.61
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
P/Prated
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.5: Results of P from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.75
==PAGE:135==
G Results of the Mann-box modelled time series
127
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
2
3
4
M ∗
F/M ∗
F0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.6: Results of M ∗
F from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.75
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
2
3
4
5
M ∗
T, Y/M ∗
T, Y0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.7: Results of M ∗
T,Y from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.75
8.0
16.0
24.0
X,[R]
2
4
6
M ∗
T, X/M ∗
T, X0
LES
Ref. Mann-box
0D turbulence
1D turbulence
2D turbulence
Figure G.8: Results of M ∗
T,X from the surrogate generated time series, with ˆCT = 0.75
==PAGE:136==
128
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX H
Response surrogates - ME
The heat-maps of the response surrogates’ ME is found in this appendix, along with
a box-plot condensing the information to quartiles.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-0.27 0.91
1.1
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.88 0.92
1
1.3
1.7
2
2.3
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.3
1.1
0.98
1
1.1
1.2
2.6
2.7
3
3.1
3
2.5
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1
2.2
2
2.3
3.4
2.9
2.3
2.1
2.1
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.4
1.2
1.1
0.84
-0.66 0.55
1.5
2.7
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
0.87 0.58
-0.73 0.26
1.3
1.9
1.5
2.1
2.5
2.1
1.9
1.5
1.3
1.2
0.87 0.57 0.32
-0.23 -0.34 0.78 0.59 0.95
1.7
1.9
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.1
0.86 0.63 0.35 0.14
0.77 0.88 -0.29 0.44 0.03
1
1.4
0.85 0.65 0.81 0.86 0.65 0.35 0.08 0.04
1.1
-0.91 -1.8 -0.75 -1.5
0.22 0.51 0.21 0.11 0.21 0.41 0.23 -0.05 -0.23 -0.47
-1.3
-1.3
-2.1
-1.1
-2.1 -0.74 -0.36 -0.85 -0.71 -0.58 -0.31 -0.32 -0.41 -0.61 -0.82
0.06 -0.57 -0.93 -1.3
-1.1 -0.98 -0.92 -0.84 -0.57 -0.67 -0.69 -0.83 -0.88 -0.77 -0.94
-0.18 -0.65 -0.28 -1.2
-0.9
-1.4
-1.1 -0.92 -0.57 -0.93
-1
-1.3
-1.3
-1.2
-1.1
0.33 -0.08 -0.05 -0.77 -0.9
-1.2
-1.6
-1.4
-1.3
-1.3
-1.5
-1.6
-1.7
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2 -0.98 -0.93 -0.97 -1.5
-1.9
-2.2
-2.5
-2.3
-2.2
-2.1
-2
-2
-1.9
-1.7
-2.1
-1.6
-1.4
-2.1
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.7
-2.5
-2.5
-2.4
-2.3
-2
-1.7
-1.6
-1.5
-1.4
-1.3
-2
-2.3
-2.4
-2.6
-2.5
-2.3
-2.3
-2.3
-2.2
-2
-1.7
-1.5
-1.3
-1.1
-1.2
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-1.9
-2
-2
-2
-1.8
-1.6
-1.3
2.73
1.34
0.18
1.25
3.35
a ME
Figure H.1: Power (P) - Heat-map of test data ME, sample size (n = 20) varies with X
& Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:138==
130
H Response surrogates - ME
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
1.3
-3.7
-4
-6.2
-6.7
-5.1
2
-1
0.83
3.8
5
3.5
2.8
4.3
3.4
-0.76 -6.1
-3.4
-3.4
-3.9
-5.4
0.23 -0.33 0.53
2.5
4.3
4.9
5.3
5.4
4.4
-0.8
-1.6 -0.87 -1.2
0.21
-2
0.33 0.63 0.38
5.6
7.9
6.4
3.2
4.6
5.9
3
3.3
1.2
2.8
0.51
1.7
4.2
-0.09 0.75
2.2
4.9
3.9
4.4
1.9
3.6
7.1
5.1
-1.5
1.3
-3.2
1.1
1.2
-1.3
1.1
1.7
-0.52
5
4.5
4.3
5.8
3
-2.5
-4.7
-3.8
-2.8
1.1
-2.7
2.2
-1.4
2.8
1.2
4.4
3.4
3.9
3
-1.5
-6.3
-2.8
-6.1 -0.69 -1.5
-3.2
-2.8
3.3
2.6
5.8
4.2
4.1
3.5
0.64
5
5
6.8
-2.6 -0.58
-2
3.5
1.4
-1.9
-3.3 -0.74 -0.4
3.8
0.95 -0.17
-1
4.1
-3
-4
-0.8
-2.4
1.1
-3.5
-4
-2
-3
-5
-4.7
-5.5
-4.6
2.9
-2.5
-6.7
-2.6
3.2
2.4
0.39
-3
-4.3 -0.38 -3.3
-4.8
-4.4
-4
-4.2
4
1.1
-3.8
-7.1
-0.3
-2.1
-3.1
-1.2 -0.63 -0.33 -3.3
-2.6
-3.2 -0.14
1
7.9
3.4
4.9
-7.8
-9
0.01
-3.1
-4.9
-2.3
-1.1
-2.8
-3.5
-3
0.12
-1.1
-3.6
1.6
-2.5
-7.3
-7
-5.2 -0.92 0.46 -0.25 0.12 -0.83 -2.5
-3.1 -0.65
1.9
6.2
8.6
-2.4
-2.8
0.43
-1.9
-2.9
0.24 0.35 -0.04
1.9
1.4
0.04 0.75 -0.34
8.9
8
2.3
9.9
2.3
-2.7
2.3
2.2
3.3
1.1
2.8
4.2
0.52
3.9
1.9
2.7
6
2.9
8.4
7.2
-0.48 -1.7
2.9
3.6
1.2
3.8
4.7
4.5
4.9
1.9
6.2
5.2
3.3
1.8
7.9
6
1
0.89
5.5
7.5
6.9
4.5
2.4
3.3
2.3
9.04
2.46
0.63
3.38
9.94
a ME
Figure H.2: Blade flap-wise (M ∗
F) - Heat-map of test data ME, sample size (n = 20)
varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:139==
H Response surrogates - ME
131
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-13
-4
-2.1
-5.8
-5.4
-10
-11
-5.8
-6.1
6.8
4.9
1.4
9.6
13
18
-3.2
0.93
-3.5
-3
0.06
-4.4
-5.6
-9.6
-18
-14
-9.4
-2.4
0.09 0.62
12
-5.6
-3.3
-8.8
-3.7
-0.8
-3.2 -0.93
2.2
0.5
-1.4
13
8.6
-6.1
0.12
8.2
0.69
-12
-11
0.33
15
4.2
0.08
-2.6
-5
-2.4
13
11
-3.5
-2.8
1.8
2.6
3.2
-0.9
9.1
0.73
-1.3
4.2
-1.8 -0.96 -4.8
-1.1
0.29
4.1
8.2
15
4.5
-0.06 0.23
-7
-0.97
3.3
-2.7
-1.1
0.36
1.1
2.9
8.8
1.8
3.2
13
-6.2
8.1
-1.5
13
-6.7
0.79
4
16
15
18
17
7.7
1.4
-1.4
-3.1
11
3.7
12
7.2
6.2
10
-0.14
9.6
16
14
17
22
8.1
-2.5
7.7
1.2
3.6
14
1.1
4
6.3
0.51
2.8
-0.37
11
20
21
17
5.2
-5.8
8.4
12
-4.9 -0.22
-10
-0.47 -5.5
-2.8
6.4
-0.33 -5.2
0.27
7.9
8.5
-6.8
-2.3
4.1
0.42
-5.8
-3.8
4.2
-5.5
9.3
10
1.3
-10
-8.2
-2.6
-5.7
-15
4.8
11
3.3
-1.2
7.1
-5.2
-17
3.9
-0.78
14
9.9
5.9
4.4
-0.36
5.3
-1.9
0.62
-4.8
-9
0.34
10
-2
-12
-12
-0.09
1.1
1.5
2.8
4
8.1
-0.64
7.2
2.6
-4.9
-8.3
-3.4
0.45
-9.4
-19
-16
-8.6
-3.3
-1.1
-5.5
-6.6
9.5
9.5
11
-2.8
2.1
10
11
10
4
2.2
6.8
5.2
3
-9.1
-14
16
14
14
2.7
4.4
5.9
2.2
6.3
6.1
7.8
6.5
10
5.8
-3.4
-7.9
4.6
6.4
13
5.7
12
6.7
1.8
-2.9
3.9
15
14
9.6
5
5.3
9.6
19.21
18.26
3.03
1.27
7.68
21.52
21.52
a ME
Figure H.3: Tower side-side bottom (M ∗
T,X) - Heat-map of test data ME, sample size
(n = 20) varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:140==
132
H Response surrogates - ME
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
-8.5
-12
-9.8
-3.8
-3.2
-1.9
4.5
8.6
4.8
5.7
11
-0.16
7.4
3.9
11
-11
-10
-7.8
3
-1.4
2.9
-0.81
4.8
3.1
1.6
6.1
6.9
12
7.7
9.3
-9.6
-8
-6.5
1.1
-1.7
1.1
3.5
10
3.3
3.6
4
7.3
5.9
6.3
6.2
-4.5 -0.79 -1.7
1.7
1.4
4.1
3.5
4.4
3.4
0.74
1.9
7.8
5.3
4.8
9
-3.4
0.07
-2.3
0.85
-2.3
0.2
-2.6
-3.6
0.13
2.5
4.2
2.9
4.9
-1.2
2
0.32
-1.9
0.36 -0.24
-2
-3.2
0.72
-1.7
-0.5
1.8
0.7
2.1
5.1
-0.95 -2.9
-0.7
-1.3
5.5
-4.2 -0.75 -0.92 0.77
1.3
7.4
0.45
5.8
5
-0.58 -2.9
-5.4
-0.28
-4
-1.8
2.5
-0.11
4.7
3.9
3.9
7
1.2
2
-0.74 -2.3
-4.8
-5.8
-2.3
-4.1
-2.4
-2.3
3.5
4.8
2
-4.5
-1
-0.92
2.6
5.6
0.84
-4
-3
-4.7
-6.9
-4.9
-1.2 -0.07
2.2
-1.9
2.1
-0.22
2.7
0.39
0.7
3.8
0.68
2.1
-5.8
-5.1
-4.1
-8.2
0.54
-2.1
-1
-0.78 -1.6
1.7
0.98
-1.1
-3
3.8
2.2
-7.3
-5.2
-2.6
-2.5
-2.2
-1.2
0.96 -0.78 -1.1
2.3
-3.2
-2.7
-2.3
-3.6
1.8
-1.9
-1.7
-2
-3.5 -0.34 -1.5
0.66 0.15 0.92
4.1
2
-2.2
-3.5
2.8
5.2
-1.8
0.43 -0.38
2.5
-0.34 -1.6
-0.6
-2.4
-1.6
3.1
2.9
1.6
2.3
3
1.6
-1.1
0.25
1.4
-2.4
1.2
-0.33
4.9
-2.6
1.3
-0.36 -0.54
3.3
3.8
2
-1.6
2.5
3.4
2.3
-3.8
-3.4
-5.6
-2
-4.9
-3.2
2.3
1.7
7.3
3.6
0.62 -0.19
7.7
9.1
4.7
-2.5
-3.7
-3.5
-2.5
-3.2
2.7
1.4
5.6
4.5
0.66
2.4
0.68
12.48
9.81
2.23
0.36
2.94
9.98
12.48
a ME
Figure H.4: Tower fore-aft bottom (M ∗
T,Y ) - Heat-map of test data ME, sample size
(n = 20) varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX I
Response surrogates - RMSE
The heat-maps of the response surrogates’ RMSE is found in this appendix, along
with a box-plot condensing the information to quartiles.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
0.47
1.2
1.3
2.8
2.3
2.1
2
1.9
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.6
1.9
2.2
2.5
3.4
3
2.6
2.5
2
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.5
2.9
2.9
3.2
3.3
3.2
2.8
2.5
2
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
2.4
2.3
2.6
3.7
3.2
2.6
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.2
2
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.3
2.3
1.8
2
3.2
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.2
1.9
1.4
1.3
3
2.6
2
2.6
1.9
2.4
2.7
2.3
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.3
1.2
3.4
3.9
3.3
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.2
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.1
3.9
3.6
3.8
3
2.4
2
1.9
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.1
3.4
3.8
4
3.4
2.5
2.1
1.6
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.1
1.1
1.1
3.6
3.1
3.2
3.9
2.9
2.6
2.1
2
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.3
3
3.1
2.6
3.5
2.7
2.6
2.6
2.3
2.1
2
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.5
3.6
3.1
2.3
3.2
2.8
3
2.7
2.3
2.2
2.1
2
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.7
2.6
2.2
1.7
3.3
3
2.6
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2
1.7
1.4
1.3
2.9
3
3
3
3.2
3
2.9
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.3
1.8
1.6
2.9
3.3
3.4
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.3
3.1
2.9
2.6
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.6
2.6
3
3.2
3.5
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.9
2.7
2.4
2.1
1.5
1.3
1.5
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.2
1.9
0.47
1.61
2.24
2.78
3.97
a RMSE
Figure I.1: Power (P) - Heat-map of test data RMSE, sample size (n = 20) varies with
X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:142==
134
I Response surrogates - RMSE
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
3.7
5.6
7.3
7.2
8.2
6.3
5.7
7
5.2
5.3
7.6
6.4
6.1
6.5
8.4
7
8.4
8.2
8
7.3
6.6
7.4
5.2
3.3
3.9
7.2
10
8
7.7
6.5
7.7
9.3
9.7
4.7
3.1
4.2
5.5
8.2
4.8
6.8
11
8.9
7.6
11
9.8
5.7
4.8
5.8
6
5.2
8.5
10
8.1
6.2
6.9
8.8
6
7.5
4.7
6.6
11
7.3
4.8
7.9
5.3
7.8
7
5.7
5.9
6.8
5.5
8.6
6.6
7
9.1
7
7.4
5.5
5.3
4.2
6
5.4
6.8
8.8
6.6
8.4
8.1
6.9
7.3
7.3
2.8
6.8
4
7.8
6.7
6.1
5.3
5.1
7.5
6.8
8.7
6.3
6.9
6.6
5.3
10
5.7
9.4
3.4
8.1
4.1
5.8
4.1
3.2
6
4.5
5.5
5.9
2.7
2.8
3.3
4.3
4.6
7.8
8.2
5.5
3.1
4.9
4.8
5
4
6.8
8.1
6
8
3.5
5
8.7
5.8
5.1
7.2
3.9
6.7
5.8
5.8
4
8.4
8.8
8.4
8.1
8.1
2.4
4.9
7.7
4.1
6
5.9
4
3.3
2.3
3.7
5.2
6.8
6.9
6.6
18
13
9.4
9.7
12
7.1
6.1
5.6
3.7
3
3.7
4.9
3.5
4.4
4.3
8.4
17
16
14
9.7
9.1
5.2
3.8
3.1
3.6
2.4
3.5
4.5
3
3.4
6.4
9.6
14
10
6.8
10
12
2.8
3.4
2.8
5.5
4.4
6
4.8
3.1
9.5
9.2
3.4
17
13
15
14
9
7.6
6
7.1
6
4.6
4.9
3.3
3.3
8.8
7.4
12
11
10
15
11
11
7.6
9.4
9.5
7.8
7.8
4.4
6.8
5.5
3.8
5.3
11
9.6
8.6
13
12
11
11
8
6.2
8.5
7
2.29
2.29
4.92
6.63
8.30
12.82
17.86
a RMSE
Figure I.2: Blade flap-wise (M ∗
F) - Heat-map of test data RMSE, sample size (n = 20)
varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
16
8.3
6.9
8.5
14
19
14
12
14
19
18
10
15
27
34
4.7
6.2
9.8
9
11
15
12
14
20
19
15
12
8.6
12
21
8.1
4.7
9.8
15
16
12
15
11
5.5
9.4
15
15
17
13
15
9.1
14
15
17
24
13
11
14
13
8.9
15
16
12
14
9.8
4.1
4.9
4.1
19
9.9
5.8
15
5.8
5.8
8.7
5.7
9.8
13
14
21
7.7
2.2
3.5
11
15
10
10
13
6.7
8.8
14
13
6.2
7.3
24
7.7
12
11
23
16
10
13
36
23
30
20
8.8
7.7
9.4
8.7
16
6
20
23
15
12
9.6
16
21
17
20
25
11
11
15
6.6
11
21
13
11
16
11
11
8.4
15
23
27
19
11
14
14
20
9.1
14
18
16
17
6.9
10
6.7
6.9
6.1
9.8
12
14
6.2
4.9
2.9
11
16
5.9
13
16
18
6.8
13
10
6.8
9.6
17
6
14
4.5
6.8
16
14
21
11
12
23
17
12
8.4
9
8.3
4.8
1.3
7.4
12
6
20
11
13
14
9.4
8.7
15
9.8
10
15
7.6
7.8
5.8
11
13
10
8
12
24
19
13
12
16
17
17
11
12
14
15
6.1
15
16
23
13
12
17
19
22
26
27
22
17
16
13
8
9
7.1
14
13
11
13
18
17
14
18
14
16
26
16
18
12
6.9
12
12
18
17
16
17
21
27
1.26
1.26
9.10
12.88
16.26
26.95
35.74
a RMSE
Figure I.3: Tower side-side bottom (M ∗
T,X) - Heat-map of test data RMSE, sample size
(n = 20) varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:143==
I Response surrogates - RMSE
135
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
X [R]
2.0
1.75
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
-1.0
-1.25
-1.5
-1.75
-2.0
Y [R]
9.6
13
15
9.7
4.2
3.9
6.3
10
6
11
17
10
15
11
17
12
12
10
10
2.6
6.1
8.1
6.5
6.3
5.6
9.2
11
15
9.3
12
13
11
7.2
2.5
5.2
7.3
15
14
6.5
8.5
4.9
8.7
6.8
7.2
8.3
5.8
2.4
2.5
7.6
5.2
12
7
8
5.6
3.4
3.4
8.4
6.5
6.3
9.8
3.7
1.1
3.3
5.5
5.8
8
7.3
5.4
4.1
5.9
6
4.3
6.1
6.2
7
1.1
4
7.2
6.8
8.6
8.1
6.1
5.5
5.3
4.2
3.6
3.7
6.3
7.5
5.2
4.6
3.3
9.3
9.8
4.6
3.1
4.4
5.6
8.5
5.5
6.1
5.7
2.4
6.7
9.5
2.8
4.5
4.4
4.8
3.6
5.8
4.9
6.2
8.3
2.6
3.4
6.1
5.2
9
8.6
4.2
7.8
5.1
3.3
5
7
6.6
5.3
3.1
3.4
6.7
7.5
5.9
6.2
5.3
8.7
9.6
6.5
4.7
4.6
8.5
7.2
5.7
4.1
6.7
6.4
7.5
9.5
8.7
7.3
7.7
6.3
6.9
8.6
5.3
4.6
7.7
5.2
2.8
6.5
6.9
8.3
10
13
8.6
12
7.4
3.3
4.6
3.7
3.2
4.6
4.8
4.3
6.5
5
4.8
5.9
6.1
5.4
5.6
2.8
6.1
4.7
4.5
4
3.1
8.5
5
8.8
5.8
5.1
4.1
3.7
7.1
4
3.5
4.6
6.7
3.2
4.4
3.9
4.3
3.9
5.5
6.3
8.5
5.1
3.9
5.7
3.8
1.2
2.5
3.5
4.6
5.3
6.6
6
5.5
2.9
4.5
6.3
7.2
4.8
5.5
3.5
4
3.6
5.5
8.2
6.9
3.9
6.5
6.8
4.6
4.7
7.7
4.8
3.8
7.6
9.7
11
5.6
12
10
6.2
5
6.3
4.6
4.3
8.2
8.8
6
8.6
6.1
1.05
1.05
4.54
5.98
7.90
12.65
17.45
a RMSE
Figure I.4: Tower fore-aft bottom (M ∗
T,Y ) - Heatmap of test data RMSE, sample size
(n = 20) varies with X & Y due to data shuffle during training.
==PAGE:144==
136
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX J
Response surrogates,
discretization study
In this appendix, additional results from the discretization study of the load surro-
gates are shown.
a Blade flapwise M ∗
F
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
ME [%]
19
34
56
106
211
411
m
b Tower side-side M ∗
T,X
40
20
0
20
40
ME [%]
19
34
56
106
211
411
m
c Tower fore-aft M ∗
T,Y
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
ME [%]
19
34
56
106
211
411
m
Figure J.1: Load surrogates dependency on inflow plane disctrization levels, ngrid = 255
