==PAGE:1==
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
An Environmental Assessment
Master Thesis
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
An Environmental Assessment
Master Thesis
January, 2020
By
Georgia Psyrri
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Building 115, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.env.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Residual Resources
Engineering, Department of Environmental Engineering, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
ii
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The present study is focusing on the environmental effects of bioprotective bacteria in the
dairy food supply chain. FreshQ is a bacteria produced and distributed by Chr. Hansen
that reduces the effects of post-acidification in dairy and extends the shelf life by 7 days.
The main focus of the study is to assess the potential environmental effects of extending
the shelf life on yogurts by quantifying yogurt waste material flows across all the actors
of the supply chain: the dairy factory, the distribution center, the point of sale and the
household. These values were found to be 5.35%, 0.03%, 1.66% and 7.21%. To get the
maximum waste reduction, the allocation of the extended shelf life among the actors of
the supply chain used was 1 day for distribution center, 5 days for the point of sale and
1 day for the household. The calculated waste fractions due to the extension of shelf life
were found to be 3.94% for dairy, 0.04% for distribution center, 0.36% for point of sale
and 1.9% for the household.
To evaluate the environmental impacts of the additional allocated days, an LCA was per-
formed. The functional unit for the LCA was set to be the consumption of 1 lt of yogurt
at an average household in DK. The results of the LCIA indicate that the environmental
burdens of Chr. Hansen in producing and distributing FreshQ are minimal to insignificant
compared to the other actors contribution. The extension of shelf life with FreshQ benefits
11 out of 14 investigated impact categories.
The loss of waste in the waste management is noticable when focusing on a smaller scale
but does not contribute to the final overall result when set against the scale of the studied
system’s boundaries. The most impactful process was found to be the production of cow
milk and the activities related to the dairy plant. It is advicable that future studies on the
dairy supply chain should focus on obtaining detailed information on the diary in order to
get more accurate results, as this turns out to be the main driver of the environmental
impacts of the system studied.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Georgia Psyrri, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
This thesis started with the intention to perform a Life Cycle Assessment on the impacts
of extending the shelf life of dairy products but turned out to be a valuable source of infor-
mation about biotechnology, the dairy market and industry. Unaware of the implications
and difficulties that showed up due to lack of data or available methodology on how to
quantify the shelf life of a food product, I would like to thank the people whose expertise
guided me towards the completion of the study. First and foremost I would like to thank
my supervisors, Alessio Boldrin and Anders Damgaard for their guidance and enthusiasm
for the project, Valentina Bisinella and Paola Federica Albizzati for giving me a guidance
and a stepping stone regarding data and iLUC effects. Professor Richard Ipsen from the
KU Food department for giving me an insight on the modern dairy industry and market.
Finally, the people closest to me during the writing of the thesis and last but not least my
partner for the invaluable patience and support.
iv
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
Yogurt Supply Chain in EU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Yogurt Properties-Application of FreshQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The complexity of food waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Materials and Methods
6
2.1
Goal and Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Baseline and Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Modelling Waste Treatment Options and Environmental Savings . . . . . . 10
2.4
Data and Inventory Setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Pedigree matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
LCI
21
3.1
Dairy Plant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
FreshQ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Inventory for Depot, Point of sale and Households
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
LCIA
29
4.1
Characterised and Normalised results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Life Cycle Interpretation
32
5.1
Contribution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6
Discussion
42
7
Uncertainties and Limitations
45
7.1
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A Bibliography
49
B Appendix
52
B.1 Waste Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
B.2 Waste Fractions Modelled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction and Background
With an estimated 30% of global food not being consumed according to FAO (Gustavsson
et al., 2011) the European Union is engaged to reduce food losses in the production and
supply sectors, as well as to halve food waste per capita by 2030, from both consumers
and retailers (Goal 12.3). Food Loss and Waste (FLW) is directly linked to environmen-
tal, social and economic damaging impacts that obscure the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG’s) as set by the UN. In reality, the underlying objective of the policy is not
food waste per se but the environmental/resource degradation and implications for food
security (Drabik et al, 2019). Another concern that has received little conceptual under-
standing is the economics of food waste and the possible implications of treating less
food waste. A number of research papers related to FLW measurements highlight the
lack of harmonised or integrated FLW assignments limiting the acquisition of reliable and
comparable data (Wesana et al., 2019), which can partially be contributed to the histor-
ically vague definition and distinctive separation of FLW (Principato L. ,2018). For this
assessment, the definition of FLW as defined in 2011 by Gustavson et al. is used:
Food losses refer to the decrease in edible food mass throughout the part of the supply
chain that specifically leads to edible food for human consumption. Food losses take
place at production, post-harvest, processing stages in the supply chain. Food waste
can be considered as food losses occurring at the end of the food chain (retail and final
consumption), which relates to retailers and consumer’s behavior.
Numerous practices have been developed to minimize FLW, from enhanced food pack-
aging to logistics improvements throughout the supply chain. Bio-protection is within the
field of food biotechnology and involves the use of natural microbial food cultures to in-
hibit unwanted contaminants, preventing food spoilage or enhancing food safety. This
biotechnology is implemented at the level of the manufacturer and can have a significant
impact on all actors of the supply chain in reducing food waste.
The purpose of this study is to locate and evaluate the potential environmental benefits
of extending the shelf life of dairy products with the use of bioprotective cultures. During
the course of the assessment, there was no published paper found related to the potential
environmental benefits of extending the shelf life of dairy throughout the entire supply
chain. For accuracy reasons and time restrictions, the study is focused on only one dairy
product, yogurt in Denmark.
A comprehensive literature study was conducted to identity the key actors of FLW and
the most environmental damaging processes. The study was further on divided among
the three main actors, manufacturer, retail and household in order to identify hotspots,
quantify FLW and all the related processes to the production, distribution, selling and con-
sumption of yogurt in DK. The quantification of a baseline was based by following the
guidelines as set by the European Dairy Association for conducting environmental foot-
print on fermented milk products, released in 2016. Data on yogurt waste from retailers
and consumers in DK and consumption patterns where extracted from different studies
(DTU Food, Petersen et al…). Published papers on benefits on extending shelf life of
foods (Lee et al., 2015) and a cost and benefit analysis of extending the shelf life of yo-
gurt with FreshQ (Westergaard-Kabelmann P. and Olsen M., 2016) are used to quantify
behavior patterns and environmental performance. The potential environmental impacts
of extending the shelf life of yogurt are presented along with the implications it can with-
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
1
==PAGE:10==
hold in relation to the waste management. Finally, newest research papers on economic
analysis of food waste are presented with the intention to predict possible outcomes of
reducing food waste and change of demand.
1.1
Yogurt Supply Chain in EU
A supply chain is related to the two distinct flows of material and information (based on
Ganeshan, 1999), through the organization of activities and processes, connecting the
supplier with the consumer. This form of organization is better known as supply chain
management, with its primary aim being to deliver superior consumer value at less cost
whilst satisfying the requirements of other stakeholders in the supply chain (Van der vorst,
2000).
Yogurt belongs traditionally to the cold chain supply chain, where time and temperature
are of the outmost importance. The actors of the supply chain start from the cow farm,
continue to suppliers of consumables, manufacturers, wholesale, retail, households and
finally the waste treatment of food loss and waste. Yogurt Loss and Waste is reported to be
occurring on all stages of the supply chain (Parfitt et al., 2011), signaling for a multi-actor
action (De Steur et al., 2015). Since the bioprotective bacteria is applied at the yogurt
production stage, no loss or waste can be prevented before and therefore the farmer has
been excluded from the assessment.
When managing the yogurt supply chain, in reality what is being managed is the total
shelf life of the product: The total shelf life of the yogurt is defined as the number of
days from production until the day before there is a food safety or quality compromise.
Usually, total shelf life is by 15-25% lower than the maximum technical shelf life due to
reasons of caution (Lee et al., 2015). Once the product is opened, its shelf life is reduced
because it is exposed to environmental contaminants and the rate of deterioration is no
longer controlled by the sealed packaging. Lastly, an important performance indicator in
the supply chain is the so-called Minimum Life On Receipt (MLOR), which is the minimum
days of the total shelf life of the yogurt required to be available at the retail bot and retail for
purchase. In the dairy market in general, it is desirable to have as big MLOR as possible.
Figure 1.1: Breakdown of the total shelf life of yogurt
1.2
Yogurt Properties-Application of FreshQ
There are a number of properties that differentiate yogurts from each other: rheology,
compactness, taste, flavor and freshness are some key elements that characterise yo-
gurts and can be important selling points. During the total shelf life of yogurt, it can be
2
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:11==
succumbed to post-acidification, which may contribute to unwanted development of mi-
croorganisms, increased reduction of viable counts, accumulation of lactic acid and de-
velopment of unwanted flavor. This is mainly due to uncontrollable growth of strains, low
pH values and refrigerated temperatures (Nielsen et al., 2018). FreshQ is a bio-protective
culture comprised by the bacterium of the species Lactobacillus fermentum, whereas the
bacteria itself is increases the pH of a fermented milk product. It is distributed by Chr.
Hansen and the main functionality of FreshQ is that it protects the fermented milk product
from spoilage by inhibiting post-acidification (Nielsen et al.,2018):
1) The final milk product enhanced with FreshQ bioculture can maintain the pH above 4
when stored for at least 14 days at 25◦C.
2) Incubation with FreshQ reduces the concentration of acetaldehyde produced by the
starter culture by at least 50% and secretes diacetyl in a range of 0 to 5 ppm. This would
mean less usage of flavor additives on certain yogurt types and a change in the product’s
formula.
These properties have been researched in an internal assessment at Chr. Hansen and re-
sulted in an estimation of 7 days extended shelf life in refrigerated conditions (Westergaard-
Kabelmann P. and Olsen M., 2016), where the final product’s freshness, chemical and
physical quality properties are maintained. The extension of shelf life allows the man-
ufacturers to reduce the weekly batch frequencies by increasing the size of the batch.
Due to the inhibition of post-acidification, in this assessment the open life of yogurt with
FreshQ is considered to be extended as well and is equal to the available life of the yogurt
at the household. According to professor of the dairy, meat and plant product technology
department in KU Richard Ipsen, the reduction of acetaldehyde and release of diacetyl is
small and for simplification it was decided that there will not be any changes in the prod-
uct’s formula before and after the application of FreshQ. A detail profile of the chemical
and elemental properties of the yogurt assessed are presented in appendix B.
1.3
The complexity of food waste
The waste hierarchy is the principle waste management framework that is adopted world-
wide: Its aim is to identify the options most likely to deliver the best overall environmental
performance (Papargyropoulou et al., 2014). As is illustrated in Figure 1.2, the best form
of action is food waste prevention. For the consumer this would mean to increase the in-
take from food destined to be thrown out over the intake of newly purchased food. Given
that the demand for food is defined by the end consumer, this form of action has raised
some questions regarding the economic implications. Some economists prefer to use
the waste hierarchy as a flexible guide in formulating waste strategies (Papargyropoulou
et al., 2014) while others investigate the complicated interaction of supply and demand
under the influence of prevention with mathematical models.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.2: The food hierarchy taken from Papargyropoulou et al., 2014
Even though the impact of reducing food waste has been the topic of numerous research
papers however, there is a lack of holistic view and unified methodology due to the inherent
complexity of food waste in the supply and demand sector: Income effects that account
for the marginal consumption induced when there is less food waste generated at the
households are indirect effects (Martinez-Sanchez et al., 2016) often overlooked. These
indirect effects are the result of food production prevention due to displacing the purchased
food with food waste that was destined to be thrown out. Indirect effects have a low
predictability and are known as the rebound effect.
Another indirect effect often overlooked is the land use changes (iLUC) induced by produc-
tion of food commodities, that involve upstream impacts associated with changes needed
in arable land (Martinez-Sanchez et al., 2016). In the case of yogurt, some of the food
losses during the processing are utilised as animal fodder and used instead of the produc-
tion of soy meal. A decrease in this waste stream would mean that more land should be
cultivated to cover the same demand for animal fodder. Similarly, the environmental sav-
ings from treating less waste are not the same and a significant reduction of food waste
may require a different waste treatment management approach.
1.4
Life Cycle Assessment
Because the food supply chain withholds numerous hotspots where FLW is being gener-
ated, a life cycle assessment facilitates a holistic analysis of the processes and activities
related to food products (Roy et al, 2009), from the production, processing and distribu-
tion, to use and disposal. For this reason, a life cycle assessment was conducted in order
to evaluate the potential environmental impacts of applying FreshQ in yogurts.
A life cycle assessment (LCA) is a tool that is used to access the potential environmental
impacts and resources used throughout a product’s life cycle (ISO 2006b). It is widely
used because of its ability to process complicated material and information flows and
produce results that are accessible and understandable to non-technical people who may
4
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:13==
hold key positions in decision making.
An LCA can focus on the entire life cycle of a product (cradle to grave) or just until it is
available for distribution at the processing factory (cradle to gate). The methodology and
approach used to realise an LCA can vary and is highly dependant on the accessibility of
data and/or the goal and scope of the assessment, but the framework remains the same
and attributes to the transparency and reliability of each assessment.
The goal and scope determines the purpose of the study, what product systems will be
investigated and how. A definition of a functional unit is set: a functional unit is a service
or a function which can be translated into a material flow, is valid within a certain time
frame and enables the comparison between two different systems.
The inventory analysis (LCI) relates to the data gathering and quantification of input/output
data in the system or subsystems. Once the data extracted from the inventory analysis
is modelled, the output is translated into potential environmental impacts for a series of
predefined impact categories. This stage is called life cycle impact assessment (LCIA)
and is followed by the interpretation phase that substantiates the initial conclusions drawn
from the LCIA.
Figure 1.3: The four important phases of a life cycle assessment
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Materials and Methods
As previously stated, during the course of the assessment, there was no published paper
found related to the potential environmental benefits of extending the shelf life of yogurts
throughout the entire supply chain. The assessment does not have any primary data as
it was difficult to require any information from the major actors of the yogurt supply chain.
Consequently, the assessment is based on a variety of resources, assumptions, methods
and materials in order to reach the goal and scope.
2.1
Goal and Scope
The objective of the project is to estimate the potential environmental impacts of imple-
menting bioprotective technology in Denmark, namely the food culture FreshQ from Chr.
Hansen into yogurt at the production stage and to identify possible hotspots. The assess-
ment is comparing scenarios before and after the application of FreshQ. This includes
creating a model where all actors of the supply chain are connected through their demand
and waste generation as well as quantifying the change in demand and waste generation
based on the prevention principle.
The actors involved in the study include the processing factory, debot, point of sale, con-
tinue to households and end with the treatment of waste. The program used to model
the supply chain and estimate the potential environmental benefits is EASETECH version
3.2.3. Two approaches exist in LCA: The attributional, where average market data is used
and mutli-outputs are handled with allocation, and consequential, where what is being as-
sessed is the affect, consequence of introducing a new technology, and mutli-outputs are
handled by system expansion. Considering the interaction of markets due to change
of waste volume and virgin materials, for the purposes of the thesis, the consequential
approach was deemed to be the most appropriate. The handling of multifunctional pro-
cesses will be with system expansion. Currently FreshQ is being applied to a number of
dairy products, with Chr. Hansen adjusting its bioprotective benefits to meet the increas-
ing demand for less implications in the initial chemical formula of the dairy and to attribute
a more desirable taste. For this reason the temporal scope is relatively short (10 years).
6
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: System’s boundaries for the Baseline (yogurt without FreshQ) and Scenario
(yogurt with FreshQ)
Figure 2.1 shows the boundaries of the system under investigation. The foreground sys-
tem comprise all the processes that are specific to the production, distribution,consumption
and disposal of yogurt. The background is modelled with average data and is not specific
to the system. It can be seen that the foreground of the Scenario has been extended
to include the activities taking place at Chr. Hansen in producing FreshQ. The activities
modelled in the foreground include all the outputs and activities of each actor (Dairy Plant,
Chr. Hansen, Depot, Point of sale and Household) and the waste management options
of their operations to support the supply chain of yogurt.
Functional Unit
The functional unit is set to be the consumption of 1 lt yogurt at an average Danish house-
hold. This functional unit will be used to compare two scenarios (Baseline A and Scenario
1) before and after the application of FreshQ on a yogurt product. The set of scenarios
serve as a comparative analysis and represent a one time buy of 1 lt of yogurt before and
after the application of FreshQ.
Method
The LCIA will be performed in a hierarchist perspective at midpoint and the chosen tool
to quantify the potential environmental effects is ILCD 2013 Prosuit Global NR w/o LT,
as this is the most recent methodology in the software. A sensitivity assessment will be
performed on the choice of methodology.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
7
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.1: Impact categories at midpoint level that will be investigated.
Impact Category
Units
Climate Change
kgCO2-eq
Ozone Depletion
kgCFC-11
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
CTUh
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
CTUh
Particulate Matter
kgPM 2.5-eq
Ionising Radiation
kgBQ U235
Photochemical Ozone Formation
kg NMVOC
Terrestrial acidification
mol H+ eq.
Eutrophication Terrestrial
mol N eq.
Eutrophication Freshwater
kg P eq.
Eutrophication Marine
kgN eq. 2.5-eq
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
CTUe eq. 2.5-eq
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
MJ
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
kg antimony -eq
Completeness Structure and Limitations
Based on the goal, scope and functional unit, the requirement for the assessment is the
collection of data for all the processes related to produce, distribute, store, purchase and
consume 1 unit of yogurt at an average household in Denmark. The average household
is a mix of single and family housing size and consumption patterns, and the results as
such can be interpreted for both types of housing in Denmark. The waste ratios, intake
and demand are calculated to satisfy the goal and scope of this study and are considered
constant with no seasonal variations.The geographical representativeness is high and can
be used for related activities and processes with similar supply, demand and consumption
patterns in DK.
The structure of the study is following as close as possible the recommended EU-practice
for LCA studies and is of an experimental nature, since no LCA methodology or approach
was available on how to quantify the environmental impacts of extending the shelf life
of any food product. No primary data was available and as such, the uncertainty of the
results is high. However the value of the study is in its experimental nature, in using
different models to find waste percentages when no data is available and to use the shelf
life of a food product as an independent variable. Finally, even though the model includes
all the processes related to the satisfaction of the functional unit, more attention was paid
on quantifying the upstream processes, since literature data indicate that these are the
most impactful processes.
2.2
Baseline and Scenarios
Compared to other countries in EU, the supply chain in terms of time delivery is much
shorter since the size of Denmark is small and allows a considerably fast distribution of
consumables and food products. Once the yogurt is purchased at the retail, it is assumed
8
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:17==
that it is opened the same day at the household and consumed within the time frame of 5
days in the consumption rate of yogurt in Denmark.
Figure 2.2: Baseline used to quantify the environmental benefits of using FreshQ in yo-
gurts in DK.
The shelf life properties of the baseline were based on the European Dairy Association’s
guidelines of performing environmental footprint on fermented milk products released on
2016 (Fig. 2.2.) The profile of the yogurt chosen for the assessment is a low-fat strawberry
flavored stirred yogurt and was chosen based on consumption patterns of consumers in
Denmark. A table of its component and chemical characteristics is given in appendix B.
The benefits of using FreshQ are different for each actor of the supply chain. The addition
of extra days in the MLOR allows manufacturers to limit the batch runs of their products
at least by one run per week. This in practice means that in order to meet the demand,
the volume of each batch increases, less yogurt loss is generated, and more storage
space and energy is needed since the product is refrigerated for more days and at a
greater volume. It is assumed that the extra storage of the product is taking place after
its distribution at the depot. Additionally, there is a potential economic benefit for the
yogurt products destined to be exported because they can reach longer destinations at a
greater volume for less runs, however such an environmental assessment would require
a detailed supply chain management plan as a baseline and will not be researched further
under this study. Waste reduction is the prime benefit for the other two actors. Retailers
have a higher chance of selling their products since the available days for the consumer to
purchase are extended. Similarly, consumers have more days to consume yogurt which
is sustained in the fridge for longer days.
Figure 2.3: Scenario 1, and 2 shelf life break down used to quantify the environmental
benefits of using FreshQ in yogurts in Dk.
The extended 7 days of shelf life after the application of FreshQ are allocated to the actors
based on the principle that any increases in product life achieved should be passed on in
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
9
==PAGE:18==
full where possible to the consumer in ways that don’t result in waste increasing elsewhere
in the supply chain (Lee et al., 2015). By following this principle, the household gets 1
day and retailers the rest of the days because as food supply chain actors, they are in a
unique position to minimise waste but also influence consumer attitudes and behaviors
(Kulikovskaja Witzel 2017).
2.3
Modelling Waste Treatment Options and Environmental
Savings
There are different waste treatment options for yogurt reported in literature: Landfilling,
thermal treatment, anaerobic digestion. Some resources (Berlin et al., 2006 and Garcia
et al.,2012) report the use food loss at the dairy as animal feed. The selection for the
thesis was based on best practices in DK and common practices of each actor.
Wastewater is being treated depending on the source of waste generation. For house-
holds, water from the sink has an organic load but is not heavily contaminated and is being
sent to Avedøre wastewater treatment plant. The treated water is released in the ocean.
The production of probiotic at Chr. Hansen generates industrial wastewater, a combina-
tion of wastewater and liquid waste. The wastewater has a low organic load while the
liquid waste, which is comprised of cleaning agents and other chemicals, was added to
the wastewater due to lack of data allowing it to be assessed separately. The wastewater
from Chr. Hansen is sent to POTW and the treated water is released in the surface water.
The operational and treatment properties of the wastewater treatment plants is set to the
default mode of Easetech.
Anaerobic digestion is being used to treat the yogurt waste from the dairy plant. By con-
trast to the other actors, yogurt waste from the dairy plant is not enclosed by the packaging
and can easily be sorted and isolated without any contamination. A percentage of the yo-
gurt waste is being used as liquid feed for pigs (Table 2.2). It is considered that the liquid
feed is substituting the production of soybean meal used for animals and an allocation
factor of 3:1 was used based on the protein content of each substance (Table A3 in ap-
pendix). This substitution is affected by the reduction of yogurt waste and represents an
indirect land use change (iLUC) caused from adding FreshQ to yogurts. The leakage is
set to be 10%, water content 93% and the use of land was set to be sandy loam soil. The
avoided rate of N due to the properties of sandy loam soil was set to 0.4.
The values in table 2.2 were used to estimate the portion of soy meal that is being diverted
due to the use of waste yogurt as protein feed in pig farms. The protein content of the
soy meal is three times higher than the protein content in yogurt. For this reason, the
replacement of 1 gr of yogurt liquid feed was set to be the equivalent to 0.33*1 gr of soy
meal fodder.
Table 2.2: . Protein and energy comparison between two types of animal feed (Source
USDA).
Animal Feed
Protein content
Energy (calories per 100 g)
Soy Meal
450 gr
336 gr
Yogurt (liquid feed)
150 gr
96 gr
The remaining actors, depot, point of sale and households sent the solid waste to be
treated at the WTE (Waste to Energy) facility. The outputs of the thermal treatment are
10
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:19==
electricity (22%) and heat (73%), each of which substitute marginal electricity consump-
tion from coal and heat from natural gas respectively, fly ash which is being utilized as
backfilling material in Germany salt mines and bottom ash which is used for Al recycling.
The depot and the point of sale are separating the secondary packaging (carton) and send
it to Sweden for recycling. The sorting efficiency of the depot and retailer is considered to
be 100% and properties of the carton recycling facility where set to default.
Finally, it is reported from numerous studies and datasets that a percentage of the waste
in dairy is sent to a sanitary landfill. The reason behind this is not clear and treating food
waste in DK is prohibited but nevertheless the process was covered as suggested by an
Ecoinvent dataset on production of yogurt from cow milk in CA-QC in order to cover fully
all the potential environmental costs and benefits.
2.4
Data and Inventory Setting
In Denmark it has been reported that there is an effort to minimise food waste through
different strategies (Kulikovskaja Witzel, 2017), mostly at the point of sale, and therefore
the food waste generated by retailers is considerably smaller than what is being reported
in other Nordic or EU countries. The highest generation of food waste is generated by
households (Stenmark et al., 2016) and therefore the majority of waste reduction studies
and plans have been focusing on improving best before labelling or analysing consump-
tion patterns. Data on food loss reduction at the level of dairy factory has been less
investigated due to lack of accessibility of data, nevertheless the small number of LCA
studies that focus on yogurt production conclude that the number one driver in terms of
environmental influence is the production and market of cow milk (Jungbluth et al. 2018,
Garcia et al., 2012). This suggests that any reduction of cow milk is going to have the
highest environmental impacts of all the processes.
Data and processes used to perform the life cycle assessment have the highest geograph-
ical and technological representativeness possible, and in the case of conflicting data or
processes, the worst-case scenario was preferred.
2.4.1
Yogurt Loss Waste Intake and Demand
The data used for the waste generation and reduction of yogurt waste is divided among the
four major actors (Dairy, Depot, Point of sale and household). Due to lack of accessibility
and no primary data, literature was used extensively. For any data gaps or simplifica-
tions, the worst-case scenario was applied and any assumptions are clearly stated. The
calculated yogurt loss and waste reduction is presented in table 2.2 and explained below
for each actor.
Table 2.3: Yogurt waste percentages before and after the application of FreshQ.
Model
Dairy Plant Loss
Depot Waste
Retail Waste
Household Waste
Baseline
5.35%
0.003%
1.66%
7.21%
Scenario
3.94%
0.004%
0.36%
1.9%
Dairy Plant
The yogurt loss percentages and estimation of loss reduction due to lower number of
weekly batch runs where estimated from a study by Berlin et al. 2008 and the changes of
a weekly schedule of a dairy plant in Sweden: The most important challenge dairy plants
face is the consumer demand for product variety. This leads to the production of frequent
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
11
==PAGE:20==
and lower and volumes per product. The extension of shelf life allows the manufacturers
to meet the demand while still reducing the weekly batch runs, which in turn generates
less waste. The final schedule has a reduced weekly frequency of batch runs by one
and increased batch sizes so the weekly production volume remain the same as before
the change.The yogurt loss is divided to loss destined to be used as animal feed, loss
because of laboratory testing or evaluated unsuitable for human consumption.
The dairy plant based on which the waste data is extracted has 7 bases of yogurt, each
of which has a different set of flavors. In general, it can be observed from the weekly
schedule that the amount and type of waste is highly dependent on the product sequence:
A change from one base to the other yields a higher amount of waste than switching
between different flavors of the same base.
Figure 2.4: Weekly schedule of model dairy plant before the application of FreshQ.
12
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: Weekly schedule of model dairy plant with one less batch run.
The amount of waste caused by the sequence is related to the changing technique: Clean-
ing causes most of the waste and involves water and cleaning agents. Water rinsing
causes less waste, while the pushing principle (PP) related to product change with the
same base has the least generation of waste. All waste illustrated in the tables are due
to mixed zones estimated by the length and diameter of the pipe (Berlin and Sonesson,
2006). The design of the dairy was for processing milk and not producing yogurt and for
this reason the plant may not be of the highest technological representation. Neverthe-
less, even though the absolute values of waste may not be representative, the difference
of waste between the two schedules (25.75% reduction) remains accurate and applicable
to the waste change modern dairy plants would experience. Compared to the weekly pro-
duction, 5.35% of the produced yogurt is turned into waste while after the change, 3.97%
of the produced yogurt is turned into waste.
Depot and Point of sale
Once the product has matured and passed the laboratory tests, it is transported by a refrig-
erated freight to the depot, which is the storage facilities for the retailers and is responsible
for the distribution across the whole country of DK.
In the present assessment, businesses with the highest accessibility and probability from
which a household would purchase yogurt were considered, namely supermarkets and
discount stores. Together, 2949 supermarkets and discount stores (Kulikovskaja and
Aschemann-Witzel, 2016) generate 82000 tons of food waste per year out of which 1.66%
was estimated to be yogurt waste. This represents the 28.47% of the annual food waste
generated by businesses in DK but has the highest number of avoidable food waste of all
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
13
==PAGE:22==
sectors and consequently, the biggest opportunity to mimimise yogurt food waste through
shelf life extension. Additionally, a low figure of 3945 kg of yogurt is being donated an-
nually by all supermarkets and discount stores (FødevareBanken, 2019. Personal Com-
munication). Even though donations are an effective way to battle food waste in DK, it
is still considered a loss from the retailer’s side and was therefore not considered as a
waste stream utilisation but was added to the total yogurt waste generated by the retail
industry. The annual yogurt waste generated by each supermarket or discount store has
been calculated to be 462,82 kg.
All yogurt waste generated at the point of sale was assumed to be due to passing the
expiry date and was retrieved from the study of Petersen et al. in 2016 on food waste
from selected types of the retail sector in DK. Due to lack of data, the waste percentage of
the depot was set to be small, having in mind that its operational activities involve multiple
stakeholders and that there is a higher chance to sell the products by default. For the
baseline, the arbritary percentage of 0.03% of yogurt waste was attributed to activities
related to the depot and storage management while 1.66% of the yogurt was thrown out
by the retail. The waste reduction due to the extension of shelf life was estimated by using
an exponential probability distribution with equations taken from Thomas Westergaard-
Kabelmann and Mette Dagliesh Olsen’s 2016 cost and benefit analysis for FreshQ (Eq
2.1).
P(t) = 1 −(1 −p)t
(2.1)
where P is the probability of the product being sold, t the number of days the yogurt is
available for retail at the supermarket or discount store and p being a constant probability,
derived by the design and waste reduction initiatives of a supermarket or discount store.
The effects of the constant probability p are expressed through the rate of waste w (in
percentage) with equation (2.2)
p = 1 −w(1/n)
(2.2)
where n is the fixed number of days the yogurt product is available for purchase.
From field work it was estimated that in DK the average number of days the yogurts are
available for purchase is 15 days. The difference of waste by extending the shelf life by
one day, would be the equal to the difference P(t+1)-P(t) (Kulikovskaja and Aschemann-
Witzel, 2016).
The waste generations have a high level of uncertainty (+-25%) due to inaccessibility of
data and the nature of the private sector’s operations. Communications with retail workers
limited the average shelf life days of yogurts while on retail to 2-3 days, where by the end
very little of the yogurt is left. This is verified by Kulikovskaja and Aschemann-Witzel
2016 report on food waste initiatives in Danish food retail, where little to none food waste
reduction initiatives are reported related to dairy products.
14
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.4: Results of the exponential probability distribution, illustrating the decrease in
waste with the extention of shelf life
Shelf Life Extension (Day)
Waste
1
1.26 %
2
0.96 %
3
0.66 %
4
0.56 %
5
0.36 %
Figure 2.6: Probability distribution of purchase used to calculate waste percentages
Table 2.5: Results of the exponential probability distribution, illustrating the decrease in
waste with the extention of shelf life
Shelf Life (Day)
Probability
15
0.983
16
0.987
17
0.990
18
0.993
19
0.994
20
0.996
Household
The yearly yogurt intake was taken from a 2015 study by DTU Food on Danish Consump-
tion Patterns (Pedersen et al., 2015). The yogurt waste at the Danish households was
retrieved from a study by Petersen et al. in 2014 about food waste at Danish households,
where a weighting factor of 0.6 and 0.4 was used for food waste generation for single
families and multi-families respectively. The number of persons occupying the average
household is set to 2.2 and the yogurt was assumed to be opened and starting to be con-
sumed on the same day of the purchase. The household is assumed to be generating
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
15
==PAGE:24==
yogurt waste, some of which is unavoidable due to packaging (1.9% of the total yogurt
contained), the packaging material, plastic bags from shopping and lastly wastewater from
cleaning plates and utensils used to consume the yogurt (Keoleian et al., 2004).
The extension of open shelf life is valid only in the case of FreshQ, since the applica-
tion of FreshQ reduces spoilage by postponing acidification in ambient conditions, hence
making open life and shelf life interchangeable terms for the purposes of this thesis. No
yogurt consumption or buying patterns were available in literature and a pattern was cre-
ated based on the open shelf life of the product. The product’s shelf life is set to be the
independent variable by creating blocks of consumption: Each block is set to last as long
as the product’s open shelf life at the household and equals to the activity of consuming
1 lt of yogurt. The annual demand sets the number of times the household goes to the
supermarket and buys yogurt over the course of a year and defines the number of blocks,
which in this case is 26.26. Finally, the annual intake was divided by the number of days
each block represents (independent variable) times the number of blocks present within a
year in order to calculate the daily intake. In this case the annual demand was divided by
26.26*5= 131.3 days of consuming yogurt per year. The same methodology was applied
to calculate the daily waste of yogurt.
Table 2.6: Daily intake and waste of yogurt used for the assessment. The annual demand
was used as a reference point to create a series of consumption blocks over the course
of 1 year, each lasting 5 days. For calculations see appendix B.
Daily (gr)
Annual (kg)
Intake
185.6
24.37
Waste
18.39
1.89
Demand
204
26.26
2.4.2
Reference flows and modelling sequence
Since the assessment is not focusing on a specific actor and each actor is allocated dif-
ferent external processes and waste generation, a subsystem boundary was defined for
each actor. The subsystems are tied with each other via a reference flow as it is defined
by the functional units and is affected by the amount of yogurt waste allocated to each
actor (Table 2.5), with one unit being a packed product of 1 lt yogurt (1 lt=1040gr yogurt).
Table 2.7: Reference flows for each actor according to baseline/scenario.
Model
Dairy (i)
Depot (ii)
Point of sale (iii)
Household (iv)
Baseline A
1.075 units
1.017 units
1.017 units
1 unit
Scenario 1, 2
1.045 units
1.004 units
1.003 units
1 unit
The reference flows have been calculated based on the annual demand and waste gen-
eration of yogurt of each actor, imitating a reverse cascade structure. The waste percent-
ages allocated to each actor are used to retrieve the equivalent surplus needed to satisfy
the functional unit. The calculated reference flow for the model starts from Dairy (i), moves
to the Depot (ii) Point of sale (iii) and ends at the Household (iv). For Chr. Hansen the
reference flow is calculated based on the amount of milk used for the production of yogurt
16
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:25==
at the dairy farm for scenario 1. It can be observed that on extending the shelf life day at
the depot, the waste percentage increases as the depot shares the load of storing longer
days. This is because due to lack of any data, the waste percentages of yogurt were set
to be proportional with the number of days each product is on storage.
Concentrated frozen products contain usually 109 -1010 active cells per gr and a concen-
trated frozen culture with a cell count of 1011 per gr added at 1 kg per 1000 liters of milk will
give an initial count of 107 per g (Early, R., 1998), which is the minimum count required for
FreshQ (Nielsen et al., 2018). This analogy was used to calculate the amount of FreshQ
used for the reference flow (Table 2.8).
Table 2.8: Reference flows for FreshQ production according to scenario.
Model
Cow Milk (lt)
Reference flow for FreshQ (kg)
Scenario 1,2
1.01
1.01E-04
The following sequence of figures illustrate the modelled sequence according to the pre-
defined reference flow. Easetech is a model specified in waste mangement LCA and each
stakeholder starts with a waste generation module, product of all the activites modelled:
Upstream processes include all the processes from cradle to gate, storage, distribution
to the next stakeholder and related emissions. The rest of the modules are either waste
transportation or specified waste treatments assigned for each stakeholder and waste
material with highlighted environmental savings.
Figure 2.7: Modelling structure for Dairy plant with legend of illustrations.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.8: Modelling structure for Depot and Point of sale.
Figure 2.9: Modelling structure for Household and FreshQ.
Finally, for scenario 2, the amount of waste missing from the waste treatment facilities
due to the reduction of yogurt waste is being replaced by imported food waste from other
countries that was destined to be landfilled. The chemical composition of the imported
food waste is different than that of yogurt and can potentially be more environmentally
beneficial than treating yogurt. Scenario 2 incorporates two different waste treatment
strategies for the imported food waste, an anaerobic digestor treatment (a) and a thermal
treatment (b).
18
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.10: Modelling structure for the household of Scenario 2.
Table 2.9: List of environmental savings according to waste treatment modelled.
Waste Management
Environmental Saving
Animal feed
Soybean meal (for animals) displacement.
Thermal Treatment
Marginal electricity from coal substitution.
Thermal Treatment
Heat from natural gas substitution.
Thermal Treatment
Backfilling for salt mines.
Thermal Treatment
Al recycling.
Anaerobic Digestion
Marginal electricity from coal substitution.
Anaerobic Digestion
Artificial fertilisers substitution.
Carton Recycling
Carton production avoidance.
Importing food waste
Credits from avoided landfilling.
2.5
Pedigree matrix
The construction of a pedigree matrix is used to facilitate the reliability and transparency
of the LCA study. Table 2.10 shows the important processes and activities used to make
the LCA model scored according to their completness (C), reliability (R), and technological
(T), geographical (G) and temporal (t) representativeness and their scores (s)
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.11: Pedigree matrix for the study.
Overall there was an attempt to have the highest possible completeness and the choice
of the datasets used to make the model prioritised a high geographical and technological
representativeness.
20
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:29==
3
LCI
This chapter is divided in two parts where the inventory used for two main actors, Dairy
plant and Chr. Hansen’s production line is broken down. The other part presents the rest
of the actors of the supply chain inventory.
3.1
Dairy Plant
In practice, there are two ways to carry out an LCA on diary operation: The first is by
considering the sum of processes taking place at the dairy as a black box and assess
further the total outputs and inputs. The second way is more detailed since it takes into
account all the outflows and inflows of each process and is used primary for a hot spot
analysis. In order to get more detailed information about which part of the yogurt pro-
duction is more impactful, a combination of black box-hot spot analysis approach was
used. The processes taking place at the dairy were divided into processing electricity,
heat, consumables, packaging and storage.
Dairy factories face a number of challenges compared with the production of other food
products: The multipurpose and multiproduct plants produce products with a relatively low
shelf life (23 days) and have several changes of flavors in the same equipment within the
same day (Berlin et al., 2008). Furthermore, the operation of a diary is characterized by a
combination of continuous and batch mode operation. The multi-product batch reactor(s)
used to perform the fermentation, a common process for all the stirred yogurts, provide
some operational flexibility in utilizing resources (Stefanis et al., 1996), however its oper-
ational and hygienic characteristics are highly dependent on the variety and quantity of
fermented milk products produced. Moreover, studies have shown (Stefanis et al., 1996
Berlin et al., 2008) that product sequencing and batch scheduling can have a significant
environmental impact. The processes taking place at the dairy plant for stirred yogurt are
depicted in figure 3.1. Based on the reference flow it has been assessed that the reduc-
tion of yogurt production due to the extension of shelf life for the functional unit to be 30.39
gr.
The dairy factory represents a multi-output process, where different products are being
produced. To determine the outputs, the inventory of the dairy factory for this LCA is
following the ecoinvent’s consequential process of production of yogurt from cow milk, CA
QC: The outputs are stirred yogurt (main product), cream, unripped cheese and animal
feed from yogurt loss.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.1: Production line of stirred yogurt.
22
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2: Inventory for modelling the activities of dairy for baseline
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.3: Inventory for modelling the activities of dairy for baseline.
24
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:33==
3.2
FreshQ
An LCA on the production of concentrates of Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus
CFL1 (Pénicaud et al., 2018), a lactic acid bacterium, was used to extract inventory data
for the modelling of the production of FreshQ. Its production share many similarities with
the production of the LAB strain used for FreshQ and involves the following processes:
media preparation, fermentation, concentration, lyophilisation, stabilization, storage, and
transport between producers as illustrated in the process flow chart (figure 3.5). In the
industry, there are two ways to store the bacteria: One is frozen and another is freeze
dried, with the packaging and storage temperature being different for each options. No
information was given related the processes and it was assumed that the final product
is stabilised by freezing it and storing the product for 3 days at the storage facilities of
Chr. Hansen at -20◦c before it is transported with a cooling freight lorry to the dairy plant.
Refrigerant leakage during the fermentation process was calculated by assuming that the
entire operation lasts maximum 1 day. It was assumed that once delivered to the diary,
the bacteria was used directly at the fermented milk without any prior storage or additional
treatment.
Figure 3.4: Process flow diagram used to model the production of FreshQ
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.5: Inventory used to model the activiites of Chr. Hansen in producing FreshQ
26
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Inventory for Depot, Point of sale and Households
All data used to model Depot, Point of sale and Households were extracted from the Euro-
pean dairy association’s published guidance on environmental footprint of dairy products,
released for public in 2016 (Bengoa et al., 2016), unless stated otherwise. The allocation
was based on volume of product.
Refrigerants and energy consumption for Depot, Point of sale and Households in
DK
The energy and gas used to model the activities of Depot, Point of sale and Household
are secondary, as suggested by Bengoa et al. for the environmental carbon footprint of
dairy products in EU. Even though a report on the annual purchases of refrigerants in DK
(Sørensen et al., 2018) show that retail and commerce use HFC-404A as a refrigerator,
due to modelling restrictions, it was decided to model the refrigeration system based on
R-134a, which is mainly used for medium temperatures. It is reported that the majority of
domestic refrigerators operate with R-134a as a refrigerant (Sørensen et al., 2018). The
calculation of the refrigerant emissions from the activities of the household was performed
by dividing the annual emission of refrigerant attributed to domestic refrigerators (5.4 ton)
by the total number of households occupied by the average household (2.622.727,27
households). The final number attributed to 1 lt of yogurt was calculated by assuming
that the average capacity of domestic refrigerators is 280 lt (Weide et al., 1996).
Table 3.1: Energy and consumption of refrigerants at depot and point of sale (POS) used
for baseline.
Parameter
Value
Electricity Consumption Depot
2.69E-03 kWh
Natural gas Depot
4.21E-03 MJ
Refrigerant gas (leaks) Depot
8.48E-07 kg R-131a
Electricity consumption POS
2.88E-02 kWh
Refrigerant gas (leaks) POS
3.64E-07 kg R-134a
Table 3.2: Energy and consumption of refrigerants at household used for baseline.
Parameter
Value
Storage duration
5 days
Tap water
4.322 kg
Electricity consumption
5.54E-02 kWh
Refrigerant leaks
1.01E-09 R-134a
Packaging
A percentage of 2% has been added to all the processes extracted from literature related
to packaging to represent the unavoidable fraction.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.3: Primary packaging materials for 1000 ml yogurt packaging. Together, they
consist of 1 unit of product.
Material
Amount (g)
LPB
22.15
Aluminium Foil
0.2
LPDE
5.85
HDPE
1.38
The material fraction of liquid packaging board is based on the consistency of 75% carton,
20% LDPE and 5% aluminium (source: Papcel company).
Table 3.4: Secondary and tertiary packaging materials for 1000 ml yogurt packaging.
Material
Amount (g)
Carton Boxes
24.96 g
Separators (as carton)
1.66 g
LPDE for wrapping
1.56 g
Pallet
6.24 units
Table 3.5: Primary packaging materials for 1 kg FreshQ packaging (Pénicaud et al., 2018).
Material
Amount (g)
Alluminum foil
5.7
All aluminium material is modelled as sheet rolling, aluminium, RER for the 3.6 ecoinvent
database.
Distribution
Table 3.6: Processes and Distances used for Distribution of material.
Parameter
Process
Dairy plant-Depot
Refrigerated truck, 16-32t, EURO4, 150 km GLO
Depot to Point of sale
Refrigerated truck, 7.5-16t, EURO4, 50 km GLO
Point of sale to household
transport, passenger car, EURO 5,4.5 km RER
Chr. Hansen to Dairy (FreshQ)
Refrigerated truck, 7.5-16t, EURO4, 50 km GLO
The modelling of the transportation from point of sale to the household was taken from
Bengoa et al. where the transportation is allocated to be travelled 65% by car, allocation
per item considering 20 items purchased.
28
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:37==
4
LCIA
4.1
Characterised and Normalised results
The characterised results of the comparative life cycle assessment for before and after
the application of FreshQ are presented at table 4.1. Scenario 1, where FreshQ has been
applied performs better at 11 out 14 impact categories: Human Toxicity with and without
cancer effects and Ecotoxicity of Freshwater are the impact categories where Baseline A,
yogurt without the addition of FreshQ performs better.
A similar pattern can be observed for scenarios 2a and 2b compared with baseline a.
For scenarios 2a and 2b, the thermal treatment (2b) is outperforming the treatment with
anaerobic digestion (2a) in all areas but human toxicity, cancer effects. Compared with
scenario 1, scenario 2b performs better in 4 impact categories, namely climate change,
freshwater eutrophication, depletion of abiotic resources fossil and elements, with ionising
radiation being the only impact category where scenario 2b performs worse than scenario
1.
To support a comparison between the different impact categories, the scores of the impact
categories are related to a common scale and expressed through a normalization factor
with the common units of person equivalent (PE).
Table 4.1: Characterised results for Baseline A and Scenario 1 according to impact cate-
gory at midpoint level.
Impact Category
Baseline A
Scenario 1
Units
Climate Change
7.08
6.78
kgCO2-eq
Ozone Depletion
1.32E-06
1.26E-06
kgCFC-11
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-5.22E.07
-4.99E-07
CTUh
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-3.82E-04
-3.65E-04
CTUh
Particulate Matter
4.35E-03
4.15E-03
kgPM 2.5-eq
Ionising Radiation
1.14E-01
1.10E-01
kgBQ U235
Photochemical Ozone Formation
2.02E-02
1.93E-02
kg NMVOC
Terrestrial acidification
8.19E-02
7.83E-02
mol H+ eq.
Eutrophication Terrestrial
0.34
0.33
mol N eq.
Eutrophication Freshwater
1.44E-03
1.37E-03
kg P eq.
Eutrophication Marine
2.51E-02
2.40E-02
kgN eq. 2.5-eq
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-2.24E+02
-2.15E+04
CTUe eq. 2.5-eq
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
69
65.89
MJ
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
5.49E-07
5.22E-07
kg antimony -eq
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.2: Characterised results for Scenario 2a and Scenario 2b according to impact
category at midpoint level.
Impact Category
Scenario 2a
Scenario 2b
Units
Climate Change
6.78
6.78
kgCO2-eq
Ozone Depletion
1.26E-06
1.26E-06
kgCFC-11
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-5.00E-07
-4.99E-07
CTUh
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-3.65E-04
-3.70E-04
CTUh
Particulate Matter
4.15E-03
4.15E-03
kgPM 2.5-eq
Ionising Radiation
1.10E-01
1.10E-01
kgBQ U235
Photochemical Ozone Formation
1.93E-02
1.93E-02
kg NMVOC
Terrestrial acidification
7.84E-02
7.83E-02
mol H+ eq.
Eutrophication Terrestrial
0.33
0.33
mol N eq.
Eutrophication Freshwater
1.37E-03
1.37E-03
kg P eq.
Eutrophication Marine
2.41E-02
2.40E-02
kgN eq. 2.5-eq
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-2.15E+02
-2.15E+02
CTUe eq. 2.5-eq
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
65.86
65.78
MJ
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
5.61E-07
5.20E-07
kg antimony -eq
Table 4.3: Normalised results for Baseline A and Scenario 1 according to impact category
at midpoint level.
Impact Category
Baseline A
Scenario 1
Units
Climate Change
8.75E-04
8.38E-04
PE
Ozone Depletion
3.18E-05
3.04E-05
PE
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-9.63E-03
-9.21E-03
PE
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-0.35
-0.33
PE
Particulate Matter
1.58E-03
1.50E-03
PE
Ionising Radiation
8.60E-05
8.28E-05
PE
Photochemical Ozone Formation
3.56E-04
3.40E-04
PE
Terrestrial acidification
1.65E-03
1.58E-03
PE
Eutrophication Terrestrial
2.97E-03
2.84E-03
PE
Eutrophication Freshwater
2.32E-03
2.22E-03
PE
Eutrophication Marine
2.67E-03
2.56E-03
PE
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-0.34
-0.32
PE
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
1.11E-03
1.06E-03
PE
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
1.60E-05
1.52E-05
PE
30
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:39==
Table 4.4: Normalised results for Scenario 2a and 2b according to impact category at
midpoint level.
Impact Category
Scenario 2a
Scenario 2b
Units
Climate Change
8.37E-04
8.37E-04
PE
Ozone Depletion
3.04E-05
3.04E-05
PE
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-9.22E-03
-9.21E-03
PE
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-0.33
-0.33
PE
Particulate Matter
1.50E-03
1.50E-03
PE
Ionising Radiation
8.28E-05
8.28E-05
PE
Photochemical Ozone Formation
3.41E-04
3.41E-04
PE
Terrestrial acidification
1.58E-03
1.58E-03
PE
Eutrophication Terrestrial
2.84E-03
2.84E-03
PE
Eutrophication Freshwater
2.21E-03
2.22E-03
PE
Eutrophication Marine
2.57E-03
2.56E-03
PE
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-0.32
-0.32
PE
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
1.06E-03
1.05E-03
PE
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
1.64E-05
1.51E-05
PE
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Life Cycle Interpretation
5.1
Contribution Analysis
Actors Contribution Analysis
A contribution analysis was performed on absolute values and is presented in figure 4.1
in detail (note scale): The activities of the dairy are dominant in all impact categories,
with values ranging from 96.4% for depletion of abiotic resources (elements) up to 99.9%
for human toxicity, non cancer effects. The activities taking place in the household are
the second most impactful with the highest contribution being for depletion of abiotic re-
sources, abiotic with 3.4%. Last, the sum of Depot and Point of sale (Retail in graph) make
very little contribution to the overall result with the highest being similarly with House-
hold, depletion of abiotic resources, elements with 0.15%. No significant change is being
observed in Scenario 1 with the addition of Chr. Hansen’s activities: The contribution
remains relatively the same with the operations taking place at the dairy still being dom-
inant for all tested impact categories. The highest contribution for Chr. Hansen is at the
category of Freshwater eutrophication with 1.2E-03%.
Figure 5.1: Baseline actor’s contribution.
32
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.2: Baseline actor’s contribution in smaller scale
Figure 5.3: Scenario 1 actor’s contribution in smaller scale
The most dominant processes for the modelled system can be viewed at tables 4.5 for
Baseline and Scenario 1. It can be observed once again that there is very little difference
between Baseline and Scenario: The most dominant processes for all impact categories
are those related to the consumables used for the production of yogurt and the packaging
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
33
==PAGE:42==
of the final product. The production of cow milk has the highest share of the consumables
in almost impact categories, with some being completely dominant. The only exception is
in Ozone depletion where the production of liquid packaging board has the highest con-
tribution and that of the depletion of abiotic resources, elements, where the production
of cow milk still has the highest score, but the contribution is more evenly contributed
among the rest of the consumables and packaging materials. Scenario 2 a and b incor-
porate only the import and treatment of food waste and does not have any differences in
terms of process contribution compared with Scenario 1.
Substance and Process Contribution Analysis
From the results some important conclusions can be drawn: The comparative analysis
between the Baseline and Scenario 1 shows that all impact categories benefit from using
the bio-protective bacteria FreshQ in yogurt in DK, except from those related to toxicol-
ogy/ecotoxicity. These three impact categories, namely Human toxic health, cancer and
non cancer effects and Ecotoxicity of freshwater are modelled with UseTox, which charac-
terises human and exotoxicological impacts of chemicals and models the intake of chem-
icals. All three impact categories are heavily influenced by the production of cow milk and
are inverse correlated with the increase market of cow milk, which signals an environmen-
tal avoidance. The table with the highest substance contribution (table 4.6) shows that the
prevention of the release of chromium in the agricultural sub compartment is the cause of
the environmental benefit related to human toxicity non-cancer effects, while the process
contributing mostly to environmental benefits related to human toxicity cancer effects and
freshwater ecotoxicity can be traced back to the avoidance of zinc release. Zinc oxide is
widely used in pig farms as a veterinary medicine and from 2022 its use will be banned in
DK (Ministry of Environment and Food in DK, 2020). The avoidance of zinc release to the
different compartments is connected to the activities at the dairy farm where milk is being
produced and cows slaughtered. In particular, the allocation factor of slaughtered cows,
which can vary from farm to farm, plays a major role in displacing meat from pig farms.
34
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:43==
Table 5.1: Process contribution analysis results for Baseline A and Scenario 1.
Impact Category
Baseline A
Scenario 1
Climate Change
Milk 81.42%
Milk 81.46%
Ozone Depletion
LPB 49.00%
LPB 48.90%
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
Milk -84.51%
Milk -84.45%
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
Milk -90.74%
Milk -90.73%
Particulate Matter
Milk 65.93%
Milk 66.40%
Ionising Radiation
Milk 80.20%
Milk 80.71%
Photochemical Ozone Formation
Milk 72.77%
Milk 72.90%
Terrestrial acidification
Milk 83.89%
Milk 84.01%
Eutrophication Terrestrial
Milk 84.70%
Milk 84.77%
Eutrophication Freshwater
Milk 76.16%
Milk 76.23%
Eutrophication Marine
Milk 82.36%
Milk 82.37%
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
Milk -89.59%
Milk -89.58
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
Milk 66.55%
Milk 68.60%
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
Milk 35.05%
Milk 35.64%
Table 5.2: Substance with the highest contribution for Scenario 1.
Impact Category
Scenario 1
Compartment
Climate Change
Carbon Dioxide 26.32%
air
Ozone Depletion
Methane Halon 45.05%
urban air
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
Chromium 71.74%
soil
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
zink 97.12%
soil
Particulate Matter
ammonia 30.29%
air non urban
Ionising Radiation
Carbon 14 97.72%
non urban air
Photochemical Ozone Formation
Nitrigen Oxide 42.21%
air non urban
Terrestrial acidification
Ammonia 72.68%
air non urban
Eutrophication Terrestrial
Ammonia 75.01%
air non urban
Eutrophication Freshwater
Phosphate 39.15%
surface water
Eutrophication Marine
Nitrate 57.69%
groundwater
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
Zink 68.33%
soil
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
Oil crude 34.23%
from ground
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
Aluminium 48.31%
from ground
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 5.3: Substance with the highest contribution for Baseline.
Impact Category
Baseline
Compartment
Climate Change
Carbon Dioxide 26.39%
air
Ozone Depletion
Methane Halon 45.11%
urban air
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
Chromium 71.79%
soil
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
zink 97.12%
soil
Particulate Matter
ammonia 30.19%
air non urban
Ionising Radiation
Carbon 14 97.68%
non urban air
Photochemical Ozone Formation
Nitrigen Oxide 42.60%
air non urban
Terrestrial acidification
Ammonia 72.76%
air non urban
Eutrophication Terrestrial
Ammonia 72.85%
air non urban
Eutrophication Freshwater
Phosphate 39.10%
surface water
Eutrophication Marine
Nitrate 57.64%
groundwater
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
Zink 68.35%
soil
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
Oil crude 34.05%
from ground
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
Aluminium 48.03%
from ground
Methane halon is an ozone depletion substance that is connected to the production of
liquid packaging board, a material that is used for food packaging. Liquid packaging as a
parameter has been found to have the highest sensitivity in ozone depletion and hence
any avoidance in the production of extra packaging is going to benefit significantly the
specific impact category. Lastly the substance that contributes mostly for the depletion of
abiotic resources, is aluminium even though the most dominant process has been found to
be the production of cow milk. In reality, in the particular impact category the consumables
module, under which the process of cow milk belongs, does show that alluminium is the
substance with the highest contribution, however when switched to per process the top
one is shown to be the production of cow milk. It is not entirely clear why there is this
deviation between process and substance in this impact category unless the production
of cow milk is related somehow to the extraction of aluminium.
5.2
Sensitivity Analysis
The sensitivity analysis is divided into two sections. One is testing each important param-
eter’s sensitivity to the structure of the model through a perturbation analysis, by varying
the input value, and the other is called a scenario analysis. The latter tests the model
robustness and is associated with changes in discrete characteristics of the model. Both
analyses are an essential part of an LCA because they determine the parameters that are
the most decisive for the output results (Wei et al., 2014). The choice of the parameter’s
to be analysed was based on the distribution analysis and the uncertainty of assumptions
made to model the activities of each actor.
Perturbation Analysis
The perturbation analysis was carried out by varying each important parameter by -+10%.
Easetech enables an OAT sensitivity analysis on a number of parameters simultaneously
36
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:45==
by dividing the difference of the score for each impact category with the difference of the
value of the parameter.
SR =
∆result
initialresult
∆parameter
initialparameter
(5.1)
NSRi =
SRi
max(|SRi|)
(5.2)
The equation 4.1 is equal to the sensitivity ratio (SR) which is unique for every parameter
and characterises their significance to each impact category of each model. The nor-
malised sensitivity ratio is an normalised score where the parameters are scored from 0
to 1 and can be compared with each other. A total of 49 parameters were tested to cover
the assumptions made and uncertainties due to lack of primary data. The parameter with
the highest sensitivity across all the impact categories for the baseline is the production
of cow milk. Table 4.7 shows the parameters with the highest sensitivity ratio with the
number of impact categories they are dominating.
Table 5.4: Baseline, Number of impact categories with NSR> 0.3 NSR>0.5 and NSR max
Parameter
NSR>0.3
NSR>0.5
NSR max
Cow milk
14
12
12
LPB
2
1
1
Heat (Diary)
1
1
1
Factory (Diary)
1
0
0
Strawberry
1
0
0
It can be noted that all the parameters in the table have at least a 0.3 normalised sen-
sitivity ratio and that they are part of the activities taking place at the Dairy Plant. Some
parameters represent the same processes but with significant different values as they are
attributed to different actors, such as Heat in Dairy and Heat in Depot.
A similar pattern is being observed when the perturbation analysis is performed on Sce-
nario 1 and 2.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 5.5: Parameters Tested in the sensitivity analysis. Priority was given to upstream
processes
Parameter
Parameter
Parameter
Ammonia Emission
Ammonia Liquid Dairy
Cardboard Dairy
Cheese Input
Chemical Factory
Cream Input
Heat (Diary)
El Dairy Main
Evaporation Milk
Heat Dairy
HPD
LPB
LPD
Methane22 Emission
Pallet
Raw Milk Input
Refrigerant134a Dairy
Sanitary Land
Sheet Rolling Dairy
Soybean Sub
Spray Drying
Strawberry Input
Tapwater Dairy Input
Wastewater Dairy
Waterdeionised Dairy
WTE Dairy el
El Depot
El House
El Retail
Heat Depot
HFC 134a Depot
HFC 134a House
HFC 134a Retail
Tap House
Trans Dairy to Depot
Trans Depot to Retail
Trans House
Al FQ
Deion FQ
El FQ
Heat FQ
NitricAcid FQ
SodiumCloride FQ
SodiumHydroxide FQ
Tap FQ
Whey FQ
Yeast FQ
HCFC 140 FQ
Landfill
Table 5.6: Scenario 1, Number of impact categories with NSR> 0.3 NSR>0.5 and NSR
max
Parameter
NSR>0.3
NSR>0.5
NSR max
Cow milk
14
12
12
LPB
2
1
1
Heat (Diary)
1
1
1
Factory (Diary)
1
0
0
Strawberry
1
0
0
38
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.7: Scenario 2, Number of impact categories with NSR> 0.3 NSR>0.5 and NSR
max
Parameter
NSR>0.3
NSR>0.5
NSR max
Cow milk
14
12
12
LPB
2
1
1
Heat (Diary)
1
1
1
Factory (Diary)
1
0
0
Strawberry
1
0
0
Scenario Analysis
The purpose of the scenario analysis is to check if the choice of processes have an impact
on the output results and is an indicator of the model’s robustness. As such, the processes
that have the highest contribution or highest uncertainty will be prioritised.
The breakdown of the dairy activities will be replaced by another similar process in Ecoin-
vent database, the production of yogurt for RoW. The purpose for making the breakdown
was to increase the geographic and technological representativeness. The particular sce-
nario analysis will be useful to determine to what degree the choice of higher representa-
tiveness and detail of data change the results.
The choice of method to quantify the potential environmental impacts is going to be tested
by replacing the method with ReCiPe v 1.11 w/o LT world. The process of heat district
or industrial with natural gas at boiler condensing modulating > 100 kW (Europe without
Switzerland) is replaced with heat central or small scale from natural gas boiler condens-
ing modulating less that 100 kW (Europe without Switzerland) from Ecoinvent 3.6, and
medium and low voltage electricity used for DK is replaced with an electricity mix for 1kv-
60kv (medium voltage) or less than 1kv (low voltage) 2008, EU-27 from EASETECH.
It can be observed from the results at figure 4.3 that a different choice of method or boiler
process does not make a significant change for climate change. The change of electricity
from consequential DK to grid mix EU signals a significant change to the finale scores.
The reason behind this can be twofold: This is related first of all to the change of geo-
graphical representativeness from DK to EU, where practices in the energy department
vary significantly. A second very important thing to point out is that modelling impactful
processes such as electricity consumption as consequential can underestimate the en-
vironmental impacts of electricity usages by using an electricity mix of renewables, not
yet applicable is the time scope is very small. Since the temporal scope of the study is
relatively small and not extending over 40 or 50 years, there is a possibility that the en-
vironmental impact score is higher that what was modelled. There was another scenario
tested where the electricity is represented by only wind technology and was found to be
closer to the results of the model, making the case of overestimating the contribution of
renewables even stronger.
Switching between the processes for yogurt production from the modelled breakdown
to the process found in Ecoinvent has the most significant change of all the scenarios
tested. This is reasonable since the process from Ecoinvent has different geographical
and possibly technological representativeness than what was modelled for this assess-
ment, including electricity.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.4: Scenario 1: scenario analysis for Climate Change as a tested impact category.
Y for yogurt, E for electricity, B for boiler, M for methodology. Capital T stands for the tested
process.
Table 5.8: Scenario 1: Characterised results for the choice of different electricity in DK.
Impact Category
E
TE
Units
Climate Change
6.78
7.31
kgCO2-eq
Ozone Depletion
1.26E-06
1.29E-06
kgCFC-11
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-4.99E.07
-5.03E-07
CTUh
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-3.70E-04
-3.70E-04
CTUh
Particulate Matter
4.15E-03
4.19E-03
kgPM 2.5-eq
Ionising Radiation
1.10E-01
2.19E-01
kgBq U235
Photochemical Ozone Formation
1.93E-02
1.98E-02
kg NMVOC
Terrestrial acidification
7.82E-02
8.02E-02
mol H+ eq.
Eutrophication Terrestrial
0.33
0.33
mol N eq.
Eutrophication Freshwater
1.37E-03
1.36E-03
kg P eq.
Eutrophication Marine
2.40E-02
2.41E-02
kgN eq. 2.5-eq
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-2.15E+02
-2.15E+02
CTUe eq. 2.5-eq
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
65.89
73.87
MJ
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
5.22E-07
5.32E-05
kg antimony -eq
40
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.9: Scenario 1: Characterised results for the choice of different yogurt module.
Impact Category
Y
TY
Units
Climate Change
6.78
7.54
kgCO2-eq
Ozone Depletion
1.26E-06
1.31E-06
kgCFC-11
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-4.99E.07
-5.02E-07
CTUh
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-3.70E-04
-3.70E-04
CTUh
Particulate Matter
4.15E-03
4.53E-03
kgPM 2.5-eq
Ionising Radiation
1.10E-01
1.10E-01
kgBQ U235
Photochemical Ozone Formation
1.93E-02
2.02E-02
kg NMVOC
Terrestrial acidification
7.82E-02
8.27E-02
mol H+ eq.
Eutrophication Terrestrial
0.33
0.34
mol N eq.
Eutrophication Freshwater
1.37E-03
1.38E-03
kg P eq.
Eutrophication Marine
2.40E-02
2.46E-02
kgN eq. 2.5-eq
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-2.15E+02
-2.15E+02
CTUe eq. 2.5-eq
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
65.89
79.60
MJ
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
5.22E-07
4.76E-07
kg antimony -eq
Table 5.10: Scenario 1: Characterised results for the choice of different boiler.
Impact Category
B
TB
Units
Climate Change
6.78
6.80
kgCO2-eq
Ozone Depletion
1.26E-06
1.25E-06
kgCFC-11
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
-4.99E.07
-4.99E-07
CTUh
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
-3.70E-04
-3.70E-04
CTUh
Particulate Matter
4.15E-03
4.16E-03
kgPM 2.5-eq
Ionising Radiation
1.10E-01
1.11E-01
kgBQ U235
Photochemical Ozone Formation
1.93E-02
1.93E-02
kg NMVOC
Terrestrial acidification
7.82E-02
7.83E-02
mol H+ eq.
Eutrophication Terrestrial
0.33
0.33
mol N eq.
Eutrophication Freshwater
1.37E-03
1.37E-03
kg P eq.
Eutrophication Marine
2.40E-02
2.40E-02
kgN eq. 2.5-eq
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
-2.15E+02
-2.15E+02
CTUe eq. 2.5-eq
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
65.89
65.78
MJ
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
5.22E-07
5.23E-07
kg antimony -eq
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
41
==PAGE:50==
6
Discussion
From the LCIA it can be concluded that the waste reduction at the level of Diary plant,
Depot Point of sale is enough to outbalance all the operational activitites of Chr Hansen
in producing FreshQ and all the operational burdens of extending the shelf life, that have
been identified through this study: The added electricity, heat and emissions related to the
cooling facilities are outbalanced by the benefits of avoiding yogurt production by reducing
yogurt loss and waste.
Each actor’s contribution to all impact categories remained relatively the same for Base-
line and Scenario 1. The activities of the dairy plant are indeed dominant over the other
actors and are followed by the activities taking place at the household. The smallest con-
tribution is shared by point of sale, depot and Chr. Hansen. For the shake of simplicity,
point of sale and depot are going to be summed together from now on (Retail), since
both of them express the same activities in the supply chain and both have small impact
scores.
Figure 6.1: Retail and Chr. Hansen comparative contribution.
On both Baseline A and Scenario 1, the characterised impact score for Retail and Chr.
Hansen on climate change is negative. For Chr. Hansen it has been found that the
processes of yeast fodder and deionised water give a negative feedback, something, that
contributes significantly to the negative overall score. If the negative feedback is turned
into positive, an overall positive score for climate change is obtained. An investigation
in the Ecoinvent database showed that all the processes of deionising water and fodder
yeast have a negative climate change feedback and the reasons behind this must be
further researched in the database itself. Retail on both Baseline and Scenario 1 have a
negative score in climate change as well.
Having in mind that Depot and Point of sale are the two actors with the highest data
uncertainties, it could signify that the operations of these two actors to support the supply
chain of yogurt are underestimated. It is worthwhile to note that both Depot and Retail
are in the position of receiving alot of waste due to tetriadry packaging that can easily
42
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:51==
be segregated and recycled. Consequently, these two actors would benefit greatly from
a good waste management system. It is highly likely that the negative score on climate
change can be attributed two the combination of the aforementioned.
Waste loss
Having waste generation as a reference flow for the functional unit is a common practice
for all solid waste management LCA’s. However it should be pointed out that it is unusual
to track back the waste flow across all the stakeholders in the supply chain and convert
it into a unit of product. The uncertainty in quantifying product flow is significant, even
more so when it is done the reverse way, when little to none data is available due to lack
of waste monitoring.
Despite the inherited uncertainties, quantifying the waste reduction due to prevention
measures can be beneficial for the future of any waste management. Table 5.2 shows
the total waste reduction according to type. Within the boundaries of the system it has
been assessed that the losses from treating less waste are insignificant compared to the
environmental benefits of prevention. However, when assessing scenarios on a smaller
system such as waste management, any loss of waste is a lost environmental benefit.
Table 6.1: Waste difference between Baseline and Scenario 1 according to material
Material
Difference in gr
Yogurt to AD or Incineration
91.86
Feed
10.72
Carton
3.32E-04
LDPE
5.75
LPB
0.22
Aluminium
1.5E.02
HDPE
0.14
As a tertiary packaging material, the amount of cardboard is not expected to change
significantly from one scenario to the other. This is reasonable given that the tertiary
packaging waste reduction is only affected by the waste reduction between the depot
and point of sale, which is small. As a consequence, the cardboard recycling treatment
facilities are not expected to experience a significant change of volume due to extending
the shelf life.
Overall, from the LCIA it can be concluded that the reduction of waste attributed to pack-
aging does not have a significant impact. However, it is important to stress that the con-
clusions would be different if the focus was on a smaller system than the one studied. For
example, table 5.3 shows the reduction in environmental benefits if the focus would be
only on iLUC effects.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 6.2: Environmental benefit reduction from iLUC module
Impact Category
Reduction
Climate Change
46.75%
Ozone Depletion
47.12%
Human Toxicity, cancer effects
46.98%
Human Toxicity, non cancer effects
47.52%
Particulate Matter
47.04%
Ionising Radiation
46.92%
Photochemical Ozone Formation
46.80%
Terrestrial acidification
46.52%
Eutrophication Terrestrial
46.65%
Eutrophication Freshwater
47.13%
Eutrophication Marine
47.08%
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
47.09%
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
41.93%
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
104%
Scenario 2 incorporates the import and treatment of food waste from another country in
the EU that was destined to be landfilled equal to the yogurt waste reduction. The travel
distance is 1500 km and the imported fraction was set to be 50-50 animal products and
vegetables. The LCIA showed that overall there are some environmental benefits from
importing waste compared to scenario 1 and that these benefits can compensate for the
iLUC effects. It should be noted however that similarly with the other waste treatments,
the environmental benefits of avoided landfiling does not have a major impact once scaled
to the system under study.
The efficiency of each treatment (AD or Incineration) can vary depending on the LHV of
the waste fraction imported, composition and the settings of each waste treatment facility
and is outside of the scope of the study but should be assessed in another study with
smaller system boundaries more comprehensively.
44
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:53==
7
Uncertainties and Limitations
It has been mentioned that during the course of the study, no LCA papers where found
on quantifying shelf life extension. Moreover, it has been noted that the usual practice
of quantifying food waste when no data is available to be through supply and intake data
since waste values are more difficult to find. As it can be concluded in this study, intake
data without taking into consideration the opened shelf life of food is not realistic and can
lead to wrong values: According to the average yogurt intake studies used for this LCA,
the daily intake of low fat yogurt is 30.34 gr per person while, by taking into account the
shelf life and opened shelf life days, intake goes up to 84.36gr. Consequently, any waste
calculations based purely on demand and intake daily values can overestimate the food
waste generation.
On the other hand, there could be the argument that consumer’s habits vary and are
highly uncertain. Apart from the inherited uncertainties due to lack of primary or secondary
data, the study relies on some assumptions that are uncertain themselves. Such is the
typical case when there is total lack of data or when an LCA has to rely on a self-defined
consumption model, as it was in this case, to calculate demand from waste streams.
The data with the highest uncertainties is related to the waste generation in retail (depot
and point of sale), where another mathematical model was used to predict waste reduc-
tion, from data found in literature that itself had a standard deviation of +-25%. Natu-
rally, due to the inherited difficulties of obtaining data with high confidence, an uncertainty
analysis using the same parameteres as the pertrubation analysis would not produce any
applicable results since the parameters with the highest uncertainty are derived from pre-
calculations, witholding their own assumptions. Such an analysis would be difficult and
out of the scope of this assessment.
A consequential LCA quantifies the change in environmental exchanges that occur as
a consequence of a decision of change in demand, or by adding or removing a specific
human activity (Weidema, 2003). Another important thing to point out is that this is the best
fitting approach for the purposes of this study but it is not without flaws as it was shown
in the scenario analysis. Modelling impactful processes such as electricity consumption
as consequential can underestimate the environmental impacts of electricity usages by
using a an electricity mix of renewables. Moreover, the choice of having processes with
high representativeness means that the results of the model are not applicable elsewhere
than in DK. In particular the scenario analysis demonstrated that the choice of modelling
the production of yogurt is dentrimental and that getting primary data from a dairy are
essential for the accurancy of results.
Finally, the operations of Chr. Hansen and Retail have a negative characteristic impact
score on climate change. This is an indication that there is an underestimation of the
processes taking place in these two actors but more detailed and accurate data is not
expected to change significantly the final result since their share of contribution is very
small.
7.1
Future perspectives
FWL is receiving increasingly attention and many studies have been conducted on the
socioeconomic aspect as well as environmental aspect of reducing food waste fractions.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
45
==PAGE:54==
This assessment, like many others, validates the prevention principle since it can be visi-
ble by the results that that the majority of environment impacts across the studied impact
categories are attributed to upstream processes and actors further up the chain than the
end consumer. Hence, the maximum environmental benefit is obtained if the yogurt food
waste reduction is followed by a yogurt production prevention.
The yogurt waste generated as we move further down the supply chain towards the house-
hold may be more damaging to the environment since more activities and processes can
be attributed to it. Therefore a waste prevention or limitation that is taking place as high as
possible the supply chain will be more environmentally beneficial. A solution that affects
all the stakeholders of any food chain in reducing waste such as FreshQ is more attractive
than a solution that is limited to only one actor.
Based on the prevention principle, a prediction of the reference flow was made in order
to assess the environmental benefits of the same yogurt on a longer time scale. The
methodology to calculate the reduction in demand is the same that was described in a
previous chapter, to calculate the reference flow for scenario 1 and can be better illustrated
in the figure below.
Figure 7.1: Model for yogurt consumption and demand pattern.
The extra slot of day allocated in the house (in green) is used to consume the portion
of the of the yogurt that would be otherwise wasted. The annual demand of yogurt was
then used to calculate how many units of yogurt would be prevented from being produced
due to drop of demand. However, this excess of savings from not buying yogurt could
as well be spend on other products or activities that may resolve into a less favorable
environmental condition than before the extension of shelf life. This is known as the
rebound effect, where expected gains from an action or new technology result in a worse
off situation due to behavioral changes.
On the other hand, in a 2019 published paper by Drabik et al. on economics of consumer’s
food waste, it is concluded that provided there are no costs of deposition, consumption
always increases and that in achieving SGG 12.3, there is not a direct linear relationship
between reducing consumer food waste and a reduction in retail sales. Moreover, in a
comparative statistics exercise, Drabik et al. showed that consumer purchases decline
with a cut in the rate of consumer waste only with price inelastic demands (Drabik et al.,
2019), something that yogurt is not.
A potential increase in demand is also visible in figure 6.1, where the consumer is not
satisfied by the halved daily consumption of the sixth day and purchases more. Such
possible scenarios make the prediction of the environmental benefits of extending shelf
life difficult and cannot be fully attributed to the introduction of a new technology such as
FreshQ in the market. The choice of one demand over the other is difficult and is prone
to the same uncertainties, as every study that deals with behavior patterns.
46
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:55==
Even though it was planned for this study to use a scenario on an annual consumption
scale, technical restrictions and time limitations made the realisation not feasible and the
assessment was reduced to a one time buy scenario. An annual scale would be more
representative as it takes into consideration a change of demand due to the prevention
principle or other economic related factors, but can be the topic of a future project where
primary data is available.
7.2
Conclusions
An assessment was conducted on the potential environmental benefits of introducing a
new biotechnology in the market of yogurts. The reduction of post-acidification effects
result in an extention of the shelf life by 7 days. The conclusion of the assessment are:
1)The allocation of days for each actor used to make the assessment was 1 day at the
distribution center, 5 days at the point of sale and 1 extra day at the household. This was
found to be the allocation with the maximum reduction of FWL.
2) All actors have a waste reduction apart from the depot as it has the burden of storing
the product for extra days.
3)The environmental impacts of producing FreshQ are minimal compared with the activi-
ties of other actors of the supply chain. This can be translated as that the environmental
burden of adding FreshQ as an extra ingredient in yogurt is negligible, compared with the
benefits gained by extending the shelf life.
4)Based on the LCIA, the dairy and production of cow milk has the highest contribution
across all impact categories apart from . Moreover, the sensitivity analysis showed that
cow milk is the most sensitive parameter in 12 out of the total 14 impact categories, making
any reduction in cow milk environmentally beneficial for the system analysed.
5)The impacts of treating less waste are insignificant compared to the benefits of the
system as a whole and can be further enhanced by importing food waste destined to be
landfilled from another EU country. If the waste treatment options should be assessed in
more detail, it is recommended to use a much smaller system than the one assessed.
It is important to note that the assessment is based on data retrieved from literature, and
are therefore characterised with high uncertainty. Despite the lack of primary data, the
main conclusions are in line with similar LCA’s on dairy products, validating the method-
ology used. Future assessments on the same topic should focus on getting primary data
from dairy plants for more accurate results.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:57==
A
Bibliography
Bengoa X., Dubois C., Humbert S., 2016. Product environmental carbon footprint cate-
gory rules for diary products. Draft for public consultation July 28, 2016. Project made for
the European Dairy Association (EDA)
Berlin, J. and Sonesson, U., 2008. Minimising environmental impact by sequencing cul-
tured dairy products: two case studies. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(4), pp.483-498.
De Steur, H., Wesana, J., Dora, M.K., Pearce, D. and Gellynck, X., 2016. Applying value
stream mapping to reduce food losses and wastes in supply chains: A systematic review.
Waste management, 58, pp.359-368.
Delre, A., ten Hoeve, M. and Scheutz, C., 2019. Site-specific carbon footprints of Scan-
dinavian wastewater treatment plants, using the life cycle assessment approach. Journal
of cleaner production, 211, pp.1001-1014.
Drabik, D., de Gorter, H. and Reynolds, C., 2019. A Conceptual and Empirical Frame-
work to Analyse the Economics of Consumer Food Waste. Resources, Conservation and
Recycling.
Early, R. ed., 1998. Technology of dairy products. Springer Science Business Media.
Ganeshan, R., 1999. Managing supply chain inventories: A multiple retailer, one ware-
house, multiple supplier model. International Journal of Production Economics, 59(1-3),
pp.341-354.
González-García, S., Castanheira, É.G., Dias, A.C. and Arroja, L., 2013. Environmental
life cycle assessment of a dairy product: the yoghurt. The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment, 18(4), pp.796-811.
Gustavson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., van Otterdijk, R. and Meybeck, A., 2011.
Global food losses and food waste. Swedish Institute for Food and Biotechnology (SIK),
Gothenburg, Sweden, pp.1-37.
Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., Van Otterdijk, R. and Meybeck, A., 2011.
Global food losses and food waste (pp. 1-38). Rome: FAO.
Jungbluth, N., Keller, R. and Meili, C., 2018. Life cycle assessment of a detailed dairy
processing model and recommendations for the allocation to single products. The Inter-
national Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 23(9), pp.1806-1813.
Kandemir C., Quested T., Reynolds J. C., Fisher K., Devine R., 2019. Household food
waste simulation model: Investigation of interventions for staple food items waste.
Keoleian, G.A., Phipps, A.W., Dritz, T. and Brachfeld, D., 2004. Life cycle environmental
performance and improvement of a yogurt product delivery system. Packaging Technol-
ogy and Science: An International Journal, 17(2), pp.85-103.
Kulikovskaja, V. and Aschemann-Witzel, J., 2017. Food waste avoidance actions in food
retailing: The case of Denmark. Journal of international food agribusiness marketing,
29(4), pp.328-345.
Laulund, S., 1994. Commercial aspects of formulation, production and marketing of pro-
biotic products. In Human Health (pp. 159-173). Springer, London.
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
49
==PAGE:58==
Martinez-Sanchez, V., Tonini, D., Møller, F. and Astrup, T.F., 2016. Life-cycle costing
of food waste management in Denmark: importance of indirect effects. Environmental
science technology, 50(8), pp.4513-4523.
Martinez-Sanchez, V., Tonini, D., Møller, F. and Astrup, T.F., 2016. Life-cycle costing
of food waste management in Denmark: importance of indirect effects. Environmental
science technology, 50(8), pp.4513-4523.
Nielsen et al., 2018. Lactobacillus Fermentum Bacteria Inhibiting Post-Acidification. United
States Patent Application Publication Pub. No. US 2018/0235248 A1.
Nieto, P.P., Hidalgo, D., Irusta, R. and Kraut, D., 2012. Biochemical methane potential
(BMP) of agro-food wastes from the Cider Region (Spain). Water Science and Technol-
ogy, 66(9), pp.1842-1848.
Papargyropoulou, E., Lozano, R., Steinberger, J.K., Wright, N. and bin Ujang, Z., 2014.
The food waste hierarchy as a framework for the management of food surplus and food
waste. Journal of Cleaner Production, 76, pp.106-115.
Parfitt, J., Barthel, M., Macnaughton, S. (2010). Food waste within food supply chains:
quantification and potential for change to 2050. Philosophical transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 365(1554), 3065–3081.
Pedersen Agnes N., Christensen T., Matthiessen J., Knudsen V., Rosenlund-Sørensen
M., Biltoft-Jensen A., Hinsch H., Ygil K., Kørup K., Saxholt E., Trolle E., Søndergaard A.,
Fagt S., 2015 Danskernes kostvaner 2011-2013. DTU-Food
Pénicaud, C., Monclus, V., Perret, B., Passot, S. and Fonseca, F., 2018.
Life cycle
assessment of the production of stabilized lactic acid bacteria for the environmentally-
friendly preservation of living cells. Journal of Cleaner Production, 184, pp.847-858.
Peter Lee (Oakdene Hollins), Steve Osborn (Leatherhead Food Research), Peter White-
head (WRAP), 2015. Extending product shelf life. Project code: MAR103-101. Accessed
on 15/12/2019.
URL: https://www.wrap.org.uk/sites/files/wrap/Product%20Life%20Report%20Final0.pdf
Petersen C., Kaysen O., Sharangka M., Econet AS, Tønning K., Teknologisk Institut,
Hansen T., Ziba, 2014, Kortlægning af dagrenovation i Danmark, ISBN nr. 978-87-93178-
52-6
Petersen C., Kaysen O., Sharangka M., Econet AS, Tønning K., Teknologisk Institut,
Hansen T., Ziba, 2014, Kortlægning af madaffald i servicesektoren ISBN nr. 978-87-
93178-75-5
Principato, L., 2018. Food Waste at Consumer Level: A Comprehensive Literature Re-
view. Springer.
Roy, P., Nei, D., Orikasa, T., Xu, Q., Okadome, H., Nakamura, N. and Shiina, T., 2009. A
review of life cycle assessment (LCA) on some food products. Journal of food engineering,
90(1), pp.1-10.
Sivaramakrishna, D., Sreekanth, D., Himabindu, V. and Anjaneyulu, Y., 2009. Biologi-
cal hydrogen production from probiotic wastewater as substrate by selectively enriched
anaerobic mixed microflora. Renewable energy, 34(3), pp.937-940.
Sørensen M., Nielsen O., Hjelgaard K., Poulsen T., Valbum K., Nilsen N.,2018. Danish
consumption and emission of F-Gases. Environmental Project no. 1979. Stefanis, S.K.,
50
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:59==
Livingston, A.G. and Pistikopoulos, E.N., 1997. Environmental impact considerations in
the optimal design and scheduling of batch processes. Computers chemical engineering,
21(10), pp.1073-1094.
Stenmarck, Â., Jensen, C., Quested, T., Moates, G., Buksti, M., Cseh, B., Juul, S., Parry,
A., Politano, A., Redlingshofer, B. and Scherhaufer, S., 2016. Estimates of European food
waste levels. IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute.
Thomas Westergaard-Kabelmann and Mette Dagliesh Olsen, 2016. Reducing food waste
and losses in the fresh dairy supply chain. A Chr. Hansen Impact Study. van der Vorst,
J.G., 2000. Effective food supply chains: generating, modelling and evaluating supply
chain scenarios.
Viktorija Kulikovskaja Jessica Aschemann-Witzel (2017) Food Waste Avoidance Actions
in Food Retailing: The Case of Denmark, Journal of International Food Agribusiness
Marketing, 29:4, 328-345
Waide, P. A., B. Lebot and Sietze van der Sluiss. “Analysis of the Efficiency of European
Domestic Refrigerators 1 Year After the Energy Label.” (1996).
Wesana, J., Gellynck, X., Dora, M.K., Pearce, D. and De Steur, H., 2019. Measuring food
losses in the supply chain through value stream mapping: a case study in the dairy sector.
In Saving Food (pp. 249-277). Academic Press.
Zampori L., Saouter E., Scau E., Cristobal J., Castellani V., Sala S., 2016. Guide for
interpreting life cycle assessment result. JRC technical reports. doi:10.2788/171315
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
51
==PAGE:60==
B
Appendix
B.1
Waste Characterisation
Product (in gr)
per 1 kg yogurt
Cheese
0.4024
Gelatin
51.67
Cow Milk
966
Cream
25
Maize Starch
18
Strawberry
36
Wheat Grain
1.71
Whey
7.4
Sugar
61
Table B.1: Yogurt profile used to model.
Composition
Yogurt
pH
3.9
TS (g(kg)
209
VS (g/kg)
200.3
COD (g/kg)
342.8
C%
42.7
H%
6.6
N%
2.2
P%
0.2
S%
0.2
Ash%
4.2
O%
43.9
CH4 (g/VS)
392
Table B.2: Waste characterisation for yogurt. Chemical and Elemental composition re-
trieved from Nieto et al., 2012
Material Fraction
Chr. Hansen Wastewater
Domestic Wastewater
Water %
99.78
99.98%
TS %
0.22
0.027
VS %
99.98
42.7
P(TS%)
na
0.08
N(TS%)
na
0.56
COD(TS%)
4.38
6.65
Reference
Sivaramakrishna et al. 2009
Delre et al. 2019
Table B.3: Wastewater chemical characterisations used for modelling
B.2
Waste Fractions Modelled
Baseline
52
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:61==
Figure B.1: Baseline Dairy Waste Generation
Figure B.2: Baseline Depot Waste Generation
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure B.3: Baseline Retail Waste Generation
Figure B.4: Baseline Household Waste Generation
Scenario 1
54
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:63==
Figure B.5: Scenario 1 Dairy Waste Generation
Figure B.6: Scenario Chr Hansen Waste Generation
Figure B.7: Scenario Depot Waste Generation
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure B.8: Scenario Retail Waste Generation
Figure B.9: Scenario Household Waste Generation
56
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
==PAGE:65==
Bioprotection Solutions in Supply Chain
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.env.dtu.dk
