==PAGE:1==
Learning and Planning with
Monte-Carlo Tree Search and
Convolutional Neural Networks
Kåre Joakim Jørgensen, s144852
Fredrik Zander Kloster, s172189
Technical University of Denmark
Supervised by Thomas Bolander
February 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
AlphaGo Zero (AGZ) is a state-of-the-art Artiﬁcial Intelligence solution for play-
ing zero-sum two-player board games.
This thesis seeks to modify the self-
learning methodology used by AGZ and adapt it to a planning domain.
The solution consists of two main components: Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS),
and an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN). MCTS generates a search tree and
guides the search — attempting to strike a balance between exploring and ex-
ploiting, while the ANN predicts which states are the most promising. Results
are generated by MCTS, which is used by the ANN for reinforcement learning,
and thereby progressively improve the predictions. Finally, In order to test and
train the network, a Procedural Level Generator (PLG) is introduced. The PLG
successfully combines conventional techniques with custom made algorithms to
provide a selection of diﬀerent levels.
The ﬁnal model manages to solve simple levels, but is outperformed by con-
ventional uninformed tree search algorithms like breadth-ﬁrst search.
In or-
der to perform eﬃciently, substantially more training would be beneﬁcial, and
MCTS requires the hindrance of an opponent. Furthermore, the state-space of
a planning domain allows for inﬁnite sequence of actions, which impedes the
eﬀectiveness of the algorithm. Additionally, both components struggles due to
sparse rewards in the planning domain, as this makes it diﬃcult to accurately
evaluate states. More computational power, training time and addressing these
problems, could potentially lead to a competitive solution.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the
requirements for acquiring an MSc degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The workload was carried out evenly between the two collaborators Kåre J.
Jørgensen and Fredrik Z. Kloster, with a 30 ECTS reward for both students.
Kongens Lyngby, 02-February-2020
Kåre Jørgensen and Fredrik Kloster
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Professor Thomas Bolander for awesome
and friendly guidance, even though we always ended up doing the exact opposite
of what we were advised. Additionally, the discussion regarding the topic outline
with Ph.D. student Andrea Dittadi was incredibly helpful.
We would like to acknowledge our wonderful families for the incredible sup-
port and continuous encouragement, for this thesis and throughout our time as
students. Special gratitude goes out to Aksel S. Jahren for late-night lectures,
Martin Kloster for the many discussions and Nils Kloster for proofreading. Last
but not least, we would like to give a heartfelt thanks to Cathrine Wraber and
Lydia E. M. Seba, for listening to incoherent rants, and supporting us in every
way imaginable.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
The Domain - Wizzy-domain
3
2.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
State Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Uninformed Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.4
A* Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
11
3.1
The algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
UCT Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
AlphaGo Zero policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Single-player MCTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
17
4.1
The Basic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Loss Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.2
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Hyperparameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Convolutional Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Residual neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
AlphaGo Zero design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Design of BetaCore
31
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Solving Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.2
Training Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
MCTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.1
Training Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Procedural Level Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.1
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4.2
Solvability veriﬁcation and benchmarks
. . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.3
Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Results and Discussion
49
6.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.1
BFS Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.2
Component Evaluations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.1.3
BetaCore results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.1
Evaluating MCTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2.2
Evaluating the Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2.3
Possibility of Heuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
59
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A Refactored framework
61
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, the research and interest in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has cre-
ated an economic boom. Corporate industries invest heavily in automated so-
lutions, stapling the "Artiﬁcial Intelligence" label on practically every possible
product. Everything from Smart-Homes to robot vacuum cleaners is considered
intelligent. Self-driving cars are often portrayed as science ﬁction, but they al-
ready exist and even outperform human drivers in some cases. Software AI is
developed to write music, recognize images, play popular games and much more.
DeepMind, a subsidiary of Alphabet, has developed the AI AlphaGo, a system
specialized in playing the board game Go. Due to the vast amount of possible
actions in Go, a common belief was that the game was far too complicated for
a computer to play eﬃciently. Nonetheless, AlphaGo beat the current grand
champion Lee Sedol in 2016 four to one1 and has since been improved further,
with the release of AlphaGo Zero (AGZ) [17].
AlphaGo Zero utilizes Deep Learning to train an Artiﬁcial Neural Network
(ANN or simply NN) how to play the game instead of a programmer designing
the solution. The system improves the trained model by using Reinforcement
Learning and thereby achieves superhuman performance. Furthermore, the sys-
tem builds on the search algorithm Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), which
is a domain-independent heuristic search algorithm, that attempts to guide the
1https://deepmind.com/alphago-korea
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
decisions made by AGZ. By combining the Deep Neural Network and MCTS,
the system performs signiﬁcantly better than when only using one or the other.
Another area of AI research is Automated planning, where the goal is to con-
struct some sequence of actions, leading from an initial state to some goal state.
Planning has many diﬀerent use-cases, for instance enabling autonomous robots
to plan on the ﬂy, either when doing something as simple as vacuuming or
something as complex as driving a car.
There exists both domain-dependent and generic planners. Domain-dependent
planners utilize knowledge about the domain, and hand-crafted heuristics to
eﬃciently ﬁnd an optimal solution. The solution quality can vary, based on how
well the heuristic is designed. Ordinarily, such heuristics are very susceptible to
changes in the domain, as a manual change of the heuristic is needed when the
domain changes. Generic planners, however, attempts to model the domain in
a formal language, such as STRIPS or PDDL. The planners can easily handle
changes in the domain but can be less eﬀective than their domain-dependent
counterparts.
The paper [20] proposed an MCTS algorithm for solving a real-life transporta-
tion planning problem and shows that the algorithm can be used to solve a
planning problem. The success of AlphaGo, as well as the prior work on MCTS
in planning domains, brought up the idea of combining MCTS and a deep neural
network in a planning domain. The chosen domain, henceforth called Wizzy-
domain, is a modiﬁed Sokoban domain, originating from the course 022852 at
DTU.
This thesis will focus on trying to reproduce the results of AlphaGo[17] in Wizzy-
domain. Firstly, the the domain we work with is introduced, as well as rules,
constraints and planning theory in chapter 2. Chapter 3 and 4 provide relevant
background theory of the two main components MCTS and ANNs, respectively.
With all the prerequisites covered, chapter 5 presents the design of our solu-
tion, henceforth called BetaCore, and discusses the design choices, followed by
test results and benchmarks.
The performance of BetaCore is compared to
conventional planning algorithms regarding solution quality, computation time
and resource usage, thereby highlighting the advantages and the drawbacks of
the AGZ methodology in this domain. We discuss problematic factors in the
Conclusion and propose potential improvements for any possible future work.
2https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/02285
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
The Domain -
Wizzy-domain
The domain from the course 02285 Artificial Intelligence and Multi-Agent
Systems 1 was the working environment foundation for this project. The inspi-
ration for the problem domain originates in the potential utilization of auto-
mated mobile robots in hospitals to carry out mundane transportation tasks.
For instance, automating the transportation process of medical instruments and
equipment to ultimately streamline the task. An introduction to the infrastruc-
ture of the domain is given, followed by a formal description of the problem.
Additionally, necessary planning theory is introduced along with search strate-
gies implemented in the original domain.
2.1
Architecture
The domain originates from a DTU course and is designed accordingly. The
application is written in Java 12, managed and built by Apache Maven, and
is a distributed system with a client-server model. The client is available to
the students, which contains a basic framework for problem planning, while the
1https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/02285
==PAGE:14==
4
The Domain - Wizzy-domain
server validates whether a given plan is a valid solution for the given level. The
domain has been reworked and further developed to comply with our require-
ments (see appendix A). For all further references, Wizzy-domain is used as the
oﬃcial name for the modiﬁed domain.
A description of the problem and environment are presented in the following
section.
2.2
Problem Description
This section presents the abstract planning problem, which is brieﬂy mentioned
in the introduction. The environment is a fully observable grid world, consist-
ing of the following objects: Agents, Boxes, Goals and Walls. Agents carry out
actions which aﬀects the system, and they can execute a ﬁnite set of prede-
termined deterministic actions. An action table with diﬀerent corresponding
directions are available in table 2.1, describing each action and resulting eﬀect.
Simply put; agents are able to move around in the world and push/pull boxes
in one of the four directions. Each action costs exactly 1. A state is determined
by the location of both boxes and agents.
Agents are represented by a number, and boxes are represented by a letter. A
goal is a static cell in the grid world with a character or number. The goal is
to move the boxes such that all goals cells contains a compatible box/agent. A
box or agent is compatible with a goal if it has a corresponding letter/number.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Problem Description
5
Actions
Action
Argument(s)
Eﬀect
No Action
None
Nothing
Move
Direction d
Moves the agent 1 cell in
the direction d
Push
AgentDirection ad,
BoxDirection bd
Moves agent in ad direction,
and pushes box towards bd
Pull
AgentDirection ad,
BoxDirection bd
Moves agent in ad direction,
and pulls box to bd
Directions
Directions
Abbreviation
Relative Coordinate
North
N
(−1, 0)
East
E
(0, 1)
South
S
(1, 0)
West
W
(0, −1)
Table 2.1: Actions and Directions
Using the action deﬁnitions, an action could for instance be Push(N,E), which
moves the agent 1 cell north, and pushes the box 1 cell eastbound. In addition,
every agent and box are assigned a color. Agents are exclusively permitted to
interact with similar colored boxes.
A grid world scenario in the domain is represented by a level ﬁle (.lvl). Such
ﬁles contain all the information to run an episode; the world size, wall place-
ments, boxes and agents (with colors), and the goals. Figure 2.1 displays an
example of a .lvl ﬁle, and the resulting level. In a raw .lvl ﬁle, agents are
represented by a unique integer in the range 0...9. The letters A...Z represent
boxes. There can exist multiple boxes with the same letter, while agents must
be unique. Each declaration stage is separated by #, where #initial and #goal
represents the initial state and goal state. The letters present in the goal state
converts to respective goal cells.
In order to solve the level in ﬁgure 2.1, agent 0 (the blue circle) has to move
box A (the blue square) to its goal, which is the yellow cell with corresponding
letter. After the box is correctly placed, the agent has to move back to the
original position. A possible correct action sequence for this level is:
Move(S), Move(S), Push(E,N), Push(N,E), Push(E,N), Move(W), Move(W),
Move(N).
==PAGE:16==
6
The Domain - Wizzy-domain
#colors
blue:0,A
#initial
+++++
+0+ +
+
+
+ A +
+++++
#goal
+++++
+0+A+
+
+
+
+
+++++
#end
Figure 2.1: A simple single agent level. Agent 0 have a goal to push box A to
it’s goal (represented by the yellow square)
2.3
Planning
A sequence of actions leading from the initial state to the goal state is required
to solve a level.
The sequence length deﬁnes the strength of the plan, but
when considering the optimal algorithm for a certain planning problem, the
calculation time and memory usage are important factors as well. The original
domain contains a few built-in classic generic planning algorithms, which our
solutions is benchmarked against. In this section, the relevant algorithms are
discussed, along with the general concept of state search which the respective
algorithms are based on.
2.3.1
State Analysis
The ﬁnite set of the state-space is deﬁned by the number of movable cells, boxes,
and agents. Let e be the sum of the agents and boxes, and n the available cells.
Levels can consist of more than one room, and the product of all the state-space
in every disconnected room gives us the total count. A room r is deﬁned as
a closed environment within the level. The general equation to calculate the
bounded size of the total state-space is:
r
Y
i=1
ni!
(ni −ei)!
(2.1)
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Planning
7
Figure 2.2: A level with 3 rooms. The 3rd room is empty, and is not accessible.
In the level pictured in ﬁgure 2.2, there are 3 rooms, each containing 6 cells. The
ﬁrst two rooms consist of 1 box and 1 agent each, while the last one is empty,
and can’t be accessed by any of the other agents. The formula gives us that the
ﬁrst two rooms have at most
6!
(6−2)! = 30 states2, while the last room only have
1 possible state. Hence, the total state-space is bounded to 30 ∗30 ∗1 = 900.
2.3.2
Expansion
A common representation of the state-space is by a search tree. The initial state
is set as the root node of the tree, and the respective children are generated by
expansion. Given an arbitrary state node, an expansion is completed when the
set of all legal moves are branching oﬀthe node. Expanding the whole tree at
once would be extremely ineﬃcient considering the cost and time. Instead, ex-
pansion is embedded as a part of the searching. As the searching and expanding
is proceeding, the current leaf nodes are mapped as the frontier. By checking if
generated leaf nodes have been previously explored, inﬁnite loops are avoided.
This is a trivial task, solved by traversing the tree upwards and checking if the
generated node has been seen before [14]. In ﬁgure 2.3, the simple level from
ﬁgure 2.1 is expanded twice. In the second expansion, a copy of the initial state
won’t be generated because the node is already visited.
2The box can never end up on the left side of the agent, so the number of states in this
scenario is a lot fewer than the estimate.
==PAGE:18==
8
The Domain - Wizzy-domain
Figure 2.3: A simple expansion.
2.3.3
Uninformed Search
The fundamental algorithms for tree searching are Breadth-First Search(BFS)
and Depth-First Search(BFS) (ﬁgure 2.4).
Both are classiﬁed as unin-
formed; meaning no additional information regarding the domain itself is known.
Expansion starts in the root node. BFS expands and searches breadth wise, be-
fore advancing in depth, while DFS searches in-depth and considers one complete
path at a time. If a goal state is found, the depth of the goal node corresponds
to the solution length. Hence DFS might ﬁnd a solution of arbitrary length
faster than BFS, but BFS always yields the optimal solution if a solution exists.
DFS’s frontier only needs to store the children to the root, and current descend-
ing expansion which is often achieved with a simple stack data structure. The
frontier memory in BFS potentially requires a larger portion of the memory, if
the state space is large.
(a) BFS
(b) DFS
Figure 2.4: BFS and DFS search strategy visualized.
DFS is space-eﬃcient but usually ﬁnds a goal state deeper down in the tree. BFS
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Planning
9
always ﬁnds a goal state in lowest possible depth, meaning the best solution is
always found, but generally uses more memory and time.
BetaCore is an uninformed search algorithm as well, and the upcoming bench-
marks are compared to BFS. The test levels are simple, which results in BFS
ﬁnding an optimal solution within a reasonable time period. Therefore, Be-
taCore is evaluated according to the BFS (optimal) solution, considering the
deviation and potential improvement in time and memory. The benchmarks are
presented in section 6.
2.3.4
A* Search
A* is an informed search algorithm, meaning it has domain speciﬁc knowledge.
The algorithm attempts to ﬁnd the shortest path from an initial state n0 to some
goal state g, by combining the cost of the current node with the estimated cost
of reaching the goal node. More formally, A* selects the path that minimizes
f(n) = g(n) + h(n). Here, n is the next node in the path, g(n) is the cost of the
path from n0 to n (for instance the length), and h(n) is a, often hand-crafted,
heuristic estimating the cost from n to g.
Due to the nature of heuristics, every heuristic is domain-dependent to some
degree. A simple example could be counting how many unachieved goals exists
in the current state (also called the goal-count heuristic), but the function can
be arbitrarily complicated. In fact, complexity is often needed, as simple heuris-
tics frequently fail even comparatively easy tasks. The goal-count heuristic for
instance, does not account for boxes having to be moved away from a goal, in
order to not block other boxes or agents, and would therefore not accurately
predict the cost of many states.
This algorithm is one of the implemented search algorithms in the 02885 domain,
and utilizes a simple all-pair-shortest-path heuristic. Due to fast running time
for simpler levels, A* is utilized to verify the correctness of our procedural level
generator. This is explained in section 5.4.
==PAGE:20==
10
The Domain - Wizzy-domain
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
In this chapter, the utilized search algorithm, Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS),
is presented and explained. Furthermore, improvements and modiﬁcations to
the traditional MCTS are outlined.
In [7] MCTS was introduced as a method for solving two-person zero-sum games
with perfect information, and was initially implemented in Crazy Stone, a Go-
playing program with a board size of 9 X 9. It attempts to model/simulate the
diﬀerent states of the state-space (in this case the game of Go), and calculate
the probability of winning from each given state. The algorithm constructs an
asymmetrical tree of states, attempting to balance exploration and exploitation.
3.1
The algorithm
MCTS is an anytime algorithm, meaning that it can be stopped at any time and
then return a valid solution. However, the simulation gets progressively more
precise the longer the algorithm runs. Generally, the runtime of the algorithm
is bound by memory usage, CPU time, or number of iterations.
==PAGE:22==
12
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
Figure 3.1: Outline of the MCTS algorithm [6]
Several policies, one for each step of the algorithm, deﬁnes the performance and
characteristics of the MCTS algorithm. Each policy serves a diﬀerent purpose
and can be customized to the domain in question. Examples of policies will be
presented. The algorithm itself consists of four repeating steps (ﬁgure 3.1), and
a ﬁnal selection of the next move:
1. Selection: The selection is run recursively, starting from the root and is
run until some leaf node (meaning a node with one or more moves that
have not been expanded) is reached.
The nodes at each timestep are
selected based on some policy that attempts to balance exploration and
exploitation. The selected node might also be terminal if such a node is
found (meaning the game has ended).
2. Expansion: The chosen leaf node is expanded according to some policy.
This is done by executing one or more valid actions from the selected node
and simulating the resulting child-node(s).
3. Simulation: The Score of the chosen leaf node is evaluated, according to
some policy. In traditional two-player games, a random rollout is often
used, where random actions are chosen, until a terminal state is reached.
Either 1 for a win or -1 for a loss is then returned as a score.
Other
policies for simulation, with or without domain-speciﬁc knowledge, can
also be used.
4. Backpropagation: The simulated score of the chosen node is backprop-
agated through the tree from the node to the root, based on some policy.
Oftentimes, each node contains its score, visit count (how many times the
node has been visited during the run of the algorithm), and the sum of
the score of its children.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 The algorithm
13
5. Play: When the algorithm is stopped, and the tree is returned, an action
is chosen from the root according to the policy. A simple play policy could
for instance be returning the most visited child node.
The algorithm is therefore deﬁned by the policies used during the search (the
selection, expansion, simulation and backpropagation policies), as well as the
play policy after the algorithm has ﬁnished running for a total of 5 diﬀerent
policies. This is illustrated in pseudo-code in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 MCTS
1: procedure MCTS(root)
2:
while computational limit not reached do
3:
do
4:
node ←SelectionPolicy(root)
5:
while node not leaf
6:
ExpansionPolicy(node)
7:
score ←SimulationPolicy(node)
8:
BackpropagationPolicy(node, score)
9:
end while
10:
return PlayPolicy(root)
11: end procedure
A beneﬁt of MCTS is that the search does not necessarily require any game-
speciﬁc knowledge (meaning it is uninformed, similarly to BFS and DFS). With
a perfect simulation of the state-space in question, and an appropriate selection
strategy, the search is able to converge on a good move (with some exceptions,
see [2]). Furthermore, the search scales well if given more time/resources, and
can be stopped at any time.
3.1.1
UCT Selection
Upper Conﬁdence bound 1 applied to Trees (UCT) [12], is a selection policy
that most implementations of MCTS use a variation of.
One of the more diﬃcult problems to solve in MCTS is exploration vs.
ex-
ploitation.
This means selecting nodes that both have a good reward while
simultaneously avoiding accidentally overlooking nodes with a low reward that
might lead to a better outcome eventually. These two criteria are contradic-
tory, and this problem is known as the exploration-exploitation dilemma [3].
==PAGE:24==
14
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
UCT was introduced as a solution to this problem by adapting the Upper Con-
ﬁdence Bound (UCB1) algorithm [3].
Originally applied to the multi-armed
bandit problem, this algorithm can be used to ﬁnd a solution for the exploration
vs. exploitation dilemma as the multi-armed bandit problem exempliﬁes the
dilemma.
The selection policy is deﬁned as selecting the node that maximizes the following
equation:
wi
ni
+ c
r
ln Ni
ni
(3.1)
Where wi is the total score after the i-th move, ni the total visit count after
the i-th move, Ni the visit count of the parent after the i-th move and c is the
exploration parameter. The ﬁrst term of the formula represents the exploitation,
and is high for nodes with high average win ratios. The second term represents
exploration, which is high for nodes with few simulations. Thus, the constant c
can be used to control the balance between exploration and exploitation.
3.1.2
AlphaGo Zero policies
In [17], MCTS is used in conjunction with reinforcement learning to master the
game of 19 X 19 Go. Each edge in the tree holds the following:
• N(s, a): The visit count
• W(s, a): The total value of the next states
• Q(s, a): The mean value of the next states
• P(s, a): The prior probability of selection action a
The policies used in MCTS is deﬁned as follows:
1. Selection: Recursively select nodes starting from the root that maximizes
Q(s, a) + U(s, a), until a leaf node is reached. U(s, a) is deﬁned as:
U(s, a) = cpuctP(s, a)
pP
b N(s, b)
1 + N(s, a)
(3.2)
Here, cpuct is a constant determining the level of exploration. If the con-
stant is low, exploration is favored, whereas if the constant is high, the
exploitation factor is favored.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 The algorithm
15
When comparing the selection Q(s, a) + U(s, a) to UCT selection, notice
how Q(s, a) corresponds to the ﬁrst term, cpuct corresponds to c, and the
last term is very similar to the last term of UCT. The main diﬀerence be-
tween the two equations are the addition of the probability term P(s, a),
added to account for the probability vector simulated by the neural net-
work.
2. Expansion: The neural network is queried for the probability vector p
as well as the estimated value v. Furthermore, each edge (sL, a), where L
is the index of the leaf node, is initialized to {N(sL, a) = 0, W(sL, a) =
0, Q(sL, a) = 0, P(sL, a) = pa}.
3. Simulation: The simulation step is implicit in the expansion step as the
neural network is queried for v.
4. Backpropagation: v is backpropagated in a backwards pass from the
leaf node to root (t ≤L) by setting each value for the edges to:
N(st, at) = N(st, at) + 1
W(st, at) = W(st, at) + v
Q(st, at) = W(st, at)
N(st, at)
5. Play: The move to play a from root node s0 is sampled from the distri-
bution:
π(a|s0) =
N(so, a)1/τ
P
b N(s0, b)1/τ
(3.3)
Where τ is the temperature parameter controlling the level of exploration.
The temperature parameter is set to one for the ﬁrst 30 moves of each
game when training to ensure a diverse set of moves, are selected. After
30 moves, τ is set to an inﬁnitesimal value, which means that the move
with the highest visit count is selected. To achieve additional exploration,
Dirichlet noise is added to the probabilities P in the root node:
P(s, a) = (1 −ϵ)pa + ϵηa
Where η ∼Dir(0.03) and ϵ = 0.25. An inﬁnitesimal temperature value is
used in competitive play without added noise (meaning the node with the
highest visit count is selected).
==PAGE:26==
16
Monte-Carlo Tree Search
3.2
Single-player MCTS
As MCTS was originally proposed for two-player games, some modiﬁcations are
needed in a single-player domain, such as Wizzy-domain. In this section, the
possible modiﬁcations are presented and reviewed in regard to Wizzy-domain.
In [15] MCTS is used for solving SameGame, a one-player puzzle game. Several
modiﬁcations to MCTS is proposed in the paper, for instance a single-player
variant of UCT (SP-UCT):
wi
ni
+ c
r
ln Ni
ni
+
sP w2
i −ni × ( wi
ni )2 + D
ni
(3.4)
The ﬁrst two terms are the original UCT equation (3.1), while the last term
represents possible deviations in the child node scores. The new term contains
the sum of the squared scores so far (P w2
i ), corrected by the expected results
(ni ×( wi
ni )2). In addition, a large constant (D) is added to make sure that rarely
explored nodes are considered as well.
SP-UCT was introduced as a way to curb the following challenges, when using
MCTS in a single-player puzzle game: The score of a puzzle can be arbitrarily
large contrary to in two-player zero-sum games where the score is denoted by
win, loss or draw (1, −1 or 0), and that no opponent exists to play against. This
means that the game must be optimized without the hindrance of an opponent.
For puzzles the score can be arbitrarily large, meaning that it is not necessarily
between −1 and 1 as in Go, or other turn-based games. In [15] SameGame is
used, where it is possible to achieve a score in the thousands. To mitigate this
issue, the constants c and D are set to appropriate values for the range of scores
possible (in SameGame [0, 6000] can be used). Furthermore, the play policy is
changed to account for the single-player aspect of the puzzle. In a traditional
MCTS setting, the node with the highest average score, or the highest number
of playouts, is chosen, as either of these choices maximizes the probability of
winning. Whereas in puzzle games the goal is to maximize the score. Therefore,
the highest-scoring simulation is saved, and the ﬁrst node of this sequence of
moves is chosen. Since there is no opponent to counteract the simulation, it is
guaranteed to return the highest possible score in the current MCTS run.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Using the same concept as AlphaGo Zero, the ﬁnal piece of the puzzle is the
implementation of a neural network. The network will be used to predict a cer-
tain score for a state and which action most likely leads to a goal state. Ideally
the Simulation step in the Monte-Carlo tree search is primarily provided by a
lookup in a trained neural network. The relevant neural network theory and
concepts for this thesis are presented in this chapter. Understanding the back-
ground theory is necessary for following the upcoming discussions, the neural
network implementation, and essential design choices.
All the theory presented in this chapter is based on [18] and [16]
4.1
The Basic Model
The purpose of an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) is to create a prediction
based on some input. The fundamental diﬀerence between ANNs and regular
functions and algorithms is the ability to update its variables based on the
performance, regularly referred to as "learning". An ANN is a data structure
built up by a circuit of nodes and edges, mimicking a biological neural network.
The nodes are neurons connected by directional edges acting like the synapses.
Every neuron and synapse store a value called activation and weight respectively.
==PAGE:28==
18
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Normally the layers of an ANN are divided into the following categories: input,
hidden and output. The layers are an array of neurons, where the layers are
aligned sequentially. Every neuron is connected with a synapse to all neurons
in adjacent layers. The structure of such a network is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Model of a simple neural network with three input neurons, two
hidden layers with four neurons each, and one output neuron.
The input for the sample network is a vector of size 3, which are preferably
normalized. After the network receives an input array, the feedforward process
starts. The neurons from the input layer ﬁre up the connected synapses. The
ﬁrst hidden layer calculates the weighted sum and inserts the sum into an activa-
tion function. The activation converts the value into a comparable real number.
Connected neurons in the next layer activate if the value is greater than a de-
ﬁned threshold, and the weighted sum is calculated for a neuron n with weights
w (input edges). All neurons in layer xi are multiplied with weights wi and
summed with a bias (w0) into hj before entering the nonlinear activation func-
tion. The ﬁrst ﬁeld in equation 4.1 show the equation for hj. The second ﬁeld
shows the weighted sum hj inserted into an arbitrary activation function σ,
giving the ﬁnal result yj for neuron j.
hj =
X
i
(wij ∗xi) + w0
yj = σ(hj)
(4.1)
The activation function σ for the hidden neurons is chosen from a selection of
functions. Typically, an activation function follows a layer. The functions are
classiﬁed into linear and non-linear functions, however linear functions are rarely
used. A few common non-linear functions are Sigmoid, Hyperbolig Tangent and
Rectiﬁed Linear Unit(ReLU). These functions have diﬀerent characteristics and
are suitable for diﬀerent models.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 The Basic Model
19
Figure 4.2: The
Sigmoid
function
(green
curve)
and
Hy-
perbolic
Tangent
(red
curve).
The Sigmoid function (also referred to
as the logistic function) maps the in-
put into a real number in the inter-
val (0,1). Hence, all negative inputs
of x are changed to a value close to
0, and all values greater than 1 are
set to approximately 1. In ﬁgure 4.2
the green curve represents the Sig-
moid function, which has the formula
f(x) =
1
1+e−x .
Hyperbolic Tangent
function, f(x) = tanh x, has the same
characteristic, except that the result-
ing number is in the range (-1, 1).
The tanh x function curve is displayed
in the same ﬁgure, represented by the
red line. Sigmoid and tanh have for a
long time been the default activation
functions for neural networks. How-
ever, in larger networks these func-
tions have performed poorly due to saturation. Since the values are mapped
in range (0,1) and (-1,1) in these functions, x does not saturate when growing.
In larger networks, x ultimately converges towards a zero or one, which dam-
ages the accuracy of the prediction. This cripples both the learning rate and
the performance of the network. The resulting saturation also contributes to
the vanishing gradient problem [9], which is explained further in section 4.2.
a =
(
0
if x < 0
x
otherwise
(4.2)
In recent years, RelU has proven to be the
best choice for conventional networks.
The
function shown in equation 4.2, returns 0 if x
is less than negative and x otherwise. Com-
pared to the previously mentioned counter-
parts, ReLU doesn’t have a ﬁnite range, and
the degree of activation has no upper limit.
The same saturation does not occur since x can’t converge when positive, but
still strictly deactivates for negative results. It is also cheaper computationally
since the function only does a simple check instead of a calculation. Because of
the computational speed, a network based on ReLU trains faster. The reason
for still having a strict zero is to preserve the sparsity attribute of the network.
It is important to maintain sparsity to avoid an overﬁtting model. Multiple ver-
sions of ReLU exist, like the modiﬁed versions Dying and Leaky ReLU. However,
these functions were not thoroughly investigated during the implementation of
the Wizzy-domain network and not further discussed.
After the feedforward process has completed, the ﬁnal output is calculated. The
==PAGE:30==
20
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
output layer often use an activation function, which depends on the problem and
the desired output data. Since the output is not a part of the training process,
activation functions like Sigmoid and TanH can be used. The predicted value ˆy is
compared to the expected value y, which indicates the accuracy of the prediction.
The formal notation for the expected value calculation is E = (y−ˆy). In order to
improve the prediction accuracy, the network is trained using backpropagation
utilizing the predicted value. This process is an essential part of the learning.
Backpropagation and training are further explained in section 4.2.2.
4.2
Training
Improving the model by training is the paramount procedure to achieve the
maximum potential of a neural network. By utilizing the deviation from the
predicted value to the expected value, the model is pinpointing which neurons
require tweaking. A loss function preforms an interpreting of the deviation.
Setting up the correct learning conﬁgurations and functions for a model is as
important as the network structure itself. Important variables like the learning
rate must be set to the correct value. The hyperparameter tuning approach
helps to adjust the learning parameters to optimal values.
Traditionally an
ANN model is trained with a ﬁnite data set. The data set is preprocessed with
methods designed to optimize the quality. BetaCore includes a procedural level
generator which is able to generate a practically inﬁnite data set. Therefore it
is not necessary for the implementation to preprocess the data.
4.2.1
Loss Function
Evaluating the ANN prediction using a loss function, gives the model an indi-
cation of how well it performs. The loss function quantiﬁes the error rate of
the model if further predictions are performed. Optimally, models have a loss
value converging towards zero, meaning the models frequently execute precise
predictions. Unfortunately, no universal loss function ﬁts all models. The func-
tions mean square error (MSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) are the two
traditional choices for regression problems. On a surface level they are simi-
lar but have distinct attributes. As shown in equation 4.3, the only superﬁcial
diﬀerence is whether the prediction deviation is squared or absolute.
MSE =
Pn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
n
MAE =
Pn
i=1 |yi −ˆyi|
n
(4.3)
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Training
21
Deciding on a regression loss function comes down to how much outliers should
be considered. MAE calculates absolute deviance, meaning great outliers are
not punished. In comparison, MSE is more sensitive to outliers, as the error is
squared.
For classiﬁcation problems Cross-Entropy (CE), or a variation of it, is the stan-
dard loss function. The binary cross Entropy function classiﬁes binary input,
while the multi-class version classiﬁes up to n classes. Like MSE and MAE, CE
returns a value between 0 and 1, where converging loss towards 0 is the goal.
Simply put, cross-entropy calculates the average error of all n classes. The out-
put layer must contain n neurons, one for each class. The Softmax activation
function or similar action functions are applied to the output layer to convert
the n output neuron values into a probability distribution.
Despite the theoretical reasoning, hyperparameter tuning the regressional loss
function gives an insight into the best performing function for the model. Beta-
Core’s ANN is considered both a regression network and a classiﬁcation network.
The regression measurement output is the predicted score of a state. Addition-
ally, the model predicts the optimal action which is deﬁned as classiﬁcation. The
regression function is a hyperparameter for BetaCore, while Multiclass Cross-
Entropy is the chosen default for the classiﬁcation.
4.2.2
Optimization
The output result from the loss functions indicates the deviation between the
predicted and the correct answer. This value indicates how much the weights
and biases in the model have to be adjusted. The network learning is simply
the model trying to decrease the loss value. The next goal is to ﬁnd the weights,
biases, and activations which contribute to the minimization of the loss function.
In feedforward neural networks such as ours, the process of minimizing the loss
is referred to as backpropagation — the core algorithm behind how ANNs learn.
Determining which weights inﬂuence the loss result the most, is achieved by
calculating the gradient with respect to the weights, by using gradient methods,
such as stochastic gradient descent.
Imagining the gradient as a slope, the descent refers to traversing down the slope
to ideally localize the global minimum. The backpropagation process starts by
looking at the last layer, calculating the gradient for the weights and biases,
and iterating backwards through the layers updating the weights. This process
continues until the input layer is reached.
==PAGE:32==
22
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Figure 4.3: Example of a loss function
slope from a single weight,
visualizing global vs local
minimum
In reality the error graph is wij di-
mensional, which quickly makes it dif-
ﬁcult to visualize. However, the ﬁg-
ure 4.3 simpliﬁes the gradient descent
concept, by illustrating a loss func-
tion graphed based on a single weight.
The original starting point is random,
since all weights are initially set to
random. The gradient for each weight
wij is calculated by taking the partial
derivative of the loss function with re-
spect to wij.
Vanishing gradient is a phenomenon
during the backpropagation phase,
where the gradient gradually decays
while propagating the layers, result-
ing in the front layers’ gradients get-
ting insigniﬁcantly small.
This hin-
ders the overall training eﬃciency
dramatically. The vanishing gradient
problem is especially common with outdated activation functions, which are lim-
ited by a range. Oversized hidden layers also contribute to vanishing gradients.
The conﬁguration constant learning rate determines just how much the gradient
should change the original weighted value. A simpliﬁed formula for the update
is wi = wi −(learning rate ∗gradienti). The learning rate is a number between
0.0 and 1.0, and stabilizes the learning process. If the rate is too high, the loss
converges faster but destabilize the training process. On the other hand, it takes
a longer time to converge with a small rate, and might cause the progress to get
stuck in a suboptimal local minimum.
This whole process is computationally heavy and especially takes a long time
if the learning rate is low. Commonly, the data-set is randomly ordered and
divided into batches. The gradient is calculated with the average predictions in
the batch. If the batches are too large, the quality of the gradients is reduced.
Iterating through the whole data set, where all samples are predicted once, is
deﬁned as one epoch. Training over too many epochs may lead to an overﬁtted
model. Overﬁtting occurs when the model tries to predict based on false cor-
relations in noise. Overﬁtted networks are too customized to training data and
does not generalize well with prediction of unseen data. Underﬁtting is present
when there is lack a of correlations between input features and predicted out-
puts. Underﬁtted networks have both high loss on training data and test data,
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Convolutional Networks
23
whereas overﬁt networks have low loss on training and high loss on test data.
The epoch parameter should be set accordingly to prevent the network from
over- or underﬁtting.
4.2.3
Hyperparameter Tuning
Hyperparameter Tuning is the process of training subject models with diﬀer-
ent conﬁgurations in order to evaluate the optimal parameters. Compared to
a theoretical standpoint, conﬁgurations can deviate in expected outcomes in
practice. Testing out each parameter is most beneﬁcial for the ﬁnal tuning of
parameters. This is the basic form of hyperparameter tuning, usually referred
to as hand-tuning or the trail-and-error process.
Regularly when training machine learning models, cross-validation is the stan-
dard procedure for training and validation on a limited data set. Splitting the
data set into a designated testing set and a validation test, allows the model to
be validated on unseen data in order to avoid overﬁtting. Furthermore, the test
data is partitioned into an arbitrary number of folds, where each fold is removed
for validation for every iteration. The amount of chosen folds depends on the size
of the working dataset. Cross-validation is maximizing the training potential
for a data set, which is especially crucial for smaller datasets. Fortunately, with
a fully functioning level generator, the model has access to an inﬁnite amount
of training and validation data, and the regular form of cross-validation is not
necessary.
Training in Wizzy-domain has proven to be a particularly time-consuming pro-
cess. The sheer amount of setups and combinations in such a deep neural net-
work is overwhelming, and only the most signiﬁcant conﬁgurations have been
chosen for testing. The selected hyperparameters with greatest performance im-
pact, are the regression loss function, learning rate, epochs and batch size (the
bolded terms in the previous section). The conﬁguration test and respective
performance results are presented in section 5.3.1.
4.3
Convolutional Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is a type of neural network most com-
monly used to analyze images. A CNN is characterised by containing at least
one convolutional block in the hidden layer. A convolutional block contains ﬁl-
ters designed to recognize patterns in the data. In this section, the concept and
==PAGE:34==
24
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
design of CNNs will be introduced.
Ordinary neural networks consist of layers of fully connected neurons, meaning
every value in an input vector has a corresponding weight in the input layer,
and every following layer has input weights matching the output neurons of the
previous layer. This means, that ordinary neural networks do not scale well to
images. For instance, if we imagine a 512 × 512 × 3 image, the ﬁrst layer would
have 512 × 512 × 3 = 786, 432 weights, which is clearly a very large number of
parameters and would quickly lead to overﬁtting. Furthermore, we would like
the network to ignore the placement of the pixels. If the image is shifted by a
few pixels, the new image would be considered an entirely new input for the old
network. This can be avoided by using CNN, seen as convolutional ﬁlters are
transitional invariant.
Architecture
A convolutional layer works by applying some number of learnable features (also
called ﬁlters) [13]. These features conventionally have a small ﬁxed height and
width of 5×5 or 3×3 (called the feature size), while the depth is the same as the
input (3 for an image with 3 color channels). These ﬁlters are then applied to
the raw input by sliding, or more accurately convolving, across the entire width
and height of the input. In convolving the cross-correlation is calculated by
multiplying each value of the input with the corresponding value of the feature
and taking the average of these values. This produces a 2-D activation map
describing exactly where the feature is located in the input image (see Figure
4.4 for an example). Intuitively the features will learn to activate when certain
shapes are present in the image.
By convolving each feature across the input, some number of activation maps
are generated matching the number of features. These are stacked along the
depth dimension, and constitutes the output from the convolutional layer. The
ﬁnal width and height of the activation maps, depend on the hyperparameters.
It is important to note that in convolutional layers, not all neurons are connected
to all neurons in the previous layer. This is called local connectivity, and means
that each neuron in the layer is connected only to a local region of the input
volume. The size of the local region is called the receptive ﬁeld of the neuron,
and is equal to the feature size. However, while the connections are local in
space, they always cover all the channels of the input volume.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Convolutional Networks
25
(a) Input
(b) Feature
(c) Activation map
Figure 4.4: An example feature, applied to an input. The feature (b) is the
pattern searched for in the input. The activation map sets cell
(1,4) and (3,2) to 1, since the pattern exactly matches that area.
Hyperparameters
The parameters of the CNN can be conﬁgured with certain hyperparameters:
1. Depth: The number of features in the layer.
2. Stride: How much the features move when convolving is controlled by the
stride, which in our case is 1. With a greater stride, the output activation
map is correspondingly smaller. In practice, stride values greater than 3
are uncommon.
3. Zero-padding: Controls how many zeroes should be added to the input
in order to control the height and width of the output.
By using the hyperparameters as well as the input size, the ﬁnal weight and
height of the output can be calculated with the equation:
Wout = Win −K + 2P
S
+ 1
(4.4)
Where Win is the input volume, K is the receptive ﬁeld size of the neurons, P
is the zero-padding, and S is the stride.
For instance, in the example from ﬁgure 4.4, the ﬁnal size of the output is 5.
This could also be calculated by using the equation with an input volume of
Win = 7, a receptive ﬁeld size of K = 3, zero-padding of P = 0 and a stride of
S = 1:
Wout = 7 −3 + 2 × 0
1
+ 1 = 5.
==PAGE:36==
26
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
In order to match the output size to the input size, a zero-padding of P = 1
could be used:
Wout = 7 −3 + 2 × 1
1
+ 1 = 7.
In general, setting the zero-padding to P = (K −1)/2 when the stride is S = 1,
guarantees that the input and output have the same size spatially.
Parameter Sharing
Parameter sharing is used in convolutional layers to control the number of pa-
rameters used. In the example from ﬁgure 4.4 with a total of 50 features, there
is 5×5×50 = 1250 neurons, each with 3×3×3 = 9 weights and 1 biases. There
are a total of 10 ∗1250 = 12, 500 parameters in the ﬁrst layer of the network.
This number is not very high, but it is easy to imagine that an image of size
512 × 512 × 3 would drastically increase the number of parameters.
In order to reduce the number of parameters used in the layer, the features
are reused across all layers. In other words, Splitting the neurons into depth
slices, all neurons in a depth slice uses the same parameters. In other words, we
assume that each feature should be the same for the entire image. For instance,
in our example, we have 50 depth slices, each of size 5 × 5. This results in
50×3×3×3 = 450 weights, and a total of 500 parameters (+50 biases) instead
of 12, 500, as calculated previously.
4.4
Residual neural networks
Residual neural network (ResNet) was introduced in [10] and is a network that
utilizes skip connections in the network. The authors of ResNet point out a
degradation problem, meaning that they observed a lower training accuracy when
adding more layers to the network.
They note that the vanishing gradient
problem [8] is not the cause, although this problem is also mitigated by utilizing
ResNet.
The skip connections work by adding a link between layers in the network with
the identity function. More formally, a residual block is deﬁned as:
y = F(x, {Wi}) + x
(4.5)
Where x is the input vector, y is the output vector and the function F(x, {Wi})
is the mapping. Figure 4.5 shows the residual block in comparison to a plain
block.
==PAGE:37==
4.5 AlphaGo Zero design
27
(a) A plain block.
(b) A residual block.
Figure 4.5: The diﬀerence between a plain and a residual block [18]
The addition of the input to the ﬁnal output ensures that it is easy for the layer
to approximate the identity function. In other words, if we add new residual
layers to a network, it is unlikely that the accuracy suﬀers as it is easy for the
block to approximate doing nothing to the input at all.
4.5
AlphaGo Zero design
The AlphaGo Zero neural network consists of a single convolutional block (ﬁgure
4.6a), followed by 19 or 39 residual blocks (ﬁgure 4.6b), and ﬁnally, two head
blocks to output the value/policy of the state (ﬁgure 4.7) [17]. The total network
depth is thus 39 or 79 parameterized layers for the 20- and 40 block networks,
plus an additional 3 layers for the value head, and 2 layers for the policy head.
The state of the Go-board is encoded as a 19 × 19 × 17 image stack, consisting
of 8 stacks of the current player’s stones (1 if the intersection contains a stone
for the player, 0 if not), as well as 8 stacks for the opponent. A history of 7
stacks consisting of the 7 states before the current state, is included as a history
reference due to the rules of Go. The ﬁnal image stack represents the current
color to play (all 1’s if black is to play, or 0 if white is to play).
For the loss function AlphaGo Zero uses a combination of MSE for the value of
the state, and cross-entropy for the probability vector. The losses are weighted
==PAGE:38==
28
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
equally.
(a) Convolutional block.
(b) Residual block.
Figure 4.6: The design of the convolutional blocks and residual blocks.
==PAGE:39==
4.5 AlphaGo Zero design
29
(a) Value head.
(b) Policy head.
Figure 4.7: The design of the value heads and policy heads.
==PAGE:40==
30
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Design of BetaCore
This chapter describes the design and implementation of BetaCore.
Firstly,
an overview of the overall process is presented, and further divided into two
phases; solving and training. Additionally, the custom design for MCTS and NN
are explained, emphasizing the dissimilarities between BetaCore and AlphaGO.
Finally, the Procedural Level Generation (PLG) design is presented.
5.1
Overview
Several design choices were made when designing BetaCore. First and foremost,
the implementation was modeled after AlphaGo Zero, with both MCTS and a
CNN, as explained in section 3.1.2 and 4.5. The MCTS was written in Java,
while the neural network was implemented in Python, due to a large amount of
mature machine learning libraries that exist for Python (with PyTorch being the
chosen library). In order for these two to communicate eﬃciently, simple pipes
between processes were used. The procedurally generated levels were imple-
mented to improve the training and benchmarking, and automate the creation
of levels.
==PAGE:42==
32
Design of BetaCore
Figure 5.1: Generating the solution plan and the training set.
Figure 5.1 shows an overview of the training/solving phase of the implementa-
tion. The MCTS process starts after receiving a level, expanding and evaluating
states based on the policies and the NN prediction. After the estimated optimal
action is selected, the resulting state is set as the new root. If training, the
action is appended to the training set, along with action chosen, and whether or
not the state is a goal state. If solving, the action is added to the solution plan.
This continues until a solution is found or the iteration limit has exceeded.
5.1.1
Solving Phase
The solving phase BetaCore attempts to ﬁnd a solution to the presented level
as fast as possible.
It primarily builds on the implementation of MCTS as
well as the NN. As can be seen in the pseudo-code in Algorithm 2, MCTS is
continually run. A computational limit of at most 100 is put on the number of
MCTS iterations, given that it is not guaranteed a solution is found.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Overview
33
Algorithm 2 BetaCore - Solving
1: procedure Solve(root)
2:
iterations = 0
3:
while root is not goal state and iterations < 100 do
4:
root ←MCTS(root)
5:
iterations = iterations + 1
6:
end while
7:
return root.getPlan
8: end procedure
5.1.2
Training Phase
The training process for BetaCore is shown in Algorithm 3 in pseudo-code.
The training is built upon the generation of 10 random levels, and attempts
to solve each randomly generated level. The process stops either if the current
level is solved, or if the computational limit is reached (which in this case is 50
iterations).
The sequence of states, actions performed and whether or not the sequence led
to a win or not is appended to the training data. Finally, when all generated
states have been solved 12 times, the network is trained using the generated
data. If the new network performs better than the old, the new one is accepted
as the current network, and the process is repeated for 100 iterations.
The goal of using diﬀerent randomly generated levels, is that the network ﬁnds
more generalized solutions to the domain, instead of overﬁtting the network. If
a single level is used for training, the network might get very good at solving
that speciﬁc level, but very bad at solving any other level. Every level is ﬂipped
horizontally, vertically, and both, resulting in a total of 4 training examples per
unique state to further improve the training. The goal is that the network learns
to recognize patterns that are similar in ﬂipped levels, and thereby improve the
generated training data.
==PAGE:44==
34
Design of BetaCore
Algorithm 3 BetaCore - Training
1: procedure Train()
2:
trainingSet ←[]
3:
states ←PLG(10)
4:
iterations ←0
5:
while iterations < 100 do
6:
for state in states do
7:
episodes ←0
8:
while episodes < 12 do
9:
trainingSet.append(RunEpisode(state))
10:
episodes ←episodes + 1
11:
end while
12:
end for
13:
OldNeuralNetwork ←NeuralNetwork
14:
NeuralNetwork.train(trainingSet)
15:
NeuralNetwork ←ChooseBestNetwork(
OldNeuralNetwork, NeuralNetwork, states)
16:
iterations ←iterations + 1
17:
end while
18: end procedure
19:
20: procedure RunEpisode(root)
21:
states ←[]
22:
actionsTaken ←[]
23:
iterations ←0
24:
while root is not goal state and iterations < 50 do
25:
node ←MCTS(state)
26:
runStates.append(root)
27:
runActionsTaken.append(root.actionsTaken)
28:
root ←node
29:
iterations ←iterations + 1
30:
end while
31:
result ←root is goal state
32:
return states, actionsTaken, result
33: end procedure
5.2
MCTS
In the following section, the design choices for MCTS in the Wizzy-domain will
be explained. As Wizzy-domain is not a two-player domain, certain modiﬁca-
==PAGE:45==
5.2 MCTS
35
tions had to be made, to improve the feasibility of using MCTS.
Algorithm 4 MCTS
1: procedure MCTS(root)
2:
iterations ←0
3:
while iterations < 400 do
4:
do
5:
node ←SelectionPolicy(root)
6:
while node not leaf
7:
ExpansionPolicy(node)
8:
(score, probabilityVector) ←NeuralNetwork.predict(node)
9:
node.probabilityVector ←probabilityVector
10:
BackpropagationPolicy(node, score)
11:
iterations ←iterations + 1
12:
end while
13:
return PlayPolicy(root)
14: end procedure
In Algorithm 4 is the MCTS process is shown. The algorithm is very similar to
traditional MCTS, outlined in Algorithm 1, with some notable exceptions. The
Simulation policy is exchanged for the prediction from the neural network, and
the Play policy used is based on whether or not BetaCore is currently training,
or solving levels.
Finally, some modiﬁcations was made in order to accommodate single-player
MCTS. In section 3.2, SP-MCTS is used for SameGame, a puzzle with an arbi-
trarily large score. In the context of Wizzy-domain, however, it is not beneﬁcial
to account for an arbitrary score as the ﬁnal score can either be −1 or 1. For a
larger score to be achieved, a heuristic could be added (the goal-count heuristic
for instance). We have chosen not to implement a heuristic, as the ﬁnal result
would not be domain agnostic. The play policy when solving chosen for Beta-
Core is the play policy described in 3.2, where the node with the highest total
score is chosen.
Policies
As outlined in section 3.1 the Monte-Carlo Tree Search consists of ﬁve diﬀerent
policies; selection, expansion, simulation, backpropagation and play policies.
The policies we chose for BetaCore will be outlined in this section.
==PAGE:46==
36
Design of BetaCore
The design of BetaCore is modeled after the AlphaGo Zero design, and therefore,
the policies of MCTS is very similar to the policies of AlphaGo Zero as well
(outlined in section 3.1.2).
The modiﬁed policies are deﬁned as follows:
1. Selection: Identical. Selects a node, starting from the root and termi-
nating when a leaf node is reached, based on the modiﬁed UCT equation
(equation 3.2).
2. Expansion: All children of the node is expanded, and each edge (sl, a),
where L is the index of the leaf node, is initialized to {N(sL, a) = 0,
W(sL, a) = 0, Q(sL, a) = 0, P(sL, a) = 0}.
3. Simulation: The neural network is queried for the probability vector p
as well as the estimated value v. The probability for each edge is set to
P(sL, a) = pa.
4. Backpropagation: v is backpropagated in the same manner as AlphaGo
Zero, with the added extension of updating all other occurrences of state
s in the graph as well. The extension is fully explained in the following
subsection.
5. Play: When training, the play selection is similar to AlphaGo Zero. The
distribution outlined in equation 3.3 is used, without any added temper-
ature parameter. When solving however, the child node with the highest
score is selected. More formally the action at at time-step t is chosen by
at = arg max
a
(W(st, a)). This is in contrast to AlphaGo Zero, where the
node with the highest visit count is chosen, and was chosen due to the
single-player characteristic of Wizzy-domain (as outlined in section 3.2).
Backpropagation extension
When using MCTS in Wizzy-domain, we encountered an issue of states be-
ing generated multiple times. This is not as big of a challenge in traditional
two-player games such as Go or Chess, as the individual game pieces can not
generally be moved backward once placed/moved.
In our domain, however,
repeat states in the game-tree posed a problem.
To mitigate this issue, the backpropagation policy was slightly modiﬁed.
In
addition to maintaining the search tree generated by MCTS, an additional data
structure holding all unique states, and its corresponding MCTS nodes is uti-
lized. When backpropagating for some node n, with state s, the secondary data
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Neural Network
37
structure is queried, and the backpropagation is executed for all other nodes n′
containing the state s.
Thereby, the ﬁnal search tree has more accurate information regarding the indi-
vidual nodes, and the problem of duplicated states is mitigated to some extent.
5.3
Neural Network
The network design for BetaCore was chosen to be very similar to the AlphaGo
Zero design, with 1 convolutional block, 19 residual blocks, a policy head and
a value head. One diﬀerence to note is the number of ﬁlters. Where AlphaGo
Zero uses 256 features for each convolutional layer, we chose to use 128 features
in BetaCore, due to the increased computational time of using 256. A complete
overview of the network architecture is shown in ﬁgure 5.2, and an overview of
the diﬀerent blocks can be seen in section 4.5.
Figure 5.2: Overview of the architecture.
When training and predicting, the level is decomposed into binary layers, one
layer per level component.
The components are the walls, box goals, agent
goal, agent and boxes respectively. The input for the network is a ﬁxed size of
10x15, and all layers are transposed into this size, padded with zeroes outside
the bounds of the level. The feed-forward process in the hidden layer kicks oﬀ
with a convolutional block, consisting of 128 features with a size of 3x3. Up next
is a series of 19 residual blocks, and ﬁnally, the output value from the residual
blocks is run through each head separately. The output is run through the value
head which outputs the state value, and through the policy head, producing the
action probability vector.
Important to note is, that each head receives the
output directly from the residual blocks, and does not interact with each other.
==PAGE:48==
38
Design of BetaCore
In training, we selected the MSE loss function (equation 4.3) for the value head
and the Cross-Entropy loss function for the policy head. MSE was chosen as we
wish to punish incorrectly predicted states according to the deviance, and Cross-
Entropy as the value from the policy is a classiﬁcation problem. Furthermore,
we chose a mini-batch size of 64.
5.3.1
Training Results
In the following section, the results from training the neural network will be pre-
sented and discussed. Additionally, the chosen hyperparameters are presented
and discussed as well.
Veriﬁcation
To verify the capabilities of the network, we initially trained on a single level,
which caused the network to heavily overﬁt. While the network was able to
accurately predict and solve the level in question, no other levels could be solved.
This led us to introduce one new level at a time. After the model is trained on
the ﬁrst level (meaning a solution is found, and the loss has stabilized), a new
level is added to the training set in order to generalize. Both states are then
used as training data, and the process is continued. Our hypothesis was, that
if we continually added levels, the network would eventually generalize well to
all levels.
Figure 5.3: Training progress.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Neural Network
39
The progress of the loss from this experiment over 3 Minor Basic levels, is
shown in ﬁgure 5.3.
The curve initially decreases since the model learns to
recognize the ﬁrst level. After the second level is introduced at 14 iterations,
the loss increases which is expected. After the model familiarizes itself with both
levels, the loss decreases once again. The third level is added at 28 iterations,
and based on the graph, the concept looks promising.
Unfortunately, the training is not generalized enough and struggles to solve
unseen levels. However, the experiment showed that the network is capable of
learning to recognize levels, and outputs relevant values, leading to solved levels.
Generalized training
In order to accomplish a generalized model, we chose to train with 10 diﬀerent
levels simultaneously. By training on diﬀerent levels from the beginning, we
believed that the model would not overﬁt, and generalize more eﬃciently.
Before training, the learning rate and epoch count was hyperparameter tuned
in order to determine the optimal for BetaCore. All the tests have been done
on the same set of levels, consisting of 10 levels pr. level type pr. complexity.
Firstly, the optimal learning rate was determined.
Figure 5.4: Learning Rate over 10 diﬀerent levels.
24 hours of training for the learning rates 0.01, 0.001 and 0.0001 can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.4. As can be seen in the graph, the loss does not decline signiﬁcantly
for any of the learning rates, beyond the ﬁrst iterations. However, the learning
==PAGE:50==
40
Design of BetaCore
rate 0.01 has a slightly better loss, as well as being more eﬃcient. This learning
rate evaluates 80 iterations for a 24-hour time period, while 0.001 evaluates
approximately 75, and 0.0001 only reaches 47.
Due to the better performance, both in terms of loss and eﬃciency, the learning
rate 0.01 was chosen.
Figure 5.5: Epochs. The loss converges around 5 epochs.
In ﬁgure 5.5 the result from training with diﬀerent epochs, as well as learning
rates, can be seen. The learning rates perform very similarly, and none of them
beneﬁts signiﬁcantly from running more than 5 epochs. Therefore, the number
of epochs was chosen to be 5, regardless of the learning rate.
In ﬁgure 5.6, the graph of the total solution length is displayed. As is evident
from the graph, the results vary wildly, and does not decrease signiﬁcantly over
time. However, if we take the graph from ﬁgure 5.7 into account, we can see,
that the number of solved levels increase, which in turn makes the total solution
length increase as well. In other words, the solution length of the individual
levels does improve, but since more levels are added, this cancels out, and results
in a linear total solution length.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Neural Network
41
Figure 5.6: Total solution length.
Figure 5.7: Number of unsolved levels.
This shows us that the model improves over time in ﬁgure 5.6 and 5.7. While
the improvements are not linear, there is a signiﬁcant downward trend in both
the length of the solutions found, as well as the number of unsolved levels.
In conclusion, the loss when training does not decrease in any signiﬁcant way,
which could signify a problem with the neural network. Nonetheless, an im-
provement in performance, with regards to ﬁnding solutions, was observed,
indicating that the neural network does learn. A further discussion of these
conﬂicting factors will be presented in section 6.2.
==PAGE:52==
42
Design of BetaCore
5.4
Procedural Level Generation
To train our network eﬃciently, and to have enough unique sample levels, a
procedural level generation system was developed and implemented.
Procedural generation is a system where content is created pseudo randomly
by an algorithm, instead of manually handcrafted. PLG is utilised in certain
video games to automatically generate content for the player. The idea of cre-
ating PLG for Wizzy-domain was inspired by [19], where PLG for Sokoban was
successfully developed.
This section goes through the diﬀerent algorithms used to generate levels, as well
as their respective designs and characteristics. Compared to other games, our
domain is a relatively easy environment to develop such a system for. The level
doesn’t have to be interesting or fun since human players are not the target, and
because every move is reversible, our domain does not have deadlocks compared
to similar games like Sokoban. A deadlock is deﬁned as a state, from which no
other states can be generated. At any given state you can revert to any previous
state. This means that the level can always be reset, and reverted to the initial
state. To maintain a solvable level when distributing the elements, the two key
considerations are:
• All goals must have at least one compatible box, where there exist a path
from box to the goal.
• All goals must have at least one compatible box, where there exists a path
from box to an agent of the same color.
Figure 5.8: No possible plan can re-arrange the box to the right-hand side of
agent.
Figure 5.8 shows a cramped level, there is no possible way to switch sides of two
elements, e.g a tight corridor. These levels should be avoided, and is covered by
the considerations.
The procedural level generation program takes two arguments: a complexity
class and a generation algorithm. The complexity class holds information re-
garding level size, goals and boxes, and makes it easier to classify each level,
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Procedural Level Generation
43
and measure the strength of an AI. All levels are single agent, and only one
color. Complexities are divided into three main subcategories, which are brieﬂy
described below:
• Minor Small 5x5 levels, 1 box and 1 goal.
• Standard Medium sized levels of 10x8 tiles. 3 boxes and 3 goals
• Major Larger levels of size 15x10. 5 boxes and 5 goals.
5.4.1
Algorithms
5.4.1.1
Basic
The ﬁrst algorithm developed was Basic. As the name suggests, the algorithm
and output result is very simple.
None of the Basic levels have any walls,
hence containing elements only, that are randomly distributed. The algorithm
is outlined below.
1. Create walls around the boundaries of the level
2. For all the boxes and agents: Pick a point, if no element already exist at
corresponding cell, place the element. Otherwise pick another point.
3. Do the same for all the goals
Figure 5.9 shows what a generated Basic level.
Figure 5.9: A Basic level, with Minor complexity. It contains no walls except
the level bounds, and all elements are placed randomly, including
the box and agent goals.
==PAGE:54==
44
Design of BetaCore
5.4.1.2
Random-walk
The Random-walk algorithm is based on the Drunkard1 algorithm. An outline
of how the algorithm works is: Fill the entire level with walls, pick a random
cell and mark it as a path, move over to to a random adjacent cell and mark
it as a path and continue to pick neighbor cells and create paths, until some
condition.
Algorithm 5 Random Walk
1: procedure RandomWalk
2:
paths ←new list
3:
p ←randomPoint()
4:
paths.add(p)
5:
while paths.size < minimumPathSize do
6:
p ←randomPointFromPaths()
7:
digTunnels(p)
8:
end while
9:
distributeElements()
10: end procedure
11:
12: procedure DigTunnels(point p)
13:
newPoint ←p + randomDirection()
14:
if isWall(newPoint) and !outOfBounds(newPoint) then
15:
paths.add(newPoint)
16:
digTunnels(newPoint)
17:
end if
18: end procedure
The pseudo-code in Algorithm 5 provides a brief walk-through of our version of
random-walk. As seen in procedure DigTunnels a random cell is picked and
marked as path, and added to a list. This cell is the base of the recursive method
DigTunnels, which keeps creating paths via adjacent cells until the picked cell
is already deﬁned a path or is out of bounds. When this process terminates,
DigTunnels is invoked again if the number of paths covers less than 50% of
the area (represented by the minimumPathSize variable). A random cell from
the path list is picked as new base for DigTunnels, to make sure every path is
connected. After the layout of the map is generated, the elements are distributed
the same way as Basic.
Figure 5.10 displays an example level generated by Random Walk
1http://pcg.wikidot.com/pcg-algorithm:drunkard-walk
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Procedural Level Generation
45
Figure 5.10: A Standard Random Walk level..
5.4.1.3
Dungeon
Inspired by the dungeon crawling game genre, a Dungeon level is highly recog-
nizable by the room and hallway layout. Adonaac’s blog post [1] on the subject
was a major inﬂuence on the implementation, following roughly the same pro-
cedure. Assuming the level starts with only walls, the process is as follows:
1. Generate randomly sized rooms (rectangles) and place them randomly
across the map until 40% of the surface area is covered by rooms. Two
rooms can not intersect and require at least one cell in between.
2. Create a minimum spanning tree of the rooms, where each room’s most
central point operates as a vertex.
3. Every edge is a "hallway" between two rooms. Create a path from every
edge. The paths are created with at most one turn, to get the correct
look.
4. Assign a room as a designated agent room.
Put agents of each color
in agent rooms, such that all rooms contains at most one agent of each
color, and create more agent rooms if needed. Boxes are randomly placed
elsewhere, but never ﬁlls a room, nor are they placed in a corridor.
In the process, agents and boxes have designated rooms, which is done deliber-
ately to ensure that the map is always solvable. Agents can’t be trapped inside
a room by unmovable boxes.
==PAGE:56==
46
Design of BetaCore
(a) Standard complexity.
(b) Example of an arbitrary large level.
Figure 5.11: Examples of Dungeon levels.
5.4.2
Solvability veriﬁcation and benchmarks
Beyond the key consideration previously deﬁned, no validation of whether or
not the levels are solvable is implemented. In order to verify that the generated
level in general is solvable, the generated levels was manually tested using the
A* algorithm. The unsolved levels were manually inspected to verify the claim
from A*. A set of 9000 levels where generated to benchmark the performance
of each algorithm, 1000 levels for each combination of type and complexity.
Table 5.1 displays the results, the computation time and total memory used.
Additionally, the amount of levels A* manged to solve out of a 1000.
Complexity
Time Elapsed
Memory
Solvable
Basic
Minor
0.593s
1.95mb
1000
Standard
0.689s
1.95mb
1000
Major
0.671s
1.95mb
1000
Random Walk
Minor
0.780s
1.97mb
897
Standard
1.160s
2.33mb
1000
Major
2.150s
1.95mb
999
Dungeon
Minor
0.660s
2.03mb
1000
Standard
3.262
2.46mb
1000
Major
3.348s
2.47mb
1000
Table 5.1: Benchmarks for the PLG algorithms.
Out of the 3000 levels produced by Basic and Dungeon A* had a 100% solve
rate. However, Random Walk generated several unsolvable levels, especially
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Procedural Level Generation
47
within the Minor complexity.
These unsolvable levels generated a cramped
scenario previously shown in ﬁgure 5.8. Due to the small area of the Minor
levels, this was a relatively frequent occurrence. Level in ﬁgure 5.12a shows one
example, after the agent places A correctly, the agent have no possible way of
reaching the agent goal. The single impossible level generated in the Major class
had an unfortunate placement of boxes. The level is displayed in ﬁgure 5.12b.
Box D is blocking for C and the agent, and the level is therefore not solvable.
(a) Minor.
(b) The 1 impossible Major level.
Figure 5.12: Unsolvable Random Walk level examples.
Referring to the benchmarks, Basic and Dungeon are the safest algorithms in
terms of solvability. The likelihood that Random Walk yields an impossible
level for Standard or Major is 0.0005 based on the benchmarks. The result of
Minor landed on an inadmissible 89.7% solve rate. For safety reasons, all Minor
Random Walk generations are preferably veriﬁed by A* before adding to a
training set.
In terms of resource usage, Dungeon stands out as the costliest, even though
the diﬀerences are insigniﬁcant in practice. Especially considering the higher
solve rate of the produced levels, compared to Random Walk. Therefore, the
Dungeon algorithm is the preferred algorithm.
5.4.3
Improvements
As explained in the previous section, generating impossible levels are a possibil-
ity for all of the generation algorithms. The likelihood is so small for Dungeon
and Basic, that the need for checking if a level is solvable is only necessary for
Random Walk. As mentioned, no humans are going to play the levels, and
they are constructed primarily for network training.
==PAGE:58==
48
Design of BetaCore
However, a potential improvement could be an adaptation of the Taylor and
Parberry’s "Farthest State" methodology [?]. This procedure involves placing
all elements randomly, and assign this state as "goal state". The next step is
creating a state-tree with all the possible actions, and picking the deepest state
as the initial state. This ensures that there is a set of actions from the initial
state to the goal, hence the level is guaranteed to be solvable.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Results and Discussion
The following section contains benchmarks of BetaCore with the uninformed
search algorithm BFS used as a baseline.
Furthermore, each component in
BetaCore is benchmarked and analyzed. After the results are presented, the
overall evaluation is discussed, as well as potential improvements.
6.1
Results
All tests are done on procedurally generated levels, generated by the solution
presented in chapter 5.4, where all the PLG algorithms are applied for exper-
imentation and measurement. In the upcoming tables, the previously deﬁned
level complexity classes; Minor, Standard and Major are used to eﬃciently
compare the strength of each algorithm. For each level type, 10 levels are gen-
erated and solved, resulting in a total of 3 ∗3 ∗10 = 90 levels. The same set
of generated levels are used for all upcoming benchmarks. Note that two of the
Minor Random Walk levels were unsolvable, which brings the total number
of levels down to 88.
Training the network and calculating solutions require an immense amount of
data power to compute eﬀectively. Even for Basic Standard levels, the state
space averages around four million, with a 2.5GB RAM usage. Credible and
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and Discussion
legitimate results are of high signiﬁcance, therefore all tests are executed on
the DTU super-computer1 with the same job parameters. All tests were run
on 12 cores on the HPC cluster2 with 6GB of RAM per core, for a total of
72GB of ram. Two Tesla V100 32GB GPUs was used for training, and a single
for benchmarking. Completely identical CPU cores are not guaranteed, as the
cluster contains multiple diﬀerent hardware components. However, the cores
are equivalent in computational power.
6.1.1
BFS Algorithm
First and foremost, the uninformed planning algorithm BFS is benchmarked on
the deﬁned level types.
Breadth-First Search
Level Type
Minor
Standard
Major
Basic
Solved
10/10
7/10
0/10
Average Solution
3.3
13.5
0
Average Time
0.33 s.
241.3 s.
0 s.
Total Time
3.3 s.
6013.4 s.
12000.6 s.
Max RAM
29 MB
2417 MB
4327 MB
State Space
72
4,669,920
1,092,514,737,600
Random Walk
Solved
8/8
10/10
0/10
Average Solution
2.1
16.9
0
Average Time
0.25 s.
6.83 s.
0 s.
Total Time
3.1 s.
68.3 s.
12000.5 s.
Max RAM
30 MB
203 MB
3776 MB
State Space
20
255,024
14,658,134,400
Dungeon
Solved
10/10
10/10
0/10
Average Solution
1.1
34.3
0
Average Time
0.32 s.
3.33 s.
0 s.
Total Time
3.2 s.
33.3 s.
10801.6 s.
Max RAM
30 MB
155 MB
3351 MB
State Space
20
570,024
44,261,653,680
Table 6.1: Benchmarks for BFS on all the generated levels.
1https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
2https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=2520
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Results
51
Table 6.1 shows the results from running BFS. It shows that the algorithm had
no problems solving any of the Minor levels, but struggles in the Standard and
Major levels, due to the state space quickly growing in size. The performance
of BFS is tightly coupled with the size of the state space, which is shown in the
diﬀerence between Standard Basic levels, and Standard Random Walk
levels.
Since there are no walls in a Basic level, the state space is bigger,
which the algorithm struggles with. Furthermore, none of the Major levels
were solved, which can be attributed to the enormous state space these levels
produce.
Despite the multiple cores, and a total of 72GB of memory, BFS is still very
ineﬃcient. Note, that the average solution found in the table is guaranteed to be
the shortest possible solution, due to the nature of BFS. Therefore, the average
solution in table 6.1, represents the best possible outcome.
6.1.2
Component Evaluations
When evaluating BetaCore, an individual examination of the two main compo-
nents gives an insight of possible bottlenecks in the overall solution, and how
well the two work together when solving levels. Therefore, the MCTS and NN
implementations are isolated and evaluated individually.
6.1.2.1
MCTS
When benchmarking MCTS, the policies from section 5.2 were used, with the
exception of the Simulation policy. Instead of querying the neural network
for the value and policy vector, a random simulation was used. This entails
a random playout from the current state, until a goal state is reached, or a
maximum of 180 diﬀerent states has been considered. If a goal state is reached,
the value is set to 1, and if not 0.
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and Discussion
Monte Carlo Tree Search
Level Type
Minor
Standard
Major
Basic
Solved
10/10
5/10
0/10
Average Solution
3.3
385.3
0
Average Time
0.64 s.
296.76 s.
0 s.
Total Time
6.4 s.
7938.2 s.
9610.5 s.
Max RAM
64 MB
59,643.24 MB
56,140 MB
State Space
72
4,669,920
1,092,514,737,600
Random Walk
Solved
8/8
9/10
0/10
Average Solution
2.1
60.7
0
Average Time
0.3 s.
37.27 s.
0 s.
Total Time
4 s.
1575.9 s.
8409.3 s.
Max RAM
31 MB
26,350 MB
49,759 MB
State Space
20
255,024
14,658,134,400
Dungeon
Solved
10/10
7/10
0/10
Average Solution
1.1
301.4
0
Average Time
0.36 s.
154.65 s.
0 s.
Total Time
3.6 s.
4014.1 s.
6001 s.
Max RAM
31 MB
38,438 MB
35,559 MB
State Space
20
570,024
44,261,653,680
Table 6.2: Benchmarks for MCTS on all the generated levels.
In table 6.2 the results from running MCTS is presented. Comparing the per-
formance of MCTS to BFS, we see that the performance of MCTS is worse
or at best equal for all types and complexities. The RAM usage is signiﬁcantly
higher, and the solutions are nowhere near optimal. Furthermore, MCTS solved
fewer levels than BFS, and the levels it did solve, required more time.
6.1.2.2
Neural Network
For the Wizzy-domain and similar domains like Sokoban, evaluating the quality
of the ﬁnal CNN model is particularly diﬃcult. The output is arbitrary and rel-
ative, compared to e.g classiﬁcation problems. Given a state and an action, only
considering the score of the resulting state won’t clarify whether that particular
action is optimal. This is unless all actions from the given state are evaluated.
Even so, evaluating what move is the best is not always obvious, even for hu-
mans. Therefore, we designed a level where it is obvious which action is optimal.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Results
53
By manually predicting the state, the CNN should favor the optimal action,
Figure 6.1: A simple level where the optimal action is obvious.
The level shown in ﬁgure 6.1 was designed to conduct this test. The possible
actions for agent 0 are: Move(W), Move(S), Move(E). Unless Move(S) ends up
highest scored, the network does not predict as intended. Predicting the state
results in the following probability vector:
[Move(E) = 0.0001, NoOp = 0.0445, Move(S) = 0.9538, Move(W) = 0.0001]
As is visible in the probability vector, the correct move is chosen with very high
probability. However, predicting the state resulting from the Move(S) action,
the following probability is produced:
[NoOp = 0.0537, Push(S, E) = 0.0002, Pull(W, S) = 0.0002,
Push(S, W) = 0.0002, Pull(E, S) = 0.0005, Move(E) = 0.00005,
Move(W) = 0.00002, Pull(N, S) = 0.4593, Move(N) = 0.4799]
Neither Pull(N,S) or Move(N) is the optimal solution, rather the chosen move
should be Push(S,E), which is given a very low probability. This might indicate
that the CNN gives high certainty on already trained states, whilst unfamiliar
states are scored incorrectly. This is discussed further in section 6.2.
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and Discussion
6.1.3
BetaCore results
In this section, the benchmark is run on the ﬁnal BetaCore, trained as explained
in section 5.3.1.
Note that the levels used for training is diﬀerent from the
benchmarking levels.
BetaCore
Level Type
Minor
Standard
Major
Basic
Solved
7/10
0/10
0/10
Average Solution
11.1
0
0
Average Time
18.7 s.
0 s.
0 s.
Total Time
3734 s.
12000 s.
12000 s.
Max RAM
713.71 MB
2,690.24 MB
2,594 MB
State Space
72
4,669,920
1,092,514,737,600
Random Walk
Solved
8/8
0/10
0/10
Average Solution
4.1
0
0
Average Time
8.9 s.
0 s.
0 s.
Total Time
71.5 s.
12000 s.
12000 s.
Max RAM
366 MB
2,004 MB
2,176 MB
State Space
20
255,024
14,658,134,400
Dungeon
Solved
8/10
0/10
0/10
Average Solution
14
0
0
Average Time
19.5 s.
0 s.
0 s.
Total Time
2557.7 s.
12000 s.
12000 s.
Max RAM
486 MB
1,873 MB
2,403 MB
State Space
20
570,024
44,261,653,680
Table 6.3: Benchmarks for BetaCore on all the generated levels.
In table 6.3 the result from running BetaCore on the generated levels is shown.
In general, only the Minor levels were solved, and the solutions found were far
from optimal. Furthermore, it took substantially longer for BetaCore to ﬁnd a
solution, than either BFS or MCTS with random simulation.
Overall, the performance of BetaCore is exceedingly poor on the generated data
set. While MCTS performs worse than BFS, both perform signiﬁcantly better
than BetaCore in all aspects. In section 6.2, we discuss the possible reasons for
the lackluster performance.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Discussion
55
6.2
Discussion
In this section, the previously presented benchmarks are discussed.
6.2.1
Evaluating MCTS
In this section, the benchmark results for MCTS will be discussed. Evaluating
the underwhelming performance of MCTS separately provides an understanding
of the eligibility of using the algorithm for Wizzy-domain, and similar planning
domains. The benchmarks show that the performance of MCTS is considerably
worse than BFS, and in this section the causes and possible solutions will be
discussed.
Firstly, it is important to point out that in usual planning domains, as well
as Wizzy-domain, cycles in the state-space exist.
Unlike Go or SameGame,
planning domains allow inﬁnite paths in the ﬁnite state-space due to cycles. The
cycles occur when a previously generated state is revisited. This is problematic
for MCTS, as the expected length of the simulation step becomes very large.
In other applications of MCTS, a terminal node is reached if the simulation
is allowed to continue for long enough, as cycles are not allowed.
No such
guarantee is present in a planning domain, which makes the a random simulation
unfeasible.
In BetaCore, we deal with this problem, by imposing an upper bound on the
number of simulated nodes (presently set at 180 nodes). If the terminal state
is not found within 180 steps, it is assumed that it can not be found in the
simulation.
However, when using an upper bound, the chosen bound must
strike a balance between being too small, which would result in no goal state
ever being found, and too large, which would impact the performance.
Wizzy-domain suﬀers from the problem of sparse rewards as well. If the two
players in a game of Go continue to make random moves, a ﬁnite number of
simulations is needed before a winner is determined. The result of the game
is then used as a reward for the algorithm. Rewards are scarce in a planning
domain. The result from the simulation is often not very useful, as it is only if
the simulation is lucky, and hits the terminal node, that a value other than -1
is used as reward. This makes it diﬃcult for the algorithm to distinguish the
promising states from the irrelevant states.
When training, we could have chosen to introduce some handcrafted measure
of rewards. For instance, a goal-count based reward could be utilized. By doing
==PAGE:66==
56
Results and Discussion
this, BetaCore would be incentivised to place boxes on goals. However, this
would result in the solution being domain-dependent, and only achieve results
as good as the handcrafted measure of reward. Additionally, guiding the search
by handcrafted heuristics defeats the purpose of self-learning.
Furthermore,
problems would arise when using the goal-count measure, as exempliﬁed in
ﬁgure 6.2. Even if the box C is initially placed on its goal, it has to be removed
later in order to place B and E. Rewarding the agent for placing a box on a goal
is not necessarily the optimal strategy.
Figure 6.2: The CEB level.
Finally, the levels BetaCore is trained
on (PLG level set) creates a state
space where the majority of the states
are uninteresting, meaning the value
of the state is approximately zero.
Using the level in ﬁgure 6.1 again
as an example, all states generated
where either the agent or box is lo-
cated at the top or bottom lane are
irrelevant for the solution.
This particular issue was introduced
formally by [21] and deﬁned as dead
components, meaning a strongly con-
nected component in the state-space, that does not contain a goal. Adopting
the solution from [21] could have proven productive, but was deemed to be out
of scope.
The thesis [5] attempted to implement MCTS in the 02885 domain and ran into
similar issues with the original algorithm. They were forced to heavily modify
the algorithm with heuristics in order for the solution to be comparable with
A*. Nonetheless, their presented solution was not applicable in this thesis, as
the goal was to create a domain-independent implementation.
With the solutions presented in section 5.2, the MCTS implementation produced
suﬃciently viable results. Furthermore, the ﬁnal model for BetaCore replaces
the simulation step of the MCTS, with a neural network. By using the neural
network instead of an entirely random simulation, many of the presented issues
are avoided. Because of this, we chose to persist with using MCTS instead of
exploring other options.
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Discussion
57
6.2.2
Evaluating the Neural Network
Based on the benchmarks, the CNN performs worse than random. Looking at
the level in ﬁgure 6.1 and the resulting probability vector outcomes, the CNN
decides to move back to the original position with highest certainty. During our
testing, we observed the CNN moving back and forth between states repeatedly.
In many cases, the trained CNN either predicted the optimal move with high
certainty, or exhibited the aforementioned behaviour.
Our hypothesis, is that the CNN accurately predicts already seen states, while
struggling to evaluate unfamiliar states.
This might be due to the already
discussed sparse reward issue presented in section 6.2.1.
Another problem could occur when introducing levels of previously unseen di-
mensions. BetaCore is trained on one dimension only, and is still struggling
to recognize unseen states. The goal was to train on diﬀerent dimensions, par-
ticularly on the three diﬀerent complexity classes, but was abandoned due to
time constraints. The changing dimensions in the state-space of Wizzy-domain
adds an additional layer of complexity in regards to training, compared to AGZ.
Therefore, an already very computationally demanding task becomes even more
time consuming.
A further bottleneck for the training process is the computational power. Figure
6.3 shows the loss progress over the 70 hours of training for AGZ. It takes around
10 hours of training before the loss decreases. The AGZ model was trained with
4 tensor processing units, speciﬁcally designed processing units for accelerating
neural network operations [11]. These processing unites perform signiﬁcantly
better than Tesla V100 GPUs, and according to this blog post by HPCWire3 4
v100 is required to achieve the equivalent computational power.
If we assume the source is accurate, AGZ trains with 8 times the eﬃciency of Be-
taCore. Consequently, training AGZ on the same hardware used for this thesis,
the loss would start declining after 80 hours. Regardless if this is precise or not
it gives an idea of the hardware diﬀerence DeepMind operates with. Comparing
the BetaCore training progress directly with AGZ is unfair considering both the
domain-, and computational power diﬀerences.
With this in mind, and based on the loss results presented in ﬁgure 5.4, we could
argue that the loss might eventually decrease if the training continued for an ex-
tended time to compensate for the weaker computational power. Unfortunately,
due to time constraints BetaCore trained for 24 hours only.
3https://www.hpcwire.com/2018/04/30/riseml-benchmarks-google-tpuv2-against-nvidia-v100-gpu/
==PAGE:68==
58
Results and Discussion
Figure 6.3: AGZ Loss over the course of training [17].
6.2.3
Possibility of Heuristics
Looking at the similar problem solution implemented by [4], he trained a network
to learn a heuristic with promising results. However, the goal for this thesis
was to implement an absolutely uninformed learning strategy. The usage of a
heuristic would contradict this goal.
This discards the possibility of supervised learning techniques, e.g training the
network on solutions generated by A*. Training a heuristic based on an estab-
lished heuristic for A*, the heuristic would never exceed the original heuristic’s
performance, regarding solution strength.
At best, the trained network will
produce exactly the same solution as its heuristic counterpart.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have studied self-learning in a planning domain, by adopting
the methodology introduced in [17] for AlphaGo Zero. In [17], Monte-Carlo
Tree Search and a Deep Convolutional Neural Network is utilized to achieve
superhuman performance in the board game Go.
The goal of the thesis was to research the usage of Reinforcement Learning
without handcrafted heuristics coupled with MCTS in a Sokoban-inspired envi-
ronment called Wizzy-domain. We adopted the AGZ methodology for Wizzy-
domain, which resulted in BetaCore. Several successful modiﬁcations were im-
plemented to accommodate this adoption, and the hyperparameters of the CNN
was chosen based on the empirical analysis.
The presented results indicates that BetaCore is capable of independently learn-
ing how to plan for Wizzy-domain, albeit with simple levels. Computationally,
the solution demands far more resources than conventional planners, both re-
garding training the network, and ﬁnding solutions.
The lack of rewards in the state-space proved to be a big factor, when training
the CNN. Especially MCTS suﬀered from the inﬁnite cycles present in planning
domains, and this in turn inﬂuenced the CNN. Several challenges with using
MCTS in a planning domain were identiﬁed, and while some were solved, oth-
ers had no obvious solution. Both the CNN and the MCTS algorithm were
==PAGE:70==
60
Conclusion
shown to have a subpar performance when adopted for a planning algorithm.
Furthermore, the time constraints of this thesis, combined with the computa-
tional demand, impeded the progress.
We believe, despite the reviewed challenges, that improving BetaCore further
could prove fruitful. This would entail further researching the use of MCTS, as
well as the embedded utilization of CNN in MCTS, in a planning domain.
7.1
Future Work
If the work on the topics presented in this thesis was to be expanded upon, a
factor to be aware of, is the necessary time required to train the CNN. Consider-
ing all the required hyperparameter tuning and testing during development, the
overall progress was signiﬁcantly delayed. Given more time, additional experi-
ments with the CNN could be conducted. For instance trying diﬀerent regression
loss functions and activation functions (e.g modiﬁcations of ReLU).
Continuing training the CNN for an extended time, and observing the develop-
ment of the CNN in terms of prediction- and solution quality, could be beneﬁcial.
When training the network, the complexity could be gradually increased to im-
prove the system, and ultimately either prove or disprove the use of MCTS
embedded with a CNN in a planning domain. If the performance of CNN stag-
nates regardless, the unaddressed problems with MCTS for Wizzy-domain could
be investigated. Solutions excluding the use of heuristics is preferred in order
to maintain the domain-independent self learning aspect.
An interesting topic to look into would be expanding the CNN to support
multi-agent levels. However, some of the more fundamental problems with the
approach would need to be addressed, as the addition of several agents compli-
cates the planning. Furthermore, an easy way to enhance the performance of
the implementation would be rewriting BetaCore in pure Python.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Refactored framework
A major refactor of the standard domain was necessary in order to implement
new extensions. The original code had a lot of inconsistencies and unconven-
tional architectural structures, which made it diﬃcult to cleanly expand upon
the domain. The biggest changes are explained in the following sections. Re-
fer to the commit history in the repository to see all the changes. Both the
search-client and the "gridworld hospital" domain have been refactored.
General Architecture
The general architecture of the domain was changed from one with a minimal
amount of classes, responsible for an assortment of diﬀerent tasks each, to a
more contained structure with more classes and objects. In the refactor, a large
emphasis was placed on high cohesion and low coupling, as we sought to make
the domain easier to expand upon and change.
Due to the refactor, it is now easier to extend upon the domain, as the abstrac-
tion layers added to the structure makes it easier to implement new features.
Furthermore, it is now easier to change the underlying data structure of the
domain, as well as debug and understand the code.
==PAGE:72==
62
Refactored framework
Objects into data structures
In the original domain, the sequence of states was stored in an assortment of ar-
rays, referenced a number of times in the class (StateSequence) itself. This made
changing the data structure used very cumbersome, as any changes aﬀected the
entire class, in a high number of places. Therefore, we chose to restructure all
data into dedicated data structures, with a high level of abstraction, so that
the underlying data structures used can easily be changed. It is very possible
that the data structure does not need to change, beyond the changes after the
refactor, but for the sake of maintainability and readability, the changes was
implemented regardless.
In order for the easy addition of diﬀerent actions (extensions), all actions have
been implemented as classes, that implements an interface. The methods that
each action implements is isPreConditionsMet(), getPostCoordinate(), apply(),
draw() and getAﬀectedObjects. These methods allows for easy implementation of
all necessary logic needed for a new action, including checking the preconditions,
postconditions and drawing the action on the screen. By simply creating a new
class implementing the interface, an action is added, and no further work needs
to be done.
Shared Classes
Color and Action where classes which existed in both the domain and the client,
but where implemented diﬀerently, and contain unforgivable inconsistencies. A
new shared folder is now available, where both these classes is recreated to ﬁt .
Color have been renamed to Farge, to avoid confusion with java.awt.color.
Action/ActionType
Action was a class which existed in both subprograms, but implemented diﬀer-
ently. Both had a manual declaration of the coordinates of the diﬀerent actions.
Unfortunately, did they have some inconsistencies with the coordination decla-
rations which created a lot of frustration. E.g, lets look at the PushNE action.
The ﬁrst line is refers to the server version, and the second line is for client. The
last 4 arguments deﬁnes the coordinates, the ﬁrst 2 are the box changes, and
the last 2 represent the changes for the box. However, these should be the same
since they represent the same action, but aren’t. This is compensated for in the
==PAGE:73==
63
respective code for each parser, but not optimal for readability nor scalability.
Action PushNE = new Action(Type.Push , 0, 1, -1, 0)
PushNE("Push(N,E)", ActionType.Push , -1, 0, 0, 1)
Thus, a new Action class was implemented, with all the necessary functionality
to support the client and server. With scalability in mind, a new enum called
MoveDirection is implemented, which pre-deﬁnes coordinates. This gives a the
actions a solid consistency throughout the whole solution. The PushNE action
is now declared like this:
PushNE(ActionType.Push , MoveDirection.NORTH ,
MoveDirection.EAST)
Extension: Paint
As an early programming exercise to familiarize with the code, was to develop
the Paint feature. This extension added another type of agent called Wizard,
with a diﬀerent action set than regular agents. Wizards are distinctively colored
Gray, and can’t push nor pull any boxes. However, they are equipped with a
new move Paint. Applying Paint on a box, changes it’s color. Wizards are
constrained paint only to colors of other agents in the level. This introduced
interesting problems, where wizards and agents had to collaborate in order to
solve levels. Such a scenario is shown in ﬁgure A.1.
Because of time constraints, applying this extension to our ﬁnal solution was
not prioritized.
Figure A.1: Example of a Paint. To solve this level, the Wizard (0) have to
change the color of A to red in order for agent 1 to be able to
move the box to the goal
==PAGE:74==
64
Refactored framework
Results
Running the tool scc on the new domain versus the old, gives us these results1:
Version
Files
Lines
Blanks
Comments
Code
Complexity
Original
5
2782
281
309
2192
385
Refactored
24
2160
356
43
1761
226
The tool indicates that the refactoring was successful, as the number of ﬁles
increased, but the actual number of lines of code decreased. The amount of
lines have been reduced by 22.3%, and complexity by 41.3%. The scc complexity
score is based on the amount of loops and branches in the project2.
Mentioned in A, we decided to utilize more classes in the domain, in favour of
simplicity, compared to the data sparsity of native arrays. Because the domain
objects are only created once, the performance isn’t notably worse. However, in
the client, game objects are still represented by arrays since code optimization
is crucial to the performance of the solution search.
1Tag v0.1
2https://github.com/boyter/scc
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1] A. Adonaac. Procedural dungeon generation algorithm. Mars 2015.
[2] I. Althöfer. On board-ﬁlling games with random-turn order and monte carlo
perfectness. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lec-
ture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
7168:258–269, 2012.
[3] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the mul-
tiarmed bandit problem. Machine Learning, 47(2):235–256, May 2002.
[4] F. Bergamin. Learning heuristics for planning using neural networks, læring
af heuristikker til automatiseret planlægning ved brug af neurale netværk,
2018.
[5] M. K. Brøns and Z. H. Kireli. Applying monte carlo tree search in a sokoban
domain, anvendelse af monte carlo tree search inden for et sokoban domæne,
2018.
[6] G. Chaslot, S. Bakkes, I. Szita, and P. Spronck. Monte-carlo tree search:
A new framework for game ai. 01 2008.
[7] R. Coulom. Eﬃcient Selectivity and Backup Operators in Monte-Carlo Tree
Search. In P. Ciancarini and H. J. van den Herik, editors, 5th International
Conference on Computer and Games, Turin, Italy, May 2006.
[8] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep
feedforward neural networks. In Y. W. Teh and M. Titterington, editors,
==PAGE:76==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence and Statistics, volume 9 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 249–256, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, 13–15 May
2010. PMLR.
[9] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning. The MIT Press,
2016.
[10] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition, 2015.
[11] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa,
S. Bates, S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, and et al. In-datacenter per-
formance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In Proceedings of the 44th An-
nual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, ISCA ’17, page
1–12, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
[12] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In In:
ECML-06. Number 4212 in LNCS, pages 282–293. Springer, 2006.
[13] F. Li, J. Johnson, and S. Yeung. Cs231n: Convolutional neural networks
for visual recognition. http://cs231n.github.io/, 2019.
[14] S. Russell and P. Norvig. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. Pren-
tice Hall Press, USA, 3rd edition, 2009.
[15] M. P. Schadd, M. H. Winands, M. J. Tak, and J. W. Uiterwijk. Single-
player monte-carlo tree search for samegame. Knowledge-Based Systems,
34:3 – 11, 2012.
A Special Issue on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Computer
Games: AICG.
[16] M. Schmidt. B lecture notes in machine learning, cpsc 340. https://www.
cs.ubc.ca/~schmidtm/Courses/340-F17/, December 2017.
[17] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou, A. Huang, A. Guez,
T. Hubert, L. Baker, M. Lai, A. Bolton, Y. Chen, T. Lillicrap, F. Hui,
L. Sifre, G. van den Driessche, T. Graepel, and D. Hassabis. Mastering the
game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017.
[18] A. Smola and M. Li.
Stat 157: Introduction to deep learning.
http:
//courses.d2l.ai/berkeley-stat-157/, 2019.
[19] J. Taylor and I. Parberry. Procedural generation of sokoban levels. 2011.
[20] D. Toropila, F. Dvorak, O. Trunda, M. Hanes, and R. Bartak.
Three
approaches to solve the petrobras challenge: Exploiting planning techniques
for solving real-life logistics problems. In 2012 IEEE 24th International
Conference on Tools with Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 1, pages 191–198,
Nov 2012.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[21] O. Trunda and R. Barták. Using monte carlo tree search to solve planning
problems in transportation domains. Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), 8266(2):435–449, 2013.
