==PAGE:1==
Topology Optimization for 
Fail-safe Design  
Hans Christian Christiansen  
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Topology Optimization for Fail-safe Design
Author:
Hans Christian Christiansen
S144425
Supervisors:
Ole Sigmund
PhD, Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Fengwen Wang
PhD, Senior Researcher
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Start date:
1st August 2019
End date:
1st February 2020
Statement:
This project has been done as a part of fulfilling
the requirements to obtain a M.Sc. degree in Mechanical
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The project represents a work-load of 35 ECTS points.
Signature and date:
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis details the work done to design a fail-safe structure.
This
has been done by using the Augmented Lagrangian with the steepest descent
method. The Augmented Lagrangian was successfully veriﬁed by comparing
the results for a maximization of stiﬀness problem with volume constraints to
the results from two other methods, these two methods being the Optimality
Criteria and the Method of Moving Asymptotes. In addition the results for
a minimization of volume problem with stress constraints were veriﬁed by
comparing them to results from the literature.
During the work structures for a multiple load-case as well as for robustness
was also designed.
The over-all goal of creating a fail-safe structure was achieve albeit one that
requires adding a small layer of a secondary material to the structure.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Modelling of Optimization Problems
3
3
Filters and Optimization Methods
6
3.1
A note upon the value of r, rmax and γ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Sensitivity Analysis
11
4.1
Maximization of Stiﬀness with Volume-Constraint . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Minimization of Volume with Stress-Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Results
14
5.1
Test-problem and Common values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Veriﬁcation of the Augmented Lagrangian Using the Other Methods .
15
5.3
Finite Diﬀerence Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Veriﬁcation of Stress-Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.5
Veriﬁcation of the Results for Minimization of Volume with Maximum
allowable Stress-constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.6
Minimization of Volume With Maximum Allowable Stress and Mul-
tiple Load-case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.7
Minimization of Volume with Two Values of Maximum allowable
Stress-constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.8
Minimization of Volume with Maximum and Minimum allowable Stress-
constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.9
Minimization of Volume Using a Maximum and Minimum Allowable
Stress Constraints and Ensured Structural integrity . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.10 Additional Result of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Discussion
31
7
Conclusion
33
A Appendix
35
A.1 The Developed Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The purpose of this thesis is to design fail-safe structures by using topology opti-
mization. This means that a small area of the resulting design should have a slightly
higher level of stress, such that the point of failure is known. The structure should
be designed to use as low a volume as possible while not exceeding the stress-level
that is allowed. The original idea was also to add an extra level of security by mak-
ing the demand that the rest of the structure’s structural integrity should not be
compromised by having an area that has failed. An example on such a design area
can be seen in ﬁg. 1.
Figure 1: Example of design-area, where Ωalso includes Ωf
The motivation for this subject, is that with recent developments within the ﬁeld of
topology-optimization, it has become possible to make designs with fairly uniform-
stress distribution and through that an overall lower stress-level.
However this
presents a problem for some industries, as it means it become impossible to know
where a given structure would be liable to fail ﬁrst or mean that the place is in an
area not practically usable and therefore it is not possible to monitor the health of
a structure, such as an air-plane. The successful creations of a fail-safe design with
a predetermined area of failure could therefore become a considerable help in the
future and allow for structures using less volume without compromising safety.
The work in the thesis is based upon the work shown in [da Silva et al., 2019a] and
[da Silva et al., 2018] which performs volume optimization with stress-constraints
by using the Augmented Lagrange with Steepest Descend Method. In the thesis the
implementation of the Augmented Lagrangian will be veriﬁed against the results
from two other methods, the Optimality Criteria, seen in [Andreassen et al., 2011],
and the Method of Moving Asymptotes, as seen in [Svanberg, 1987]. This is done
by using the Augmented Lagrangian upon a maximization of stiﬀness problem with
a volume-constraint and then comparing the results.
Afterwards The the Aug-
mented Lagrangian are used upon a minimization of volume with stress-constraint
for which the results will be compared to results in [da Silva et al., 2019a]. Once the
implementation is properly veriﬁed it will be used to design structures with fail-safe
designs.
1
==PAGE:6==
As a test case, the so-called "Norwegian Sock"-case will be used, as it contains a
number of design challenges that present a good test of the optimization code and is
well described in the literature, which means it is a good case to verify the function-
ality of the code. In general the "Norwegian Sock"-case is a L-shaped domain, which
has a sharp corner on the inside of the L-shape. This leads to a stress build-up,
which a successful algorithm will remove by smoothing out the corner. It is also
one of the test-cases used in [da Silva et al., 2019a], which opens up the possibility
of comparing the gained results with those in [da Silva et al., 2019a] and thus verify
the implementation.
The code developed during the work on this thesis is based upon the code detailed
in [Andreassen et al., 2011] and therefore uses the same types of basic 2D elements
along with their derivatives ie. the stiﬀness matrix and similar. However as the
elements are not original work, they are not expanded upon further.
In the course of the work a multiple load-case has been implemented as well as ro-
bustness as based upon [Wang et al., 2011], however these results are of a secondary
nature to the primary objective.
It should be noted that the author has worked with the implementation of the Opti-
mality Criteria and the Method of Moving Asymptotes in a special course previously.
2
==PAGE:7==
2
Modelling of Optimization Problems
As previously mentioned two overall problems will be solved, a maximization of
stiﬀness and a minimization of volume. For the maximization of stiﬀness there is a
volume constraint, while the minimization of volume has a number of diﬀerent types
of stress-constrains. The maximization of stiﬀness problem can be described in the
following way as seen in [Andreassen et al., 2011]:
min : c1(¯x) = UTKU =
X
∀e∈Ω
Ee(¯xe)uT
e k0ue
s.t.:V (¯x)
V0
= v
KU = F
0 ≤¯xe ≤1
∀e ∈Ω
(1)
Where x denotes the design variables also called the densities, ¯x denotes the ﬁltered
design variable, U is the displacement vector, K denotes the global stiﬀness matrix,
V (¯x) is the volume of the design, V0 is the volume of the entire design domain, v is
the volume fraction and F is the force-vector. Ek is the Young’s modulus of element
e found by the stiﬀness interpolation explained later, ue is the local displacement
vector for element e, while k0 is the baseline local stiﬀness matrix. Ωcontains all
elements in the design area as can also be seen in ﬁg. 1.
It should be noted that there has been made a small change to the local stiﬀness
matrix compared to how it is made in [Andreassen et al., 2011]. The diﬀerence is
that the thickness t is multiplied onto the local stiﬀness matrix, the reason for this
change is to make comparison to [da Silva et al., 2019a] possible as the thickness is
present in the work done there.
The minimization of volume problem is based upon [da Silva et al., 2019a] and looks
like the following:
min : c2(¯x) = V (¯x)
s.t.:σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1 = 0
∀e ∈Ω
KU = F
0 ≤¯xe ≤1
∀e ∈Ω
(2)
Where σ(e)
eq (x) denotes the equivalent von Mises stress and σy denotes the maximum
allowable stress.
Three further variants of this problem exists, one where the constraints has been
3
==PAGE:8==
changed to the following:
min : c2.1(¯x) = V (¯x)
s.t.:σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1 = 0
e ∈Ω\Ωf
σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy · α1
−1 = 0
∀e ∈Ωf
KU = F
0 ≤¯xe ≤1
∀e ∈Ω
(3)
Where α1 is introduced, so that the higher allowable stress is deﬁned as a value of
σy and as such it can be seen that if α = 1 then eq. (3) becomes eq. (2). While Ωf
is a subset of Ωas the example in ﬁg. 1 show. The second variant is the following:
min : c2.2(¯x) = V (¯x)
s.t.:σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1 = 0
e ∈Ω\Ωf
σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy · α1
−1 = 0
∀e ∈Ωf
1 −σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy · α2
= 0
∀e ∈Ωf
KU = F
0 ≤¯xe ≤1
∀e ∈Ω
(4)
Where α2 < α1. As can be seen a constraint detailing a minimum allowable stress
has been added.
The third variant is similar to the problem deﬁnition in eq. (4) but with an additional
design ﬁeld that doesn’t contain the higher stress-domain, so as to model that this
area has failed and has no load-bearing capability. This therefore looks like the
following:
min : c2.3(¯x) = V (¯x)
s.t.:σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1 = 0
e ∈Ω\Ωf
σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy · α1
−1 = 0
∀e ∈Ωf
1 −σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy · α2
= 0
∀e ∈Ωf
K1U1 = F
σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1 = 0
∀e ∈Ω\Ωf
K2U2 = F
0 ≤¯xe ≤1
∀e ∈Ω
(5)
4
==PAGE:9==
The problem deﬁnition in eq. (5) is the originally envisioned way to do the fail-safe.
As the Young’s modulus for each element is needed to calculate the stiﬀness matrix
the Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization (SIMP) interpolation is used based
upon the one used in [da Silva et al., 2019a]:
Ek(¯xe) = (xminimum + (1 −xminimum)¯xp
e)E0
(6)
Where E0 is the baseline Young’s modulus and xminimum is a minimum value of the
densities. xminimum is used to prevent singularities in the global stiﬀness matrix,
when solving KU = F. For eq. (6) the penalization factor p is always 3 in this
thesis.
σ(e)
eq (xe) is calculated as in [da Silva et al., 2019a]:
σ(e)
eq (¯xe) =
q
σT
e (¯x)Mσe(¯x)
(7)
Where M is a constant matrix and only works for plane-stress problems, which will
be assumed in this thesis.
M =


1
−1
2
0
−1
2
1
0
0
0
3


(8)
While σe denotes the stress vector of element e and is found using the consti-
tutive matrix C and the strain-displacement matrix B as they are described in
[Cook et al., 2002]:
σe(¯xe) = Eε(¯xe)CBeue(¯xe)
(9)
Where Eε denotes the stress-relaxed Young’s modulus and is found using the ε-
relaxation approach as described in [da Silva et al., 2019a]:
Eε(¯xe) = E0fε(¯xe)
(10)
where
fε(¯xe) =
¯xe
ε(1 −¯xe) + ¯xe
(11)
The reason that relaxation is used for the stress-calculations, instead of the interpo-
lation seen in eq. (6), is the wish to achieve a solution as black and white as possible
and improve the accuracy of the stresses near the topology boundaries.
The ε-
relaxation approach works by artiﬁcially penalising intermediate densities, so that
they have considerably higher stresses, leading these densities to be pushed towards
either a value of 0 or 1. Therefore the value of ε has an impact on the result of the
calculations and has to be chosen accordingly, further on how to choose ε correctly
can be seen in [da Silva et al., 2019a].
5
==PAGE:10==
3
Filters and Optimization Methods
Four ﬁlters are used in this thesis, a sensitivity ﬁlter, a density ﬁlter, a heavy-
side ﬁlter and a threshold projection ﬁlter. The sensitivity ﬁlter, the density ﬁlter
and the heavy-side ﬁlter won’t be further discussed here, as they are described in
[Andreassen et al., 2011] and were already a part of the code, which this work is
based upon. The threshold projection ﬁlter is based on [Wang et al., 2011]:
¯xe = tanh(βη) + tanh(β( ˜xe −η))
tanh(βη) + tanh(β(1 −η))
(12)
Where ˜xe is the density-ﬁltered density of element e, β and η are values that control
the behaviour of the ﬁlter and has a large impact on the results of the optimization.
η stays at a ﬁxed value throughout the optimizations, while β always starts out at
the value of 1 and is updated by a factor of 2, when there has been both a minimum
of 40 iterations since the last update and either the compliance doesn’t change more
than 0.001 between iterations or the largest change in densities is below 0.01 at the
same time as the value of the constraints are within 0.001 of the set constraint. The
ﬁltering of the sensitivities is done through the chain-rule. In addition if the value
of β exceeds 2∗R
1.5 , where R is the ﬁlter radius, then β is automatically set to 12.
The updating scheme used for the heavy-side scheme is slightly diﬀerent, as the
heavy-side ﬁlter doesn’t check for changes in the value of the objective function but
instead force an increase in β if more than 150 iterations has been performed since
the start or since the last change.
The threshold projection ﬁlter is also the basis of the robustness, which is based
upon [Wang et al., 2011]. It is done by creating two ﬁltered densities, densities be-
longing to the dilated design and densities belonging to the eroded design.
This is done by using two diﬀerent η values, where the one for the dilated design
is 0.4, while the normal design uses 0.5. the ﬁltering of the sensitivities are then
done by using the chain rule on the ﬁlter for the two values of η, where the one
using η = 0.4 is used to ﬁlter the sensitivities for the objective function, while the
other is used to ﬁlter the sensitivities stemming from the constraints. For ﬁnding
the sensitivities of the objective function the dilated ﬁeld are used, while the normal
densities are used for the sensitivities of the constraints. The dilated density is used
for everything where evaluation of the objective function is needed and the same
applies to the normal densities, when it comes to the constraints.
As mentioned in the introduction three optimization methods are used; the Opti-
mality Criteria, the Method of Moving Asymptotes and the Augmented Lagrangian
Method. The Optimality Criteria and the Method of Moving Asymptotes are sued
to verify that the Augmented Lagrangian method works and are within a reason-
able distance from the two other methods. The reason for using these methods
for veriﬁcation is that these methods are already implemented and well tested. As
the methods are not the main-focus of the thesis and not used for the fail-safe de-
sign they will not be further detailed here, the Optimality Criteria is detailed in
6
==PAGE:11==
[Andreassen et al., 2011], while the Method of Moving Asymptotes is detailed in
[Svanberg, 1987]. The reason why Optimality Criteria and the Method of Moving
Asymptotes aren’t used is that for the optimization with stress-constraint every
element will have it’s own stress-constraint, which means that there is as many
constraints as active elements.
Neither the Optimality Criteria nor the Method
of Moving Asymptotes can handle such a large amount of constraints without be-
coming prohibitively expensive in computational time, which leads them to not be
practicably usable for this type of optimization.
The Augmented Lagrangian used here is the Augmented Lagrangian Steepest De-
scent Method and is based upon [da Silva et al., 2019a]. The variant of the Aug-
mented Lagrangian itself in general form looks like the following:
L(¯x, r, µ) = c(¯x) + r
2
Nk
X
k=1
µk
r + g(k)(¯x)
2
(13)
Where µ is a vector containing the Lagrangian multiplier, g(k) symbolises the kth
constraint, µk is kth Lagrangian multiplier, r is the penalization factor where r > 0,
c(¯x) is the objective function of the problem, while ⟨·⟩is a max check on 0 and the
value inside, ie. the equation doesn’t consider negative values of the constraints.
The penalization and the Lagrangian multiplier is updated for each iteration ac-
cording to the following scheme:
µ(new)
k
=
D
r

g(k)(¯x(new))

+ µk
E
(14)
r(new) = min(γr, rmax)
(15)
Where (new) indicates the values found during the current iteration, γ is an update
value above 1, rmax is a maximum value for r. It should be noted that the results
are heavily reliant upon the values of r and rmax. As can be seen these values have
a continuous updating scheme. This is in contrast to the updating scheme in
The descent direction is calculated as the following:
D = −∂¯L
∂¯x
(16)
The new densities are then found by the following:
x(new) = x + ω · D
(17)
Where xnew is the new densities and ω is the step-size. It should be noted that D is
scaled by the largest absolute value of D that doesn’t belong to an element that is
either below a tolerance value of τ or above 1−τ. This speciﬁc version of scaling was
introduced, when it was noticed that in some situations the absolute largest value
of the descent direction was considerably larger than the rest while working on an
element that has already hit the upper or lower density boundary, which in itself
isn’t a problem unless the change is towards the boundary that the element already
7
==PAGE:12==
has the value of, an example is an element with a density of 1 while the direction is
working for a higher density leading to virtually no change between iterations.
The newly calculated densities from the Augmented Lagrangian are subject to the
following heuristic move-limit from [da Silva et al., 2018], which is used to avoid os-
cillations in the optimization. It works such that if (x(new) = −x)(x −x(old)) < 0,
then the following is used:
x(new)
min
= x(new) −k1 ∗(x −xmin)
(18)
x(new)
max = x(new) + k1 ∗(xmax −x)
(19)
Else if (xnew −x)(x −x(old)) > 0 then the following is used
x(new)
min
= x(new) −k2 ∗(x −xmin)
(20)
x(new)
max = x(new) + k2 ∗(xmax −x)
(21)
Where x(old) is x from the previous iteration, k1 and k2 is weighting factors where
0 < k1 < 1 and 1 < k2 and xmin and xmax are the minimum and maximum al-
lowable values of the found densities from the last iteration while x(new)
min
and x(new)
max
are the minimum and maximum allowable values of the found densities for the next
iteration. In addition a further move-limit is imposed in that x(new)
min
and x(new)
max
are
limited to having a max diﬀerence to x(new) of 0.2.
As can be seen this move-limit isn’t completely the same as in [da Silva et al., 2018],
as the indicator of oscillation (xnew −x) ∗(x −xold) < 0 doesn’t use ≤as in
[da Silva et al., 2018].
The reason is that this was found to eventually lock all
changes as xmin and xmax would converge towards the same value.
To create an overview of the implementation of the Augmented Lagrangian Method
a pseudo-code is presented here for the entire optimization, the pseudo-code is a
simpler version of the one in [da Silva et al., 2018]:
Where κ is a value used as a tolerance check, which means that the constraints
are allowed to not be satisﬁed by a certain predeﬁned amount and which stops the
calculation if the changes in the densities are below the same value at the same time.
As can be seen the pseudo-code in algorithm 1 has one major change compared to
[da Silva et al., 2018], which is that the line-search is gone. The reason behind this
was that it was found to not contribute much in this implementation, while slowing
down the code considerably. This happened because the Augmented Lagrangian has
a tendency to occasionally overshoot the values and then correct itself, this leads to
situations, where the Augmented Lagrangian would occasionally increase in value
and would do so no matter the size of the step, thus leading to a series of very small
steps, which costs a lot of computational time without actually changing anything
compared to not having the line-search on the value of the Augmented Lagrangian.
It should also be noted that actually calculating the Augmented Lagrangian itself is
no longer needed as the only point of usage was as a part of the line-search and as
such new calculations of the stresses for every change of the step-size aren’t needed
unlike if the line-search is performed.
8
==PAGE:13==
Algorithm 1 Optimization procedure using the Augmented Lagrangian with the
steepest descent method
1: Start with the densities from the previous iteration and the maximum and min-
imum move-limits xmax and xmin
2: Make ﬁnite element analysis
3: Make sensitivity analysis
4: Filter sensitivities
5: Calculate descent direction D
6: Calculate the new densities xnew
7: Update densities with movelimits
8: Filter the densities to gain ¯xnew
9: Update movelimits
10: if Both the maximum value of |x(new) −x| and the maximum value of g(¯x) is
below κ then
11:
Stop the optimization
12: else
13:
Update x, ¯x, x(old), µ, r and return to step 1
The reason for the constraint to also be subjected to the tolerance value κ is to
limit the needed iterations to attain results.
This is not really relevant for the
problem stated in eq. (1). But due to the non-linear development of the stress-
constraints in eqs. (2) to (5) attaining complete satisfaction of the constraints will
take an unnecessarily high amount of iterations. The reason being that the stress
will continue to oscillate which means that attaining precise satisfaction of the stress-
constraints are extremely diﬃcult, the reason being that if the stress is less than
the constraint that will lead to the objective functions sensitivity dominating and
leading to a change in the structure, which means a change in the stress. As the
change in the stress isn’t linear this can easily be in the form of a considerably
increase in the stress.
If it is vital that a stress stays under a certain limit, then the suggesten would then
be to use a value for which the upper part of the tolerance matches the desired
maximum stress.
3.1
A note upon the value of r, rmax and γ
When looking at eq. (13) one will note that the r essentially controls the weight
of the constraints in comparison to the objective function, as such the value of r
is quite important. As such when starting an optimization it is important that r
isn’t too high or that r increases too fast, as one risks ending up with a result that
might satisfy the constraints, but which is not the most optimal topology. However
if r is too small then one risks that the problem newer converges or in the case of
the minimization of volume that all volume is removed leading to the optimization
failing.
If r is too small late in the optimization then the objective function ends up dom-
9
==PAGE:14==
ination leading to a small drift towards towards a smaller objective function but
at the expense of the constraints. If r is to high late in the optimization then one
will note that the optimization instead increases the objective function in favor of
the constraints, which can lead to results that aren’t actually the most optimal,
but can also lead to instability with high oscillations in both objective function and
constraints, as the constraints when satisﬁed becomes 0 and such lets the objective
function dominate, which in turn leads to unsatisﬁed constraints that then have too
much of a weight leading to a potentially inﬁnite calculation.
It should also be noted that the value of r is dependent on the problem as the sen-
sitivities of the objective function and the constraints necessarily will have diﬀerent
size diﬀerences pure value wise and as such the value of r has to balance the two
in comparison to each other. This can be seen later in the diﬀerence between the
values in seen in section 5.2 and section 5.5. One will therefore have to be willing
to try quite diﬀerent values when ﬁrst doing the optimizations.
A method that might help in an initial guess of at least the start-value of r, is to note
the size of the sensitivities compared to each other at the ﬁrst iteration and how the
optimization develops. Preferably during the ﬁrst iteration the sensitivities of the
objective function should dominate compared to the sensitivities of the constraints.
This of course also depend on the initial guess as an example if the initial volume is
set high in section 5.5 then the initial r should be higher compared to if the initial
volume is set lower.
For the results in this thesis it was found that usually r = 0.000001, rmax = 0.1705
and γ = 1.05 was the most optimal values or at least a good starting point for
ﬁnding the correct combination of values.
10
==PAGE:15==
4
Sensitivity Analysis
4.1
Maximization of Stiﬀness with Volume-Constraint
For the maximization of stiﬀness with volume-constraints calculating the sensitivities
are fairly simple as the derivative of the objective function depends entirely upon
the stiﬀness interpolation of the Young’s modulus, which is found by diﬀerentiating
eq. (1) as is done comparatively in [Andreassen et al., 2011]:
∂c1
∂¯xe
= −p¯xp−1
e
(1 −xminimum)uT
e k0ue
(22)
While the volume is in eﬀect the densities and therefore becomes the following:
∂V
∂¯xe
= 1
(23)
Which holds true if all elements has the same size.
As seen in eq. (16) the derivative of the problem speciﬁc Augmented Lagrangian is
also needed, this is found through the chain-rule to be the following:
D = −
 ∂c1
∂¯x + µ ∗
∂V
∂¯x
V0 · v + r ∗
 V (¯x)
V0 ∗v −1
!
∂V
∂¯x
V0 · v
!
(24)
4.2
Minimization of Volume with Stress-Constraints
For the minimization of volume with stress-constraints the sensitivity analysis is the
one shown in the appendix to [da Silva et al., 2019a]. Here the objective function is
the volume hence the derivative of the objective function is the same as the derivative
seen in eq. (23) and is normalised by the volume of the entire design-domain.
The derivatives of the stress-constraints seen in eqs. (2) to (5) are only found as
a complete part of the second term in eq. (13), the derivatives of the constraints
controlling maximum allowable stress is done ﬁrst.
The second term in eq. (13) is here called S:
S = r
2
Ne
X
e=1
*µe
r + σ(e)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1
+2
(25)
Which is then rewritten to be able to use the adjoint method:
S = r
2
Ne
X
e=1
*µe
r + σ(e)
eq ((¯x))
σy
−1
+2
+ λT(KU −F )
(26)
as KU −F = 0 and λ is an arbitrary vector.
The derivative of eq. (26) are then found as:
∂S
∂¯xe
= r
2
Nk
X
k=1
he
∂σ(k)
eq (¯x)
∂¯xe
+ λT(∂K
∂¯xe
U + K ∂U
∂¯xe
)
(27)
11
==PAGE:16==
where the ﬁrst term is found by the chain-rule, k is introduced to help denote the
sum of all elements and avoid confusion with the e from the partial derivatives and
hk is introduced for readability and is deﬁned as the following:
hk =
*
µk + r
 σ(k)
eq (¯x)
σy
−1
!+ 1
σy
(28)
By substituting eq. (9) into eq. (7) the following can be found:
σ(k)
(eq)(¯x) = fε(¯x)ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x)
(29)
where
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x) =
q
uT
k BT
k C0MBkuk
(30)
Where C0 = E0C. It can also be seen that fε also controls the interpolation of
the stress as a function of the density. The derivative of eq. (29) is found using
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x) =
(ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x))2
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x) :
∂σ(k)
(eq)(¯xe)
∂¯xe
= ∂fε(¯xk)
∂¯xe
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x) + fε(¯xk)
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x)
aT
k
∂uk
∂¯xe
(31)
where ak is introduced for brevity and is the following:
aT
k = uT
k BT
k C0MC0Bk
(32)
By then inserting eq. (31) into eq. (27) and using that
Ne
P
k=1 uk = U one gets the
following:
∂S
∂¯xe
=
Nk
X
k=1
hk
∂fε(¯xk)
∂¯xe
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x) + λT ∂K
∂¯xe
U +


Nk
X
k=1
hk
fε( ¯xe)
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x)
aT
k + λK

∂U
∂¯xe
(33)
Then by calculating the adjoint vector:
Kλ = −
Nk
X
k=1
hk
fε( ¯xk)
ˆσ(k)
(eq)(¯x)
ak
(34)
One can avoid calculating ∂U
∂¯xe and thus the derivative of S becomes the following:
∂S
∂¯xe
= he
∂fε(¯xe)
∂¯xe
ˆσ(e)
(eq)(¯x) + λe
∂ke
∂¯xe
ue
(35)
Where the sum around he
∂fε(¯xe)
∂¯xe
ˆσ(e)
(eq)(¯x) has been removed and e inserted instead of
k as ∂fε(¯xk)
∂¯xe
is zero unless k=e and that term with the global stiﬀness matrix can be
found by using the local values. Thus the decent direction for eq. (2) becomes the
following:
D =
∂V
∂¯x
V0
+ ∂S
∂¯x
(36)
12
==PAGE:17==
For eq. (3) ﬁnding the derivative is a question of doing the same calculation for the
elements of the two areas, taking into account α1σy applies for some of the elements.
The deriviation of the minimum allowable stress constraint is more or less the same,
however one will have to swap out σ(e)
eq (x)
σy
−1 for 1 −σ(e)
eq (x)
σy·α2 .
It should be noted that if an element isn’t subject to a speciﬁc type of constraint
that element is still a part of the calculations but the constraint, i.e.
σ(e)
eq (x)
σy
−1,
σ(e)
eq (x)
σy·α1 −1 or 1 −σ(e)
eq (x)
σy·α2 , becomes zero for that element.
13
==PAGE:18==
5
Results
5.1
Test-problem and Common values
Figure 2: L-shaped problem
For the results the calculations are done on the L-shaped problem, which can be
seen in ﬁg. 2. The reason being that this problem is the same as the one seen in
[da Silva et al., 2019a], which means that the results from there can be used to ver-
ify the implementation of the Augmented Lagrangian and the optimization problem
seen in eq. (2). For the problem the values seen in table 1 are used for all calcu-
lations on the L-shaped problem. While the used mesh-size for all calculations is
200 by 200, where a 0.6 by 0.6 square are assigned passive elements that does not
inﬂuence the calculations and are solely there to make matrix assembly easier. As
such the actually used mesh-size is smaller. It should also be noted that the force of
0.3 is spread out over the length of 0.05 to prevent singularities by having the force
focused in a single node or element. The mesh-size is based upon the investigation
in [da Silva et al., 2019a] ﬁnds that 200 by 200 works, it’s not quite as good as a
mesh of 400 by 400, but not bad enough that the increase in computational time is
deemed to be worth it here.
E0
xminimum
ν
t
ε
κ
τ
106
10(−9)
0.3
0.001
0.5
0.01
0.01
Table 1: Values used for all calculations in the entire chapter
In addition for all calculations using the Augmented Lagrangian the initial values
for all µ are 0, k1 = 0.7 and k2 = 1.2.
For all calculation using the Augmented Lagrangian on the minimization of volume
14
==PAGE:19==
with stress-constraints the following values are used, where applicable: σy = 16000,
α1 = 1.1 and α2 = 1.05. Due to the projection ﬁlters ability to deal with the prob-
lem of stress evaluation at jagged boundaries as described in [da Silva et al., 2019a]
this will be the only ﬁlter showed for the calculations dealing with problems with
stress-constraints.
To deal with oscillations R is set to 8 and with a maximum β-value of 12, these
are chosen as there where some problems with oscillations in the stress-evaluation
and these values give smaller oscillations and are also slightly more conservative
compared to the one recommended for a mesh size of 200 by 200. These values are
used for all optimization with stress-constraints.
Unless otherwise the optimizations with stress-constraints always use an initial value
for r as 0.000001, while rmax is 0.1705 and γ is 1.05.
5.2
Veriﬁcation of the Augmented Lagrangian Using the
Other Methods
For veriﬁcation of the implementation of the Augmented Lagrangian the results
of the Augmented Lagrangian are compared with the Optimality Criteria and the
Method of Moving Asymptotes with the application of diﬀerent ﬁlters. For this the
maximization of stiﬀness problem with the volume is used on the L-shaped problem
in ﬁg. 2. For all of the calculations done in this sub-chapter the volume-fraction
has been set to 0.5, the maximum-value of β has been set to 8 for the heavy-side
ﬁlter, while for the threshold projection ﬁlter the maximum value of β is set to 12 as
previously mentioned. In addition the same ﬁlter radius corresponding to 4 elements
has been used for all the calculations. For the Augmented Lagrangian calculations
the initial value of r is 0.005, for the calculations using the heavy-side ﬁlter rmax is
0.05 and γ is 2, while for the rest of the Augmented Lagrangians rmax has been 10
and γ has been 1.2.
The reason for the diﬀerence is that for the heavy-side ﬁlter the value of rmax and
γ lead to a too slow convergence leading to the sensitives of the objective function
dominating early in the calculation, while the constraint where dominating too much
late in the calculation, which lead to a local minimum of the design with quite a bit
of gray areas.
The results from these calculations can be seen in table 2.
Method and Filter
Gray-scale
Objective Function
OC and Sensitivity
0.0141
15
==PAGE:20==
OC and Density
0.0151
OC and Heavy-side
0.0146
OC and Projection
0.0136
MMA and Sensitivity
0.0143
MMA and Density
0.0139
MMA Heavy-side
0.0139
16
==PAGE:21==
MMA and Projection
0.0136
AL and Sensitivity
0.0143
AL and Density
0.0152
AL and Heavy-side
0.0140
AL and Projection
0.0136
Table 2: Results for the maximization of stiﬀness with volume-constraint-problem
using diﬀerent methods and ﬁlters. OC is short for Optimality Criteria, MMA is
short for Method of Moving Asymptotes and AL is short for Augmented Lagrange
As can be seen in table 2 the values of the objective function for the diﬀerent
methods are roughly within the same span of values. The diﬀerence in the objective
function between the largest and the smallest Optimality Criteria is roughly 10%,
for the Method of Moving Asymptotes this is 5% and for the Augmented Lagrange
17
==PAGE:22==
it is roughly 10%. When looking at the gray-scales of the designs they all look
somewhat similar with acceptable diﬀerences that can be explained by the methods
and ﬁlters having found slightly diﬀerent local minima.
It should also be noted that the volume-constraint was satisﬁed for all the designs.
It can also be seen that some of the designs have some slight problems, most notably
the Augmented Lagrange combined with the Sensitivity ﬁlter, where there is a sort
of layer around the design. However as it is the sensitivity ﬁlter and the sensitivity
ﬁlter doesn’t use the chain-rule to ﬁnd physical densities, there is always a chance
that the results of the ﬁlter will present some trouble and as the overall result looks
like the rest the result is accepted as is.
Overall however it can be said that the results of the Augmented Lagrangian is
close enough to the two other methods that it can be concluded that the method as
implemented works as well as the two other methods.
Another important point for these calculations is also that the lowest objective
function for all the methods are attained for the threshold projection ﬁlter, which
interestingly is also the ﬁlter for which the three methods come closest to each other
all attaining 0.136 for the objective function, despite the designs themselves not
being completely the same.
It is also interesting to compare the eﬃciency iteration wise of the diﬀerent methods,
the number of iterations used for the diﬀerent methods and ﬁlter can se seen in the
following:
Method and Filter
Iterations
OC and Sensitivity
179
OC and Density
1331
OC and Heavy-side
650
OC and Projection
896
MMA and Sensitivity
244
MMA and Density
1188
MMA Heavy-side
3306
MMA and Projection
925
AL and Sensitivity
203
AL and Density
942
AL and Heavy-side
737
AL and Projection
335
Table 3: Number of iterations used for the diﬀerent methods.
OC is short for
Optimality Criteria, MMA is short for Method of Moving Asymptotes and AL is
short for Augmented Lagrange
As can be seen the Augmented Lagrangian looks to be generally more eﬃcient,
when looking at number of iterations used, compared to the other methods, espe-
cially when considering the projection ﬁlter.
For purposes of comparison later the stress of the results for the Augmented La-
grangian will be shown here:
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3: Stress-distribution for the Augmented Lagrangian with the threshold pro-
jection ﬁlter. The highest stress is placed in the corner of the sharp corner.
As can be seen in ﬁg. 3 the stress isn’t well-distributed and the total stress amount
to 83785. This of course is the result of a topology optimization that does not take
the stress into account in any way.
5.3
Finite Diﬀerence Tests
Figure 4: Placement of elements: Orange is element 1, yellow is element 2 and green
is element 3
To verify the implementation of the sensitivity analysis a ﬁnite diﬀerence test has
been performed on the stress-constraint from eq. (2).
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5: Finite Diﬀerence Test for three diﬀerent elements, when using maximum
allowable stress
As can be seen the results from the ﬁnite diﬀerence test that can be seen in ﬁg. 5,
creates the V-shape one would expect from a successful test.
In addition a ﬁnite diﬀerence test has been performed on a random element subjected
to the minimum allowable stress-constraint seen in eq. (4).
Figure 6: Finite diﬀerence test for a random element, when using minimum allowable
stress
The results in ﬁg. 6 shows a ﬁnite diﬀerence test that is successful as it creates the
expected V-shape, while not having too large relative errors.
20
==PAGE:25==
5.4
Veriﬁcation of Stress-Calculations
To be sure that the stress calculation is correct a stress calculation has been per-
formed on a straight beam, a problem which can also be easily done analytically,
for the analytical solution a standard case from [Tvergaard, 2004] has been used:
|σmax| =
F ∗l
1
6 ∗t ∗h2
(37)
Figure 7: The beam used for the case
Figure 8: Finite element analysis of the beam with a 200 by 40 element mesh
To avoid singularities in the ﬁnite element model at corners the stress is evaluated
at the top of the beam 0.1m from the support, while the used thickness is 0.001m.
The result from the analytical calculation was 13500 Pa. and as seen on ﬁg. 8 this
ﬁts fairly well. When looking into the data the corresponding element to the eval-
uation point has a stress of 130460 Pa. As this is oﬀwith 3.3% the ﬁnite element
stress-calculation is deemed acceptable.
5.5
Veriﬁcation of the Results for Minimization of Volume
with Maximum allowable Stress-constraints
The results for the problem described in eq. (2) with the design domain and material-
values for ﬁg. 2 can be seen in the following:
21
==PAGE:26==
Gray-scale
Stress
Volume
32%
Table 4: Results for the Minimization of Volume-problem with maximum allowable
stress 16000
The result in table 4 does not match completely with the results, which can be seen
in [da Silva et al., 2019a], however both show the smoothed out re-entrant corner,
which would be expected of a stress optimized structure.
As such the attained
volume is also considerably less than the one obtained in [da Silva et al., 2019a] as
the one obtained here uses 18.4% less volume. It should however be considered that
the situation in [da Silva et al., 2019a] isn’t completely the same as the goal is to
create robust topology to take into account manufacturing uncertainties.
However an email [O. Sigmund 2019, personal communication, 12 December] with
a further result from the same work as presented in [da Silva et al., 2019a] and in
[da Silva et al., 2019b], this result is found for a problem and situation matching
the one here. This result conﬁrm that it is the diﬀerence in situation that is the
cause of the diﬀerence in attained volume, as the further results attain 32%, which
is the same as obtained here and as such in can be said that the results here has
been veriﬁed. It should be noted that this further design look more like those seen
in [da Silva et al., 2019a], however this most likely stem from having found diﬀerent
local minima.
Looking at the results in table 4 it can also be noted that the results in table 4 has a
much better distribution of stress with plenty of areas having similar levels of stress.
In addition the calculations took 3347 iterations, which is almost three times as
many as in [da Silva et al., 2019a] where 1222 iterations were used.
However as
previously mentioned the situation is slightly diﬀerent, unfortunately the number of
iterations from the further results aren’t at present available.
The maximum stress was found to be 13148, which is above the maximum allowable
stress but within the tolerances.
22
==PAGE:27==
5.6
Minimization of Volume With Maximum Allowable Stress
and Multiple Load-case
Figure 9: Sketch of the multiple load-case
As can be seen the situation in contains two sharp corners that has to be dealt with,
while also contending with only one of the forces being active at a time. The results
for the multiple load-case seen in ﬁg. 9 can be seen in the following:
Gray-scale
Volume
30.5%
Gray-scale
Stress
Table 5: Results for the Minimization of Volume with maximum allowable stress-
constraint of 16000 on the multiple-load-case
23
==PAGE:28==
As can be seen the result attains some of the same features as those seen in table 2
and is also somewhat symmetric.
To verify the same case has been calculated for the same loads but as a simultaneous
two-loads case. The results can be seen in the following:
Gray-scale
Stress
Volume
18.3%
Table 6: Results for the Minimization of Volume with maximum allowable stress-
constraint of 16000 on thr simultaneous load-case
As can be seen the design in table 6 is considerable diﬀerent and uses considerable
less volume. However if one use only one of the two loads, one can see the reason,
as this structure can’t handle this load-situation leading to excessive stresses and
displacement. The reason is quite reasonable in that the two forces in table 6 cancels
the horizontal momentum from each other out meaning the result in table 6 only
need to handle a vertical load. The diﬀerences in results however conﬁrm that the
multiple load-case has been implemented correctly.
It might look like the sharp corners in table 6 touch the structure, however it has
been veriﬁed that it just avoids touching the structure itself.
The two problems are also considerably diﬀerent when it comes to the results as the
multiple load-case uses 2305 iterations, while the simultaneous load-case uses 813
iterations, which ﬁts well with the simultaneous load-case being considerably more
simple.
5.7
Minimization of Volume with Two Values of Maximum
allowable Stress-constraints
The results here are those for the problem seen in eq. (4) and are calculated using
the values seen in section 5.1. The results for this calculation can be seen in the
following:
24
==PAGE:29==
Gray-scale
Stress
Volume
32.1%
Table 7: Results for the Minimization of Volume-problem with maximum allowable
stress 16000 in main area and a small area with allowable stress of 17600
The placement of the high stress area can be seen in table 8. As can be seen in
table 7 the result uses a bit less volume than the result seen in table 4, which would
be an expected result of allowing an area to have higher stress. As can also be seen
it doesn’t seem like the calculation has changed much to try and take advantage of
the area allowing the area with higher stress. It does however seem like the higher
stress is placed in the outer most surface of the structure, which makes sense as this
is also one of the areas with the highest stress in the result in table 4.
However as it can be quite diﬃcult to see the high stress area a zoom showing only
the area where higher stress is allowed:
Zoom of Gray-scale
Zoom of Stress
Placement of Area
Table 8: Zoom on the high stress area along with it’s placement for the results seen
in table 7, the higher stress area is marked by red, the normal stress area is marked
with blue
When looking at the zoom of the stress-ﬁgure in table 8, it can be noted that the
highest stress seem to not be placed right at the surface of the structure, however
the reason for this can be seen in the gray-scale as the elements with the smaller
stress consists of elements with intermediate volumes and is as such a result of the
ﬁlter radius. It can therefore still be said that the highest stress is placed in the
surface.
25
==PAGE:30==
To get a better understanding the highest stress inside the area with a looser con-
straint and outside has been checked. Here it was found that the highest stress
overall was 17635, which is slightly higher than the constraint but well within the
tolerance, this stress was placed within the are with the looser constraint, while
the highest stress outside this constraint was 16089, which also is higher than the
constraint, but within the tolerance.
However this calculation was also considerably more expensive compared to the one
in section 5.5 as a total of 7247 iterations was used for this calculation, showing that
the rater small change in the problem is considerably more diﬃcult to calculate.
5.8
Minimization of Volume with Maximum and Minimum
allowable Stress-constraints
The problem deﬁnition belonging to the problem here is the one seen in eq. (4). For
the calculations in addition to those mentioned in section 5.1, the initial value of r
is 0.000001, while rmax is 0.1705, γ is 1.05, while the ﬁlter radius R is 8.
Gray-scale
Stress
Volume
41.7%
Table 9: Results for the Minimization of Volume-problem with maximum allowable
stress 16000 in main area and a small area with allowable stress of 17600 and a
minimum allowable stress of 16800
As can be seen area has a visibly higher stress compared to the rest of the structure,
unfortunately this come from a heavy use of gray elements, which doesn’t as such
have a physical meaning. The rest of the structure looks quite like the structure in
section 5.5, even though considerably more volume is being used. This extra volume
however seams to have been primarily added to the beam that contains the high
stress area.
When looking at the structure, it overall does make sense as, when the force is ap-
plied, it looks as though the high stress area will be pushed together thus leading
to a stress concentration.
A zoom in on the higher stress are and it’s placement can be seen in table 10.
26
==PAGE:31==
Zoom of Gray-scale
Zoom of Stress
Placement of Area
Table 10: Zoom on the high stress area along with it’s placement for the results seen
in table 9, the higher stress area is marked by red, the normal stress area is marked
with blue
Out of interest a zoom has also been made of the area with the high stress and as
can be seen some of the elements has almost no density and the stress-distribution
internally in the area can best be described as looking like a chequerboard, although
the overall diﬀerence between them isn’t large, when considering the size of the
stress.
Interestingly enough the number of iterations used for this calculation, 2443, are by
a large margin less than the number of iterations used in section 5.7. However the
situations aren’t exactly the same as there were problems obtaining results for the
problem here for the placement used in section 5.7.
5.9
Minimization of Volume Using a Maximum and Mini-
mum Allowable Stress Constraints and Ensured Struc-
tural integrity
The results shown here are purely to show that the optimization is working towards
the wished results, as it has not been found to succeed yet, therefore these results
are just a picture of the situation after 804 iterations:
27
==PAGE:32==
Gray-scale
Stress
Stress without failed area
Volume
39.3%
Table 11: Results for the Minimization of Volume-problem with two types of stress-
constraints and ensured structural integrity
Zoom of Gray-scale
Zoom of Stress
Placement of Area
Table 12: Zoom on the high stress area of the results seen in table 11 along with it’s
placement, the higher stress area is marked by red, the normal stress area is marked
with blue
As can be seen in table 11 and table 12 the optimization is clearly trying to do the
optimization, but intermediate densities are being used to try and obtain the desired
outcome. The highest stress in the structure is placed in the are with the looser
28
==PAGE:33==
maximum stress-constraint, but the stress isn’t uniformly distributed and the stress
outside the structure exceeds the allowed stress as it is 16626, when the failed area
is removed this same value is 24961 and as such this structure would also fail.
5.10
Additional Result of Interest
To show the importance of the interpolation of the Young’s Modulus a graph has
been made to show the diﬀerence between the SIMP-approach and the ε-stress
relaxation approach:
Figure 10: The Young’s modulus as a function of X for the two interpolation
As can be seen in ﬁg. 10 the two interpolations are almost symmetric around the
line X=E and as seen in eq. (29) the calculated stress depends directly on the inter-
polation. This also means that the stress in an element intermediate density doesn’t
have any physical meaning, in addition to intermediate densities not being physical
themselves.
As previously mentioned robustness was also implemented. For the robustness cal-
culation the value of rmax is 0.8 is used, but only 0.455 was used, otherwise the same
values as those mentioned for the stress-constraint problems in section 5.1 has been
used.
29
==PAGE:34==
Dilated Gray-scale
Dilated Stress
Dilated Volume
40.9%
Normal Gray-scale
Normal Stress
Normal Volume
34.7%
Table 13: Results for the Minimization of Volume-problem with maximum allowable
stress 16000 and robustness
This calculation took 267 iterations, for the dilated design the maximum stress was
16714, which is 4.5% above the constraint and more than what was allowed by the
tolerances. While it was 16037 for the normal design, it should however be noted
that it was for the normal design that the stress-constraint was checked for. It can
also be seen in table 13 that the stress distribution of the dilated design is worse
than for the normal design. It should be mentioned that this calculation uses less
iterations than in [da Silva et al., 2019b] and less volume, however the situation and
the way the robustness is done is not the same as in [da Silva et al., 2019a].
30
==PAGE:35==
6
Discussion
When looking at the original idea for the fail-safe, it is quite clear that good usable
results has not been obtained. The reason being that the sensitivities relating to
the minimum allowable stress has a tendency to achieve the goal by using interme-
diate densities and as intermediate densities doesn’t physically exist then the results
aren’t usable.
The most likely reason for this behavior is that the ε-stress relaxation approach
speciﬁcally penalize intermediate densities, such that they have artiﬁcially higher
stresses compared to, when the stress-relaxation isn’t used as can be seen in ﬁg. 10.
The idea as previously mentioned is to force the stresses towards 0 and 1, when
ﬁnding the sensitivities of the stress-constraints.
A variety of diﬀerent methods were tried to try and ﬁx the problem with interme-
diate densities, one was to make a small layer of elements on either side of the area
with the required minimum stress. This did show some promise, but ultimately
never reached a viable solution.
Another attempt was to remove all constraints
from a layer around the high-stress area. This unfortunately led to stresses going
above 100000, interestingly this also happened in an area with intermediate den-
sities, which is further conﬁrming that the stress-relaxation is probably one of the
reasons for the intermediate densities being used in the high stress area. The last
attempt was instead of having no constraints in the elements around of the high
stress area, was to use the higher maximum stress-constraint. This unfortunately
never reached a point, where it was within of the tolerances of the constraints and
looked quite a lot like the one attained in section 5.8.
However to be able to say more about the exact reason more work will need to be
done, one interesting thing that could be done is to try and use the normal SIMP
approach that is used for the stiﬀness matrix. The experiment would be two-part,
one where all stress calculations are changed to the SIMP-interpolation and one
where only the stress-relaxation used for the sensitivities of the stress-constraints
are changed to the SIMP-interpolation. The ﬁrst one is not expected to give much
usable results as the stress-relaxation was introduced to avoid to much gray-areas.
One might note that when looking at ﬁg. 10 the stress should still be largest for a
density of 1, however the stress also depend upon the displacement and as a less
stiﬀstructure will have a larger displacement, this leads to the elements with inter-
mediate densities having a larger stress, than a comparable full density element.
Another problem that can have helped create the problem with the high stress area
is the shape of the high-stress area as a square isn’t generally the best shape, when it
comes to creating uniform stress due to the corners. However it should be mentioned
that a completely successful method should be able to deal with as many shapes as
possible and no investigation has been done to see if this plays any eﬀect.
It can also be argue that a fail-safe design has been attained in the form of the result
from section 5.7, the reason being that the highest stress is somewhat controllable
and is placed in the surface and as such it becomes possible to monitor the health
of the structure. One way is to add a small layer of another material on the area
31
==PAGE:36==
with the higher stress. This material would then have a slightly lower yield stress,
such that the added material would fail ﬁrst. The layer of added material should
also be such that it doesn’t change the stress distribution of the structure, such that
the area with the highest stress stays the same.
The only problem with this method is that it is not completely controllable in that
one needs to calculate the structure beforehand, so as to know where to place the
area with the higher allowable stress. The method is therefore not the most ﬂexible.
The Augmented Lagrangian method, at least as implemented here, isn’t the easiest
method to use. The reason being that to obtain good results that are the most
optimal structures, then one will have to do quite a few calculations and based upon
the results ﬁne tune the values of γ and rmax as mentioned in section 3.1. As such
if there was another method that could practicably do optimizations with stress-
constraints in a reliable and precise way, then most likely that would be preferable.
32
==PAGE:37==
7
Conclusion
It can be concluded that the over-all goal of designing a fail-safe structure has been
obtained. This is done by having an ensured area, where the stress will be higher
under the speciﬁc load-situation that the structure was designed for.
The found structure however does not contain the added layer of security of ensured
structural integrity upon failure of the area with the higher stress. The reason be-
ing that even though the results for the calculations trying to achieve this never
attain sattisﬁed constraints, even though they show signs that the structures has
been optimized according to this goal, unfortunately this is achieved by the usage
of intermediate densities, which does not exist physically.
The results were veriﬁed by using using the Augmented Lagrangian upon a maxi-
mization of stiﬀness problem with a volume-constraint and comparing the results to
results from using the Optimality Criteria and the Method of Moving Asymptotes
upon the same problem. It was also veriﬁed by using the Augmented Lagrangian
upon a minimization of volume problem with stress-constraints and comparing them
to results from the literature, where good agreement between the value the objective
function between the results, while the stresses was within the tolerances.
In addition to the original objectives during the work robustness and a multiple
load-case structures was also designed.
As further work it is suggested to investigate the impact of the stress-relaxation
upon the use of intermediate densities and further explore methods to avoid the
intermediate densities. Other avenues of further work could be to work towards
another optimization method than the Augmented Lagrangian due to the impact of
r’s updating scheme upon the results and the need to ﬁne tune these values to ﬁnd
optimal structures.
33
==PAGE:38==
References
[Andreassen et al., 2011] Andreassen, E., Clausen, A., Schevenels, M., Lazarov,
B. S., and Sigmund, O. (2011). Eﬃcient topology optimization in matlab us-
ing 88 lines of code. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 43:1–16.
[Cook et al., 2002] Cook, R. D., Malkus, D. S., Plesha, M. E., and Witt, R. (2002).
Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis. John Wiley and sons, inc,
fourth edition.
[da Silva et al., 2018] da Silva, G. A., Beck, A. T., and Cardoso, E. (2018). Topology
optimization of continuum structures with stress constraints and uncertainties in
loading. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 113:153–
178.
[da Silva et al., 2019a] da Silva, G. A., Beck, A. T., and Sigmund, O. (2019a).
Stress-constrained topology optimization considering uniform manufacturing un-
certainties. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 344:512–
537.
[da Silva et al., 2019b] da Silva, G. A., Beck, A. T., and Sigmund, O. (2019b).
Topology optimization of compliant mechanisms with stress constraints and man-
ufacturing error robustness. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-
neering, 354:397–412.
[Svanberg, 1987] Svanberg, K. (1987). The method of moving asymptotes—a new
method for structural optimization. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Engineering, 24:359–373.
[Tvergaard, 2004] Tvergaard, V. (2004). Styrkelære: Statik og bjælketeori. DTU.
[Wang et al., 2011] Wang, F., Lazarov, B. S., and Sigmund, O. (2011). On pro-
jection methods, convergence and robust formulations in topology optimization.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 43:767–784.
34
==PAGE:39==
A
Appendix
A.1
The Developed Code
1 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% TOPOLOGY -OPTIMIZATION WITH
FAILSAFE %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 %%%%%% Master -thesis project by Hans Christian
Christiansen , S144425
3
4 %Functions has been gathered in a single file for
ease of transfer
5
6 %Recommended call for the single L-shaped problem:
7 %TopOptCombined (200,200,1,1,0.99,3,4.0,4,0.5,3,...
8 %0.4 ,0.4 ,0.001 ,0.000001 ,2 ,16000 ,1);
9
10 %The r-value 0.000001 , omega (step.size), the
gamma value and rmax
11 %(controlled in StressAL) are 0.5, 1.25 and 0.005
respectively. They are
12 %the ones I have found to work best for the simple
L-shape. The ones
13 %mentioned in SilBecSig18 are r=0.003, rmax=3000,
gamma=10 and omega 0.8.
14 %The reason these aren ’t used here are that they
weren ’t found to work well
15 %for this implementation
16
17 %To change to the double -sided problem change the
last number to 2, I also
18 %suggest changing the two 0.4-values to 0.25
otherwise it will be a quite
19 %short "foot" on the doublesided -problem.
20
21 %Haven ’t had time to find optimal values for the
double -sided problem. But
22 %in general. If the volume of the design domain
goes very close to zero or
23 %reaches zero , then r is too low or gamma isn ’t
high enough. If rmax is too
24 %low then densities will start to fall continously
as the volume has to
25 %much to say , while if the volume goes up
continously then most likely rmax
35
==PAGE:40==
26 %is too high. Gamma being too high is usually seen
by the problem becoming
27 %unstable
28
29 function [obj ,it ,vol ,xPhys2 ,nP ,highStress ]=...
30
TopOptCombined(nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly ,volfrac ,penal ,
rmin ,ft ,eta ,OA ,...
31
Ltop ,Lright ,thk ,r,op ,maxSigma ,prob ,alpha)
32 close all
33 %%%% Explanation of input
34 %nelx is number of elements at the biggest width
35 %nely is number of elements at the biggest height
36 %lx is length of design in the x-direction
37 %ly is length of design in the y-direction
38 %CODE PRESSENTLY HARD -CODE TO ONLY WORKS WITH
EQUAL NUMBER OF ELEMENTS IN
39 %EACH DIRECTION AND WITH SQUARE DESIGN FIELDS.
40 %volfrac is volume -fraction
41 %penal is penalisation factor for SIMP
42 %rmin is radius for filter
43 %ft is filter type; 1 is sensitivity filter , 2 is
density , 3 is Heavyside
44 %and 4 is projection
45 %eta is used for the prjection filter;
46 %OA is the optimization method , 3 is the one for
AL (1 and 2 are
47 %not working for the stress problem , but exist as
legacy code)
48 %L are lenghts of various sides of an L-shape ,
given in values between 0
49 %and 1
50 %thk is the thickness of the design domain
51 %r is the intitial value of the penalization -
factor for the augmented
52 %lagrangian
53 %op is the type of optimization op=1 is stiffness
maximization , op=2 is
54 %stress -based optimization
55 %maxsigma is maximum allowable stress , only used
by stress -based
56 %optimization
57 % prob is the type of problem , prob=1 is the
normal L-based problem , prob=2
58 % is the double -sided L with multiple -loadcases ,
while prob=3 will be with
36
==PAGE:41==
59 %a higher -stress area.
60
61
62 %values currently used for running the L-shaped
problem from the paper
63 %TopOptCombined (200,200,1,1,0.99,3,8.0,4,[0.5
0.5],3,0.4,0.4,0.001,
64 %0.000001 ,2 ,16000 ,1);
65
66 %Suggested values used for running problem with
high stress area
67 %TopOptCombined (200,200,1,1,0.99,3,8.0,4,[0.5
0.5],3,0.4,0.4,0.001,
68 %0.000001 ,2 ,16000 ,4 ,[1.1 1.05]);
69
70 %% INITIALIZATION OF PARAMETERS
71 %figCh = figure(’Units ’,’normalized ’,’Position
’,[0.05 0.55 0.4 0.4]);
72 figDens = figure(’Units ’,’normalized ’,’Position ’
,[0.55 0.55 0.4 0.4]);
73 %figStress = figure(’Name ’,’Equivalent Stresses ’);
74 E0 = 1e6; %Young ’s modulus of solid material
75 Emin = 1e-9; %Not used - Legacy value
76 xMinimum = 1e-9; %Global change of minimum -values
of densities.
77 nu = 0.3; %Poisson
78 xTilde=zeros(nely ,nelx); %made to be able to use
optimization functions
79 nel=nelx*Ltop*nely +(1- Ltop)*nelx*Lright*nely; %
Number of active elements
80 highStress =[];%Initialising vector for function -
calls
81 %Finding the active elements of the various
problems
82 if prob ==1
83
84
passive =[nely*Ltop*nelx +1: nely:nely *( nelx)]; %
Non -used elements
85
passive =[0:1: nelx *(1- Lright) -1]’+ passive;
passive=passive (:);
86
nP=setdiff ([1:1: nelx*nely]’,passive);
87
NoConstr =[];
88 elseif prob ==2
89
passive =[1: nely:nely *(1- Ltop)/2* nelx ];
37
==PAGE:42==
90
passive =[ passive nely *((1- Ltop)/2+ Ltop)*nelx
+1: nely:nely*nelx ];
91
passive =[0:1: nelx *(1- Lright) -1]’+ passive;
passive=passive (:);
92
nP=setdiff ([1:1: nelx*nely]’,passive);
93
NoConstr =[];
94 elseif prob ==3
95
passive =[nely*Ltop*nelx +1: nely:nely *( nelx)]; %
Non -used elements
96
passive =[0:1: nelx *(1- Lright) -1]’+ passive;
passive=passive (:);
97
nP=setdiff ([1:1: nelx*nely]’,passive);
98
%Field contaning higher stress area ,hardcoded
for now:
99
highStress =[ nelx *0.20* nely -0.6* nely :1: nelx
*0.20* nely -0.5* nely ];
100
NoConstr =[ nelx *0.20* nely -0.63* nely :1: nelx
*0.20* nely -0.47* nely ];
101
NoConstr=NoConstr ’+[15: nely:nely *30];
102
NoConstr=NoConstr (:);
103
104
highStress=highStress ’+[20* nely:nely:nely *25];
105
highStress=highStress (:);
106
107
%NoConstr was created as a part of an
experiment to get solid high -
108
%stress areas
109
NoConstr=setdiff(NoConstr ,highStress);
110
111
highStress (:)=int64(highStress (:));
112
NoConstr (:)=int64(NoConstr (:));
113
NoConstr =[];
114 elseif prob ==4
115
passive =[nely*Ltop*nelx +1: nely:nely *( nelx)]; %
Non -used elements
116
passive =[0:1: nelx *(1- Lright) -1]’+ passive;
passive=passive (:);
117
nP=setdiff ([1:1: nelx*nely]’,passive);
118
%Field contaning higher stress area ,hardcoded
for now:
119
highStress =[ nelx *0.3* nely -0.57* nely :1: nelx
*0.3* nely -0.53* nely ];
120
NoConstr =[ nelx *0.3* nely -0.6* nely :1: nelx *0.3*
nely -0.5* nely ];
121
NoConstr=NoConstr ’+[0: nely:nely *15];
38
==PAGE:43==
122
NoConstr=NoConstr (:);
123
124
highStress=highStress ’+[5* nely:nely:nely *10];
125
highStress=highStress (:);
126
127
NoConstr=setdiff(NoConstr ,highStress);
128
129
highStress (:)=int64(highStress (:));
130
NoConstr (:)=int64(NoConstr (:));
131
%NoConstr =[];
132
133
nP2=setdiff(nP ,highStress);
134 elseif prob ==5
135
136
passive =[nely*Ltop*nelx +1: nely:nely *( nelx)]; %
Non -used elements
137
passive =[0:1: nelx *(1- Lright) -1]’+ passive;
passive=passive (:);
138
nP=setdiff ([1:1: nelx*nely]’,passive);
139
%Field contaning higher stress area ,hardcoded
for now:
140
highStress =[ nelx *0.35* nely -0.6* nely :1: nelx
*0.35* nely -0.5* nely ];
141
NoConstr =[ nelx *0.20* nely -0.63* nely :1: nelx
*0.20* nely -0.47* nely ];
142
NoConstr=NoConstr ’+[15: nely:nely *30];
143
NoConstr=NoConstr (:);
144
145
highStress=highStress ’+[0* nely:nely:nely *10];
146
highStress=highStress (:);
147
148
NoConstr=setdiff(NoConstr ,highStress);
149
150
highStress (:)=int64(highStress (:));
151
NoConstr (:)=int64(NoConstr (:));
152
NoConstr =[];
153 else
154
error(’Problem not deffined ’)
155 end
156
157
158 %% PREPARATION OF MESH , FORCES AND FILTER
159 %Calling functions that create mesh and related
values
160 if prob ==1|| prob ==3|| prob ==5
39
==PAGE:44==
161
%Calling the function creating the mesh for
the normal L problem
162
[KE ,F,U,freedofs ,iK ,jK ,Hs ,H,edofMat ]=
MeshStress(nu ,nelx ,nely ,rmin ,Ltop ,Lright ,thk
);
163 elseif prob ==2
164
%Calling the function creating the mesh for
the double L problem
165
[KE ,F,F2 ,U,U2 ,freedofs ,iK ,jK ,Hs ,H,edofMat ]=...
166
MeshDoubleL(nu ,nelx ,nely ,rmin ,Ltop ,Lright ,
thk);
167 elseif prob ==4
168
[KE ,F,F2 ,U,U2 ,freedofs ,iK ,jK ,Hs ,H,edofMat ]=...
169
MeshStressFailSafe(nu ,nelx ,nely ,rmin ,Ltop ,
Lright ,thk);
170 else
171
error(’Problem not implemented ’)
172 end
173 %% PREPARATION FOR OPTIMIZATION -LOOP
174
175 x = repmat(volfrac ,nelx ,nely);
176 xPhysOLD = x;
177 x(passive)=0;
178 beta = 1;
179 if ft == 1 || ft == 2
180
xPhys1 = x;
181
xPhys2 = x;
182 elseif ft == 3
183
xTilde = x;
184
xPhys1 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*exp(-beta);
185
xPhys2 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*exp(-beta);
186 elseif ft == 4
187
xTilde = x;
188
xPhys1 = (tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta*(xTilde -
eta (1))))...
189
/(tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta*(1-eta (1))));
190
xPhys2 = (tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta*(xTilde -
eta (2))))...
191
/(tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta*(1-eta (2))));
192 end
193 loopbeta = 0;
194 loop = 0;
195 change = 1;
196 checkconst = 1;
197
40
==PAGE:45==
198 if OA==1
199
lambda =0;
200
AL=0;
201 elseif OA==2
202
xold1=x(nP);
203
xold2=x(nP);
204
low =0;
205
upp =0;
206
lambda =0;
207
AL=0;
208 elseif OA==3
209
xold=x;
210
xmin=x;
211
xmin (:)= xMinimum;
212
xmax=x;
213
if op==1
214
lambda =0;
215
elseif op==2
216
if prob ==1|| prob ==5
217
lambda=zeros(length(xPhys1 (:)) ,1);
218
elseif prob ==2|| prob ==3
219
lambda=zeros(length(xPhys1 (:)) ,2);
220
elseif prob ==4
221
lambda=zeros(length(xPhys1 (:)) ,3);
222
end
223
end
224 end
225 ObjChang =1;
226 cold =0;
227
228 %%%%%%% Outer loop
229 while change >0.01
|| checkconst >0.01
230
231
loopbeta = loopbeta +1;
232
loop = loop +1;
233
234
%% FE-ANALYSIS
235
236
[U,K]= FEStress(E0 ,xMinimum ,xPhys2 ,penal ,nelx ,
nely ,iK ,jK ,KE ,F,U,freedofs);
237
238
if prob ==1|| prob ==5
239
elseif prob ==2
240
[U2 ,~]= FEStress(E0 ,xMinimum ,xPhys2 ,penal ,
nelx ,nely ,iK ,jK ,KE ,F2 ,U2 ,freedofs);
41
==PAGE:46==
241
elseif prob ==4
242
xPhys2prob4=zeros(nely ,nelx);
243
xPhys2prob4(nP2)=xPhys2(nP2);
244
[U2 ,K2]= FEStress(E0 ,xMinimum ,xPhys2prob4 ,
penal ,nelx ,nely ,iK ,jK ,KE ,F2 ,U2 ,freedofs)
;
245
end
246
%% SENSITIVITY -ANALYSIS AND OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
247
%Sensitivity Analysis done in function
248
249
if op==1
250
%Calling sensitivity analysis for
maximization of stiffness
251
[c,constraint ,dc ,dconst ]= SaoStress(U,
edofMat ,KE ,nely ,nelx ,xMinimum ,E0 ,...
252
penal ,xPhys2 ,nel ,volfrac ,nP ,r,lambda);
253
elseif op==2
254
%Calling sensitivity analysis for stress -
based problems
255
[c,constraint ,dc ,dconst ,~]= SensStress(
xPhys2 ,penal ,xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K,...
256
edofMat ,nu ,U,nelx ,nely ,nP ,r,lambda (:,1),
maxSigma ,freedofs ,volfrac ,...
257
nel ,lx ,ly ,union(highStress ,NoConstr),prob ,
alpha (1) ,1,[]);
258
259
volumeScaling=volfrac*nel;
260
%Finding Objective function
261
c=sum(xPhys1(nP))/volumeScaling;
262
if prob ==1
263
elseif prob ==2
264
[~,constraint2 ,~,dconst2 ,~]= SensStress
(xPhys2 ,penal ,xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K ,...
265
edofMat ,nu ,U2 ,nelx ,nely ,nP ,r,lambda
(:,2),maxSigma ,freedofs ...
266
,volfrac ,nel ,lx ,ly ,highStress ,prob ,
alpha (2) ,1,NoConstr);
267
elseif prob ==3
268
[~,constraint2 ,~,dconst2 ,~]= SensStress
(xPhys2 ,penal ,xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K ,...
269
edofMat ,nu ,U,nelx ,nely ,nP ,r,lambda
(:,2),maxSigma ,freedofs ...
270
,volfrac ,nel ,lx ,ly ,highStress ,prob ,
alpha (2) ,2,[]);
271
elseif prob ==4
42
==PAGE:47==
272
[~,constraint2 ,~,dconst2 ,~]= SensStress
(xPhys2 ,penal ,xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K ,...
273
edofMat ,nu ,U,nelx ,nely ,nP ,r,lambda
(:,2),maxSigma ,freedofs ...
274
,volfrac ,nel ,lx ,ly ,highStress ,prob ,
alpha (2) ,2,NoConstr);
275
276
[~,constraint3 ,~,dconst3 ,~]= SensStress
(xPhys2prob4 ,penal ,...
277
xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K2 ,edofMat ,nu ,U2 ,nelx ,
nely ,nP ,r,lambda (:,3) ,...
278
maxSigma ,freedofs ,volfrac ,nel ,lx ,ly ,
highStress ,prob ,alpha (2) ,3,...
279
NoConstr);
280
elseif prob ==5
281
[~,constraint2 ,~,dconst2 ,~]= SensStress
(xPhys2 ,penal ,xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K ,...
282
edofMat ,nu ,U,nelx ,nely ,nP ,r,lambda
(:,1),maxSigma ,freedofs ,volfrac ,...
283
nel ,lx ,ly ,union(highStress ,NoConstr),
prob ,alpha (1) ,4,[]);
284
end
285
else
286
error(’Optimization
problem not
implemented ’)
287
end
288
289
%Normalization of values for stiffness problem
290
if loop ==1
291
c0=c;
292
end
293
294
if op==1
295
dc=dc/c0;
296
dconst=dconst /(nel*volfrac);
297
end
298
299
ObjChang=abs(c-cold);
300
cold=c;
301
302
%% FILTERING OF SENSITIVITIES
303
%Performing filtering of sensitivities;
304
305
if ft == 1
43
==PAGE:48==
306
dc(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*(x(nP).*dc(nP))./Hs(nP)
./max(1e-3,x(nP));
307
elseif ft == 2
308
dc(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*(dc(nP)./Hs(nP));
309
dconst(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*( dconst(nP)./Hs(nP))
;
310
elseif ft == 3
311
dx = beta*exp(-beta*xTilde)+exp(-beta);
312
dc(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*(dc(nP).*dx(nP)./Hs(nP))
;
313
dconst(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*( dconst(nP).*dx(nP)
./Hs(nP));
314
elseif ft == 4
315
%As seen in paper by Wang and mentioned in
the SilBecSig18
316
dx1 = beta*(sech(beta*(xTilde -eta (1))))
.^2/( tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta -beta*
eta (1)));
317
dx2 = beta*(sech(beta*(xTilde -eta (2))))
.^2/( tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta -beta*
eta (2)));
318
dc(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*(dc(nP).*dx1(nP)./Hs(nP)
);
319
dconst(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*( dconst(nP).*dx2(nP)
./Hs(nP));
320
if prob ==2|| prob ==3|| prob ==5
321
dconst2(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*( dconst2(nP).*
dx2(nP)./Hs(nP));
322
elseif prob ==4
323
dconst2(nP) = H(nP ,nP)*( dconst2(nP).*
dx2(nP)./Hs(nP));
324
dconst3(nP2) = H(nP2 ,nP2)*( dconst3(nP2
).*dx2(nP2)./Hs(nP2));
325
end
326
end
327
328
if isnan(dconst(nP))==1
329
error(’Not a Number ’)
330
end
331
332
%% OPTIMIZATION -ALGORITHM
333
334
%%%The actual calculations for the different
methods are placed in
335
%%%functions for ease of switching
44
==PAGE:49==
336
%Filter is build into the functions unless MMA
337
%%%optimization -functions
338
339
%Optimality Criteria
340
341
if OA==1
342
[xnew ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:)] = StressOC(x,dc
,dconst ,ft ,xTilde ,H,Hs ,volfrac ,nel ,...
343
nP ,beta ,eta);
344
elseif OA==2
345
%MMA
346
[xnew ,low ,upp ,xold1 ,xold2] = StressMMA(x(
nP) ,...
347
xPhys2(nP),dc(nP),dconst(nP),loop ,low ,upp ,
nel ,...
348
xold1 ,xold2 ,volfrac);
349
350
xNewTemp = x;
351
xNewTemp(nP)=xnew;
352
xnew=xNewTemp;
353
354
if ft == 1
355
xPhys2 (:) = xnew;
356
xPhys1 (:) = xnew;
357
elseif ft == 2
358
xPhys2(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
359
xPhys1(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
360
elseif ft == 3
361
xTilde(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
362
xPhys2 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*
exp(-beta);
363
xPhys1 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*
exp(-beta);
364
elseif ft == 4
365
xTilde(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
366
xPhys1 = (tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta
*(xTilde -eta (1))))...
367
/(tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(
beta*(1-eta (1))));
368
xPhys2 = (tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta
*(xTilde -eta (2))))...
45
==PAGE:50==
369
/(tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta
*(1-eta (2))));
370
end
371
372
elseif OA==3
373
%AUGMENTED LAGRANGE
374
375
if loop ==1
376
%create values used for function call ,
but not actually used
377
omega =1;
378
end
379
380
%figure(figx)
381
%Calling the optimization methods
382
if prob ==1
383
[xnew ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),xold ,omega ,
lambda ,r,xmin ,xmax ,constraint ,AL ]...
384
= StressAL(x,c,dc ,dconst ,omega ,xold ,
xMinimum ,E0 ,penal ,nelx ,...
385
nely ,iK ,jK ,F,U,[], freedofs ,edofMat ,KE ,
ft ,beta ,eta ,xTilde ,nP ,nel ,...
386
volfrac ,loop ,lambda ,r,c0 ,H,Hs ,xmin ,
xmax ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),constraint ,
nu ,...
387
maxSigma ,op ,lx ,ly ,prob ,highStress ,
alpha ,[]);
388
elseif prob ==2
389
[xnew ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),xold ,omega ,
lambda ,r,xmin ,xmax ,constraint ,AL ]...
390
= StressAL(x,c,dc ,dconst+dconst2 ,omega
,xold ,xMinimum ,E0 ,penal ,nelx ,...
391
nely ,iK ,jK ,F,U,U2 ,freedofs ,edofMat ,KE ,
ft ,beta ,eta ,xTilde ,nP ,nel ,...
392
volfrac ,loop ,lambda ,r,c0 ,H,Hs ,xmin ,
xmax ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:) ,...
393
constraint+constraint2 ,nu ,maxSigma ,op ,
lx ,ly ,prob ,highStress ,alpha ,[]);
394
elseif prob ==3
395
dconstraint=dconst -dconst2;
396
[xnew ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),xold ,omega ,
lambda ,r,xmin ,xmax ,constraint ,AL ]...
397
= StressAL(x,c,dc ,dconstraint ,omega ,
xold ,xMinimum ,E0 ,penal ,nelx ,...
46
==PAGE:51==
398
nely ,iK ,jK ,F,U,[], freedofs ,edofMat ,KE ,
ft ,beta ,eta ,xTilde ,nP ,nel ,...
399
volfrac ,loop ,lambda ,r,c0 ,H,Hs ,xmin ,
xmax ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),constraint+
constraint2 ,nu ,...
400
maxSigma ,op ,lx ,ly ,prob ,highStress ,
alpha ,NoConstr);
401
elseif prob ==4
402
dconstraint=dconst -dconst2+dconst3;
403
[xnew ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),xold ,omega ,
lambda ,r,xmin ,xmax ,constraint ,AL ]...
404
= StressAL(x,c,dc ,dconstraint ,omega ,
xold ,xMinimum ,E0 ,penal ,nelx ,...
405
nely ,iK ,jK ,F,U,U2 ,freedofs ,edofMat ,KE ,
ft ,beta ,eta ,xTilde ,nP ,nel ,...
406
volfrac ,loop ,lambda ,r,c0 ,H,Hs ,xmin ,
xmax ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:) ,...
407
constraint+constraint2+constraint3 ,nu ,
maxSigma ,op ,lx ,ly ,prob ,...
408
highStress ,alpha ,NoConstr);
409
elseif prob ==5
410
dconstraint=dconst;
411
[xnew ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),xold ,omega ,
lambda ,r,xmin ,xmax ,constraint ,AL ]...
412
= StressAL(x,c,dc ,dconstraint ,omega ,
xold ,xMinimum ,E0 ,penal ,nelx ,...
413
nely ,iK ,jK ,F,U,[], freedofs ,edofMat ,KE ,
ft ,beta ,eta ,xTilde ,nP ,nel ,...
414
volfrac ,loop ,lambda ,r,c0 ,H,Hs ,xmin ,
xmax ,xPhys1 (:),xPhys2 (:),constraint+
constraint2 ,nu ,...
415
maxSigma ,op ,lx ,ly ,prob ,highStress ,
alpha ,NoConstr);
416
end
417
418
%Normalizing Al-values for console -output
419
if loop ==1
420
AL0=AL;
421
end
422
AL=AL/AL0;
423
424
end
425
%% UPDATE PARAMETERS
426
if OA==1
427
change = max(abs(xnew(nP)-x(nP)));
47
==PAGE:52==
428
x = xnew;
429
elseif OA==2
430
change = max(abs(xnew(nP)-x(nP)));
431
x = xnew;
432
elseif OA==3
433
change = max(abs(xnew(nP)-x(nP)));
434
x(:) = xnew (:);
435
end
436
437
obj(loop)=c;
438
it(loop)=loop;
439
vol(loop)=mean(xPhys2(nP));
440
vol(loop);
441
442
%Calculating stresses for plotting
443
if prob ==1|| prob ==3|| prob ==5
444
sigmaEq=zeros(size(xPhys2));
445
[sigmaEq (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U,edofMat ,
nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
446
elseif prob ==4
447
sigmaEq1=zeros(size(xPhys2));
448
sigmaEq2=zeros(size(xPhys2));
449
xPhys2prob4=zeros(nely ,nelx);
450
xPhys2prob4(nP2)=xPhys2(nP2);
451
[sigmaEq1 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U,edofMat ,
nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
452
[sigmaEq2 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2prob4 ,U2 ,
edofMat ,nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,
lx ,ly);
453
elseif prob ==2
454
sigmaEq1=zeros(size(xPhys2));
455
sigmaEq2=zeros(size(xPhys2));
456
[sigmaEq1 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U,edofMat ,
nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
457
[sigmaEq2 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U2 ,edofMat
,nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
458
else
459
error(’Problem not implemented ’)
460
end
461
%plotting stresses
462
%figure(figStress)
463
%image((sigmaEq),’CDataMapping ’,’scaled ’),
colorbar , colormap jet
464
465
if op==1
48
==PAGE:53==
466
checkconst=sum(xPhys2(nP))/(nel*volfrac)
-1;
467
elseif op==2
468
if prob ==1
469
checkconst=max(sigmaEq(nP))/maxSigma
-1;
470
elseif prob ==2
471
checkconst=max(max(sigmaEq1(nP)),max(
sigmaEq2(nP)))/maxSigma -1;
472
elseif prob ==3
473
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,highStress);
474
checkconst=max(sigmaEq(lS))/maxSigma
-1;
475
checkconst=max(checkconst ,max(sigmaEq(
highStress))...
476
/( maxSigma*alpha (1)) -1);
477
checkconst=max(checkconst ,1-min(
sigmaEq(highStress))...
478
/( maxSigma*alpha (2)));
479
elseif prob ==4
480
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,highStress);
481
checkconst=max(max(sigmaEq1(lS)),max(
sigmaEq2(nP2)))/maxSigma -1;
482
checkconst=max(checkconst ,max(sigmaEq1
(highStress))...
483
/( maxSigma*alpha (1)) -1);
484
checkconst=max(checkconst ,1-min(
sigmaEq1(highStress))...
485
/( maxSigma*alpha (2)));
486
elseif prob ==5
487
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,highStress);
488
checkconst=max(sigmaEq(lS))/maxSigma
-1;
489
checkconst=max(checkconst ,max(sigmaEq(
highStress))...
490
/( maxSigma*alpha (1)) -1);
491
end
492
end
493
494
if prob ==1|| prob ==3|| prob ==5
495
%% PRINT RESULTS
496
fprintf(’ It .:%5i Obj .:%11.4f Max Sigma .:%7.3f
ch .:%7.3f ch. obj .:%7.3f\n’,loop ,c, ...
497
max(sigmaEq (:)),change ,ObjChang);
49
==PAGE:54==
498
fprintf(’ min xPhys :%11.4f Max xPhys :%7.3f r
:%7.3f AL :%7.3f Const .:%7.3f\n’,min(xPhys1(
nP)) ,...
499
max(xPhys1(nP)),r,AL ,constraint);
500
fprintf(’ beta: %5i\n’, beta);
501
%% PLOT DENSITIES
502
503
figure(figDens)
504
sub1=subplot (1,4,1);
505
imagesc(1-xPhys1); caxis ([0 1]); axis equal;
axis off;
506
colormap(sub1 ,gray);
507
drawnow;
508
sub2=subplot (1,4,2);
509
placement=xPhys2;
510
placement(highStress)=0.5;
511
imagesc(1- placement); caxis ([0 1]); axis equal
; axis off;
512
colormap(sub2 ,gray);
513
drawnow;
514
sub3=subplot (1,4,3);
515
imagesc(1-x); caxis ([0 1]); axis equal; axis
off;
516
colormap(sub3 ,gray);
517
drawnow;
518
sub4=subplot (1,4,4);
519
imagesc(sigmaEq); axis equal; axis off;
520
colormap(sub4 ,jet);
521
drawnow;
522
523
elseif prob ==2|| prob ==4
524
%% PRINT RESULTS
525
526
fprintf(’ It .:%5i Obj .:%11.4f Max Sigma .:%7.3f
ch .:%7.3f ch. obj .:%7.3f\n’,loop ,c, ...
527
max(max(sigmaEq1 (:)),max(sigmaEq2 (:))),change ,
ObjChang);
528
fprintf(’ min xPhys :%11.4f Max xPhys :%7.3f r
:%7.3f AL :%7.3f Const .:%7.3f\n’,min(xPhys1(
nP)) ,...
529
max(xPhys1(nP)),r,AL ,constraint);
530
fprintf(’ beta: %5i\n’, beta);
531
%% PLOT DENSITIES
532
figure(figDens)
533
50
==PAGE:55==
534
sub1=subplot (1,5,1);
535
imagesc(1-xPhys1); caxis ([0 1]); axis equal;
axis off;
536
colormap(sub1 ,gray);
537
drawnow;
538
sub2=subplot (1,5,2);
539
placement=xPhys2;
540
placement(highStress)=0.5;
541
imagesc(1- placement); caxis ([0 1]); axis equal
; axis off;
542
colormap(sub2 ,gray);
543
drawnow;
544
sub3=subplot (1,5,3);
545
imagesc(1-x); caxis ([0 1]); axis equal; axis
off;
546
colormap(sub3 ,gray);
547
drawnow;
548
sub4=subplot (1,5,4);
549
imagesc(sigmaEq1); axis equal; axis off;
550
colormap(sub4 ,jet);
551
drawnow;
552
sub5=subplot (1,5,5);
553
imagesc(sigmaEq2); axis equal; axis off;
554
colormap(sub5 ,jet);
555
drawnow;
556
557
end
558
559
%figure(figCh)
560
%image(((xPhys2 -xPhysOLD)/max(abs(xPhysOLD (:)-
xPhys2(:)))),’CDataMapping ’,’scaled ’);
colormap jet , colorbar , caxis([-1 1]); axis
equal; axis off; drawnow;
561
%fprintf(’%f\n’,max(max(abs(xPhysOLD -xPhys2))));
562
%xPhysOLD = xPhys2;
563
%% UPDATE HEAVISIDE REGULARIZATION PARAMETER
564
%updating scheme of heavyside and projection
check both objective
565
%function and constraints
566
if ft == 3 && beta < 8 && (checkconst <=0.01 ||
loopbeta
>= 150) &&
(change
<= 0.01...
567
|| loopbeta
>= 150)
568
beta = beta *2;
569
loopbeta = 0;
570
change = 1;
51
==PAGE:56==
571
ObjChang = 1;
572
checkconst =1;
573
fprintf(’Parameter beta increased to %g.\n’,
beta);
574
end
575
if ft == 4 && beta < 2* rmin /1.5 && (checkconst
<=0.01 || ObjChang <=0.001) ...
576
&&
(change
<= 0.01 ||
ObjChang <=0.001)
&& loopbeta
>= 40
577
beta = beta *2;
578
if beta >2* rmin /1.5
579
beta =12;
580
end
581
loopbeta = 0;
582
change = 1;
583
ObjChang = 1;
584
checkconst =1;
585
fprintf(’Parameter beta increased to %g.\n’,
beta);
586
end
587
588
589 end
590 %error(’We are at the end ’) %made to be able to
use "pause on errors" to
591 %inspect values
592 %if prob==1
593 %
save(’xPhys2.txt ’,’xPhys2 ’,’-ascii ’);
594 %elseif prob==2
595 %
save(’xPhys2.txt ’,’xPhys2 ’,’-ascii ’);
596 %elseif prob==3
597 %
save(’xPhys2.txt ’,’xPhys2 ’,’-ascii ’);
598 %elseif prob==4
599 %
save(’xPhys2.txt ’,’xPhys2 ’,’-ascii ’);
600 %
save(’xPhys2.txt ’,’xPhys2prob4 ’,’-ascii ’);
601 %end
602 end
603
604 %%%%%% FUNCTION TO MAKE MESH FOR STRESS
OPTIMIZATION
605 %%%%%%HARD -CODED FOR NOWRWEGIAN -SOCK CASE
606
607 function [KE ,F,U,freedofs ,iK ,jK ,Hs ,H,edofMat ]=
MeshStress(nu ,nelx ,nely ,rmin ,Ltop ,Lright ,thk)
608 %% PREPARE FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
52
==PAGE:57==
609 A11 = [12
3 -6 -3;
3 12
3
0; -6
3 12
-3; -3
0 -3 12];
610 A12 = [-6 -3
0
3; -3 -6 -3 -6;
0 -3 -6
3;
3
-6
3
-6];
611 B11 = [-4
3 -2
9;
3 -4 -9
4; -2 -9 -4 -3;
9
4 -3
-4];
612 B12 = [ 2 -3
4 -9; -3
2
9 -2;
4
9
2
3; -9
-2
3
2];
613 KE = thk *1/(1 -nu^2) /24*([ A11 A12;A12 ’ A11]+nu*[B11
B12;B12 ’ B11]);
614 nodenrs = reshape (1:(1+ nelx)*(1+ nely) ,1+nely ,1+
nelx);
615 edofVec = reshape (2* nodenrs (1:end -1,1:end -1)+1,
nelx*nely ,1);
616 edofMat = repmat(edofVec ,1,8)+repmat ([0 1 2* nely
+[2 3 0 1] -2 -1],nelx*nely ,1);
617 iK = reshape(kron(edofMat ,ones (8,1)) ’,64*nelx*nely
,1);
618 jK = reshape(kron(edofMat ,ones (1,8)) ’,64*nelx*nely
,1);
619 % DEFINE LOADS AND SUPPORTS (Norwegian Sock)
620
621 %For SilvaBeckCardoso
622 %forcePlacement=int64((nelx+1)*(nely+1)*2 -23/100*(
nely+1)*2:2:( nelx+1)...
623 %
*(nely+1)*2 -17/100*( nely+1)*2);
624
625 %For SilBecSig
626
627 forcePlacement=int64 ((( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *(
nely +1) *2):-(nely +1) ...
628
*2:(( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *( nely +1) *2) -...
629
(nelx +1) *0.05*( nely +1) *2);
630 F = sparse (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
631 F(forcePlacement ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement);
632 %F(forcePlacement ’)=-0.3/length(forcePlacement);
633 U = zeros (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
634 fixeddofs = union ([1:2*( nely +1) :2*( nely +1)*( nelx*
Ltop)+1]...
635
,[2:2*( nely +1) :2*( nely +1)*( nelx*Ltop)+2]);
636 alldofs = [1:2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1)];
637 freedofs = setdiff(alldofs ,fixeddofs);
638
639 %{
53
==PAGE:58==
640 forcePlacement=int64 ((( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *(
nely +1) *2):-(nely +1) ...
641
*2:(( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *( nely +1) *2) -...
642
(nelx +1) *0.05*( nely +1) *2);
643 forcePlacement2=int64 (( nely +1) *2*(1 - Lright):( nely
+1) *2:( nelx +1) *0.055*( nely +1) *2);
644 F = sparse (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
645 F(forcePlacement ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement);
646 F(forcePlacement2 ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement2)
;
647 U = zeros (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
648 fixeddofs = union ([(1- Ltop)/2*( nelx)*( nely +1)
*2+1:2*( nely +1) :...
649
((1- Ltop)/2+ Ltop)*( nelx)*( nely +1) *2+1]...
650
,[(1-Ltop)/2*( nelx)*( nely +1) *2+2:2*( nely +1)
:...
651
((1- Ltop)/2+ Ltop)*( nelx)*( nely +1) *2+2]);
652 alldofs = [1:2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1)];
653 freedofs = setdiff(alldofs ,fixeddofs);
654 %}
655 %% PREPARE FILTER
656 %Works
657 iH = ones(nelx*nely *(2*( ceil(rmin) -1)+1) ^2,1);
658 jH = ones(size(iH));
659 sH = zeros(size(iH));
660 k = 0;
661 for i1 = 1: nelx
662
for j1 = 1: nely
663
e1 = (i1 -1)*nely+j1;
664
for i2 = max(i1 -(ceil(rmin) -1) ,1):min(i1+(ceil
(rmin) -1),nelx)
665
for j2 = max(j1 -(ceil(rmin) -1) ,1):min(j1+(
ceil(rmin) -1),nely)
666
e2 = (i2 -1)*nely+j2;
667
k = k+1;
668
iH(k) = e1;
669
jH(k) = e2;
670
sH(k) = max(0,rmin -sqrt((i1 -i2)^2+(j1 -j2)
^2));
671
end
672
end
673
end
674 end
675 H = sparse(iH ,jH ,sH);
676 Hs = sum(H,2);
54
==PAGE:59==
677
678 end
679
680 function [KE ,F,F2 ,U,U2 ,freedofs ,iK ,jK ,Hs ,H,edofMat
]= MeshStressFailSafe ...
681
(nu ,nelx ,nely ,rmin ,Ltop ,Lright ,thk)
682 %% PREPARE FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
683 A11 = [12
3 -6 -3;
3 12
3
0; -6
3 12
-3; -3
0 -3 12];
684 A12 = [-6 -3
0
3; -3 -6 -3 -6;
0 -3 -6
3;
3
-6
3
-6];
685 B11 = [-4
3 -2
9;
3 -4 -9
4; -2 -9 -4 -3;
9
4 -3
-4];
686 B12 = [ 2 -3
4 -9; -3
2
9 -2;
4
9
2
3; -9
-2
3
2];
687 KE = thk *1/(1 -nu^2) /24*([ A11 A12;A12 ’ A11]+nu*[B11
B12;B12 ’ B11]);
688 nodenrs = reshape (1:(1+ nelx)*(1+ nely) ,1+nely ,1+
nelx);
689 edofVec = reshape (2* nodenrs (1:end -1,1:end -1)+1,
nelx*nely ,1);
690 edofMat = repmat(edofVec ,1,8)+repmat ([0 1 2* nely
+[2 3 0 1] -2 -1],nelx*nely ,1);
691 iK = reshape(kron(edofMat ,ones (8,1)) ’,64*nelx*nely
,1);
692 jK = reshape(kron(edofMat ,ones (1,8)) ’,64*nelx*nely
,1);
693 % DEFINE LOADS AND SUPPORTS (Norwegian Sock)
694
695 %For SilvaBeckCardoso
696 %forcePlacement=int64((nelx+1)*(nely+1)*2 -23/100*(
nely+1)*2:2:( nelx+1)...
697 %
*(nely+1)*2 -17/100*( nely+1)*2);
698
699 %For SilBecSig
700 forcePlacement=int64 ((( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *(
nely +1) *2):-(nely +1) ...
701
*2:(( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *( nely +1) *2) -...
702
(nelx +1) *0.05*( nely +1) *2);
703 F = sparse (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
704 F(forcePlacement ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement);
705 F2 = sparse (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
706 F2(forcePlacement ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement);
707 U = zeros (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
708 U2 = zeros (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
55
==PAGE:60==
709 fixeddofs = union ([1:2*( nely +1) :2*( nely +1)*( nelx*
Ltop)+1]...
710
,[2:2*( nely +1) :2*( nely +1)*( nelx*Ltop)+2]);
711 alldofs = [1:2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1)];
712 freedofs = setdiff(alldofs ,fixeddofs);
713 %% PREPARE FILTER
714 %Works
715 iH = ones(nelx*nely *(2*( ceil(rmin) -1)+1) ^2,1);
716 jH = ones(size(iH));
717 sH = zeros(size(iH));
718 k = 0;
719 for i1 = 1: nelx
720
for j1 = 1: nely
721
e1 = (i1 -1)*nely+j1;
722
for i2 = max(i1 -(ceil(rmin) -1) ,1):min(i1+(ceil
(rmin) -1),nelx)
723
for j2 = max(j1 -(ceil(rmin) -1) ,1):min(j1+(
ceil(rmin) -1),nely)
724
e2 = (i2 -1)*nely+j2;
725
k = k+1;
726
iH(k) = e1;
727
jH(k) = e2;
728
sH(k) = max(0,rmin -sqrt((i1 -i2)^2+(j1 -j2)
^2));
729
end
730
end
731
end
732 end
733 H = sparse(iH ,jH ,sH);
734 Hs = sum(H,2);
735
736 end
737
738 %%%%%% FUNCTION TO MAKE MESH FOR STRESS
OPTIMIZATION
739 %%%%%%HARD -CODED FOR Double L case
740
741 function [KE ,F,F2 ,U,U2 ,freedofs ,iK ,jK ,Hs ,H,edofMat
]=...
742
MeshDoubleL(nu ,nelx ,nely ,rmin ,Ltop ,Lright ,
thk)
743 %% PREPARE FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
744 A11 = [12
3 -6 -3;
3 12
3
0; -6
3 12
-3; -3
0 -3 12];
56
==PAGE:61==
745 A12 = [-6 -3
0
3; -3 -6 -3 -6;
0 -3 -6
3;
3
-6
3
-6];
746 B11 = [-4
3 -2
9;
3 -4 -9
4; -2 -9 -4 -3;
9
4 -3
-4];
747 B12 = [ 2 -3
4 -9; -3
2
9 -2;
4
9
2
3; -9
-2
3
2];
748 KE = thk *1/(1 -nu^2) /24*([ A11 A12;A12 ’ A11]+nu*[B11
B12;B12 ’ B11]);
749 nodenrs = reshape (1:(1+ nelx)*(1+ nely) ,1+nely ,1+
nelx);
750 edofVec = reshape (2* nodenrs (1:end -1,1:end -1)+1,
nelx*nely ,1);
751 edofMat = repmat(edofVec ,1,8)+repmat ([0 1 2* nely
+[2 3 0 1] -2 -1],nelx*nely ,1);
752 iK = reshape(kron(edofMat ,ones (8,1)) ’,64*nelx*nely
,1);
753 jK = reshape(kron(edofMat ,ones (1,8)) ’,64*nelx*nely
,1);
754 % DEFINE LOADS AND SUPPORTS (Norwegian Sock)
755
756 %For SilvaBeckCardoso
757 %forcePlacement=int64((nelx+1)*(nely+1)*2 -23/100*(
nely+1)*2:2:( nelx+1)...
758 %
*(nely+1)*2 -17/100*( nely+1)*2);
759
760 %For SilBecSig
761 forcePlacement=int64 ((( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *(
nely +1) *2):-(nely +1) ...
762
*2:(( nelx +1)*( nely +1)*2-Lright *( nely +1) *2) -...
763
(nelx +1) *0.05*( nely +1) *2);
764 forcePlacement2=int64 (( nely +1) *2*(1 - Lright):( nely
+1) *2:( nelx +1) *0.055*( nely +1) *2);
765 F = sparse (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
766 F2 = sparse (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
767 F(forcePlacement ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement);
768 F2(forcePlacement2 ’+1) = -0.3/length(forcePlacement2
);
769 U = zeros (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
770 U2 = zeros (2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1) ,1);
771 fixeddofs = union ([(1- Ltop)/2*( nelx)*( nely +1)
*2+1:2*( nely +1) :...
772
((1- Ltop)/2+ Ltop)*( nelx)*( nely +1) *2+1]...
773
,[(1-Ltop)/2*( nelx)*( nely +1) *2+2:2*( nely +1)
:...
774
((1- Ltop)/2+ Ltop)*( nelx)*( nely +1) *2+2]);
57
==PAGE:62==
775 alldofs = [1:2*( nely +1)*( nelx +1)];
776 freedofs = setdiff(alldofs ,fixeddofs);
777 %% PREPARE FILTER
778 %Works
779 iH = ones(nelx*nely *(2*( ceil(rmin) -1)+1) ^2,1);
780 jH = ones(size(iH));
781 sH = zeros(size(iH));
782 k = 0;
783 for i1 = 1: nelx
784
for j1 = 1: nely
785
e1 = (i1 -1)*nely+j1;
786
for i2 = max(i1 -(ceil(rmin) -1) ,1):min(i1+(ceil
(rmin) -1),nelx)
787
for j2 = max(j1 -(ceil(rmin) -1) ,1):min(j1+(
ceil(rmin) -1),nely)
788
e2 = (i2 -1)*nely+j2;
789
k = k+1;
790
iH(k) = e1;
791
jH(k) = e2;
792
sH(k) = max(0,rmin -sqrt((i1 -i2)^2+(j1 -j2)
^2));
793
end
794
end
795
end
796 end
797 H = sparse(iH ,jH ,sH);
798 Hs = sum(H,2);
799
800 end
801
802 %%%%% FUNCTION TO MAKE FE-ANALYSIS FOR STRESS
OPTIMIZATION
803
804 function [U,K]= FEStress(E0 ,xMinimum ,xPhys ,penal ,
nelx ,nely ,iK ,jK ,KE ,F,U,freedofs)
805
sK = reshape(KE(:) *(( xMinimum +(1- xMinimum)*xPhys
(:) ’.^penal)*(E0)) ,64* nelx*nely ,1);
806
K = sparse(iK ,jK ,sK); K = (K+K’)/2;
807
U(freedofs) = K(freedofs ,freedofs)\F(freedofs);
808
if max(abs(U)) >1e3
809
keyboard
810
end
811 end
812
58
==PAGE:63==
813 %%%%% FUNCTION TO MAKE SENSITIVITY -ANALYSIS AND
CALCULATE OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
814
815 function [c,constraint ,dc ,dv]= SaoStress(U,edofMat ,
KE ,nely ,nelx ,Xmin ,...
816
E0 ,penal ,xPhys ,nel ,volfrac ,notPassive ,r,lambda
)
817
ce = reshape(sum((U(edofMat)*KE).*U(edofMat) ,2),
nely ,nelx);
818
c = sum(sum(( Xmin+xPhys .^ penal *(1- Xmin)*E0).*ce)
);
819
dc = -penal*E0*(1- Xmin)*xPhys .^( penal -1).*ce;
820
dv = ones(nely ,nelx);
821
constraint = r/2*max(0,lambda/r+sum(xPhys(
notPassive))/(nel*volfrac) -1)^2;
822 end
823
824 %Function to calculate the augmented lagrangian
and it’s derivatives.
825
826 function [c,sigmaConstraint ,dc ,dSigma ,sigmaEq ]=
SensStress(xPhys ,penal ,...
827
xMinimum ,E0 ,KE ,K,edofMat ,nu ,U,nelx ,nely ,nP ,r,
lambda ,...
828
maxSigma ,freedofs ,volfrac ,nel ,lx ,ly ,highStress
,prob ,alpha ,alphanr ,noConstr)
829
830 %epsilon for epsilon -relaxation approach from page
4 SilBecSig18
831 epsilon =0.2;
832
833 volumeScaling=volfrac*nel;
834 %Finding Objective function
835 c=sum(xPhys(nP))/volumeScaling;
836
837 %Making empty matrice for stresses
838 sigmaEq=sparse(length(xPhys (:,1)),length(xPhys
(1,:)));
839
840 %Calculating the equivalent von mises stress
841 [sigmaEq (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys ,U,edofMat ,nu ,penal ,
E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
842
843 %Setting up B-matrice
844 a=lx/nelx *1/2;
59
==PAGE:64==
845 b=ly/nely *1/2;
846
847 %B-matrice
848 B=1/(4*a*b)*[-b 0 b 0 b 0 -b 0;
849
0 -a 0 -a 0 a 0 a;
850
-a -b -a b a b a -b];
851
852
853 %Derivative of SIMP as seen on page 3 SilBecSig18
854 DE=penal *(1- xMinimum)*xPhys (:) .^( penal -1)*(E0);
855
856 %Interpolation of xPhys used for the constituative
matrice and derivative
857 %As seen on page 4 SilBecSig18
858 EC = xPhys (:) ./( epsilon *(1- xPhys (:))+xPhys (:));
859
860 DEC = epsilon ./(( epsilon *( xPhys (:) -1)-xPhys (:))
.^2);
861
862 %Constitutive Matrix (with Young ’s modulus)
863
864 C = [1 nu 0; nu 1 0; 0 0 (1-nu)/2]*( E0)/(1-nu^2);
865
866 %M for stress calculations
867 M=[1
-1/2 0;
-1/2 1 0; 0 0 3];
868
869 %creating various matrices for storage
870 LambdaCalc=sparse(length(U) ,1);
871
872 dc = ones(nely ,nelx)./ volumeScaling;
873
874 dL = zeros(nely ,nelx);
875
876 dSigma = zeros(length(xPhys (:)) ,1);
877
878 ak = zeros (8,1);
879
880 sigmaHat = zeros(length(xPhys (:)) ,1);
881
882 hm = zeros(length(xPhys (:)) ,1);
883
884 Adjoint = zeros(length(xPhys (:)) ,1);
885
886 %Calculating hm (called hk in SilBecSig18 page 32)
887
60
==PAGE:65==
888 if alphanr ~=2 && alphanr ~=4
889
hm = max(0,lambda+r.*( sigmaEq (:)/maxSigma -1))
*1/ maxSigma;
890 end
891 if prob ~=2&& prob ~=5
892
hm(highStress)=0;
893 end
894 hm(noConstr)=0;
895
896 if prob ==3|| prob ==4|| prob ==5
897
if alphanr ==1
898
hm(highStress) = max(0,lambda(highStress)+
r.*( sigmaEq(highStress)/...
899
(maxSigma*alpha) -1))*1/( maxSigma*alpha
);
900
elseif alphanr ==2
901
hm(highStress) = max(0,lambda(highStress)+
r.*(1- sigmaEq(highStress)/...
902
(maxSigma*alpha)))*1/( maxSigma*alpha);
903
elseif alphanr ==3
904
elseif alphanr ==4
905
hm(highStress) = max(0,lambda(highStress)+
r.*( sigmaEq(highStress)/...
906
(maxSigma*alpha) -1))*1/( maxSigma*alpha
);
907
else
908
error(’Alphanr problem ’)
909
end
910 end
911
912 for i=1: length(xPhys (:))
913
914
%Finding local displacements
915
uk=U(edofMat(i,:));
916
917
%calculates variables as seen on page 32 in
SilBecSig18
918
ak(:)=(uk.’*B.’*(C)*M*(C)*B).’;
919
920
sigmaHat(i)=sqrt(uk.’*B.’*(C)*M*(C)*B*uk);
921
922
if imag(sigmaHat(i))~=0
923
keyboard
924
end
925
61
==PAGE:66==
926
%Calculating the right hand side of the
adjoint as seen on page 32-33
927
if sigmaHat(i)==0
928
elseif sigmaHat(i) >0
929
LambdaCalc(edofMat(i,:))=LambdaCalc(
edofMat(i,:))...
930
+(hm(i)*EC(i)/sigmaHat(i)).*ak;
931
end
932 end
933
934 %Calculating adjoint vector
935 Adjoint(freedofs)=K(freedofs ,freedofs)\(-
LambdaCalc(freedofs));
936
937 %Calculating the sensitivities as on page 32
SilBecSig18
938 for i=1: length(xPhys (:))
939
if sigmaEq(i) >=0
940
dSigma(i)=hm(i)*DEC(i)*sigmaHat(i)+...
941
Adjoint(edofMat(i,:)).’*(DE(i).*KE)*U(
edofMat(i,:));
942
else
943
error(’Sigma equivalent is below zero ’)
944
end
945 end
946
947 %calculating the sum of the constraints as
SilBecSig18 page 7
948 if prob ==1|| prob ==2
949 sigmaConstraint=r/2*sum(max(0,lambda (:)/r+...
950
sigmaEq (:)/maxSigma -1) .^2);
951 elseif prob ==3|| prob ==4|| prob ==5
952
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,highStress); %Area
with low stress
953
sigmaConstraint=r/2*sum(max(0,lambda(lS)/r+...
954
sigmaEq(lS)/maxSigma -1) .^2);
955
if alphanr ==1
956
sigmaConstraint=sigmaConstraint+r/2*sum(
max(0,lambda(highStress)/r+...
957
sigmaEq(highStress)/( maxSigma*alpha) -1)
.^2);
958
elseif alphanr ==2
959
sigmaConstraint=r/2*sum(max(0,lambda(
highStress)/r+...
62
==PAGE:67==
960
1-sigmaEq(highStress)/( maxSigma*alpha))
.^2);
961
elseif alphanr ==3
962
elseif alphanr ==4
963
sigmaConstraint=r/2*sum(max(0,lambda(
highStress)/r+...
964
1-sigmaEq(highStress)/( maxSigma*alpha))
.^2);
965
else
966
error(’alphanr prblem ’)
967
end
968 end
969
970 end
971
972 %%%% FUNCTION PERFORMING THE OPTIMALITY CRITERIA
973 %As in top88
974 function [xnew ,xPhys1 ,xPhys2] = StressOC(x,dc ,dv ,
ft ,xTilde ,H,Hs ,volfrac ,nel ,...
975
nP ,beta ,eta)
976 l1 = 0; l2 = 1e9; move = 0.2; xnew=zeros(size(x));
977
while (l2 -l1)/(l1+l2) > 1e-3
978
lmid = 0.5*( l2+l1);
979
xnew(nP) = max(0,max(x(nP)-move ,min(1,min(x(nP
)+move ,x(nP).*sqrt (...
980
-dc(nP)./dv(nP)/lmid)))));
981
if ft == 1
982
xPhys1(nP) = xnew(nP);
983
xPhys2(nP) = xnew(nP);
984
elseif ft == 2
985
xPhys1(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(nP);
986
xPhys2(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(nP);
987
elseif ft == 3
988
xTilde(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(nP);
989
xPhys1 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*exp(-
beta);
990
xPhys2 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*exp(-
beta);
991
elseif ft == 4
992
xTilde(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(nP);
993
xPhys1 = (tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta*(
xTilde -eta (1))))...
994
/(tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta*(1-
eta (1))));
63
==PAGE:68==
995
xPhys2 = (tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta*(
xTilde -eta (2))))...
996
/(tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta*(1-
eta (2))));
997
end
998
if sum(xPhys2(nP)) > volfrac*nel , l1 = lmid;
else l2 = lmid; end
999
end
1000 end
1001
1002 %%%% FUNCTION USING MMA FOR OPTMIZATION
1003 function [xnew ,low ,upp ,xold1 ,xold2] = StressMMA(x,
xPhys ,dc ,dv ,...
1004
loop ,low ,upp ,nel ,xold1 ,xold2 ,volfrac)
1005
1006 move =0.2* ones(size(x(:)));
1007 m=1; n=size(x(:) ,1); a0=1;
1008 a=zeros(m,1); ci =1000* ones(m,1);
1009 d=zeros(m,1);
1010
1011
1012 xmin (:) = max(0,x(:)-move);
1013 xmax (:)=min(1,x(:)+move);
1014 %xmax=ones(size(x(:)));
1015
1016 df0dx=dc;
1017
1018 fval =[sum(xPhys (:))/nel/volfrac -1];
1019 f0val =0; %Doesn ’t really matter f0val isn ’t used
by mmasub
1020
1021 dfdx =[dv(:) ’];
1022
1023
1024 [xnew ,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,~,low ,upp] = ...
1025
mmasub(m,n,loop ,x(:),xmin (:),xmax (:) ,...
1026
xold1 (:),xold2 (:),f0val ,df0dx (:),fval ,...
1027
dfdx ,low ,upp ,a0 ,a,ci ,d);
1028
1029 xold2=xold1;
1030 xold1=x;
1031
1032 end
1033
1034 %%%% FUNCTION PERFORMING THE AUGMENTED LAGRANGE
64
==PAGE:69==
1035 function [xnew ,xPhys1 ,xPhys2 ,xold ,omega ,lambda ,r,
xmin ,xmax ,constraint ,AL ]...
1036
= StressAL(x,c,dc ,dConst ,omega ,xold ,xMinimum ,
E0 ,penal ,nelx ,nely ,iK ,jK ,F,...
1037
U,U2 ,freedofs ,edofMat ,KE ,ft ,beta ,eta ,xTilde ,nP
,nel ,volfrac ,...
1038
loop ,lambda ,r,c0 ,H,Hs ,xmin ,xmax ,xPhys1 ,xPhys2
,...
1039
constraint ,nu ,maxSigma ,op ,lx ,ly ,prob ,
highStress ,alpha ,NoConstr)
1040
1041
%Creating vectors and values to avoid heavy
use of notPassive
1042
%xtemp1 is the values that was input
1043
%xtemp2 is values meant for output
1044
xtemp1=x(nP);
1045
xtemp2=x(nP);
1046
xnew=x;
1047
1048
%Initialize values that doesn ’t change.
Problem dependent values are
1049
%updated continiously instead od having the
check as on page 8
1050
%SilBecSig18
1051
gamma =1.25;
1052
rmax =0.008;
1053
1054
%Initializing values that vill carry over. As
suggested in SilBecCar18
1055
k=2;
1056
omegamax =0.5;
1057
k1 =0.7;
1058
k2 =1.2;
1059
move =0.2;
1060
1061
%Creating movelimits
1062
if loop ==1
1063
xmin=zeros(size(xtemp1));
1064
xmin (:) = xtemp1 (:)-move;
1065
xmax=ones(size(xtemp1));
1066
xmax (:)=xtemp1 (:)+move;
1067
end
1068
1069
%Calculating the lagrangian from input values
1070
Lagrange=c/c0+constraint;
65
==PAGE:70==
1071
1072
if op==1
1073
if max(0, constraint)==0
1074
dL=-(dc(nP));
1075
else
1076
dL=-(dc(nP)+lambda*dConst(nP)...
1077
+r*( constraint)*dConst(nP));
1078
end
1079
elseif op==2
1080
%Setting up common sensitivity for the
augmented lagrangian
1081
dL=-(dc(nP)+dConst(nP));
1082
end
1083
1084
1085
%Fixing problem with descent direction (
first encountered during
1086
%stiffness based optimization , not certain
if still necessary
1087
if ft==1
1088
Des = dL/max(abs(dL));
1089
elseif ft ==2||3||4
1090
nei=find( x(nP) >0.001 &x(nP) <0.999);
1091
Des = dL/max(abs(dL(nei)));
1092
else
1093
error(’ft not implemented ’)
1094
end
1095
1096
%find the new values of densities , new
densities are called called
1097
%xtemp2
1098
xtemp2= xtemp1+omega*Des;
1099
1100
%checking against movelimits
1101
xtemp2=max(xmin ,xtemp2);
1102
1103
xtemp2=min(xmax ,xtemp2);
1104
1105
%creating xnew for output
1106
xnew(nP)=xtemp2;
1107
1108
%Not using line -search as in SilBecCar18 (
which is referenced in
1109
%SilBecSig18). Reason: Was found
previously to not actually
66
==PAGE:71==
1110
%contribute anything except slowing down
the code as line -search
1111
%necesitates calculating new augmented
lagrangian and
1112
%sensitivities.
1113
1114
%Filtering densities before output
1115
if ft == 1
1116
xPhys1 (:) = xnew (:);
1117
xPhys2 (:) = xnew (:);
1118
elseif ft == 2
1119
xPhys1(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
1120
xPhys2(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
1121
elseif ft == 3
1122
xTilde(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
1123
xPhys1 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*
exp(-beta);
1124
xPhys2 = 1-exp(-beta*xTilde)+xTilde*
exp(-beta);
1125
elseif ft == 4
1126
xTilde(nP) = (H(nP ,nP)*xnew(nP))./Hs(
nP);
1127
xPhys1 = (tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta
*(xTilde -eta (1))))...
1128
/(tanh(beta*eta (1))+tanh(beta*(1-
eta (1))));
1129
xPhys2 = (tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta
*(xTilde -eta (2))))...
1130
/(tanh(beta*eta (2))+tanh(beta*(1-
eta (2))));
1131
end
1132
1133
%calculating move -limits for next iteration
1134
%Movelimits are based upon heuristic approach
as seen in SilBecCar18 on
1135
%page 165
1136
if loop ==1
1137
xmin=zeros(size(xtemp2));
1138
xmin (:) = xtemp2 (:)-move;
1139
xmax=ones(size(xtemp2));
1140
xmax (:)=xtemp2 (:)+move;
1141
xmax (:)=max(0,min(1,xmax (:)));
67
==PAGE:72==
1142
xmin (:)=min(1,max(0,xmin (:)));
1143
else
1144
xminT=zeros(size(xtemp2));
1145
xminT (:) = xtemp2 (:)-move;
1146
xmaxT=ones(size(xtemp2));
1147
xmaxT (:)=xtemp2 (:)+move;
1148
xmaxT (:)=max(0,min(1,xmaxT (:)));
1149
xminT (:)=min(1,max(0,xminT (:)));
1150
1151
check =(xtemp2 -xtemp1).*( xtemp1 -xold(nP));
1152
1153
xmin(check <0)=( xtemp2(check <0) ...
1154
-k1*( xtemp1(check <0)-xmin(check <0)));
1155
xmax(check <0)=( xtemp2(check <0) ...
1156
+k1*( xmax(check <0)-xtemp1(check <0)));
1157
xmin(check >0)=( xtemp2(check >0) ...
1158
-k2*( xtemp1(check >0)-xmin(check >0)));
1159
xmax(check >0)=( xtemp2(check >0) ...
1160
+k2*( xmax(check >0)-xtemp1(check >0)));
1161
1162
xmax (:)=max(0,min(1,xmax (:)));
1163
xmin (:)=min(1,max(0,xmin (:)));
1164
xmin (:)=max(xmin (:),xminT (:));
1165
xmax (:)=min(xmax (:),xmaxT (:));
1166
1167
if min(xmin) <0
1168
error(’Something is wrong witth xmin ’)
1169
end
1170
end
1171
1172
AL=Lagrange;
1173
1174
xold=x;
1175
1176
omega=omegamax;
1177
1178
%Calculating stresses for lambda
1179
if prob ==1|| prob ==3|| prob ==5
1180
sigmaEq=zeros(size(xPhys2));
1181
[sigmaEq (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U,edofMat ,
nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
1182
elseif prob ==2
1183
sigmaEq1=zeros(size(xPhys2));
1184
sigmaEq2=zeros(size(xPhys2));
68
==PAGE:73==
1185
[sigmaEq1 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U,edofMat ,
nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
1186
[sigmaEq2 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U2 ,edofMat
,nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
1187
elseif prob ==4
1188
sigmaEq1=zeros(size(xPhys2));
1189
sigmaEq2=zeros(size(xPhys2));
1190
xPhys2prob4=zeros(nely ,nelx);
1191
nP2=setdiff(nP ,highStress);
1192
xPhys2prob4(nP2)=xPhys2(nP2);
1193
[sigmaEq1 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2 ,U,edofMat ,
nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly);
1194
[sigmaEq2 (:)]= StressCalc(xPhys2prob4 ,U2 ,
edofMat ,nu ,penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,nelx ,nely ,
lx ,ly);
1195
else
1196
error(’Problem not implemented ’)
1197
end
1198
1199
%Updating lambda as in SilBecSig18 where it is
called mu
1200
if op==1
1201
lambda=max(0,r*(sum(xPhys2(nP))/(nel*
volfrac) -1)+lambda);
1202
elseif op==2
1203
if prob ==1
1204
lambda=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq (:)/maxSigma
-1)+lambda);
1205
1206
lambda(NoConstr)=0;
1207
elseif prob ==2
1208
lambda (:,1)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq1 (:)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda (:,1));
1209
lambda (:,2)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq2 (:)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda (:,2));
1210
1211
lambda(NoConstr ,1) =0;
1212
lambda(NoConstr ,2) =0;
1213
elseif prob ==3
1214
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,union(
highStress ,NoConstr)); %Area with
low stress
1215
lambda(lS ,1)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq(lS)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda(lS ,1));
69
==PAGE:74==
1216
lambda(lS ,2) =0;%max(0,r.*(sigmaEq(lS)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda(lS ,2));
1217
1218
%lambda(NoConstr ,1)=0;
1219
%lambda(NoConstr ,2)=0;
1220
1221
lambda(union(highStress ,NoConstr) ,1)=
max(0,r.*( sigmaEq(union(highStress ,
NoConstr))...
1222
/( maxSigma*alpha (1)) -1)+lambda(
union(highStress ,NoConstr) ,1));
1223
lambda(highStress ,2)=max(0,r.*(1-
sigmaEq(highStress)...
1224
/( maxSigma*alpha (2)))+lambda(
highStress ,2));
1225
1226
elseif prob ==4
1227
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,highStress);
%Area with low stress
1228
nP2=setdiff(nP ,highStress);
1229
lambda(lS ,1)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq1(lS)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda(lS ,1));
1230
lambda(nP2 ,2)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq2(nP2)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda(nP2 ,2));
1231
1232
lambda(NoConstr ,1) =0;
1233
lambda(NoConstr ,2) =0;
1234
lambda(NoConstr ,3) =0;
1235
1236
lambda(highStress ,1)=max(0,r.*(
sigmaEq1(highStress)...
1237
/( maxSigma*alpha (1)) -1)+lambda(
highStress ,1));
1238
lambda(highStress ,3)=max(0,r.*(1-
sigmaEq1(highStress)...
1239
/( maxSigma*alpha (2)))+lambda(
highStress ,3));
1240
elseif prob ==5
1241
lS=setdiff ([1: nelx*nely]’,highStress);
%Area with low stress
1242
lambda(lS ,1)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq(lS)/
maxSigma -1)+lambda(lS ,1));
1243
1244
lambda(highStress ,1)=max(0,r.*( sigmaEq
(highStress)...
70
==PAGE:75==
1245
/( maxSigma*alpha (1)) -1)+lambda(
highStress ,1));
1246
1247
lambda(NoConstr)=0;
1248
else
1249
error(’Problem not implemented ’)
1250
end
1251
else
1252
error(’Optimization
problem not
implemented ’)
1253
end
1254
1255
%Continously updating r. In SilBecSig18 this
is only done if the
1256
%maximum stress reduces less than the stepsize
. Reason this is not done
1257
%here , is that this was based upon SilBecCar18
where this is done
1258
%continously.
1259
%if mod(loop ,30)==0
1260
r=min(gamma*r,rmax);
1261
%end
1262 end
1263
1264 function [sigmaEq ]= StressCalc(xPhys ,U,edofMat ,nu ,
penal ,E0 ,xMinimum ,...
1265
nelx ,nely ,lx ,ly)
1266
1267 %Epsilon approach as described in SilBecSig18
1268 eta =0.2;
1269
1270 sigmaEq=zeros(length(xPhys (:)) ,1);
1271
1272 %Setting up B-matrice (ie. stress -strain
relationship
1273 a=lx/nelx *1/2;
1274 b=ly/nely *1/2;
1275
1276 B=1/(4*a*b)*[-b 0 b 0 b 0 -b 0;
1277
0 -a 0 -a 0 a 0 a;
1278
-a -b -a b a b a -b];
1279
1280 %Interpolation of Young ’s modulus , using epsilon
approach from SilBecSig18
1281 E=xPhys (:) ./( eta*(1- xPhys (:))+xPhys (:));
71
==PAGE:76==
1282
1283 %Constitutive Matrix
1284 C=[1 nu 0; nu 1 0; 0 0 (1-nu)/2]* E0/(1-nu^2);
1285
1286 %M matrice as in SilBecSig18
1287 M=[1
-1/2 0;
-1/2 1 0; 0 0 3];
1288
1289 %Calculating stresses
1290 for i=1: length(xPhys (:))
1291
1292
strain_e=B*U(edofMat(i,:));
1293
1294
sigma_e =(E(i).*C)*strain_e;
1295
1296
sigmaEq(i)=sqrt(sigma_e ’*M*sigma_e);
1297 end
1298
1299 end
Appendix/TheCode.m
72
==PAGE:77==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Tlf.: +45 4525 4250
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
February 2020
