==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Strong Authentication via Trusted Platforms
Integrating the use of TPMs in the FIDO U2F Protocol
Benjamin Larsen (s180222)
Supervisor: Thanassis Giannetsos, Ph.D.
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a masters degree in engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 31, 2020
Benjamin Larsen (s180222)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
To my father, Marinus, who showed nothing but love and support through my
whole education, but didn’t get to see the final result.
Thank you for everything.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
FIDO U2F
11
2.1
Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Requirement summarization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Problem Statement
23
4
Modelling
25
4.1
Trusted Platform Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Adapted design
47
5.1
FIDO U2F Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Privacy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Key Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Implementation
63
6.1
Environment setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7
Revocation
79
7.1
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
7.2
Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
8
Conclusion
89
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In a world where humans have become more and more connected, and lives are not
only lived but also stored online, an ever-growing need for secure authentication mod-
els has proven its necessity. The last two decades have seen an immense increase in
internet-connected devices and is only growing larger and larger[1][2], reasons among
others due to easy access to high-capacity internet connections and the human desire
for simplicity and accessibility.
Companies have worked a long time to provide secure authentication for their users,
and almost every company has strict password-requirements for its users. Despite
this, as seen in a wide range of attacks, groups and individuals with malicious in-
tent are experts in exploiting passwords[3] - even those who seem secure. With the
immense computing-power and specialized equipment now available to the every-day
hacker, passwords are bound to become longer and more complicated. Despite this,
an attacker can still launch phising[4] and spear-phishing[5] campaigns which of the
time of writing is still very useful.
Gaining a users password might not only provide access to a single service but even
a multitude of services, due to single-sign-on (SSO) and Active Directory setups. To
protect against unintended logins, companies started to require two-factor authenti-
cation, which in addition to a password, requires the user to provide something he
has (e.g., by accepting on a smartphone) or something he is (fingerprint, iris, etc.).
Two factors can still be exploited, e.g., by the use of real-time phishing attacks[6],
implementing more factors; hence multifactor authentication can make it even more
difficult for an attacker to gain access to credentials.
The FIDO Alliance has, for many years, worked on standardizing authentication[7]
using public-key cryptography, where keys are either stored on an external or in-
ternal secure storage. In the first case, keys are stored, for example, on a device
such as a Yubikey[8]. This authentication protocol is called Universal 2nd Factor
(U2F)[9], whereas the use of an internal authenticator and key storage is implemented
in the Universal Authentication Framework(UAF)[10]. In recent years FIDO has de-
veloped FIDO2, which is built on W3C Web Authentication specification[11] and
their Client-To-Authenticator-Protocol (CTAP)[12], where CTAP1 is the U2F Stan-
dard, and CTAP2 is the newly developed protocol which has extended features such
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
as PIN-requirement, password-less logins among others.
Neither UAF or CTAP1/2 takes user privacy into consideration when it comes to
linkability. Instead, they strive to achieve global anonymity, i.e., that two colluding
parties cannot identify a mutual user based on the authenticator. However, neither
provide any guarantees for anonymity since the trust resides in a foreign vendor
(the manufacturer of the authenticator). Further, they do not offer any significant
guarantees for operational assurance and functional safety, though UAF does allow
the use of secure elements or trusted execution environments. If an authentication-
device (e.g., a smartwatch) is compromised, the verifier has no way of knowing so,
and the keys could potentially be compromised depending on the implementation of
the authenticator. Further, the mission of FIDO U2F is indeed to provide strong
authentication with little complexity but comes with a price-tag for hardware.
This raises the question if it is possible to create an enhanced version that, among
all the other security guarantees, also is enhances privacy and provides some level of
operational assurance. In this thesis report, we develop an implementation of such
a model, which is demonstrated with the use of a Trusted Platform Module (TPM),
which is a ubiquitous module found in a wide range of devices.
1.2
Objectives
In this section, objectives for this project will be outlined and is divided into two
parts: functional and non-functional.
Non-Functional
Non-functional objectives are objectives that do not have a functional goal but can
be required to fulfill to do functional objectives.
1. Understand Trusted Environments: The reasoning behind it, what capabilities
and limitations they have.
2. Understand FIDO U2F protocol: how does it work, and what are its limitations.
3. Analyze the FIDO U2F protocol concerning user privacy.
4. Get familiar with programming to a trusted environment, with focus on the
TPM.
5. Learn the basic steps in Direct Anonymous Attestation, though not on a math-
ematical level.
6. Gain an overall basic knowledge of Trusted Computing and the ideas that sup-
ports it.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Structure
3
The goals, as mentioned above, are fundamental to solve the final goal of achieving
strong authentication via trusted platforms with privacy and functional safety in
mind.
Functional
Functional objectives define what needs to be done on a technical level and/or any
strict requirements. We will use a Trusted Platform Module is an example of a trusted
environment, why the functional requirements will reflect this.
1. Enhance FIDO U2F Protocol to support user-defined anonymity and functional
safety
2. Use a software based trusted element to support the implementation
3. Define models to depict the core functionalities and relationships between assets
that need to be trusted.
4. Implement using C/C++ a proof of concept solution of the protocol that uses
the software implementation of the secure element
5. Implement using C/C++ a proof of concept imitation of host, issuer, and service
provider1 that supports the protocol.
6. Extract timings from the PoC solution.
1.3
Structure
This report is split into eight main parts. Chapter one shows an introduction to the
thesis, which contains the motivation behind the project, what objectives it aims to
cover and related work. In the second chapter, we look into the FIDO U2F protocol
and define limitations and requirements for this. The third chapter covers the problem
statement, and in the fourth chapter, we present the modeling of the proposed system.
To do this, we also give an introduction to the TPM, how it works, and what it
is capable of.
In the fifth chapter, we present work on the FIDO U2F protocol
and describe how we meet the requirements described in chapter two. This chapter
contains both design considerations as to the protocol itself and shows an analysis of
different ways of storing the keys. In the sixth chapter, we present the implementation
details and the experiments done, where we will also discuss the result. In chapter
seven, we discuss the issues revolving around revocation and propose a solution to this.
Lastly, in chapter eight, we present our conclusion and any future work identified.
1These entities will be defined later in the report. For reference, the host contains the TPM, the
issuer is the entity that produced the TPM, and the service provider is the entity the host tries to
authenticate to.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
While the report can be read in any order, we recommend following the structure of
the report to get a complete overview.
1.4
Related Work
In this section, we look into related work for this project. We will look at the history
of authentication, how and why it has been developed. We will then look into the
popular authentication schemes that exist and look for implementations of these.
1.4.1
Historic development
Here we will look into the development of authentication over time.
We will see
how and why different approaches were developed to get an understanding of the
environment in which we operate.
1.4.1.1
Passwords
Passwords are, by definition, arbitrary combinations of characters and numbers that
form a secret that is known only to the claimant and the verifier. It is then per defi-
nition proof of knowledge. Assuming that only those two parties know the password
and brute-forcing and intelligent guessing is impossible, then the proof of knowledge
does indeed allow for reliable authentication.
Password-security is its own worst enemy. If it is easy, it can be remembered but does
not require much effort from an adversary to guess or brute-force. If it is hard, one
might write it down, breaking the security since the proof of knowledge is now avail-
able to anyone who sees the password. Having a simple password is, as mentioned,
subject to issues such as brute-force or intelligent guessing. Human psychology also
plays a role: having a secure password remembered is excellent for the security of that
system, but as the number of authenticated sessions needed in daily lives increased,
so did the number of passwords. Remembering a large set of different lengthy, com-
plicated, passwords is next to impossible, so people tend to re-use or slightly change
their passwords. This has that negative consequence that if one password is broken,
that user is more or less compromised on multiple systems.
1.4.1.2
Password managers
To handle unique, complex, passwords, people started using password managers such
as KeePass[13], LastPass[14], or DashLane[15], just to mention a few. Generally, this
was mostly used by professionals in the early days but has grown popular with the
general population over the last decade. They work by encrypting passwords (either
on disk or in the cloud) with a master password. This effectively ensures that people
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Related Work
5
only had to remember one password instead of many, and could construct that pass-
word to be very difficult to guess or brute-force. On the downside, if that password
is compromised, then all passwords of that user are undoubtedly compromised.
1.4.1.3
2-Factor authentication
As a potential solution to the problem of leaking passwords, two-factor authentication
has been presented in many applications. Two factors simply mean that the user
provides further proof that he is whom he says he is. Two factors of the same type
could be used, as it is in a nuclear submarine: both the captain and the XO need
to provide authentication in the form of physical keys, hence if an adversary gains
access to one of the keys, the system as a whole is still secure. When it comes to
passwords, this might not prove strong enough. Take an example where an adversary
has installed a keylogger on a system. Using two unique passwords does not solve
the problem, and even without an adversary obtaining the keys, human psychology,
phishing attacks, and more can still be used to gain access to the passwords.
Therefore two factors of different types should be used. The European Union made
this a requirement for payment systems[16], and required that an authenticating user
must provide two of the following:
1. Something they know (e.g. password, PIN)
2. Something they own (e.g. phone, psyical token)
3. Something they are (e.g. fingerprint, iris-scan)
If a user, for example, uses a password and a fingerprint, then even if the password
is compromised, then an adversary would find it hard to authenticate as the user.
The most prominent method of multifactor authentication is the combination of the
two first. RSA SecurID[17], for example, provides a small hardware token that pro-
vides a second-factor value, that can only be known if one possesses that token. Yu-
bikey[8] is another token which can be used in conjunction with the FIDO U2F
Protocol[10]. Both of these solves the issue, but they are costly. In the modern-day
and age, most of us own a smartphone, why Google created Google Authenticator[18],
and Microsoft created Microsoft Authenticator[19]. Both works by receiving a notifi-
cation that somebody is trying to log in, which then can be accepted or declined, or
they provide device-specific PINs as with the RSA SecurID.
More examples include 3D-Secure[20] developed by EMVCo, which makes payment
online with credit cards safer by, e.g., sending a one-time password to the customer,
that would need to be provided during payment. When the card is used in stores, the
user would need to provide a PIN as a second factor, the first-factor being ownership
of the card itself.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
1.4.1.4
Multifactor authentication
While 2-factor authentication is a drastic improvement over the normal password,
most implementations are still based on a password and then a second factor such as
proof of ownership or biometric data. The issue with especially proof of ownership
is targeted attacks to steal external hardware tokens, or if these devices are compro-
mised. To enforce even stronger authentication, multifactor authentication can be
used, which introduces three or more factors. This could be fingerprint, password,
and proof of ownership. This is, of course, more costly, but greatly adds security.
Arguments could be made that local multifactor authentication can be used. That is,
instead of providing the verifier with a set of proofs, one could prove to a local verifier
that then, in turn, can attest to the foreign verifier, that all proofs presented are valid.
A very timely example is Apple Pay[21]. Apple Pay can have a virtual card that can
be used for paying - both at a physical terminal or online. The difference is that the
owner of the card never has to provide a password or anything else. This boils down
to the banks’ trust in the implementation of Apple Pay. If the user can use Apple Pay,
then the user must has identified himself, e.g., through FaceID or PIN. Since he also
presented the physical phone, he has indeed done 2-Factor authentication (or more).
This is possibly the beginning of a new era of authentication, where trust is shifted
from the centralized organizations to the edge containing the devices themselves.
1.4.1.5
Current landscape
With the current development in technology, passwordless authentication is being
more available, e.g., by using an external authenticator. Such an authenticator can,
if trusted, verify, for example, a PIN or biometric data, as in the example above.
Apple Pay is a very novel way of doing 2-factor authentication with a single device.
Still, nothing stops a verifier for requiring specific hardware tokens (such as specific
brands of smartphones) to do multifactor authentication on their behalf, e.g., to prove
location, face recognition, or any other proofs.
1.4.2
Modern solutions
Here we look into related work that is actively being developed. We will look into
FIDO implementations, and we will look into the usage of a trusted element in regards
to authentication.
1.4.2.1
UAF
Universal Authentication Framework is developed by FIDO to provide passwordless
authentication. If a user has logged in, e.g., by username and password, they can
initiate a session to setup UAF. The FIDO server can provide a set of protocols the
client has to comply with, such as Face ID, passwords, etc., and the client provides
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Related Work
7
the relying party (FIDO server) with a public key and an attestation certificate that
identifies the type of authenticator (such as Apple FaceID) and potentially attests
to the state of the device. When a device is requesting to authenticate, the FIDO
server sends a challenge alongside a set of policies. These policies contain information
about requirements the clients need to meet, e.g., to use fingerprint-sensors or face-
recognition. If the user can comply with the requirements set in the policies, the local
authenticator signs the challenge. The host sends the challenge back to the service
provider, who verifies it based on a known public key.
1.4.2.2
WebAuthn
Though both UAF and U2F are relatively simple protocols, developers still had to
implement a lot, and even if a service supported the FIDO protocols, the users’
device (in many times browser) had to support the protocol as well. FIDO joined
forces with World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), who is behind the World Wide Web
standards, to standardize the authentication schemes further, and ensuring browser
would support it. Together they developed a JS API called WebAuthn, which was
formally recognized by W3C as a standard in March 2019[22].
The protocol, or at least the principle behind it, are the same as in UAF. The service
provider gives the user a challenge that is to be signed with the users private key. The
private key is protected by some authenticator, such as Apple ID, Windows Hello, or
a Yubikey.
By design, this API supports passwordless authentication. It does this by identifying
the user by an id, and then challenge the host as in U2F/UAF. In the meantime, it
locates the public key and can verify or refuse the signature. Though this is single-
factor authentication, it is still regarded as strong authentication, since the relying
party has trust in the authenticator used.
1.4.2.3
FIDO CTAP2
FIDO2 is an extension of the existing protocols, which is done together with W3C.
CTAP2 is the main contribution by FIDO Alliance and defines the protocol for a host
to talk to a roaming authenticator, such as a Yubikey, smartwatch, or smartphone.
CTAP2 is, in its essence, an updated version of CTAP1/U2F, which implements
a new encoding scheme, Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR)[23], and
support more transport layer protocols such as BLE, and is backward compatible
with CTAP1/U2F Authenticators. CTAP2 is still in its early stages but is developed
on top of the stable U2F. We will describe the U2F protocol in depth in chapter 2.
1.4.2.4
Windows Hello
In the last couple of years, Microsoft’s service Windows Hello has seen much interest
from the security industry, because they are using a TPM to protect user-access to
Windows 10. They, like the FIDO alliance, support a world without passwords[24],
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
and one of the ways they do this is by using Windows Hello. Most fundamentally, it
provides strong authentication by only using a PIN. The claim that a PIN is stronger
than a password depends on the context. In case the PIN is used as a password, i.e.,
as a symmetric key. The PIN is much weaker than a password (of course assuming the
entropy of the password is larger than the PIN), but if the PIN is used as entropy to
gain access to an asymmetric key, it is stronger. Claiming that a PIN is stronger than
a password, assumes that the private key is securely stored, and can only be accessed
with the user-provided entropy. It further assumes that anti-hammering features are
present in the key storage, which it is in a TPM2.
Microsoft has not, to the best of knowledge, released any public documents how
they are working with the TPM in regards to how they are protecting the keys, and
neither have they published any formal verification of their models. However, it does
seem that Microsoft requires somewhat sophisticated capabilities of sensors and the
CPU since matching is required to be done in a Trusted Execution Environments
(TEE’s)[25][26], assuming they comply by their sensor requirements[27].
Though
based on their sensor requirements, it is apparent that they secure their key by (at
least) a signature from the sensor in a TPM Policy(PolicySigned)[28].
Windows Hello is working on supporting authentication to FIDO2 enabled relying
parties[29][30], but is at the time of writing still in progress.
Figure 1.1: Registration and authentication using Windows Hello. Original image
found in Window Hello overview specification[29].
In figure 1.1, we see the authorization flow for Windows Hello (for business). A user
unlocks Windows using either a PIN and optionally with biometrics. After the user
2It is possible to disable such anti-hammering features on individual keys in a TPM during key
creation.
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Related Work
9
has proven its identity, it sends a uniquekey to the Identity Provider, which can be
used later on to verify a signature. When the user wants to authenticate, it creates
a signed request, from which the Identity Provider can authenticate the user. In this
example, the Identity Provider returns tokens, which can be used within the business.
In summarization, Windows Hello is a growing key- and authentication management
system, and is also being developed to be able to authenticate to FIDO2 relying
parties. Assuming they use FIDO2’s DAA-capabilities, they can potentially provide
anonymous passwordless authentication, but not unlinkability nor does not seem to
offer any flexibility for the Identity Provider.
==PAGE:18==
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
FIDO U2F
In this section, we look into the FIDO U2F/CTAP1 protocol and discuss the limita-
tions we identify. We focus on the U2F since UAF is an extension of this protocol,
and is still at the time being analyzed. At the end of the chapter, we provide a set
of requirements that are extracted from the specifications. Then we provide another
set of requirements to address the limitations identified.
2.1
Description
FIDO Universal 2nd Factor is a protocol described in the FIDO white-paper ”The
Need for a New Authentication Model”[7] and in a more recent specification in
2017[10]. The alliance aims to achieve strong authentication without the disadvantage
of having high complexity.
In general, U2F defines a protocol for achieving strong authentication using two
factors: A password to prove something the user knows and a hardware token to
prove something the user has.
The protocol consists of the following entities:
• Host
• Relying Party (In some cases mentioned as Origin)
• U2F Device
The host is simply the computer, smartphone, tablet, or any other code-executing
platform, whose intent is to authenticate itself. The relying party, or origin, is the
entity whom the host wants to authenticate to. The U2F Device is the second factor
in the protocol and is used by the user of the host. It is often referred to as a roaming
authenticator. The U2F Device is an assumed safe storage device that can store keys
used for authentication.
The concept of the protocol is simple: upon registration1, the U2F Device generates
a key pair (public- and private key). The private key is kept securely on the U2F
1Registration is as any other registration when the user wants to establish a relationship with
the relying party.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 FIDO U2F
Device, and the public key is shared with the host. During the time of authentication,
the relying party sends a challenge to the host, which needs to return a signature over
the challenge by using the registered public key’s corresponding private key. If any
other key is used, the relying party will not be able to verify the signature with the
registered public key, and the authentication fails.
From a user perspective, the protocol works by the user merely logging in using
username and password, followed by either inserting a key into the host, alternatively
using NFC/BLE to present the key to the system, in such a way that it can extract
a key.
To understand how that works, we will now look into the two phases of U2F: regis-
tration and authentication.
2.1.0.1
Registration
Before a user can register, it must first be authenticated using basic authentication
such as username and password. The relying party will respond with a challenge.
Such a challenge is technically just a large number that is statistically unlikely to
be guessed, as per the FIDO documentation at least eight random bytes with good
entropy. Upon reception of the challenge, the host prepares a message to the U2F
Device.
Figure 2.1: Registration Request Message from host to U2F Device. Original image
found in FIDO U2F specification[10] in Raw Message Formats section
4.
The challenge parameter is defined as the SHA256 hash digest of the Client Data,
which is shown in table 2.1.
Client Data
Typ
Challenge
Origin
Cid_pubkey
Table 2.1: Client Data which is prepared and hashed by the host.
1. Typ is an identifier of the intent with the data, in this case registration.
2. Challenge is the received challenge from the relying party.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Description
13
3. Origin is the relying party’s facet-id (e.g. URI)
4. Cid_pubkey is optional, contains information (Channel ID) for the TLS ses-
sion.
We will see later why this is important.
The application parameter of figure 2.1 is a SHA256 hash digest of the application
ID (facet ID) as seen from the host. When the U2F Device receives the registration
request, it generates a key pair and a key handle (that identifies the private key)
and stores the private part of that key in its non-volatile memory. Following that it
generates response-message shown in 2.2. It is required that this key pair is origin
specific and is linked to the origin, why the application parameter is provided.
Figure 2.2: Registration Response Message from U2F Device to host. Original im-
age found in FIDO U2F specification[10] in Raw Message Formats sec-
tion 4.
In addition to the static reserved byte (still there for legacy reasons), the response
contains:
• user public key is the newly generated public key.
• key length the length of the newly generated public key.
• attestation certificate A X.509 certificate that certifies the key used, signed
by a trusted vendor. (Or DAA signature, but the current implementation is
deemed unstable)
• signature a signature over the application- and challenge parameter, along with
the key handle and public key, generated by the certified key in the certificates
corresponding private key.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 FIDO U2F
The signature, public key, key handle, certificate, and clientdata is sent to the relying
party. Upon receiving the message, the relying party checks the attestation certificate
and then proceeds to check the signature provided in the message. The relying party
should further examine the client data to see if a MITM is present. If either the origin
or the optional channel ID is wrong, a MITM is present, since this reflects how the
host saw the relying party.
When the signature is confirmed, the relying party saves the public key and key handle
and links it to that corresponding user who had performed basic authentication.
Figure 2.3: The registration protocol.
In figure 2.3, we see the whole protocol shown as a protocol-sequence diagram.
2.1.0.2
Authentication
As with the registration, the host first contacts the relying party and does basic
authentication. By doing so, the host receives a challenge from the relying party, the
key handle, alongside the application data from which it constructs an authentication
message shown in figure 2.4.
The message is shown in figure 2.4 is then sent to the U2F Device, which then checks
the control byte. It can be one of three types:
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Description
15
Figure 2.4: Authentication Message from host to U2F Device. Original image found
in FIDO U2F specification[10] in Raw Message Formats section 5.
1. Check-only: Check if the key handle is created by this token, and check if it
was created for the provided application parameter.
2. Enforce-user-presence-and-sign: In addition to the verification in check-only,
enforce that the user is present (e.g., by having the user click a button on the
key) and sign with the key identified by the key handle.
3. Don’t-enforce-user-presence-and-sign: In addition to the verification in check-
only, it should also return a signature with the key corresponding to the key
handle.
The challenge- and application parameters are the same as in 2.1 though the client
data’s typ value now shows this is an authentication request.
When the U2F Device receives the authentication request message (and potentially
verified user presence), it proceeds to create a signature over the challenge and appli-
cation parameter, among others.
Figure 2.5: Authentication Response Message from U2F Device to host. Original
image found in FIDO U2F specification[10] in Raw Message Formats
section 5.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 FIDO U2F
As seen in the response message in figure 2.5, the signature is done over the application
parameter, challenge parameter, a user presence byte, and a counter. The counter is
included in the signature since it is used for the relying party to determine if cloning
of the U2F device has happened. The counter is incremented every time a key is
used and can be unique for each key or global. The message is then forwarded to the
relying party.
When the relying party receives the message, it checks the counter. If it has not
increased (or even decreased) since last use, the device is probably cloned. After such
validation, it proceeds to verify the signature using the public key corresponding to the
user and key handle. As with registration, the relying party must check the clientdata,
to ensure no man in the middle is present. If the signature can be confirmed, the
user is then authenticated with both something he knows (password) and something
he has (hardware token).
Figure 2.6: The Authentication protocol.
In figure 2.6, we see the sequence of commands needed to authenticate.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Requirements
17
2.1.0.3
Privacy and security
The protocol is resistant against man-in-the-middle attacks (MITM), where an at-
tacker intercepts communications between the relying party and host. This is mainly
due to the host being able to see where the data comes from when preparing the client
data. This is, of course, on an application level, it is not taking into consideration of
IP-spoofing or any other data-manipulation techniques.
In regards to privacy, there is no linking between the keys (assuming a good random
number generator for key generation), and each key is site-specific, meaning two rely-
ing parties cannot correlate keys from the same host. Nevertheless, unique certificates
are being provided to the relying party during registration. They can be linked to a
key unless anonymous attestation techniques are being used (more on this in chapter
5). If two relying parties both save the certificate and link it to the received key,
they can find keys originating from the same device. If the counter-value is being as
a global value, it will also be possible for relying parties to find keys from the same
device, even without the certificates; though this is of course not as easy since most of
the relying parties the device is associated with, needs to collude to find a correlation
between keys.
As the alliance writes in the specification, the U2F Device does not have any method
to detect whether or not the host is compromised, why a compromised host can
exercise the U2F Device to execute valid registrations or authentications.
2.2
Requirements
In this section, we go deeper into the protocol and draw out actual requirements.
Overall we have two use-cases:
1. Register
2. Authenticate
We will look into each of them individually and draw out the requirements. We will
further address the overall protocol challenges and limitations that we need to solve.
2.2.1
Registration
In the registration phase, the user provides basic authentication to receive a challenge.
We will assume that this basic authentication can be of any kind, and does not have to
be usernames and passwords, because in that case, we break the objective of privacy.
For simplicity, we can assume that basic authentication can be done by using a group
signature, that shows you are eligible to register for the system.
When the host receives the challenge and application parameters, it creates the client-
data and does a SHA256 hash of that, so the host must be able to do so. Further,
it needs to check that the application parameter provided matches what the host
==PAGE:26==
18
2 FIDO U2F
sees. We, therefore, state that the system must protect against MITM-attacks for
the Registration Request Message.
After that, the client data digest and the received application parameter will be sent
to the U2F Device. We will reference the U2F Device as a Trusted Environment
(TE) in this section, since it can be both a U2F Device, TEE, TPMs, or any secure
element.
The first thing we identify is that the TE must be able to generate a key pair: a
public and a private key. Looking in the specification[31], we can see it should be an
ECC keypair using the P-256 NIST curve. It is also shown that en U2F device should
provide a key-handle, which is an identifier of the key, which is used for the relying
party to provide to the host during authentication. This is a breach of privacy, as
we shall see later. For now, we ignore the key handle and does not require the TE to
provide such data. We then identify that the TE must provide a signature over a set
of data, which also requires hashing capabilities. According to the specification, this
must be SHA-256.
Surely the relying party will need to verify the type of authenticator (this is the only
assurance the relying party has that the keys are kept safe) and is done with an
X.509 Certificate[32] in the Raw Message Formats descriptions[31]. However, they do
support DAA and proposes an implementation for this[33]. Based on this, we can,
therefore, state that the TE must provide attestation-capabilities.
When the relying party receives the registration response message, it checks the signa-
ture, and by doing so, it verifies that the registration request message which the host
received, was indeed from the relying party since the challenge-parameter contains
information for how the host saw the Registration Request Message. We, therefore,
state that the system must protect against MITM-attacks for the registration response
message sent to the relying party.
Based on this information, the relying party then needs to verify the attestation
certificate (or DAA signature). Following successful verification, the relying party
must save the public key and the key handle and link it to the authenticating user.
2.2.2
Authentication
When a user on a host needs to authenticate, it will send a username/password
combination to the relying party, which we call basic authentication. The host must
then be able to locate the corresponding ECC public key and its keyhandle. The
relying party will then have to generate a random challenge with a certain entropy.
The challenge and key handle (which we ignore) are then sent to the host, which must
verify that the provided App ID is valid for that origin; hence the system must also
provide MITM-resistance in the Authentication Request.
The host prepares an Authentication Message for the TE, which must be able to
provide a signature over a provided dataset with a particular key. It also increments
a counter to provide proof that it is not a copied TE. Further, on request, it must
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Requirement summarization
19
provide proof of user presence. Therefore, the TE must provide proof that it is not
cloned and potentially that a user is present.
The message is then sent to the relying party that also here ensures no man in the
middle has been present and verifies the signature.
2.2.3
Limitations
The protocol is created as a generic extension of single-factor authentication towards
2-factor authentication. Due to that, it is only natural that the first step in both
registration and authentication is providing user-information.
In a context where
anonymity is key, this is undoubtedly an issue that needs to be addressed. Due to the
design of the protocol, the public keys are strongly linked with the user, giving no
option for privacy-based use cases. This is especially obvious in the authentication
phase, where the relying party is sent user information to acquire the key-handle
which is sent to the user. While nothing is stopping a user from registering multiple
keys with the relying party, the nature of the protocol dictates that the user then
must provide a username and a password for each of the keys provided, making either
linking of signature possible or user-invalidation hard. We describe in more depth
why multiple keys can enhance privacy in section 5.2. As the protocol is designed
as a 2-factor protocol, it by design supports only two factors, while fixed in UAF,
we base our analysis of the U2F protocol. In some use-cases, it might be relevant
to authenticate with multiple factors, and potentially without a username/password
combination, which is referred to as passwordless authentication.
The protocol as a whole does not provide any guarantees of operational assurance
or functional safety, and the only way the relying party can know if the TE is com-
promised or in any other way is malicious is by continuously verifying the provided
attestation certificate that was sent during registration, and by verifying a counter-
value being updated as expected. It provides no guarantee that the TE cannot operate
in a compromised state, and the attestation certificate again proves a challenge in a
privacy context and needs to be addressed.
We will go more into technical details of the challenges and how we aim to solve them
in section 5.1.
2.3
Requirement summarization
In this section, we will summarize the requirements extracted from the FIDO U2F
Protocol and the challenges discovered. The requirements extracted from the FIDO
protocol are named Rn, and the challenges needed to be solved called Un.
R1: Host most support SHA-256 hashing capabilities In the FIDO specifica-
tions, SHA-256 is used for hashing. As this is core functionality, e.g., to prepare
data for signing, this must be supported by the host. Other hashing algorithms
==PAGE:28==
20
2 FIDO U2F
can be used, but we prefer SHA-256 since it has been used in the FIDO protocol,
and it is more collision-resistant than, for example, SHA1 and MD5.
R2: Protocol must provide basic MITM protection FIDO uses origin-specific
data to prevent Man-In-The-Middle attacks and phishing attempts. They do
this by ensuring that keys can only be exercised by the origin whom it was
created for. This enhanced protocol must also support this.
R3: TE must be able to generate key pairs The FIDO protocol states that a
public key should be sent to the relying party, and to prove a second factor an
authenticator) must contain the private part to that key.
R4: Only TE can read the private key In the FIDO protocol, an external au-
thenticator stores the private keys, and only the authenticator can provide
signatures from the private keys.
R5: TE must be able to attest to the type of trusted environment The trusted
environment must be able to attest to the type of environment it is, e.g., if it is a
Yubikey, TPM, or a protected execution environment, which must be verifiable.
R6: TE must be able to provide proof of human presence The FIDO U2F Pro-
tocol specifies that an authenticator should have, e.g., a button that the user
can press to provide proof of presence. This is done to ensure that malware
cannot exercise keys.
R7: TE must be able to provide proof that it has not duplicated In the orig-
inal protocol, a counter is included that counts the number of times a key (or
all keys accumulative) has been used. The relying party can, therefore, see if
the authenticator has been cloned.
R8: TE must ensure that keys are only exercised by the origin to which it was issued
The TE must not provide a signature of a challenge from an origin whom the
key was not issued to. This is done to prevent phishing-attempts and man-in-
the-middle.
R9: TE must be able to ensure user presence In the U2F protocol, the rely-
ing party can require proof that the user is present. This should be implemented
in the extended version as well.
The following requirements are extracted from the overall limitations described.
U1: Protocol must support anonymous registration
The protocol as is does
not support anonymous registration, as username and passwords are given. In
a privacy-sensitive context, we must not do this.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Requirement summarization
21
U2: Protocol must support multiple unlinkable keys Instead of only having
one key, multiple keys can enhance anonymity as long as they are unlinked.
Section 5.2 explains why that is. These keys should, of course, be registered
anonymously as requirement [U1] states.
U3: Protocol/TE must support anonymous attestation To ensure that the
TE that provides the authentication key is valid and of a certain type, it must
provide attestation capabilities. The protocol must support the use of anony-
mous attestation, which we talk further about in section 5.1.1.
U4: Protocol must support client-side key selection As the current protocol
is designed, it is the service provider that selects the appropriate key for the
user. To enhance privacy, we need to move that operation towards the client.
U6: TE must guarantee to invalidate all authentication keys for a SP upon request
Upon an invalidation request for an authentication key, all authentication keys
for that given service provider should be invalidated.
U7: Protocol must support multifactor passwordless authentication Instead
of being limited to a username and password (which is not a requirement due
to U1), we need to provide passwordless authentication with multiple factors,
not limiting to any number of factors.
U8: System must provide functional safety for operations Instead of putting
trust in the implementation of the U2F Device, we need to provide functional
safety guarantees that keys can only be generated and exercised under specific
circumstances.
U9: System must provide Operational Assurance We must provide assurance
that the TE cannot produce cryptographic signatures or do any other operation
if the host is not in a trusted state.
Over the next sections, we will tackle the limitations and requirements identified, and
provide an enhanced version of the FIDO U2F Protocol using a TPM. The scope of
this project will not cover operational assurance in the form of execution guarantees,
but we will focus on system configuration and state.
==PAGE:30==
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Statement
The threat landscape and actors in regards to authentication have changed dramati-
cally over the last couple of decades, moving from individuals with limited resources
and goals to groups, organizations and state-sponsored entities with concrete goals
and a tremendous amount of resources available, both in the form of raw computa-
tional power and the extensive information of the internet[34]. Every single human,
organization, and state who resides in modern society can fall victim to fraud, iden-
tity theft, public humiliation[35], or defacement, resulting in a potential financial
and reputational loss. Despite numerous attempts to keep up with the adversaries,
such as international campaigns for password hardening and two-factor schemes, data
breaches due to bad passwords, compromised keys, or targeted attacks still happen.
FIDO U2F provides a standardized way to provide 2-factor authentication by extend-
ing passwords with proof of ownership by introducing a second factor. While FIDO
U2F indeed does provide 2-Factor authentication, it is limited in its design. FIDO
UAF provides a more generic implementation where multi-factor authentication is
available locally, i.e., with biometric data and password. Even with implementations
using trusted elements in WebAuthn[30][36] or modern external authenticators[8] the
trust lies solely within the implementation of the authenticator itself, and they pro-
vide no models to support how they are using the TPM. Existing protocols do not
focus on user privacy, and the vendor is left with the responsibility to provide anony-
mous attestation. The client is left with no option to unlink and hide their activities
and are, therefore, subject to data mining.
Since neither of the discussed protocols sets any requirements to the state of the host
or authenticator, it cannot provide any operational assurance or functional safety. It
must solely rely on features of the protocol, such as proof-of-presence, origin-specific
keys. However, this relies heavily on the assumptions that neither the host nor the
U2F Device or local authenticator is not compromised.
==PAGE:32==
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Modelling
In this section, we look into the modeling of the system concerning the requirements
and limitations identified, with the use of a Trusted Platform Module, TPM. Before
we delve into the modeling, we must understand how the Trusted Platform Module
works and the capabilities it provides. The first section will contain an introduction
to the TPM. The second section contains models that capture the assumptions, re-
quirements, and core functions needed for the system to be trusted and meet the
requirements established.
4.1
Trusted Platform Module
The Trusted Platform Module or TPM[37] is a common module found in modern
platforms. It is a physicaltrusted module, separated from the rest of the hardware on
the platform. It can be seen as a secure cryptographic processor with secure storage
capabilities. It can be used for both key generation, storage, random number gener-
ation, or other cryptographic operations. The TPM is very limited in its operations
and its physical size, making it easier to protect - both against physical and logical
attacks. A smaller code-base is naturally easy to verify and protect and defend than
a large code-base.
In the year 2000, The first public released specification under the version number
0.44[38]. The first major release was 1.1b[38], and was quickly replaced by version
1.2[39] in 2003. In 2013 version 2 was released[37], which is the current standard at
the time of writing.
The absolute most crucial property of the TPM is that it is tamper-evident. The TPM
acts as a trust-anchor for the platform, and for that to be true, the TPM has to be
tamper-proof, though nothing is ever impenetrable, why we say it is tamper-evident.
In the next section, we will describe the overall architecture of the TPM.
4.1.1
Architecture
The architecture of the TPM is relatively simple since simple architectures, and small
code-bases has a smaller attack surface. It can be divided into three different compo-
nents, as illustrated in figure 4.1.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Modelling
Figure 4.1: A visual representation of the core components of the Trusted Platform
Module.
4.1.1.1
Cryptographic processor
The cryptographic processor is crucial to TPM operations. Since it lies under the
protection of the module, it is thereby trusted, which means that an adversary will
not be able to manipulate the component in any way. The processor has the following
tasks:
1. Random Number Generator
2. Asymmetric en- and decryption (RSA, ECC)
3. Symmetric en- and decryption (AES-128, AES-256)
4. Hashing (SHA-1, SHA-2 256)
These four operations form the pillars of the cryptographic capabilities of the TPM.
These can be used, among other things, to create and verify signatures, key generation,
and symmetric signing (HMAC). The processor should not be used as a cryptographic
coprocessor for the CPU since it is not designed for such usage; hence it will probably
be slower than the alternative.
4.1.1.2
Persistent memory
The persistent memory, also known as non-volatile (NV) memory, is a small area
within the module that persists through power-cycles. According to the TPM Pro-
file for a PC Platform, the vendor must provide at least 6962 bytes of non-volatile
memory[40]. To put that in perspective, that will hold only 27 RSA-2048 keys.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
27
Because of this minimal memory, it is generally not recommended to store data in
the non-volatile memory, but instead, encrypt it and save on disk, as we shall discuss
in a later section.
4.1.1.3
Versatile memory
The versatile - or volatile - memory will not hold its state through a power-cycle. The
non-volatile memory is generally used to load data into the TPM, and with them do
operations. It is also in the volatile memory that primary keys are created (they can
be transfer ed to the non-volatile memory, but that should only be done under certain
circumstances1
The area can be divided into two main subareas: the object store and the session
store. The object store is used to store objects such as keys. Whenever a key is
loaded, it is put into the object-store.
The session store of course stores sessions, which are used to audit actions, authorize
said actions, or even encrypt parameters.
4.1.2
Hierarchies
A hierarchy is a set of objects of which each of them has been assigned a handle.
This hierarchy can then be managed as a single group. Such a group consists of both
volatile and persistent objects. At the top of each hierarchy, a seed is located, which is
kept within the TPM and never revealed. The seed is used as a generator for primary
keys - as long as the seed and the template for the key have not changed, the same
primary keys will be generated.
The TPM 2.0 has three persistent hierarchies and one volatile. The three persistent
are named:
• Platform
• Storage
• Endorsement
Moreover, the last volatile hierarchy is called the NULL hierarchy. The platform
hierarchy is intended to be used by the platform, that could be to do signature-checks,
quotes, etc., during boot. The storage hierarchy is used by the platform owner, e.g.,
for the user to save keys, perform signatures, among others. This is not intended
for privacy-sensitive operations. The last persistent hierarchy is the endorsement
hierarchy, and it is used when privacy-sensitivity is a requirement.
The NULL hierarchy can be used as an ad-hoc hierarchy for the user of the platform.
If the user decides to use the TPM as a cryptographic coprocessor, then the NULL
1This could be if it is an RSA key that takes a large amount of time to generate. All keys can be
regenerated during boot, why it mostly is better to just regenerate a key in volatile memory, such
as an EC key.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Modelling
hierarchy is an obvious hierarchy to use, since it is volatile and has no authorization-
values or policies attached to it.
4.1.3
Keys
The TPM can generate both symmetric and asymmetric keys. In this report, we will
focus on the asymmetric keys, as they are the ones that we will be using. The TPM
2.0 supports creating both RSA and ECC keys, but we will focus on ECC. The keys
are generated inside the TPM and do not rely on any external entropy, but instead
works by using its random number generator.
4.1.3.1
Primary keys
The primary keys are located just below the seed and are derived from that. Generally,
there is no limit on how many primary keys one can create, but only a limited set
can be loaded at a time. A key is generated by a public template and the seed. If the
template and the seed are the same, then the resulting primary key will be the same.
There is a field that can be changed, uniqueData, and by altering that, a new key
can be generated. Moreover, if any other public data is changed, such as the policy
digest, the key will also be different.
Whenever a primary key is created, it is by default residing in volatile memory. It is
possible to evict them to non-volatile memory, but note that there is only a certain
amount of memory available. Since the process of creating a key is repeatable, one
does not need to save a key. The public data can be stored on the host, and whenever
the primary key is needed, it can be regenerated based on that public template (and
the persistent seed).
4.1.3.2
Keys
Other keys than primary keys will be sub-keys of said primary keys. As a sub-key,
it will be wrapped (encrypted) by the parent key.
It will not be loaded into the
TPM, but be returned as an encrypted blob of data. If the key is asymmetric, then
only the private part is encrypted. The key can then be loaded into the TPM when
needed. By wrapping the keys, there is no limit on how many keys can be made by
the TPM. These keys are different than primary keys in the sense that every time a
key is created under a primary key it will be mint condition and unique; hence the
keys are not re-creatable.
We model this by drawing keys in trees, where parents wrap children, for example if
the key Kx and Ky is children of Kp, then Blob(Kx) = enc(Kx)_Kp and Blob(Ky) =
enc(Ky)_Kp, and we show it in a tree as show in figure 4.2.
Kp is, by definition, not wrapped since it only exists in the TPM and is made based
on the secret primary seed and the public template. That means that if the TPM
is restarted. Kp can simply be recreated, and it is then possible to load Kx and Ky
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
29
Figure 4.2: A visual representation of keys in a hierarchy, here showing primary key
Kp and two normal keys as children..
into the memory. Key wrapped by primary keys can, in turn, wrap other keys, if so
desired.
4.1.4
Sessions
Sessions are an essential concept in regards to TPM’s since it is the sessions that
provide the interface for authentication. Sessions can be quite complicated, and in
the manner, we will use sessions in this project, we will focus on the basics.
Fundamentally sessions are used to authorize commands for specific entities, and
there are generally three types of sessions: Password-, HMAC- and Policy-sessions.
Password-sessions are the most simplistic and work as one would expect. A clear-text
password is provided, which is then given to the TPM. This obviously is not secure,
since the password is sent in clear text, though since there is a ready-to-use, state-less,
session within the TPM (identified by the TPM_RS_PW handle), it is straightforward
to use and does not have to be started or flushed. It is intended mainly for local use
and can be used in PoC solutions.
For a more secure passing of the password, HMAC sessions can be used, which uses
the password as an input into an HMAC-calculation that is done on the commands
and responses. When a command is sent to the TPM, the calculated HMAC is sent
along with it. On reception, the TPM verifies that the HMAC is as expected - if so,
the command is authorized. The other way around is simply the receiver who verifies
the HMAC to the expected value, which can only be calculated if both parties know
the password.
This can be done, for example, with an encryption key. When the key is created, it
is created with an authValue, which is simply a TPM-term for a password. When
the key-owner later wants to use the key, he will have to create an HMAC-session
in which he provides the authValue for the key. As determined above, if that value
is wrong, then the resulting HMAC calculation will be wrong, and the TPM will
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Modelling
not execute the command. Summarizing, the difference between a password- and an
HMAC-session is the visibility of the password itself.
The last type is policy-sessions, which is an extension of the HMAC sessions and is also
called Enhanced Authorization. Whereas HMAC-sessions only work with passwords,
policy-sessions authenticate commands by almost infinite different criteria, such as
state of the configuration of the machine (which we shall talk much more about),
passwords, or even external parameters such as fingerprint-readers, iris-scanners, face-
recognition, etc. Technically it would be possible only to allow a key to sign if you
are on top of Mount Everest if it is below freezing and noise is less than 30dB -
of course assuming the external equipment is trusted. There are a lot of different
policies available, and they can be AND’ed and OR’ed together to create highly
specific policies for almost any possible use-case.
To summarize: Password sessions are validated upon a shared secret, and the pass-
word is simply sent to the TPM; hence commands are validated on the password being
correct. In an HMAC session, commands are only executed if the HMAC sent with
the command is correct, which requires both parties to agree on the shared secret
and the session key. Policy sessions, on the other hand, requires a set of operations
to be executed in the right order, to provide a correct policyDigest which is passed
to the TPM.
4.1.5
Extended Authorization
Extended Authorization is key to achieving passwordless authentication. We need to
authenticate if, and only if, a certain set of requirements is met, e.g., fingerprint AND
password OR iris-scan AND password OR iris-scan AND password. It is evident that
this supports multi-factor authentication and be combined as wished. One of the
powerful features about Extended Authorizations is the value upon which it works,
known as the policydigest. This value does not need to be secret, and it can even
be generated externally without the use of a TPM. The argument for having this
value public available is due to the nature of a hash function. It is easy to compute
but very difficult to find the original values based only on the digest.
Whenever the entity is being used, a policy-session must be started. After the session
is started, necessary commands are executed in a correct order, which separately
manipulates the session policy-buffer. When all commands are executed, and the
entity is used in another command (e.g., TPM2_Sign, the TPM checks that the session
policy-buffer contains the value of which the entity was created with.
If so, the
command is executed. This means that even if a collision is found for a policy digest,
such as recent attacks on SHA1[41], this will not affect the security of the unsealing
since it is not possible to set a policy digest in a policy session, it is only possible to
execute commands.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
31
4.1.5.1
Policies
There are different types of policies that can be created.
The most simple is an
assertion policy, which builds upon a single authentication, e.g., a signature, password,
state of a register, etc. The different authentications can be combined to produce a
multifactor policy, which is based on a combination (AND) on assertion-policies.
These can be extended into compound policies, which are a bit more complex in the
sense that they can contain both AND and OR combinations of assertions. It is also
possible to create wildcard-policies which can be changed later on, but this we will
not cover in this project. The policies currently implemented are shown below.
PolicyAuthorize can be used to authroize an update to a policy.
PolicyAuthValue is similar to using an authorization value on an object, though
in this context, it requires an HMAC session.
PolicyPassword is what it sounds like: a password is needed to comply with the
policy; this can be provided as clear-text when executing, as opposed to an
authorization value.
PolicySecret checks a password for a NV index.
PolicyNV checks the data for a NV index.
PolicySigned checks for a specific signature.
PolicyCommandCode is restricting that only a specific command can be executed
with this object, e.g., sign.
PolicyCounterTimer checks against the internal state, e.g., a key that only works
during a specific boot cycle, or work in a certain time.
PolicyCpHash checks the command and parameters sent to a TPM. Hence it can,
for example, allow access to specific indexes only.
PolicyNameHash TBD
PolicyDuplicationSelect checks where the object is copied to.
PolicyNVWritten checks if a NV index has been written to in the past. Can, e.g.,
be used to ensure that a NV index only can be written to once.
PolicyLocality checks where the commands originate from, e.g., if its from a trusted
area in the CPU.
PolicyPCR checks the PCRs for expected values.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Modelling
One of the fascinating policies that can be implemented is the state of an external
device. It is based on the TPM2_PolicySigned, which simply checks a signature with
a known public key. That means that the TPM does not care about who or what
provided the signature, but just that it is correct.
An example of this could be a fingerprint-scanner. The TPM does not care whether or
not the user authenticated himself with his right or left index-finger, just that he did
authenticate himself. The question is then whether or not the device authenticating;
hence the entity providing the signature is trusted. In Windows Hello, there are strict
requirements for the sensors[27], but that is just one implementation. It is up to the
author of the policy to decide what devices it trusts, which makes this kind of policy
very flexible.
Of course, it is not limited to biometric sensors, but could be anything. For example,
it could be a movement-sensor that only provides a valid signature if somebody is in
the room, to prevent remote attacks. Only the imagination sets the limit for the use
of such a policy.
It is worth noting that it is also possible to restrict entities only to be executed with
specific commands. This is generally useful to ensure that entities are being used in
their expected context, e.g., if a signing key is created, we do not expect people to
encrypt data or wrap other keys.
All of these different assertions are very powerful. However, one of the most inter-
esting in regards to functional safety is the TPM2_PolicyPCR which checks whether a
specific set of PCRs are in a particular state. For now, just think of PCRs as a set of
registers representing the state of the system - if the system configuration changes, so
do the PCRs. Utilizing the PCRs, we can lock a key to the state of a system. If the
key is moved to another system, then it cannot be used due to the PCR values being
different. If we assume that the state of the PCRs represent the total configuration of
the system with all the programs and files, then we can assume that if an adversary
compromises the system, then the PCRs will change; hence they keys are locked in.
An example of a use case could be a company that requires all users to have a specific
anti-virus installed on their system; otherwise, they may not access the corporate
network. The way this could be solved could be having the system extending certain
PCRs with the digest of the required executable. If that executable is different than
expected, then the PCRs would not be in a state that allows the release of the key.
However, if the executable exists and is not compromised, then the PCRs reflect that,
and the user can use the system to access the corporate network.
4.1.6
PCRs & Integrity Verification
A Platform Configuration Register, or PCR, is a register that stores information
about the current software state of the platform. Such information can represent the
actual software running on the platform, or configurations that they use. Per design
it’s not possible to set at PCR to a certain state, but only extend them. The PCRs
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Trusted Platform Module
33
are designed to hold a hash digest, and that means they can be very small. For a
SHA1 implemented PCR Bank each register is 20 bytes[42].
Extending a register is done by including the selected PCR’s current contents in the
hash calculation to be done.
PCRn = SHA1(PCRn + data)
By doing this, we can ensure the order of measurements, and just a single configu-
ration error in the system can change the contents of the PCR, making it a perfect
indicator of configuration correctness. The only another way a PCR can be changed
is to reset it (which depending on the platform it is installed in, might only be a
subset of PCRs that can be reset; otherwise the TPM or platform must be restarted).
Overall there are two kinds of measurements: pre-boot and post-boot. The first thing
that happens when a system boots and the PCRs are empty is the software in the
Core Root of Trust for Measurement (CRTM)[43] or just Root of Trust for Mea-
surement (RTM)[44] is started. By definition, this is trusted, since there is nothing
to verify this. It can be provided by a unique chip, by the BIOS, or the CPU could
provide it. If the first is the case, then it’s a Static Root of Trust for Measurement the
latter is true, then we’re talking about Dynamic Root of Trust for Measurements[45],
though these have specific architecture requirements[45], e.g. it should provide pro-
tected execution environment such as Intel TXT[26] or AMD SVN[25].
The RTM then does a measurement as one of the first things in the boot process, or
when the CPU enters protected execution mode. It then verifies the next piece of
software to start, e.g., the following BIOS, and extends a PCR with this measure-
ment. The next software, in this example, the BIOS, then measures the next in line,
which is extended in the PCR. All of this continues until the system is booted, and a
chain of trust has been done. If the last measurement has an expected value, then we
can guarantee that none of the measured items (and their configurations) have been
altered since the comparison digest was created.
In post-boot, we can then measure the applications and their configurations if nec-
essary, using a Measurement Agent (MA), which is the same as an RTM but lies in
software. Assuming the integrity measurements performed by the RTM are correct,
we can trust the MA has not been compromised2, and we can, therefore, have the
Measurement Agent doing the subsequent measurements of any software.
A modern PCR has at least one PCR bank, though they should provide one PCR-bank
per hashing-algorithm they support[46]. The amount of PCRs in a bank depends on
the platform in which the TPM resides, but for example, in a PC, the standard says
it must contain 24 PCRs[40]. While it indeed is possible to store all measurements
in a single PCR, but spreading out integrity measurements opens up the possibility
2While the is true, it still requires the comparison digest to be valid, and it only guarantees the
state at the time of measurement. It cannot detect if the system is in a compromised state during
runtime
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Modelling
PCR
Used for
0
BIOS
1
BIOS Configuration
2
Option ROMs
3
Option ROM configuration
4
IPL (Normally MBR)
5
IPL Configuration/Data
6
State transitions and wake events
7
Platform Manufacturer Specific
8-15
Static OS (Bootloader, Arguments, Kernel etc.)
16
Debug
17-22
DRMT & DLME3 specific
23
Application support
Table 4.1: PCR usage example. According to [43][45] where the latter states it’s
standardized in PC Client implementation specification section 11.7, but
not been able to verify yet.
of selective trust. If an application only cares about the pre-boot state (BIOS, MBR,
etc.), then it could use those values, e.g., for sealing. Other applications might not
care about the pre-boot state, but instead only on the applications installed.
If all measurements are saved in one single PCR, the application that only has an
interest in the pre-boot measurements would not see the expected digest if, e.g., an
application was updated. The application that was dependent on specific applications
measured would not see the expected hash if a BIOS-update happened.
Such a
problem is called PCR brittleness, and is also an issue when doing integrity verification
on isolated PCRs. The issue is that user-level applications are highly dynamic, and
software is updating all the time. In the earlier days, software might not be updated
as often, but today with our high-speed internet connections, push updates are not
uncommon - try to ask yourself when you updated your browser manually the last
time. That leaves administrators with an immense amount of platform configurations
that might be valid, and updating policies is not always easy. TPM 1.2 was massively
hit by this since it was not able to update policy with a new value. For example,
if the BIOS was updated (which is a massive security-issue if it is not!), then keys
would be locked and impossible to unlock unless the BIOS was downgraded to the
old version. One solution was to unseal all the keys, update and then re-seal the keys,
though it created a timeframe where the keys were exposed.
Instead, version 2.0 implemented a Wildcard-policy called TPM2_PolicyAuthroize,
which allows a policy to be changed at a later point in time. By doing so, an admin-
istrator could update policies to require new measurement values.
Besides that, dynamic roots of trust implementations[47][48] can provide a solution
to the issue by attesting to what software does (hence dynamic) instead of what it
is, as static measurements do at boot-up. Dynamic attestation is still a large area of
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Models
35
research, since it can have a significant overhead, but by doing so, one can attest to
the execution of code, instead of the state of code.
4.2
Models
Now that we have a basic understanding of the TPM, we can start integrating it into
the FIDO U2F protocol. We start by presenting an overall system model that shows
the components of the system. After introducing the components, we look into trust
modelling.
4.2.1
System Model
In this section, we describe the overall system model to gain a high-level understanding
of the setup needed to understand the trust models. We start by defining the different
actors in the system, presented in figure 4.3. This setup is not much different from the
standard U2F setup, and we simply replace the roaming authenticator with a TPM.
We further present an Issuer, who is not an active asset in the U2F specifications,
though that is simply the manufacturer of the module. For a roaming authenticator
such as Yubikey, the Issuer would be Yubico.
Service Provider The Service Provider is equivalent to the Origin or Relying Party
from the FIDO U2F Description mentioned in section 2.1. The Service Provider
is the entity that the user wishes to authenticate with. The service provider
also acts as a verifier as it verifies that the TPM a valid, using anonymous
signatures created using the DAA protocol, which we discuss further in section
2.1.
Host The host contains the client and is also called the platform (when we say plat-
form, we mean the host and TPM). The host could be a computer, smartphone,
vehicle, etc. The host acts as a middle man for the TPM. It is responsible for
handling communication with the service provider, as in the FIDO U2F proto-
col. The host further provides information to the TPM regarding the service
provider it is talking to, again as in the original protocol.
Trusted Platform Module The Trusted Platform Module resides within the plat-
form and is physically bound to it. The TPM provides secure cryptographic
functionalities and is used to generate keys and signatures. The TPM also has
the responsibility of measuring the integrity of the host, i.e., by hashing appli-
cations, to ensure device integrity. The TPM encrypts and decrypts Service
Attestation Keys, which are unique to a user/service-provider pair.
Service Attestation Key A service attestation key (SAK) encrypts and decrypts
multiple authorization keys.
Such a Service Attestation Key is unique to a
specific service provider and a single user. The key can only usable if a request
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Modelling
Figure 4.3: An overview of the different components of the system. Dashed lines
are used to symbolize conceptual links, where filled lines are actual use.
comes from the service provider it is linked to. Since it is needed to decrypt
authentication keys, if that is lost, then all authorization keys are lost as well.
We see why this key was introduced when we talk of the key hierarchy in section
4.1.2.
Authentication Key The authorization keys are used for signing the challenges
received from the service provider. Those keys are protected by policies, which
are described in detail in section 4.1.5.1, which virtually ensures that only the
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Models
37
right user, under the right circumstances, can gain access to the key.
The
authentication key is equivalent to the keys described in the FIDO U2F Protocol,
but better protected.
DAA Key is a unique key only accessible to the TPM. The DAA key provides
anonymous attestation to the service provider. This can be compared to the
attestation certificate in the FIDO U2F protocol.
Issuer Last we have the Issuer, who is the manufacturer of the TPM. It is the Issuers’
responsibility not to issue valid credentials to a TPM, in case it is not valid (i.e.,
compromised). In the FIDO U2F protocol, this is the relying party.
User The user(s) are the last actor and are responsible for providing authentication
data such as passwords, biometric data, etc. to the host to be able to unseal
keys.
One thing that might seem confusing is the keys shown in the figure. This is, in fact,
very simple, if we go back to figure 4.2 that shows the key hierarchy, we show that
a Primary Key (that resides within the TPM) wraps (encrypts) another key. As we
said, the encrypted key can, in turn, wrap other keys, shown in this model. A pri-
mary key wraps the service attestation key, and that key wraps authentication keys.
A service attestation key is unique to a user and service provider. It is wrapping all
the authorization keys used to authenticate the user to that given service provider.
We ensure we meet the requirement of origin-specific keys by sealing the service at-
testation key with the application parameter value; hence it attests to the service
provider. Since we have defined it as a limitation that there can be only one authen-
tication key per user, we provide multiple keys, which are all protected by the service
attestation key.
In chapter 5, we present all the design decisions and discussions
made.
4.2.2
Additional Requirements
We presented in the requirements that we must ensure that the system will only work
when the host is in a trusted state.
As this system is to be trusted by a range of different providers, not one standard
alone can be derived and uphold, when creating service attestation keys or DAA
keys. However, standards could be derived in a forum of providers, hence providing
necessary guarantees for device integrity during non-authentication scenarios such as
registration or DAA Key creation.
This system only supports Configuration Integrity Verification (CIV) and is measured
before and immediately after boot. For the overall system, that means an attacker
that can execute attacks on the system post-boot, would not be discovered.
Take, for example, a corporate computer at a large company. The company dictates
that to access the corporate network, you must sign a key that is sealed by PCR
values representing the currently installed software, to ensure no foreign programs are
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Modelling
present. When the user boots his computer, it extends certain PCRs with the hashes
of the currently installed programs. When the user logs on to the secure network, he
unseals the key and is successful since everything is in order. Unfortunately, the user
clicks on a link in an email that downloads some malware. Later, when the user again
needs to log on to the secure network, he can still do so because the measurements
were done at the time of boot. The malware can then potentially spread, or do other
harm. It is not until the user reboots his machine that the PCRs would represent a
compromised system; hence there is a specific window for adversaries to work in.
To be able to achieve trust in the dynamic environment of the platform dynamic
measurements are needed, such as Control-Flow Attestation techniques[47][48], but
other dynamic roots of trust can be used to achieve the same necessary guarantees,
but still have issues in handling Data-Oriented Programming (DOP)[49] attacks[50].
In the models, we assume that universal standards for device integrity are in place
and are being checked, meaning that any operation can only happen if and only
if the device meets the integrity requirements. These requirements are met by the
measurements gathered during boot, and guarantee that the system configurations
are as expected — the measurements are the only operational assurance that we
provide if key creation is dependent on this.
4.2.3
Trust Models
We must flesh out the core functionality of the system that needs to be trusted. The
models are designed to capture the assumptions and relationships between assets and
entities in the system, needed for the system to operate in a trusted manner. They
should capture not only the use-cases of the system but also the potentially untrusted
entities and assets, such as objects, data, etc.
The final goal of these models is to provide a formally verifiable trust model, that
can be verified with tools such as ProVerif[51], such that these models can be used to
generate attestation policies that can protect safety-critical operations and guarantee
operational assurance.
To model systems as this, multiple modeling languages should be used, each having
their own strength. Predicates are better to capture low-level assumptions such as
physical security, trusted internal communication, and memory safety. Diagrams ease
the concept of modeling trust relationships that needs to be created and maintained
to achieve trust in the system.
Using axioms, these predicates can be glued together to achieve a trusted state of
the system. An example could be that a system has dynamic measurement safety. If
the software measuring, it is in a trusted state (P1), and the hardware is physically
secure (P2). Here we presented two predicates together to form an axiom that can
be represented in a mathematical way. These axioms can then be linked to create a
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Models
39
chain of trust needed to fulfill the trust requirements of the system, in our case, the
correctness of the software running on the host.
We can use diagrams to model the trust relations between entities in the system.
These diagrams depict a sequence of states that reflect assets, entities, code-execution,
etc., that need to be trusted. If any of the states do not meet their requirements, they
cannot be trusted; hence overall security cannot be guaranteed. Using these models,
we can describe a generic enhanced version of the FIDO U2F Protocol, that solves
the challenges and requirements fleshed out in section 2.3. The models described are
focused on the TPM, but can without much effort be moved to other trusted domains,
as long as they hold the same properties and security guarantees as described in the
model.
We limit the modeling to the diagrams to depict the core functionality and trust
requirements of the system.
To be able to formally verify the models and create
attestable Control Flow Graphs that can be turned into attestation policies, the
predicates and axioms are, of course, needed.
In this section, we model the following use-cases:
1. Create Service attestation Key
2. Create Authentication Key
3. Create DAA Key
4. Create Attestation Signature
5. Create Authentication Signature
These use-cases are the core safety-critical operations for the system, why they need to
capture trust assumptions and requirements. Having these models defined (alongside
the predicates and the axioms), they can be formally verified and monitored using
Control Flow Attestation Techniques described in the previous section. Should any of
the states not execute correctly, then the safety of the system cannot be guaranteed.
Therefore the states are core operations a system.
We model the system under the assumption that device integrity is measured at boot-
time and compared to a standard. If the measurements do not adhere to the standard,
then execution, in general, should not be possible.
4.2.3.1
Create Service Attestation Key
The Service Attestation Key is used to wrap the authentication keys.
They are
unique to a specific user and a specific service provider. During registration, this key
is created and reflects the origin as the hosts see it that point in time, supporting
requirements of origin-specific keys, since the authentication keys that this key wraps,
can only be unlocked if the correct service provider is present.
As shown in figure 4.3, the key is encrypted by the TPM. In reality, it’s encrypted
by a primary key (described in section 4.1.3) that lies within the TPM. After this
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Modelling
model succeeds a key is provided to the host where the public part is available, and
the private part is encrypted by the primary key, and can only be decrypted in the
TPM if the correct AuthValue is provided.
Precondition: Primary key created.
Postcondition: Service Attestation key wrapped by primary key, and the key blob
is returned
Figure 4.4: State diagram showing the states for generating a Service Attestation
key. Blue is able to be done on host and green is on the TPM.
Generate AuthValue This AuthValue is required to protect the overall system of
MITM-attacks, as defined in chapter 5, which fulfills requirement [R2, R8]. It
represents a user-provided password, the relying party as seen from the host,
and a public known randomness. This value is used as an authorization value
(password) for the key.
TPM Create Creates the attestation key that is used to wrap authentication keys.
The AuthValue is set as the host-provided value.
Seal Seals the newly created key to the authorization value provided.
Assuming all states are successfully executed, a (non-authentication) key is created
and sealed to an authorization value that represents the origin in play.
4.2.3.2
Create Authentication Key
The authorization key(pair) is the key that is used during authentication. When cre-
ated, the public part of the key can be sent to the relying party. The key is created
with a set of policies (see section 4.1.5.1) that is required by the service provider.
The service provider can also provide specific policies to be complied with, in this
model, we exemplify this with a configuration whitelist. This, of course, requires that
a service attestation key is loaded, which, as we defined in the previous model, can
only be done if the origin we are creating authentication keys to are the same as when
the service attestation key was created. As with the Service Attestation Key, we are
getting data output to the host, where the public key is readable for the host, but
the secret part is not.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Models
41
Precondition: Primary and Service Attestation key created.
Postcondition: Authentication key wrapped by attestation key.
Figure 4.5: Diagram showing the states for generating an authentication key. Blue
is provided by the host, green is states with relation to the authentica-
tion key and red is in regards to the service attestation (parent) key..
Configuration Whitelist To achieve trust in the system from a provider’s perspec-
tive, it might send one or more configuration whitelists. Such configuration
whitelists are used to provide a trust-baseline for unsealing the key.
Generate AuthValue The process in which the unique authorization value needed
to unseal the service attestation key, is provided.
An example could be a
SHA256 hash of some application-specific data, user-specific data (password),
and some randomness to ensure uniqueness. This value is to ensure an adversary
intercepting communications are not providing data to the system.
Calculate Policy Digest In an authenticated session, the policy digest is calculated
to be able to unseal the key. The digest is calculated by executing different
policy commands on the TPM, followed by getting the newly created digest.
Such a digest can be any combination of the policies described in sectionpolicies
to support the requirements of multi-factor authentication.
Load Service Attestation Key Loads the attestation key to be able to provide a
parent for the key that is undergoing creation.
Unseal Unseals the Service Attestation Key (inside the TPM, the private key is not
available to the user)
TPM Create Creates the Authentication Key. This state must provide a unique
key that cannot be linked to any other authorization key, created under the
same service attestation key or not to meet requirement [U2].
Seal Seals the Authentication Key to the configuration whitelist and the policy digest
value generated.
As with the service attestation key, to be able to achieve trust in the authentication
key, the provided values must be untampered. If we assume that standards are in
place for a base-level of trust, then these operations can only successfully execute, if
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Modelling
the host is in such a state. Such an operation could, for example, be by sealing the
primary key to that standard.
The whitelist is by design the foundation of the policy, as it should represent the
desired state of the configurations in the system. As described in section 4.1.6, the
registers of the TPM can be extended but not overwritten. Because of this, the actual
policy-value can be generated by extending that value with the secondary policies.
This model shows how the TPM can fulfill requirements to generate keys that are
only readable in the TPM per design. Due to the nature of the policies, any number
of policies could be used to seal the key, why we here do not meet the limitation of
being restricted to only having two factors.
4.2.3.3
Create DAA Key
The DAA key is used in the DAA protocol (described in more detail 5.1.1.3) and
is used to attest to the validity of the TE. We create this key to comply with the
requirement of attestation. This key is encrypted by the TPM, why a primary key
must be created. We discuss this further in chapter 5. Since the DAA key is used
to attest to the validity of the TPM during authentication, it should, of course, be
protected by a platform password.
Precondition: Parent key created. While the DAA can take form as the Primary
Key, it does not have to. We will discuss this in the design chapter.
Postcondition: DAA Key created and sealed
Figure 4.6: State diagram showing the states for generating an ECC Key for Direct
Anonymous Attestation. Blue is able to be done on host and yellow is
on the TPM.
Password This is the password the key is to be sealed with. The password is a
secret value and should, therefore, only be known to the owner of the platform.
TPM Create Creates the ECC DAA Key with the password send with as authValue.
Seal Seals the newly created key to the authorization value provided.
Creating the DAA key has the same relationships as the attestation key shown in
figure 4.4. Since there are no established standards for device integrity, this is not
depicted here. To ensure that nobody else than the platform owner can create the
DAA Key, we seal the key with a password.
The DAA Key is used to meet the
requirement of being able to attest to the type of environment.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Models
43
4.2.3.4
Create Attestation Signature
To be able to attest to the validity of the trusted module, we need to provide a signa-
ture from a DAA key. This signature establishes a guarantee at the service provider
that the trusted module, i.e., is a TPM and that it is valid. The Direct Anonymous
Attestation is described further in section 5.1.1.3.
Precondition: DAA Setup and Join protocols completed successfully.
Postcondition: Signature created
Figure 4.7: State diagram showing the states necessary for signing an Authentica-
tion Key for Registration with a Relying Party.
password The password required to unseal the DAA key. This is provided untam-
pered and is known only to the platform owner.
Load DAA Key Load the DAA Key into the TPM.
Unseal Unseal the DAA key with the password (AuthValue) provided by the host.
Randomize Credential Before using the credential, it is necessary to randomize
the credential such that the signatures are unlinkable to meet requirement [U2].
If linkability is desired between signatures, a basename can be provided here.
DAA Sign The signing operation with the DAA key. The signing operation is done
on the marshaled public key. This is done by using the TPM’s commit function
and further calculations on the host.
The goal of the use case is to provide a signature to a public key that can be verified
as only being able to be produced on a valid TPM. Since it is the public part of an
authentication key that is to be signed, no special operations are needed to load this.
The public key is being signed to convince the verifier that the public key originated
from a valid TPM.
Indeed the key could be protected by one or more policies, though working under the
assumption that the password is only known to the platform owner, this is enough.
As with key generation, there are not established a standard for device integrity, why
the DAA signing is not subject to configuration integrity verification. Since we are
using Direct Anonymous Attestation, we remove the ability (if so desired) to link
to different attestation signatures with each other, hence supporting requirements
revolving around anonymous attestation.
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Modelling
4.2.3.5
Create Authentication Signature
This is central to the authentication phase of the protocol described in section 2.1.0.2.
We need to sign data with a private key, of which the corresponding public key lies on
the service provider. This is indeed a rather large operation since we need to unseal
not only the service attestation key but also the authorization key. To do this, we
must receive information about the service provider from the host and comply with
policies.
Precondition: Authentication Key, Service Attestation Key and Primary Key is
created
Postcondition: Signature created
Figure 4.8: State diagram showing the states necessary for signing an host-provided
dataset for authentication with a Relying Party. Colors differ on what
key is being worked on, and blue represents host-provided data.
Integrity Measurements Integrity Measurements are being done during boot and
create a set of digest values stored within the TPM. These values represent the
current configurations of the platform and range from low-level configurations
such as the BIOS, MBR, etc., all the way to post-boot measurements of installed
applications and their configurations.
Calculate AuthValue The value based on application- and user data and prede-
fined random data. It is used to gain access to the Service Attestation key and
protect against man in the middle attacks.
Load Service Attestation Key Load the service attestation key into the TPM.
Unseal Unseal the Service Attestation Key, which gives the TPM access to the
private parts of the key. The private part is never revealed to the user.
Load Authentication Key Loads the selected authentication key into the TPM,
but the private part of the key is still sealed.
Calculate Policy Digest In an authenticated session, the policy digest is calculated
to use the authentication key. This must be done by executing the required
policies correctly and in the correct order. If a configuration whitelist digest is
provided by the relying party during setup, the first policy to execute must be
the PolicyPCR followed by any policies required.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Models
45
Unseal The unsealing of the authentication key based on the policy digest calculated
before.
TPM Sign The signing operation with the Authentication Key on the host provided
dataset. This succeeds if and only if the policy-digest matches that of which
was generated during creation, and if the correct authvalue for the parent is
provided.
This use-case is fundamental for the trust of the system. Assuming all the steps in
model 4.2.3.2 are executed correctly, then it is only possible to sign the data provided
if both the service attestation key can be unsealed (based on the clients perspective
of the verifier and a password) and the platforms integrity measurements meets the
expectations of the relying party and any other negotiated policies such as biometrics,
proof of presence, etc. This provides necessary functional safety guarantees described
in requirement [U8] since a change in accepted software (intentional or otherwise) will
result in the key being unsealable. It is essential to highlight that even though device
integrity is ensured here, it is still based on the configuration measured during boot.
Any adversary able to affect the system afterward will be able to do so without us
knowing unless we assume dynamic measurement capabilities.
The requirements of the original protocol dictate that we must provide proof that
we are not cloned and potentially that a human is present. The nature of the TPM
dictates that it cannot be cloned, so the attestation is enough to cover this. As to
proof of presence, if the relying party so desires to require such proof, that can be
included in the policies negotiated. This is why the calculation of the policy digest is
such a safety-critical operation of this system.
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Adapted design
In this chapter, we introduce the adapted design of the FIDO U2F protocol that
enhances privacy, as well as the design and reasoning of TPM key hierarchies. The
first section contains an analysis of the existing protocol, where we go more into details
of the limitation discussed in chapter 1. We then propose changes to the protocol
and end with a breakdown of each step. When we have proposed a design for the
new protocol, we move into how we will achieve privacy through a set of unlinkable
keys. Following that, we will discuss how we store the keys on the TPM and propose
different solutions.
5.1
FIDO U2F Protocol
In this section, we go into details of the limitations in the FIDO U2F Protocol and
how we aim to solve them. We divide this section into two: one for registration and
one for authentication.
5.1.1
Registration
In figure 2.3 in section 2.1 we see the registration protocol depicted. It is obvious
from a privacy perspective that we already in the first communication from host to
the relying party are saying who we are.
The FIDO U2F protocol is not meant to ensure user privacy, but only implement a
second factor, why it is natural to authenticate with username and password during
registration. Since we do not want to say who we are, we will not implement this.
The adaption of the protocol aims to be as generic as possible; why it is not possible
to precisely specify the authentication method. Instead, we change this to a more
generic term basic authentication. Basic authentication implies that the host (or user
of the host) can provide evidence that it is eligible for registration. This term can
define a user/password registration, but does not have to.
By doing this, we ensure that this setup can be used to obtain both full- and partial
anonymity1. An example could be a smart-shopping application where customers use
their devices to scan their groceries. At the time the customer enters the store, they
1Full anonymity in this context means unlinkability between two registration requests
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Adapted design
scan a QR-code[52], which gives a shared token that is used for basic authentication.
In other cases, the user might have to do other forms of authentication, e.g., password,
group signature, or any other way of authentication that lets the relying party verify
that registration is allowed.
The relying party then sends a challenge. Since we strive to do local multi-factor
authentication, we must meet some policies to comply with, as we showed in chapter
4.2.3 how we do. These requirements are sent back with the challenge and can, for
example, contain a configuration whitelist, requirements to password, biometric data,
and so forth.
Moving through the protocol, we arrive at the challenge-response message, the re-
sponse from the host to the challenge during registration. As discussed in section
2.1, this message contains an attestation certificate that allows the relying party to
validate the type of U2F Device. If the relying party does not link this with the
to-be-stored public key, then we still have unlinkability in further authentication re-
quests. To achieve full anonymity, we need to provide attestation without revealing
our identity. We present three different methods to accomplish this and describe the
pros and cons of each solution.
5.1.1.1
Group Certificates
A simple way is to use a group certificate that is issued to multiple devices. The
problem is evident in this situation: if a device is compromised, it is impossible
to revoke the certificate for just that member.
This solution is described in the
FIDO U2F standard, where they note that a certificate could be shared by 100.000
devices[53] though it is in the end up to the vendor to choose a decent number.
5.1.1.2
Privacy Certificate Authority
A Trusted Platform Module contains a unique key, that only it and the Issuer knows
about, we call that key the Endorsement Key (EK)[54]. That key can, therefore, be
used to attest to the TPM, but that raises some obvious privacy concerns, namely that
two parties can identify a common device. To address this issue, the Trusted Com-
puting Group (TCG) introduced the Privacy CA in their TPM 1.2 specification[39]
that was later standardized by ISO[55].
The TPM can then generate another key, called the Attestation Identity Key (AIK),
which then is signed with the Endorsement Key. The endorsement key can be shared
with a privacy-preserving certificate authority who needs to know the Endorsement
Key, e.g., it could be the manufacturer. The Privacy CA then issues a certificate on
the AIK, which states that this is a valid TPM - nothing else.
Assuming the Privacy CA maintains a list of revoked endorsement keys, then the
manufacturer can provide information on whether or not a TPM has been marked as
being rouge. If a device requires unlinkability between all attestations, the Privacy
CA is very much included in the communication, which sets significant requirements
==PAGE:57==
5.1 FIDO U2F Protocol
49
for availability. Further, this can only guarantee privacy as long as a verifier, and the
CA does not cooperate to reveal the platform.2
5.1.1.3
Direct Anonymous Attestation
Direct Anonymous Attestation (DAA) is a protocol that offers anonymous attestation
of a platform without providing information about the platform itself. It still relies
on a common trusted party such as the TPM Manufacturer, which we call Issuer.
The protocol consists of two main phases: Join and Sign. In the first phase, the TPM
(the Prover) proves to the Issuer who it is and sends along a DAA Key (an ECC
key). The Issuer then issues a credential based on that key to the Prover, which it
verifies. When the platform needs to attest to its identity, it scrambles the credential
and creates a signature with the modified credential. It is up to the platform whether
the signatures provided can be linked to each other, by introducing a basename into
the scrambled credential.
When the Verifier receives the signature, it can verify that it is legit based on a
Zero-Knowledge proof - without talking to the Issuer.
With this approach, the Issuer is only contacted when it needs to issue a credential,
and a verifier can verify a signature independently of the Issuer. This approach, of
course, leaves revocation, which can be done by a signature-based revocation[56][57].
Signature-based revocation works by the Issuer having a list of suspicious signatures
in a revocation list, which is shared with verifiers (verifiers can, of course, add to local
lists as well). A verifier can then share their revocation list with a signer, and ask
them to prove they did not create those signatures.
In this project, we continue using DAA since it is the only protocol that can provide
complete anonymity. As we are designing a general solution, it is mainly up to the
user to determine whether the basename should be used. Returning to the protocol,
we suggest swapping out the attestation certificate with a DAA signature over the
public key. By doing so, we prove to the relying party that we are a valid TPM, and
we ”certify”3 the public key.
Now that we have looked into the different possibilities for attestation, we continue
moving through the protocol. When the relying party has verified that attestation
certificate (i.e., a DAA signature) and signature, it is linking the key with a user,
which under the circumstances of privacy is not an option. By removing the user-
link, the only thing the relying party can link the public key is the key handle.
In figure 5.1, we see the adapted protocol as to this analysis. By utilizing DAA, we
can anonymously attest to being a host with a Trusted Platform Module without
revealing the identity.
We further remove the requirement for the username and
2Blind signatures can prevent this, but the availability of the CA is still an issue
3Not to be confused with a TPM Certify. Certify in this context is simply just to state that we
acknowledge this public key is available for a valid TPM.
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Adapted design
Figure 5.1: The adapted registration protocol. Red parts are new, and black line-
through is removed.
password combination and leave it to the relying party to decide the authentication
scheme. Basic authentication might include zero-knowledge proof or any other form
of proof of eligibility for a service. We then introduce a new parameter, PolicyData,
that is a set of policies the key must be sealed with.
5.1.1.4
The Application ID
In the original FIDO U2F Protocol, the Application ID was introduced to make it
easier for a user to connect to a service. A user might use different browsers, apps, or
other means to access the same service, which could make the relying party ask the
user to register a new key. They, therefore, introduced the application ID, which is a
generalized notion of the origin.
That means it is up to the host to check that it is the right origin. It does this by
fetching the contents of that application ID, and obtain a list of valid facets and check
of the origin is within that list. The hash of this application ID is then sent to the
TE, to ensure that it is indeed issued to this.
While this makes it easier to reuse a key under various circumstances, it gives the
==PAGE:59==
5.1 FIDO U2F Protocol
51
relying party information about the user, considering they can make out a set of
devices the user owns. Further, it only makes sense to do this if key-creation speed
is an issue, or if it is linked to specific user-details, which this whole project aims to
avoid.
Therefore we discard the notion of an application ID and instead continue using the
”origin” as a primary way of identifying a relying party. This change means that we
have no check on the origin in the host since this is no longer needed.
Last we remove the linking between a public key, a user, and a key handle to just
being a link between the key and its handle. Because the handle is not linked to the
user, it must be universally unique. Such identification can be made with a UUID[58],
or it could be a hash of the public key.
5.1.2
Protocol Breakdown
In this section, we break down each step and provide arguments for the parameters.
Basic Authentication Without basic authentication, the service provider or rely-
ing party does not have any authority to allow user registration. Some authenti-
cation is necessary but can be of different levels. To support requirements, this
basic authentication must be able to be unlinkable to a specific user or person.
Challenge The challenge is a simple nonce, which is essential to protect against
replay attacks (an attack where an adversary tries to re-send a message that
has been sent in the past. If the challenge is different every time, hence nonce,
the attack will fail).
As a new parameter, we add PolicyData, which is a
(potentially negotiated) set of policies used to seal the key; this can be require-
ments of different authentication-schemes such as passwords, biometrics or an
application whitelist.
Prepare Registration Request Message The host receives the challenge param-
eter and immediately prepares the client data shown in table 2.1, which most
importantly is a hash of the challenge and the application ID seen from the host
perspective - the hashed version of client data is called the ChallengeParameter.
The application parameter is vital, as it is used to prevent phishing and man in
the middle attacks. Instead of the ApplicationParameter being just the digest
of the AppID, we introduce it as the digest of the AppID and and application
ID seen from the host (e.g., AppID: Email, Application ID: https://google.com).
We do this to protect the key from MITM attacks but support multiple appli-
cations on a single RP.
Registration Request Both the ChallengeParameter and the ApplicationParameter
is sent to the TPM (or any other trusted environment) and is to be used to gen-
erate a signature and a key.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Adapted design
Generate and Sign The trusted environment then creates a keypair and seals it to
the origin described by the application parameter. It then returns a signature
on those parameters plus the public key and the UUID (key handle). Further,
the TE returns a DAA signature over the PK to attest to it being a valid,
trusted environment. The ClientData is not sent with the message as it is not
needed.
Validate When the relying party receives the message, it should first confirm the
DAA Signature, and if that holds, it can check the signature provided. In the
original protocol, the ClientData is sent along for the Relying party to verify
the signature and validate the data. In our case, we have no interest in knowing
what went wrong (i.e., the origin is incorrect due to MITM), but simply if
something is wrong. The Relying Party can simply reconstruct the ClientData
as it expects it to look like, and then check the signature. If anything is not as
expected, it discards the key; otherwise, the key is stored but not linked with a
user.
We can now see how the adapted version of the protocol offers the same capabilities
as the original protocol in the form of protection and verification but does not expose
user-data. It is notable that it is not possible to prove that the keys indeed has been
sealed using the policies, but assuming a non-compromised host4 it should seal the
key with the policies received.
5.1.3
Authentication
Analyzing the authentication, we spot the same issue as with registration: the first
step includes the host authenticating using username and password, which again is a
big privacy violation in the context of this project. Since we do not want to identify
ourselves, but only proof that we have registered, we need not send anything but a
request for a challenge. Obviously, since the Relying Party does not know who the
user is, it cannot send the corresponding key handle. Therefore the Relying Party
simply provides the challenge-parameter and the application data. It is now up to the
platform to locate a key registered with the service provider, which is then used to
sign the challenge. In the response message to the host, there is no need for a counter
since the TPM is by design un-cloneable, and the platform is verified when loading
the key. We further ignore the control-byte since user presence can be established
with policies, e.g., by biometrics as to requirement [R9]. Since the relying party can
decide what protocols are needed, we do not need to send anything back. The key
handle (UUID) is sent along, such that the relying party can locate the key.
As we see in figure 5.2 we have reduced the data needed to be transmitted, and no
personal information is exchanged, but the Relying Party can be convinced that it is
a genuine user, since it has registered at an earlier state.
4This can be achieved if some form of attestation is present, this is described in more detail in
section 4.2.3.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 FIDO U2F Protocol
53
Figure 5.2: The adapted authentication protocol. Red parts are new, and black
line-through is removed.
5.1.3.1
Protocol breakdown
In this subsection, we go through the adapted protocol and look at why parameters
are as they are, and any changes made in regards to authentication.
Request Before the user-provided authorization with username and password here,
to provide the first factor of authentication. Since this tells the relying party
who the user is, we discard this step. Instead, we simply request a challenge
without any other authorization.
Challenge In the original protocol, the relying party would identify the user and
provide a challenge, AppID, and a Key Handle. In section 5.1.1.4, we argued
why we discarded the App ID, and since the relying party has no information
as to who we are, it cannot provide a Key Handle, hence supporting the require-
ment [U4] that handles should be chosen at client-side. Due to this, the relying
party simply returns a challenge.
Prepare Originally the host had to check the origin on the facet list fetched with the
help of the AppID provided to see if the origin provided is legit. Instead we sim-
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Adapted design
ply create the ClientData structure showed in table 2.1 and hash it to create the
ChallengeParameter and hash the origin to provide the ApplicationParameter.
Unseal and Sign If, and only if, the application parameter is the same as when the
authorization key was created5, then the authorization key can be loaded. If
that happens, the key needs to be unsealed in regards to the policies negotiated.
If that is successful, then the TE can sign the challenge parameter and send it.
Again, since we do not have the App ID, we do not include that in the signature.
The UUID of the public key is also included in this message; otherwise, the
Relying Party cannot locate the key. The key handle is essential to privacy:
it is the host and not the relying party that decides what key to use, as we
described in the requirements.
Since the user-presence can be defined in a
protocol, this is not returned, and neither is the counter due to the fact that
the key could not be unlocked on any other platform (assuming configuration
integrity verification and the fact that the trusted environment by design is
assumed un-cloneable.6
Validation It is not before this step that the Relying Party can locate the public
key. When the public key is located, the signature can be verified, and the user
is authenticated.
In the next section, we show why we can achieve the same guarantees as to the original
FIDO protocol with this adapted design.
5.2
Privacy
This project aims to achieve unlinkability between authentications. This is partly
done by convincing the service provider that we can be trusted by using Direct
Anonymous Attestation, but that only gives us anonymous trust, i.e., that the ser-
vice provider trusts that we are a valid TPM. The overall use-case is to authenticate
using a challenge-response pattern without the service provider being able to gain
knowledge of linked activities, e.g., movement, coherent messages, and so forth. We
aim to solve this issue by using multiple authentication keys, which, by design, are
unlinkable. This ensures that it becomes harder for the service provider to gain infor-
mation about what a user or device is doing. We will, in this section, describe why
that is.
Having multiple authentication keys can effectively be compared to the children’s
puzzle connect-the-dots. Even without the timings of the ”dots,” the full picture can
be deduced.
5We will show in section 5 that it was actually when the authorization key’s parent was created,
but in this context, it does not matter
6Of course, in reality, nothing is 100% secure, and attacks on TPMs happen more and more
often, which of course, strengthens the overall security. For this project, we assume a TE, or in this
case, a TPM, is un-cloneable
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Privacy
55
Figure 5.3: An elephant can without much effort be recognized, even without knowl-
edge where to start.
Now let us assume that each dot is being used for authentication. By looking at the
signatures as a whole, this presents a coherent structure, an activity, or any other
pattern. A simple but effective way to make this harder is to use fewer dots, as shown
in figure 5.4, where we removed half of the dots.
Figure 5.4: Just by removing half the dots, we see that it is much harder to see an
elephant. To be honest it looks more like a polar bear.
The drawing is equivalent to use multiple signatures, in this example, just two. If the
service provider cannot link the signatures together, it must look at the individual
signatures as a single picture.
Though this does not make it impossible for the
service provider to identify the two signatures used by looking at the overall image,
as depicted in figure 5.5.
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Adapted design
Figure 5.5: By looking at the overall image for multiple signatures, the provider
can indeed identify the two signatures used..
That raises the question: how many signatures are needed? It depends on a multitude
of variables, but most importantly are how often authentication happens and how
many devices/users are present. Imagine the above example, but with 12 different
images on top of each other (representing 12 users). If each of them is using 4-5
signatures, this can become very hard to solve.
Though it also depends on how
coherent the actions during authenticated sessions are. Of course, the more coherent
actions are, and the more signatures are reused, the service provider gains a better
understanding to guess the keys related to a device or user.
Having several indistinguishable users in the same set is generally called an anonymity
set[59], and is among other places used in obfuscation protocols such as Onion Rout-
ing[60].
In this report, we do not focus on the number of signatures, but providing the frame-
work to use as many as needed.
5.3
Key Management
In this section, we present the designed solution for managing keys within the TPM.
Before moving into the design itself, it is necessary to look at the use cases, just as
the original protocol implemented til Application ID as a way for ensuring the user
can use the key for several origins within the same domain.
We cannot neglect the fact that a platform can be shared between multiple users that
we need individual access control, which is supported by the policy-design. We also
need to ensure that keys can only be used if they are invoked by the origin it whom
it is made for.
Ensuring origin-specific keys is done by providing the origin-digest, a simple SHA256
hash of the origin, as an authorization value (essentially a password) for the key.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Key Management
57
When the host passes the request for a signature, it also provides the hash of the
origin. If that hash unlocks the key, then the key can be accessed, and we can be sure
that the correct origin is exercising the key.
Say two users u1 and u2 are both registered to the same service provider on the same
platform, then the authorization value would be the same. If the service provider
has not negotiated any policies, it is now possible for u1 to exercise u2’s key. One
solution is to create a mandatory password policy (PolicyAuthValue), and another
is to embed a mandatory password into the authorization-value of the key. The first
solution requires both to use policies and authorization-value (which will be done
in most cases), and the second only requires authorization-value. Taking this one
step further, it is evident that if both keys are protected with the same password,
then the policy or authorization-value will be the same. By design, this cannot be
leveraged from the outside, since it is the user that decides what key to use and
not the service provider. If we are paranoid, we can ensure that the authorization
values are not the same, by also embedding a public known random value to the
authorization value. This approach ensures that even with the same service provider
and the same password, the authorization value will be different. The random value
further ensures that if an attacker gets hold of the authorization value, that he cannot
deduce the password used by the user. This way might seem over the top, but if we
think about the motivation for this project, it makes sense. Passwords are generally
insecure, and people have a tendency to reuse them - this might also be the case in
this user-password, why we ensure the uniqueness of the authorization value.
Based on this, the authorization-value is defined as:
authvalue = SHA256(Origin||Password||Random)
(5.1)
The next step is to look into the storage of the key. There are multiple ways of doing
this, and we will present different solutions.
5.3.1
Solution 1: Primary Signing Keys
A simple solution is to use primary keys. Primary keys are per definition recreateable
because they are derived from the protected Hierarchy Seed and a public template,
as shown in figure 5.6.
Any key can be regenerated at a time when it is needed. This simply requires the
public template and the hierarchy seed. Since we are using ECC keys, which compared
to RSA is one hundred to one thousand times faster[61], the generation-time is not
an issue. Though the authorization-value is not part of the public template, why a
policy would be needed to protect the key with the origin digest.
While this achieves the same guarantees for origin-specific keys (assuming the PolicyAuthValue
holds the value defined above), we still need to figure out where we store these keys.
Since the data is purely public information, it could be stored on the host without
any security-risks7.
7Apart DoS by deletion, but that is always a problem while storing data public
==PAGE:66==
58
5 Adapted design
Figure 5.6: Primary Signing Keys derived from hierarchy seed and the template, S
being the secret hierarchy seed.
We can identify one major problem: invalidation of the keys. We have identified at the
beginning of this report, that we need to be able to invalidate all users authorization
keys, if just a single one is requested to be invalidated by the relying party.
Assume K1 and K2 in figure 5.6 belong to u1 and are both registered with service-
provider SP1. The service provider decides that it will revoke access to u1 based
on his actions with k1. Since the key is recreatable by design, deleting it would not
help. Some techniques can help with this issue, which we will describe further in
chapter 7. So the TPM does nothing, but the relying party can have a revocation
list, and thereby not accept any signatures from that key, so the host might as well
just delete the template. However, since this setup utilizes multiple keys per user
per service provider, u1 can simply use K2 to authenticate with and can continue his
action despite the fact that his access is revoked. Unless they DAA signatures have
used the same basename for both K1 and K2, the service provider has no way of
identifying any link between the keys. Since the keys cannot be deleted, the host has
no easy way of revoking the keys, and if so, they must be individually revoked. One
could argue that the keys could be evicted to non-volatile memory, and the TPM can
delete them, but it does not change the fact that the keys can be recreated, and the
NV area of the TPM is very limited in the form of storage.
5.3.2
Solution 2: Non-primary signing keys
Using non-primary keys opens new possibilities in regard to revocation. By creating
a single primary key, equivalent to the Storage Root Key (SRK) in the TPM 1.2
family, we can use this as a master-wrapping key, meaning all subsequent keys will
be encrypted by the SRK and is, therefore, a simple data-blob that only can be read,
if we decrypt them with the primary key. By doing so, we can store the secret parts
of the key and load them when needed.
As shown in figure 5.7, we simply store the keys on the host as they are wrapped by the
SRK. The primary key should, of course, be protected by some policy, only allowing
platform owners to use that key. This hierarchy solves the issue about invalidation,
as the keys generated per definition will be unique every time they are generated;
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Key Management
59
Figure 5.7: Primary Storage Key derived from hierarchy seed (S) and wrapping
keys which are stored on the host.
hence they are non-recreateable. The host will now be able to delete all keys for a
single user that is used to authenticate with a given service provider and follows the
requirements. While this implementation ensures that keys will be revoked, it still
opens a small window for authentication.
Say this is used to authenticate a vehicle’s communication on a highway. It might say
to the cars behind it that it is doing an emergency stop, which causes the vehicles
behind to break as well. If the vehicle is compromised, these commands could be used
in malicious activities. If the central controller decides that this vehicle is sending out
false commands, it will invalidate the user. Still assuming all invalidation commands
reach the system, the host will now start the process. Since this is a O(n) operation,
this can take a significant amount of time depending on the number of keys and the
speed of invalidation, but for example assume 15 keys are registered to the vehicle,
and each deletion takes 2ms, then it has 30ms to recognize that it is being invalidated
and send out residual malicious commands. Further, it cannot be proved that there
exist copies of the keys why even a deletion might not be enough. Assuming we have
a way to ensure that the keys cannot be loaded again, we will, without doubt, add
additional instructions to the TPM, which just adds to the slow invalidation.
Two solutions can be thought to this problem: ensure the keys are stored in the
non-volatile memory and cannot leave this area, or send a list of public keys to the
service provider, making them revoke the keys. The first solution is infeasible with
a large number of keys, and the second is moving trust to the service provider, and
the invalidation-message can take a long time depending on the network, and further
exposes the user identity and can now be tracked back in time.8
8This can have use-cases, e.g., if a requirement is that any honest person should not have linkable
==PAGE:68==
60
5 Adapted design
5.3.3
Solution 3: Non-primary wrapped signing keys
We have solved the issue with multiple users on the same host for the same service
provider by sealing keys to an authorization value. The issue that still lies is that
of invalidation within a reasonable time. A solution to this problem is by adding an
extra layer of keys, that wraps the authentication keys. Such a key is unique to the
user and service provider, meaning that two users on the same host using the same
service providers, will each have a parent key for their authentication keys. We note
these keys as Service Attestation Keys.
Figure 5.8: Primary Storage Key derived from hierarchy seed (S) which wraps Ser-
vice Attestation Keys which in turn wraps the authentication keys..
In figure 5.8, we see such a key hierarchy. As before, we store everything on the
host, but the storage root key. This further enables us to give different keys unique
authorization-properties. For example, the SRK is protected by the owner of the
platform. The Service Attestation Keys are protected by a user and a specific service
provider. Lastly, the keys (now mentioned as Authentication keys) are protected by
the user alone.
Instead of having an authorization value (based on the origin, user-provided password,
and random data) for the authentication keys, we instead protect the Service Attes-
tation Key with this value. Authentication keys can then be protected by policies
signatures, but if that person turns dishonest all signatures should be linked, but that again puts
trust in the service provider.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Key Management
61
provided by the service provider. Even with zero policies, the service provider can
be satisfied that the user has used a password and is on a platform he owns since it
must be an owner of the platform to access the SRK and did provide a password to
be able to unseal any of the authentication keys.
When it comes to invalidation, we now have a O(1) operation because all we need
to do is to make sure the Service Attestation Key cannot be loaded. Though this is
still faster, it still assumes one of the following. a) The key has not been copied and
is securely deleted. b) Measures to ensure that the key cannot be loaded has taken
place.
This, of course, has the drawback of extended executiontime, since two keys have to
be unsealed, though that moved O(1) →O(1(+1)) where revocation moved O(n) →
O(1).
Depending on the number of keys, timing requirements of authentication, and invali-
dation, the last two options can be used. Both of these designs are creating unlinkable
keys to support requirements and, assuming they are created in a privacy-oriented
hierarchy such as the Endorsement Hierarchy. As to the invalidation of keys, both of
these also comply with requirements.
We will discuss the issues of revocation further in chapter 7, where we also propose a
solution to the problem of guaranteed deletion.
5.3.4
Hierarchy and DAA-key
In the TPM, there are three persistent hierarchies and one volatile. They are, respec-
tively, called Endorsement, Platform, Storage, and NULL Hierarchy. As described
in section 4.1.2, they all have their respective area of responsibility.
The storage
hierarchy is an obvious but naive choice to use, since it is intended for the user but
provides no guarantees on privacy, e.g., linkability between keys[62]. Therefore we
recommend that the Endorsement hierarchy is used, though that requires access to
said hierarchy.
The DAA Key is also required to be placed somewhere. If possible, a possible place
to put it is to use the key as the Primary Key (SRK in the figures). That way, if the
Issuer revokes the DAA key, e.g., due to suspicion of compromise, then access to the
keys is lost immediately. This type of revocation can be seen as a hard revocation,
but does not necessarily render the TPM useless - it just needs to prove that it is not
compromised, and thereby can get a new DAA credential.
If the Issuer sends a revocation request and the DAA is not the primary key, then
all the Service Attestation Keys must be revoked or a very hard revocation can take
place. Such hard revocation could be done, i.e., by changing the hierarchy seed in
the endorsement hierarchy, which invalidates all keys in that hierarchy, including the
Endorsement Key (EK).
The decision of where to put the DAA key also depends on the trust in the cryptog-
raphy itself. If the DAA key is used as a primary key, then one has to consider if the
DAA signatures can leak information about the key itself. Using DAA as a primary
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Adapted design
key is, after all, the foundation of all the other keys. Such issues are still an area of
research, but even so, it is worth considering. One could also ask if it is necessary - if
the DAA key is revoked, then the Issuer is showing distrust in the TPM as a whole,
why it might as well revoke the EK. If the DAA key is a child-key of the endorsement
key (or as a primary key in the endorsement hierarchy), this would have the same
effect, as neither the DAA key or all the other keys would be available.
5.3.5
Chosen solution
In this project, we continue with the third solution as it offers a better structure
in regards to responsibility. If the non-volatile memory area is used in regards to
revocation, it is preferred to have fewer keys to revoke.
This key hierarchy supports the adapted FIDO U2F protocol in the sense that the
TPM ensures that the origin can only exercise the key it was issued to.
During
registration, if a Service Attestation Key is not created for this service provider, one
will be created and sealed by a user password and the origin digest (and a random
value).
Then authentication keys sealed by service provider provided policies are
created. It is under the assumption that if the origin digest (as seen from the host),
provided in an authentication request message, can generate the correct authorization
value with the users’ password and the keys random value, that access to unsealing
of authentication keys are possible.
We create the DAA key as a sub-key of the Endorsement Key. We do this since
it’s complicated to make a DAA key primary, and since we have established that
revocation can be done just as fast with the DAA Key not being a parent of the
Service Attestation Keys.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
This chapter focuses on the implementation of a Proof of Concept (POC) solution
for the designed system. The implementation is written in C/C++ and is build upon
IBMs Software TPM[63] and Trusted Security Stack (TSS)[64]. For the DAA part, we
use an implementation[65] that is developed by a research team at the University of
Surrey1. We base the implementation on top of this to ensure the DAA functionality
works as expected.
The goal of the implementation is to prove that it is possible to implement the de-
signed solution and to measure how much time the individual phases consume. Since
this is done on a software TPM, it is evident that the timings depend on the computer
on which it runs, but using information from other experiments on hardware TPM,
gives us the opportunity to get a general idea of how it would be on a hardware TPM.
6.1
Environment setup
In the development of the solution, we used Manjaro Linux version 18.1.1 as the
operating system. On this machine we installed the IBM TPM[63] and TSS[64].
The installation is straight forward, though to make it enhance usability, we provide
symlinks. We install the software TPM in the /opt/ folder. In this implementation,
we use version 1332.
When we have extracted the software TPM to the folder, we create a symlink to the
folder and call it ibmtpm — following that, we enter the folder and install the software
TPM by executing make.
1 #!/bin/bash
2 tar -C /opt/ -xzf ibmtpm1332.tar.gz
3 cd /opt/
4 ln -s ibmtpm1332 ibmtpm
5 cd ibmtpm/src
6 make
Listing 6.1: Installing the Software TPM.
1H. Treharne, T. Giannetsos, J. Whitefield, and L. Chen, ”Privacy-enhanced Capabilities using
Direct Anonymous Attestation,” Impact Acceleration Project funded by Surrey and Thales, UK,
EPSRC iCASE, GA 15220193
==PAGE:72==
64
6 Implementation
To run the software TPM, we simply run the executable from the src folder.
To install the TSS, we follow the same steps of installing it in the /opt/ folder and
creating a symlink ibmtss.
We use version 1470 in this project.
We then enter
the folder and configure it. Since we use a software TPM, we configure it to not
use a hardware TPM. Following that we execute the make command to compile the
libraries.
1 #!/bin/bash
2 tar -C /opt/ -xzf ibmttss1470.tar.gz
3 cd /opt/
4 ln -s ibmtss1470 ibmtss
5 cd ibmtss
6 autoreconf -i
7 ./configure --disable-hwtpm
8 cd utils
9 make
Listing 6.2: Installing the Software TPM.
During the configuration, external dependencies, such as OpenSSL, might be missing.
If so, these should be installed. When this is done the library will be installed in
/opt/ibmtss/utils/.libs/ and is called libibmtss.so. This can then be added to
the library path.
The environment is now set up and ready to use. To test, one can execute one of the
TPM commands from the /opt/ibmtss/utils/ directory, where each command is
implemented as a program to use.
6.2
Implementation details
In this section we describe the implementation in more details. This implementation
is, as mentioned using Surrey’s implementation of the DAA, why we have used their
existing structure, and we have added files as we needed. It is worth noting that
we have not tried to add our experiment into their experimental implementation,
but instead, use their implementation as a foundation to build this. That means
that the original experiments by Surrey might not compile in this implementation.
Also, we are using CMake, where the original implementation is using Make. For
the implementation of the TPM commands using TSS, inspiration has been drawn
from the provided code in the downloaded TSS, that compiles to programs. We have
simply studied that code and implemented the parts we need.
We begin with an overview of the implementation and continue going into depth with
the phases in the solution and lastly go into depth with some of the commands. It
should be noted that the code snippets shown in this section are cropped to remove
non-interesting parts.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Implementation details
65
6.2.1
Overall structure
The implementation consists mainly of three classes and one file containing supporting
functions. The classes are:
bla_tpm is the class that interacts with the TSS to send commands to the TPM
bla_host emulates the host of the TPM
ServiceProvider acts as the service provider in the protocol
Further we use a header shared_services.h the provides ad-hoc functions such
as authorization value calculations and host-based cryptographic functions. We of
course use functions from the DAA Implementation, but this is not described here.
The experiment that runs the examples are in the file
Daa_tpm/Tpm_experiments/DAA_Authentication/DAA_Authentication.cpp. Even
though the name suggests it, DAA is not used for authentication but for attestation.
The classes are found in Daa_tpm/common/ and headers in Daa_tpm/include/.
6.2.2
Provision
When the host is constructed, it provisions the TPM. It does this using the following
commands.
1 void bla_host::initialize_tpm() {
2
this->tpm_.power();
3
this->tpm_.startup();
4
this->tpm_.clear_keys();
5
6
TPM2B_PUBLIC ek_pk;
7
TPM_HANDLE ek_handle;
8
9
this->tpm_.create_primary_EK_RSA_key(&ek_pk, &ek_handle);
10
this->tpm_.make_ek_persistent_surr(ek_handle);
11
this->tpm_.create_primary_ECC(&spk_, storage_password);
12
ek_.pk = ek_pk;
13 }
Listing 6.3: Initialization of TPM.
This provision starts by powering the TPM up and starting it. To be sure we have
a pristine TPM, we clear any keys that potentially are lying within it. Since we do
not have an Issuer, nor do we have a pre-installed Endorsement Key, we install an
endorsement key in the non-volatile memory and put a copy to the public part of
this on the host. It is also in this method that we create the primary key, which we
will protect with a password. This key will be the same every time its generated, as
discussed earlier.
The TPM is now initialized and ready to use. We now continue to create the DAA
Key and execute the join phase.
==PAGE:74==
66
6 Implementation
1 void bla_host::setup_daa() {
2
3
Key DAA(name, nullptr, nullptr,ek_persistent_handle);
4
this->tpm_.create_daa_key(ek_persistent_handle ,&DAA, nullptr);
5
this->daa_ = DAA;
6
7
Load_Out daa_loaded;
8
9
this->tpm_.load_key(ek_persistent_handle , nullptr,DAA.pk,DAA.sk,
daa_loaded);
10
TPM_HANDLE DaaHandle = daa_loaded.objectHandle;
11
Byte_buffer ekpub = get_ek_from_public_data(ek_.pk);
12
13
this->tpm_.daa_join(ekpub,DAA,ek_persistent_handle ,DaaHandle);
14
this->tpm_.unload_key(DaaHandle);
15 }
Listing 6.4: Creating the DAA Key and execute Join.
In the first step, we define a local reference to a key. We give it a name and insert a
reference to it is parenthandle. We then ask the TPM to create the actual DAA Key,
and as shown, we are not providing any password to it, neither is the Endorsement
Key protected by any password. It is only due to this being a proof of concept that
this is possible, and in future implementations, they should, of course, be protected.
We then ”save” the key on the host and continue to load it into the TPM. Due to the
DAA Implementation by Surrey, we convert the public part of the Endorsement Key
to a Byte_buffer, which is in practice a powerful array-implementation. After that,
we can start the Join phase, which we will talk about later. After the join completes,
we can unload the key from the TPM, since we do not need it anymore.
The TPM is now provisioned, at has an Endorsement Key (EK), A validated DAA
Credential, and a primary key for storage of the to-be-created keys.
We then continue to provision the Service Provider.
The Service Provider is not
required to have a TPM, but in this implementation, we work with the assumption
that it has one. As we do not want to do context switching, we simply pass a reference
to the same TPM to the SP which will not cause any problems, since we are not doing
anything concurrently. Further, we here generate the policy which we need the host
to adhere to. The policy can be generated strictly on a host, but in this example,
we do it by using a TrialSession. In such a session, we can execute a set of policy
commands and then get the resulting policyDigest.
1 ServiceProvider::ServiceProvider(bla_tpm *tpm) {
2
this->tpm_ = tpm;
3
TPM2B_DIGEST container;
4
TPM_HANDLE trial_session;
5
tpm_->start_auth_session(&trial_session , TPM_SE_TRIAL);
6
tpm_->execute_PCR_policy(trial_session , 0x10000);
7
tpm_->get_policy_digest(&trial_session , &container);
8
tpm_->unload_key(trial_session);
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Implementation details
67
9
policy_ = container;
10 }
Listing 6.5: Initialize service provider.
We see in the listing above that we simply save the policy on the system, such that
it can be sent later.
The service provider also contains a public accessible string
that mimics the origin. Since we have no implemented anything with actual network
communication, we cannot correctly identify the origin, hence to obtain the origin
”as seen from the host,” we simply call serviceProvider.Origin.
6.2.3
Registration
For registration we follow the adapted protocol shown in figure 5.1 on page 50. In
this solution, we do not do basic authentication, as we have described how it can
be a variety of different authentication schemes. Before we register with the Service
Provider, we create a Service Attestation Key for the Service Provider we aim to
register with. To do that, we must construct the application parameter, which, as
shown in the listing below, is a simple hashing operation.
1 static void create_application_parameter(const char* origin, uint8_t*
resultbuff){
2
sha256(origin, resultbuff);
3 }
4 create_application_parameter(sp.Origin, application_parameter);
5 Key sak = host.create_service_attestation_key(user_password ,
application_parameter);
Listing 6.6: Create Service Attestation Key Protocol.
As we see in the listing above, we create the SAK with the application parameter
and the user password. Within the function, the authorization value is calculated as
discussed in the design, shown in the listing below.
1 static void calculate_authvalue(const char *user_password , unsigned char *
application_unique , unsigned char* random, unsigned char *buffer) {
2
3
unsigned char user_h[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
4
sha256(user_password , user_h);
5
6
for ( i = 0; i < SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE -1; i++){
7
buffer[i] =
((application_unique[i] ^ random[i]) ^ user_h[i]);
8
}
9 }
Listing 6.7: Create authorization value.
With the authorization value is created, the key is created in the TPM, sealed to
that value. Now with the key being created in the TPM under the Primary Key, we
==PAGE:76==
68
6 Implementation
can continue the registration. The host contacts the Service Provider and receives a
challenge and a policy.
1
2 void bla_host::start_registration(Key &sak, ServiceProvider& sp, const char*
user_sak_pass) {
3
4
// Obtain challenge and policy
5
TPM2B_DIGEST policy;
6
std::string challenge = sp.request_registration(policy); // Policy sent
as reference
7
8
9
// Prepare the ClientData
10
uint8_t registration_data[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
11
uint8_t application_parameter[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
12
uint8_t challenge_parameter[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
13
char typ = 'r'; // Substitute for "typ"
14
char pk = 'x'; // Substitute for "Cid_pubkey"
15
create_application_parameter(sp.Origin, application_parameter);
16
create_challenge_parameter(typ,challenge,sp.Origin,pk,
challenge_parameter);
17
18
19
// Generate the authentication key, seal it to policy
20
Key authentication_key = create_authentication_key(sak, user_sak_pass ,
application_parameter , &policy);
21
22
23
// Prepare Registration Request Message
24
create_registration_message(challenge_parameter , authentication_key.pk.
publicArea , registration_data , authentication_key.UUID, &
authentication_key.policy);
25
26
27
// Sign the public key with the DAA Key
28
daa_sign_publickey(authentication_key , daa_signature , pk_size,
marshalled_publickey);
29
30
31
// Sign the challenge
32
auto signed_challenge = sign_challenge(registration_data ,
application_parameter , sak_pass);
33
34
// Register the auth key
35
sp.register_new_authkey(marshalled_publickey ,pk_size,daa_signature ,
signed_challenge , authentication_key.UUID);
36
37 }
Listing 6.8: The registration protocol.
As we see, the steps above follow those of figure 5.1, though the key is generated
before the TE receives the application and challenge parameter. If we were trying to
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Implementation details
69
register with someone we did not expect to (i.e., that the origin was different from
the origin there was present during the SAK creation), then we would not be able to
load the Service Attestation Key.
Upon reception, the Service Provider validates and stores the signature, as shown
below.
1
2 void ServiceProvider::register_new_authkey(uint8_t* marshalled_publickey ,
size_t pk_size, std::string daa_signature , TPMT_SIGNATURE
signed_challenge , int UUID){
3
4
if(verify_daa_signature(std::move(daa_signature),marshalled_publickey ,
pk_size)){
5
TPMT_PUBLIC pkRef;
6
unmarshal_public(&pkRef,marshalled_publickey ,pk_size);
7
if(verify_challenge_origin_signature(pkRef,
registration_challenge_sessions.at(0), signed_challenge ,
8
UUID)){
9
registered_public_key = pkRef;
10
}
11
else{
12
throw ("Bad signature.");
13
}
14
}
15
16 }
Listing 6.9: Validation of the signature..
It does this validation in two steps: first, it verifies that the DAA signature is valid;
otherwise, it would not be able to trust the sender to have secured the key. Then it
checks the signature by recreating the expected challenge parameter and, of course,
use the handle, received the public key, and the sent policy. If the validation succeeds,
it saves the key. In this PoC solution, it merely just saves the one key for later use.
In reality, it should be stored and index by the UUID.
6.2.4
Authentication
Authentication is straight-forward since the adapted protocol shown in figure 5.2 on
page 53 is a simple challenge-response protocol.
1
2 void bla_host::start_authentication(ServiceProvider & sp, const char*
user_sak_pass){
3
4
unsigned char challenge_parameter[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
5
unsigned char application_parameter[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
6
7
std::string challenge = sp.request_authentication();
==PAGE:78==
70
6 Implementation
8
9
marshal_authentication_request(challenge, challenge_parameter);
10
create_application_parameter(sp.Origin, application_parameter);
11
12
TPMT_SIGNATURE signature = sign_challenge(challenge_parameter ,
application_parameter , user_sak_pass);
13
14
sp.authenticate(&signature,this->AK_.UUID);
15 }
Listing 6.10: Start authentication..
The host initiates the authentication by requesting a challenge for the service provider
as the protocol dictates. It then continues to prepare the challenge parameter, which
consists now only of the SHA256 hash digest of the challenge.
Now, to sign the
challenge, we will need to provide the authentication value for its parent: the Service
Attestation Key, otherwise it cannot load. To do this, we must provide both the
origin as we, the host, see it and the user-provided password. The first is done by
generating the application parameter and use the sp.Origin value. The second is
passed in as a parameter, and both can now be sent to the function that gets the
signature, as we show below.
1
2 TPMT_SIGNATURE bla_host::sign_challenge(unsigned char* h_challenge , unsigned
char* app_param, const char* userpass) {
3
4
Load_Out sak_ref; // Loaded Service Attestation Key
5
Load_Out ak_ref; // Loaded Authentication Key
6
TPMT_SIGNATURE sig; // The signature to be
7
TPMI_SH_POLICY policy_session; // The session handle needed reg.
policies
8
9
// Load SAK
10
tpm_.load_key(spk_.handle, reinterpret_cast <const unsigned char *>(
storage_password), SAK_.pk, SAK_.sk, sak_ref);
11
12
13
// Calculate the authroization value based on the inputs we got
14
unsigned char SAK_AuthValue[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
15
calculate_authvalue(userpass, app_param, SAK_.random, SAK_AuthValue);
16
17
// Load the authentication key
18
tpm_.load_key(sak_ref.objectHandle , SAK_AuthValue , AK_.pk, AK_.sk,
ak_ref);
19
20
21
22
23
// Start a policy session
24
tpm_.start_auth_session(&policy_session ,TPM_SE_POLICY);
25
26
// Execute policies (to use the AK)
27
tpm_.execute_PCR_policy(policy_session ,0x10000);
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Implementation details
71
28
29
// Create signature
30
tpm_.sign_message(h_challenge ,SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE ,ak_ref.objectHandle ,
nullptr,sig,policy_session);
31
32
33
// Flush handles
34
tpm_.unload_key(policy_session);
35
tpm_.unload_key(sak_ref.objectHandle);
36
tpm_.unload_key(ak_ref.objectHandle);
37
38
return sig;
39 }
Listing 6.11: Create signature.
As we see in the listing above, we start by loading the Service Attestation Key. This
itself does not require authentication; it is only when the key is used (e.g., as a
parent to load a key) that authentication is needed. After that, we are creating the
authorization value based on the inputs. If the origin we are authenticating to is not
whom we expect, the SAK cannot be used to load the Authentication key.
Now comes the unsealing. In this PoC implementation, we only use the PCR policy,
but a structure in the key could explain what was needed to be done. Before executing
policy commands, we initialize a policy session, and then we execute the commands.
We then provide the session-handle for that said policy session to the TPM function
that does the signing. If the policy digest within the policy-session does not match
that of the key, then it will not do this signing. After that, we can flush the handles
and return the signature.
This signature is then sent to the Service Provider alongside a UUID that identifies
the public key that is needed to verify the signature.
1
2 void ServiceProvider::authenticate(TPMT_SIGNATURE* response, int uuid) {
3
4
std::string c = challenge_sessions.at(0);
5
unsigned char h_challenge[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
6
marshal_authentication_request(c, h_challenge);
7
8
TPM_HANDLE
hdl;
9
10
tpm_->load_public(registered_public_key , &hdl);
11
tpm_->verify_signature(h_challenge ,SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE , response,hdl);
12
tpm_->unload_key(hdl);
13 }
Listing 6.12: Authenticate user by signature..
As we see again, this is a proof of concept, why the public key(s) are not stored by the
UUID, but in a real application, that would be the case. We use the TPM to verify
the signature, but this could be done at the host. If all goes well, the Service Provider
==PAGE:80==
72
6 Implementation
has now authenticated the device without knowing its identity. It could issue a token
or something else that could be used for the rest of the session.
6.3
Experiments
To get an indicator of application domains, we need to run experiments to see how
long the operations take. We are using a software version of the TPM why we can
expect it to be reasonably fast. However, the DAA Join phase is still a relatively
heavy operation, why we can expect this to be much slower than all other operations.
We recognize that timings are subject to many errors, such as other processes working
in the background. We divide the timing experiments into four different levels:
• TPM Commands
• DAA Commands
• Key Generation
• Application
The first is to measure how long time the different operations on the TPM takes. The
next is to measure the timings for the DAA Phases and the last for the two main
use-cases: Register and Authenticate. We then do another set of experiments where
we test that the sealing holds and that we can detect a man in the middle.
6.3.1
Timings
We do the experiments by using the std::clock and measure the time operations take.
To change the experiment scope the program has to be recompiled with a different
flag. To measure the TPM commands define TL0_TPM, DAA TL1_DAA, key generation
TL2_KEYS and lastly for the application define TL3_APP. We run each experiment 5
times to get a mean value.
6.3.2
General timings
In this section we present and discuss the results acquired.
In table 6.1 we see a relative consistent set of results. We note that the operations
that take the longest are the verification of the pairings and the verification of a sig-
nature. A mean time of around 44ms to verify a signature might seem long, but it
is worth remembering that the alternative (Privacy CA, discussed in section 5.1.1.2)
would require network communication, which can be assumed to be rather lengthy
unless the Privacy CA is close by. Moving to the key creation timings in table 6.2, we
see a swift creation of keys. This is, of course, due to the nature of the software-based
TPM having many more resources than a hardware-based. We further see that the
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Experiments
73
DAA Timings
Operation\Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
Host Prepares
1.36
1.28
1.29
1.01
1.96
1.38
Host Reponds
22.45
10.78
16.06
10.82
15.73
15.17
Issuer Verifies
18.19
7.08
11.56
9.65
9.30
11.16
Issuer Creates Credential
12.78
14.57
24.25
21.69
20.67
18,79
Host Verifies Credential
13.81
44.63
59.13
56.70
55.56
45.97
Host Prepares Sign
14.12
12.31
10.24
14.38
10.43
12.30
Host Signs
0.94
1.00
0.85
0.95
0.84
0.92
Verifier Verifies
10.96
49.21
53.42
58.23
47.86
43.94
Table 6.1: Timings on the DAA Operations of the system. All times are measured
in ms.
Key Creation Timings
Operation\Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
Service Attestation Key
1.29
0.75
0.81
1.43
0.60
0.98
Authentication Key
1.65
2.08
2.12
2.08
2.13
2.01
Table 6.2: Timings on Key Creation. All times are measured in ms.
Application Timings
Operation\Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
Registration
64.28
81.30
66.68
83.24
77.74
74.65
Authentication
6.17
8.10
8.74
7.64
7.03
7.54
Table 6.3: Timings on the two main usecases. All times are measured in ms.
authentication key takes double the amount of time to create, which comes to no
surprise. Referring to the trust model in figure 4.5, we can see that there are more
required operations that in the creation of the service attestation key in figure 7.6,
which includes loading the service attestation key, and include a policy.
Now to the most interesting results, the application timings, we see registration being
quite lengthy, but authentication is fast. The reason why the registration is almost ten
times as slow lies within the attestation steps of the protocol. As we see in table 6.1 the
attestation part (prepare, sign and verify) takes a total of 12.30+0.92+43.94 = 57.16
ms. That means the resulting operations (creating parameters, verifying registration
signature, etc.) takes a mean time of 17.49 ms, which does not look unreasonable.
Depending on the use-case, 7ms authentication might be good enough. An example
to illustrate this would be a vehicle driving 140 km/h, during the time it took to
authenticate the message the vehicle would have moved 27cm.
==PAGE:82==
74
6 Implementation
6.3.3
TPM Timings
In this section, we present the timings for the TPM commands executed. We can see
that some of these follow the models in section 4.2.3.
TPM Timings - Endorsement Key
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_CreatePrimary
1.04
0.50
0.61
0.87
0.95
0.79
TPM2_EvictControl
1.06
1.01
1.03
1.10
1.07
1.05
Table 6.4: Timings for TPM commands to create endorsment key..
Under normal circumstances, the Endorsement Key would already be created. We
include it here since we actually do it, and we get an idea of how fast it is to evict a
key to non-volatile memory.
TPM Timings - Create Primary Storage Key
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_CreatePrimary
0.62
1.00
0.92
0.66
0.34
0.71
Table 6.5: Timings for TPM commands to create primary key..
The primary key is also assumed to be created at some point in the lifetime of the
system. If not, it is simply created by using this command. As we can see, it is quite
fast, and opposed to the EK shown in table 6.4, which is an RSA key, it is not much
faster. This can be due to the chosen options of both the RSA/ECC key and, of
course, due to the computing power of the test environment.
TPM Timings - Setup DAA and Join
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_Create
0.36
0.43
0.34
0.25
0.08
0.35
TPM2_Load
1.07
0.82
1.12
1.01
0.73
0.95
TPM2_ActivateCredential
0.21
0.62
0.40
0.42
0.25
0.38
TPM2_Commit
0.41
0.50
0.33
0.40
0.26
0.38
TPM2_Hash
0.13
0.30
0.36
0.28
0.26
0.27
TPM2_Sign
0.32
0.30
0.24
0.39
0.40
0.33
TPM2_ActivateCredential
0.30
0.33
0.21
0.20
0.39
0.29
TPM2_FlushContext
0.92
0.84
1.14
0.79
0.56
0.85
Table 6.6: Timings for initiating DAA with creating the key and joining..
We see the first two timings being the same in model 4.2.3.3 where we create the
DAA key. The rest is part of the join phase, which is specific to DAA. As we saw in
table 6.1, the join phase is quite lengthy. Fortunately, we can see here that it is not
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Experiments
75
the TPM commands that are heavy, meaning that even with a hardware TPM, we
will not suspect a considerable increase in timings.
TPM Timings - Create Service Attestation Key
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_Create
0.44
0.48
0.55
0.53
0.76
0.55
Table 6.7: Timings for TPM commands to create Service Attestation Key.
Creating the service attestation key is straight forward. If we look at model 4.2.3.1,
there is not any heavy lifting done by the TPM. We see that the timings in figure
6.2 is almost twice as slow, which is because of the hashing being done at the host to
create the authorization value.
TPM Timings - Create Authentication Key
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_Load
1.03
1.03
1.19
1.07
1.18
1.10
TPM2_Create
0.47
0.31
0.45
0.57
0.58
0.48
TPM2_FlushContext
0.75
1.39
0.54
0.72
0.78
0.84
Table 6.8: Timings for creating authentication key.
Creating the Authentication Key is shown in model 4.2.3.2 and the timings in table
6.8. As we can see, we simply need to load the parent key, create the authentication
key, and then unload the parent key. The policy digest is given beforehand (e.g., by
the service provider) along the authvalue, the timings fit well with those in table 6.2,
since there are not many operations going on at the host.
TPM Timings - Create Attestation Signature
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_Load
1.39
0.66
1.15
0.31
0.81
0.87
TPM2_Commit
0.26
0.36
0.25
0.20
0.37
0.29
TPM2_Hash
0.16
0.47
0.30
0.39
0.36
0.37
TPM2_Sign
0.21
0.39
0.40
0.43
0.38
0.36
TPM2_FlushContext
0.74
0.76
0.93
0.83
0.72
0.80
Table 6.9: Timings for creating signature over public part of authentication key.
The .operations in table 6.9 follows model 4.2.3.4, where we simply model an operation
randomize credential. In practice, we can see that this is done on the host and with the
two commands TPM2_Commit and TPM2_Hash. As we can see in table 6.1 this includes
”Host prepares sign” and ”Host signs.” Again we see the TPM-time is relatively low
to the overall timings, why we again can conclude that the heavy lifting is done by
the host.
==PAGE:84==
76
6 Implementation
TPM Timings - Create Authentication Signature
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_Load
1.34
0.43
1.00
0.93
0.72
0.88
TPM2_Load
0.93
0.37
1.03
2.36
0.74
1.09
TPM2_StartAuthSession
0.76
0.27
0.48
0.87
0.71
0.62
TPM2_PolicyPCR
0.36
0.13
0.47
0.20
0.28
0.29
TPM2_Sign
1.06
0.43
1.35
2.04
1.09
1.19
TPM2_FlushContext
0.56
0.35
0.67
1.10
0.72
0.68
TPM2_FlushContext
0.55
1.31
0.74
0.71
0.72
0.81
TPM2_FlushContext
0.97
0.95
0.65
0.65
0.74
0.79
Table 6.10: Timings for creating the registration signature.
In table 6.10, we see the timings for creating an authentication signature. We see
that it follows model 4.2.3.5 by first loading the two keys (service attestation and
authentication) and then calculates the policy digest by executing the commands
that are required. After that, it signs and unloads the keys and flushes the session.
All of this takes a little over 6ms, which, of course, would be depending on what
policies should be executed.
TPM Timings - Verify Authentication Signature
Operation/Run
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
TPM2_LoadExternal
1.09
2.07
0.96
0.25
0.79
1.03
TPM2_VerifySignature
0.34
0.69
0.46
0.09
0.51
0.42
TPM2_FlushContext
0.97
0.35
0.78
0.24
0.75
0.62
Table 6.11: Timings for verifying authentication signature with a TPM.
At last, the service provider verifies the signature received. It first loads the public
key into the TPM, followed by the verification and, at last, the unloading of the public
key. As we can see, the timings in table 6.10 and 6.11 adds up to be approximately
what we see under authentication in table 6.3. We do not have much host-based work
to do, why the authentication is mostly based on the TPM. This is, of course, subject
to longer timings when done on a hardware TPM.
6.3.4
Man In The Middle
As a requirement, we had that keys should be origin-specific, and must not be exer-
cised by a foreign origin. To test this, we change the code in start_authentication
on the host. We will set up a scenario where the origin suddenly is not as expected.
The code looks like the following.
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Experiments
77
1
2 void bla_host::start_authentication(ServiceProvider & sp, const char*
user_sak_pass){
3
4
unsigned char challenge_parameter[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
5
unsigned char application_parameter[SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE];
6
7
std::string challenge = sp.request_authentication();
8
9
marshal_authentication_request(challenge, challenge_parameter);
10
// create_application_parameter(sp.Origin, application_parameter); //
Original
11
create_application_parameter("https://www.evil_origin.com",
application_parameter);
12
13
TPMT_SIGNATURE signature = sign_challenge(challenge_parameter ,
application_parameter , user_sak_pass);
14
15
sp.authenticate(&signature,this->AK_.UUID);
16 }
Listing 6.13: Start authentication..
Since we now are receiving the request from a wrong origin, we expect this to fail
since the authorization value being made to use the Service Attestation Key is now
wrong, and we, therefore, expect to get an TPM_RC_BAD_AUTH error.
We add the
”VERBOSE” flag to get debug messages. The output is shown below, cropped to
present the (correct) registration and bad authentication.
1 Registration:
2 [*] Creating service-attestation key.
3
[+] SAK created with auth key:
ee64f58b60ea5f848a19ddb789c6a4d426d79186c785b07ae7ffaa2bc380
4 Authentication:
5 [*] Loading key
6
[*] Authvalue used to load: 176
e7935bf6faa9cb54828acc1ce7e1d9a4a7e51145dde7053623117d77b
7
[-] Failed at Load key due to TPM_RC_BAD_AUTH - authorization
failure without DA implications
Listing 6.14: Console output for test.
As expected, we get an error while trying to load the authentication key, with the
wrong authvalue for the parent.
6.3.5
Policy violation
The whole concept of this system is that the relying party, or service provider, can
trust that a device can only exercise a key if, and only if, the policy-requirements
negotiated are fulfilled. In this PoC, the policy negotiated is a configuration integrity
verification, i.e., that the host is at an expected configuration.
==PAGE:86==
78
6 Implementation
To test this, we emulate a configuration change by changing the PCRs which are used
in the policy in the sign_challenge method on the host.
1
2 TPMT_SIGNATURE bla_host::sign_challenge(unsigned char* h_challenge , unsigned
char* app_param, const char* userpass) {
3
4
/* Code cropped */
5
6
// Start a policy session
7
tpm_.start_auth_session(&policy_session ,TPM_SE_POLICY);
8
9
// Execute policies (to use the AK)
10
// tpm_.execute_PCR_policy(policy_session ,0x10000); // Original
11
tpm_.execute_PCR_policy(policy_session ,0x10001);
12
13
// Create signature
14
tpm_.sign_message(h_challenge ,SHA256_DIGEST_SIZE ,ak_ref.objectHandle ,
nullptr,sig,policy_session);
15
16
17
/* Code cropped */
18
19
return sig;
20 }
Listing 6.15: Create signature.
By doing this, we assume that we get a different policy digest, and hence the key
cannot be used. We expect a TPM_RC_POLICY_FAIL.
1 [*] Loading key
2
[*] Authvalue used to load: 1786
f6effd7c965953926c410c25d42e0cf1c78ede74de4522213127ade90
3
[+] Key loaded: 80000002
4 [*] Starting auth session.
5 [*] Executing PCR Policy.
6 [*] Signing data.
7
[-] Failed at Signing due to TPM_RC_POLICY_FAIL - a policy check
failed
Listing 6.16: Console output (cropped) for wrong policy.
As expected, we are not able to use the key to sign the challenge given.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 7
Revocation
Revocation in the context of the TPM can be defined in two main categories: hard and
soft revocation. When we speak of hard revocation, we mean that the endorsement
certificate is effectively revoked. Revocation can be done by changing the seed of the
endorsement hierarchy, essentially making all keys in there useless, and the issuer no
longer trusts the device. That means that the TPM no longer will be able to attest to
being a valid TPM. The definition of soft revocation is a bit vaguer but implies that we
do not necessarily render the TPM inoperable. Getting a new endorsement certificate
can be difficult, and if the violation behind the revocation is provable fixable, then
we do not want to revoke the endorsement certificate. We further introduce an even
softer form of TPM-use restriction, which we call invalidation. Since this does not
have to be due to any violation but can simply be a user-defined contract violation,
we do not use the term revocation. Invalidation does, therefore, not have to include a
revocation authority (RA) but could be either dependant on a local or foreign party.
In this chapter, we will discuss revocation and invalidation on multiple levels and
propose a possible solution.
7.1
Challenges
This setup proposes multiple challenges. First of all, we need a way to revoke the
TPMs trust, without revoking the endorsement key. That requires that we can revoke
all the keys stored in the system and ensure that the TPM cannot register any new
keys until it is trusted again. Secondly, we need to be able to make the authentica-
tion keys for a specific service unusable, upon request from a service provider. The
proposed setup allows a user or device to register multiple unlinkable public keys with
a service provider, the keyword being unlinkable. If such users or devices act in an
unintended way, or for any other reason, the service provider might choose to revoke
the access rights for the said user or device. The unlinkable signatures are, therefore,
a double-edged sword; on one side, it makes it difficult for the service provider to
track activities. On the other side, it does not allow the service provider to have
knowledge of any user-associated keys if the user should be denied access. From the
service providers’ perspectives that leave one option: note that the used key is invalid.
==PAGE:88==
80
7 Revocation
7.2
Solutions
In this section, we propose solutions to the two problems. These are not implemented
in this project but is just a proposal. We will work from the assumption that the key
hierarchy is, as shown in figure 5.8.
7.2.1
Soft revocation by RA
We discussed in chapter 5 that we had two options: a) have the DAA Key as a
primary key or b) have a separate primary and DAA key. Having the DAA Key as
a primary key solves this problem nicely. When a revocation authority revokes the
TPM, the DAA key is revoked. This approach solves both the challenge of rendering
keys unusable and ensures the TPM cannot attest to it being valid. If the DAA key
is not, the primary key, then upon revocation both the DAA Key and the Primary
Key, has to be rendered unusable.
Whenever the TPM can be trusted again, it can contact the issuer to obtain a new
DAA credential, and it can then register keys again that can be verified by the service
providers.
7.2.2
Invalidation by Service Provider
From a service provider’s perspective, it is key for this system, that authentication
key invalidation can be trusted. As noted earlier, the service provider can only locally
invalidate a single authentication key, which is not enough to revoke the users’ access
to that specific service. To solve this issue, we designed the key hierarchy to support
this. When the service provider wants to invalidate a user or devices set of keys to
that respective service, it merely sends an invalidation request. If that is verified, the
Service Attestation Key is rendered unusable, effectively ensuring the authentication
keys cannot be loaded.
7.2.3
Trusted Revocation and Invalidation
The issue in the above-defined solutions are clear: The primary keys cannot be deleted,
and the service attestation keys can be duplicated. If the primary keys are just flushed,
anyone can regenerate it based on the public template. One would have to change
the seed, which is not desired. If we delete the service attestation keys data blob, we
cannot guarantee that it has not been cloned. We need to restrict the use of the key
and not eliminate the key itself.
We propose using the non-volatile memory for managing revocation and invalidation.
In figure 7.1, we show this memory area, which is a non-volatile index defined in
the TPM. The first bit is used for revocation, and the subsequent bits are used for
invalidation. We propose restricting key usage, both for the primary key(s) and the
Service Attestation Keys, by linking them to these bits.
We do that by using a
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Solutions
81
Figure 7.1: A 20 byte NV index used for invalidation and revocation. This is as-
suming all bits are available, but some might be reserved.
policy: TPM2_PolicyNV which checks a non-volatile memory location to contain a
value. Depending on whether it is a primary key or a service attestation key, we bind
them to either the first bit or any of the subsequent bits. If that bit is not as when
created, then the key cannot be used.
In case that we have both a DAA key and a primary key, both of these should use the
same policy, linking them to the revocation bit. If the RA wishes to revoke the TPM,
it then sends a request to set the first bit in that index, which makes it impossible
to use either the primary or DAA key. In the context of invalidation, each Service
Attestation Key has a respective invalidation-bit. If the Service Provider wishes to
invalidate all the authentication keys, it sends a request to do so. The host will then
provide the invalidation-bit to the TPM and sets that bit. Now the Service Attestation
Key cannot be loaded, rendering the authentication keys inoperable. To ensure that
the bit stored on the host has not been tampered with, the bit is embedded into the
keys authorization value, making use of the Service Attestation Key impossible if the
bit is changed.
7.2.3.1
Securing the index
It is obvious that we need to provide some form of security for the revocation- and
invalidation index. It should only be the revocation authority that can set the first
bit and only the respective service providers that can invalidate keys related to their
service. We propose doing that by using two different policies: TPM2_PolicySigned
and TPM2_PolicyCpHash, which both need to be complied with, to gain writing rights
to the index.
The first ensures a signature is as expected, and the second checks that certain specific
parameters are provided. To use these, we need to provide a set of different policy
combinations that are allowed. For example, the RA needs to be able to set the first
bit, but not the others, and no other should be able to set the first. However, at the
same time, a service provider needs access to the second bit, but not the first or any
subsequent bits. We solve this by using a compound policy, which allows us to define
multiple policy combinations for a single index.
==PAGE:90==
82
7 Revocation
(PolicyA & & PolicyB)||(PolicyC & & PolicyD)
(7.1)
The above statement is an example of a compound policy and is depicted in figure
7.2. As long as either of those is valid, access is granted. We use this by saying: if you
provide a signature from the RA and you are trying to write to the first bit, then you
are allowed OR if you provide a signature from service provider A and are trying to
access the second bit, then access is granted, and so forth. By doing this, we ensure
a) The request came from a valid source and b) it can only write to its respective bit.
Figure 7.2: A compound policy based on signatures and command parameters.
Since the SetBits command can only set a bit, an rouge user wont be able to clear
the bit. Instead, the attacker deletes the whole index and re-creates it with the same
attributes to give it the same name. Though the attacker cannot use the key, be-
cause the PolicySigned will fail when used upon an index that has not been written
to. Since the attacker cannot write to the index, because he cannot provide a valid
signature, the check will always fail. If the attacker tries to re-create the index, but
with policies, he can comply with, then the name of the index (effectively the hash
of the attributes incl. the policy) will be changed, and the key cannot be exercised.
This leaves us with a rather tricky issue: we cannot extend the compound policies,
without updating the policies of the key, since they depend on the name of the index.
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Solutions
83
We could use PolicyAuthroize to change the policies on the keys, but that breaks
the trust in the system since a rouge user simply could remove all policies on keys.
We have to look further into this issue to be able to provide dynamic, secure NV
policies.
7.2.3.2
Revocation and invalidation
Here we present the proposed model for revocation and invalidation. The model as-
sumes that the service attestation key or DAA/Primary Key has been created and
sealed with their respective revocation bit.
Precondition: Revocation bit identified
Postcondition: Revocation bit set in NV Memory
Figure 7.3: Trust model for revocation and invalidation.
Execution Integrity ensures that the execution flow is as expected. This can be
done with Control Flow Attestation that ensures that the control flow of code
is as expected.
Provider Signature is a provided signature over a hash provided by the TPM (in-
cluding a nonce); hence we need to transmit that value securely to the Service
Provider or the Revocation Authority. This, of course, requires the TPM to be
in a state that allows it to be trusted to send this value. If it is not, we must
assume that the general policies ensure that no keys can be used.
TPM LoadExternal Loads the service provider’s public key into the TPM, neces-
sary for validating the signed signature.
TPM PolicySigned sends in the signature and the handle to the loaded public key,
and can only be satisfied if the signature over the previously provided hash is
correct.
TPM PolicyCpHash checks that the parameters (the index) are the same as were
assigned to the key that is trying to be revoked.
Unseal gain access to the index if successful the index can be written to.
==PAGE:92==
84
7 Revocation
TPM SetBits when executed, it checks the policy digest is as expected and that
the parameters to the command are correct due to the PolicyCpHash policy. If,
and only if, both the signature and the command parameters match policy, the
bit is set.
In figure 7.3, we see the proposed trust model for revocation and invalidation. It
is noteworthy that we did not include the device integrity check.
The reason is
revocation should be possible, even on a compromised host. We instead introduce
the execution integrity check, which does runtime checks on the code executed. If we
take a look in figure 7.2, we can quickly see that only the right service provider can
set the respective revocation or invalidation bit.
By implementing this, we, of course, need to change the way we generate the Service
Attestation Key, and the primary and DAA key is created. We show the updated
model below
7.2.3.3
Create revocable primary key
The nature of the primary key in a TPM means that its re-creatable, as described in
section4.1.3. While this feature is ensuring that we can create it after a reboot, we
need to insert a policy in the public area, to assure that it can only be used if the
revocation bit is not set.
Precondition: None
Postcondition: Primary key created sealed by the NV Index.
Figure 7.4: Creating a revocable primary key.
Public Template the public part of the primary key that states what kind of public
key it is.
Execution Integrity ensures that the execution flow is as expected, can be achieved
with control attestation.
Calculate Policy Digest calculates the policy digest based on the public key of the
RA/Issuer and the revocation bit allocated for this key.
TPM Create Primary creates the key based on the hierarchy seed and the public
template.
==PAGE:93==
7.2 Solutions
85
Seal Seal the key to the policy digest generated.
By following this model, we ensure that the primary key is linked to the revocation
bit specified. This bit can be set as static, i.e., that it is always the first bit in the
index. That means we do not have to protect any bit stored on the host.
7.2.3.4
Create revocable DAA key
If we have a DAA key under a primary key and we need to be able to revoke it, then
we add policies to the existing model shown in section 4.2.3. This is much like the
previous models, but here we create a sealed key that is stored on the host.
Precondition: Primary key created
Postcondition: DAA key created sealed by the contents NV Index.
Figure 7.5: Creating a revocable DAA key.
Execution Integrity ensures that the execution flow is as expected, which can be
achieved using control flow attestation.
Password the password for the DAA Key.
Calculate Policy Digest calculates the policy digest based on the NV Index des-
ignated to this key being in an unset state.
TPM Create creates the key with the password as authorization value and the
policy that binds it to a specific bit in a certain revocation index.
Seal Seal the key to the policy digest generated, making it only useable when the
revocation bit is not set.
It is vital that we bind this key to the same revocation bit as the primary key if we
follow the design mentioned in section 4.1.3. By doing so, we do not have to store a
bit on the host, and whenever a revocation comes for the primary key, the DAA key
will automatically be revoked as well.
==PAGE:94==
86
7 Revocation
7.2.3.5
Create invalidatable Service Attestation Key
To create a Service Attestation Key under this design, the following model is pro-
posed. Contrary to the previous models, we need to store an identifying revocation
bit on the host.
Precondition: Primary key created
Postcondition: SAK weapped by primary key, sealed by authorization-value and
NV Policy.
Figure 7.6: Creating a Service Entity Key with new revocation setup.
Execution Integrity ensures that the execution flow is as expected. This can be
done with Control Flow Attestation that ensures that the control flow of code
is as expected.
Generate Authvalue calculates the authorization value-based user-provided pass-
word, origin-specific data, and a revocation bit. We do not need the randomness
anymore since no two SAK will have the same revocation bit (assuming we only
use one NV index).
Calculate Policy Digest calculate the PolicyDigest needed to seal the key to a
certain bit in a NV index.
TPM Create create the actual key, with the digest value calculated in the previous
step
Seal the key is sealed to the NV Index with the requirement that a single bit is not
set.
This model shows how we create the service attestation key. We embed the index-bit
in the authorization value, such that if anything happens to that bit, then the key
will not be able to be used in any case. This bit is unique to this key, and no other
key is allowed to use this bit.
7.2.3.6
Define a sealed index
As shown in the previous models, all keys are using a non-volatile memory index,
which, of course, needs to be defined.
==PAGE:95==
7.2 Solutions
87
Precondition: None
Postcondition: Ïndex sealed by compound policies.
Figure 7.7: Defining space in the non-volatile memory and sealing it to policies.
Execution Integrity ensures that the execution flow is as expected. This can be
done with Control Flow Attestation that ensures that the control flow of code
is as expected.
Public Keys & Bit-indexes the public keys and their respective revocation/inval-
idation indexes. These indexes must be unique. E.g., Service Provider 1 has bit
number 2, and its respective public key, and Service Provider 2 has bit 3, and
the respective public key.
Calculate Policy Digest calculate the policy digest by executing the compound
policies based on the public keys and indexes. This state requires that public
keys are loaded into the TPM via LoadExternal.
TPM NV DefineSpace defines the non-volatile memory area in the TPM.
Seal seals the memory area by the calculated policy digest.
With this setup, we can effectively revoke a TPM without having a revocation list,
assuming that the TPM actually receives the commands in question. This approach,
though effective, has limitations in the form of non-volatile memory space. Since we
cannot at the moment extend with new service providers, we need to define an index
every time a new service provider is (re)introduced. If we assume a PC TPM, this
leaves a little over 300 indexes to be defined ( 6962
20
≈348), but other applications
for the indexes might be present).
This implementation also presents a potential
risk. If two users are registered with the same service provider, then they can both
be revoked by that service provider, i.e., if the service provider wants to invalidate
u1, then it can also invalidate u2 since the signature in both branches would be the
same. Though this is possible, the service provider would not have the incentive to
do so. The important part is that a rouge service provider cannot invalidate keys
that authenticate to another service provider.
==PAGE:96==
88
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this chapter, we present the conclusion on the project, followed by any future work
identified.
8.1
Conclusion
In this report we have analyzed the FIDO Universal 2nd Factor protocol and found
limitations in respect to privacy, multi-factor authentication, operational assurance
and functional safety. Using anonymous attestation techniques and moving from one
to multiple authentication keys, we have demonstrated that we can provide user- and
service-provider desired privacy that allows a user to initiate unlinkable authenticated
sessions. Depending on the context and anonymity set, this complicates any action
for the service provider to identify a single user in a set of users.
We have shifted the trust from the service provider to the clients, allowing the use of
multiple factors in trusted local authentication, in any desired combination or degree.
By using a client- and service-provider policies, such as biometric data, physical loca-
tion, or any other form of data, we provide guarantees that a user cannot authenticate
without complying with those policies.
With the trust now shifted from centralized applications to the edge of the system,
we provide trust and a level of operational assurance using configuration integrity
verification, by measuring the state of the host during boot. These measurements
ensure that no cryptographic operations such as signing and key generation cannot
happen if the host is in an untrusted state.
We support multiple levels of trust,
allowing the individual service provider to define the contents of the term trusted
state. We have demonstrated this by showing that we can restrict the use of keys
with a provided policy, which needs to be reflected in the configuration measurements.
We have defined trust models, which, when extended with predicates and axioms, can
be turned in attestation policies. These can range from policies that demonstrate the
configuration that needs to be present, to policies that ensure the correct execution
during runtime.
We have further shown that we provide functional safety by ensuring that not only
using keys but also safety-critical actions and operations can only take place under
certain assumptions.
If those assumptions are not met, then the operations and
actions requested cannot be completed.
==PAGE:98==
90
8 Conclusion
We have provided a framework that ensures that all safety-critical operations can
only happen if a host is in a particular state. This framework provides a base level
of trust that can be defined by a group or organization. Using a Trusted Platform
Module, we further ensure that cloning or tampering is not possible, and will result
in authentication being improbable.
We have implemented this in a proof of concept application, which complies with the
existing security guarantees given by the FIDO U2F protocol and demonstrates the
correctness of the enhanced model. When working with a secure element, storing the
keys are critical to both safety and space-limitations. We have therefore constructed
a key hierarchy that supports fast invalidation of particular users’ keys for a given
service provider, without breaking privacy. We have further presented a model that
both guarantees that revoked and invalidated keys remain that way, and that only
the correct revoking or invalidating party can execute such revocation or invalidation.
We have provided a generic model for anonymous authentication, that when extended
with Control Flow Attestation techniques, can provide guarantees for correct execu-
tion to ensure trust in the overall scheme.
Lastly, the models presented provide
requirements for implementation, and no hidden implementation is needed. The only
vendor that needs to be trusted is the manufacturer of the trusted environment.
This project is a first attempt to create a holistic model that represents requirements
for both trust and function that supports authentication in a passwordless world.
Enhancing the U2F protocol is a stepping-stone for moving into UAF and WebAuthn,
which are both in early stages and still being analyzed by the research community.
This general enhanced model can be investigated further to provide enhancements
and implementation to the final UAF/WebAuthn protocol.
8.2
Future work
In this section, we present any future work identified during the project.
8.2.1
Models and Operational Assurance
We have provided the first part of a formal model, namely the state diagrams. In the
future, we need to enhance these models with predicates and axioms and formally
verify these, using industry acknowledged tools.
Based on the verified models with predicates and axioms, we must identify and extract
attestation policies that can provide guarantees of execution correctness for mixed
functions and assets that execute the protocol.
==PAGE:99==
8.2 Future work
91
8.2.2
Revocation
In our context, revocation is still an open research problem, and it is generally up
to each implementation to provide revocation.
We need to analyze the proposed
solution further and enhance the models as we did with the other models, to formally
verify them. We then need to implement a chosen solution and evaluate them against
existing protocols. Based on the domain and functional requirements, some protocols
might prove better under certain assumptions.
8.2.3
Implementation
The implementation needs a significant touch, where we need to extract the exact
functions needed from the DAA implementation we have used. Instead of using a
software-based TPM, we need to migrate to a hardware TPM and run our experiments
on that as well.
We then need to generalize the implementation, moving it from
a proof of concept solution to a versatile generic implementation, with safe error
handling.
In such an implementation, we have multiple things to do. We need to ensure that
the registration message containing the attestation signature is moved from a single
signature to a data-structure or certificate the reflects not only the state of the TPM
but also the type, issuer, and other information. We further need to migrate from the
current sessions to HMAC-sessions, ensuring data sent to the TPM is encrypted. We
need to implement the rest of the policies, with all their respective versatile use-cases.
Further, we need to protect key generation with policies that ensure that the host is in
a global trusted state, meaning a consortium of service providers or a standardizing
organization provides a base of trust.
That could be a configuration whitelist or
requirements for software installed.
In a real-world scenario, the protocol might not run on clients possessing the same
computational power as we have been using during this project. We need to explore
the transitioning from a TPM to other architectures and secure elements that are
more appropriate for resource-constrained devices.
==PAGE:100==
92
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Ericsson, Internet of Things Forecast – Mobility Report. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ericsson.com/en/mobility-report/internet-of-things-
forecast.
[2]
F. Dahlqvist, Growing Opportunities in the Internet of Things, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/
Private%20Equity%20and%20Principal%20Investors/Our%20Insights/
Growing%20opportunities%20in%20the%20Internet%20of%20Things/Growing-
opportunities-in-the-Internet-of-Things-v5.ashx.
[3]
C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and J. Voas, “DDoS in the IoT: Mirai
and other botnets,” Computer, 2017, issn: 00189162. doi: 10.1109/MC.2017.
201.
[4]
NemID, Eksempler på phishing. [Online]. Available: https://www.nemid.nu/
dk-da/pas_paa_dit_nemid/phishing/eksempel_phishing/.
[5]
T. Halevi, N. Memon, and O. Nov, “Spear-Phishing in the Wild: A Real-World
Study of Personality, Phishing Self-Efficacy and Vulnerability to Spear-Phishing
Attacks,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2015. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2544742.
[6]
T. Chan Pan; Haskell, ReelPhish: A Real-Time Two-Factor Phishing Tool |
FireEye Inc, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.fireeye.com/blog/
threat-research/2018/02/reelphish-real-time-two-factor-phishing-
tool.html.
[7]
Fido Alliance, “The Need for a New Authentication Model,” number December,
pages 1–6, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://fidoalliance.org/wp-content/
uploads/FIDOMessagingWPv1.pdf.
[8]
Yubico | YubiKey strong two factor authentication. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.yubico.com/.
[9]
——, “Universal 2nd Factor ( U2F ) Overview,” 2017.
[10]
——, “FIDO UAF Architectural Overview FIDO Alliance Review Draft 28
November 2017,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https : / / fidoalliance . org /
specs/fido- uaf- v1.2- rd- 20171128/fido- uaf- overview- v1.2- rd-
20171128.html.
==PAGE:102==
94
Bibliography
[11]
Web Authentication: An API for accessing Public Key Credentials Level 1. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn/.
[12]
——, “Client to Authenticator Protocol (CTAP),” page 79, 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-v2.0-ps-20190130/fido-
client-to-authenticator-protocol-v2.0-ps-.
[13]
KeePass Password Safe. [Online]. Available: https://keepass.info/.
[14]
Share Passwords with a Password Manager for Business | LastPass. [Online].
Available: https://www.lastpass.com/solutions/business- password-
manager.
[15]
Password Manager App for Home, Mobile, Business | Dashlane. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.dashlane.com/.
[16]
European Parliament and Council of the European Union, Directive (EU) 2015/2366
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on payment
services in the internal market, amending Directives 2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC
and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, and repealing Directive
200, 2015.
[17]
Identity and Access Management | RSA SecurID Suite. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rsa.com/en-us/products/rsa-securid-suite.
[18]
Home · google/google-authenticator Wiki. [Online]. Available: https://github.
com/google/google-authenticator/wiki.
[19]
What is the Microsoft Authenticator app? - Azure Active Directory | Microsoft
Docs. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/azure/
active-directory/user-help/user-help-auth-app-overview.
[20]
EMVCo, “3-D Secure Protocol and Core Functions Specification October 2017,”
number October, 2017.
[21]
Apple Pay - Apple (UK). [Online]. Available: https://www.apple.com/uk/
apple-pay/.
[22]
FIDO2: Web Authentication (WebAuthn) - FIDO Alliance. [Online]. Available:
https://fidoalliance.org/fido2/fido2-web-authentication-webauthn/.
[23]
C. Bormann and P. Hoffman, RFC 7049: Concise Binary Object Representation
(CBOR), 2013.
[24]
Building a world without passwords - Microsoft Security. [Online]. Available:
https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2018/05/01/building-a-
world-without-passwords/.
[25]
Amd, “AMD Secure Virtual Machine Architecture Reference Manual,” num-
ber 33047, pages 1–124, 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.mimuw.edu.
pl / ~vincent / lecture6 / sources / amd - pacifica - specification . pdf %
5Cnpapers2://publication/uuid/E6373C1D-71CF-448F-9B83-88B437BA194B.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
95
[26]
James Greene, “Intel Trusted Execution Technology,” Intel Whitepaper, num-
ber July, 2003. [Online]. Available: www.intel.com/technology/security.
[27]
Sensor requirements for secure biometrics - Win32 apps | Microsoft Docs. [On-
line]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/windows/win32/
secbiomet/sensor-requirements-for-secure-biometrics.
[28]
W. Arthur, D. Challener, and K. Goldman, “Extended authorization (ea) poli-
cies,” in A Practical Guide to TPM 2.0: Using the New Trusted Platform Module
in the New Age of Security. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2015, pages 217–248, isbn:
978-1-4302-6584-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4302-6584-9_14. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4302-6584-9_14.
[29]
Windows Hello for Business Overview (Windows 10) - Microsoft 365 Security
| Microsoft Docs. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/security/identity-protection/hello-for-business/hello-
overview.
[30]
M. Jhinger and P. Kuntal, “AMD White Paper FAST IDENTITY ONLINE(FIDO):
PASSWORD-LESS AUTHENTICATION,” pages 1–12,
[31]
F. Alliance and P. Standard, “FIDO U2F Raw Message Formats,” number Oc-
tober, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-
undefined- undefined- ps- 20150514/fido- u2f- raw- message- formats-
v1.0-undefined-ps-20150514.html%0Ahttps://fidoalliance.org/specs/
fido-u2f-raw-message-formats-v1.0-RD-20140209.html.
[32]
“X.509 : Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Direc-
tory: Public-key and attribute certificate frameworks,” International Telecom-
munication Union, Telecommunication, Standard, October 2019.
[33]
R. Lindemann, N. N. Labs, J. Camenisch, M. Drijvers, A. Edgington, A. Lehmann,
and R. Urian, “FIDO ECDAA Algorithm,” number February, 2017.
[34]
Capacium; Gallagher, “Cry Cyber and let slip the dogs of war,” 2019.
[35]
Stars’ nude photo attack may have been down to password codes - Independent.ie.
[Online]. Available: https://www.independent.ie/business/technology/
news/stars- nude- photo- attack- may- have- been- down- to- password-
codes-30552629.html.
[36]
Windows Hello and unlocking with companion devices - UWP applications |
Microsoft Docs. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
windows/uwp/security/companion-device-unlock.
[37]
T. C. G. TCG, “TPM Library Part 1: Architecture,” 2014.
[38]
T. C. P. Alliance, “Trusted Computing Platform Alliance,” Network Security,
volume 2001, number 3, page 6, 0, issn: 13534858. doi: 10 . 1016 / s1353 -
4858(01)00312-9.
==PAGE:104==
96
Bibliography
[39]
TCG and TCG, “TPM - Part 1 Design Principles, Specification v.1.2,” num-
ber October, 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.trustedcomputinggroup.
org / files / resource _ files / 6469D0B1 - 1D09 - 3519 - ADC345F5B6060474 /
tpmwg-mainrev62_Part1_Design_Principles.pdf.
[40]
Trusted Computing Group, “TCG PC Client Platform TPM Profile (PTP)
Specification Family ”2.0” TCG Public Review,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
/ / trustedcomputinggroup . org / resource / pc - client - platform - tpm -
profile-ptp-specification/.
[41]
M. Stevens, E. Bursztein, P. Karpman, A. Albertini, and Y. Markov, “The first
collision for full SHA-1,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
volume 10401 LNCS, pages 570–596, 2017, issn: 16113349. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-63688-7{\_}19.
[42]
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Secure Hash Standard,” FIBS
180-4 Publication, volume 4, number August, page 36, 2015. doi: 10.6028/NIST.
FIPS.180- 4. [Online]. Available: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
fips/fips180-3/fips180-3_final.pdf%5Cnhttp://thor.info.uaic.ro/
~fltiplea/CC/FIPS180-3.pdf%5Cnhttp://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/
FIPS/NIST.FIPS.180-4.pdf.
[43]
W. Arthur, D. Challener, and K. Goldman, A Practical Guide to TPM 2.0.
Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2015, page 375, isbn: 978-1-4302-6583-2. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4302-6584-9. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-1-4302-6584-9.
[44]
G. Proudler, L. Chen, and C. Dalton, Trusted Computing Platforms. Springer,
2014, isbn: 0-13-009220-7.
[45]
A. Segall, Trusted Platform Modules: Why, when and how to use them. 2016,
isbn: 9781849198936. doi: 10.1049/pbpc013e.
[46]
T. Platform and M. Library, “Trusted Platform Module Library Part 1: Archi-
tecture,” 2014.
[47]
T. Abera, N. Asokan, L. Davi, J. E. Ekberg, T. Nyman, A. Paverd, A. R.
Sadeghi, and G. Tsudik, “C-FLAT: Control-flow attestation for embedded sys-
tems software,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security, 2016, isbn: 9781450341394. doi: 10 . 1145 / 2976749 .
2978358.
[48]
G. Dessouky, S. Zeitouni, T. Nyman, A. Paverd, L. Davi, P. Koeberl, N. Asokan,
and A. R. Sadeghi, “LO-FAT: Low-Overhead Control Flow ATtestation in Hard-
ware,” Proceedings - Design Automation Conference, volume Part 12828, 2017,
issn: 0738100X. doi: 10.1145/3061639.3062276.
[49]
H. Hu, S. Shinde, S. Adrian, Z. L. Chua, P. Saxena, and Z. Liang, “Data-
Oriented Programming: On the Expressiveness of Non-Control Data Attacks,”
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
97
[50]
G. Dessouky, T. Abera, A. Ibrahim, and A. R. Sadeghi, “LiteHAX: Lightweight
hardware-assisted attestation of program execution,” IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Computer-Aided Design, Digest of Technical Papers, ICCAD,
2018, issn: 10923152. doi: 10.1145/3240765.3240821.
[51]
ProVerif. [Online]. Available: https://prosecco.gforge.inria.fr/personal/
bblanche/proverif/.
[52]
“Information technology. Automatic identification and data capture techniques.
QR Code 2005 bar code symbology specification,” International Organization
for Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, March 2015.
[53]
F. Alliance, “Universal 2nd Factor (U2F) Specifications,” 2016. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-u2f-v1.1-id-20160915/
fido- u2f- overview- v1.1- v1.1- id- %0Ahttps://fidoalliance.org/
specifications/download/.
[54]
T. C. G. TCG, “TCG EK Credential Profile,” number November, 2014.
[55]
“Information technology — Trusted platform module library,” International
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, Standard, August 2015.
[56]
E. Brickell and J. Li, “Enhanced privacy ID: A direct anonymous attestation
scheme with enhanced revocation capabilities,” IEEE Transactions on Depend-
able and Secure Computing, volume 9, number 3, pages 345–360, 2012, issn:
15455971. doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2011.63.
[57]
——, “A Pairing-Based DAA Scheme Further Reducing TPM Resources Review
Security Model of DAA,” pages 1–14,
[58]
P. Leach, R. Salz, and M. Mealling, “A Universally Unique IDentifier (UUID)
URN Namespace,” RFC Editor, RFC 4122, Jul. 2005, pages 1–32. [Online].
Available: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4122.
[59]
Anonymity Set - Privacy Patterns. [Online]. Available: https://privacypatterns.
org/patterns/Anonymity-set.
[60]
M. G. Reed, P. F. Syverson, and D. M. Goldschlag, “Anonymous connections
and onion routing,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol-
ume 16, number 4, pages 482–493, 1998, issn: 07338716. doi: 10.1109/49.
668972.
[61]
K. Maletsky, “RSA vs ECC Comparison for Embedded Systems,” Atmel-8951A-
CryptoAuth-RSA-ECC-Comparison-Embedded-Systems-WhitePaper_072015, 2015.
[62]
W. Arthur, D. Challener, and K. Goldman, A Practical Guide to TPM 2.0.
Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2015, pages 107–108, isbn: 978-1-4302-6583-2. doi: 10.
1007/978-1-4302-6584-9. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/
10.1007/978-1-4302-6584-9.
[63]
K. Goldman, Ibm’s software tpm 2.0 (1563), https://sourceforge.net/
projects/ibmswtpm2/, version 1563, 2019.
==PAGE:106==
98
Bibliography
[64]
——, Ibm’s tpm 2.0 tss (1470), https : / / sourceforge . net / projects /
ibmtpm20tss/, version 1470, 2019.
[65]
S. Wesemeyer, C. J. P. Newton, H. Treharne, L. Chen, and R. Sasse, “Formal
Analysis and Implementation of a TPM 2 . 0-based Direct Anonymous Attes-
tation Scheme,”
