==PAGE:1==
 
Numerical analysis of forced and 
spontaneous imbibition of modified-
salinity water in chalk 
Henning Becker 
Supervisors: 
Ali Akbar Eftekhari, Hamid Nick 
January 2020 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
Table of Contents 
1 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................................. 2 
2 
METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................................................. 4 
2.1 
MODELLING THE IMBIBITION PHASE IN GEM...................................................................................... 4 
2.1.1 
Changing the ionic composition of the brines................................................................................ 4 
2.2 
MODELLING OF THE SUBSEQUENT CORE FLOOD IN GEM ..................................................................... 5 
2.3 
GEOCHEMISTRY AND PROPERTIES OF THE OIL AND WATER .................................................................. 6 
2.4 
MODELLING DIFFUSION ..................................................................................................................... 8 
2.5 
FORMULAS FOR CAPILLARY PRESSURE AND RELATIVE PERMEABILITY ................................................. 9 
2.6 
OPTIMIZATION OF THE PARAMETERS USING MATLAB........................................................................ 11 
2.6.1 
Coupling Matlab to CMG ........................................................................................................... 11 
2.6.2 
Testing different optimization algorithms in Matlab .................................................................... 13 
2.7 
VERIFICATION OF THE WORKFLOW (USING A DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT) .............................................. 14 
3 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ............................................................................................................ 17 
3.1 
TESTING A MORE OIL-WET CASE (USING A DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT) .................................................. 17 
3.2 
INFLUENCE OF GRID SPACING (USING ONLY NUMERICAL DIFFUSION) ................................................. 20 
4 
CONCLUSIONS................................................................................................................................... 23 
5 
REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................................... 24 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
 
Relative permeability and capillary pressure have a strong impact on the simulation results of fluid flow 
in a reservoir, and consequently the predicted amount of the recovered oil from the reservoir. These 
curves are usually estimated based on core flooding experiments in small core samples, which are not 
necessarily representative of a several-square-kilometre-wide reservoir. While core flooding is usually 
an accurate method to determine the relative permeability of the sample, the core sample is too small 
and the flooding experiment is too fast. Therefore, capillary pressure effect is not properly captured. 
Additionally, there are several parameters in the relative permeability equations and usually little 
experimental data to fit these (oil recovery and pressure differential), which makes it hard to find a 
unique set of parameters. There is special technique to determine the capillary pressure curve, but 
centrifugal experiments are expensive and seldom done. Spontaneous imbibition experiments, in which 
the flow is fully dominated by capillary forces, are often done but seldom analysed and incorporated in 
the optimization of the relative permeability and capillary pressure parameters. 
 
In this work, the results of spontaneous imbibition experiments are added to the modelling and fitting 
of the relative permeability and capillary pressure correlation. This has certain advantages. First, 
spontaneous imbibition experiments are simple and cheap, as they only consist of an oil filled core 
submerged into brine. The experimental set up is simple and straightforward, which results in a high 
degree of reproducibility. This is not the case for core floods, where flow rates and pressure must be 
controlled. During the imbibition phase, the oil recovery relies predominantly on the capillary pressure, 
which gives a solid base to estimate the parameters for the capillary pressure curve. Furthermore, it 
offers a second dataset to fit the relative permeability curve as well, which potentially reduces the 
uncertainty of the fitted parameters. 
 
Many of the spontaneous imbibition experiments in carbonates are done using a succession of brines, 
differing in ionic strengths and compositions. This way the mechanisms of modified salinity flooding 
are investigated. Although modelling modified salinity flooding with reservoir simulation software is 
still in the development phase, some of the models are already implemented in the simulators such as 
CMG, which is used in this study. Since the early published modelling attempts, e.g. Jerauld, Lin, Webb, 
& Seccombe (2006), modified salinity water flooding is still modelled by interpolating between two or 
more relative permeability and capillary pressure curves. Here the more favourable curves are associated 
with the modified injected water. While in the first paper the interpolation was based on total salt content 
of the water or the molality of an aqueous component, this has changed since. It became clear that this 
approach is too simple and that models need to consider the entire geochemical system in the modelling 
process. However, until now there is no consensus of what parameter is suited best for interpolation and 
modelling the process in carbonates. To model the geochemical reactions, transport simulators are often 
coupled to geochemical modelling software like PHREEQC. Kazemi & Jerauld (2019) coupled the 
geochemical tool iPHREEQC to the compositional reservoir simulator UTCOMP. The geochemical 
reactions as well as the surface complexation were modelled with data obtained from Hiorth, Madland, 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
& Cathles (2010). To model the wettability change in the transport model, they introduced a stability 
number as interpolant. This stability number represent the ratio of electrostatic to VdW forces and is 
thereby based on the change of wettability and the geochemical processes happening during modified 
salinity water injection. For a stability number greater than one, the water film on the chalk is stable, as 
electrostatic forces dominate (water-wet surface). Values smaller than one represent the oil-wet case. 
Using this approach, they were able to model various experiments and even field trials in sandstones. 
For carbonates the results were worse and the model failed to predict the right trends for chalk. 
 
All the modified salinity flooding models are still in the development phase. This is especially true for 
CMG-GEM, which lacks some of the advanced processes, like surface complexation that are included 
in the model by Kazemi & Jerauld (2019). Also, the choice of interpolants is much more restricted in 
CMG-GEM. Either the interpolation is based on the molality of an aqueous species, the molality of 
adsorbed species or on the dissolution of minerals. This is only a rough approximation of the natural 
processes and thus the forecast capability for modified salinity injection is limited. However, it is one 
of the most advanced commercial tools available for modelling the modified salinity water injection. In 
GEM the fluid flow is governed by the Darcy law. The concentrations of the individual aqueous species 
in each grid block are affected by the transport of the aqueous phase, mineral precipitation and 
dissolution (kinetic), diffusion (if defined) and the reactions with other aqueous species (instantaneous). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Methodology 
 
 
The goal is to build a model with CMG that simulates an imbibition experiment, where the salinity or 
ionic composition of the imbibing brine is changed during the course of the experiment. Additionally, 
it should be possible to model a subsequent core flood on the same core. It is not possible to model an 
imbibition experiment and a core flood with the same CMG file, so the experiment was split and 
modelled in two separated files. The results from both simulations (recovery factor and pressure) are 
then used to fit the parameters of the capillary pressure and relative permeability curves. The models 
are initially constructed in CMG and later the input file is modified using a Matlab script. Therefore, the 
mentioned process below is done automatically. The user of the created tool only defines the 
composition of the imbibing and injected fluids. 
2.1 Modelling the imbibition phase in GEM 
The physical dimensions of the model in GEM were set up as extracted from the work of Fathi, Austad, 
& Strand (2011), who conducted experiments on cylindrical outcrop chalk cores from Stevns Klint. To 
replicate the experimental setting, the model was built as a cylindrical (axisymmetric) grid in CMG. The 
size of the core is 7 cm in height and 2 cm in radius, which is a typical core size for flooding or imbibition 
experiments. To allow the oil to flow to the top of the surrounding cell and water to imbibe, the 
constructed computational domain needs to be bigger than the core itself. Additionally, there needs to 
be space on the top to allow the accumulation of the produced oil, without restricting the flow of oil out 
of the core. The flow of oil is slow and 1 cm additional space on the side is sufficient to account for an 
unrestricted flow to the top. More space aids in exchanging the brines later, as the flow from injector at 
the bottom to the producer at the top is less restricted. The water-filled space outside of the core was 
modelled by using an extremely high porosity (0.99) and permeability (5000 mD) compared to the 
values for the core. The value of permeability needs to be high enough to not restrict the flow of oil out 
of the core, while at the same time allowing the numerical solver to find a solution efficiently. The large 
permeability difference between the core and the surrounding water-filled space slows down the 
numerical solver and is one of the reasons for the difference in run time between imbibition and core 
flood simulation. But other severe problems can arise, when the geochemical reactions and dissolution 
of the minerals are implemented into the model. The settings under the numerical section in GEM are 
not straight forward to adjust. They have a very strong impact on the run time of the simulation. The use 
of the keyword *ADTSC, which turns on adaptive time stepping control, is very beneficial in many 
cases. 
2.1.1 Changing the ionic composition of the brines 
In most of the experiments that investigate the influence of modified salinity water injection, the ionic 
composition of the imbibing brine is changed over the course of the experiment. This way it is possible 
to investigate the influence of specific ions or different sequences of injected brines e.g. seawater 
followed by a modified salinity brine. In the actual experiment, this is done by immersing the core into 
the new brine. It is not possible to replicate this in CMG, because the ionic composition of the brine 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
cannot be changed in the middle of a simulation. This usually causes charge imbalance and numerical 
problems in the geochemical solver. Once the initial molalities are set, it is only possible to change them 
by injecting a different brine. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce an injector and a producer in the 
water filled space surrounding the core. The injection starts on the day the brine changes and ends as 
soon as the brine in the water-filled space is completely exchanged. 
 
 
Figure 1 Molality of SO42- 12 hours after water replacement started. The initial brine with low SO42- contend in the 
surrounding space has been completely replaced. SO42- starts to imbibe into the core sample from the surface 
(using only numerical diffusion). 
For an accurate representation of the experiment, the pressure difference between the injector and the 
producer needs to be balanced. When it is too low, the exchange of the brine is too slow. When it is too 
high, the pressure differential will transform the imbibition experiment into a core flood. As the 
permeability difference between core and surrounding space is high, most of the flow will occur out of 
the core sector. The behaviour of the injection front can be tracked in the 2D view in Results, by 
changing the view to the molality of an aqueous component. Considering the time scale of the whole 
experiment, I aimed for a complete water exchange within 6 to 12 hours (Figure 1). The pressure 
difference needed for this produces only a minor increase in the oil recovery factor plot. In case of any 
modifications to the grid, the pressure difference between injector and producer must be reevaluated. 
2.2 Modelling of the subsequent core flood in GEM 
The core flood simulation is set up as a bottom-up injection with 100 cells and the same physical core 
dimension as explained before (Figure 2). The round shape of the core is changed to a rectangular shape 
in the GEM model while keeping the cross-sectional area constant. Compared to the imbibition phase 
the modelling of the core flood is relatively simple. There is only one-dimensional flow, the number of 
cells is much lower and the geochemistry does not produce any numerical errors that slow down the 
solver. 
Producer 
Injector 
==PAGE:7==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
6 
 
 
Figure 2 Core flood model in GEM with water saturation. The injector is in the bottom cell. 
Due to the one dimensionality of the model, there are some simplifications. The ionic composition of 
the last brine in the imbibition phase of the experiment is used as the only, initial brine in the core. The 
last water saturation is exported and written into the text file for the core flood, so that the simulation 
continues at the correct point. As the model for the core flood is one dimensional, it uses the average 
water saturation in the defined core sector. After the imbibition experiment, the brine is not necessarily 
evenly distributed in the core, because the imbibition is strongest on the surface and slows down towards 
the inner core (Figure 4). However, as brine exchange in the core flood is much faster than in the 
imbibition process and due to the cylindrical shape of the core, the error is small. 
2.3 Geochemistry and properties of the oil and water 
The oil is modelled as a one-component mixture, by using decane from the CMG component list. The 
pressure and temperature are low, so the two important oil parameters for this experiment are the 
viscosity and the density of the oil. They were both reported, but only at room temperature and 
atmospheric pressure. Oil viscosity is heavily depending on temperature, so it needs to be adjusted to 
the temperature of the experiment (110 °C). First the API gravity is calculated by using the specific 
gravity of the oil. 
°𝐴𝑃𝐼= 141,5
0,8 −131,5 ≈45 
Equation 1 
Then I used a suitable correlation Egbogah & Ng (1990) to calculate the viscosity at the higher 
temperature of the experiment. The influence of temperature on the viscosity of water is less and 
automatically adjusted by CMG. The molalities of the water are the same as from the experiment by 
Fathi et al. (2011). They were written into GEM using the primary molality keyword. This means that 
GEM will calculate the molalities of the secondary species on its own prior to the start of the simulation. 
The correct input depends on what was measured in the laboratory. 
 
The focus of this work was not to set up an accurate geochemical model for the carbonate cores, but to 
implement the coupling and optimization of transport parameters with Matlab. For that reason, the 
implemented geochemical model is as simple as possible to speed up the simulations. It is not possible 
to completely neglect the geochemistry, because GEM needs at least one aqueous component to 
interpolate between the two curves for relative permeability and capillary pressure (modified salinity 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
water injection). Modelling the wettability change by using an aqueous component as interpolant and a 
reduced geochemical model, is a strong oversimplification of the geochemical processes that are 
happening in the core. 
 
To improve the geochemical modelling, the number of geochemical reactions and aqueous species 
should be increased later. To keep it simple the core was modelled as pure calcite. This is seldom the 
case and additional minerals should be added with their volumetric fraction, if they are present in the 
core. Kinetic dissolution of the mineral (calcite) was artificially slowed down by decreasing the rate 
constant in GEM. To model the dissolution more accurately, the rate constant has to be history matched 
based on experimental data, as the dissolution rate is affected by several experimental parameters, e.g. 
water-mineral interfacial area. 
 
 
Figure 3 Example of unphysical behaviour encountered on a coarse grid during modified salinity injection: 
extremely high molality of Ca2+ in a single cell. 
If the geochemistry model is modified, there are a few factors that need to be considered when running 
the simulator. The geochemistry has a strong influence on the stability and run time of the numerical 
simulation, especially for the imbibition part. The area outside of the core may experience unphysical 
behaviour with extremely larger changes of the molality in a single cell (Figure 3). These changes slow 
down the solver but seem to have a negligible effect on the calculated recovery factor, as they only 
appear outside of the core sector. Decreasing the block size at the edge of the core sector and increasing 
the block size towards the edge of the surrounding cell and the wells drastically reduced the occurrence 
of these errors. Therefore, when the diffusion of the ions is considered by assigning values to the 
diffusion coefficients, a grid that is refined towards the surface of the core sector should be used (Figure 
4). If more geochemical reactions, minerals and aqueous components are added, it might become 
necessary to recheck the behaviour to grid refinement or coarsening. Generally, the geochemical model 
can be as complicated as needed, but more aqueous species will slow down the simulation. If the 
geochemical model includes a lot of species, it is usually required to have good experimental data to fit 
the unknown parameters or equilibrium constants. 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
8 
 
2.4 Modelling diffusion 
The effect of low salinity flooding at the beginning of the imbibition phase is determined by the diffusion 
of the aqueous species into the core. As SO42- is used for interpolation, its diffusion determines the 
wettability of the rock and eventually the estimated recovery factor. There are two ways to model the 
diffusion of the ions into the core sector with GEM. The first way is to approximate the natural diffusion 
by using the numerical diffusion that automatically occurs during every numerical simulation with an 
upwind numerical scheme. It is computationally less expensive than implementing diffusion with a 
diffusion coefficient and results, depending on the grid size, in a slower or faster diffusion process than 
physically expected. Because the numerical diffusion is influenced by the grid spacing, the diffusion of 
the ions becomes also grid dependent when using this method. The proper way to implement diffusion 
is to use a diffusion coefficient. For the implementation of the diffusion coefficient in GEM, I used the 
keyword ‘DIFFC-AQU’, which allows to specify the coefficient for every oil component and aqueous 
species. When the diffusion is calculated for every aqueous species, the numerical solver becomes very 
slow and instable. This is why I set the coefficient for all the other species, which have no influence on 
the interpolation and thereby the recovery factor, to zero. For SO42- I used a diffusion coefficient of 
5×10-7cm2/s. The value was obtained from Qiao, Johns, & Li (2016), who modelled the same 
experiment. 
 
 
Figure 4 Comparing pure numerical diffusion (left) with diffusion modelled by using a coefficient only SO42- (right) 
No reactions involving SO42- were considered. 
Figure 4 compares the different speeds of the two methods on a refined grid 12 hours after the water 
exchange. The injected sea water contains more SO42- than the initial formation water. The injected 
water has filled up the whole imbibition cell and started to diffuse into the core evenly from all 
directions. In the model using numerical diffusion SO42- has only started to diffuse into the surface, 
while the SO42- modelled with a coefficient has already diffused deep into the core sample. The grid 
dependence of the numerical diffusion is also visible. Comparing the left picture with Figure 1, shows 
the strong grid dependence. This can result in uneven imbibition. 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
2.5 Formulas for capillary pressure and relative permeability 
For completely water-wet reservoirs the capillary pressure correlation, which is based on the work of 
Brooks & Corey (1964), can be calculated by: 
𝑃𝑐(𝑠𝑤) =
𝑐𝑤
(𝑠𝑤−𝑠𝑤𝑖
1 −𝑠𝑤𝑖)
𝑎𝑤 
Equation 2 
Where: 
𝑠𝑤𝑖 𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
𝑠𝑤 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
 
Like most capillary pressure correlations, the right-hand side has two fitting parameters: 
 
 
𝑐𝑤, which is interpreted as the pore entry pressure. This is the minimum pressure needed for 
water to get into the core and start to replace the oil. 
 
𝑎𝑤 or 
1
𝜆, which is interpreted as an index of the pore size distribution. This reflects that the 
capillary pressure depends strongly on the radius of the individual capillaries and thereby the 
distribution of the radii. 
 
While 𝑐𝑤 is setting the height of the capillary pressure curve, 𝑎𝑤 determines the degree of the curvature. 
 
The first equation can be regarded as one limiting case (completely water-wet). Replacing the water 
subscripts with subscripts for oil yields the other limiting case (completely oil-wet). Adding up the two 
limiting cases yields an expression for mixed-wet reservoirs. For the oil-wet case, the capillary pressure 
is by definition negative, while the capillary pressure for the water-wet case is positive. The two limiting 
saturations (oil residual and water irreducible) are approached asymptotically. The final wetting state of 
the reservoir depends mainly on the ratio of 𝑐𝑤 to 𝑐𝑜. 
𝑃𝑐(𝑠𝑤) =
𝑐𝑤
(𝑠𝑤−𝑠𝑤𝑖
1 −𝑠𝑤𝑖)
𝑎𝑤+
𝑐𝑜
(1 −𝑠𝑤−𝑠𝑜𝑟
1 −𝑠𝑜𝑟
)
𝑎𝑜 
Equation 3 
Where: 
𝑠𝑤𝑖 𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
𝑠𝑤 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
𝑠𝑜𝑟 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑜𝑖𝑙 𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
 
The fitting parameters: 
 𝑐𝑤, 𝑎𝑤 and 𝑎𝑜 are positive numbers, while 𝑐𝑜 is a negative number. 
 
 
To keep the following formulas more readable, effective saturations are defined by: 
𝑆𝑒,𝑤=
𝑠𝑤−𝑠𝑤𝑖
1 −𝑠𝑤𝑖−𝑠𝑜𝑟
 
Equation 4 
 
𝑆𝑒,𝑜=
𝑠𝑜−𝑠𝑜𝑟
1 −𝑠𝑤𝑖−𝑠𝑜𝑟
= 1 −𝑠𝑤−𝑠𝑜𝑟
1 −𝑠𝑤𝑖−𝑠𝑜𝑟
 
Equation 5 
It is possible to derive the expression for the relative permeability based on the capillary pressure. The 
derivation is done individually for each of the two branches (water-wet (ww) and oil-wet (ow)). Starting 
from the Corey-Burdine equations for water: 
==PAGE:11==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
10 
 
𝑘𝑟𝑤= 𝑆𝑒,𝑤
2
∫
1
𝑃𝑐
2 𝑑𝑆𝑒
𝑆𝑒
0
∫
1
𝑃𝑐
2 𝑑𝑆𝑒
1
0
 
Equation 6 
And for oil 
𝑘𝑟𝑜= (1 −𝑆𝑒,𝑜)
2 ∫
1
𝑃𝑐
2 𝑑𝑆𝑒
1
𝑆𝑒
∫
1
𝑃𝑐
2 𝑑𝑆𝑒
1
0
 
Equation 7 
Inserting the experimentally found relationship between effective saturation and capillary pressure for 
the water-wet case: 
𝑆𝑒= (𝑐𝑤
𝑃𝑐
)
𝜆𝑤
 
Equation 8 
or similarly: 
𝑃𝑐= 𝑐𝑤
𝑆𝑒
𝑎𝑤 
Equation 9 
Yields for the wetting phase (water) relative permeability: 
𝑘𝑟𝑤,𝑤𝑤= 𝑆𝑒,𝑤
3+2𝑎𝑤 
Equation 10 
The same derivation can be done for the non-wetting phase (oil), which yields: 
𝑘𝑟𝑜,𝑤𝑤= (1 −𝑆𝑒,𝑤)
2(1 −𝑆𝑒,𝑤
1+2𝑎𝑤) 
Equation 11 
The derivation for the oil-wet branch of the capillary pressure is similar and gives: 
𝑘𝑟𝑤,𝑜𝑤= (1 −𝑆𝑒,𝑜)
2(1 −𝑆𝑒,𝑜
1+2𝑎𝑜) 
Equation 12 
And: 
𝑘𝑟𝑜,𝑜𝑤= 𝑆𝑒,𝑜
3+2𝑎𝑜 
Equation 13 
This derivation gives four equations, two for oil and two for water. To find the final permeabilities for 
the mixed-wet case, an interpolation is done based on the two parameters 𝑐𝑤 and 𝑐𝑜 as described in 
Skjaeveland et al. (2000): 
𝑘𝑟𝑤= 𝑐𝑤𝑘𝑟𝑤,𝑤𝑤+ 𝑐𝑜𝑘𝑟𝑤,𝑜𝑤
𝑐𝑤−𝑐𝑜
 
Equation 14 
 
𝑘𝑟𝑜= 𝑐𝑤𝑘𝑟𝑜,𝑤𝑤+ 𝑐𝑜𝑘𝑟𝑜,𝑜𝑤
𝑐𝑤−𝑐𝑜
 
Equation 15 
On one hand these equations are very practical for history matching the data, as there are only four 
fitting parameters (𝑐𝑤, 𝑐𝑜, 𝑎𝑤, 𝑎𝑜).  𝑆𝑜𝑟 can often be estimated from the forced imbibition experiment. 
On the other hand, it does not give a lot of freedom for fitting the recovery curve to the experimental 
data, because the relative permeabilities depend strongly on the matching parameters for the capillary 
pressure. 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
One modification to the formula is to introduce 𝑘𝑟𝑜0, which is the permeability for oil at irreducible 
water saturation and 𝑘𝑟𝑤0, which is the permeability for water at residual oil saturation. 
𝑘𝑟𝑤= 𝑘𝑟𝑤0
𝑐𝑤𝑘𝑟𝑤,𝑤𝑤+ 𝑐𝑜𝑘𝑟𝑤,𝑜𝑤
𝑐𝑤−𝑐𝑜
 
Equation 16 
 
𝑘𝑟𝑜= 𝑘𝑟𝑜0
𝑐𝑤𝑘𝑟𝑜,𝑤𝑤+ 𝑐𝑜𝑘𝑟𝑜,𝑜𝑤
𝑐𝑤−𝑐𝑜
 
Equation 17 
This makes the relative permeabilities more independent from the capillary pressure and yields a better 
history match, although the modelling approach becomes more empirical. Finally, the functions need to 
be modified, so that they fit in the CMG input format. This means that, e.g. the Pc curve needs to be 
steadily increasing or that the first values for the two Pc curves have to be the same. Figure 5 shows an 
example of the general shape of the curves in line with the GEM input requirements: 
 
'
Figure 5 Artificial relative permeability and capillary pressure curves used for verification of the workflow 
During the optimization, Matlab calculates the relative permeability and capillary pressures in a separate 
function, so it is easier to change the formulas. When the size of the table is changed, the size of the 
table in the initial file has to be changed in Builder as well. Otherwise, the Matlab script that updates 
the CMG input file may overwrite more than just the table in the dat file. 
2.6 Optimization of the parameters using Matlab 
There are eight parameters for the relative permeability and capillary pressure curves. The two curves 
are different for high and low salinity brines, which doubles the initial set of parameters to 16. Some of 
the parameters are usually known and can thus be fixed prior to the optimization. One example for this 
case is the connate water saturation that is usually established during the aging process. Other parameters 
might be fixed as well, if the properties of the core are well known or at least the range of the parameter 
can be narrowed down (e.g. residual oil saturation). The less parameters to optimize for, the faster the 
optimization process can become. 
2.6.1 Coupling Matlab to CMG 
Once the simulation file is set up in Builder, Matlab handles the whole optimization process. The input 
is almost the same for all the optimization algorithms. They require a vector of starting values and one 
vector for the upper and lower boundary. The surrogateopt algorithm is different, as it randomly creates 
its own starting points based on the boundaries. It is thus less affected by the choice of the starting point. 
==PAGE:13==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
12 
 
The starting points or boundaries are then passed to the objective function together with the options, 
which makes it possible to specify the step size of derivative based optimizers. 
 
The relative permeability and capillary pressure tables are calculated separately for the low and high 
salinity parameters within the objective function so that they change in every iteration. The calculation 
of the tables is done in a separated function, so it is easier to change them. This separated function saves 
the relative permeability and capillary pressure tables as a text file in the same folder. The table has 
entries for 100 water saturations by default. Matlab then reads this text file line by line and removes the 
mandatory table heading. 
 
The whole simulation in CMG is stored in a dat file, which can be read by Matlab just like a normal txt 
file. When Matlab reads the dat file it is very important to read it line by line, so that the structure of 
each line is not altered in any way that would cause GEM to crash later. After that, the simulation file 
is stored in a vector, which contains a whole line in each cell. The cells containing the respective low 
and high salinity table are then replaced by the new tables, which were also read line by line. It might 
occur that the position of the tables moves within the simulation file, because CMG adds or removes 
lines on the very top of the simulation file. To prevent Matlab from writing the new tables at the wrong 
position and deleting valuable code, I used the Matlab ‘find’ function. This function searches for a 
respective keyword, which always appears below the mentioned tables. Matlab searches for that 
keyword and saves the line number in a vector called index. The first appearance of the keyword 
identifies the high salinity and the second one the low salinity table. As the keyword appears below the 
mentioned tables, Matlab insert the vectors of the new tables in the 100 lines above the line indicated 
by the keyword. 
 
After the tables are replaced, Matlab calls GEM and specifies the name of the input and output file. 
When GEM is finished, Matlab calls Report, which then opens the previously defined tutor4.rwd file. 
The tutor4.rwd file gives Report the instructions to call the output of GEM by the path in Windows, so 
it is important to change that path as well when the folder is copied to a different location. With the 
instruction give in tutor4.rwd, Report produces a simplified text file that is easier to read than the raw, 
complex simulation output of GEM. The final text file contains the average oil saturation of the core 
sector for the times specified in the tutor4.rwd file. The times are determined by the experiment and 
have to be changed, if a different experiment is used. The same times must be defined in the date section 
of CMG as well. 
 
With the use of different parameters for relative permeability and capillary pressure, the oil recovery at 
the end of the imbibition phase changes. That means that the initial water saturation of the core flood 
has to be modified, so that it is equal to the last water saturation of the imbibition phase. This is done 
with the same procedure as for the imbibition tables. Matlab searches the dat file for a suitable keyword 
in this case ‘SW CON’ and replaces the next line with the last average water saturation from the 
imbibition phase. This way the recovery factor curve starts at the correct point for the core flood. As the 
core flood is simulated in a different CMG file, the newly generated tables must be written into that file 
as well. This is done the same way as for the imbibition file. To simplify the GEM simulation output for 
the core flood, the file named tutor5.rwd is used. It works the same as tutor4.rwd. To generate the final 
recovery curve the results of the core flood must be shifted by the duration of the imbibition experiment, 
which is 90 days in this case. For the core flood, the pressure drop is also considered when fitting the 
parameters. This ensures a better fit of the relative permeability curve, because capillary pressure plays 
only a minor role during the core flood. The experimental data for the pressure is stored in a different 
Excel file. The handling and coupling for the pressure data are the same as explained for the recovery 
factor. 
 
At the end, the final plot and the error values are calculated. This section includes also a plot of the 
variables used for calculating the new tables. This gives a good impression of the operation and 
convergence of the algorithms. The error value is calculated as difference between the calculated and 
the measured experimental data, which is stored in a simple Excel table. When lsqnonlin is used, the 
values in the error vector should not be squared. When patternsearch or surrogateopt is used, the values 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
in the error vector must be squared and summed up to a single value. Here it is also possible to modify 
the weighting of different stages of the experiment or the weighting between pressure and recovery 
factor data. The importance of any section or phase can be increased by increasing the error it is 
contributing to the total error. 
 
It might happen that GEM does not find a solution, which leads to incomplete tables and errors occur. 
To prevent the whole optimization process from crashing, there is a try and catch function implemented 
in the objective function. If GEM fails to find a solution, the catch case is that the error is not a number 
(NaN). It is important that the chosen optimization algorithm is able to handle NaN as input. As the 
different algorithms use different error values structures (vector, number), the NaN input needs to be 
matched, too. When GEM fails during the imbibition phase, it does not directly create an error in Matlab. 
However, there is no final water saturation that could be implemented into the core flood. The value that 
Matlab reads from the file is not a number (NaN). Consequently, the core flood simulation fails too but 
again without creating an error in Matlab. In the end, the algorithm fails without causing an error and 
going to the catch statement. It is therefore necessary to check, if SW CON is ‘NaN’ and force an error 
into Matlab, if it is. 
2.6.2 Testing different optimization algorithms in Matlab 
Matlab has a variety of different optimization algorithms and an overview page. This page explains how 
to choose the most suitable one according to the optimization function. The requirements for this specific 
case are: 
 
 
The algorithm should search as global as possible, because there are many local minima 
 
It should be able to handle many variables 
 
It needs to be robust in case GEM cannot find a solution e.g. it should be able to handle NaN as 
input without failing 
 
The speed is secondary, as most of the time is spent on running the external GEM simulation, 
fewer iterations are favourable 
 
Applying these requirements, three suitable algorithms were tested: 
 
 
Derivative based: lsqnonlin 
Lsqnonlin optimizes by least square fitting, hence the name. The algorithm is based on 
derivation but the default step size of 10-9 is too small for this optimization problem. It can be 
modified by setting the options. The algorithm itself requires the error to be calculated and 
passed as a vector and without squaring the values. 
 
 
Matlab search algorithms: patternsearch 
Patternsearch is one of the search algorithms in Matlab, which do not work based on derivatives. 
Thus, it is the recommended optimization algorithm for non-smooth problems. The error value 
is calculated by squaring and summing up the error vector calculated for lsqnonlin. It searches 
more globally and finds better solutions than lsqnonlin. But it is not straight forward to match 
the settings to the current problem for example the step size. 
 
 
Surrogate optimization: surrogateopt 
The best results were obtained using surrogateopt. It is only available from Matlab 2018 or later 
and is the only algorithm designed to find the global minimum. It does not require an explicitly 
defined starting point, because the starting point is selected randomly based on the upper and 
lower boundary given. This reduces the external influence on the optimization process. When 
it cannot optimize the function any further, it will restart with a new, randomly selected starting 
point. Values can be fixed and taken out of the optimization by setting the upper and lower 
boundary equal. This is handy, as values can be fixed without rewriting the objective function. 
Generally, surrogateopt evaluates the objective function at certain points and creates a surrogate 
function of it. The calculation of the variables for the next iteration is based on this surrogate 
and is much slower compared to patternsearch or lsqnonlin. In this case it does not matter 
==PAGE:15==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
14 
 
considering the long simulation runs of GEM. As it has to create the surrogate function, it uses 
the whole range between the upper and lower boundary. 
2.7 Verification of the workflow (using a diffusion coefficient) 
I did not find a complete data set of a spontaneous imbibition experiment followed by a subsequent core 
flood. So, I generated a completely artificial dataset in CMG, based on the first fitting of the parameters 
to the data from Fathi et al. (2011). The fitting to the experimental data resulted in the curves shown in 
Figure 5 and the core flood was modelled injecting 2 cm3/hour. 
 
The curves in Figure 5 were used to generate an artificial dataset. The output of the artificial case was 
redefined as new ‘experimental data’. Then I changed the starting point or set broad boundaries 
(surrogateopt) and let Matlab search for the initial input parameters. This way it is easy to check if the 
workflow is functioning correctly, because the solution is known. The physical meaning of the values 
is not important here as this serves only as verification of the optimization and coupling process. The 
convergence of the algorithms to the right variables as well as the time needed for optimization are 
checked. For this verification I used surrogateopt, because it is the most reliable of the three algorithms 
tested. It has no default stopping criteria other than the maximum number of iterations, which is 50 times 
the number of variables including the fixed ones. As long as the maximum iterations have not been 
reached, it will continue to search for the global minimum. To check the convergence, the parameters 
for oil were fixed in this test run, the reasons for that are based on the experimental set up and are 
explained further in Results and discussion. It can be observed that certain variables converged faster 
than others. 
Table 1 Solutions for the verification case 
 
S_wi 
S_or 
C_w 
C_o 
λ_w 
λ_o 
krw_0 
kro_0 
HS solution 
0.1 
0.2 
500 
-1000 
2 
2.2 
0.1 
0.1 
HS optimized 
fixed 
0.156 
516.12 
fixed 
2.114 
fixed 
0.106 
0.192 
relative error [%] 
- 
-22.0 
3.2 
- 
5.7 
- 
5.5 
91.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LS solution 
0.1 
0.05 
800 
-1200 
2 
2.6 
0.3 
0.3 
LS optimized 
fixed 
0.060 
784.85 
fixed 
1.985 
fixed 
0.304 
0.293 
relative error [%] 
- 
20.5 
-1.9 
- 
-0.7 
- 
1.2 
-2.2 
 
 
Figure 6 Convergence of the variables versus the number of iterations (800) 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
Figure 6 shows the convergence of the variables for the test case. After the restart, most of them converge 
to the right solution in Table 1. This verifies that the optimal solution can be found using Matlab. The 
high number of variables and many local minima complicate the optimization process. The variables of 
the high salinity part converge slower than the ones for low salinity. This happens, because several 
variables are adjusted for the model to fit only a few experimental data points. The high salinity phase 
only represents a third of the data points for the whole imbibition experiment (Figure 7) and the core 
flooding synthetic data is generated using the low salinity parameters as well. Furthermore, there is the 
additional pressure drop data for the core flooding (Figure 8). The relative permeability parameters 
converge faster, because of the additional pressure data in the core flood; it also helps for the 
convergence of the capillary pressure correlation. 
 
 
Figure 7 Recovery factor with optimized variables 
 
Figure 8 Pressure with optimized variables 
==PAGE:17==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
16 
 
 
Figure 9 Comparison of exact and optimized relative permeability curves 
Figure 9 shows the relative permeability curves for the solution and optimized results. The biggest 
difference can be observed for the high salinity curves (blue). This is due to the fewer and only 
spontaneous imbibition data points, which is mostly dominated by the capillary forces. Therefore, the 
model and the objective function are more sensitive to the capillary pressure parameters. 
 
 
Figure 10 Comparison of exact and optimized capillary pressure curves 
Figure 10 shows the exact and optimized capillary pressure curves. The fit is very good for water 
saturation values lower than 50%. They diverge at higher water saturations, because those parts of the 
curves are fitted mostly to the core flooding results, for which the model is less sensitive to the capillary 
pressure parameters. For the high salinity phase (blue) the match is even worse, because there is less 
experimental data points for it, i.e. no forced imbibition test of the high salinity formation water. 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3  Results and discussion 
 
 
The high number of unknown variables results in many local minima. This complicates the search for a 
unique set of parameters. It is necessary to run a high number of simulation to fit the variables to the 
experimental data. This illustrates the initial problem very well and shows the need to implement more 
than just the core flooding data to fit a unique set of parameters.  
 
In the test case the main variables for oil in the capillary pressure correlation were fixed. This was done 
to show that it is possible to find the exact solution. In reality these values are of course unknown. It is 
hard to estimate these parameters based on a spontaneous imbibition experiments, because they mainly 
determine the negative part of the capillary pressure curve (Equation 3). The problem is that most of the 
negative part is not represented by the experimental data, because spontaneous imbibition stops, when 
the capillary pressure approaches zero. During the core flood the negative part of the capillary pressure 
curves has only a limited influence on the results, depending on the capillary number that is dictated by 
the injection rate. For high injection rates, the capillary forces have a limited effect on the measured 
pressure drop and recovery factor. Performing a test for the spontaneous imbibition oil into a water 
saturated core can provide more useful data points for this fitting procedure. 
3.1  Testing a more oil-wet case (using a diffusion coefficient) 
When testing a more oil-wet case, the variables that have a bigger influence on the negative part of the 
imbibition curve should become more decisive in the fitting process. In this run no variable except the 
irreducible water saturation was fixed. The fit is not as good as before. This is expected, because the 
algorithm has to optimize four additional variables with the same number of iterations. 
 
Table 2 Solutions for the oil-wet case 
 
S_wi 
S_or 
C_w 
C_o 
λ_w 
λ_o 
krw_0 
kro_0 
HS solution 
0.1 
0.2 
500 
-1800 
2.4 
2.4 
0.2 
0.1 
HS optimized 
fixed 
0.22 
498.77 -1588.3 
2.80 
2.20 
0.20 
0.20 
relative error [%] 
- 
10.47 
-0.25 
-11.76 
16.67 
-8.44 
1.69 
102.69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LS solution 
0.1 
0.15 
600 
-1300 
2.4 
2.4 
0.2 
0.3 
LS optimized 
fixed 
0.13 
887.29 -1721.9 
2.80 
2.31 
0.20 
0.22 
relative error [%] 
- 
-10.18 
47.88 
32.45 
16.61 
-3.83 
1.61 
-27.27 
 
==PAGE:19==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
18 
 
 
Figure 11 Recovery factor with optimized variables (oil-wet case) 
 
Figure 12 Pressure with optimized variables (oil-wet case) 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
 
Figure 13 Comparison of exact and optimized relative permeability curves (oil-wet case) 
The relative errors in Table 2 are larger than in Table 1. At the same time the recovery factor and pressure 
curve still show a reasonably good fit (Figure 11 and Figure 12). This is mainly due to the fact that the 
curves do not have the same importance over the whole time span of the experiment. For example the 
largest differences in the relative permeability correlation (Figure 13) are in the beginning for the oil 
relative permeability (𝑘𝑟𝑜0). At this point the experiment is mostly influenced by the capillary pressure 
and 𝑘𝑟𝑜0 has only a minor influence. During the core flood it changes and the relative permeability 
becomes more important. The fit improves, especially for the low salinity variables. 
 
 
Figure 14 Comparison of exact and optimized capillary pressure curves (oil-wet case) 
The same can be observed for the capillary pressure, where the largest deviation arises for water 
saturation >0.3 (Figure 14). At that saturation the spontaneous imbibition has already finished and the 
core flood started. Thus the optimization algorithm is not guaranteed to converge to the initial variables. 
There are multiple solutions with very similar results. They show the same behaviour for the part that is 
used in the experiment and diverge for the water saturation ranges for which no experimental data is 
==PAGE:21==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
20 
 
available, as the objective function is not sensitive to the change of these variables. For most 
experiments, that will be the negative part of the capillary pressure curve. 
3.2 Influence of grid spacing (using only numerical diffusion) 
Using numerical diffusion as approximation for the diffusion of the ions is computationally very 
advantageous. As the focus was on testing the optimization workflow and the coupling with Matlab, I 
used a coarse grid with a small number of cells (780) to speed up each simulation and thereby the 
optimization process. In the grid used for testing the optimization, each cell is squared with a side length 
of 2 mm (the cylindrical grid is radial-symmetric). For any numerical simulation the grid spacing is an 
important factor. Therefore, the convergence with grid refinement was investigated. As the core flood 
was modelled one dimensional, the grid refinement is more decisive for the imbibition part of the 
experiment. For the two refined grids, the cell length is halved for each grid, going from 2 mm to 0.5 
mm cell length. The total number of blocks increases also, but to stay within the limits of the educational 
GEM license (10000 cells max), I had to coarsen the grid around the core sector. So, the total number 
of blocks is only 780, 2730 and 5800. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15 Refined grids used for testing numerical diffusion. Cell length 2 mm (upper left), 1 mm (upper right) and 0.5 mm in 
the lower picture. Core sector is marked in blue. 
First the influence of grid refinement on the recovery factor is checked. For the first phase of the 
imbibition, the imbibing brine has the same ionic composition as the initial formation water. The 
influence of the grid spacing during this phase is negligible (Figure 16). They reach the same recovery 
factor. A new brine is injected on day 14 for 12 hours. It has a different ionic composition than the initial 
formation water. In this second phase of imbibition, the grid has a significant influence on the recovery 
factor. The finer the grid, the less oil is recovered from the core because of imbibition. 
 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
 
Figure 16 Influence of the grid spacing on the recovery factor 
The difference in the recovery factors is based on the different imbibition speed of the new aqueous 
species into the core sector. The most important aqueous species is SO42-, because it is used as interpolant 
between the high and low salinity curves. For the first imbibition phase there is no SO42-, but Mg2+ 
generally shows the same behaviour and can be used as a substitute (Figure 17). For the first imbibition 
phase, the total amount of Mg2+ shows no grid dependence, because it flows into the core sector with 
the aqueous phase. Diffusion does not have an influence during this phase. However there is a clear 
trend for the second imbibition phase. For finer grids, the amount of Mg2+ and SO42- increases much 
slower. As only numerical diffusion is used, all aqueous species exhibit exactly the same behaviour and 
trends for the different grids. SO42- is used as interpolant, so the different amounts of it in the core sector 
lead to a lower recovery factor for finer grids. This behaviour can be explained by both the lower 
numerical diffusion for the finer grids and the lower imbibing flux of water due to the lower imbibition 
rate (which is also reduced due to the lower concentration of the ions used as interpolants). 
 
 
Figure 17 Influence of the grid spacing (2 mm to 0.5 mm cell length) on total mole of Mg2+ and SO42- in the core over the 
course of the whole experiment. 
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
recovery factor [%]
time [days]
780 blocks
2730 blocks
5800 blocks
0
0.0005
0.001
0.0015
0.002
0.0025
0.003
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
total moles in core sector
time [days]
Mg 2mm
Mg 1mm
Mg 0.5 mm
SO4 2mm
SO4 1mm
SO4 0.5 mm
==PAGE:23==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
22 
 
When the imbibing brine is the same as the formation water, the effect of the grid is negligible. The 
reduced amount of SO42- in the core sector is due to the reduced numerical diffusion for the finer grid. 
When diffusion is slower, the fitted capillary pressure curve will be much more water-wet to recover 
the same oil. Compared to the simulations with the diffusion coefficient, the finer grids result in very 
slow diffusion and thus in very high capillary pressure curves for the modified salinity brine. The 
approach of using numerical diffusion as approximation can only be recommended for very coarse 
grids, with caution. 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Conclusions 
 
 
Optimizing the relative permeability and capillary pressure parameters for formation and modified 
salinity water flooding by fitting a two-phase reactive flow model to spontaneous and forced imbibition 
data could be achieved by coupling CMG-GEM and Matlab. 
 
For the simulation of the spontaneous imbibition tests, the injection of the modified salinity brines into 
the highly permeable surrounding space of a core in combination with the geochemical model slows 
down the numerical solver in GEM. The first imbibition phase with formation water takes about 20 
seconds to calculate, while the rest can take up to 30 times longer for a similar or 2-3 times longer 
experimental time (using numerical diffusion only). However, this is the only way to switch from 
formation to modified-salinity brine in the model. 
 
The simulation is very sensitive to the diffusion of the interpolant species. For all aqueous species it can 
be approximated by using the numerical diffusion. This gives a computational advantage but makes the 
diffusion very grid dependent, especially for low salinity flooding. The issue of which grid describes 
the process more accurately could not be fully resolved. Compared to the results with a diffusion 
coefficient (5×10-7cm2/s), the refined grids show very slow diffusion. There is only little influence of 
the grid on the first imbibition phase, when the ionic concentrations are the same. Thus, the 
simplification of using numerical diffusion can only be recommended for very coarse grids or when 
interpolation based on aqueous species is not used. One recommended method for obtaining a solution 
to serve as the truth for later comparison is to run the simulation on a very fine grid and small time-
steps, using the real values of the molecular diffusion coefficients. This also requires a higher order 
numerical scheme to minimize the numerical diffusion. 
 
The coupling with Matlab works well and is reliable. The optimization algorithm (surrogateopt) has a 
solid documentation and converges to the right solution, if theoretically possible. Some parameters are 
not properly reflected by the experimental data, which complicates the fitting process for those variables. 
The same problem arises, when low and high salinity imbibition phases are not evenly distributed over 
the experimental data points. Weighting the error differently could decrease both of these problems.  
 
As the correlation curves do not have the same importance in every stage of the experimental set up, 
there is the possibility that multiple solutions exist. The optimized variables can result in a close fit for 
the positive capillary pressure curve but might diverge for negative pressures. This may lead to 
inaccuracies in the future, when the correlations are used out of this verified range. 
 
The history match is much better for the variables that have influence on two different stages of the 
experiment. In this case the low salinity parameters are influencing the spontaneous imbibition 
experiment and the subsequent core flood. This gives much more data to fit the variables and results in 
a better fit. This shows the necessity to use more than one experiment to get a unique set of parameters. 
==PAGE:25==
Numerical analysis of forced and spontaneous imbibition of modified-salinity water in chalk 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 References 
 
 
Brooks, R. H., & Corey, A. T. (1964). Hydraulic properties of porous media. 
Egbogah, E. O., & Ng, J. T. (1990). An improved temperature-viscosity correlation for crude oil 
systems. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering (Vol. 5). 
Fathi, S. J., Austad, T., & Strand, S. (2011). Effect of water-extractable carboxylic acids in crude oil on 
wettability in carbonates. Energy and Fuels, 25(6), 2587–2592. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef200302d 
Hiorth, A., Madland, M. V, & Cathles, L. M. (2010). The Impact of Pore Water Chemistry on Carbonate 
Surface 
Charge 
and 
Oil 
Wettability. 
Transp 
Porous 
Med, 
85, 
1–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11242-010-9543-6 
Jerauld, G. R., Lin, C. Y., Webb, K. J., & Seccombe, J. C. (2006). Modeling Low-Salinity 
Waterflooding. In SPE Annual Technical Conference (p. 14). https://doi.org/10.2118/102239-MS 
Kazemi, A., & Jerauld, G. R. (2019). Modeling wettability change in sandstones and carbonates using 
a surface-complexation-based method. IOR 2019 - 20th European Symposium on Improved Oil 
Recovery, (2012). https://doi.org/10.3997/2214-4609.201900157 
Qiao, C., Johns, R. T., & Li, L. (2016). Modeling Low-Salinity Waterflooding in Chalk and Limestone 
Reservoirs. Energy and Fuels, 30(2), 884–895. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b02456 
Skjaeveland, S. M., Siqveland, L. M., Kjosavik, A., College, S., Thomas, W. L. H., & Virnovsky, G. A. 
(2000). Capillary Pressure Correlation for Mixed-Wet Reservoirs. SPE Reservoir Evaluation & 
Engineering, 3(1), 60–67. https://doi.org/10.2118/60900-PA 
 
