==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering (Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence)
Detection of new states encoun-
tered by a reinforcement learning
agent
Lukáš Bátrla (s180012)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning is an active area of research where researchers invent ap-
proaches that prevent any catastrophic behaviour of the agents. One approach is to
incorporate a human in the learning process. However, the current solutions are still not
perfect, as they need to cover many different aspects to be considered completely safe.
The focus of this thesis it to solve the problem with distributional shift that happens
when the agent encounters a novel state that is different from everything that the agent
have seen before, as such state might present a danger for the agent.
We investigate how Variational Auto-Encoders can be used to discover such states
by using them as a technique for anomaly detection. This combination of methods can
then be integrated into more general safe reinforcement learning frameworks like HIRL.
We found that by using the Variational Auto-Encoder model for anomaly detection,
it is possible to detect the novel states that come from different distribution than the
states on which the model was trained. Therefore, such model can be directly integrated
into HIRL, to overcome the problem of distributional shift.
The code accompanying this project is available in the author’s GitLab repository1
hosted at DTU.
1https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/s180012/master-thesis
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, February 1, 2020
Lukáš Bátrla (s180012)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Professor, Dr. Ole Winther for supervising this thesis and also for
his role as the teacher of the Deep Learning course which significantly contributed to
my knowledge in this area.
I would also like to thank my other supervisor, Ph.D. candidate Valentin Victor
David Julien Lievin, for his guidance throughout the whole semester and our discussions
about generative models that helped me to fully understand the details behind these
models.
Furthermore, I would like to thank David Janků from the Czech Association for
Effective Altruism who helped me in the beginning when I was looking for ideas for the
thesis. Especially, I would like to thank him for introducing me to William Saunders,
the author of HIRL, who I want to thank for suggesting the project ideas relevant to
safe reinforcement learning, which lead to the final idea behind this thesis.
Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends, and my girlfriend for being very
supportive throughout my whole studies and especially during the months I worked on
the thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Reinforcement Learning
3
2.1
Types of machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Theoretical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Artificial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Implementation of DQN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Variational Auto-Encoder
21
3.1
Generative Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Variational Auto-Encoder Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Implementation of VAE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Anomaly Detection
35
4.1
Theoretical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Deep anomaly detection with VAE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Novel State Detection in Reinforcement Learning
45
5.1
The basic framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Detecting catastrophic actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Discussion
49
6.1
DQN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Variational Auto-Encoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Variational Auto-Encoder for anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.4
Anomaly detection for safe reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Future work
53
7.1
More complex environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Model complexity and hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.3
Semi-supervised generative models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.4
Active learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Conclusion
57
A Derivation of marginal likelihood from KL divergence
59
B Implementation of the evidence lower bound
61
C Implementation details for convolutional layers in VAE models
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
As many prognoses suggest, artificial intelligence will play increasingly bigger role in our
lives in the future. From robots that will carry many unpopular tasks in households, to
intelligent systems that will be able to run a full check on a person to identify potential
diseases. Already now there are many technological applications using artificial intelli-
gence. Take drones for example. Those unmanned aircrafts of various sizes are able to
stabilize themselves in the air, or even coordinate with other drones to avoid collision.
They can learn to follow a path in the forest, or even to follow a person. Similarly,
self-driving cars can learn to drive in heavy traffic as well as on a country road.
Even though such systems can be hard coded to some extent, we can consider them
autonomous in their learning. One problem that arises when autonomous systems learn
to perform a task, is how to make them to learn it safely. In the case of self-driving car,
we surely do not want the system to find out that driving into a ditch is a bad idea just
by trial and error. Such approach could easily cause a lot of damage, not only for the
car, but for anything that stands in its way. For this reason, the self-driving systems
make use of human knowledge by incorporating a human driver that sits in the car while
the car is learning. In case of any dangerous or unwanted actions, the human driver can
intervene and prevent a catastrophe. This approach is similar to how humans learn to
drive a car. For students in driving schools, there is a licensed driver in the car who can
intervene in case of any dangerous situation.
The problem with trial and error is not restricted to self-driving cars. Self-driving
systems are just a tip of an iceberg called reinforcement learning.
The whole idea
behind reinforcement learning is that a system learns by trial and error.
Therefore,
while learning, any such system poses a risk of performing some form of catastrophic
actions that might cause unwanted damage.
With increasing awareness of safety in artificial intelligence, the need to ensure that
the designed solutions are prone to any harmful decisions or misuses has increased as well.
We can, therefore, find various theoretical frameworks that focus on solving the safety
issues. One of the frameworks that we will discuss in this thesis is Human-in-the-Loop
reinforcement learning with its variations introduced in [Abe+17; Chr+17; Sau+17].
1.1
Objective
The objective of this thesis is to set up a machine learning algorithm that is capable
of detecting situations when a reinforcement learning agent is about to encounter a
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
new catastrophic state. The new catastrophic (or maybe just undesirable) state can be
thought of as a scene that the agent has not seen before, and that might or might not
poses a risk for the agent or its environment.
We will start by creating a model that can detect previously unseen scenes. For that
purpose, we will explore generative models and anomaly detection, and investigate the
combination of both as a tool to make decisions about novelty of a particular scene.
Later, we propose an architecture of incorporating the model into a safe reinforcement
learning setup. Specifically, we take the approach from Human Intervention Reinforce-
ment Learning (HIRL) [Sau+17] and attempt to incorporate our detection model into
HIRL.
1.2
Structure
To achieve our objective, we will focus on three different areas of machine learning. We
will start with introducing reinforcement learning in the context of other types of machine
learning. It will provide us with the necessary background on self learning agents. The
other area will cover generative models which have several useful applications not only
for reinforcement learning.
They will help us extract underlying structures in high
dimensional data like images.
Finally, the third area will be focused on discovering
unseen or corrupted data. In the reinforcement learning concept, we want to use this
ability to make a qualified decision on safety of a particular scene that the agent sees.
Therefore, we will combine the knowledge from those three areas to solve a more general
problem.
As the range of tasks varies a lot, we will start by taking small steps. In each of the
areas, we will introduce a series of simplified problems that we will try to solve.
Firstly, we start by introducing reinforcement learning in the context of machine
learning.
We explain what artificial neural networks are, and how they are used in
deep reinforcement learning. We then implement and evaluate one of the core deep
reinforcement learning algorithms called DQN [Mni+13].
Secondly, we introduce generative models. We then focus on one specific type of
generative models called Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [KW13]. We then use VAE
to learn complex representations of various image datasets.
Thirdly, we investigate the methods for anomaly detection. Using our knowledge
from the chapter about VAE, we experiment with the VAE as a model for anomaly
detection. We provide results documenting the usefulness of the combination of VAE
and anomaly detection.
Finally, we propose a framework for incorporating anomaly detection into safe rein-
forcement learning. We focus on an existing framework for safe reinforcement learning
called Human-in-the-Loop, and suggest an extension that would make the framework
more robust.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Reinforcement Learning
First, we introduce reinforcement learning (RL) and its position within the context of
machine learning. Then, we take a detailed look at various reinforcement learning ap-
proaches. We also introduce artificial neural networks without which RL (and especially
deep RL) would not be as widely applicable as it nowaday is. We also introduce some
examples of environments suitable for reinforcement learning tasks and we conclude the
chapter with experiments that show how a particular model performs in these environ-
ments.
2.1
Types of machine learning
There are three main approaches to machine learning – supervised, unsupervised and
reinforcement learning. We will briefly introduce all of them in the following sections.
2.1.1
Supervised learning
An approach where machine learning model has access to observations and expected
outputs (labels), is known as supervised learning. The observations are used to teach the
model a proper mapping of some underlying function. The model predicts the output
of the mapping for each observation. It learns to improve itself by getting feedback
(supervision) in a form of a cost function that describes how much is the predicted
output different from the true output.
2.1.2
Unsupervised learning
If a model does only have access to the observations but not to the true labels, it
learns in an unsupervised manner. In a situation like this, we might be interested to
cluster the observations to discover some structure in the data. Another application of
unsupervised learning is reducing dimensionality of the input data in order to find a
simpler representation.
There are many more problems that unsupervised learning helps to solve. We will
look closer on generative modeling, especially using Variational Auto-Encoder, in Chap-
ter 3.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Reinforcement Learning
2.1.3
Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is very different from supervised and unsupervised learning.
In RL, an agent performs actions in an environment. By interacting with the environ-
ment, the agent receives rewards as indications of how good (or bad) those interactions
were. Therefore, we can understand RL as learning by trial and error. We will introduce
RL formally and in more details in the following section.
2.2
Theoretical background
Reinforcement learning is a process in which an agent tries to achieve a goal by inter-
acting with its environment. The environment is in a state s ∈S, where S is called
the state space and represents the set of all possible states in the environment. The
agent interacts with the environment by performing actions a ∈A, where A is called
the action space and represents the set of all possible actions. By performing action
a in state s, the environment is transformed to a new state s′, based on a transition
function T . The transition function T defines the probability of the next state, given
the current state and the action. Finally, by performing the action a in state s, the
agent receives a feedback from the environment in form of a reward r given by a reward
function R. Moreover, the RL framework assumes that the next state s′ depends solely
on the current state s and the current action a but not on any previous states or actions.
This last assumption is referred to as the Markov property.
Given the above, RL can be described as Markov decision process (MDP) represented
by M = (S, A, T , R, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A ×
S →[0, 1] is the transition function, R : S × A →R is the reward function, and γ is a
discount rate. We will discuss the purpose of the discount rate below.
As [SB18] describes it, at each timestep t the agent acts as to maximize the expected
(future) return Rt associated with action at. The expected return is defined as
Rt = rt + rt+1 + rt+2 + . . . + rT =
T−t
∑
k=0
rt+k,
where T is the total number of timesteps.
A task where the state is reset after T
timesteps is called the episodic task. When T = ∞, it is called the continuing task.
Especially for the case of continuing tasks, it is useful to add a discount that implies
the idea that future rewards are less important than the current reward. The expected
return is then defined as
Rt = rt + γrt+1 + γ2rt+2 + . . . =
∞
∑
k=0
γkrt+k,
where γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount rate. By using γ < 1, we can prevent the future return
from being infinite.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Theoretical background
5
The overall objective of the agent is to find a policy π∗that maximizes the expected
return from all states. A policy π(a|s) represents the probability of action a given state
s. The optimal policy π∗is defined as π∗= arg maxπ E [R|π].
2.2.1
Types of RL algorithms
In general, a RL algorithm is iterative process, where each iteration consists of three
main steps:
1. run the policy to collect data,
2. evaluate the policy,
3. and improve the policy based on the evaluation.
There are two main classes of RL methods — model-based and model-free methods.
In model-based methods, the underlying model of the environment is learned and then
used to reach the objective. The algorithms usually learn the transition function T as
well as the reward function R. On the other hand, model-free methods do not learn the
underlying model of the environment. As our intention is not to learn the model, we
will focus on model-free methods in the rest of the chapter.
As [Aru+17] describes, model-free methods are usually divided into three categories
— methods based on value functions, methods based on policy search, and hybrid meth-
ods using both value functions and policy search (also known as actor-critic). We will
describe each one in the following subsections.
2.2.1.1
Value-based methods
To start, we will introduce two types of value functions — state-value function and
state-action-value function.
The state-value function V π(s) represents the expected return given that the agent
starts in state s and follows policy π [Aru+17]. V π(s) is formally defined as
V π(s) = E [R|s, π] .
Given the optimal state-value function V ∗(s), the optimal policy π∗can be understood as
performing action at at state st that maximizes the expected return Est+1∼T (st+1|st,at) [V ∗(st+1)].
However, in model-free methods, the transition function T is unknown.
The problem above can be solved by state-action-value function, also known as qual-
ity or Q-function, Qπ(s, a) [Aru+17]. In the case of Q-function, we are given both state
s and action a. The policy π is then followed from the next state onward. Formally,
Qπ(s, a) is defined as
Qπ(s, a) = E [R|s, a, π] .
The optimal policy π∗is then represented by performing action a∗at state s that
maximizes Qπ(s, a). Formally, at state s, we select action a∗such as π∗(s) = a∗=
arg maxa Qπ(s, a).
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Reinforcement Learning
2.2.1.2
Policy search methods
As [Aru+17] describes, compared to value-based methods, policy search methods work
with the optimal policy π∗directly. They often use an iterative process to improve the
parameters θ of a policy πθ in order to maximize the expected return E [R|θ]. There
are two ways to update the parameters – gradient-based and gradient-free optimization.
The advantage of gradient-free methods is that they can be applied to non-differentiable
policies. In gradient-based methods, the expected return is estimated using Monte Carlo
sampling.
However, the gradients cannot pass through the samples.
Therefore, the
gradients are instead estimated, which is referred to as the REINFORCE rule [Wil92]. As
[Aru+17] further explains, the gradient of an expectation over a function f of a random
variable X with respect to parameters θ is, using the REINFORCE rule, computed as
∇θEX [f(X; θ)] = EX [f(X; θ)∇θ log p(X)] .
2.2.1.3
Actor-critic methods
By combining the previous approaches, we get actor-critic methods. The actor is repre-
sented by the policy, whereas the critic is represented by the value function. As [Aru+17]
describes, the role of the critic is to provide the actor with feedback (in form of a tempo-
ral difference (TD) error) based on the actor’s selected action and the reward received
from the environment. The TD error is given as δ = r + Qπ(s′, a′) −Qπ(s, a), where s′
denotes the next state and a′ the next action given as a′ ∼π(a′|s′). δ is then used to
update the actor but also the critic itself. The actor then receives new state from the
environment and TD error from the critic, based on which it chooses its next action.
2.2.2
Deep reinforcement learning
In the past, it was computationally impossible to solve high-dimensional RL problems.
With the advances in deep learning, however, the high-dimensional problems can be
solved by combining the original RL algorithms with deep learning methods.
In this thesis, we worked with one of the most basic algorithms implementing Q-
function, called DQN (see Section 2.4.2 for detailed description of the algorithm). How-
ever, before diving into deep reinforcement learning, we need to introduce artificial neural
networks, the fundamental element of modern deep learning algorithms.
2.3
Artificial Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks, commonly also known as neural networks, are popular tool
for solving problems in many domains. They are composed of neurons organized in
layers, with connections between neurons that transfer signal from one neuron to another.
Conceptually, artificial neural networks take inspiration from biological neural networks
in a brain, but in practice both systems are very different.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Artificial Neural Networks
7
In this section, we will introduce the basic concept of artificial neural networks. We
start by introducing perceptrons, followed by various activation functions.
We also
introduce two common concepts — fully connected neural network and convolutional
neural network. Finally, we introduce two optimization methods.
2.3.1
Perceptron
Perceptrons are the simplest case of artificial neurons. The input to a perceptron is a
binary vector and the output is a single binary number [Nie18]. An example perceptron
can look like in Figure 2.1 where x1, x2, and x3 are binary input values, w1, w2, and w3
represent importance weights, and b is a bias term. The weights are real numbers that
define how much important each input is. The bias term is then used as a threshold for
generating the binary output.
Figure 2.1: An example of artificial neuron with three inputs x1, x2, x3, three connec-
tions (weights) w1, w2, w3, a bias term b, and a single output.
The output of the perceptron is calculated as
output =



0
if w · x + b ≤0
1
if w · x + b > 0 ,
where for m inputs, w·x is the dot product ∑m
i=1 wixi. In our example with three inputs,
w · x = ∑3
i=1 wixi.
2.3.2
Activation functions
Since perceptron is very limited type of artificial neuron, given the constraints on binary
inputs and binary output, most neural networks use different type of neurons which
allows the input xi ∈[0, 1] [Nie18]. The output is then computed as output = ϕ(wx + b)
where ϕ is so called activation function.
To avoid clutter while introducing specific activation functions, we use the following
substitution:
z = wx + b
Therefore, by writing ϕ(z) in this section we mean ϕ(wx + b).
In the next paragraphs, we introduce three common choices for activation functions
— sigmoid function, hyperbolic tangent function, and rectified linear unit.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Reinforcement Learning
Figure 2.2: Sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, and ReLU activation functions.
2.3.2.1
Sigmoid function
Sigmoid is a non-linear function that maps real-valued input into [0, 1] interval.
As
the output is in range between 0 and 1, sigmoid function can be used to represent
probabilities or even pixel intensities. Moreover, sigmoid is a smooth function with easily
calculated derivative which makes it convenient to use in neural networks. Sigmoid was,
therefore, a very popular activation function in the machine learning community before
the introduction of rectified linear units.
Formally, sigmoid function ϕ : R →[0, 1] is defined as
ϕ(z) =
1
1 + e−z .
It is depicted in the left subplot in Figure 2.2.
2.3.2.2
Hyperbolic tangent function
Hyperbolic tangent, usually abbreviated as tanh, is a function similar to sigmoid but
returning values in interval [−1, 1].
Formally, tanh function ϕ : R →[−1, 1] is defined as
ϕ(z) = ez −e−z
ez + e−z .
The tanh function is depicted in the middle subplot in Figure 2.2.
2.3.2.3
Rectified linear unit function
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) function was introduced by [Aga18]. It maps real-valued
input to values in interval [0, +∞). It maps all non-positive values into zero while for
positive input values it behaves as identity function. ReLU is a preferred activation
function in various applications of neural networks especially because it is less compu-
tationally expensive than sigmoid and tanh activations. It also solves the problem with
vanishing gradients (neurons in former layers learn much slowly than neurons in the final
layers) so that learning is more equally distributed over layers.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Artificial Neural Networks
9
Formally, ReLU function ϕ : R →[0, +∞) is defined as
ϕ(z) = max(0, z).
The ReLU function is depicted in the right subplot in Figure 2.2.
2.3.3
Feedforward Neural Network
A feedforward neural network is a special type of an artificial neural network in which
the output from one layer is passed as input to the consequent layer and never backwards.
An example of such network is in Figure 2.3 where the signal from the input layer is
passed into the hidden layer and the output from the hidden layer is passed into the
output layer. Feedforward neural networks can have one or more hidden layers. The
number of hidden layers defines the depth of the network.
Figure 2.3: An example of a feedforward network with input layer, one hidden layer,
and output layer.
As [GBC16] explains, the aim of a feedforward neural network is to approximate some
function f ∗. In a classification problem, feedforward neural networks try to approximate
function y = f ∗(x) by learning parameters θ for which a mapping ˆy = f(x; θ), defined
by the network, provides the best approximation of f ∗(x).
In the following sections, we will introduce two most commonly used types of feed-
forward neural networks — multi-layer perceptron and convolutional neural networks.
2.3.3.1
Multi-layer perceptron
In multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network, every two adjacent layers are fully connected.
It means that every neuron in one layer has connection to every neuron in the adjacent
layer. An example of MLP network is depicted in Figure 2.3.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Reinforcement Learning
The MLP network is composed from functions representing hidden layers. For a
network of depth three, f ∗(x) is being approximated by chaining three functions f (1),
f (2), and f (3) into f(x) = f (3)(f (2)(f (1)(x))).
The output of the i-th layer (in MLP with L layers) is defined as
ai = f (i) (
Wiai−1 + bi)
,
where i ∈[2, L] and a1 = x.
Function f (i) then represents a non-linear activation
function. The activation function of each layer can be different.
2.3.3.2
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional neural network (CNN) are designed in a way that makes them able to
capture spatial information. This is especially important in tasks where we work with
images. The ability to capture spatial patterns makes CNN more convenient to work
with images than MLP network.
Compared to MLP where each neuron receives input from all neurons in the previous
layer, in CNN only a subset of inputs (called local receptive field) is connected to a neuron
[Nie18]. An example receptive field is depicted in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: An example of a local receptive field that maps a local subset of input
neurons into a single neuron in the first hidden layer. Image taken from
[Nie18].
Another property of CNN is that it uses shared weights and biases. The weights and
bias are shared across all local receptive fields in a single layer. Therefore, the network
is learning to capture one feature in different locations across the input space.
Convolution layers typically also employ a pooling function. As [GBC16] explains,
a pooling function calculates the summary statistics of the nearby outputs. Therefore,
it further decreases the dimension of the output. There are various pooling functions,
like max pooling which takes the maximum value of a selected region of neurons in
the previous layer, or average pooling which uses the average of the selected region of
neurons.
Finally, CNN can be composed of one or more convolutional layers followed by zero
or more dense layers.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Artificial Neural Networks
11
2.3.4
Optimization algorithms
In order to learn the optimal parameters θ of our approximation function f(x; θ) that
gives the best approximation of the function f ∗(x), we need to use some optimization
algorithm.
In this section, we introduce two optimization algorithms — gradient descent with
its less computationally expensive variant called stochastic gradient descent, and Adam.
2.3.4.1
Gradient descent
Gradient descent is one of the basic optimization algorithms used to optimize the weights
and biases in neural networks.
As [Nie18] explains, gradient descent algorithm optimizes the parameters of a neural
network by minimizing a cost function. The cost function, also known as loss or objec-
tive function, varies depending on the objective of the neural network. Given the cost
function C(θ), the parameters are updated in each iteration by computing the gradient
∇C and updating the parameters θ as
θ′ = θ −η∇C,
where η represents learning rate which is a hyper-parameter that is small and positive.
2.3.4.2
Stochastic gradient descent
Computing the cost function C for all training samples can be very expensive, espe-
cially when our dataset has thousands or even millions of data points. For that reason,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) does not calculate the whole C but only estimates it.
To explain the approach by which SGD estimates C, we need to first explain a term
mini-batch. Mini-batch is a group of m randomly selected data points x1, x2, . . . , xm.
As [Nie18] explains, the SGD algorithm approximates the value of gradient ∇C over
the whole dataset by averaging the sum of gradients in each data point from the mini-
batch. Formally, the estimation can be written as
∇C ≈1
m
m
∑
i=1
∇Cxi.
2.3.4.3
Adam
Another popular gradient-based optimization algorithm is Adam (name derived from
adaptive moment estimation) that was introduced in 2017 by [KB14]. Adam is fast and
accurate and can outperform other optimization algorithms in various tasks which is the
reason of its recent popularity within the deep learning community.
Compared to SGD, Adam uses individual adaptive learning rates for each network
parameter. The learning rates are computed using estimates of first and second moments
of the gradients [KB14].
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Reinforcement Learning
2.3.5
Backpropagation
In order to use one of the optimization algorithms described in section 2.3.4, we need
to calculate the gradients of the loss function with respect to weights and biases in
the network. An efficient way to calculate the gradients is to use the backpropagation
algorithm.
The backpropagation algorithm is composed of two parts — forward pass and back-
ward pass. In the forward pass, the input is passed through the networks, resulting in an
output. The output is used to calculate the output error using the specified cost function.
In the backward pass, we take the value of the error and calculate the gradients with
respect to weights and biases in the last layer. Then, using chain rule, we can calculate
the gradients of the previous layers until we reach the first layer.
Formally, as described by [Nie18], in the forward pass we set the first activation layer
a1 = x. Let us define a substitution zl = Wlal−1+bl. Then for each layer l = 2, 3, . . . , L
we compute
al = ϕ
(
zl)
,
where ϕ is the chosen activation function. Finally, we compute the output error as
δL = ∇aC ⊙ϕ′(zL).
The backward pass consist of backpropagating the error, which [Nie18] formally
describes for each layer l = L −1, L −2, . . . , 2 as calculating the error vectors
δl =
((
Wl+1)T δl+1
)
⊙ϕ′(zl),
where ⊙is the elementwise product. The gradient of the cost function C with respect to
a single weight wl
jk and the gradient of C with respect to a single bias bl
j are respectively
given as
∂C
∂wl
jk
= al−1
k δl
j
and
∂C
∂bl
j
= δl
j.
With the formulas for computing gradients, we can use one of the optimization
methods to update the weights and biases in the network accordingly. Therefore, make
the network to learn to optimize the parameters.
2.4
Implementation of DQN
In this section, we start by introducing Q-learning as the basis for DQN. After that, we
derive the general form of the DQN framework.
2.4.1
Q-learning
As for all value-based RL methods, the goal of Q-learning is to learn the optimal policy.
As the name suggests, the main idea behind Q-learning is to learn the optimal action-
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Implementation of DQN
13
value function Q∗(s, a). We start by creating a Q-table Q[s, a] to store the values of
Q(s, a) for all combinations of states s ∈S and actions a ∈A.
As [SB18] explains, we start by initializing the Q-table with some initial values and
set Q(terminal-state, ·) = 0. In each episode, the Q-value is updated in each step of the
episode as follows:
1. Sample action a using policy derived from Q.
2. Get reward r and next state s′ by taking the action a.
3. Update Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α [r + γ maxa Q(s′, a) −Q(s, a)], where α stands for
learning rate and maxa Q(s′, a) is estimate of optimal future Q-value.
4. Move to the next state s ←s′.
5. Repeat steps 1. to 4. until reaching the terminal state.
When we have an infinite number of steps, the above approach ensures that Q(s, a)
converges to the optimal Q-function Q∗(s, a) [SB18].
2.4.2
DQN
Since the Q-function is calculated for each state separately, the Q-learning algorithm
described above (Section 2.4.1) is impractical (memory- or computation-wise), especially
when the number of state-action combinations is large [Mni+13]. For that reason, the
optimal Q-function is often estimated by a parameterized function Q(a, s; θ) ≈Q∗(s, a).
While approximating the Q-function, for example, by a neural network, we might run
into some challenges that are common for RL problems, like that the states are not
respecting the i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed) principle. For example,
since there is a relation between two consequent states, the neural network trained on
batches of consequent transitions may overfit to non-optimal Q-function.
One way to avoid having a training batch full of consequent transitions is to create
a large pool with transitions from different steps and episodes, and to sample our batch
from that pool. This approach is called experience replay. At each time step, the current
transition is stored into the pool which is called experience memory. To update the Q-
function, we take a batch of random samples from the experience memory and use it to
compute the new value of the Q-function.
While training the Q-function in iterations, its value changes with every update.
This might result in unstable behavior of the network. A way to avoid this is to use
a target network.
The target network is updated less often than the main network
so it provides more stable estimations of the Q-function. The target network is used
to calculate the expected next Q-function which is then compared with the current Q-
function computed by the main network to measure a loss function which is then used to
compute the gradients in the main network. After every T steps, we copy the parameters
from the main network to the target network.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Reinforcement Learning
Deep Q-Network [Mni+13] (DQN) uses both experience replay and target network
which results in good performance in many RL tasks. The algorithm, as defined by
[Mni+13], can be found in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Deep Q-learning with Experience Replay (replicated from [Mni+13])
1: Initialize replay memory D to capacity N
2: Initialize action-value function Q with random weights
3: for episode = 1 to M do
4:
Initialize sequence s1 = {x1} and preprocessed sequence ϕ1 = ϕ(s1)
5:
for t = 1 to T do
6:
With probability ϵ,
select a random action at.
Otherwise,
select
at = maxa Q∗(ϕ(st), a; θ)
7:
Perform action at and observe reward rt and image xt+1
8:
Set st+1 = st, at, xt+1 and preprocess ϕt+1 = ϕ(st+1)
9:
Store transition (ϕt, at, rt, ϕt+1) in D
10:
Sample random minibatch of transitions (ϕj, aj, rj, ϕj+1)
11:
Set yj = rj for terminal ϕj+1. Otherwise, set yj = rj + γ maxa′ Q(ϕj+1, a′; θ)
12:
Perform a gradient descent step on (yj −Q(ϕj, aj; θ))2
13:
end for
14: end for
2.5
Experiments
Our experimental setup consists of training a DQN model on two environments of which
one was created for the purposes of this thesis while the other one is a standard publicly
available environment for RL. Our goal is to learn the optimal policy regarding each
task.
2.5.1
Environments
2.5.1.1
Gridworld environment
Gridworld is a simple environment that consists of two-dimensional grid of cells. One
example that gridworlds are fundamental environments, especially when performing va-
riety of experiments, is in AI safety. Take an agent whose task is to cross a bridge across
a river as described in [Lei+17]. It is very easy to construct the environment such that
some of the grid cells represent the bridge, other ones that represent the river, and one
that represents the agent. Setting the possible actions the agent can perform, and the
transition functions is in such case very straight forward.
Our implementation of gridworld environment represents a 5×5 grid where the agent
occupies exactly one cell. The goal for the agent is to find a path to a goal cell. To
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Experiments
15
(a) 5 × 5 gridworld
(b) Pong
Figure 2.5: Examples of RL environments. (a) Initial setup in 5 × 5 gridworld en-
vironment.
The agent is located in the top-left cell, the goal is in the
bottom-right cell, and the red cell represents lava. (b) Pong contains two
paddles, one ball, top and bottom walls, and a score indicator (in the upper
part).
make the task a bit more challenging, we include one cell with lava. The agent starts
each game in the top-left corner. The goal is located in the bottom-right corner. The
lava is placed randomly in one of the remaining cells. For the initial state setup, see
Figure 2.5(a).
The movement of the agent in the environment is given by four possible actions (up,
down, left, right) that together form the action space. Each action moves the agent
one cell in the action’s direction. In case the agent is in one of the edge cells and selects
an action that would move it outside of the grid, its position remains unchanged as if
the agent would not perform any action. However, even in such case, the agent gets a
reward for selecting the action.
The gridworld task is episodic. That means the environment is reset for every new
episode. The episode can be terminated in several ways. The first one is when the agent
reaches the goal. The second one is when the agent steps into lava. The third one is
when the agent performed 100 actions and did not reach any of the two final states.
Especially the last condition helps the agent from getting stuck in a loop of transitions
that do not lead to any of the final states.
The way we want the agent to act is given by the reward system which we defined
as follows:
• Reaching the goal is rewarded by r = 0.
• Stepping on lava is penalized by r = −50.
• Every other move is rewarded by r = −1.
In this setting, a reward is connected directly to the preceding action which makes it
easier to track ”good” and ”bad” actions.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Reinforcement Learning
Our gridworld is deterministic environment. Therefore, the transition from state s
by performing action a always results in the same next state s′ as well as the same
reward r.
We distinguish two setups. The first one is a gridworld where lava is always rendered
at the same place. In the second setup, lava is rendered randomly in the grid at the
beginning of each episode. We refer to the static lava case as static-lava whereas to the
environment with randomly positioned lava as random-lava.
2.5.1.2
Pong environment
Pong is one of the famous Atari 2600 games, where the player scores a goal by getting
the ball behind its opponent. The ball bounces in between two paddles of which one is
controlled by the player while the other one is controlled by the opponent (an algorithm
that is part of the game). A screen shot from the game is depicted in Figure 2.5(b).
For our experiments, we use a specific PongNoFrameskip-v4 environment imple-
mented in the Arcade Learning Environment [Bel+13]. PongNoFrameskip-v4 is accessi-
ble through open-source library called OpenAI Gym [Bro+16].
In Pong, the states are represented as 210 × 160 RGB images (see Figure 2.5(b) for
an example of a state). The agent controls the right paddle with three possible actions
(up, down, no-action) that moves the paddle in the particular direction.
The rewards in Pong are distributed as follows:
• Winning a game is rewarded by r = +1.
• Losing a game is penalized by r = −1.
• At each time steps, the agent receives a reward r = 0.
The non-zero rewards (+1 and −1) are very sparse since winning or losing a game takes
many time steps. Moreover, those rewards are not only connected to the last action but
to a series of actions that were performed in the past. This makes the Pong environment
more challenging than the gridworld environment.
2.5.2
Architecture and parameters
Since the gridworld and Pong environments differ in many aspects, we use different
parameters to train the agent in each case.
The high-level architecture is, however,
common for both problems.
Our DQN architecture consists of two identical neural
networks — policy network and target network — as explained in Section 2.4.2. These
networks take a state as input and output probability over the action space that we
use to select the appropriate action. Moreover, we utilize the advantage of the replay
memory which is introduced in Section 2.4.2 as well.
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Results
17
Gridworld
A state is represented by a 3 × 5 × 5 tensor, where the first dimension
specifies the number of channels (RGB in this case). The state is flattened and taken as
input to the DQN network which is designed as MLP (see Section 2.3.3.1). The network
has three hidden layers and an output layer. The hidden layers consist of 256, 256, and
512 neurons respectively with ReLU activations. The output is of size 4 because there
are 4 possible actions that the agent chooses from.
To optimize the parameters in the network, we used RMSProp optimization with
learning rate of 1e −4. The actions were chosen by ϵ-greedy strategy where ϵ is linearly
annealed from 0.6 in the first episode to 0.005 in episode 250 after which the ϵ is fixed
at the 0.005 value. The training took 500 episodes in the case of static-lava setup and
1000 episodes in the case of random-lava setup. The size of replay memory was in both
setups set to 10000. Finally, the γ parameter was set to 0.9.
Pong
A state is represented by 1 × 84 × 84 tensor representing a grayscale cropped
area that captures the playing area. Similarly to [Mni+13], we stack the last 4 frames
and use this 4 × 84 × 84 tensor as the input to our network.
The network consists of four hidden layers and an output layer. The first three layers
are convolutional with 32 filters of size 8 × 8 with stride 4, 64 filters of size 4 × 4 with
stride 2, and 64 filters of size 3 × 3 with stride 1, respectively. The fourth layer is fully-
connected with 512 neurons. All hidden layers use ReLU activations. The output layer
is fully-connected with 6 output units, each representing one action from the action
space. Even though there are factually only three different actions, the environment
uses more general action space where two actions represent action up, two down, and
two no-action.
We use RMSProp optimizer with 1e −4 learning rate and batch size of 32. The
actions were chosen by ϵ-greedy policy with ϵ linearly annealing from 1 to 0.1 over the
first million frames as in [Mni+13] after which the ϵ was fixed at 0.1 for the rest of the
training. The training took 10 million frames in total. Finally, the size of the replay
memory was set to 100000 and the γ parameter was set to 0.99.
2.6
Results
We now introduce the task specific results for both gridworld and Pong environments
(described in Section 2.5.1) that were collected using the models defined in Section 2.5.2.
As opposed to supervised learning where the standard is to use a test set to evaluate
the performance of an algorithm, in RL the performance is commonly measured by the
total episodic reward. The results below utilize this metric to evaluate the performance
of the DQN algorithms.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Reinforcement Learning
(a) static-lava setup
(b) random-lava setup
Figure 2.6: Moving average of 50 previous episodes for both the total episodic rewards
and the number of steps to finish an episode.
The results are for the
static-lava environment (a), and the random-lava environment (b).
2.6.1
Gridworld
For both gridworld setups (static-lava and random-lava) we report the total episodic
reward. In addition to that, we find it relevant to report another metric that represents
the total number of steps before terminating the episode.
static-lava
The training of the DQN algorithm on the static-lava gridworld en-
vironments is depicted in Figure 2.6(a). From the moving average over 50 episodes of
the total episodic rewards, we can see that it took around 300 episodes for the agent
to learn the task properly (having stable reward r = 8 which in 5 × 5 grid represents
the shortest path to the goal). The same conclusion is visible in the number of steps
per episode where from episode 300 onward, the agent needed 8 steps to reach the goal
(with minor fluctuations caused by the ϵ-greedy strategy with ϵ = 0.005). An interesting
part is around episode 120 when the agent started to use more time to find the way to
the goal while its main focus was to avoid lava. From episode 220, the agent started to
optimize the path to the goal which is represented by decreasing number of steps and
at the same time increasing rewards in the following episodes.
random-lava
In the case of random-lava setup, learning took longer as the environ-
ment presents a more complex task. In Figure 2.6(b) we notice that the agent steadily
improves in avoiding lava and finding the path to the goal cell. From episode 200 on-
ward, we can see that the agent occasionally takes more steps comparing to its learning
trend. We understand this behavior as that the agent learns that the number of steps
is correlated with the rewards. Also, we can see that while the average number of steps
to solve the task almost converged close to the limit of 1000 episodes, there is still room
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Conclusion
19
for optimizing the network since the agent did not fully learned to avoid all possible
locations with lava.
From the above experiments, we can conlude that our DQN architecture is robust
enough to learn the optimal policy for both gridworld environments.
2.6.2
Pong
The DQN algorithm was trained for over 5000 episodes where each episode consists of
a series of games until one of the players reaches the score of 21. As can be seen in
Figure 2.7, the agent starts by loosing all of its games. As its actions are random at
the beginning, it occasionally encounters situations where its paddle hits the ball and
wins a game, which results in improving the approximation of the Q-function. Around
the episode 1000, the agent learns the proper actions that results in higher score, which
stays around +15 from episode 2000 forward. We notice that the learned Q-function is
not ideal since it does not result in the score of +21. However, being able to win at least
21 games while loosing less than 10 games per episode is a success. We can therefore
conclude that the DQN was able to learn a semi-optimal policy to play Pong.
2.7
Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced reinforcement learning and its algorithms. We introduced
artificial neural networks, a valuable tool for deep learning, together with the most
common activation functions and optimization algorithms. Because of that, we could
apply deep learning to reinforcement learning.
Figure 2.7: Moving average of 50 previous episodes for the total episodic rewards
within the Pong environment.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Reinforcement Learning
We then chose to implement the DQN algorithm and validate its potential on two dif-
ferent environments. To fully understand the mechanics behind the interaction between
the agent and the environment, we designed our own gridworld environment. Being able
to test the DQN on gridworld, we could see how different the learning is based on the
complexity of the environment. The agent learned the optimal policy in both gridworlds
and semi-optimal policy in Pong.
With the basic knowledge of reinforcement learning, we can continue to learn about
generative models. We are especially interested in utilizing generative models for anomaly
detection, which we will use later for discovering novel state in the reinforcement learning
setting.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Variational Auto-Encoder
In this chapter, we introduce a deep learning architecture from the family of generative
models, called Variational Auto-Encoder [KW13]. First, we introduce the theoretical
background of generative modeling as well as the Variational Auto-Encoder framework,
followed by introducing its variant called β-Variational Auto-Encoder [Hig+17]. Then,
we describe the implementation details of both architectures, introduce our experiments,
and evaluate the results.
3.1
Generative Modeling
The aim of a generative model is to describe how a given dataset was generated [Fos19].
If we, for example, take a dataset of images of cats, the aim of a generative model can be
to learn the features that describe a cat so that it can later generate new, realistic images
of cats that are not present in the training dataset. However, working for example with
images means working with data of thousands or even millions of dimensions that are
represented by pixels. Finding some relevant features in such high-dimensional data
makes the problem very difficult to solve.
In formal terms, given a dataset of observations X, a generative model estimates
the probability of observing the observation x ∈X which is denoted as p(x) [Fos19].
For a comparison, a discriminative model estimates the probability of a label y being
associated with a given observation x which is denoted as p(y|x).
Assuming that we have examples X generated by an unknown distribution pdata, the
goal of the generative model is to learn a model p that mimics pdata [Fos19]. Model p
should ensure that it generates samples that are likely to be generated by pdata but that
are at the same time different from the already observed training data.
A probability density function (PDF) p(x) is a function that represents the density
of probability of a point x. One important property of PDF is that its sum (or integral
in case of continuous variables) over all values that x can take, is 1.
A parametric
model pθ(x) is a PDF described by a finite number of parameters θ [Fos19]. Using the
parametric model, we want to find the optimal set of parameters ˆθ. For that, we need
to define two more terms — likelihood and maximum likelihood estimation.
A likelihood function L(θ|x) (defined as L(θ|x) = pθ(x)) represents the probability
of θ given an observation x [Fos19]. The likelihood of the whole dataset X is then
L(θ|X) =
∏
x∈X
pθ(x),
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Variational Auto-Encoder
given that all observations in X are independent.
In order to find the optimal set of parameters ˆθ that maximizes the likelihood of
the dataset X, there is a method called maximum likelihood estimation. A maximum
likelihood estimate (MLE) is defined as
ˆθ = arg max
θ
L(θ|X).
An important aspect in generative models is latent variable. A latent variable is non-
observable variable which can be inferred from the observable variables. The reason for
a latent variable to be part of generative models is that it can represent hidden structure
in the data and reduce the dimensionality of the data. As an example, let us say that we
want to generate handwritten digits from 0 to 9. Using a complicated computer vision
model, we can divide the image into smaller parts and extract a shape from the digit in
each part. A vector of such shapes will then represent our latent variable. Given a digit
we want to generate, we take the vector of shapes that are common for that digit and
use it to generate a new digit.
In mathematical terms, we have a vector of latent variables z that are generated by
a PDF p(z). We can now represent our prior distribution p(x) as a function over the
latent variable z, which we can formally write as
p(x) =
∫
z p(x, z)dz =
∫
z p(x|z)p(z)dz,
(3.1)
according to the law of total probability on continuous variables.
However, in many cases p(x) is intractable which makes the generative problem
very difficult to solve or even approximate the solution. One method to overcome the
intractability issue is Variational Auto-Encoder [KW13], which is introduced in the
following section.
3.2
Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
The aim of the Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) framework, as [KW13] describes it, is to
overcome some challenges that other generative models face, namely the intractability of
the marginal likelihood pθ(x) and the true posterior density pθ(z|x), as well as expensive
sampling in case of a large dataset. The intractability of pθ(x) comes from equation (3.1)
where we need to integrate over all possible values of z. The later intractability of pθ(z|x)
can then be explained using the Bayes’ theorem with which pθ(z|x) is given as:
pθ(z|x) = pθ(x|z)pθ(z)
pθ(x)
,
where again we have the intractable prior distribution pθ(x).
As described earlier, we start with a dataset X = {x(i)}N
i=1 that is generated by some
unknown random process. Let us assume that the random process depends on some
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Variational Auto-Encoder Framework
23
continuous random variable z and that the random process, as [KW13] describes, consists
of a prior distribution pθ∗(z) that generates samples z(i), and a conditional distribution
pθ∗(x|z) that generates samples x(i). Because the true parameters θ∗are unknown, it is
further assumed that both distributions come from their family distributions pθ(z) and
pθ(x|z) respectively.
To overcome the intractability of the true posterior density pθ(z|x), [KW13] intro-
duces a recognition model qϕ(z|x) that approximates pθ(z|x). Given the recognition
model, we can rewrite equation (3.1) as follows:
pθ(x)
=
∫
z pθ(x|z)pθ(z)dz
=
∫
z pθ(x|z)pθ(z)qϕ(z|x)
qϕ(z|x)dz
=
∫
z qϕ(z|x)pθ(x|z)pθ(z)
qϕ(z|x)
dz
Now, we can write the marginal likelihood of a single datapoint x(i) as
log pθ
(
x(i))
= log
∫
z qϕ(z|x(i))pθ(x(i)|z)pθ(z)
qϕ(z|x(i))
dz.
(3.2)
Using Jensen’s inequality formula, we further get
log
∫
z qϕ(z|x(i))pθ(x(i)|z)pθ(z)
qϕ(z|x(i))
dz ≥
∫
z qϕ(z|x(i)) log pθ(x(i)|z)pθ(z)
qϕ(z|x(i))
dz.
The term on the right hand side of the inequality can be further rewritten as:
∫
z qϕ(z|x(i)) log pθ(x(i)|z)pθ(z)
qϕ(z|x(i))
dz
= Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z)pθ(z)
qϕ(z|x(i))
]
= Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z) + log pθ(z) −log qϕ(z|x(i))
]
= Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z)
]
−DKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z)
)
Finally, we can rewrite the marginal likelihood from (3.2) as
log pθ
(
x(i))
≥Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z)
]
−DKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z)
)
= L(θ, ϕ, x(i)).
(3.3)
The term L(θ, ϕ, x(i)) in (3.3) is referred to as the variational lower bound (or evi-
dence lower bound). The KL divergence term measures how similar is the distribution
behind the recognition model qϕ(z|x(i)) to the latent distribution pθ(z). The term with
expected value then represents a reconstruction loss, and therefore says how good are
the reconstructions compared to the given sample x(i).
Instead of using the Jensen’s inequality formula, the equation (3.3) can be de-
rived from KL divergence between the approximation qϕ(z|x(i)) and the true posterior
pθ(z|x(i)) (see Appendix A). The result of this derivation shows that the KL divergence
between qϕ(z|x(i)) and pθ(z|x(i)) should be as small as possible in order to get the vari-
ational lower bound the closest to the marginal likelihood.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Variational Auto-Encoder
As [KW13] further states, in VAE, the aim is to optimize the variational lower bound
with respect to the variational parameters ϕ and the generative parameters θ for which
we need to calculate the gradients over both parameters. However, especially the gra-
dient over ϕ causes a problem because in the forward phase of training, z ∼qϕ(z|x) is
sampled from qϕ(z|x) which is an operation that has no gradient. Therefore, backprop-
agating the error through this sampling layer is not possible.
The solution to overcome the problem with sampling z from qϕ(z|x) is called the
reparametrization trick.
The idea behind the reparametrization trick is to calculate
z using a deterministic function qϕ(ϵ, x) that takes an independent random variable
ϵ ∼p(ϵ) as input. Therefore, we can write that
z ∼qϕ(ϵ, x).
As an example, let us assume that z is sampled from the approximate posterior that
follows the univariate normal distribution qϕ(z|x) = N(µϕ(x), σϕ(x)I). The reparametriza-
tion is then to first sample ϵ ∼N(0, I) and then calculate
z = µϕ(x) + σϕ(x) ⊙ϵ,
which is a deterministic operation for which we can compute gradients.
3.3
Implementation of VAE
In this section, we describe the general form of the VAE model as a composition of the
recognition model and the reconstruction model. At the end of the section, we explain
the connection between the VAE and the β-VAE models.
3.3.1
Encoder
The recognition model (encoder) is represented as a neural network that takes as input
a datapoint x and encodes it into the latent space. Based on the chosen distribution
of the latent space, Gaussian distribution in our case, the model returns two values for
each latent feature – mean µϕ(x) and log-variance log σ2
ϕ(x):
qϕ(z|x) = N(z|µϕ(x), σϕ(x)I)
The encoder can be implemented in various ways, using multilayer perceptrons
(MLP), convolutional neural networks (CNN), and others. While it is possible to achieve
good results using only MLPs, our final architecture uses combination of convolution
layers and fully connected layers.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Implementation of VAE
25
3.3.2
Decoder
The reconstruction model (decoder) is represented as a neural network that takes as
input a latent vector z and decodes it into the original shape of datapoint x. When
working with binary-valued images, the generative distribution is often represented as
Bernoulli distribution. In this case, the decoder returns a vector of means µθ(z):
pθ(x|z) = Bernoulli(x|µθ(z))
3.3.3
VAE Framework
Our VAE implementation combines both the encoder and the decoder in the following
manner. First, a datapoint x from the input space is passed to the encoder, generating
vectors µϕ(x) and log σ2
ϕ(x) as its output. The output is used to generate the latent
distribution qϕ(z|x) = N(z|µϕ(x), σϕ(x)I). To get the input for the decoder, we now
need to sample z ∼qϕ(z|x) using the reparametrization trick z = µϕ(x) + σϕ(x) ⊙ϵ,
where ϵ ∼N(0, I). Given z as input, the decoder returns µθ(z) which we use to generate
the Bernoulli distribution pθ(x|z) = Bernoulli(x|µθ(z)).
We chose the latent prior to follow an isotropic normal distribution pθ(z) = N(0, I).
Now, having all the distributions we need, we can calculate the variational lower bound
from equation (3.3). We take the logarithm of pθ(x|z) evaluated at the input datapoint x,
add the logarithm of pθ(z) evaluated at the latent sample z, and subtract the logarithm
of qϕ(z|x) evaluated at the latent sample z.
3.3.4
β-VAE Framework
The β-VAE [Hig+17] framework fully utilises the previously defined VAE framework.
Its only difference is the β regularization parameter that forces the latent features to
be independent. For the features to be independent, z needs to come from an isotropic
normal distribution p(z) = N(0, I). Therefore, using the variational lower bound in
equation (3.4) can increase the emphasis to the posterior distribution qϕ(z|x) to be closer
to the isotropic normal distribution by increasing the value of β. As a consequence of
larger β, the reconstruction power of the model decreases.
Lβ(θ, ϕ, x(i)) = Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z)
]
−βDKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z)
)
(3.4)
3.3.5
Probabilistic approach
Our implementations are build in Python 3.6 using PyTorch [Pas+17] library and es-
pecially its torch.distributions package.
Compared to other approaches, we use
torch.distributions to define all the earlier mentioned distributions (qϕ(z|x), pθ(z),
and pθ(x|z)). As can be seen in Listing 3.1, the distributions are assigned according to
Section 3.3.3 (see lines 10, 11, and 16). Using torch.distributions made it also very
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Variational Auto-Encoder
simple to handle the reparametrization trick which we were able to do in only one line
of code (see line 12).
1 # Import classes for normal and Bernoulli distribution
2 from torch.distributions import Normal, Bernoulli
3
4 class VAE(nn.Module):
5
...
# additional methods
6
def forward(self, x):
7
x_mu, x_logvar = self.encoder(x)
# pass input data to encoder
8
x_std = torch.exp(x_logvar / 2)
# calculate standard deviation
9
10
q_zx = Normal(x_mu, x_std)
# q(z|x) = Normal(z | x_mu, x_std)
11
p_z = Normal(torch.zeros_like(x_mu), torch.ones_like(x_std))
# p(z)
= Normal(z | 0, I)
12
z = q_zx.rsample()
# sample from q(z|x) with reparametrization
13
14
z_mu = self.decoder(z)
# pass z to decoder network
15
z_mu = z_mu.view(z_mu.shape[0], -1)
16
p_xz = Bernoulli(z_mu)
# p(x|z) = Bernoulli(x | z_mu)
17
...
# additional code
Listing 3.1: Forward method in VAE.
Having all the distributions represented as distributions in the code helped us to
construct the computation of the variational lower bound in the same mathematical
form as it was introduced in [KW13], without any additional tricks or workarounds
using means and variances as is common in many implementations of Variational Auto-
Encoders. We include the code for the evidence lower bound in Appendix B, Listing B.1.
3.4
Experiments
In our experimental setup, we train both VAE and β-VAE models on two publicly
available image datasets and one custom dataset. The goal is to learn the latent repre-
sentations z that contain useful features that ensure quality reconstructions.
3.4.1
Data
3.4.1.1
MNIST
The MNIST (Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology) dataset [LC10]
consists of 70,000 images split into 60,000 training samples and 10,000 test samples.
Each image represents a handwritten digit (from 0 to 9) and comes with its respective
numerical label in [0, 1, . . . , 9]. All images in the database have the size of 28×28 pixels,
are normalized and centered. The images are grayscale, therefore each pixel can have a
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Experiments
27
value between 0 and 1. Because of its simplicity, MNIST is a popular dataset used for
comparison of different machine learning algorithms.
3.4.1.2
FashionMNIST
The FashionMNIST dataset [XRV17] consists as well of 70,000 grayscale images of size
28 × 28 pixels that are split into 60,000 training and 10,000 test samples. Each image
represents a clothing article and is associated with a label in [0, 1, . . . , 9] representing 10
categories of fashion items. From those 10 categories, three represent different kinds of
shoes (sandals, sneakers, and ankle boots), six categories represent clothes (shirt, T-shirt,
pullover, dress, coat, and trousers), and the last category represents bags.
The FashionMNIST dataset provides more complex objects than digits (as in the
case of MNIST). Therefore, comparing both will provide us better understanding of the
learnt representations.
For our experiments, we drop the labels and use only the images to train the models.
3.4.1.3
Pong
The Pong dataset was generated by running our DQN network on the PongNoFrameskip-
v4 environment introduced in Section 2.5.1.2. We ran the DQN experiment on 1000
training steps while storing screen shots of the environment at each step (the resulting
1000 images form our Pong dataset). The images were then preprocessed in the following
manner. First, the image was cropped to obtain the area of the playing board. Then, it
was resized by only preserving every second pixel (in both directions). The image was
then converted to grayscale and the background was converted to black color, leaving
the paddles and the ball bright gray. After the preprocessing, the images have size of
80 × 90 pixels. An example of such preprocessed image is depicted in Figure 3.1.
3.4.2
Architecture and parameters
MNIST + FashionMNIST experiment
For the training of both VAE and β-VAE
models, the architecture was selected to achieve the variational lower bound of less than
100 on the MNIST dataset. After testing different architectures, the final architecture
of the encoder uses three convolutional layers with 16, 32, and 64 channels respectively,
all followed by ReLU [Aga18] activation functions (complete set of parameters for the
Figure 3.1: An example image from our Pong dataset.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Variational Auto-Encoder
convolutional layers is included in Appendix C, Table C.1). The last convolutional layer
is followed by a fully connected layer with 256 hidden units and ReLU activations. The
output of the last layer is fed into two separate fully connected output layers, both with
10 output units. The outputs from one layer represent the means, and the outputs from
the other layer represent the log-variance.
The final architecture of the decoder copies the layers from the encoder but in reversed
order.
The last convolutional layer in the decoder is followed by sigmoid activation
function.
The batch size of the data is set to 64 for both datasets. The dimension of the latent
space is set to 10. As an optimizer, we use Adam [KB14] with learning rate of 0.001.
The network was trained over 100 epochs.
Pong experiment
For the experiments on Pong dataset and since the input images
are bigger than in the case of MNIST and FashionMNIST, the final architecture consists
of four convolutional layers with 16, 32, 64, and 64 channels respectively, with ReLU
activations applied in each layer (complete set of parameters for the convolutional layers
is included in Appendix C, Table C.2).
The remaining part of the network is com-
posed of three fully connected layers with the same parameters as in the MNIST and
FashionMNIST experiment above.
The latent space is 10-dimensional. The batch size is set to 32 and we used Adam
optimizer with learning rate of 5e −4. The network was trained over 150 epochs.
3.5
Results
The following results were achieved by using the encoder and decoder models with the
architecture defined in Section 3.4.2. Both VAE and β-VAE models were trained over
100 epochs for MNIST and FashionMNIST, and over 150 epochs for Pong experiment.
3.5.1
MNIST
Variational lower bound
The process of optimizing the lower bound for the VAE is
shown in Figure 3.2. The model learns to perform better with every iteration. However,
from around epoch number 10, the model starts to slightly overfit to the training data.
Even with the overfitting, the validation lower bound converges to 96. To reduce the
overfitting, regularization techniques such as dropout could be implemented into the
current architecture.
Reconstructions
After 100 epochs, the VAE model learned to produce very accurate
reconstructions as can be seen in Figure 3.3. Only a few samples are reconstructed as a
different digit and those are mainly the ones that are also hard to distinguish by human.
Results for the β-VAE model shows that the reconstruction power decreases with
higher values of β (see Figure 3.3). With higher β, the reconstructions tend to be more
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Results
29
Figure 3.2: Training and validation loss represented by the negative lower bound over
100 epochs of training on MNIST.
blurry and we can notice more digits being reconstructed as different digit then the one
that was encoded.
Latent space representation
When we look at each learnt feature in the latent
space, we can see some common characteristics between certain features in the case of
VAE. As can be seen from Figure 3.4, the third feature represents the slope of the digit
whereas the 5th and the 10th latent feature seems to catch the boldness of the digit.
On the other hand, β-VAE model tends to force encoding into smaller number of
features. Therefore, we can see in Figure 3.4 that with increasing β, more latent features
are left unused. As in the case of β = 10, only 3 features contain some information about
the dataset. This comes with the effect of lower capacity to represent the dataset which
results in lower precision in reconstruction.
(a) True inputs
(b) VAE
(c) β-VAE, β = 6
(d) β-VAE, β = 10
Figure 3.3: Comparison of the datapoints from the true input space of MNIST (a) and
its respective reconstructions by both VAE (b) and β-VAE with β ∈{6, 10}
(c) and (d). The input data represent one batch from the test set.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Variational Auto-Encoder
(a) VAE
(b) β-VAE, β = 6
(c) β-VAE, β = 10
Figure 3.4: Interpolations over axes in latent space generated for the MNIST dataset
for VAE (a) and β-VAE with β ∈{6, 10} (b) and (c). The samples are
generated by decoding z where z varies independently over each axis for
each row.
3.5.2
FashionMNIST
Reconstructions
The results on FashionMNIST are more interesting in the sense that
we can better see how the model understands the dataset. In Figure 3.5, we notice that
the VAE model is not perfect in reconstructing the patterns that some of the clothes or
shoes have, but instead learns to reconstruct the items on a more general level (e.g., a
striped pullover is reconstructed as a uniform pullover).
The reconstructions by the β-VAE model with β = 6 are more blurry. The model
also makes more mistakes in reconstructing different item than what it received as input
(e.g., see the third item in the third row in Figure 3.5 where the reconstruction looks
more like a shoe than the original handbag).
Latent space representation
The latent space for VAE depicted in Figure 3.6(a)
covers most of the possible categories. Moreover, there is a potential to learn even more
(a) True inputs
(b) VAE
(c) β-VAE, β = 6
Figure 3.5: Comparison of the datapoints from the true input space of FashionMNIST
(a) and its respective reconstructions by VAE (b) and β-VAE with β = 6
(c). The input data represent one batch from the test set.
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Results
31
categories as three features in the latent space (represented by rows 1, 2 and 5) do
not carry any useful information. Furthermore, Figure 3.7(a) provides interpolations
between pairs of items. Interestingly, we can see that while interpolating between a
sandal and an ankle boot, there is a sneaker shoe right in the middle (see the third row
in Figure 3.7(a)). We can conclude that the learned latent space encodes the dataset
into meaningful latent representations.
In case of β-VAE with β = 6, the model uses only four features to encode the data (see
Figure 3.6(b)). This, as in the case of MNIST results in lower quality of reconstructions.
The encoded items are represented more generally (e.g., the variety of ankle shoe types
is reduced which can be seen by comparing the ankle shoe in the third and fourth row
in Figure 3.7(a) and Figure 3.7(b)).
3.5.3
Pong
Reconstructions
The experiments with β parameter in β-VAE shows similar pattern
as we saw in the previous experiments on MNIST and FashionMNIST. We can state that
all our models have the capacity to reconstruct all three objects in the Pong dataset —
both paddles and the ball.
For VAE and β-VAE with β = 2, we notice that the reconstructions are not signifi-
cantly different. From Figure 3.8 (c) and (d), we can even see that the reconstruction
for VAE is of lower quality than for β-VAE with β = 2. However, this is only the result
of sampling ϵ ∼N(0, I) which influences the latent representation z. From that we can
also infer that there can be a small variance in reconstructions that were produced by
the same model with the same input image.
The last thing that we investigated in this experiment, are the reconstructions of
β-VAE model with β < 1. We chose β = 0.1 to see the effect on the reconstructions.
As can be seen in Figure 3.8(b), the reconstruction is very close to the true input
(a) VAE
(b) β-VAE, β = 6
Figure 3.6: Interpolations over axes in latent space generated for the FashionMNIST
dataset for VAE (a) and β-VAE with β = 6 (b). The samples are generated
by decoding z where z varies independently over each axis for each row.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Variational Auto-Encoder
(a) VAE
(b) β-VAE, β = 6
Figure 3.7: Example interpolations between items from FashionMNIST dataset for
VAE (a) and β-VAE with β = 6 (b). Each row is an interpolation in the
latent space between a pair of items (e.g., white T-shirt and dark shirt in
the first row).
(a) True inputs
(b) β-VAE, β = 0.1
(c) VAE
(d) β-VAE, β = 2
Figure 3.8: Comparison of true input from Pong dataset (a) and its respective recon-
structions by β-VAE with β = 0.1 (b), classical VAE (c) and β-VAE with
β = 2 (d).
sample.
Compared to VAE and β-VAE with β = 2, even the ball is reconstructed
properly. This implies the fact that by choosing β < 1, we force the model to focus
more on reconstructions than on the KL divergence term in (3.4) (Section 3.3.4). We
are factually getting closer to the classic autoencoder which means that the focus of our
model is shifting towards mimicking the identity function.
Latent space representation
As we saw in Figure 3.8, all three models are able
to perform reasonably well in reconstructing input images. To find out how well these
models generalize to unseen data, we explored the encoded latent space representations.
As can be seen in Figure 3.9, all models provide valid interpolations. However, we do
not see the smooth transitions from image to image as in the FashionMNIST experiment.
We would expect to see a transition where the paddle smoothly transitions between the
two positions in the respective input images. What we see instead is a step transition
between two or three different positions of the paddle. This does not necessarily mean
that our latent space is meaningless. Instead, it suggests that the learned manifold is
of more complicated shape, where the transitions between different paddle positions are
more complex than linear. Therefore, the results of our linear interpolations are not
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Conclusion
33
Figure 3.9: Example of interpolations in latent space between two images from Pong
dataset. Top row represents interpolation for β-VAE with β = 0.1, middle
row for VAE, and bottom row for β-VAE with β = 2.
smooth.
3.6
Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced the basics of generative models. Specifically, we focused on
the Variational Auto-Encoder framework and its etension β-VAE. We implemented both
frameworks using a probabilistic approach which helped us to understand the practical
meaning of each element in the framework. We were also able to implement the loss
function in the same form as the mathematical formulas in [KW13].
We conducted experiments using three different datasets, two of which were publicly
available and ready to use, and one that we created using our DQN agent playing Pong.
In all three cases, we learned the importance of β as the parameter responsible for higher
or lower regularization. We were able to tune the hyperparameters of the models to a
degree where the model achieves good results in both reconstruction and interpolation
over the latent space.
Especially the results from comparison of models with different parameter β provide
a useful basis for experimenting with Variational Auto-Encoder as a tool for anomaly
detection. We will focus on anomaly detection in the next chapter, especially in combi-
nation with Variational Auto-Encoders as a tool for modeling the distribution of normal
data.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Anomaly Detection
Anomalies, also known as outliers, are instances in a dataset that do not follow expected
behavior. Anomalies differ from all other instances in the dataset so significantly that
it seems like they were generated by a different process than the rest of the dataset
[Haw80]. Anomaly detection is then a technique for finding such different instances and
marking them as anomalous.
In this section, we will explain the difference between various types of anomalies
as well as methods for discovering them. After that, we will explain the benefits of
combining anomaly detection with deep learning. Specifically, we will focus on anomaly
detection with VAE and introduce its applications in different domains. Finally, we will
conduct a series of experiments to detect anomalies (novelties) in image data.
4.1
Theoretical background
4.1.1
Anomaly vs novelty
Anomalies are instances that differ from all other instances that are considered normal.
An example of anomalies is depicted in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: An example of anomalies in a two-dimensional dataset. Instances in N1
and N2 represent normal data, whereas instances o1, o2, and instances in
O3 represent outliers. Image taken from [CBK09].
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Anomaly Detection
As [CBK09] and [CC19] summarize it, in novelty detection the focus is on discovering
novel patterns that were not observed before. Moreover, the novel instances are later
treated as part of the normal (non-anomalous) data because they provide additional
information about the process that generates the dataset in question.
Both techniques — anomaly detection and novelty detection — are similar in their
core as they both find instances that do not conform expected behavior. Therefore,
the methods for anomaly detection are often used for novelty detection and vice versa
[CBK09; CC19].
In the rest of this document, we limit ourself to only use the term ”anomalies”.
Whether we address an anomaly problem or novelty problem will always be clear from
the context.
4.1.2
Anomaly types
Anomalies can represent many different things based on the data structure as well as the
problem domain. In general, there are three categories representing different anomaly
types — point anomalies, contextual anomalies, and collective anomalies.
Point Anomalies
A point anomaly is a situation when a data instance differ from the
rest of the data. Most anomaly detection techniques focus on locating point anomalies
[CBK09].
For example, anomalies o1, o2, and anomalies in O3 in Figure 4.1 are all
examples of point anomalies.
Contextual Anomalies
A contextual anomaly is a situation when a data instance is
considered anomalous only because of its context [CBK09]. For example, lets consider a
temperature measuring unit that records the outside temperature in Copenhagen. When
the recorded temperature is +30 ◦C in July, it does not raise any questions, but if the
same temperature appears in the data for December, we would likely consider it as
anomaly.
Collective Anomalies
A collective anomaly is a situation when a collection or group
of data instances appears to be anomalous compared to the rest of the data [CBK09].
This particular anomaly type is present only where there is some relation between the
instances. For example, if we consider online payments of a regular person, observing
one payment of 10 Euros is considered normal, but observing 5 payments of 10 Euros
that happened during one second might indicate fraud or anomalous behavior of the
payment system.
4.1.3
Availability of labels
In anomaly detection, labels are used to provide information on whether an instance
is normal or anomalous. In most cases, anomalies are very sparsely represented in the
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Deep anomaly detection with VAE
37
dataset, which makes the labeling task expensive, especially when it needs to be done
manually. It is usually more difficult to get a labeled dataset that covers all possible
anomalies than to get the labels covering instances with normal behavior [CBK09].
Even when we have a training dataset with labels for all instances (including the
anomalous ones), sometimes we cannot be sure that the dataset covers all possible
anomalies. Either there are too many different anomalies that it is impossible to cover
them all, or they are just very rare so that they did not yet appear.
Based on the quantity of available labels, anomaly detection models are generally
divided into three categories – supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised.
Supervised Anomaly Detection
The methods for supervised anomaly detection
expect to get a fully labeled dataset which means that the labels have to be available
for both normal and anomalous instances. With the labeled dataset, a supervised classi-
fier is trained to predict the normal and anomaly classes, therefore, it handles anomaly
detection as a classification problem. The only problem with this approach is that classi-
fication models tend to struggle with unbalanced datasets, which for anomaly detection
is almost always the case [CBK09].
Semi-supervised Anomaly Detection
As we already mentioned, obtaining labels
for the instances following normal behavior is easier than providing labels for both
normal data and anomalies.
In semi-supervised anomaly detection, only the labels
for normal instances are required which makes these methods more applicable than
supervised methods [CBK09]. The semi-supervised methods try to learn a manifold
around the normal instances and use it later to find anomalous instances that behave
differently as those are found outside of the manifold.
As [CC19] explains, for semi-supervised methods to work, it is assumed that either
every two points that lie close to each other in the input space as well as in the fea-
ture space, have the same label, or that the learned features maintain the ability to
differentiate normal instances from anomalies.
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
The methods for unsupervised anomaly detec-
tion do not require any labels. The ability to work on unlabeled datasets makes them
more applicable than both supervised and semi-supervised methods [CBK09]. However,
for unsupervised techniques to work, it is required that the amount of anomalous in-
stances is significantly lower than the amount of normal instances, which mainly helps
in approximating the manifold around the normal instances.
4.2
Deep anomaly detection with VAE
As is very common across the areas of machine learning, there are two general approaches
to anomaly detection — traditional machine learning algorithms and deep learning algo-
rithms. Nowadays, the traditional methods prevail for problems across many domains,
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Anomaly Detection
such as credit card fraud detection, malware detection, and spam detection. Some of the
most popular traditional methods are K-nearest neighbour (density-based technique), k-
means (clustering-based technique), and support vector machines.
However, as [CC19] describes, there are cases where the traditional methods are not
optimal. One of the main struggles for the traditional methods are images and other
highly complex data where it is difficult to capture the structure in the data. Another
problem is high volume of data, to which the traditional methods do not scale well.
Deep anomaly detection (DAD) techniques provide a better alternative in the above
mentioned cases. Using deep learning, it is possible to learn complex features directly
from the data, without the need of manual feature extraction by domain experts. How-
ever, even DAD techniques have some limitations. As [CC19] describes, it can be hard
to model the boundary between normal and anomalous data. Especially in domains
where it is not possible to properly describe even the true normal behavior.
Out of the broad spectrum of DAD methods, we will narrow our focus on unsuper-
vised anomaly detection. Those methods do not need labels to provide the information
about what instances are anomalous. The unsupervised DAD methods are mostly based
on the concept of autoencoders.
For a problem to be solvable by an unsupervised DAD technique, at least one of the
following assumptions has to be fulfilled [CC19]:
• The normal instances are distinguishable from the anomalous instances, either in
the original input space or in the latent space.
• The dataset contains far more normal instances than anomalies.
• The unsupervised method produces an anomaly score in form of distances or den-
sities.
In the following sections, we narrow our scope to unsupervised DAD using the VAE
framework which, as we have already shown in Section 3.5, provides meaningful repre-
sentations and generalization on various image datasets.
4.3
Related work
Anomaly detection on image datasets has been explored by various research groups. In
this section, we introduce some approaches that utilize VAE models on image-related
data.
Deep learning methods are very popular tool for gaining insight into image data in
medical settings. One of the applications of deep learning in dermatology is described in
[LX18]. The authors experiment with skin image data to distinguish healthy moles from
moles with diseases. Their approach is to take the images of healthy moles to learn the
underlying distribution p(x) that characterizes them. They score anomalies (in this case
the moles with disease) using the negative evidence lower bound. As they train β-VAE
model with β = 0.01 applied on the KL divergence term (see (3.4) in Section 3.3.4 for
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Related work
39
definition of evidence lower bound for β-VAE), the anomaly score is mainly influenced by
the reconstruction error. Using this anomaly score, the model is able to distinguish an
image of healthy mole from various types of mole diseases with 77 % probability. Given
that the authors admit that there is a room for improvement in their β-VAE model, the
results suggest that the evidence lower bound provides a good metric for anomaly score.
Another application of VAE as anomaly detector is on satellite data. The authors of
[SG19] worked with data from satellite Sentinel-1 SAR to detect places in the mountain
range of the Alps that pose a high risk of avalanches.
The authors conducted two
experiments using a VAE model. They compared training the model with only the data
without any avalanches (98 % of the dataset) and the model trained on the full dataset
(containing both normal images and avalanches). From this experiment, they did not
find any significant difference in performance of the model in both settings. As the
anomaly score, they used the reconstruction error. Overall, using VAE showed similar
results in locating areas with avalanches compared to other state-of-the-art models using
CNN in supervised setting.
Another critical area — video surveillance — was investigated by the authors of
[Xu+19]. In many places, video surveillance systems provide additional security. With
the improvements in feature representations using deep learning, such systems can be-
come ”intelligent” in the sense of automatic scene recognition. Most importantly for our
case, those surveillance systems can be used to find and report any anomalous activity
on the scene. [Xu+19] introduced the usage of VAE for anomaly detection in crowded
scenes. Their data comes from surveillance videos of a pedestrian walkway. Given that
the area under surveillance was a walkway, any vehicles passing through would repre-
sent anomalies. The authors started by combining a set of consequent frames into one
multi-channel image. By doing that, the data preserved both the information about
the scene as well as the motion within the scene. The authors then trained a VAE with
convolutional layers on the multi-channel image data containing only the scenes without
any abnormal events. The anomaly score was in this case the negative log likelihood
−log p(x), approximated by the evidence lower bound. However, there was one differ-
ence in using the evidence lower bound. It was calculated for each receptive field which
in case of anomaly detection provides additional information about the position of the
anomaly within the scene. Finally, the model was able to localize vehicles, bikers and
skaters on the walkway and classify frames with and without anomalies with 95.7 %
accuracy which was 1 % improvement of the other methods not utilizing VAE.
Finally, there is another approach to anomaly detection using VAE. The authors
of [Akr+19] introduced a variant of VAE called Robust Variational Autoencoder which
offers robustness to outliers in the training data. It uses so called β-ELBO as the evidence
lower bound. However, this β should not be confused with β from β-VAE introduced in
Section 3.3.4. In robust VAE, β does not influence the KL divergence term. Instead, it
replaces the reconstruction error with β-cross entropy Hβ(p(x), pθ(x|z)). The β-ELBO
is then defined as
Lβ(θ, ϕ, x(i)) = −Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
Hβ(p(x(i)), pθ(x|z))(i)]
−DKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z)
)
.
With this definition of robust VAE, the authors performed a series of experiments. The
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Anomaly Detection
experiment on anomaly detection was evaluated on MNIST dataset combined with data
from EMNIST (an extension of MNIST with images of handwritten letters). The data
from MNIST were considered as normal data while the data from EMNIST as outliers.
In the conducted experiments, the model was trained on MNIST combined with 10 %
outliers from EMNIST. In other experiments, the percentage of outliers was 5 % and 1 %.
It was shown, that by selecting a proper threshold of the mean squared error between the
original image and its reconstruction, the robust VAE slightly outperformed the classic
VAE when the proportion of outliers in the training dataset was low (1 %). However,
the dominance of robust VAE increases with higher proportion of outliers in the data
(10 %).
In our experiments, we focus on scenarios when the training dataset does not contain
any anomalies. Therefore, we focus on VAE and β-VAE models rather than on robust
VAE.
4.4
Experiments
We performed a series of experiments utilizing our trained models from Section 3.4.2.
The goal here was to take the model that was trained on the data without anomalies and
evaluate its performance of detecting instances coming from different data distribution.
4.4.1
Data
For the experiments on anomaly detection, we reuse the datasets introduced in Sec-
tion 3.4.1. However, we extend the experiments by introducing new datasets that repre-
sent the anomalous data.
MNIST + FashionMNIST
In this experiment, we use the MNIST dataset (see Sec-
tion 3.4.1.1 for details) and the FashionMNIST dataset (see Section 3.4.1.2 for details).
Both datasets contain two parts — training and test data. For our anomaly detection
experiment, we consider the MNIST data (both training and test) as the normal data,
while data from FashionMNIST as the anomalous data. This distinction is reasonable as
the model trained on MNIST data should consider data from FashionMNIST as anoma-
lies since these come from a different distribution and do not represent handwritten
digits.
Pong
For our experiments with Pong, we use the training dataset described in Sec-
tion 3.4.1.3. However, as our goal is to detect anomalies, we modified a series of training
images to incorporate anomalies. We define five different categories of adversary samples.
Each category contains six adversary samples. The categories are defined as follows:
• too_high_too_low represents samples where the right paddle (controlled by the
agent) is located higher (or lower) than in the highest (or lowest) position in the
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Experiments
41
training set as in the training set, the paddles are located in between the 6th and
85th pixel rows (out of 90).
• paddle_cross represents samples where the shape of the right paddle is modified
to a plus sign.
• new_obstacle represents samples with additional line above or below the right
paddle, representing new environment with additional obstacle that would not
allow the agent to move beyond the obstacle.
• big_ball represents samples where we enlarged the size of the ball two to three
times.
• opponent_moved represents samples where the left paddle was moved closer to the
center of the image (along the horizontal axis).
An example of each category can be seen in Figure 4.2.
4.4.2
Architecture and parameters
For the anomaly detection experiments, we use the same models with same hyperparam-
eters as for the experiments on VAE. The architecture of both VAE and β-VAE is for
the respective datasets (MNIST, FashionMNIST, and Pong) defined in Section 3.4.2.
Figure 4.2: Examples of adversary images for Pong experiment. Each example (start-
ing from left to right, top to bottom) represents an image from the test set,
too_high_too_low set, paddle_cross set, new_obstacle set, big_ball
set, and opponent_moved set.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Anomaly Detection
4.5
Results
4.5.1
MNIST + FashionMNIST
In this experiment, we tested the feasibility of applying VAE on anomaly detection.
Given the training part of MNIST dataset, we trained the VAE model so that it gen-
eralizes well on the test dataset. By this, we achieved the model to learn a manifold
surrounding the MNIST dataset. When we evaluated the model on the test data from
FashionMNIST, it was proven that the majority comes from outside of the learned man-
ifold. We can see in Figure 4.3 that the test data from MNIST are assigned almost
identical values of the negative evidence lower bound (represented as −log p(x)) as the
test MNIST data on which the model was trained. On the other hand, it can be seen
that the negative evidence lower bound is much higher for samples from FashionMNIST.
While the mean of −log p(x) is around 100 for MNIST, it is around 900 for Fashion-
MNIST. This provides significant assurance that the model is capable of distinguishing
between the data coming from MNIST distribution and the data coming from Fashion-
MNIST.
As can be further seen from Figure 4.3, using the evidence lower bound metric,
we cannot take the maximum of −log p(x) on MNIST as the threshold that would
correctly distinguish between the two datasets. However, since the area where samples
from MNIST and FashionMNIST overlap, is relatively small, we could make the outlier
threshold around 10th percentile of −log p(x) for MNIST. Such threshold would classify
a few handwritten digits as outliers but we would, in this case, achieve false negative
ratio of 0.
Figure 4.3: Box plots representing distributions of the evidence lower bound for three
different datasets (MNIST training, MNIST test, and FashionMNIST test).
==PAGE:53==
4.6 Conclusion
43
4.5.2
Pong
In the pong experiment, we focused not only on the performance of VAE in detecting
anomalies within Pong dataset, but we also investigated how different parameters of β
influence the detection for β-VAE.
In Figure 4.4(a), we see that the model clearly overfits to the training data, which
shows that β-VAE with β = 0.1 prioritizes reconstruction quality to generalization. Even
though many of the images in the test set vary just slightly compared to the training
set, the model thinks those are less likely to be generated according to p(x). The fact
that one of the test samples receives −log p(x) in between 108 and 109 makes the model
unusable for anomaly detection on Pong.
VAE, on the other hand, performs much better. We notice that the majority of
test samples lie within the minimum and maximum of the evidence lower bound for
the training set (see Figure 4.4(b)).
In this case, we could take the maximum of
−log p(x) of the test set and use it as threshold for our anomaly score. Using that, we
would be able to classify all our adversary examples from paddle_cross, new_obstacle,
big_ball, and oponent_moved sets as anomalies. However, in the case of samples from
too_high_too_low, the model cannot clearly distinguish those from the test samples
and even from the training data. This suggests that the model learned the regulari-
ties of structures within the dataset but did not learn that there is a threshold for the
movement of the paddles.
Finally, β-VAE with β = 2 performs better than the previously mentioned models.
By looking at Figure 4.4(c), we can see a clear distinction between the training and
test data, and the majority of our adversary data. A closer look provides Figure 4.4(d)
where we can see that all test instances fall within the same probability distribution as
the training instances. Moreover, we can set a clear threshold that divides the training
and test samples from all the adversaries. Therefore, we can state that the model learned
a proper manifold incorporating all common regularities within the Pong environment.
4.6
Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced anomaly detection and especially focused on anomaly
detection using deep learning. We learned how Variational Auto-Encoders model the
hidden structure of normal data and use it to discover anomalies.
We studied several applications of deep anomaly detection using Variational Auto-
Encoders, applied on image data from different domains. Based on that, we conducted
a series of our own experiments. We tested how precise is the manifold that the model
learns to classify out-of-distribution samples and presented the results.
We learned
that the β parameter in β-VAE is an important factor that influences the precision of
anomaly detection. Using our own data with different types of anomalies, we found the
best model to be β-VAE with β = 2, which generalized well to our test data, and at the
same time recognized all the anomalies.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Anomaly Detection
(a) β-VAE, β = 0.1
(b) VAE
(c) β-VAE, β = 2
(d) β-VAE, β = 2, detail
Figure 4.4: The negative evidence lower bound (−log p(x)) for samples from the train-
ing, test, and adversary sets for Pong, given three different models: β-VAE
with β = 0.1 (a), VAE (b), and β-VAE with β = 2 (c) and (d).
Knowing that our deep anomaly detection models work, we can now return to the
area of reinforcement learning and design a framework for detecting novel states in
reinforcement learning.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Novel State Detection in
Reinforcement Learning
In this chapter, we combine the knowledge from the previous chapters to introduce a
framework for detecting novel states in reinforcement learning. First, we introduce some
approaches of making reinforcement learning safer via human intervention. We introduce
these approaches to provide a bigger picture of how would our framework be useful for
safe reinforcement learning.
5.1
The basic framework
The problem we want to solve can be defined as follows. Given an initial set of states
s1, s2, . . . , sT ∈S that were generated by an agent during its first T interactions with
an environment, we aim to build a generative anomaly detector that is able to detect
novel or anomalous states within the remaining states sT+1, sT+2, . . . , sN ∈S.
We consider two possible scenarios. In the first one, all the initial states s1, s2, . . . , sT
represent the normal states. Here, we can directly utilize the VAE model as described
in Section 4.2 or its variant β-VAE. The VAE model will learn the proper state represen-
tations and approximate the respective distribution from which the initial states came
from. By learning the manifold, the model will classify all future states located outside
of the manifold as anomalies.
In the second scenario, we know that the set of initial states contains a few anomalous
samples. In that case, we would use the robust VAE model [Akr+19] that would detect
the few anomalies within our initial states. It would learn the manifold of the normal
states similarly as the VAE model in the previous case and use it later to classify the
future states as normal or anomalous.
With such defined framework, we would be able to detect novel states. However,
we aim a bit further. We would like to use the anomaly detection in a more complex
reinforcement learning setup that considers safety as the main attribute for learning. We
will introduce our approach in the following sections.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Novel State Detection in Reinforcement Learning
5.2
Detecting catastrophic actions
Detecting novel states is a vital contributor to preventing catastrophes to happen. We
can imagine a situation where a self-driving car is taught how to drive on a road. In
the initial phase of its learning, it is guided by a human that prevents any catastrophic
actions from being performed (passed to the environment). After the initial phase, the
car is able to drive on a road without proposing any catastrophic actions, so the human
observer spends less effort on correcting the actions. If suddenly the car approaches a
fallen tree that it has not seen before, it might not know that the tree poses a danger
and that accelerating the car at that point is considered dangerous.
Using that narrative, it is easier to understand the need for a system that would be
able to objectively evaluate the proposed action given the current state of the environ-
ment. In the following section, we will introduce a few approaches that are related to
the problem and that offer a framework for safe reinforcement learning.
Later, we will propose an extension to these frameworks utilizing anomaly detection
using generative models.
5.2.1
Related work
The focus on building safe and reliable reinforcement learning models is recently be-
coming a priority of many research laboratories.
Here, we will narrow our scope to
human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning which shows a reasonable approach to build-
ing safe AI systems.
Protocol programs
Let us start with so called protocol programs introduced by
[Abe+17]. In their framework for interaction between human and agent, they aim to of-
fer an agent-agnostic solution which would work for all the different RL algorithms.The
framework is depicted in Figure 5.1.
In their setup, they define the environment as an MDP given by a tuple M =
(S, A, T , R, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A × S →[0, 1]
Figure 5.1: A general setup for RL with human in the loop.
Image taken from
[Abe+17].
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Detecting catastrophic actions
47
is the transition function, R : S × A →R is the reward function, and γ is the discount
factor. The agent is then represented by a function L : S ×R →A. The last element is a
human H that has access to the history of states, actions and rewards, and a new action
a′ proposed by the agent. The human can then send a modified action to the environment
(especially if the suggested action from the agent is considered catastrophic), or send
a modified reward to the agent by which the human can force the agent to learn that
certain actions are in certain states catastrophic (or just unwanted).
The purpose of the protocol program is to channel the information flow between the
agent and the environment. Moreover, the program protocol is aimed to supersede the
agent by combining the information gained through sub-calls to L and H. Formally, the
program protocol is defined as P : S × R →A.
In a series of experiments, [Abe+17] showed that the program protocol works well in
preventing catastrophic actions. It must be stated, however, that their experiments did
not involved real human but instead the protocol was programmed manually to prevent
any predefined catastrophic actions.
HIRL
Based on the foundations from the framework with program protocols, [Sau+17]
came with Human Intervention RL (HIRL) framework. In HIRL, the human controls the
interface between the environment M and the RL agent. As with program protocols, the
aim of HIRL is to block any catastrophic action before it is passed to the environment.
At each time step t, the agent selects an action at from the action space A based on
the current state st. If (st, at) is catastrophic, the human replaces the proposed action
with safe action a∗which is then sent to the environment. In this case, the reward
r = R(s, a∗) from the environment is replaced by the human so that the agent receives
a penalized reward r∗instead.
During an initial phase, the state-action pairs (s, a) are collected with the particular
binary label from the human specifying whether the state-action is safe or not.Those are
used to train a Blocker which is a classifier that imitates the human blocking decisions.
Given (s, a), the Blocker uses a CNN to process the observation s from the envi-
ronment and then concatenate the result with one-hot encoding of the action a. It is
then passed through a fully connected layer and outputs the probability of (s, a) being
catastrophic.
The researchers in [Sau+17] performed a series of experiments on Atari 2600 games
like Pong, Space Invaders, and Road Runner, where they showed that using a real
human to oversight the agent in the initial phase of learning, and then substituting the
human with the Blocker, has proved to prevent any catastrophic action in two of the
games. However, in Road Runner, when the Blocker took over the task of blocking
catastrophic actions, after a few millions of frames, the agent found a way to exploit the
rewards by dying. The Blocker has learned various actions that lead to the death of the
agent, however, this particular action was not in the Blockers list because this particular
state-action pair has not appeared during the initial phase with the human observer.
Therefore, there is a room for further improvement of the mechanisms of the Blocker.
One of the ideas that the authors suggest to improve the Blocker is to use a form of
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Novel State Detection in Reinforcement Learning
active learning to find new, potentially dangerous actions. In the following section, we
suggest a novel framework that might work as a solution to classify if the novel actions
are catastrophic or not.
5.2.2
The extended framework
Building on the foundations from HIRL [Sau+17], we want to incorporate anomaly
detection using generative models into reinforcement learning with human in the loop.
We focus on the problem of the Blocker being unable to work with state-action pairs
that it did not see during its training. We suggest to use the techniques from anomaly
detection (introduced in Section 4.2) to overcome this problem.
In our suggested setting, learning of the Blocker is divided into two parts. In the
initial part, the Blocker learns from human interactions as in the case of HIRL. It builds
the basic knowledge about the task, and at the end, it is prepared to take over the
human and classify the actions suggested by the agent as either catastrophic or non-
catastrophic. At the end of the initial phase, the Blocker builds a generative model of
the state-action pairs. At that time, the latent representations are learned in a way
that the model can perform anomaly detection on the training data and classify all the
catastrophic state-action pairs as anomalies.
In the second phase, the Blocker is in online mode which means that it receives a
single state-action pair at a time and process it in the following way:
• Pass the state-action pair through the catastrophe classifier.
• If the pair is classified as catastrophic, block the action and suggest safer action
instead.
• If the pair is not considered as catastrophic, pass it to the generative model to get
its anomaly score.
• When the pair is classified as anomaly, query the human to label the pair and use
this to update the initial catastrophe classifier as well as the generative model.
In this setup, the generative anomaly detector assist the original catastrophe clas-
sifier in discovering the state-action pairs that would be normally classified as non-
catastrophic, but based on the generative anomaly detector, there is a possibility that
the pairs might be catastrophic (similarly to the Road Runner case in HIRL where the
agent found a way to exploit the rewards that caused its death very late in the game).
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this thesis, we introduced the fundamentals of reinforcement learning and applied the
Deep Q-Network model to our own gridworld environment. Further, we introduced the
Variational Auto-Encoder that we applied on various image datasets to investigate its
generative competencies but more importantly, to investigate its application for anomaly
detection. We will now discuss our architectural choices related to the results of our
experiments.
6.1
DQN
The field of reinforcement learning is gaining more and more popularity in recent years
mainly due to advances in deep learning. There exist several deep reinforcement learning
approaches with various strengths and weaknesses but all of them have one common goal
— to teach the agent to succeed in a given task.
We used the opportunity to learn the details of how some of these models work,
especially the DQN. We learned that the complexity of the environment is a crucial
aspect that influences the difficulty of the agent’s learning.
However, we have also
seen that the algorithms for reinforcement learning are easily adaptable to different
environments, and that the algorithm learns to optimize its policy by optimizing the
cumulative rewards.
DQN proved to be sufficient algorithm for learning the optimal policy in various
environments, like gridworld and Pong. However, we noticed that the right set of hyper-
parameters is what matters the most. Especially the use of the replay memory helped
the DQN model to avoid being stuck in a locally optimal policy. That being said, even
high replay memory will not guarantee convergence to the global optimum policy, es-
pecially when we use ϵ-greedy strategy for selecting actions with ϵ that is too small
compared to the complexity of the environment. In such case, the replay memory would
be filled by transitions following some local optimum policy because the agent would
not explore the whole environment. The exploration-exploitation dilemma is something
that one has to keep in mind while designing the algorithm (not only DQN).
We can conclude that with the right set of hyperparameters and a complex-enough
neural network the DQN framework works as intended.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Discussion
6.2
Variational Auto-Encoder
The main goal of the thesis was to experiment with Variational Auto-Encoder for
anomaly detection in images. This provided us with an excellent opportunity to ex-
plore the generative and representational capabilities of the framework.
We could see that the learned lower-dimensional representations of the input images
were not only sufficient to encode and then reconstruct the inputs but mainly also that
the model was capable of learning the underlying characteristics that the images in a
dataset share. Taking these underlying characteristics, the model was able to generate
new images based on these characteristics.
Moreover, by investigating another variant of Variational Auto-Encoder, β-VAE, we
were able to deepen our knowledge of the model and its underlying mathematics. We
learned and experimentally validated how crucial the choice of β is. For a model that
prefers reconstruction while still maintaining at least slight ability of generating new
samples, β < 1 is the parameter of choice. Similarly, if the emphasis is on learning
commonalities in the dataset that are more general, we should choose β > 1.
6.3
Variational Auto-Encoder for anomaly
detection
The ability to learn the underlying representations of a set of data, is something the
Variational Auto-Encoder was designed for. Interestingly, this ability makes it also a
convenient tool for detecting inconsistencies in the data. Given the prior work on utiliz-
ing Variational Auto-Encoder for anomaly detection in different areas and especially on
images, it reasonably became our tool of choice for our experiments on various image
datasets. Starting with popular and well established datasets in machine learning com-
munity — MNIST and FashionMNIST — we could see how well the model distinguishes
the data coming from two different distributions. Later, we utilized β-VAE to find novel
states in a reinforcement learning environment, given the states were represented by
images. We learned that for our specific anomalies, β < 1 was not of great use as the
model was not able to learn the underlying characteristics of the environment which was
a key in detecting the anomalies.
We also observed that even with smaller β, the model detects states that are signif-
icantly different from the normal states. Therefore, β is the parameter that should be
optimized for each dataset separately.
In our experiments, we found that the β-VAE model was able to classify all the
designed anomalous states. However, we cannot take these results as the ground truth
that would hold for other experiments. We might find cases where the anomalous states
come from a distribution that is so close to the distribution of the normal data that the
β-VAE framework would not be good enough as the detector of anomalies.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Anomaly detection for safe reinforcement learning
51
6.4
Anomaly detection for safe
reinforcement learning
The need for safe and reliable systems is going to be extremely important in the future
when we will see more and more autonomous systems integrated into our daily lives. We
introduced one approach to make reinforcement learning safer via human interactions.
This approach faces a few challenges. We tried to provide a solution that would make
the system robust to distributional shift. Therefore, by utilizing deep generative models
for anomaly detection, the system would detect input data points that come from a
different distribution than the normal data.
The framework faces a few challenges. One is that by extending the original HIRL
by generative anomaly detection, it would require more computational resources. At
the time of writing this thesis, the deep learning methods are still computationally very
demanding, especially when working with high-dimensional input data, which might be
a problem for the extended HIRL, preventing it from being used in real-time applications.
However, if the cost is not a concern, the applications of the framework can run on GPU
which solves the problem with slow computations.
Another challenge is that to have a truly safe (and agent-agnostic) system, we would
need to improve the decisions about a state-action pair being catastrophic. Especially,
we would need a system that is able to explain its decisions, so that a human evaluator
can validate the correctness of the decisions. The problem with VAE is that it can be
overconfident in its decisions, even if they are incorrect. A solution to explainability
can be provided by Bayesian methods. A very recent example is Bayesian Variational
Auto-Encoder which was suggested by [DH19] for detecting data points that come from
a different distribution than the normal data. This method measures how informative
is each data point for the generative model, and classifies the data points that are
highly informative as anomalies because they likely come from a different generative
process. Using this approach, we could further improve the accuracy of our VAE model
for anomaly detection.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Future work
In this thesis, we learned about reinforcement learning, Variational Auto-Encoders,
anomaly detection, and we suggested a way to combine these areas to build a detec-
tor of novel (possibly catastrophic) states and actions. However, the range of methods
that would be a suitable candidates for further investigation is vast. We will introduce
some of them, next to other possible improvements, in this chapter.
7.1
More complex environments
In our experiments on anomaly detection, we could see how the β parameter changes
the detection abilities of the β-VAE model. Fortunately, we were able to find the β
that made the β-VAE capable of drawing the threshold between the normal samples
and anomalies.
We were able to demonstrate this on data from a relatively simple reinforcement
learning environment — Pong. Overall, the workings of this environment can be sum-
marized to two paddles that can move vertically between two walls, and a ball that has
also limited area in which it can be found. Therefore, our series of experiments with
modified states might have been too simple for the model to discover, as it was able to
learn the inner workings within the environment.
However, given a more complex environment, the results might be different as in a
recent study by [Ser+19]. Especially in a situation where the VAE detector learns the
inner workings from an incomplete set of data that does not cover all the possible states.
It would be interesting to do the experiments on such complex environment and see if
the environment’s complexity introduce an additional problem, or if the VAE detector
is robust enough to withstand these conditions.
7.2
Model complexity and hyperparameters
For our experiments, we needed to experiment with different models starting from MLP
and CNN and ending with the combination of both. The architectures that we proposed
are complex enough to provide the solutions that we intended them to provide.
Our focus was not aimed on finding the best hyperparameters for each given exper-
iment.
The hyperparameters in this thesis were chosen by hand, without using any
automated parameter search method. While we were able to get the results as described
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Future work
earlier, there might be a better choice of hyperparameters that would further improve
the models.
Also, it might be interesting to further experiment with additional layers in our
models. Even though we used batch normalization in some of our models, adding a
dropout layer might help to increase the generalization of the models.
Finally, there are other types of models that we did not have the time to experiment
with in the scope of this thesis, like the Generative adversarial network (GAN). It would
be interesting to investigate their capabilities on our experiments in practice.
7.3
Semi-supervised generative models
One of the possible drawbacks of the generative methods that we investigated in this
thesis, is that they work in an unsupervised manner. It makes them highly applicable
as they do not require any labels that might be costly to obtain. On the other hand,
it might also prevent the models from learning the proper approximation of the data
manifold.
A solution to this might be provided by semi-supervised deep generative models, such
as M1+M2 model introduced by [Kin+14]. By obtaining only a small amount of labels,
the model connects the information from the labels with the structural information
inferred in an unsupervised way from the data.
In case of classification of catastrophic state-action pairs, given just a few labels of
catastrophic data points, the model can learn a better approximation of the manifold for
the normal data. That could lead to capturing more catastrophes that would otherwise
be considered as normal state-action pairs. Therefore, replacing the VAE with semi-
supervised methods could be an interesting area for further experiments.
7.4
Active learning
We could develop the idea of semi-supervised learning even further. Active learning is
a concept that suggest that an algorithm can choose the data points that should be
labeled so that the model has the highest performance.
Active learning methods work in iterations in which they select the data points that
should get labels. There are two main approaches to active learning:
• STREAM-based — takes unlabeled data point by data point and decides if it needs
to query its label or if it can label it itself.
• POOL-based — an active learner chooses a data point that it wants to get label
for from a pool of unlabeled data points. It finds the most informative data point
in the pool.
==PAGE:65==
7.4 Active learning
55
In each iteration, the algorithm selects the most appropriate data point that should
be labeled. One iteration of an active learning algorithm is defined by the following
steps:
1. Train the current model (learned using the labeled data obtained so far).
2. Select the next (most informative) data point.
3. Obtain the label of that data point from an oracle (e.g., a human annotator).
4. Add this new labeled data point to the training set.
5. Repeat the process with the updated dataset.
There are different approaches to choosing the data points that should be labeled,
which are commonly referred to as query selection strategies. Some of them are:
• Uncertainty sampling — takes the data point where the current model Θ is the
most uncertain. The uncertainty measures are:
– Least Confident — x∗
LC = argmaxx[1−PΘ(ˆy|x)], where ˆy is the most probable
label for x under the current model Θ.
– Smallest Margin — x∗
SM = argminx[PΘ(y1|x) −PΘ(y2|x)], where y1, y2 are
the most probable labels for x under Θ.
– Label Entropy — choose the data point with maximum label entropy: x∗
LE =
argmaxx −∑
i PΘ(yi|x) log PΘ(yi|x), where yi ranges over all possible labels.
• Query by committee — committee of models are trained on currently available
labeled data. Committees are either samples of different models from the model
distribution, or are obtained using ensemble methods (bagging, boosting, etc.). An
iteration in this strategy looks as follows:
1. All models vote for their predictions of unlabeled data.
2. The data point with maximum disagreement (e.g., measured by vote entropy)
is selected.
3. All committees are retrained on the new dataset.
• Other strategies like Expected Impact, or Density-Weighted Methods.
The choice of the query selection strategy depends on the experimental setup. For
anomaly detection, we might be interested in samples, for which the model is the least
confident.
By querying the data points that should be labeled, we could indeed achieve better
performance of the generative model. The active learner would choose to get labels for
the data points that helps the generative model approximate the learned manifold as
close as possible to the true manifold of the data.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Future work
We suggest to investigate the combination of active learning with semi-supervised
generative models for anomaly detection for future work. Especially its application on
the classification task on state-action pairs that was introduced in Chapter 5. Using such
setup could simplify our proposed framework. We expect that this approach of classifying
the pairs as catastrophic or non-catastrophic, would provide even more reliable results
and, therefore, improve the overall performance of our suggested framework.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to set up a machine learning algorithm to detect situations
when a reinforcement learning agent is about to encounter a novel state that is different
from all the states that the agent encountered so far. Being able to do so would help to
improve the safety of training reinforcement learning agents. The project was strongly
inspired by the reinforcement learning framework utilizing human interactions, called
HIRL.
In order to work on such a complex problem, we needed to divide our work into three
parts. Firstly, we investigated reinforcement learning as the problem domain. We intro-
duced the reinforcement learning discipline and its subcategory of deep reinforcement
learning with all the necessary details about neural networks as a key element in the
setup. Later, we implemented DQN and validated it on our own implementation of the
gridworld environment as well as on Pong environment from OpenAI’s Gym library. In
these experiments, we concluded that our DQN models had enough capacity to learn
the optimal (or at least sub-optimal) policy.
As the second step, we explored the area of generative models, focusing especially on
the Variational Auto-Encoder and its variant β-VAE. We wanted to experiment with the
model and understand the trade-off between perfect reconstructions of the input data
and the ability to generate novel samples in reasonable quality. We implemented both
VAE and β-VAE using a probabilistic approach, where we took advantage of working
directly with distributions instead of the regular approach that might be less intuitive.
We experimented with different datasets like MNIST and FashionMNIST to find out how
well can the VAE and β-VAE algorithms model those datasets. With enough evidence
that the algorithms learned meaningful latent representations in both cases while being
able to reconstruct the input data in reasobanle quality, we generated our own dataset
of images from Pong. We generated the dataset by running our DQN agent in the Pong
environment. When evaluating the algorithms on Pong dataset, the reconstructions were
of good quality. However, from interpolations in the latent space, we found that the
learned manifold was not regular as we did not see a smooth transitions from one image
to the other. Nevertheless, the algorithms achieved good results in both reconstruction
and generalization aspects, which was the key of being able to use them later for anomaly
detection.
With the knowledge of reinforcement learning and Variational Auto-Encoders, we
moved forward to investigate anomaly detection using VAE. We introduced the idea
behind anomaly detection and deep anomaly detection. Later, we investigated existing
applications of VAE for anomaly detection as the theoretical basis for our own experi-
==PAGE:68==
58
8 Conclusion
ments. In our experiments, we focused on the distributional change in data. We could
see that the β-VAE models were overall able to distinguish the MNIST dataset from the
FashionMNIST dataset. Based on that validation, we again wanted to see the results
for our Pong dataset. For that, we designed several categories of anomalous data to
test the different aspects of the model learned by β-VAE. By experimenting with the β
parameter, we were able to achieve a clear distinction of the anomalous data from the
normal data. However, to conclude with certainty that the β-VAE model is the right
tool for anomaly detection in all reinforcement learning environments, we would need
to consider a broader set of aspects that defines the complexity of an environment, and
possibly perform tests on more complex environments.
Finally, we took all the parts together (reinforcement learning, VAE, anomaly de-
tection) and suggested a novel framework for detecting novel states in reinforcement
learning environments. Considering our main goal, to improve the safety of training re-
inforcement learning agent, we suggested an approach to plug in the VAE-based anomaly
detector into HIRL, where it would detect novel state-action pairs instead of just the
states. While this contribution does not solve all the safety issues within reinforcement
learning, we believe that our suggested approach would prove useful, especially in cases
with distributional shift in states and actions, that poses a great challenge for the original
HIRL framework.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Derivation of marginal
likelihood from KL
divergence
Another way to get the marginal likelihood in equation (3.1) is to start with the idea that
we want to approximate the true posterior pθ(z|x(i)) with an approximate distribution
qϕ(z|x(i)).
To measure the similarity between the two distributions, we use the KL
divergence which should be as small as possible in order to the two distributions being
the most similar. The KL divergence between the approximation and the true posterior
can be written as follows:
DKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z|x(i))
)
=
−Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(z|x(i)) −log qθ(z|x(i))
]
=
−Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(z, x(i)) −log pθ(x(i)) −log qθ(z|x(i))
]
=
−Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(z, x(i)) −log qθ(z|x(i))
]
+Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i))
]
=
−Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z) + log pθ(z) −log qθ(z|x(i))
]
+ log pθ(x(i))
By reorganizing the last equations, we get:
log pθ(x(i))
=
DKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z|x(i))
)
+Eqϕ(z|x(i))
[
log pθ(x(i)|z) + log pθ(z) −log qθ(z|x(i))
]
=
DKL
(
qϕ(z|x(i)) ∥pθ(z|x(i))
)
+ L(θ, ϕ, x(i))
Finally, as the KL divergence is always non-negative, we get the same variational lower
bound L(θ, ϕ, x(i)) as in equation (3.3).
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Implementation of the
evidence lower bound
Our implementation of the evidence lower bound can be seen in Listing B.1. We use
it as the loss function for all our eperiments involving Variational Auto-Encoders as
well as β-VAE. We can see that the calculation of the evidence lower bound in line 8
in Listing B.1 directly follows the definition in (3.4). In lines 4 to 6, we utilize the
distributions calculated by the VAE (or β-VAE) which implementation we introduced
in Listing 3.1 in Section 3.3.5.
1 def ELBO_loss(x, z, q_zx, p_xz, p_z, beta, **kwargs):
2
x = x.view(x.shape[0], -1)
3
4
log_prob_p_xz = p_xz.log_prob(x).sum(dim=1)
# log p(x|z) evaluated on x
5
log_prob_p_z = p_z.log_prob(z).sum(dim=1)
# log p(z) evaluated on z
6
log_prob_q_zx = q_zx.log_prob(z).sum(dim=1)
# log q(z|x) evaluated on z
7
8
elbo_batch = log_prob_p_xz + beta*(log_prob_p_z - log_prob_q_zx)
9
loss = -torch.mean(elbo_batch)
10
return loss
Listing B.1: Loss function using evidence lower bound.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX C
Implementation details for
convolutional layers in VAE
models
In Table C.1, we list the details of the three convolutional hidden layers as part of
the encoder of VAE for MNIST and FashionMNIST datasets. These parameters are
complementary to the rest of the architecture described in Section 3.4.2.
Layer
Number of channels
Kernel size
Stride
First convolutional
16
(3, 3)
(1, 1)
Second convolutional
32
(4, 4)
(2, 2)
Third convolutional
64
(4, 4)
(2, 2)
Table C.1: Parameters of the convolutional hidden layers which are part of the encoder
of VAE for MNIST and FashionMNIST datasets.
Similarly, in Table C.2, we list the details of the four convolutional hidden layers as
part of the encoder of VAE for Pong dataset. These parameters are complementary to
the rest of the architecture described in Section 3.4.2.
Layer
Number of channels
Kernel size
Stride
First convolutional
16
(3, 3)
(1, 1)
Second convolutional
32
(6, 4)
(2, 2)
Third convolutional
64
(4, 4)
(2, 2)
Fourth convolutional
64
(4, 4)
(2, 2)
Table C.2: Parameters of the convolutional hidden layers which are part of the encoder
of VAE for Pong dataset.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[Abe+17]
David Abel et al. “Agent-Agnostic Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learn-
ing”. In: ArXiv abs/1701.04079 (2017).
[Aga18]
Abien Fred Agarap. “Deep Learning using Rectified Linear Units (ReLU)”.
In: (March 2018). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08375.
[Akr+19]
Haleh Akrami et al. Robust Variational Autoencoder. May 2019. arXiv: 1807.
01349. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.01349.
[Aru+17]
Kai Arulkumaran et al. “A Brief Survey of Deep Reinforcement Learning”. In:
(2017). cite arxiv:1708.05866Comment: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
Special Issue on Deep Learning for Image Understanding (arXiv extended
version). doi: 10.1109/MSP.2017.2743240. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1708.05866.
[Bel+13]
M. G. Bellemare et al. “The Arcade Learning Environment: An Evaluation
Platform for General Agents”. In: Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research
47 (June 2013), pages 253–279.
[Bro+16]
Greg Brockman et al. OpenAI Gym. 2016. eprint: arXiv:1606.01540.
[CBK09]
V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar. “Anomaly detection: A survey”.
In: ACM Comput. Surv. 41, 3, Article 15 (2009), page 58. doi: 10.1145/
1541880.1541882. url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1541880.1541882.
[CC19]
Raghavendra Chalapathy and Sanjay Chawla. “Deep Learning for Anomaly
Detection: A Survey”. In: (January 2019). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1901.03407.
[Chr+17]
Paul F Christiano et al. “Deep Reinforcement Learning from Human Pref-
erences”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30. Edited
by I. Guyon et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017, pages 4299–4307. url:
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7017-deep-reinforcement-learning-
from-human-preferences.pdf.
[DH19]
Erik Daxberger and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. “Bayesian Variational
Autoencoders for Unsupervised Out-of-Distribution Detection”. In: ArXiv
abs/1912.05651 (2019).
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[Fos19]
David Foster. Generative deep learning : teaching machines to paint, write,
compose, and play. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2019, page 308. isbn: 9781492041948.
url: https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/generative-deep-
learning/9781492041931/.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016. url: http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[Haw80]
D. M. Hawkins. Identification of Outliers. Springer, Dordrecht, 1980, page 188.
isbn: 978-94-015-3994-4. doi: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/
10.1007/978-94-015-3994-4.
[Hig+17]
Irina Higgins et al. “beta-VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts with a Con-
strained Variational Framework”. In: ICLR. 2017.
[KB14]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization”. In: (December 2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[Kin+14]
Durk P Kingma et al. “Semi-supervised learning with deep generative mod-
els”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 2014, pages 3581–
3589.
[KW13]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”.
In: (December 2013). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
[LC10]
Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. “MNIST handwritten digit database”. In:
(2010). url: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/.
[Lei+17]
Jan Leike et al. “AI Safety Gridworlds”. In: (November 2017). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1711.09883.
[LX18]
Yuchen Lu and Peng Xu. “Anomaly Detection for Skin Disease Images Using
Variational Autoencoder”. In: CoRR abs/1807.01349 (2018). arXiv: 1807.
01349. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.01349.
[Mni+13]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning”.
In: (December 2013). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
[Nie18]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination
Press, 2018. url: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/.
[Pas+17]
Adam Paszke et al. “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch”. In: NIPS-W.
2017.
[Sau+17]
William Saunders et al. “Trial without Error: Towards Safe Reinforcement
Learning via Human Intervention”. In: (July 2017). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1707.05173.
[SB18]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An In-
troduction. Second. The MIT Press, 2018. url: http://incompleteideas.
net/book/the-book-2nd.html.
[Ser+19]
Joan Serrà et al. “Input complexity and out-of-distribution detection with
likelihood-based generative models”. In: ArXiv abs/1909.11480 (2019).
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[SG19]
Saumya Sinha and Sophie Giffard-Roisin. “Detecting Avalanche Deposits
using Variational Autoencoder on Sentinel-1 Satellite Imagery”. In: 2019.
[Wil92]
Ronald J. Williams. “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for con-
nectionist reinforcement learning”. In: Machine Learning 8.3 (May 1992),
pages 229–256. issn: 1573-0565. doi: 10.1007/BF00992696. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF00992696.
[XRV17]
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. “Fashion-MNIST: a Novel
Image Dataset for Benchmarking Machine Learning Algorithms”. In: (August
2017). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.07747.
[Xu+19]
Ming Xu et al. “An Efficient Anomaly Detection System for Crowded Scenes
Using Variational Autoencoders”. In: Applied Sciences 9 (August 2019), page 3337.
doi: 10.3390/app9163337.
==PAGE:78==
