==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Development of an energy optimized
building system based on prefabricated box
modules
Master Thesis
Heidi CHRISTIANSEN - s133645
February 2, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Development of an energy optimized building system based on pre-fabricated box
modules
Danish title:
Udvikling af energioptimeret byggesystem baseret på præfabrikerede boksmoduler
This report was prepared by:
Heidi Christiansen
Supervisor:
Svend Svendsen, Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
==PAGE:3==
RESUME
Denne rapport omhandlende præfabrikerede byggemoduler beskriver udviklingen af et un-
der Færøske forhold energioptimeret byggesystem. Byggesystemet er som titlen af opgaven
siger bestående af præfabrikerede boksmoduler. PPVC metoden - Prefabricated Preﬁnished
Volumetric Construction - er specielt interessant for Færøerne på grund af det omskiftelige
vejr. Tradionelle byggemetoder resulterer i forsinkelser og komplikationer pga. vejrforhold.
Efter at have læst denne rapport, vil læseren være informeret om boksmodulbyggeri og -
producenter, nytænkning af anvendelsen af traditionelle byggematerialer og især om tilgan-
gen til dette projekt og udviklingen af modulet fra idé til prototypeforslag. Rapporten beskriver
de forskellige faser fra ide og indsamling af baggrundsviden, til skitser og konceptudvikling.
Byggesystemet er udviklet som helhed og nedi detaljen, med hensyn bebyggelsens funktion
og de tekniske løsninger på modul-niveau. De første afsnit giver et indblik i byggemetoden
og energisparende løsninger i et særskilt State of the Art afsnit. Derefter følger en intro-
duktion til den Færøske tilgang til modulebyggeri, klimaet og energiproduktionen. Efter
denne introduktion færdiggøres nogle konkrete koncepter for bærende konstruktion, instal-
lationer, vinduer og væg-, tag- og gulvkonstruktioner. Regler og anbefalinger, samt et studie
af tidligere fejl og gode løsninger bruges som grundlag for udviklingen af et energieﬀektivt,
ﬂeksibelt module, som med minimale omkostninger kan levere maksimal komfort, i form af et
godt indeklima, og en god, højkvalitetsbolig, der både sparer entreprenøren for tid og penge,
og ejerne for store udgifter til vand og varme. Dette afspejles i materialevalgene, som vægtes
i forhold til deres tilgængelighed, levetid of modstandsdygtighed mod vind og vejr. Til slut
designes og optimeres et grundmodul, som anvendes i et rækkehusbyggeri med tre på hinan-
den koblede grundmoduler. Flere muligheder for sammensætning af modulerne skitseres og
diskuteres, og endelig opsummeres resultaterne i en konklusion.
i
==PAGE:4==
ABSTRACT
This report on volumetric building modules treats the subject of an energy optimized building
system under Faroese circumstances. The building system is as the title of the report says, based
on prefabricated box modules. The prefabricated preﬁnished volumetric construction method
is particularly interesting in the Faroe Islands because of the everchanging weather, which
complicates and delays traditional outdoors construction. After reading this report, the reader
will have gained knowledge about box modules currently on the market, how traditional
materials can be used in nontraditional ways, and most importantly how this project went from
an idea to a ﬁnished proposal for a nearly zero energy module. The procedure is described
from the development of the idea, to information gathering and processing, to sketches for a
prototype module, that is analyzed and optimized to meet the standards that can be expected
of nearly zero energy buildings in the Faroe Islands. The developed system is considered on
every step on the scale, from the concept of modular building, the building system as a whole,
the functions it can fulﬁll, to technical details. The ﬁrst couple of chapters provide background
knowledge on modular building and energy saving solutions in a State of the Art report, and
on the Faroe Islands, their climate, and the spirit of time regarding modular construction and
renewable energy sources. After the introductory chapters, concrete concepts for structure,
building installations, windows and building constructions are developed. The building code,
architectural guides, laws and recommendations and previous successes and failures are studied
and used as a foundation for developing a versatile base module that with minimal cost can oﬀer
maximum comfort, and save the builder, building owner, the residents, or the guests money
and time. This is mirrored in the material choices and construction concepts, which are are
weighed on their build-ability, lifetime, and resilience towards the elements. Finally, a base
module is developed, analysed, optimized and further developed, and then tested in a town
house three-module conﬁguration. Suggestions for diﬀerent layouts and combinations of the
module are discussed, and certain results are highlighted and summed up in a concluding
paragraph.
ii
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Science in Architectural Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project is
credited to 30 ECTS points. The theme of the project was suggested by the supervisor, and
the author suggested to investigate for Faroese circumstances.
Studying at the Technical University of Denmark has been the most rewarding time of my
life so far. Handing in this thesis feels like a victory, a farewell, and of course a very big
milestone. I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my Supervisor, Svend Svendsen,
for his consultation and guidance throughout the course of this project. I would like to thank
the people at Articon for inviting me in for a talk and sharing their projects with me. I would
also like to express my appreciation for all the professors, tutors, all the workers at DTU, who
have made the last six years feel like an adventure. Finally I would like to thank my fellow
students, Anja, Soﬁe and Rihab - who made the bad days bearable and the good days even
better. And last but not least, I would like to thank my Mom and Dad, my brothers, and my
Mother in Law and Father in Law, and the rest of my wonderful family, and especially my
better half, Hans, and our daughter Hjørdis for always supporting me.
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
Resume
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgement
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background - the relevance of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the Art
3
2.1
Prefabricated Preﬁnished Volumetric Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Manufacturers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Building Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Design for Disassembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Heating and ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Faroese Conditions and Architecture
15
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Requirements and Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.2
Conceptualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.3
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.4
Test of base module performance in a module conﬁguration . . . . . .
21
4.2
Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Conceptual Design
22
5.1
Requirements and Design Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Conceptual Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
iv
==PAGE:7==
5.2.1
Design at building level - module conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.2
Oﬀ-site Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.3
Transportation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.4
On-site Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.5
Structural system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.6
Dimensions and Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.7
Building Services Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Base Module - Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Building constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3.3
Remaining inputs for IDA ICE simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3.4
Base Module - Performance of Initial Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Optimization
67
6.1
Redistributed airﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.1.1
Summer bypass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.2
Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2.1
Venting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2.2
Frameless windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.3
Building Envelope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.4
Optimized Base Module Design Proposal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.5
Version Proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.5.1
Vertically Stackable Modules - town house
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.5.2
Horizontally Stackable Modules - Opensided modules . . . . . . . . .
88
6.5.3
Hotel Room/Dormitory Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.6
Example of Module Conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7
Discussion
91
8
Conclusion
93
v
==PAGE:8==
References
94
vi
==PAGE:9==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
1
INTRODUCTION
The climate changes and environmental pollution are discussed in media on a daily basis.
The increasing focus on lowering energy consumption, waste and extraction of resources is
very valid for the building industry, which has room for improvement in all of these ﬁelds.
Many new green certiﬁcations have been introduced in the building sector the last years, and
the requirements for energy consumption are getting stricter. At the same time, population is
increasing and cities are growing. All these factors call for a focused eﬀort to make the building
industry’s construction methods greener, faster and more aﬀordable. Innovative materials and
techniques are key to solving this problem. A chapter in this report is dedicated towards
some of the State of the Art building technology. The basic principles of how to design an
energy eﬃcient building are shown in the energy pyramid in Figure 1. The pyramid illustrates
that the biggest impact and improvement comes from the conservation of energy, and thus
conserving energy should be the ﬁrst measure taken. This can be done by reducing heat losses
and thereby heating demand, reducing overheating and thereby cooling and ventilation needs,
choosing eﬃcient ventilation strategies and utilize natural ventilation. The second priority is
to choose energy-eﬃcient solutions, such as LED lighting and air handling units with high
heat recovery. Finally, the energy supply should come from renewable sources.
Figure 1: The fundamentals of green energy design shown in the energy pyramid
The main content in this report will be the development of an energy-optimized building
system, where some of the newest technology and building methods are implemented in the
design. The next couple of sections will describe the possibilities and needs for such a system.
1
==PAGE:10==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
1.1
BACKGROUND - THE RELEVANCE OF THE PROJECT
The need for aﬀordable, quickly available housing exists in many places around the world. To examine
a speciﬁc solution, a speciﬁc location is chosen. The Faroese building industry has recently conformed
to the prefabrication trend. The Faroese birthrate is amongst the highest in Europe, and with numbers
of movers to the islands peeking, and a growing tourist industry, there is a shortage of housing and
accommodation.
The use of prefabricated building elements, such as concrete ﬂoors is common, and popular,
because of the reduced building time and cost. By introducing a box module building sys-
tem the time and expenses could potentially be reduced even more. The simple box shape is
energy-eﬃcient, with maximum space and minimum external surface -heat loss- area. But
there is more to sustainable construction than just the energy use.
Sustainable design ﬁguratively rests on three pillars: the environmental, economic and social
pillar. From the environmental perspective clean energy, and low consumption of energy,
water and resources are important. But other factors must be considered to complete a socially
and economically sustainable design. Low cost and low energy buildings may be a great design
seen from an economic point of view, but in order for the design to be socially sustainable -
which it should be, in order for people to thrive and to prevent ghettos - certain principles
must be applied.
A key principle is to create a ﬂexible design, because the building’s purpose might change
over time, and the households grow or shrink. Another way to ensure a sustainable social
environment, is to make space for diﬀerent user categories. [1]. For example, an apartment
block could host a shop, a cafe or a daycare centre. Mixed functionality creates life on the
streets at all hours of the day, and this feeling of life ensures a safe, welcoming atmosphere in
the neighbourhood.
1.2
AIM OF THE PROJECT
The aim of the project is to create a high-quality, low energy and low cost building sys-
tem based on the Prefabricated Preﬁnished Volumetric Construction (PPVC) method, which
fulﬁlls the requirements for a Nearly Zero Energy Building (nZEB).
2
==PAGE:11==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
2
STATE OF THE ART
This chapter highlights the state of the art technology in construction methods, materials, windows and
HVAC concepts.
2.1
PREFABRICATED PREFINISHED VOLUMETRIC CONSTRUCTION
The construction industry has been using modular construction methods for many years. The
most common method is 2D panelized modular construction, which is being used to some
extent by most companies, in the shape of pre-fabricated ﬂoor, wall and roof elements. The
Prefabricated Preﬁnished Volumetric Construction method (PPVC method) is a 3D modular
construction method. There are three main types of volumetric modules being used: load-
bearing modules that use corner and intermediate posts to transmit gravity loads, load-bearing
modules that use exterior walls to transmit gravity loads, and non load-bearing modules (such
as bathroom modules) [2]. The structure can be made from steel and for low-rise construction,
wood. The volumetric modules can be either 4-sided modules, partially open modules, or open
sided modules. Which load-bearing structure is chosen, depends on the degree of openness
needed [3].
There are many aspects of modular construction, that call for precision and careful planning.
The location and access to the building site are important in terms of transportation, assembly,
and distance to factory. The design must include tolerances for level and alignment, and the
connections must be water- and airtight. The modules should be buildable without workers
having to align them, risking being caught under or squeezed between modules. Therefore
the building sequence should be well thought out from the beginning. The module design
shall allow for assembly and disassembly of the building as a whole, but also ensure accessibility
withing each module, for example for regular building services inspection [4].
2.1.1
MANUFACTURERS
Many companies oﬀer modules for all kinds of purposes. Most common are workers (tempo-
rary) accommodation and student housing, but there is also a market for residential homes,
hotels and oﬃce buildings. In Scandinavia the Ikea-Skanska partnership project BoKlok is
well established, with platforms in Norway and Finland, and branching out in Germany and
UK. There are several companies in Denmark that use the PPVC method, some with facto-
ries in Denmark, and some with factories in other countries. The styles and interior layout
vary from company to company, but all modules are similar in size, which is due to legal reg-
ulations for transportation. The use of box modules in Denmark began to grow, when the
initiative AlmenBolig+, which was a project aiming at creating better, cheaper public hous-
ing, paved the way. Since it started, the project has resulted in more than 20 new building
complexes. The partnering contractors have mainly been Scandi Byg and BM Byggeindustri.
Several architects and design oﬃces have worked on the diﬀerent projects. What is common
for all AlmenBolig+ projects, is the layout of the modules, with a central core for wet rooms,
3
==PAGE:12==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
plant rooms, stairs and other functions that do not require daylight or access to the outside
[5]. Other Danish companies that oﬀer volumetric modules include
• ONV Arkitekter, who mainly design, they sell own modules through a partner
• AI arkitekter
• FlexModul
• Focus Moduler
• ABC pavillioner
• Mobilhouse
• Ajos
• ... and more.
There are also several companies who oﬀer modular parts, such as Swedish Part A/B, that sell
preﬁnished bathroom pods, and the international company NCC that sell preﬁnished technical
shafts for building services installations.
Although the market for volumetric building modules is often seen as limited to workers ac-
comodation and other temporary building, an investigation of the biggest companies shows
that the volumetric construction method is used on a large scale for permanent buildings with
all kinds of purposes, from residential homes to oﬃces and institutions. Figure 2 and Fig-
ure 3 show the number and building gross area of projects carried out by one of the largest
modular construction companies in Denmark, Scandi Byg. They have also supplied at least
three Faroese building projects with prefabricated modules. A list of the projects can be seen
in Figure 4. The investigation showed that the primary use of the modules is for sustainable,
low-energy and low-cost, but high-quality permanent residences.
Figure 2: Distribution of building typologies and number of projects
4
==PAGE:13==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 3: Distribution of building typologies and gross area
Figure 4: List of projects from the reference project home page of Scandi Byg, and an addi-
tional three Faroese projects
The investigation showed that the primary use of the modules is for sustainable, low-energy
and low-cost, but high-quality permanent residences. Over the years, the modules have been
re-designed to deal with some of the issues that have arisen. One of the common problems
with modules from many diﬀerent companies has been moisture in crawl spaces. Modular
building projects from the latest years have as a result been erected directly onto prepared
5
==PAGE:14==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
terrain with insulation. An example of section drawing of such a new project can be seen in
Figure 5 below.
Figure 5: Section drawing of modernised modular construction without crawl space [6]
Other large Danish companies that have taken to producing high quality permanent mod-
ules for PPVC construction include BM byggeindustri and FlexModuler. FlexModuler have
also supplied modules for a high school expansion in Tórshavn some years back. Figure 6
and Figure 7 show examples of interior layout of modules from BM Byggeindustri. Figure
Figure 8 and Figure 9 show examples of modules from Scandi Byg and Flexmoduler, respec-
tively. These examples show the versatility of volumetric modules. They can function as single
detached houses, or stacked town houses, or opened in the side walls and joined to create a
bigger ﬂoor plan for oﬃces, daycare, and one plan houses. A module can be constructed to
suit most needs.
6
==PAGE:15==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 6: Example 1 of modules from BM byggeindustri
Figure 7: Example 2 of modules from BM byggeindustri
Figure 8: Example of module from Scandibyg
7
==PAGE:16==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 9: Example of module from FlexModul
Bjerg Arkitekter has shown a creative way of combining two modules. The ﬂoor plan can be
seen in Figure 10 below. The ﬂexibility of the interior design is illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 10: The ﬂoor plan of the Smørum Rådhus project. Installations and shafts placed in the
core, with two large open rooms [7]
8
==PAGE:17==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 11: A ﬂexible interior design by means of a creative furniture module which holds a
spare bed, place for roll-under double-bed, kitchen cupboards, refrigerator, storage space,
and a recreative space for reading or playing, and lastly folding doors to create individual
rooms [7]
2.2
BUILDING MATERIALS
Wood is considered an eco-friendly material, with moisture and temperature regulating qual-
ities, which is beneﬁcial for the indoor climate. However, it is also a ﬂammable material, and
some scientists oppose the use of wood in mass construction, and remain critical towards the
ﬁreprooﬁng methods. Wrapping the wooden construction with non-organic, non-ﬂammable
materials instead of using these materials for the structure itself is considered a waste [8]. There
are however other ways to ensure ﬁre safety in wooden buildings, for example by chemical
treatment of the wood, so it’s less prone to ignite. It could be argued, that ﬁnishing oﬀthe
wooden construction with a ﬁre resistant non-organic material, such as gypsum is not a waste
of material, since it increases the thermal mass of the building, which can save energy for
heating and cooling. In order to minimize material use and increase thermal performance of
the wooden construction, I-joists can be used. When choosing the wall construction, it is im-
portant to keep in mind, that a lot of processing can make a product more costly. Therefore,
a wall constructed with I-joists with a lower heat loss, is not necessarily more cost-eﬃcient
than a simpler wood skeleton wall. And if the energy consumption can be lowered by other
means insulated I-joists, it might be preferable to have a cheaper, simple construction. As an
example, a rough calculation of three diﬀerent wall structures has been carried out. A sketch
is shown in Figure 12.
9
==PAGE:18==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 12: Illustration of three wall construction principles.
The ﬁrst is a traditional skeleton wall built with wood rafters 45x295mm.The second is an
I-beam with similar dimensions, 47x300mm. The third estimate is of a light steel skeleton
wall. Rockwool has launched such a wall system named RockZero. A simpliﬁed construction
could be two steel C-proﬁles of 45x70 mm connected by a wooden board, in order to prevent
cold bridges. With a module height of around three meters and a length of 12 meter, and
600mm spacing between each beam, one wall would have around 20 beams x three meters.
The materials and costs for each of the walls are listed in Table 1.
Material
Cost
Total cost for 12x2.5 m wall
DKK/m
DKK
45x295 mm rafters
67 [9]
4000
47x300 mm I-joists non-residential
99 [10]
6000
2 x 45x70 mm C proﬁles
78
5000
Table 1: Energy frame according to Faroese and Danish building regulations
So one wall would would cost for the structure alone around 4000 DKK with wooden rafters,
6000 DKK with wooden I-beams and around 5000 DKK for the light steel construction. Some
of the newest box module residential buildings in the AlmenBolig+ project cost a family be-
tween 4-500 DKK a month in heating. Therefore, it might not be proﬁtable to spend 1000
DKK extra on one wall, to save a fraction in energy and cost. The money could be invested
in other improvements.
Materials such as steel and plastic are not traditionally seen as environmentally friendly re-
sources, but if handled the right way, non-organic materials, steel for instance, can be reused
and recycled many times, and in that way be a part of circular system[11]. Steel is an excellent
choice for reversible connections.
Mineral wool is a commonly used insulation material. It is non-ﬂammable, durable and has
good sound absorption properties. A more sustainable alternative could be seaweed insulation,
which has similar thermal performance, and even though it is an organic material, it is natu-
10
==PAGE:19==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
rally enriched with minerals that are ﬂame retarding. Because of it porosity, same as mineral
wool, it works well as sound insulation.
A diﬀerent kind of thermal insulation is vacuum panels. They have a very high insulation
index even with very small thicknesses. On top of this, the material consumption for vacuum
panels is quite low, since it essentially consists of empty space.
2.3
DESIGN FOR DISASSEMBLY
Design for disassembly, or design for deconstruction, is a principle that is based on sustainable
construction and material use. The arguments for design for disassembly are that the primary
structure of a building has a longer lifespan than other components such as facade, ﬂoor cov-
erings, roof, windows, pipes etc. The life span for primary constructions is estimasted to be
150 years, which is typically also longer than the time the building is planned to be used for
the speciﬁc purpose it’s constructed for. [12] Therefore, sustainable construction is based on a
ﬂexible building design, so that the building’s function is adaptable to the owner’s changing
needs.
There are several building components currently on the market, from primary structure to ﬁn-
ishes, that fulﬁll the need for ﬂexible building design. The Suteki Wood System is a wooden
beam and steel bracket system, that not only speeds up the construction phase, it makes de-
mounting and relocating beams correspondingly quick and easy. In the case of closed module
volumetric construction, each module is relatively small, and that leaves little room for an
interchangeable ﬂoorplan. However, having a deconstructable primary structure allows for
reuse and repurpose once the module or the conﬁguration of modules - the building - and the
function of the building is outdated.
Figure 13: Suteki Wood System
The design for disassembly principle is not often applied to the structural system, but it is
becoming more common in the shorter life-span building parts, such as the facade. The com-
pany Cupaclad has a product named the Vanguard system, which is a natural slate facade
11
==PAGE:20==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
system that uses mechanical stainless steel ﬁxings. The stainless steel clips work like a spring.
A ﬁxing bracket with a similar mechanism is introduced by the company Vandkunsten in the
danish publication IDEKATALOG over designstrategier for design for disassembly i præfabrikeret
byggeri.
Figure 14: Cupaclad Vanguard clip [13]
Figure 15: Proposed steel spring bracket by
Vandkunsten [14]
Having a clip mounting system eases maintenance, since single slates can be exchanged when
damaged. Another argument put forward by Vandkunsten is that the facade elements can be
reversed when they are worn and the facade loses its aesthetic. The Danish company Vmeyer
A/S has a slate mounting system with hooks, where individual plates can be exchanged. Similar
facade systems are on the market for tile facade cladding. The company Dolle oﬀers a clip-on
system for wooden panels. The panels have a pre-cut groove, that is clicked onto a plastic rail.
2.4
WINDOWS
Windows have a big impact on the energy consumption, lighting conditions, and aesthetics of
a building. They also serve many purposes, as they provide natural light, ventilation, solar heat
contribution, ﬁre exits and last but not least - a view out. The right window design ensures
a balance between solar heat gain and heat loss. Factors that impact the heat transmission
through the window include
• U-value of the glazing
• U-value of the frame
• g-value of the glazing
• Area (Size of the window)
• Shading (trees, overhang (sill depth), neighbouring buildings)
The window glazing allows for both heat loss and gain, but the frame is only a source of heat
loss. By using a frameless window design, the energy consumption can be notably reduced.
12
==PAGE:21==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
On top of that, there is a grand architectural value in the frameless design. The beneﬁts of im-
plementing frameless windows are argued for and numerized in the master thesis of E. Saliba
[15]. There are products on the market with a very narrow frame, with minimized heat loss,
such as Sky Frame sliding doors.
Another innovative product is photo-voltaic glazing. The English company PolySolar has
a range of photo-voltaic glazing products. The transparency is quite low though, from 10-
50% [16]. A low-tech way of controlling the solar gain is with overhangs. An overhang will
typically screen for all summer sun, while allowing the lower winter sun to enter through
the glazing. The disadvantage of the overhang compared to applying solar coating on the
glazing is that it shades for all of the visible light as well. This principle is illustrated in Fig-
ure 16. Overhangs in some sense might be required in case of exterior access to top ﬂoors via
walkways.
Figure 16: Illustration of overhang eﬀect on solar radiation
2.5
HEATING AND VENTILATION
There are two sides to optimal heating and ventilation system: one is the physical installation,
and the other is system control. Examples of system control parameters are mentioned next,
but after this the types of installations are in focus.
The newest technology uses temperature, CO2 and humidity control, outdoor temperature
regulation, and wireless communication.
The ventilation principle can be mechanical, natural or hybrid ventilation, and it can be cen-
tralized or decentralized (room based) ventilation. An even distribution of heat and air is
needed to secure a satisfying thermal environment. In her thesis, E. Saliba develops a highly-
insulated, theft-proof, water, air and sound tight ventilation hatch, that can be used for ven-
tilation and emergency exit in case the windows are ﬁxed, frameless windows. The window
producer IdealCombi has a product with an internal, insulated door and an external ﬁxed shut-
ter, which could be developed to be an openable ventilation hatch and emergency exit.
For smaller buildings, such as a single-family home, mechanical ventilation could be installed
with ﬂexible tubes and a central ventilation unit. The air can be distributed with ﬁxtures, or
through a diﬀuse ceiling. Regardless which type of ventilation is chosen, it is crucial to balance
the supply and exhaust air volume. The advantages of a diﬀuse ceiling is less ductwork and
low air velocity, which leads to lower noise levels and pressure losses.
Heating systems are an active mean of heating. Floor heating is very good for thermal comfort
13
==PAGE:22==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
and suitable for low supply temperatures. Low supply temperature systems are eco friendly,
since they use less energy to produce heat. Passive means of heating are for example vents in
the external wall above a suspended, perforated ceiling. The outdoor air enters through vents
and is preheated by the inside air without additional energy and supplied through the dif-
fuse ceiling. The simplest way of using passive heating is to utilize the solar gain through the
windows. Ideally, passive heating is paired with thermal mass, in order to avoid overheating,
maintain the heat longer in winter and generally keep a stable temperature.
14
==PAGE:23==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
3
FAROESE CONDITIONS AND ARCHITECTURE
The Faroese climate conditions and their eﬀect on building style and energy consumption are discussed
in this section.
The Faroe Islands are situated in the temperate climate zone on the northern hemisphere.
The climate on the secluded islands is aﬀected by the surrounding sea, which acts as a thermal
buﬀer, resulting in cool summers and mild winters [17]. The islands are known for sometimes
showing glimpses of all four seasons in one day. The mountains also aﬀect the weather, with
some places being more prone to fog during warm periods. The northern areas have a heavier
yearly rainfall. Though mild, the weather is very wet and windy. Therefore a tight building
envelope is essential to avoid moisture damage and reduce the heating demand. The Danish
agency Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut has conducted a study of two types of new buildings in
the Faroe Islands, as preparation for the newly inaugurated Faroese building regulation, BK17.
The report named Energikrav i bygningsreglement for Færøerne - Besparelsesmuligheder og økonomi
states that there is a higher heating demand, partly due to a longer heating season, and that
the inﬁltration rate is higher due to higher wind speeds, compared to Danish conditions. the
report also states diﬀerences in material and craftsmen cost [18].
The heating demand can be estimated based on degree-days. A degree-day is deﬁned as the
temperature diﬀerence between the corrected indoor temperature and the average daily out-
door temperature. The dimensioning indoor temperature is 20◦C, and is corrected with 3◦C,
because it is estimated that internal heat sources will cause a temperature rise of 3◦C. The
degree-day is therefore calculated as 17-Tout,avg. A typical Danish year has 3382 degree-days
[19]. An estimate of a Faroese degree-day year has been calculated based on monthly aver-
age outdoor temperatures [20]. These temperatures will also be used to carry out simulations
in Heat2 described later in this report. The energy consumption of the developed building
modules will be calculated with IDA-ICE, which relies on a weather ﬁle with calculated values
for temperature and wind speed, sky cover and so on. The degree-day calculation is based on
measured values of temperature only, and therefore the diﬀerences in degree-days and simu-
lated energy consumption are not directly comparable. The number of degree-days in Faroe
Islands is 4207 K · days. That means, that the heating demand for a building in Denmark
should be considerably lower than the demand for an identical building in the Faroe Islands.
Once the building module has been developed, it would be interesting to calculate the energy
consumption for the two diﬀerent climates, and compare the results to the annual number of
degree-days.
The Faroese government introduced a new set of building regulations in 2017. The require-
ments for energy consumption and heat loss of the building envelope were stricter, which
could lead to a diﬀerent approach on how to save energy. The Faroe Islands also aim to reach
100 % renewable electrical energy by 2030. The Faroese electrical energy company SEV is
working on a project, that will make it possible to store excess wind energy. The new system
is an expansion of an already existing hydropower plant. The expansion consists of a pump
15
==PAGE:24==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
that runs on excess wind energy. On windy days it will pump water from the existing, lower
reservoir to the existing, higher reservoir in the mountains of Vestmanna [21]. There, the
water will be stored until energy is needed on windless days. The availability of the diﬀerent
renewable heat sources can be seen in Figure 17. The pale blue line is average rain water in
mm, the green is average wind velocity in m/s, the yellow is average sunshine hours and the
blue is average ocean current in m/s. It can be seen that the most wind power is in the winter
months. An alternative to storing it could therefore be to utilize it for heating.
Figure 17: Availability of renewable heat sources in Faroe Islands [22]
Traditional Faroese buildings are the detached residential houses, along with various out-
houses, such as boat houses, storehouses, sheep houses and so on. The house and outhouses
are built in clusters on a piece of land, and the towns have developed around the ﬁords in
random patterns. This has proven to be good for the outdoor spaces, since the wind is stopped
and slowed down, as illustrated in Figure 18. The building style and materials have evolved
over time, but maintain a close connection to the original houses, that were made from rocks,
driftwood, and soil and grass. Nowadays, buildings are cast in concrete, and partly constructed
in wood, and to large extent, the facade is clad with wooden panels. Oddly, the function of
the materials have been reversed. The primitive houses used an outer stone wall to protect the
scarce wood from the weather [23].
16
==PAGE:25==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 18: Wind ﬂow around buildings [24]
As mentioned in section 1, the Faroese building industry has recently conformed to the pre-
fabrication trend. Some of the newest building project involving box modules have been
criticized, partly because the modules are imported, and in some cases foreign contractors are
also used [25]. From an economic point of view, it would be more sustainable to manufac-
ture the modules on the islands, with local craftsmen with Faroese building expertise. Even
though many building materials are imported by ship, from an environmental point of view, it
would be more eco-eﬃcient to transport ﬂatpacked materials across the Atlantic Ocean, than
ﬁnished volumetric modules. But currently there is no Faroese manufacturer of the prefabri-
cated preﬁnished volumetric modules, and the shortage on housing is forcing builders to think
in new, fast ways, and the modular building method is a great option. One of the builders
is the Faroese housing association Bústaðir - Føroya bústaðafelag. They are the main provider
of rental housing in the Faroes. The association carried out a member survey amongst their
1840 members, which revealed that 74% of would prefer rental homes with two and three
bedrooms, see Figure 19. It is very valuable to know the end user’s preference early in the
design process, so these numbers are kept mind as a guideline, with the reservation that they
could change.
Figure 19: Distribution of preferred number of bedrooms [26]
To conclude:
17
==PAGE:26==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
• The Faroese climate demands more of the building envelope in terms of water and air
tightness, and the heating demand is a bit higher, related to Danish values.
• The weather is everchanging, and the amount of rain, days with clear sky, fog, and
the average temperature vary from location to location. These local diﬀerences are not
accounted for in the standard test year that is used to simulate the energy consumption
and heat balance in IDA ICE. The Faroese weather ﬁle is available for IDA ICE in an
IWEC 2 format. The weather ﬁle is composed from several instantaneous observations.
The formulation used by The Building Enclosure is: For these selected locations, the ISH
database contains weather observations on average at least four times per day of wind speed
and direction, sky cover, visibility, ceiling height, dry-bulb temperature, dew-point temperature,
atmospheric pressure, liquid precipitation, and present weather for at least 12 years of record up
to 25 years.
• The Faroe Island’s aim is to shift to 100 % renewable electrical energy by 2030. It would
be meaningful to consider an electric heating system, for example heat pump and electric
convector or ﬂoor heating.
• The building industry is using prefabrication to some extent, even the PPVC method,
but the modules are imported from foreign countries and transported over a long dis-
tance.
18
==PAGE:27==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
4
METHODOLOGY
The product development strategy and tools are described in this chapter.
4.1
PROCEDURE
This section will describe the iteration process that product development is, and it will uncover all the
phases – information gathering, problem formulation, inspiration, idea generation, selection, prototyping,
testing, redesigning – that the design goes through.
Figure 20: The Engineering Design Process [27]
The aim of the project has been deﬁned in Chapter 1. A strategy of how to achieve this
aim will now be introduced. In order to develop a modular building system, the product
must be designed with consideration for the detailed work as well as the bigger picture. The
ﬁrst step towards a holistic design is to gather knowledge from all aspects surrounding the
building. A literature study is carried out to obtain information about the newest technology,
but also the three pillars of sustainability, namely the economic, social and environmental
principles of sustainability. In order to keep track on all the information, graphical tools such
as concept diagrams will be used. Then the design goals and requirements are established.
These, together with all background information and gathered knowledge will constitute the
framework for all proposed solutions. Now the conceptual design phase will begin. Once an
initial design has been developed and modeled, the energy performance is analysed. Certain
parameters’ inﬂuence on the energy consumption are investigated, and the optimal values of
these parameters can be found. This is described in more detail in subsubsection 4.1.3. When
the design of the box module has been optimized, it is adapted into diﬀerent module versions.
The diﬀerent modules will form a building system, and the planning of the system must be
considered in the early conceptual design phase.
19
==PAGE:28==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
4.1.1
REQUIREMENTS AND EVALUATION CRITERIA
The following section lists relevant standards and regulations. The concrete requirements and evaluations
criteria are pointed out in section 5.1, and in continuation thereof a set of design goals is established.
The goals should be well-argued, and measurable in some way. In case of energy and in-
door climate, the evaluation criteria will be fulﬁllment criteria for the building council and
related Danish Standards. Goals for sustainability will not be evaluated by e.g. carbon foot-
print, but rather a general assessment of durability and ﬂexibility of the design. The Faroese
building regulations are structured like and based on the Danish building regulations, with
some deviations. Both regulations are considered when setting up the design goals.
The design must fulﬁll the regulations and requirements put forward by
• The Danish and Faroese Building regulations: BR18 and BK17
• DS 474:1993(2017) Norm for speciﬁkation af termisk indeklima
• DS/EN ISO 7730:2006 Ergonomics of the thermal environment - Analytical determi-
nation and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the PMV and PPD
indices and local thermal comfort criteria
• SBI 2013-23 Energikrav i bygningsreglement for Færøerne
• DS/EN 17037:2018 Daylight in buildings
• DS/EN 15251 Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assessment of
energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment,
lighting and acoustics (will be replaced by: DS/EN 16798-1:2019 Energy performance
of buildings - Ventilation in buildings - Part 1: Indoor environmental input parame-
ters for design and assessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air
quality, thermal environment, lighting and acoustics - Module M1-6)
• www.retsinformation.dk - Law on vehicles and transportation
4.1.2
CONCEPTUALIZATION
When the design criteria are established, the design phase will go on with idea generation and
conceptualization. A concept covers the basic principles of how to solve a certain problem.
Concepts are developed for the building system as a whole, then on module basis, and lastly
the concepts are concretized and the technical details are reﬁned.
4.1.3
OPTIMIZATION
Once a basic module has been developed the energy performance is analyzed and optimized. This
will be done by varying diﬀerent parameters. The parameters used to assess and optimize the modular
building system are listed in this section.
20
==PAGE:29==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
The optimization procedure is carried out like a sensitivity analysis, where one parameter is
varied at a time. A cost-optimal solution can be found for the insulation thicknesses in the wall,
ﬂoor and roof, where the thickness of insulation and the thermal performance of the building
component with that thickness are compared to the cost of the material. The parameters are
listed below.
Parameters related to the window design:
• The heat loss coeﬃcient (U-value) of the window frame. This coeﬃcient could be min-
imized by implementing frameless windows.
• Ventilation by venting
Parameters related to ventilation:
• The speciﬁc fan power (SFP). This value can be minimized by choosing an alternative
ventilation system design.
• The airﬂow. Minimum requirements versus redistributed airﬂow.
Parameters related to building envelope:
• Heat loss coeﬃcient of the walls, ﬂoor and ceiling. (Insulation thickness)
4.1.4
TEST OF BASE MODULE PERFORMANCE IN A MODULE CONFIGURATION
The base module will be further developed, so that multiple modules can be stacked or lined
up and create one unit. In order to do this a module with a vertical stair opening, and another
with horizontal openings are developed. In addition to these, a hotel/dormitory module is
developed. Two of the main challenges that need to be solved for this to be possible are the
air- and water tightness, and the alignment of modules and installations. One key necessity is
to have a standardized manufacturing process, so that all modules have shafts and pipe connec-
tions, structural studs in the same place. In order to ease the mounting process and facilitate
a precise alignment, the foundation and underlay should be ﬂat, and contain markings for
connections.
4.2
TOOLS
The tools used to analyze, develop and evaluate the design are described in this section.
The input data is calculated and kept track of with Excel, the indoor environment and energy
consumption is calculated with IDA ICE. The 2D heatloss of constructions is calculated with
Heat2. Visual 3D models are drawn in SketchUp and Revit and detail drawings in AutoCad.
21
==PAGE:30==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
5
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN
This chapter contains the results of the literature study/ﬁeld study, design phase and optimiza-
tion process.
5.1
REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN GOALS
This section states concrete requirements, including tables with minimum and maximum value limits,
and states the most important lessons learned from the literature study. Combined these are used to
formulate a set of design goals.
The total energy consumption of a building includes energy use for heating, cooling, domestic
hot water, ventilation and lighting. The maximum allowed total energy consumption, the
energy frame, for Faroese and Danish new buildings can be seen in Table 2 below. The
requirements for U-value of diﬀerent building components are the same for both countries
and are listed in Table 3. An exemption is the Faroese requirements for external doors, which
is 1.8 W/m2K. For the windows, the requirements are that the energy balance must not be
less than -17 kWh/m2. For skylights it must not be less than 0 kWh/m2.
Building type
Yearly Energy Frame
Additional Energy
kWh/m2
kWh/gross area m2
Faroese residential
55
1600
Danish residential
30
1000
Faroese non-residential
70
1600
Danish non-residential
41
1000
Table 2: Energy frame according to Faroese and Danish building regulations
Building component
U-value
External walls
0.30
Floor separations
0.40
Floor separations with ﬂoor heating
0.50
External doors without glazing
1.4
External doors with glazing
1.5
Hatches
1.8
Roof
0.20
Floor against ground
0.20
Table 3: Maximum U-values in W/m2K according to Faroese and Danish building regulations
The thermal environment should fulﬁll the requirements for category B, which corresponds
to a Predicted Mean Vote of -0.5 to 0.5 (from slightly cool to slightly warm), which means
that at most 10% of people will be dissatisﬁed with the thermal environment [28], [29]. These
are the regulations from both Faroese and Danish building authorities. The indoor air quality
22
==PAGE:31==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
is suggested to fulﬁll the requirements for category II in DS/EN 15251. In Table 4 the values
for the parameters that will be tested and evaluated are shown. These design values apply
for non-residential buildings. For a residential building, the maximum acceptable number of
hours with temperatures above 27 ◦C and 28 ◦C are 100 and 25, respectively.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Operative design temperature, summer
24.5 ±1.5
◦C
Operative design temperature, winter
22.0 ±2.0
◦C
Floor surface temperature range
19 to 29
◦C
Number of hours with temperatures above 26 ◦C
100
h
Number of hours with temperatures above 27 ◦C
25
h
Ventilation rate for building (low polluting)
0.7
L/sm2
Ventilation rate for persons
0.7
L/s
Maximum CO2concentrationaboveoutdoors
500
ppm
Air change rate for bedrooms and living rooms
0.6 (0.42)
ach (L/sm2)
Exhaust air ﬂow for kitchens
20
L/s
Exhaust air ﬂow for bathrooms
15
L/s
Exhaust air ﬂow for toilets
10
L/s
Table 4: Requirements for a category B thermal environment and indoor air quality
In addition to these requirements, both Danish and Faroese building regulations require a
minimum ventilation rate of 0.3 L/sm2 in residential buildings. The ventilation air handling
unit must have a maximum speciﬁc fan power of 1800 J/m3. If the air handling unit only
services one residential unit, the maximum SFP is 1000 J/m3.
There are several more requirements to be fulﬁlled, such as restrictions on noise level from
installations. Therefore, it is important to consider the layout and dimension of the ventilation
system, but it is not going to be evaluated by simulation. Ventilation duct manufacturers such
as Lindab provide noise-velocity-diameter diagrams, that can be used for designing a potential
duct system. The ventilation system could also be ductless, or decentralized, which usually
means lower air velocity and less noise.
Lastly, the requirements for daylight are that the window glazing area in residential buildings
should be at least 10% of the ﬂoor area with a light transmittance of 75%. The daylight factor
in a room is considered to be suﬃcient when there is a factor of 2% in half of the ﬂoor area.
The requirements for energy and indoor climate have now been presented. There are many
requirements in the building code, that must be met, but that will not be used as validation
of the design. Other requirements, that will aﬀect the design of the building system, is for
example the requirements for ﬁre safety. They depend on usage categories. The building
regulations provide a set of pre-accepted solutions in each category, which will be used as a
tool to achieve suﬃcient ﬁre resistance in building constructions.
The law on special transportation states, that special permits are needed when freight dimen-
23
==PAGE:32==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
sions exceed 30m in length, 3.65m in width or 4.10m in height. The Danish law does not
clearly state maximum freight dimension. Swedish authorities demand a warning vehicle for
freight of up 4.50m wide, and above that a police escort is needed. These requirements are
determining for the size of the module, and another determining requirement is the room
height, which according to the building regulations must be 2.5 m in multi-storey residential
buildings.
The ﬁrst couple of chapters covered background knowledge and state of the art technologies
and techniques, which will now be used to formulate a number of design goals, along with
key words on strategies for reaching them, see Table 5.
What
How
Minimize
energy
consumption
Utilize solar gain, minimize heat loss, balancing air ﬂow to mini-
mize inﬁltration and reduce pressure in ventilation system
Excellent air quality
and thermal environ-
ment
Balancing (redirect) air ﬂow to have full eﬀect when and where it
is needed the most
Minimize cost
For manufacture: reduce material processing, For operation: re-
duce electricity, heating and cooling demand
Durable solution
Low maintenance materials, adaptable design
Flexibility
Building system: create optimal set of modules, Modules: Apply
design for disassembly principles
Sustainable solution
Cost-eﬃcient, energy-eﬃcient, eco-friendly, socially sustainable,
Prioritize materials that can be reused, consider local materials vs.
imported, Design for mixed functionality
Table 5: Design goals and strategies
5.2
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN
Conceptual design of the base module is carried out by assessing and choosing the size, layout, structure
and installations, and construction concept, in a way that fulﬁlls the requirements and design goals. All
aspects of the building design should be based on a grid, so that structural components and buildings
services can be lead onto one another. The base module is designed as a residential module, since this
type of module contains all types of rooms and installations, and is easily adapted into other module
types.
The general shape of the modules will be an oblong rectangle, with windows in both gables.
The overall room layout will include two day-lit zones for living space at each end and one
center zone where bathrooms, shafts, stairs, storage and technical rooms, all non-living spaces,
that don’t require daylight and ﬁre escape exits, can be placed. The principle is illustrated in
Figure 21.
The maximum width of the ﬁnished module should be kept under 4.5 metres for ease of trans-
24
==PAGE:33==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
portation and to avoid needing a police escort. The height from ﬂoor to ﬁnished ceiling/roof
should be no more than 3.5 m in order to allow for it to be transported on a low loader truck
through tunnels. The length of the base module is chosen based on the penetration depth of
daylight.
Figure 21: Principle sketch of main spaces
Although the modules look the same and are developed for mass production, the ﬁnished
building will have its own unique identity expressed through the conﬁguration of the modules,
the shape of the roof and the facade material. The roof can be ﬂat, gabled - symmetrical
or asymmetrical, single-pitched, or there can be a roof terrace. The facade material can be
natural materials with diﬀerent textures such as slate, wood or even corkscrew. The pictures
in Figure 22 below show the diﬀerent expressions the facade and building shape create.
Figure 22: Examples of diﬀerent shapes and materials that give the building life and identity
One of the concepts that would be meaningful to implement in the design is the concept of
Prepared for repair. It is mostly used in the car industry, where there is a clear understanding of
diﬀerent parts having diﬀerent lifetime. This concept could be implemented by for example
applying the principles of design for disassembly and pace layering. This can be done by using
25
==PAGE:34==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
prefabricated ﬂat wall, ﬂoor and ceiling elements, that are mounted together to form a box.
The gable wall of the module can be designed as a suspended facade, which can be replaced
without jeopardizing the stability of the construction. The idea of prefabricating the modules
inside a factory is to save time and to have ideal working conditions, which includes a dry
environment. In order to protect the wooden structural system from moisture damage, the
building constructions are designed to keep the wooden parts dry and warm. The roof is
built with a slope and a ventilated space to ensure that water cannot gather on top of the roof,
and should any moisture occur, it can dry out. The roof could also be prepared for repair by
constructing it with hygrometers, that detect any leak instantly, and reveal the exact spot that
needs repair.
5.2.1
DESIGN AT BUILDING LEVEL - MODULE CONFIGURATION
This section will include sketches of diﬀerent module conﬁgurations, as well as a description
of considerations in regards to diﬀerent building typologies. The entrance will for example be
diﬀerent for town houses, apartments and hotels. Residential modules should have each their
own entrance from the outside. Town houses can have one at ground level. An apartment
building in several storeys will need entries on each ﬂoor, and these can be constructed as
exterior balconies or the modules can be shifted in the vertical direction, and the edge of the
roof of the underlying boxes can be used as a passage. The modules can also be shifted in
horizontal direction to create small, retracted, more private spaces in front of the entrances,
back gardens and/or terraces. For a visual interpretation of these ideas, see Figure 23.
Figure 23: Sketches of pathways and entry
The compactness of the building is aﬀected by the choice of module conﬁguration. In its
simplest and most compact form, the building will be a rectangular box. The shape can often
be made more interesting by shifting some of the modules or having modules in a shorter
length. There is a compromise to be made between compactness and shape, since the surface
area of the building envelope increases for other shapes than a rectangular box, and along
with it, the heat loss increases. Since the base module will be developed as a single residential
module, and all individual modules in a building thereby fulﬁll the requirements for the energy
consumption and heat loss, the whole building will also fulﬁll them, even if it has a more
26
==PAGE:35==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
complex shape. This is important, because it will be possible to recreate the random, cluster
feeling that somehow deﬁnes many of the towns and neighborhoods around the Faroe Islands.
Figure 24: Shifted modules create deﬁned outdoor spaces
5.2.2
OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION
A determining factor for choosing the modular construction method is access to a factory with
reasonable distance to the site. The manufacturing process is divided into nine phases in the
guide Design for Modular Construction: An Introduction for Architects [30]:
• Phase zero is gathering all the building materials.
• Phase one is building the deck/ﬂoor and the framing for all carrying walls, exterior and
interior.
• Phase two is framing and mounting the roof/ceiling.
Then the partition walls are
framed, and pipes and plumbing is installed in rough. Phase three is applying insulation,
gypsum boards and wiring on the walls.
• Phase four is applying insulation, gypsum boards and wiring in the ceiling.
• Phase ﬁve is mounting plywood sheathing on the exterior part of the module, and gen-
eral cleanup.
• Phase six is applying interior ﬁnishes, and exterior plastic sheathing.
• Phase seven is ﬁnishing building services installations, and ﬁnish ﬂooring.
• Phase eight is installing windows and facade cladding, and weatherprooﬁng the module.
The guide Design for Manufacturing and Assembly - Prefabricated Preﬁnished Volumetric Construc-
tion [4] describes a similar process for concrete and steel modules. The steel modules are quality
checked with a trial stacking of two or three modules after the framing is ﬁnished. A wooden
frame might not be as sturdy as a steel frame, and a lot of stability is provided by the sheath-
ing and interior walls in the wooden framed module. It would be possible to perform a trial
27
==PAGE:36==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
stacking after phase ﬁve, or to apply the exterior plywood sheathing earlier in the process
when creating the module prototype, in order to see how well the framing itself would line
up when stacked. This means the factory must be spacious enough to perform a trial stacking,
or it could be done outside as long as the construction is protected from moisture.
The modules can either be built like a traditional detached house, where the whole load-
bearing structure is assembled and then insulated and clad with ﬁnishing layers, or they can be
constructed from ﬂat prefabricated elements. Many companies use prefabricated ﬂat elements,
since it makes it easier to achieve uniformity and accuracy in the production. The ﬂat elements
could be anchored together as shown in Figure 25 below.
Figure 25: Flat element assembly principle
Figure 26: Construction concepts
5.2.3
TRANSPORTATION
The transportation of the modules from factory to site would be handled by a low loader
truck. The ground clearance of all major tunnels in the Faroe Islands is 4.5-4.6 metres [31].
The dimensions of a low loader truck can be seen in Figure 27. A crane would also be needed
to load and unload the modules.
28
==PAGE:37==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 27: Dimensions of a low loader truck
5.2.4
ON-SITE CONSTRUCTION
While modules are assembled oﬀ-site, the site is dug out, and prepared for the foundation, and
main sewers and supply and return pipes for heating and domestic water are installed. Once
the wall foundation is cast and all pipe and wire installations have been placed, the plot is ﬁlled
with soil and ground insulation and the ground level is established.
Once the modules are ﬁnished, the site is ready for them to be mounted. The modules are
anchored to the foundation and to each other, in both the horizontal and vertical direction
(side to side and bottom to top).
The modules are anchored to the foundation and to each other as shown on Figure 28 and
Figure 29 below.
Figure 28: The box module is anchored to the foundation on the side of the box, into the
corner post of the longitudinal carrying wall, before the next module is placed
29
==PAGE:38==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 29: The modules are anchored to each other with a galvanized steel windbracing
perforated strap in the corners of the boxes and with wooden boards and screws into the
ceiling and ﬂoor ribbons
5.2.5
STRUCTURAL SYSTEM
With the external circumstances surrounding the module in place, the conceptual design phase
will go on to the design of the base module itself. Firstly, the structural system is developed.
A wooden load-bearing structure can consist of structural timber, glulam beams, I-beams or
cross-laminated timber panels. For a small construction - which a volumetric module of 4.5
by 3.5 by 10-12 metres can be considered to be - a traditional wood framing structure is
suﬃciently strong. Once the module is completed with insulation and ﬁnishing plate layers,
the construction is stiﬀand stabilized. Therefore, wood framing is chosen as the structural
system. Some of the beneﬁts of this traditional system are the minimal amount of timber
processing and the capability of builders to build in this way. The typical parts of a wooden
construction and their names can be seen in Figure 30 below.
30
==PAGE:39==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 30: Illustration of wooden frame with named parts
The structural system of the base module is designed to suit a multi-storey building complex.
The ﬂoor and ceiling will therefore need to have smaller openings for vertical shafts, and a
larger, reinforced opening for staircases. In addition to vertical shafts, horizontal duct and pipe
paths must be planned to avoid collision with the ﬂoor and ceiling joists. Joist and post/stud
dimensions depend on c-c (center to center) distance. A taller, wider joist costs more, but the
c-c distance can be increased, and thereby a smaller number of them is needed.
Three principles for constructing the ceiling illustrated with crossing ducts are shown in Fig-
ure 40. The ﬁrst example shows, that a single row of massive joists with a crossing duct is
simply not possible, and the duct would have to run under the joists, like in the second exam-
ple. There would then have to be a second wooden joist layer to attach the ceiling boards to.
The third example shows a ceiling construction with a combination of I-beams with cut out
holes for ducts, and regular timber joists.
31
==PAGE:40==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 31: Three types of ceiling construction
It would be possible to construct a smooth ceiling with a single row of massive joists if air is
supplied through wall inlets. The adjacent room would need to have a lower ceiling height,
where the distribution ducts can run. Many manufacturers use this method, but it has its
disadvantages. It creates a risk for a short-circuit of the ventilation air, since the inlet can’t be
placed in the middle of the room, and often will be placed near the door in bedrooms, and
near the kitchen hood in living spaces. It has also been reported that one of the problems in the
residential modules that AlmenBolig+ built in Grøndalsvænge in 2012 was that the ventilation
system was not working correctly [5]. Another disadvantage of this type of smooth ceiling
construction with wall ventilation inlets, is the need of an adjacent low ceiling room, or a cover
up cassette around the ducts running below the ceiling, which ruins the concept of having the
smooth ceiling in the ﬁrst place.
In order to make a compact construction and reduce wasted space and materials, the thickness
of the ceiling in the living spaces with a required room height of 2.5 metres is minimized with
32
==PAGE:41==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
45x145 mm joists running in the longitudinal direction. This will allow for the ducts to run
in between joists. The joists are fastened with brackets to a beam construction, consisting of
45x45 mm battens joined on both sides by 15mm plywood boards. This beam construction is
placed on both sides of the core, where there is a need of exchanging forces due to shaft and
staircase openings. The boards connecting the battens are cut with rectangular openings for
ductwork, and the openings are reinforced, for example by using Simpson Strong-Tie I-joist
hole support, see Figure 32.
Figure 32: Simpson Strong-Tie I-joist hole support [32]
The hollow beam can also be used as joists within the core. This construction allows for ducts
to run in both directions in the ceiling in the core. The ducts can then pass through the hollow
beam into the ceiling in the living spaces. Laying the joists in the longitudinal direction ensures
that the inlet can be placed in the middle of the room. The two ceiling construction principles
are illustrated in Figure 33 and Figure 34 below.
33
==PAGE:42==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 33: Ceiling with joists in the cross direction, wall ventilation inlet in living spaces
34
==PAGE:43==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 34: Ceiling with joists in longitudinal direction, ceiling ventilation inlet in living spaces
The structural system consists of a ﬂoor slab with joists of structural timber. The dimensions of
the joists have been determined by span width tables from Ringsted Spær [33]. A C24 quality
joist of 45x245 mm with c-c distance of 600 mm and span width of 4420 mm can carry its
own weight, the ceiling, insulation and partition walls of the second ﬂoor, and additionally
1500 N/m, with a deﬂection of 1/600 of the span width. The span of 4420 mm is very close
to what is needed, but in order to ensure that the ﬂoor is strong enough, the joist dimensions
are chosen to be 45x295 mm. For a traditional wooden construction the partition walls are
also light constructions, but for this module a heavier construction might be considered for
especially the bathrooms. If a bathroom pod is installed, the ﬂoor joists underneath the pod
could be reduced to 45x245 mm, which leaves some space for the thicker concrete ﬂoor with
drain pipes.
The walls are constructed with structural timber studs. It is estimated that vertical studs of
45x95 mm in quality C24 with a c-c distance of 600 mm in the longitudinal walls can carry and
transmit the weight from three additional storeys. Two studs can be joined in the corners of
the module and on each corner that deﬁnes the core space to increase the strength. The ceiling
is constructed with structural timber joists of 45x145 mm. The dimensions of the joists have
like the ﬂoor joists been determined by span width tables from Ringsted Spær. The structural
system is illustrated in Figure 35. Note that the gable of the module is not incorporated as a
35
==PAGE:44==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
stabilizing part of the construction, but the shaft walls are.
Figure 35: Illustration of the strucural system
The dimensions of the components of the structural system can be seen in Table 6. The carry-
ing capacity of the construction has not been calculated and demonstrated, and the structural
system will not be further developed in this project.
Table 6: Dimensions of the timber components in the structural system
Component
Span (height/length)
Spacing (c-c)
Dimensions
Wall studs
2500 mm
600 mm
45x95 mm
Ceiling joists
4300 mm
600 mm
45x145 mm
Ceiling hollow beams
4300
600 mm
45x195 mm
Floor joists
4420 mm
600 mm
45x295 mm
Wall top plate
4420-12000 mm
-
45x95 mm
Wall sole plate
4420-12000 mm
-
45x95 mm
Floor side plates
4420-12000 mm
-
45x295 mm
Ceiling side plates
4420-12000 mm
-
45x195 mm
5.2.6
DIMENSIONS AND LAYOUT
With the overall design concepts in place, several room layout proposals have been developed.
In Figure 36 below, some ideas are presented, including proposals for modules intended for
multi-storey residences.
36
==PAGE:45==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 36: Floor plan sketches
37
==PAGE:46==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
The sketching process began with studying the requirements, ﬁrstly measuring up the interior
space. The standard sizes of cabinets, doors, showers, toilet bowls, stair width, riser and thread,
beds, tables and so on were then documented and drawn in scale and used to arrange diﬀerent
room layouts.
It was decided to design the base module for being erected in coupled rows, and not as single,
detached houses. The reason is that the modular construction method is most eﬃcient for a
large number of identical repetitions. That means, that the base module will be developed and
analysed as an oblong box module with heat loss through gables, roof and ground ﬂoor.
In an end module, the total width of 4.5m leaves 4.1 m of interior width. This is based on
a partition wall with a thickness of 181 mm (145 mm studs and 2x12 mm gypsum boards
and 12 mm plywood board) and up to 200 mm added insulation on the external wall. The
width is considered the most critical/limiting size. The length of the module is decided to
be approximately 12 metres, which leaves room for three spaces of 4 x 4 metres: two living
spaces and a core with a length which is enough to ﬁt a staircase. The stair thread and rise is
determined by rule of thumb using the formula in Equation 1.
2 · rise + run = 61 – 63cm
(1)
The height from ﬂoor to ﬂoor is 3 metres. With 15 steps (16 rises) the step rise height is 18.75
cm. The thread depth should then be between 23.5-25.5 cm. The stair is designed as a U or
double L shaped stair with no landing in the bend. With a run width of 80 cm and 15 steps of
each 25 cm the horizontal length of the staircase is 335 cm. The stair size is used to determine
the size of the core. The internal size of the core will be 4.1x3.4 metres. The internal length
of the base module will therefore be 11.6 m.
Figure 37: Floor plan drawing of initial base module design
The layout that has been chosen for further analysis of the base module is shown in Figure 37
above. The windows can now be placed. It was decided to place the windows centrally, a
distance from the adjacent walls. In one side the distance could be made large enough to ﬁt a
38
==PAGE:47==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
full closet wall.
The size of the windows is determined based on the parametric analysis of windows carried out
by Tom Sven Siegemund as part of the lecture material for DTU course 11116 Sustainable
Buildings [34]. The investigations concluded that for a reference plane at work plane level
(0.8m from the ﬂoor), the maximum daylight factor is found for a window placed centrally and
high on the wall, with a sill height of 0.9m. Windows with similar glazing area but diﬀerent
shape and placement did not result in an equally high daylight factor on the reference plane.
A formula was obtained that gives the glazing area in m2 for a given light transmittance (LT)
and for a certain glazing-to-ﬂoor area ratio, resulting in a daylight factor of 3 % in an axis
going through the middle of the room:
GlazingArea = 0.0014 · LT2 – 0.2726 · LT + 16.04
(2)
For reference, a triple glazing window with standard properties is chosen. The window frame
is chosen to be a 100 mm PVC frame with a U-value of 2 W/m2K. This is a reference value
found in Danish Standard 418 [35]. A glazing combination of 4 mm clear glass, 16 mm argon
ﬁlled spacing, 4 mm clear glass, 16 mm argon ﬁlled spacing and 4 mm thermocoated clear
glass is chosen. Such a glazing can be purchased for 489 kr/m2 at InterGlas Aps. The U-value
of the glazing is 0.6 W/m2K, the g-value is 0.54 and the LT is 0.74 [36].
The dimensions are calculated by Equation 2. The resulting glazing area is 3.53 m2, cor-
responding to a glazing to ﬂoor area ratio of 28%. The ﬂoor area of both living spaces in
the base module is 16 m2. The ratio of 3.53 m2 glazing to 16 m2 ﬂoor is 22%. That means
the glazing area should be a bit higher to reach a daylight factor of 3%, however the Build-
ing Code requirement of 10% glazing-to-ﬂoor area is satisﬁed. The sill height is chosen to
be 0.9m, in order to allow for base cabinets to be installed along the wall with the window.
Based on these window properties two ﬁxed windows are placed at each gable wall of the base
module with maxmimum glazing height 1.4 m (window height 1.6 m), and glazing width
2.5 m (window width 2.7 m). A horizontal ﬁxed window going from one wall to an adjacent
openable window or door (1 m) can maximally be 3 m wide, which gives a glazing of maxi-
mum width of 2.8, and glazing height 1.3 m. The windows should be placed high enough to
allow for light to penetrate deep into the room. An initial decision has been made to keep the
top of windows at a level of 2.1 m above ﬂoor level, aligned with door top frames, resulting
in a window width of 3.2 m to reach 3% daylight factor, this will not ﬁt beside the door. The
glazing area will be 1m by 2.8m which is 2.8 m2 and only 17% of the ﬂoor area. It was then
decided to increase the glazing size to 2.8m width and the top height of the window at 2.5 m.
Letting the window reach the end of the wall and up to the ceiling will increase the daylight
factor and reﬂect the light from the window along the adjacent wall and ceiling. The glazing
size is then 1.4m by 2.8 m, which equals 3.92 m2 and 24% of the ﬂoor area.
The base module could be constructed as a row of houses or an apartment block. Construction
thickness is related to the insulation thickness and the dimension of the structural timber inside
39
==PAGE:48==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
the walls, ﬂoors and ceiling or roof. The wall thickness of end modules will be the largest,
since it would need to have more insulation than the 145 mm that can ﬁt between the studs.
And the same goes for the roof and ground slab. The diﬀerent constructions for the base
module are:
• External wall
• External roof
• Ground slab
• Inner walls
• Partition walls (these are the walls of the structural system)
• Ceiling
• Floor
• Bathroom wall, ﬂoor, and ceiling
The bathroom could be constructed in inorganic materials to protect the rest of the module
from moisture damage. This strategy is used by the company BoKlok. If the bathroom walls
are constructed in concrete, the thermal mass inside the module is also increased.
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, the roof can be gabled, single-pitched or
ﬂat. A ﬂat roof and a roof terrace need to have a small slope in order to lead water away.
The traditional way of constructing a ﬂat roof is with a ﬂat underlying roof and cut-to-falls
insulation. Considering the wooden structures, a ﬂat underlying roof is vulnerable to water
damage in case of leaks in the exterior roof. A more weatherproof, and potentially less costly
construction could be building the roof with joists of increasing height. The construction
principle and layers of the roof are illustrated in Figure 38. The vapour barrier should be
placed on the warm side of the construction, yet with some distance to the interior ﬁnishing
layer to avoid that electrical wires and lighting ﬁxtures punch through it.
40
==PAGE:49==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 38: Roof section sketch: Rooﬁng felt, rooﬁng underlay, ventilated cavity, wood joists
with insulation, min. 295 mm insulation, vapor barrier, 8 mm plywood board, formwork
boards, 2x gypsum boards
The construction layers of the ﬂoor, ceiling, ground slab and partition walls are shown in
ﬁgures 39 to 42.
Figure 39: Floor section sketch: 22 mm ﬂoor boards, 22 mm plywood ﬂoor heating underlay,
45x295 mm joists with insulation, 12 mm plywood boards
41
==PAGE:50==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 40: Ceiling section sketch: Plywood boards, wood joists and insulation, vapor barrier,
formwork boards, 2x gypsum boards
Figure 41: Ground slab section sketch: 22 mm ﬂoor boards, 18 mm cement render with ﬂoor
heating, 15 mm plywood underlay, moisture barrier, 45x295 mm joists without insulation, 8
mm cementbonded particle board, 2x 150 mm threadfast insulation
42
==PAGE:51==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 42: Wall section sketch: Plywood boards, 45x95 mm wood studs and insulation, vapor
barrier, 45x45 mm furring strips with insulation, 2x gypsum boards
5.2.7
BUILDING SERVICES CONCEPTS
In this section, concepts for the heating and ventilation principles are developed.
The building envelope should be optimized to a very low heat loss, in compliance with the
energy pyramid. A highly insulated module will need a minimal amount of energy for heating.
In order to get the most out of that energy, the ventilation principle should be mechanical or
hybrid ventilation with heat recovery.
Since the Faroe Islands aim to have an electrical energy production based on purely renewable
sources, the heat supply is modeled as electrical energy. This heat source is available every-
where, unlike for example district heating. The German Passive House Institute has a website
on which it is possible to ﬁnd products that are certiﬁed for use in passive houses. The list of
products under Building services has been browsed for inspiration. One of the products found
is the Nilan Compact P, which is a compact heat pump unit for both ventilation with heat
recovery and heating up domestic hot water. On Nilans website it is recommended to pair
the Compact P with an additional outdoor air or ground heat pump for room heating. It is
decided to model the ventilation and DHW system as a compact heat pump unit. The heat
will be retrieved from the exhaust air after it has passed through the heat exchange element
of the air handling unit. The room heating system could either be a low-temperature water-
based system connected to an external heat-pump, or an electrical system. The easiest heating
elements to install are convectors (radiators). For optimal comfort and aesthetics, a ﬂoor heat-
ing system could be chosen. The diﬀerences between a water-based versus an electrical ﬂoor
heating system are listed below.
• Implementation cost: The electrical system is faster, easier and less costly to install. The
main diﬀerence in costs would be the expense of the larger heat pump for the water-
based system.
43
==PAGE:52==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
• Yearly energy consumption: The electrical ﬂoor heating system uses the energy di-
rectly in a 1:1 relationship of consumed energy to supplied heat. The water-based sys-
tem provides heat from an electrical heat-pump with a COP of 3-8, which means that
the relationship between consumption and supply is 1:3 at least. The electrical energy
consumption is weighted with a factor of 2.50 in the energy frame calculation. The cost
of electricity is 1.89 DKK/kWh normally, but for heat pumps it is 1.39 DKK/kWh.
• Regulation time: The electrical system responds quicker than the water-based one.
• Temperature distribution: Even distribution for both systems depending on evenly dis-
tributed cables/pipes at correct internal distance. Pipes in water-based system might
have a slight temperature diﬀerence in supply and return ﬂow, but the diﬀerence is not
that big in a low-temperature system.
• Risks in case of damage: wooden structure could be exposed to moisture in case of leaky
water-based system.
Uponor informs about a square-meter price of 900-1300 kr/m2 on their website for water
based ﬂoor heating. A rough estimate of the cost for an electrical system from DEVI is com-
pared to this price. For the electrical heating system, a combined AHU and domestic hot
water heat pump such as Nilan VP 18-M2 could be used to complete the building services
concept. The VP 18-M2 has similar functions as the Compact P, the design air ﬂow is 300
m3/h for both products, however the VP 18-M2 is not prepared to be paired with an external
heat pump. The price for a Compact P unit is 67 000 DKK, and with an external heat pump
93 000 DKK. The price for the VP 18-M2 is 27 000 DKK. For the water-based system, the
VP 18-M2 is chosen for ventilation and DHW and an additional air to water heat pump of
appropriate size is chosen for room heating. In order to choose a size, the heating load of the
base module should be calculated. The heating load is calculated in subsubsection 5.3.4 after
the IDA ICE model is ﬁnished with heat loss coeﬃcients (U- and Ψ-values), window sizes
and properties, AHU speciﬁc fan power, schedule and other inputs, such as inﬁltration rate,
ground properties and set point temperatures, and climate ﬁle. The dimensional heating load
is 560 W. A heat pump that can deliver triple that amount is chosen, since a family residence
would consist of three stacked modules, forming a three-storey townhouse. A Panasonic heat
pump with a heating capacity of 3.2 kW at -7◦C outside is chosen for the comparison of the
systems. It costs 27000 DKK.
The cost of the direct electrical heating system is considerably lower. DEVIFlex cables are the
most durable and hold a 20 year warranty. The cables can be ﬁtted in DEVIcell DRY boards
with aluminum foil, which hold a 10 year warranty. That way the cables do not need to be
cast in a layer of render, and any damage will be easier to repair.
The cost of 50 m2 DEVIcell dry is 17000 DKK. The cost of cables for 50m2 ﬂoor area is 5600
DKK. If the heating demand is reduced to 10 kWh/m2 a year with a heated area of 50 m2,
the yearly energy demand for heating is 500 kWh. The cost comparison of the two systems
can be seen in Table 7.
44
==PAGE:53==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 7: Comparison of ﬂoor heating, water based versus electrical system
Water-based system
Electrical system
Implementation cost
900 DKK/m2 + 27 000 DKK
452 DKK/m2
Cost of 1 kWh electrical energy
1.39 DKK
1.89
Cost of 1 kWh heat
0.53 DKK (CoP = 2.6)
1.89 DKK
Cost of 500 kWh heat/year
267 DKK
945 DKK
Implementation cost diﬀerence single module
49 400 DKK
Yearly consumption cost diﬀerence town house
678 DKK
Payback time single module
72 years
Cost of 1500 kWh heat/year
802 DKK
2835 DKK
Implementation cost diﬀerence town house
93 800 DKK
Yearly consumption cost diﬀerence town house
2033 DKK
Payback time town house
46 years
The cost of the electrical system will be a little higher, since sensors and regulators are not
included in the estimate. Based on the lower cost of 900 kr/m2 from Uponor it would take
49 400 DKK/678 DKK/year = 72 years until the investment in the water-based system will
start to pay oﬀ. For the town house with three modules it takes 46 years. This is a very rough
estimate, but it serves to demonstrate that the optimal heating system and supply varies for
buildings with diﬀerent heating demand. The point of view could also be changed to strictly
consider the energy consumption, in which case the water-based system is more optimal, since
it uses less than half of the electrical energy to produce the same heat as the direct electrical
system. However, if the electricity is generated from renewable sources, the direct electrical
heating system is an environmentally friendly, and more cost eﬃcient solution. Even if the
investment in the water-based system and the extra heat pump would start to pay oﬀafter 40
or 30 years, it would probably have to be replaced before that. The warranty of heat pumps of
this size is around 5-10 years. The lifetime expectancy of a heating system is around 20 years.
The ventilation system should be able to provide a healthy indoor climate, with good air
quality and comfortable temperatures at a low noise level. The ventilation system will consist
of a central air handling unit with ﬂexible ducts and inlets in each room. The mechanical
ventilation system could be supplemented with natural ventilation. Natural ventilation can be
one-sided ventilation, for example through a window, or a ventilation hatch. The building
Korallen in Roskilde is equipped with ventilation hatches. The hatches look like a natural part
of the facade, and are in full door size. See reference pictures in Figure 43. Reference pictures
of the ventilation hatch with a ﬁxed grille from IdealCombi can be be seen in Figure 44
45
==PAGE:54==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 43: View of Korallen from outside and from one of the rooms
Figure 44: View of IdealCombi window with ventilation hatch element
For the townhouse modules the vertical main supply duct can be replaced with a shaft with
supply air, which will act much like the pressure chamber above a diﬀuse ceiling. The reduc-
tion in pressure loss is estimated to be equal to the pressure loss found in a traditional horizontal
duct of similar length. Reducing the pressure loss will in turn reduce the energy consumption
of the fans inside the air handling unit. Additional savings could be possible by insulating the
duct with a sound absorbing material, so that the muﬄers that prevent sound from travelling
from room to room, could be left out from the system. The extract, intake and exhaust duct
will be placed in another shaft, along with the drainage pipe. The air handling unit is placed
in an adjacent technical room, located on the top ﬂoor. The AHU can be placed in diﬀerent
positions, oﬀering diﬀerent potential beneﬁts. An AHU on the bottom ﬂoor with bedrooms
on the middle and top ﬂoors will not have the same impact on the noise level, as an AHU
placed on the middle ﬂoor. However, it will require longer ducts for intake and exhaust air.
An AHU placed on the middle ﬂoor will have shorter ducts. A duct on the top ﬂoor will have
the shortest distance to outside, from where air is taken in and let out. The AHU can also be
placed on the roof, but there it would need a lot of insulation and weather protection.
As all basic concepts regarding heating and ventilation, the structural system and module lay-
out are in place, the module will now be modeled in detailed in IDA ICE and the energy
consumption and heat balance will be investigated.
46
==PAGE:55==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
5.3
BASE MODULE - ANALYSIS
The size of the module has been determined as well as the room layout. From there the detailed modeling
can proceed to external surface heat loss coeﬃcients, heating load, internal gains, and ventilation rates.
Firstly the U-values of the building envelope are calculated, and the linear heat loss coeﬃcients are
determined. Secondly, the ventilation system with ventilation rates, moisture production and occupancy
schedules and choice of AHU are presented. Lastly, before the analysis of the energy consumption and
indoor climate can begin, choices of other inputs, such as window sizes, inﬁltration rate, ground properties
and so on are reasoned for and presented in tables. The analysis carried out with IDA ICE will then start
with an investigation of the heating load, calculation of internal heat gain, and the model is adjusted to
a total internal gain of 5 W/m2. The energy required for space heating, fan and pump operation and
domestic hot water is then reviewed along with the operative temperature, relative humidity and CO2
concentration in each room.
5.3.1
BUILDING CONSTRUCTIONS
The insulation in the walls, ground slab and roof is based on structure dimensions. This
amount of insulation will be the starting point for the investigation of the energy performance.
The heat loss coeﬃcients of the building envelope have been calculated. The material prop-
erties used for the calculation are listed in Table 8.
Material
Density
Design Thermal Conductivity
Speciﬁc Heat Capacity
Volumetric Capacity
-
kg/m3
W/m2K
J/kgK
MJ/m3K
Gypsum
900
0.25
1000
0.9
Plywood
700
0.17
1600
1.1
Insulation cl. 33
150
0.033
1030
0.1545
Insulation cl. 37
150
0.037
1030
0.1545
Wood
500
0.13
1600
0.8
Stainless steel connectors
7900
30
460
3.6
Bitumen
1100
0.23
1000
1.1
Cement-bonded particleboard
1200
0.23
1500
1.8
Soil
2200
2.0
1180
2.6
EPS
50
0.033
1450
0.0725
Cement render
1800
1
1000
1.8
LECA agaist soil
600
0.102
1000
0.6
LECA dry construction
600
0.102
1000
0.6
Concrete
1800
1.15
1000
1.8
Table 8: Material properties used for heat loss calculation
GROUND SLAB
The ground ﬂoor construction is presented in Figure 45.
47
==PAGE:56==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 45: Ground slab construction
The heat loss coeﬃcient of the ground slab has been calculated similarly to the heat loss coef-
ﬁcient of the facade. The thermal resistance of the ﬂoor heating layer is regarded as the last
inner resistance.
The U-value of the ground slab has been calculated to 0.089 W/m2K.
ROOF
For a ﬂat roof the slope must be at least 1:40 in order to divert rainwater. With a horizontal
length of 12 metres, the height diﬀerence from end to end will be 30 cm. With a horizontal
length of 6 metres (pitched ﬂat roof ) the height diﬀerence from center to ends will be 15 cm.
In order to create a sloped construction, the roof can be built in direct continuation oﬀthe
ceiling with joists of varying height. The smallest dimensions of the carrying roof joists are
decided to be equal to those of the ﬂoor construction. The roof construction is presented in
Figure 46.
48
==PAGE:57==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 46: Roof construction
The heat loss coeﬃcient is calculated as described in Danish Standard 418, section 6.11 [35].
The formula for the heat loss coeﬃcient of the roof is shown in Equation 3. The thermal
resistance for the ventilated space and all outer layers has been replaced with the internal
vertical surface resistance.
U′ =
1
Rmax – Rmin
· lnRmax
Rmin
(3)
The U-value of the roof has been calculated to 0.11 W/m2K.
EXTERIOR WALL
The exterior wall construction is presented in Figure 47.
49
==PAGE:58==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 47: Exterior wall construction
The heat loss coeﬃcient is calculated as described in Danish Standard 418, section 6.6 [35].The
U-value has been corrected for mechanical fasteners (Rockwool REDair screws Ø8mm) going
from the outer insulation layer to the plywood board and the construction wood. The number
of mechanical fasteners has been calculated to 6.3/m2, where the vertical distance between
fasteners is 0.264 m and the horizontal distance is 0.6 m. The formula for the total, corrected
heat loss coeﬃcient of the roof is shown in Equation 4, the formula for the heat loss coeﬀecient
of the construction layers is shown in Equation 5. The thermal resistance for the ventilated
space and all outer layers has been replaced with the internal horizontal surface resistance.
U′ = U′ + ∆U
(4)
U′ =
1
Rsi + Rse + Í Rh + Í d
λ′
(5)
The U-value of the facade has been calculated to 0.19 W/m2K.
FLOOR SEPARATION
A section view of a ﬂoor separation is presented in Figure 48.
50
==PAGE:59==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 48: Floor separation
LINE FOUNDATION
A section view of the line foundation under the loadbearing walls is presented in Figure 49.
51
==PAGE:60==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 49: Line foundation
LINEAR HEAT LOSS COEFFICIENTS IN JOINTS DUE TO THERMAL BRIDGES
The heat loss through the roof-external wall joint, wall-foundation joint and ground ﬂoor-
foundation joint are calculated with Heat2, a two-dimensional heat transfer calculation tool. A
linear heat loss coeﬃcient can then be determined for these joint connections. The calculations
are carried out as described in DS418. The heat loss of the connection between the external
wall, ground slab and foundation is found by transient calculation, the rest are found with
stationary calculations. A plot of the outdoor temperature function used for the transient
calculation can be seen in Figure 50 below. The temperature ﬁeld is initialized to a temperature
of 6.7◦C, which is the yearly average outdoor temperature in Tórshavn [20].
Figure 50: Average outdoor temperatures in Tórshavn, Faroe Islands
52
==PAGE:61==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
The results of the 2d heat loss calculations and the calculated linear heat loss coeﬃcients are
presented in the following paragraphs.
LINEAR HEAT LOSS COEFFICIENT FOR WALL-FOUNDATION-FLOOR CONNECTION
A section of the ground ﬂoor and facade has been drawn in detail and the heat loss of the
connection has been calculated in Heat2. The drawing is produced in AutoCad and exported
to a Bitmap picture. It can then be imported to Heat2, and the materials as listed in Table 8 are
deﬁned in the material list. In Heat2, the surrounding ground is given the right dimensions
(20mx20m) and the mesh is adjusted, so that it is ﬁne around the wall, foundation and ﬂoor,
but coarser in the ground, in order to speed up simulation time. The wooden joists in the ﬂoor
and cross strapping on the internal side of the wall are not included in the drawings, instead
the layers have been assigned an area-weighted thermal conductivity value. The wooden parts
are only drawn in the connection itself.
The wall studs and cross strapping is placed with a center-to-center distance of 600 mm.
That means, that for every 0.6m, 0.045m are wood and 0.555m are insulation. The thermal
conductivity for wood is 0.13 W/mK and for insulation 0.037 W/mK. The area-weighted
thermal conductivity is (0.13 · 0.045 + 0.037 · 0.555)/0.6 = 0.043975W/mK. For the ﬂoor a
thermal resistance of 0.23 mK/W for a 0.3 m cavity is used to calculated the area-weighted
thermal conductivity. This value is given in table 6.4.1 in DS 418. The resulting thermal
conductivity of the cavity is 1.283 W/mK, which is close to the standard value of 1 W/mK
for frame cavities in Heat2. As with the wall, 0.045m are wood and 0.555m are cavity. The
resulting area-weighted thermal conductivity of the ﬂoor is 1.196 W/mK.
Table 9: Boundary ﬂows and reference point temperature for last (10th) year of simulation
Internal Surface Heat Flows
Temperature at Reference Point
W/m
◦Celsius
January
9.4344673
9.1516228
February
9.3627949
9.0091267
March
9.0064888
8.8758087
April
8.2844486
8.7778454
May
7.5729904
8.7472792
June
7.0593452
8.8035316
July
6.8319168
8.9359646
August
7.2734699
9.1114416
September
7.8764071
9.2749176
October
8.7531061
9.3725901
November
9.1622057
9.3752098
December
9.3031454
9.2901688
Deviation
0.03%
Average (Sep-May)
8.750673
9.097174
53
==PAGE:62==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
The linear heat loss coeﬃcient of the ground ﬂoor construction is calculated to 0.142 W/mK
in the way stated in DS 418. The calculation is shown in Equation 6 to Equation 11. The
average heat loss through the internal boundaries of the ground ﬂoor construction is 8.7507
W/m for the period from September 1st to May 31st. The heat loss through the ﬂoor alone is
3.261 W/m, and the loss through the external wall alone is 3.599 W/m. The U-value that has
been calculated in Heat2 for just the wall is 0.172 W/m2K. The hand-calculated U-value is
0.181. The diﬀerence might be caused by the fact that Heat2 considers the volumetric capacity
of the materials. The U-value of the ﬂoor alone is calculated to 0.074 W/m2K in Heat2, where
the hand-calculated U-value is 0.089 W/m2K. This diﬀerence is larger because of a simpliﬁed
model, where the the interior surface resistance and all layers of the ﬂoor have been modeled
and the ﬂoor heating layer is modeled as a homogeneous layer without heating cables. It is
estimated that these diﬀerences are tolerable, and the result for the linear heat loss coeﬃcient
will be used in IDA ICE as input value for thermal bridges in external wall - slab connection.
To be on the safe side, the hand-calculated (slightly higher) U-values will be used in IDA ICE.
Ψ =
qavg – q f loor – qwall
Ti – Te,avg
(6)
q f loor = L f loor · U f loor · (Ti – Tre f ,avg)
(7)
q f loor = 4.0237m · 0.074W/mK · (20◦C – 9.09717◦C) = 3.261W/m
(8)
qwall = Lwall · Uwall · (Ti – Te,avg)
(9)
qwall = 1.571 · 0.17W/mK · (20◦C – 6.675◦C) = 3.599W/m
(10)
Ψ = 8.7507W/m – 3.261W/m – 3.599W/m
(20 – 6.675)K
= 0.142W/mK
(11)
LINEAR HEAT LOSS COEFFICIENT FOR WALL-FOUNDATION CONNECTION
The heat loss through the foundation underneath the longitudinal walls in between modules
is found by steady-state calculation. It is assumed that the temperature of the ground will not
ﬂuctuate as much as the temperature of the ground surrounding the foundation underneath the
external wall, since the ground is not exposed to the outdoor air. The exterior thermal surface
resistance from the EPS insulation to the ground is 1.5 m2K/W. The boundary conditions are
set to 20 ◦C inside and 9 ◦C outside (ground temperature). A temperature plot of the whole
construction is shown in Figure 51. The linear heat loss coeﬃcient is calculated similarly as the
54
==PAGE:63==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
one for the ground ﬂoor-external wall construction. The calculation is shown in Equation 14
and Equation 15.
Figure 51: Temperature plot of the connection between the longitudinal walls and the line
foundation
Ψ =
qint
Ti – Tre f ,avg
– L f loor · U f loor
(12)
Ψ = 1.0695W/m
20 – 9.09K – 0.074W/m2K · 1m = 0.02W/mK
(13)
The heat loss from the two longitudinal walls is 0.02W/mK · 2 · 11.6m = 0.464W/K. There is
no thermal bridge input for such an internal foundation in IDA ICE. The heat loss can either
be added as a separate loss, or included in the ﬂoor structure. The heat loss is added to the heat
loss of the ground ﬂoor construction, which is given a U-value of 0.089 W/mK + (0.464 W/K
/45.9 m2) = 0.099 W/mK.
LINEAR HEAT LOSS COEFFICIENT FOR ROOF CONNECTION
A section of the roof and facade has been drawn in detail and the heat loss of the connection
has been calculated in Heat2. The drawing is produced in AutoCad and exported to a Bitmap
picture. It can then be imported to Heat2, and the materials as listed in Table 8 are applied
from the material list. As with the ground ﬂoor, the insulation+wood layers in the roof and in
the wall have area-weighted thermal conductivity. The boundary conditions are set to 1 ◦C
55
==PAGE:64==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
inside and 0 ◦C outside, and q = 0 (adiabatic surfaces) in the length of the roof and wall that
are cut oﬀ. The inside temperature is set to 1 degree, because the value of the output boundary
ﬂows can then be used directly to calculate the heat loss of the wall and roof respectively. A
stationary simulation is then run. The results of the three stationary calculations for the roof-
facade connection can be seen in Table 10. The geometry of the connection and a temperature
plot can be seen in Figure 54 and Figure 53.
Ψ = qint – LWall · UWall – LRoo f · URoo f
(14)
Ψ = 0.3112W/mK – 0.1461W/mK – 0.1149W/mK = 0.0502W/mK
(15)
Figure 52: Geometry of the wall and fa-
cade connection
Figure 53: Temperature plot of the wall
and facade connection
Another construction was initially considered, with massive wood joists in the roof and a wall
that was part of the stabilizing construction of the box module. The results of the calculation
of the heat loss through that roof construction can be seen in Table 10. It can be seen that the
diﬀerence of the two constructions is very small, however, the construction with the suspended
facade has a slightly smaller linear heat loss coeﬃcient.
Construction
Linear Heat Loss coeﬃcient
W/mK
Massive joist
0.0540
Insulated hollow beam
0.0502
Table 10: Wall and facade connection, linear heat loss coeﬃcient
56
==PAGE:65==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 54: Geometry of the wall and fa-
cade connection
Figure 55: Temperature plot of the wall
and facade connection
LINEAR HEAT LOSS COEFFICIENT FOR FLOOR SEPARATION
For stacked modules, it is relevant to calculate the heat loss from the ﬂoor-ceiling connection.
The ﬂoor separation has been modeled with just a 70mm layer of insulation in the ﬂoor of the
upper module. This resulted in a linear heat loss coeﬃcient of 0.428 W/mK. It is decided to
model the ﬂoor separation with insulation in the ﬁrst 60 cm from the external wall. The linear
heat loss of the insulated ﬂoor separation is 0.326 W/mK. The two constructions are shown
in Figure 56 and Figure 57. The calculation of the linear heat loss coeﬃcient for the insulated
ﬂoor separation is shown in Equation 17. The heat loss through the entire connection is 0.6229
W/m. The U-value of the wall is 0.172, and the length is 1.729m.
Figure 56: Heat2 model of ﬂoor separation
with just 70 mm insulation
Figure 57: Heat2 model of insulated ﬂoor
separation
57
==PAGE:66==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Ψ = qint – L f loor · U f loor
(16)
Ψ = 0.6229W/mK – 1.729m · 0.172W/m2K = 0.326W/mK
(17)
5.3.2
VENTILATION
The ﬂoor area of the module is 49.5 m2. With a minimum ventilation rate of constant air
volume 0.3 L/sm2 the total ventilation rate is 13.78 L/s. Since the requirement for kitchen
exhaust is 20 L/s, and for bathroom 15 L/s, the ventilation system is designed to a capacity of
35 L/s. In the IDA ICE model, the ventilation rate will be set to constant 0.3 L/sm2 except for
three hours in the evening, where the kitchen hood will be turned on.
The air handling unit is chosen to be a Nilan VP18-M2, which is an integrated unit with an
air-to-air heat pump for domestic hot water and ventilation. The distribution system will be
ﬂexible Ø90mm ducts connected to a manifold going to the AHU and a supply box/ﬁxture
in the room. The total pressure rise of both fans in the AHU must be equal to the external
pressure loss in the duct system. The pressure loss of the critical path (from roof hoods to living
room ﬁxture) has been estimated from Nilans product data sheets.
Table 11: Pressure drop across critical path
Component
Description
Supply Airﬂow
Exhaust Airﬂow
Duct Diameter
Velocity
Pressure Loss
Pressure Loss
Number/Length
Total
[L/s]
[L/s]
[m]
[m/s]
[Pa]
[Pa/m]
[m]
[Pa]
Supply Manifold
Nilan Combox
35
2
1
2
Exhaust Manifold
Nilan Combox
35
8
1
8
Supply Roof Hood
Lindab VHL
35
0.2
1.11
1.2
1
1.2
Exhaust Roof Hood
Lindab VHL
35
0.2
1.11
1.0
1
1.0
Exterior Duct Supply
Nilan Lydﬂex
35
0.2
1.11
0.3
2.5
0.75
Exterior Duct Exhaust
Nilan Lydﬂex
35
0.2
1.11
0.3
2.5
0.75
Flexible Duct Supply
Nilan NILAir
7
0.09
0.79
0.9
8
7.2
Flexible Duct Exhaust
Nilan NILAir
7
0.09
0.79
0.9
5
4.5
Supply Grille
Nilan supply grille
21
0.9
1
0.9
Exhaust Fixture
Nilan box ﬁxture
14
4.8
1
4.8
Acoustic vents
Halton TVA
14
3
1
3.0
Total
34.1
The pressure rise of the fans inside the AHU should be able to handle a pressure of 34 Pa and
ﬂow rate of 35 L/s with a speciﬁc fan power of 400 J/m3. This is based on an extrapolation of
the performance curves for the VP18-M2 provided by Nilan, see Figure 58. The SFP relies
upon the fan operating at (or in the region of ) its best eﬃciency point (also called duty or
operating point). The unit is delivered with an EC-ventilator, which consists of a fan and a
motor. For similar ventilators, for example the SystemAir EC-Blueﬁn ventilator [37], the fan
and motor come in several sizes, which makes it possible to reach the desired operating point.
58
==PAGE:67==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 58: The capacity curve and 1000 and 800 SFP curves for the VP18-M2 combined AHU
and heat pump. The red and yellow lines show estimates of 600 and 400 J/m3 SFP curves.
A smaller air handling unit could easily deliver the same amount of air, but the SFP would
increase, and thereby the energy consumption would rise. The same goes for the duct system.
The chosen duct diameter ﬁts inside the ceiling, and since the thickness of the ceiling is already
decided by the structural elements, there is no need to choose a smaller duct diameter. The
velocity and the pressure loss are reduced as the diameter is increased, which allows for the
ventilation system to have a low pressure loss and therefore a low speciﬁc fan power value. The
velocity of the air at the inlet does not need to be high in a 4m by 4m room. The air ﬂow in
the room is convection/buoyancy driven, caused by the colder window surface and the warm
ﬂoor, and the heat plume from occupants.
5.3.3
REMAINING INPUTS FOR IDA ICE SIMULATION
The occupancy schedule has been created based on an example of a weekday living schedule
for a family of 4 in Danish Standard 18523-2 [38]. The number of residents in the single-
module residence is considered to be two adults.
The moisture production has been estimated by use of a scientiﬁc paper [39] for the mois-
ture production of certain events like cooking, showering, laundry and more, and adding the
moisture production of 50g water/h per person.
59
==PAGE:68==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 12: Weighted occupancy and moisture production schedule. The vapor production
follows the occupancy schedule
Room
Living room
Kitchen
Bathroom
Bedroom
Occupancy
Schedule
6.30-7.30
17.45-23.00
6.30-7.30
16.45-18.45
6.30-7.30
19.45-21.15
22.30-23.00
23.00-6.30
Average # of adults
0.5
1.48
0.75
1.25
0.75
1
1.5
2
Metabolic rate, MET
1
1
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
Vapor
Moisture production, g/s
0.007
0.021
0.122
0.434
0.083
0.166
0.288
0.028
An overview of the window sizes and properties can be seen in Table 24. The glazing-to-ﬂoor
area ratio is 0.26 for the bedroom and 0.24 for the living room.
Table 13: Overview of window properties
Parameter
Unit
Window 1
Window 2
Window 3
Room
-
Bedroom
Bedroom
Living room
Window h
m
1.6
1.6
1.6
Window w
m
2.3
1.0
3.0
Glazing h
m
1.4
1.4
1.4
Glazing w
m
2.2
0.9
2.8
Window area
m2
3.68
1.6
4.8
Glazing area
m2
3.08
1.26
3.92
Frame fraction
%
0.16
0.21
0.18
Opening schedule
-
Never open
Never open
Never open
Frame U-value
W/m2K
2
2
2
Glazing U-value
W/m2K
0.6
0.6
0.6
g-value
-
0.54
0.54
0.54
LT
-
0.74
0.74
0.74
Other input into IDA ICE include:
• Openings (doors) between zones.
• Ground properties: The ground model is set to Ground without insulation. The exterior
surface resistance to the ground is accounted for in the Ground ﬂoor construction.
• The inﬁltration rate is set to be wind-driven with a rate of 1.5 L/sm2 heated ﬂoor area.
This is the minimum requirement in the Faroese Building Code.
• The setpoint temperatures for the kitchen, living room and bathroom are 21 and 24, for
the bedroom they are 18 and 20. No ventilation in the technical room.
• The linear heat loss coeﬃcents of the the door and window assembly are set to 0.05
W/mK.
60
==PAGE:69==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
• The SFP of each fan is set to 0.2 kJ/m3. The heating and cooling coil eﬀectiveness are
set to 0, and the heat recovery is set to 0.85. The AHU is turned oﬀevery day from
11-15.
• The building body extends the sides of the model. It ends at the gables, ground and
roof. This will be the surfaces that cause the heat loss.
5.3.4
BASE MODULE - PERFORMANCE OF INITIAL DESIGN
The base module as a product has reached the prototype stage. The analysis of the energy and
indoor climate performance of the prototype is presented in this section.
Firstly, the heating load was calculated with ideal heaters, without any internal gains and the
fans oﬀ. The peak load was on January 22nd. The average hourly values that morning can be
seen Figure 59. The total heating peak load is 560 W. The room unit peak load is 333.7 W
in the living room, which has a ﬂoor area of 16.4 m2. The dimensional heating capacity of
the ﬂoor heating system is therefore 333.7/16.4 = 20.3 W/m2. Any heating carrier is able to
deliver the heating demand, which means that the heating system can be designed with either
convectors or ﬂoor heating, water or electricity based. The maximum eﬀect of the electrical
ﬂoor heating system that could be used under wood ﬂooring, was 100 W/m.
Figure 59: Heating load on Januar 22nd, hourly average values from 01.00-11.00 o’ clock
Next, the heat emissions from the equipment was determined. The internal gains are stated
as a constant value of 5 W/m2 in SBI guide 213. The heat from equipment is calculated as the
share of 5 W/m2 that is not coming from the occupants. The simulation results and calculated
input can be seen in Table 14 below.
61
==PAGE:70==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 14: Internal heat gain - Simulation results for Occupant and calculation of Equipment
share
Internal heat gain
Occupants
Equipment
Room
Area
Total W/m2
Total W
Total kWh
kWh
W/m2
W/m2
W
Living room
16.40
5
82.00
710.94
215.90
152
3.48
57.10
Bedroom
16.40
5
82.00
710.94
292.40
206
2.94
48.27
Bathroom
4.73
5
23.63
204.87
108.00
2.64
2.36
11.17
Kitchen
7.48
5
37.40
324.26
94.40
1.46
3.54
26.51
Technical room
0.94
5
4.70
40.73
0.00
0.00
5.00
4.70
Total
1991.74
The contribution from equipment in W was entered into the IDA ICE model. The simulation
was run again, and the results will now be presented. The energy consumption for space
heating and AHU fans as well as hours with overheating for four diﬀerent orientations can be
seen in Table 15. The number of hours with overheating are during occupancy.
Table 15: Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area
Orientation of Bedroom
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
N
9.28
0.95
37.8
126
E
11.51
0.95
267
147
S
10.75
0.95
354
0
W
11.55
0.95
339
106
The energy consumption is fairly low, but there is room for improvement. An investigation
of the thermal environment shows that the temperature levels are far from satisfactory. The
investigation shows that for each orientation either the bedroom or the living room or both
will have problems with too high temperatures. The maximum number of hours above 27
degrees is 100. The ideal temperature for sleeping is between 18-20 degrees, which only exists
roughly half of the occupied hours for the west-oriented bedroom, and only a third, almost
a quarter of the occupied hours for the south-oriented bedroom. In Figure 60 to Figure 62
the number of hours with overheating during occupancy can be seen. In the living room, the
hours with overheating are also considered for unoccupied hours, see Figure 63. There are
2.5 times as many hours with temperature above 27 ◦C in the living room, when the whole
day is considered. This is noted, because the occupancy schedule is based on two adults who
leave for work during the day. However, the base module should be a ﬂexible living unit, for
example for retired people or people who work from home. For the bedroom the occupied
time is relatively sure.
62
==PAGE:71==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 60: Accumulated curve: Hours be-
low 20 and above 27 ◦C in west-oriented
bedroom during occupancy
Figure 61: Accumulated curve: Hours be-
low 20 and above 27 ◦C in south-oriented
bedroom during occupancy
Figure 62:
Accumulated curve:
Hours
above 27 ◦C in east-oriented living room
during occupancy
Figure 63:
Accumulated curve:
Hours
above 27 ◦C in east-oriented living room
all hours
The orientation with the bedroom facing west results in the worst thermal environment, with
the total number of hours above 27 ◦C during occupancy for the bedroom and the living room
at 445 h, while having the largest energy consumption. This situation will be used for further
development of the module.
The concentration of CO2 is similar for all orientations. The concentration of CO2 above
outdoors and the relative humidity have been investigated for the western orientation. The
amount of hours within each indoor climate category from I-IV according to DS/EN 15251
is shown in Table 16 below. The relative humidity has been registered for the whole year,
and the concentration of CO2 has been registered during occupancy.
63
==PAGE:72==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 16: Number of hours within indoor climate categories I-IV as deﬁned in DS/EN 15251
Room
Bedroom
Kitchen
Bathroom
Living room
RH
Cat I
Below 50%
5400
4780
0
4840
Cat II
Below 60%
6520
6110
0
6150
Cat III
Below 70%
7420
6860
0
6890
Cat IV
Above 70%
1340
1900
8760
1870
CO2
Cat I
Below 750 ppm
198
1080
40.7
492
Cat II
Below 900 ppm
343
1190
202
905
Cat III
Below 1200 ppm
654
1194
497
2110
Cat IV
Above 1200 ppm
2080
0
598
643
The distribution in percent is shown in Figure 64 and Figure 65.
Figure 64: The distribution of hours within diﬀerent indoor climate categories, CO2 concen-
tration
64
==PAGE:73==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 65: The distribution of hours within diﬀerent indoor climate categories, relative hu-
midity
In order to obtain a satisfactory thermal environment and air quality, the module prototype
is further developed. The starting point is to investigate when the problems occur, and where
there is room for remedial action.
The operative temperature curve plots for the bedroom during the whole year is shown in
Figure 66. It is noted that all hours above 27◦C in the bedroom take place in the summer
period, from mid June to early September. The total dimensional heating demand in that
period is below 5 W/m2, which is equal to 5 W/m2 ·45.9m2 = 229.5 W. This is shown in
Figure 67. That means, that there is no need for heating in that period, since the internal heat
gain is enough to reach the set-point temperature for heating of 21◦C. If the heating system
and AHU are turned oﬀ, the windows can be opened without wasting energy. One of the
remedies could be to implement natural ventilation during summer.
Figure 66:
Temperature curve plot for
west-oriented bedroom
Figure 67: The time period where the to-
tal heating demand w/o internal gains is
above 229.5 W
65
==PAGE:74==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Venting in the summer won’t solve the problem with the bad indoor air quality. In order to
improve the air quality, another ventilation principle is introduced. The air is supplied in the
dry rooms and extracted from the wet rooms. The ventilation system will be a VAV-system,
with a redistribution of the original ventilation rate of 0.3 L/sm2. The total air ﬂow is 13.78
L/s as before. The ventilation is controlled by schedule, so that the air is supplied to rooms
according to the occupancy schedule. In practice, the AHU could be scheduled to distribute
the supply evenly between living room and bedroom during the day, boost the supply to the
living room in the evening, and to the bedroom at night. The return could be distributed
evenly between the bathroom and the kitchen, with a boosting function for the bathroom
that turns on along with the light, and for the kitchen along with the kitchen hood.
Finally, the amount of insulation in the building envelope is adjusted to ﬁnd the optimal bal-
ance between cost and conserved energy.
66
==PAGE:75==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
6
OPTIMIZATION
The Danish deﬁnition of a nearly-zero energy building is a building with a yearly energy
consumption of at most 27 kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area (residential). The energy consumption
of a residential module can be divided into three categories: space heating, AHU fan power,
and domestic hot water. There can also a small expenditure on energy for DHW pumps, that
ensure warm water right away when the need is there.
The energy used for space heating and ventilation is 12.5 kWh/m2. The energy use for do-
mestic hot water is calculated below.
The yearly amount of domestic hot water is assumed to be 250 L/m2 as listed in SBI 213. It is
assumed that the water is heated to 55 ◦C, and that the temperature of the cold water is 5◦C.
The energy used for DHW is calculated by Equation 18 and is found to be 14.6 kWh/m2.
The optimization procedure is divived into three parts. It will begin with modeling the base
module in IDA ICE with a redistributed airﬂow. The indoor air quality and thermal environ-
ment will then be examined. The second part will focus on the window design and venting.
Lastly, the building envelope is adjusted in terms of insulation size.
E =
cp,water · Vwater · ρwater · ∆T
tyear
(18)
E = 4218 · 0.250 · 1000 · 50
1000 · 3600
(19)
E = 14.6kWh/m2
(20)
The energy use for the DHW pump has been estimated. The ﬂow rate is calculated for a res-
idence of three combined modules. The ﬂow rate is 0.25 m3 ·/8760hprm2, which is roughly
0.005 m3/h. The pressure loss for this ﬂow within a PEX pipe has been read oﬀthe diagram in
Figure 68. The pressure loss is estimated to be around 20 Pa/m. The pipe length is estimated
to be around 30m. A very rough estimated of the pressure loss is then 600 Pa which is equal
to 0.06 m water column. The web catalogue from Grundfos shows that an Alpha-1 15-50 N
130 pump can run with a power of 2.9W under these circumstances. The annual energy con-
sumption is estimated to be 0.0029kW · 8760h = 25.4kWh pr 150 m2, which is 0.17 kWh/m2.
The circulation pump for hot water is not needed, and it cools the water in the tank down,
making the heat pump less eﬃcient. But having warm water at the tap when it is needed saves
water, and therefore energy. In practice it would be possible to connect the circulation pump
to the lighting switch in the bathrooms.
67
==PAGE:76==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 68: Pressure loss diagram from Wavin [40].
The heat loss of a low-energy water tank is recommended to be maximum 2 W/K for a 160 L
tank and 2.3 W/K for a 200 L tank [41]. It is assumed that the heat loss of the tank in the VP
18-M2 is not more than 2.15 W/K. With a hot water temperature of 55◦C and surroundings
at 20◦C, the annual loss/m2 for 4 hours a day is 0.00215kW · 4h/day · 365days/year/45.9m2 =
2.39kWh/year. This is the amount of electrical energy, that will be consumed by the hot water
tank when the AHU is turned oﬀ.
The total, unweighted energy consumption of the base module is 27.27 kWh/m2. The energy
use for DHW is multiplied by 2.5/1.5, since the COP of the heat pump in the VP18-M2 for
13.78 L/s is 1.5. The energy use for the pump is multiplied by 2.5, since the electrical energy
consumption is weighted with a factor of 2.5. This factor is also applied to the space heating
and fan energy. That means that the total energy consumption is 56 kWh/m2, see Table 17.
The Danish weighting is also shown, where the primary energy factor for electrical energy
is 1.9. The Faroese energy frame is fulﬁlled almost without the additional energy of 1500
kWh/gross area. The Danish energy frame is fulﬁlled with the additional energy of 1000
kWh/gross area. The base module would have a lower energy consumption for heating in
Denmark, so this is not to be seen as a calculation of the base module’s performance if it was
situated in Denmark. It is rather a comparison of the weightings, and it shows, that if the
primary energy factor changes, which it likely will once the electricity production is coming
from purely renewable sources, the energy frame will look diﬀerent.
68
==PAGE:77==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 17: Weighted and unweighted Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area
Space heating
HVAC Aux
Pump
DHW
Total
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
Unweighted
11.55
0.95
0.17
14.6
27.27
2.5 Weighting
28.88
2.38
0.43
24.33
56.01
1.9 Weighting
21.95
1.81
0.32
18.49
42.57
6.1
REDISTRIBUTED AIRFLOW
The mechanical ventilation system is adapted so that the air is supplied to dry rooms and
extracted from wet rooms. The ventilation rates for the redistributed airﬂow can be seen in
Table 18. The redistribution will be controlled by dampers, and the control mimics a VAV
system, where the ventilation rate is varied with for example the temperature of the return air.
In IDA ICE the redistributed airﬂow is modeled as a schedule controlled VAV-system.
Table 18: Redistributed airﬂow: boosting schedule, normal and boosted airﬂow
Zone
Boosted hours
Zero because boost elsewhere
Normal airﬂow
Boosted airﬂow
L/(sm2)
L/s
L/(sm2)
Kitchen
16.45-18.45
19.45-21.15
1.09
13.78
1.843
Bathroom 1
19.45-21.15
16.45-18.45
1.19
13.78
2.916
Wet room total
13.8
M-Bedroom
23.00-06.30
06.30-07.30
17.45-22.00
0.42
13,78
0.840
Living Room
06.30-07.30
17.45-22.00
23.00-06.30
0.42
13.78
0.840
Dry room total
13.8
The duct system is illustrated in Figure 69
Figure 69: Duct paths. Blue is supply and red is exhaust
Changing the ventilation control from CAV to VAV results in a higher heating demand and
higher energy consumption of the AHU. The amount of energy for heating rises from 409.2
to 452.5 kWh a year in the living room. The monthly average of heat removed by airﬂows in
the living room for CAV control and VAV can be seen in Figure 70 and Figure 71, respectively.
69
==PAGE:78==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
The increased ﬂow rate removes more heat, and in the living room the amount of hours with
temperatures above 27◦C is increased to 121 h. There are 191 hours with temperature above
27◦C in the bedroom, which is a reduction compared to the CAV system. While the AHU
is removing heat during the winter, it is also retrieving it during spring and summer. The
heat recovery control should be adjusted in the IDA ICE model. In practice, the VP 18-M2 is
equipped with a bypass option.
Figure 70: Monthly Average amount of
heat removed by airﬂows for CAV system,
living room
Figure 71: Monthly Average amount of
heat removed by airﬂows for VAV system,
living room
The system is checked for balance. It is important to balance the system, since a high over-
pressure can cause warm, humid air to enter the wooden walls and ultimately increase the
risk of mold. Some of the heat is also lost, which gives a lower heat recovery. A high under-
pressure is not good either, as it increases inﬁltration and the heating demand rises. The
monthly average AHU supply and return air ﬂows are investigated. The results are shown in
Figure 72 and Figure 73. The energy consumption and overheating are shown in Table 19.
Figure 72: Monthly Average supply air-
ﬂows
Figure 73: Monthly Average return air-
ﬂows
70
==PAGE:79==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 19: Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area for module with redistributed
airﬂow
Condition
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
CAV
11.55
0.95
339
106
VAV
13.49
0.71
191
121
The thermal environment has changed because of the redistributed ﬂow, but it is still not
satisfying. The air quality is also investigated and the results are shown in Table 20. The
percentage of hours within climate categories I-IV is shown inFigure 74 and Figure 75. The
occupied hours with levels of CO2 above 900 ppm has been signiﬁcantly reduced. The relative
humidity is however only within category II 50-65% of the time. This is not a demand that
needs to be fulﬁlled for residential buildings according to the building regulations. The reason
that the RH is so high, could be that the estimated vapor production is too large. However,
the bathroom is closed oﬀfrom the other zones and is quite small, but it is protected against
moisture damage as long as it is constructed in inorganic materials.
Table 20: Number of hours within indoor climate categories I-IV for VAV system
Room
Bedroom
Kitchen
Bathroom
Living room
RH
Cat I
Below 50%
6890
5040
3920
5130
Cat II
Below 60%
8400
6740
4950
6840
Cat III
Below 70%
8740
7440
5470
7530
Cat IV
Above 70%
20
1320
3290
1230
CO2
Cat I
Below 750 ppm
357
646
0
296
Cat II
Below 900 ppm
999
1120
0
2610
Cat III
Below 1200 ppm
2734
1194
970
2753
Cat IV
Above 1200 ppm
0
0
125
0
71
==PAGE:80==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 74: The distribution of hours within diﬀerent indoor climate categories, CO2 concen-
tration
Figure 75: The distribution of hours within diﬀerent indoor climate categories, relative hu-
midity
6.1.1
SUMMER BYPASS
As mentioned in subsubsection 5.3.4 the analysis of the initial performance of the base module
showed, that there is no energy used for heating during the summer period. It is also in the
summer period, that most of the hours with overheating occur. The Nilan VP 18-M2 is
equipped with a bypass ﬂap, that can be either open or closed. The base module is modeled in
IDA ICE with summer bypass, where the heat recovery is set to 0 from June 15th to September
1st. This setting results in such a low temperature in the zones, that the heating is turned on.
The temperature level in the bedroom from June 15th to June 17th is shown in Figure 76. It
can be seen, that the temperature follows the ventilation schedule. It slowly begins to rise in
72
==PAGE:81==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
the morning, when the supply airﬂow is directed to the living room, and it falls again when
the airﬂow is back to normal. When the AHU is turned oﬀat 11 o’clock, the temperature
really starts to rise. It continues to rise after 15 when it is turned back on again, because the
heat recovery is on. Another simulation is run with the bypass only in the afternoon from
15-19.
Figure 76: The temperature over time in the bedroom June 15th-June17th without bypass
There is still a lot of excess heat, so the bypass period is increased to last from 15-03. Now
the temperatures in the zones are signiﬁcantly lowered, but the heating energy is increased,
from 13.49 to 13.5. The energy is used over a period of 4 hours in one night in the beginning
of July. It would be possible to just turn oﬀthe heating system in the summer period, and
the heating energy would still be 13.49 and the temperatures would be consequently lower.
The results for the three models, VAV bypass whole summer, with bypass 15-19 and bypass
15-03 are shown in Table 21. The number of hours above 27◦C is during occupancy. Once
the building envelope of the module is optimized, the heat loss will be lower, and so will the
heating demand.
Table 21: Comparison of energy performance: redistributed airﬂow and bypass
Condition
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
VAV
13.49
0.71
191
121
VAV whole summer bypass W
13.71
0.72
101
52.4
VAV bypass 15-19
13.49
0.71
191
121
VAV bypass 15-03
13.5
0.71
131
64.3
6.2
WINDOWS
The temperature could also be lowered with venting. The base module IDA ICE model with-
out bypass is modeled with supplementing natural ventilation. Venting is introduced in the
73
==PAGE:82==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
summer period between June 15th and September 1st. In order to save energy the AHU
could be turned oﬀin this period. However, since the heat pump in the VP 18-M2 supplies
the heating for the domestic hot water, that would mean that the heat for DHW is coming
from direct electric heating, which would increase the weighted energy consumption. The
window frame is, unlike the glazing, mainly a source of heat loss. It does not contribute to
the level of daylight in a room, and a wooden frame is also exposed to water damage on the
outside and vapour and condensation damage on the inside. Therefore, a part of this section
is dedicated to improving the window design.
6.2.1
VENTING
The entrance door is modeled as a window with a 0.99 frame fraction in order to assign an
opening schedule. The model is simulated and the additional loss through the entrance door
(now consisting of window frame) found under living room heat balance - heat from windows
and openings - is subtracted by improving the frame U-value.
Next, the venting schedule should be determined. It it decided to not turn the AHU oﬀduring
the entire summer period, since the energy use for DHW will be too high. In order to have
an eﬃcient heat recovery, there should be no venting while the AHU is running.
The results subsubsection 6.1.1 showed that implementing summer bypass provides a satisfying
thermal environment in the living room. The investigation of the temperature in the bedroom
during the summer showed that the temperature peaks between 16.00 and 21.00. Hence, the
AHU will be turned oﬀfrom 19.00-21.00 and the window and door will be opened here. The
door can be designed as a door-sized ventilation hatch, as mentioned in subsubsection 5.2.7.
It would then be protected from rain water, noise and theft. The window in the bedroom can
be designed as a top hanged window, so that rainwater will run oﬀthe window outside.
The entrance door in the living room is opened to 20% of the opening, from 19-21, during
summer (June 15th - Sep 1st). The smaller window in the bedroom is opened to 20% of the
opening in the same time period.
It should be noted, that the electric energy to cover the heat loss from the water tank will be
1.5 times 2.39 = 3.56 kWh/m2 per year.
The thermal environment is satisfying in both the living room and the bedroom, however
the energy use for heating increases. The energy use for heating in the living room is 4.7, 5.9
and 7.1 kWh in June, July and August. The window opening period is reduced to 19-20 in
the living room. This reduces the energy for heating to 0.2, 0.3 and 0 kWh in June, July and
August. The opening period is reduced to half an hour every evening in the summer from
19.30-20.00. Now there is no uneccesary use of energy for heating. The energy performance
for the three diﬀerent venting schedules is presented in Table 22. The energy use for domestic
hot water and pump are assumed to remain 14.6 and 0.17 respectively, while the energy for
electric heating of hot water is 2.75 kWh/m2.
74
==PAGE:83==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 22: Energy Performance comparison
Condition
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
CAV
11.55
0.95
339
106
VAV
13.49
0.71
191
121
Entrance door adjustment
13.39
1.05
99.4
77
2 h venting
13.41
1.05
0
36.9
2+1 h venting
13.4
1.03
53.1
45.7
2+0.5 h venting
13.39
1.03
53.1
51.6
The door in the living room should have been modeled as a window with frame fraction
0.99 from the beginning in order for the results to be completely comparable. It it however
estimated, that the results are reliable. The diﬀerence in hours with overheating from the
adjustment was made to the model with redistributed airﬂow is 91 for the bedroom and 44 for
the living room. The improvement by implementing venting is larger than this diﬀerence in
both rooms, and thus the number of hours with temperatures above 27◦C is still under 100.
The energy consumption of the base module with redistributed airﬂow and 2+0.5 h venting
is shown in Table 31.
Table 23: Weighted and unweighted Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area
Space heating
HVAC Aux
Pump
DHW
Total
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
Unweighted
13.41
1.01
0.17
14.60
29.19
2.5 Weighing
33.53
5.53
0.43
24.33
63.82
1.9 Weighing
25.48
1.92
0.32
18.49
46.21
The summer venting would need to be automatically controlled in order to be energy eﬃcient.
The summer bypass option is more economic. Even though the summer bypass i modeled
without venting, it is likely, that in practice there would be some venting when the indoor
temperatures are very high, because people open the windows, if they feel uncomfortable.
6.2.2
FRAMELESS WINDOWS
Instead of a tradional, ﬁxed window with a large frame fraction, a frameless window design is
implemented. Such a design could consist of DAFA aluminum glazing strips, mounting blocks
and an aluminum sill, top and sided, screwed into a Rockwool Redair-Board. The mounting
blocks would keep the glazing in place, and it should rest on a glass underlay and be sealed
with weatherstrips. The construction is shown in Figure 77. This construction will have a
lower heat loss because the frame loss is eliminated, it is non-organic, and therefore durable.
Frameless windows also have a diﬀerent aesthetic appeal, and the uninterrupted view through
the glazing erases the border between inside and outside.
75
==PAGE:84==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 77: Fixed, frameless window construction
The heat loss of the construction has been calculated in Heat2. The heat loss through 1 meter
of glazing, 1 meter of wall and through the whole construction was calculated by the same
procedure as for the building constructions in subsubsection 5.3.1.
Figure 78: Geometry of frameless window
connection used for Heat2 calculation
Figure 79: Temperature plot of the frame-
less window connection
The linear heat loss coeﬃcient of the connection has been calculated to 0.081 W/mK. Since
the entrance door and the small window in the bedroom will not be changed, they are still
modeled with a heat loss coeﬃcient of 0.05 W/mK. This is deﬁned under Thermal Bridges
in IDA ICE, and cannot be individualized for the diﬀerent windows. The diﬀerence, 0.031
W/mK is therefore multiplied by the circumferences of the two ﬁxed windows. This gives
an additional heat loss of 0.23 W/K for the window in the living room and 0.27 W/K in
the bedroom. The ﬁxed windows are modeled as windows with frame fraction 0.05, and the
76
==PAGE:85==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
additional heat loss is assigned to the frame, which then gets a U-value of 1.426 W/m2K for
the living room window frame and 1.423 W/m2K for the bedroom window frame.
Table 24: Overview of window properties
Parameter
Unit
Window 1
Window 2
Window 3
Room
-
Bedroom
Bedroom
Living room
Window h
m
1.44
1.6
1.44
Window w
m
2.24
1.0
2.84
Glazing h
m
1.4
1.4
1.4
Glazing w
m
2.2
0.9
2.8
Window area
m2
3.24
1.6
4.11
Glazing area
m2
3.08
1.26
3.92
Frame fraction
%
0.05
0.21
0.05
Opening schedule
-
Never open
Never open
Never open
Frame U-value
W/m2K
1.423
2
1.426
Glazing U-value
W/m2K
0.6
0.6
0.6
g-value
-
0.54
0.54
0.54
LT
-
0.74
0.74
0.74
The energy consumption for the module with improved frameless window design has been
calculated. The result is shown in Table 25 below. The energy consumption for space heating
is reduced from 13.41 to 10.58 kWh/m2. The temperatures are consequently higher. The
temperature over time for the bedroom is shown in Figure 80. The dimensional heating
demand is below 229.5 W for a longer period of the year, from May 15th to September 15th,
which is illustrated in Figure 81.
Figure 80: Temperature curve plot for the
bedroom with frameless window design
Figure 81: Time period where total heat-
ing demand w/o internal gains is above
229.5 W
77
==PAGE:86==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
A simulation is run for a version of the base module with frameless windows and heat recovery
bypass from May 15th to September 1st. An investigation of the temperature levels and total
heating shows, that the heating is turned on in ﬁrst half of June, when the supply air bypasses
the heat recovery. The energy for space heating is increased from 10.27 to 11.05 kWh/m2
heated ﬂoor area. The heating energy in the living room is 9.9, 3.5, 0.6 and 0 kWh for May,
June, July and August respectively. In the bedroom the heating energy is 0.5, 0.6, 0 and 0
kWh for the same months. The energy use without bypass was 2.9 kWh in the living room
for May and 0 for the rest of summer. An investigation of the total heating time curve shows
that some of the heating occurs in the morning. The bypass period is then reduced to 15.00 to
19.00. The thermal environment is not satisfying, but there is no unnecessary use of energy
for heating. Then a similar model with the adjusted door (window) for venting (but without
venting) is simulated. This is to be able to compare the results. The door in the living room
is modeled as a window, and the U-value is adjusted to ﬁt the space heating energy of the
previous model version. The U-value of the original door is 1.085. This U-value is assigned
to the window frame, and the frame fraction is set to 0.99999. Another similar model with
venting in the living room from 19.30-20.00 and in the bedroom from 19.00-21.00 from May
15th to September 1st has been simulated. The energy performance is shown in Table 25. The
venting results in a higher heating demand in May. The venting period is therefore shortened
to June 15th - September 1st - which it might not be in practice, since the inside temperature
in late May to mid June is quite high for both the bedroom and the living room). Now there
is no unnecessary use of energy for heating, but the amount of hours above 27◦C is more than
100 in both the living room and the bedroom.
Table 25: Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area for module with improved
window design
Version
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
VAV
13.49
0.71
191
121
VAV whole summer bypass
13.71
0.72
101
52.4
VAV frameless
10.27
0.71
294
275
frameless+summer bypass whole day
11.05
0.71
114
93.7
frameless+summer bypass 15-19
10.7
0.71
278
204
frameless+summer bypass 15-19*
10.65
0.71
277
219
frameless+summer bypass+venting from 15th May
10.84
0.69
31.3
81.1
frameless+summer bypass+venting from 15th June
10.65
0.69
105
126
Table 26: Weighted and unweighted Energy Consumption for summer bypass from May 15th
to September 1st from 15-19, and venting from May 15th
Space heating
HVAC Aux
Pump
DHW
DHW electric
Total
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
Unweighted
10.84
0.69
0.17
14.60
2.75
29.05
2.5 Weighing
27.10
1.73
0.43
24.33
6.87
60.45
1.9 Weighing
20.60
1.31
0.32
18.49
5.22
45.94
78
==PAGE:87==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
6.3
BUILDING ENVELOPE
The wall, roof and ﬂoor construction of the module will now be designed in detail, with
insulation thicknesses optimized with respect to the cost of conserved energy. The model
with ﬁxed framless windows and summer bypass from May 15th to September 1st from 15-
19, and venting from May 15th will be used for reference.
The cost of conserved energy is calculated as follows:
CCE = 300DKK/m3 · 0.05m · EnvelopeArea
EnergyConsumption · 100years
where the 300 DKK/m3 are the cost of insulation. Each part of the envelope (wall, roof, ﬂoor)
is increased in insulation thickness in steps of 0.05m.
Firstly, the CCE is found for three diﬀerent adjustments of the insulation thickness in each of
the three envelope constructions, a total of nine variations of the current module. The CCE
plotted against the insulation thickness can be seen in Figure 82. The trend line formulas are
used to calculate exact insulation thicknesses for CCE-values of 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25.
Five IDA ICE models of the base module are created with corresponding insulation thicknesses
in the wall, roof and ﬂoor. The CCE is then plotted against the space heating energy use for
these for ﬁve models, as seen in Figure 83.
Figure 82: Cost of conserved energy as a function of insulation thickness
79
==PAGE:88==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 83: Cost of conserved energy as a function of space heating energy use
The graphs can be used to calculated how much insulation to add or remove to reach a certain
amount of energy for space heating.
The energy frame for the module as a single unit residence is 55+1600/50 = 87 kWh/m2.
The weighted annual energy consumption is 60.45 kWh/m2. The unweighted diﬀerence
is 26.5kWh/m2/2.5kWh/kWh = 10.6kWh/m2. From Figure 83 it can be read that cost of
conserved energy for this module with a space heating energy consumption that just fulﬁlls
the energy frame is -0.14 DKK/kWh. From Figure 82 it can be calculated just how much
insulation can be removed from each part of the building envelope. It can also be seen, that it
makes no sense to try to save all that money, since the insulation thickness would be zero.
If the relationship between the Danish energy frame and the Faroese energy frame is applied
to the Danish Low-Energy Class energy frame, the corresponding level to 27 kWh/m2 would
be 55kWh/m2/30kWh/m2 = 1.8, 1.8 · 27kWh/m2 = 49.5kWh/m2. The unweighted diﬀerence
from 27 to 60.45 is (60.45kWh/m2 – 27kWh)/2.5 = 4.4kWh/m2.
In order to reach a total energy consumption of 49.5 kWh/m2, the space heating must go
down by 4.4 from 10.84 kWh/m2 to 6.44 kWh/m2. From the plot above in Figure 83 the
CCE-value corresponding to 6.44 kWh/m2 is found to be 0.3725. The insulation thicknesses
corresponding to a CCE-value of 0.3725 are calculated from the trend line formulas in Fig-
ure 82.
The resulting insulation thicknesses and energy consumption can be seen in Table 27 and
Table 28. The number of hours over 27◦C is 169 in the living room, and 70.2 in the bedroom
- during occupancy.
80
==PAGE:89==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 27: Insulation thicknesses found by CCE method, and cost increase with an insulation
price of 300 DKK/m3
Building part
Insulation thickness diﬀerence
Total Insulation thickness
cost
m
m
DKK
Roof
+0.286
0.585-0.736
9900
Wall
+0.284
0.479
1125
Slab
+0.084
0.534
1260
Table 28: Weighted and unweighted Energy Consumption for CCE-Optimized building
envelope
Space heating
HVAC Aux
Pump
DHW
DHW electric
Total
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
Unweighted
5.72
0.69
0.17
14.60
2.75
23.93
2.5 Weighing
14.30
1.73
0.43
24.33
6.87
47.65
1.9 Weighing
10.87
1.31
0.32
18.49
5.22
36.22
A simulation of increased venting time in the living room from 19.30-20.30 shows that the
hours above 27◦C are reduced to 94.1, while the space heating demand is increased to 5.85
kWh/m2, which is still below 6.44 kWh/m2, and could therefore fulﬁll a energy frame of 49.5
kWh/m2 per year. The yearly energy savings of 5 kWh/m2 are 470 kr with an electricity
price of 1.89 DKK/kWh and module area of 50 m2. The total implementation cost of the
insulation is 12 285 DKK. It would take 12285/470 = 26years to pay the investment back.
Even though the calculated insulation thicknesses result in a satisfying energy performance,
it is decided to only increase the insulation thickness in the roof with 0.070m, and keep the
insulation thickness in the ﬂoor and the walls. The reason is, that in most cases the modules
will be stacked, resulting in a lower heat loss. The construction materials of the wall are also
limited by the availability of standard sizes for screws and boards for the window connection.
Moreover, the suspended facade is kept light, and relatively slim, which is good for the daylight
conditions.
The energy and indoor climate performance of the ﬁnal base module design proposal is pre-
sented in subsection 6.4.
6.4
OPTIMIZED BASE MODULE DESIGN PROPOSAL
The optimized module is modeled in IDA ICE with the same settings as the reference model for
the CCE-analysis. Only the building envelope is changed. The U-values have been calculated
as in subsubsection 5.3.1. The results are shown in Table 29
81
==PAGE:90==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 29: Insulation thicknesses, cost and U-values of the optimized module
Building part
Insulation thickness diﬀerence
Cost
Total Insulation thickness
U-value
m
m
W/m2K
Roof
+0.070
6675
0.370 - 0.520
0.09
Wall
0
0
0.240
0.18
Floor
0
0
0.450
0.089
The U-value of the facade has been corrected for mechanical fasteners. The U-value of the
ﬂoor is adjusted to 0.099 W/m2K in IDA ICE as before, in order to account for the thermal
bridge between the ﬂoor, line foundation and the ground.
The total energy consumption has been calculated for a module with
• redistributed airﬂow
• improved window design
• summer bypass from May 15th - September 1st from 15-19
• venting from May 15th to September 1st from 19-21
• with the AHU turned oﬀfrom 11-15 everyday and from 19-21 during summer
The calculation is carried out in IDA ICE. The results are shown in Table 30.
Table 30: Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area for optimized module
Version
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
Optimized module
9.68
0.69
36.2
88.8
Table 31: Weighted and unweighted Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area
Space heating
HVAC Aux
Pump
DHW
DHW electric
Total
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
Unweighted
9.68
0.69
0.17
14.60
27.89
2.5 Weighting
24.20
5.53
0.43
24.33
6.87
57.55
1.9 Weighting
18.39
1.31
0.32
18.49
5.22
43.74
The yearly energy savings of 1.16 kWh/m2 are 110 DKK with an electricity price of 1.89
DKK/kWh and module area of 50 m2. The total implementation cost of the insulation is 7
075 DKK. It would take 6 675/110 = 60 years to pay the investment back.
82
==PAGE:91==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
6.5
VERSION PROPOSALS
The volumetric construction method is ideal for apartment buildings, hotels, oﬃce buildings,
institutional buildings such as kindergardens, schools or nursing homes. In order to complete
the building system, the base module is developed into three variations of the module. The
preparations for these variations have already been thought into the design process from the
beginning, so the structural system and building services concepts are the same. In the next
couple of sections it is shown how the base module can be transformed into modules with ver-
tical openings for stairs, side openings for bigger ﬂoor plans and single modules for dormitory
or hotel buildings.
6.5.1
VERTICALLY STACKABLE MODULES - TOWN HOUSE
A ﬂoor plan layout for a town house in three storeys has been developed. In order to check,
that the modules can be coupled and still meet the requirements in the building code, the
energy consumption of the modular town house is investigated in IDA ICE. The ﬂoor plan
can be seen in Figure 84. There are ﬁve people living in the house: two adults and three
children.
83
==PAGE:92==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 84: Floor plans of three-storey town house
The occupancy and vapor schedule can be seen in Table 32.
Table 32: Weighted occupancy and moisture production schedule. The vapor production
follows the occupancy schedule
Kitchen
Dining room
Bathroom 1,2
Living room
Master Bedroom
Bedroom 1,2,3
Occupancy
Schedule
7-8;17-22
7-8;17-22
7-8:30
7-8:30;16-22
22-7:00
22-7:00
Average # of adults
0.8
0.8
0.8
2.4
2
0.6
Metabolic rate, MET
1.4
1.4
1.2
1
0.9
0.9
Vapor
Moisture production, g/s
0.025;0.11
-
0.26
0.04
0.03
0.02
84
==PAGE:93==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
The window properties are shown in Table 33 to Table 35 below.
Table 33: Overview of window properties, ground ﬂoor
Parameter
Unit
Window 1
Window 2
Window 3
Room
-
Living room
Living room
Dining room
Window h
m
1.44
1.6
1.44
Window w
m
2.24
1.0
2.84
Glazing h
m
1.4
1.4
1.4
Glazing w
m
2.2
0.9
2.8
Window area
m2
3.24
1.6
4.11
Glazing area
m2
3.08
1.26
3.92
Frame fraction
%
0.05
0.21
0.05
Opening schedule summer
-
19.30-20.00
Never open
19.00-21.00
Frame U-value
W/m2K
1.43
2
1.42
Glazing U-value
W/m2K
0.6
0.6
0.6
g-value
-
0.54
0.54
0.54
LT
-
0.74
0.74
0.74
Table 34: Overview of window properties, 1st ﬂoor
Parameter
Unit
Window 4
Window 5
Window 6
Window 7
Room
-
Bedroom 1
Bedroom 1
Bedroom 2
Bedroom 2
Window h
m
1.44
1.6
1.44
1.6
Window w
m
2.24
1.0
2.24
1.0
Glazing h
m
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
Glazing w
m
2.2
0.9
2.2
0.9
Window area
m2
3.24
1.6
3.24
1.6
Glazing area
m2
3.08
1.26
3.08
1.26
Frame fraction
%
0.05
0.21
0.05
0.21
Opening schedule summer
-
19.00-21.00
Never open
19.00-21.00
Never open
Frame U-value
W/m2K
1.43
2
1.43
2
Glazing U-value
W/m2K
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
g-value
-
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
LT
-
0.74
0.74
0.74
0.74
85
==PAGE:94==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 35: Overview of window properties, 2nd ﬂoor
Parameter
Unit
Window 8
Window 9
Window 10
Window 11
Room
-
Bedroom 3
Bedroom 3
M-Bedroom
M-Bedroom
Window h
m
1.44
1.6
1.44
1.6
Window w
m
2.24
1.0
2.24
1.0
Glazing h
m
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
Glazing w
m
2.2
0.9
2.2
0.9
Window area
m2
3.24
1.6
3.24
1.6
Glazing area
m2
3.08
1.26
3.08
1.26
Frame fraction
%
0.05
0.21
0.05
0.21
Opening schedule summer
-
19.00-21.00
Never open
19.00-21.00
Never open
Frame U-value
W/m2K
1.43
2
1.43
2
Glazing U-value
W/m2K
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
g-value
-
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
LT
-
0.74
0.74
0.74
0.74
The internal heat gain from occupants is calculated, and the remaining heat (total 5 W/m2) is
distributed via equipment. The results can be seen in Table 36.
Table 36: Internal heat gain - Simulation results for Occupant and calculation of Equipment
share
Internal heat gain
Occupants
Equipment
Room
Area
Total W/m2
Total W
Total kWh
kWh
W/m2
W/m2
W
Bedroom 3
18.49
5
92.45
392
125
0.77
4.23
78.16
M-Bedroom
18.49
5
92.45
685
425
2.62
2.38
43.93
Living Room
18.49
5
92.45
1284
782
4.83
0.17
3.13
Dining room
18.49
5
92.45
714
138
0.85
4.15
76.72
Bedroom 1
18.49
5
92.45
596
124
0.77
4.23
78.27
Bedroom 2
18.49
5
92.45
596
124
0.77
4.23
78.27
Bathroom 2
5.00
5
25.00
241
37
0.85
4.15
20.76
Kitchen
9.77
5
48.85
714
144
1.69
3.31
32.38
Bathroom 1
6.10
5
30.50
380
37
0.69
4.31
26.30
Corridoor 1
3.74
5
18.70
164
0
0.00
5.00
18.70
Corridoor 2
4.42
5
22.10
194
0
0.00
5.00
22.10
staircase
2.72
5
13.60
119
0
0.00
5.00
13.60
Technical room
0.72
5
3.60
32
0
0.00
5.00
3.60 Total
6108
The pressure loss for the ventilation system has been calculated. The pressure loss in the duct
system is minimized by constructing a 30x40 cm shaft, which the supply air will travel through.
The equivalent round duct diameter is 37.8 cm, and the velocity in such a duct for 42 L/s is
86
==PAGE:95==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
0.05 m/s. The corresponding pressure loss is close to zero. The supply manifold can be spared,
and that leaves the pressure losses from the exhaust manifold, the roof hoods and the exhaust,
intake, and return ducts, and the supply ducts from shaft to rooms. The supply ducts could be
ﬁxed to the shaft with a damper. It is estimated that the pressure drop from this connection
will not be larger than roughly the pressure drop from the damper itself, which for an air ﬂow
of 3 L/s into a Ø90 ducts is estimated to be 2 Pa. The pressure loss calculation is shown in
Table 37. The ducts system consists of 14 supply ducts and 9 return ducts.
Table 37: Pressure drop across critical path
Component
Description
Supply Airﬂow
Exhaust Airﬂow
Duct Diameter
Velocity
Pressure Loss
Pressure Loss
Number/Length
Total
[L/s]
[L/s]
[m]
[m/s]
[Pa]
[Pa/m]
[m]
[Pa]
Supply Manifold
Nilan Combox
0
0
Exhaust Manifold
Nilan Combox
42.2
12
1
12
Supply Roof Hood
Lindab VHL
42.2
0.2
1.34
3
1
3
Exhaust Roof Hood
Lindab VHL
42.2
0.2
1.34
2
1
2
Exterior Duct Supply
Nilan Lydﬂex
42.2
0.2
1.34
0.4
2
0.8
Exterior Duct Exhaust
Nilan Lydﬂex
42.2
0.2
1.34
0.4
2
0.8
Flexible Duct Supply
Nilan NILAir
3
0.09
0.47
0.9
6
5.4
Flexible Duct Exhaust
Nilan NILAir
3
0.09
0.47
0.9
8
7.2
Supply Grille
Nilan supply grille
9
0.9
1
0.9
Exhaust Fixture
Nilan box ﬁxture
9.4
4.0
1
4.0
Acoustic vents
Halton TVA
14
3
1
3.0
Total
39.1
Based on the Nilan VP 18-M2 data sheets provided on the Nilan website, it is estimated that the
unit can provide a pressure rise of 40 Pa and 42 L/s with a SFP of 600 J/m3. This will increase
the energy use for the fans. The energy use for domestic hot water, pump, and electrical
supplementing heating of the hot water water tank remain the same. The town house is
simulated in IDA ICE. There is some overheating, more than 100 hours above 27◦C, in one
of the bedrooms and in the dining room. There is room for more venting in the living and
dining room. The ﬁve hours in Bedroom 1 are considered to be within what is reasonable. The
performance of the town house in key numbers can be seen in ??. The energy consumption
is listed in Table 39.
Table 39: Weighted and unweighted Energy Consumption in kWh/m2 heated ﬂoor area,
Town House
Space heating
HVAC Aux
Pump
DHW
DHW electric
Total
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
Unweighted
5.99
0.86
0.17
14.60
24.20
2.5 Weighting
14.98
1.73
0.43
24.33
6.87
48.33
1.9 Weighting
11.38
1.31
0.32
18.49
5.22
36.73
The town house was also modeled with a Danish DRY year. The results were a terrible thermal
environment and a heating energy consumption of 9.6 kWh/m2.
87
==PAGE:96==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
6.5.2
HORIZONTALLY STACKABLE MODULES - OPENSIDED MODULES
The major diﬀerence from the vertically stacked modules to the one that can be joined in plan,
is the structure. The structure of the module carries all of the load in the corners and in the
studs on all four corners of the core. The modules can be opened in between the inner and
outer corners, and in between the core. The energy performance of the opensided modules is
not expected to deviate much from the performance of the optimized base module and town
house module, if it is used for the same purpose. The opensided module will require more work
on site, since the ﬁnishing ﬂoor boards, wall and ceiling gypsum will be mounted around the
opening when the modules are in place. But having the possibility to create a larger ﬂoor
plan, for example for use in oﬃce and institutional buildings, is important to secure that the
building system is adequate and versatile. An example conﬁguration of an oﬃce building with
opensided modules is presented in subsection 6.6.
6.5.3
HOTEL ROOM/DORMITORY MODULE
The base module has been optimized for a speciﬁc size. When the module becomes small, for
example if it should be used to build a hotel or a dormitory building, the module will need
some adjustment. Some suggestions for ﬂoor plans and sizes are shown in Figure 85. Layout
1 can be located in diﬀerent ways depending on the access route. Both layouts have a space
for the supply shaft. Layout 1 would be supplied from a central system. Layout 2 has a shared
space for a small combined unit such as the VP 18-M2.
88
==PAGE:97==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 85: Dormitory layouts.
6.6
EXAMPLE OF MODULE CONFIGURATION
In the early stage of the project, the Faroese contracting company Articon P/F was con-
tacted. The have a factory/production hall which is used for prefabricated elements, and have
had several projects where a modular construction method could be considered. One of the
projects was an oﬃce building for the municipality of Tórshavn. Another project ideal for the
volumetric construction method was the Hotel Brandan, which is under construction and is
opened in May 2020. The oﬃce building is shown how it would look like, constructed with
opensided modules in Figure 86 and Figure 87. The energy performance has not been cal-
culated for the speciﬁc example. The energy frame is higher for oﬃce buildings, so it would
not be challenging to fulﬁll the energy-frame at all. Since the AHU is turned oﬀin the day,
and it still is possible to reach a satisfying thermal environment, it should be possible too for a
building with occupancy during the day.
89
==PAGE:98==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Figure 86: Oﬃce building, ground ﬂoor
Figure 87: Oﬃce building, ﬁrst ﬂoor
90
==PAGE:99==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
7
DISCUSSION
The results have shown that it is possible to construct very energy eﬃcient, compact residen-
tial modules, that fulﬁll the requirements for the energy frame in the Faroese building code.
Some of the most non-traditional choices included the electrical ﬂoor heating system, and the
frameless window design. The electricity consumption is given a sort of penalty in the form
of the primary energy factor in the calculation of a buildings energyframe. But as described in
the beginning in section 3 there is an excess of wind energy during the winter months. Heat
pumps are an economic, environmentally friendly alternative to oil burners, but using direct
heating energy is actually just as cost-eﬃcient. A rough estimate of the implementation cost
diﬀerence for waterbased and electrical ﬂoor heating showed that it takes 46 years to pay back
the diﬀerence in implemtation cost.
The results of the energy simulations are highly dependant on accuracy and some of the mod-
eling choices might have aﬀected the results. For example the modeling of the door as a win-
dow to be open - ﬁrst the energy use is determined, then the window-door is modeled, then
mimicked to ﬁt the ﬁrst energy use by adjusting the U-value of the frame. Even though several
model checks were performed, there is some uncertainty to the results. The results are also
not to be seen as the thruth, beacuse even though it is a dynamic simulation, the inputs are
not representative for all families. In order to really secure the thermal environment, diﬀerent
living situations should be investigated. The AHU bypass from 15-19 might for example not
be something that works in every family, since increasing the bypass period just a couple of
hours resulted in temperatures below 24◦C , so the heating was turned on.
Just looking at the numbers in Table 40 it is hard to tell that performance of the original
module with constant air change rate of 0.3 L/s in each room has been improved much. But
the changes from the ﬁrst module to last are many. Firstly the air quality was improved with
the redistributed airﬂow. That also lowered the energy use for the fans in the AHU. Then
the thermal environment was improved by introducing summer bypass of the AHU. There
is a ﬁne balance in the relationship between space heating energy and overheating. That is
also why the focus was not always on a perfect result, because once the diﬀerent venting and
energy-saving strategies are combined, like venting and ventilation bypass for example, the
outcome will be diﬀerent. The goal was rather to understand and ﬁnd the balance between
the varied parameter and the energy consumption and thermal environment.
91
==PAGE:100==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
Table 40: Energy Performance comparison
Condition
Space heating
HVAC Aux
T > 27◦C in Bedroom
T > 27 ◦C in Living room
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
h
h
CAV
11.55
0.95
339
106
VAV
13.49
0.71
191
121
VAV whole summer bypass W
13.71
0.72
101
52.4
VAV bypass 15-19
13.49
0.71
191
121
VAV bypass 15-03
13.5
0.71
131
64.3
Entrance door adjustment
13.39
1.05
99.4
77
2 h venting
13.41
1.05
0
36.9
2+1 h venting
13.4
1.03
53.1
45.7
2+0.5 h venting
13.39
1.03
53.1
51.6
VAV frameless
10.27
0.71
294
275
frameless+summer bypass whole day
11.05
0.71
114
93.7
frameless+summer bypass 15-19
10.7
0.71
278
204
frameless+summer bypass 15-19*
10.65
0.71
277
219
frameless+summer bypass+venting from 15th May
10.84
0.69
31.3
81.1
frameless+summer bypass+venting from 15th June
10.65
0.69
105
126
92
==PAGE:101==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
8
CONCLUSION
To conclude, some of the main points of each chapter are highlighted. The decisions that have
been made during the conceptual design phase was to establish a structural principle. It was
chosen to build the load-bearing construction out of wood. The beneﬁts of the wood frame
construction is the build-ability, the low processing of the joists, studs and panels and from a
environmental perspective, wood binds carbon dioxide, and is therefore considered a highly
sustainable material. It is also a low cost material, and combined with a protecting surface
and without any organic material on the colder side of the insulation, it is very durable. The
module can be clad with any material, even slate, which is relatively heavy. The slate facade
draws a beautiful parallel to the traditional, old Faroese houses, and the iconic stone walls. The
investigation of the relative humidity conﬁrmed that the bathrooms should be constructed in
inorganic materials.
The heating and ventilation concept where chosen based on the knowledge that the Faroese
are working towards 100% renewable electric energy, and that there is an abundance of elec-
tricity during the heating season. The versatility of the module is secured by developing the
prototype with heat loss from ﬂoor, roof and gable walls. Having a module that performs very
well when it is at its most compact state, makes it possible to design a building with shifted
modules, like townhouses in varying heights, and still fulﬁll the energy frame. Stacked/coupled
units will increase the density/compactness of the construction, and reduce the heat loss per
area. This was demonstrated by modeling a town house with three base modules in IDA ICE.
The same house was modeled with a Danish weather ﬁle, resulting in very high temperatures
and a very bad thermal environment. The imported building modules used for the apart-
ment buildings in Karlamagnusarbreyt, Mattalágarvegur and Heygavegur from ScandiByg
may have been customized to the Faroese climate, but they may not. This could speak for
taking the initiative to construct modules in the Faroe Islands for the Faroe Islands, as it could
save energy for transportation with ship, and save materials. The CCE-analysis showed, that
the insulation thickness could be reduced signiﬁcantly, and still fulﬁll the energy frame. The
ﬁnal proposal for the base module prototype was the one with improved window design, sum-
mer bypass and venting from 15th of May - Sep 1st. The total energy consumption was 24.18
kWh/m2, with a correction for the heat pump eﬃciency of 1.5 for DHW energy. The total
annual consumption costs for the module is just above 2000 DKK.
93
==PAGE:102==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
REFERENCES
[1]
Saﬀron Woodcraft, Design for social sustainability, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://
www.social-life.co/media/files/DESIGN_FOR_SOCIAL_SUSTAINABILITY_3.pdf.
[2]
Proc. The State-of-the-Art Application of Modular Construction to Multi-Story Residential
Buildings, vol. 1, PHRC.psu.edu, 2013.
[3]
R. M. Lawson, Building design using modules, 2007. [Online]. Available: https://www.
steelconstruction.info/images/6/67/SCI_P348.pdf.
[4]
S. Building and C. Authority, Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DfMA) - Prefabri-
cated Preﬁnished Volumetric Construction. Singapore Building and Construction Author-
ity, 2017.
[5]
C. R. E. Stine Kofod.
[6]
Almene boliger - Kajerødgrunden - Skema 1. AlmenBolig+, 2019.
[7]
Smørum Rådhus - Egedal Kommune - Fremtidens almene boliger. Domea, 2017.
[8]
L. S. S. L. G. Kristian Hertz and F. Markert, “Kronik: Træbygninger kan føre til al-
tødelæggende bybrande”, Ingeniøren, Sep. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ing.
dk/artikel/kronik-traebygninger-kan-foere-altoedelaeggende-bybrande-
228579?fbclid=IwAR1PQ0uY08eJQbk3mgQSHXBOdnyLiC1zgFUH2cXMFl8YuKdPU9tJfNKz_
Nw.
[9]
Cost of wood rafters. [Online]. Available: https://www.10-4.dk/varer/byggematerialer/
trae/spaertrae/45x295mm-hovlet-spaertrae-C18-24?fromSsearch=1.
[10]
Cost of I-beam. [Online]. Available: https://lavpristrae.dk/i-bj%5C%C3%5C%
A6lke/4792-i-bj%5C%C3%5C%A6lke-47x300mm.html?gclid=Cj0KCQjw8svsBRDqARIsAHKVyqE7lw3MuL
DdUUXXGKL3nMc9OsCGF0A509BFENsrG63n-yCBwaAqBDEALw_wcB#/248-l%5C%C3%5C%
A6ngde-10_0_meter.
[11]
E. T. EEN, Det Biologiske Hus. Miljøstyrelsen, 2017.
[12]
International Council for Research and and Innovation in Building and Construction,
Building deconstruction, 2001. [Online]. Available: http://site.cibworld.nl/dl/
publications/Pub278/05Deconstruction.pdf.
[13]
CUPAGROUP, Natural slate rainscreen cladding systems, [Online]. Available: https://
cupadanmark.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/cupaclad-cat_gral_eng.pdf.
[14]
InnoBYG, CINARK, Idekatalog over designstrategier for design for disassembly i præfabrikeret
byggeri, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://issuu.com/cinark/docs/idekatalog.
[15]
E. Saliba, Design of cost eﬀective Nearly Zero Energy Buildings focusing on new types of
windows. DTU BYG, 2019.
[16]
PolySolar photovoltaic glazing products, http://www.polysolar.co.uk/Technology/
PS-CT, Accessed: 2019-09-13.
[17]
M. L. Jensen, “Den store danske”, in. Gyldendal, 2019, ch. Færøerne - klima. [Online].
Available: http://denstoredanske.dk/index.php?sideId=493624.
[18]
S. Aggerholm, Energikrav i bygningsreglement for Færøerne - Besparelsesmuligheder og økonomi.
Statens byggeforskningsinstitut, 2013.
94
==PAGE:103==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
[19]
J. Cappelen, Teknisk rapport 09-01 - Danmarks klima 2008 med Tórshavn, Færøerne og
Nuuk, Grønland. Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut, 2009.
[20]
Accessed: 2019-09-30. [Online]. Available: https://da.climate-data.org/europa/
f%C3%A6r%C3%B8erne/thorshavn/thorshavn-9012/.
[21]
M. Nielsen, “Færøerne vil pumpe vand op på et bjerg – og det kan være med til at løse
en af klimakrisens store udfordringer”, www.TV2.dk, Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://nyheder.tv2.dk/politik/2019-11-06-faeroeerne-vil-pumpe-vand-
op-paa-et-bjerg-og-det-kan-vaere-med-til-at-loese-en-af.
[22]
T. Nielsen, Grøna orkuskiftið í Føroyum. SEV, 2019.
[23]
DR.
[24]
O. J. Arkitektar, Skipanaruppskot - Nýggi miðbýurin í Klaksvík. Klaksvíkar Kommuna,
2015.
[25]
J. Niclasen.
[26]
Bústaðir, Ársfrágreiðing - bústaðapolitikkur ´ı hálva øld, 2013. [Online]. Available: https:
//issuu.com/bustadir/docs/bustadir_arsroknskapur_2013_web.
[27]
K. QUEST.
[28]
D. Standard, DS/EN ISO 7730:2006 Ergonomics of the thermal environment - Analytical
determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the PMV and PPD
indices and local thermal comfort criteria. Danish Standards Association, 2006.
[29]
DS474:1993: Code for Thermal Climate. Danish Standards Association, 2017.
[30]
J. Wilson, DESIGN FOR MODULAR CONSTRUCTION: AN INTRODUCTION
FOR ARCHITECTS. The American Institute of Architects, 2019.
[31]
frihoejdetunnel. [Online]. Available: https://fo.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tunlar_
%C3%AD_F%C3%B8royum.
[32]
I-joist hole support. [Online]. Available: https://www.strongtie.co.uk/products/
detail/i-joist-hole-support/317.
[33]
spaendviddetabeller. [Online]. Available: https://www.ringstedspaer.dk/bjaelkelag.
[34]
T. S. Siegemund, “Parameter analysis of windows”,
[35]
DS418:2011: Calculation of Heat Loss from Buildings. Danish Standards Association, 2011.
[36]
InterGlas triple glazing. [Online]. Available: https://www.interglas.dk/3_lags_
termo_med_4_mm_glas__4_4_4_-p-3938.html?bgsid=kd8654me43ppic8vmafa7b6ud3.
[37]
SystemAir. (). Ny ec ventilator med ie5-motor til geniox ventilationsaggregater forbedrer
eﬀektiviteten op til 7 %, [Online]. Available: https://installator.dk/nyeste-
teknologi-til-ventilationsaggregater. (accessed: 15.11.2019).
[38]
D. Standard, DS/EN ISO 18523-2:2018 Energy Performance of Buildings - Schedule and
Condition of Building, Zone and Space Usage for Energy Calculation - Part 2: Residential
Buildings. Danish Standards Association, 2018.
[39]
S. Pallin, P. Johansson, and C.-E. Hagentoft, “Stochastic modeling of moisture supply
in dwellings based on moisture production and moisture buﬀering capacity”, Jan. 2011,
pp. 366–373.
95
==PAGE:104==
DTU - DEPT. OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS
HEIDI CHRISTIANSEN
[40]
Accessed: 2019-12-30. [Online]. Available: http://beregn.wavin.dk/tryktab/
tryktab.
[41]
V. for Energibesparelser i Bygninger, Udskiftning af varmtvandsbeholder. Videnscenter
for Energibesparelser i Bygninger, 2019.
96
