==PAGE:1==
Physics and Nanotechnology
Master of Science in Engineering
Diffuse Reflection Infrared Spectroscopy using Up-
conversion Detection
MSc thesis
Daniel Christensen Leere
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Daniel Christensen Leere
Diffuse Reflection Infrared Spectroscopy using Upconversion Detection
MSc thesis, Febrauy 2, 2020
Supervisors:
Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg
Peter John Rodrigo
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
DTU Fotonik
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Recent advancements of upconversion and mid-infrared (mid-IR) supercontinuum
light sources have made it possible to construct a spectroscope based on diffuse reflec-
tion in the mid-IR region. The detection of mid-IR wavelengths is of great technical
and scientific interest because of the valuable information gained by the absorbing
bands of chemical molecules and functional groups within the mid-IR region. Tradi-
tionally, detection of mid-IR is limited by the detectors need for cryogenic cooling
which makes it costly and slow.
In this work, a diffuse reflective spectroscopy is
demonstrated based upconversion from mid-IR to near-infrared region (NIR) using
sum-frequency generation (SFG). At the NIR, cost-effective grating-based spectrom-
eter can be utilized to measure reflection.
Two LiNbO3 crystal was investigated,
ultimately showing that by placing a LiNbO3 crystal with a chirped poling structure
inside a cavity, diffuse reflection upconversion was demonstrated with paracetamol
and anti-histamine in the range from 2700-2400 cm−1 (∼3704-4167 µm). The pro-
posed method is relevant for mid-IR applications such as analysis of pharmacy and
medical diagnostics.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This work was carried out at the Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark (DTU Fotonik) as a requirement for the degree of Master of
Science in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology. The presented work was done
and prepared in the period from September 2nd, 2019 to February 2nd, 2020, at the
research facilities of DTU Fotonik at Risø Campus, and supervised by:
• Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg
Associate Professor, DTU Fotonik, Department of Photonics Engineering
• Peter John Rodrigo
Senior Researcher, DTU Fotonik, Department of Photonics Engineering
Kongens Lyngby, February 2nd, 2020
Daniel Christensen Leere
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
A MSc thesis is an individual project, however, there are a lot of people who has
helped me make this process possible and for that I would like to express my grati-
tude.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg
and Peter John Rodrigo. They have from the very beginning believed in me and given
me the freedom to pursue the project in whatever direction that fulfilled my academic
interest. Their guidance and support throughout the project has been invaluable, al-
ways taking the time to share their knowledge and experience in times of need. I am
sincerely grateful for all the inspiration, knowledge, patience and friendly atmosphere
the two have provided.
From the Optical Sensor Technology at DTU Fotonik;
I would also like to express my gratitude to Christian Pedersen whose door was
always open for me, providing insightful discussions on various topics and ideas.
I would like to thanks Lichun Meng who always found the time to provide me
with knowledge and assistance in the laboratory.
Finally, I would like to thanks all of my friends at DTU Physics and Nanotech-
nology for their positive energy and happy feelings. They have transformed the long
working hours into joy and made DTU feel like a second home.
Thanks to my family for their love and endless support throughout my studies.
Thanks to my lovely partner for her continuous encouragement and for being under-
standing of my absence during this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Characterization of Main Components
3
2.1
Mid-IR beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
HeNe laser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Supercontinuum laser source
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Upconversion Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Resonator Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Detectors and noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Device Characterization
15
3.1
Coupled Field Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Phasematch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Birefringent phasematching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Quasi-phasematching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Poled Lithium Niobate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.4
Non-collinear phasematching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.5
Chirped Poled Lithium Niobate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Spectroscopy & Detection
39
4.1
IR spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Upconversion based spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Diffuse Reflection Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Conclusions
49
5.1
Summary and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Further investigation and final thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
51
A Unused System Configurations
53
B Primary Data
55
C Transmission Spectroscopy
57
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Optical spectroscopy within the ultraviolet to near-infrared region has proven to be a
powerful method for identification and quantization of chemical analyses. To extend
this region to the mid infrared, 3-15µm is of great interest for science and industry.
In the mid-IR region each organic compound and functional group has some well
defined spectral absorption features. By IR spectroscopy these features are used to
characterise different materials because of their spectral finger prints caused by the
vibronic modes common to molecules [1, 2]. The spectral finger print allows for some
amazing possibilities such as biomedical optics, detection of unhealthy tissue, e.g.
cancer or medical diagnostics [3]
Frequency upconversion of mid-IR spectroscopy and images has already been
demonstrated [4, 5] and show the potential of such system [6].
Compared to the
advancement in the light sources, the detection part still lag behind. The preferred
method for mid-IR detection is Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), also
a technique used to obtain an infrared spectrum of absorption. Compared to an up-
conversion system, this method is costly, complex and is relying on cryogenic cooled
IR detectors such as InSb, which have a low energy bandgap and a high amount of
dark noise [7].
The object in this work is to construct a diffuse reflection spectroscope based on
upconversion in the mid-IR region. By nonlinear upconversion, a mid-IR signal is con-
verted to the visible-near IR region, allowing for detection with regular grating based
spectroscope and CCD/CMOS detectors with low noise. Two different configurations
of the nonlinear crystal LiNbO3 will be investigated. To show the functionality of the
system upconversion of a mid-IR signal to show the spectral features of Paracetamol
and Anti-histamine is demonstrated.
1.1
Thesis structure
The general structure for each chapter is starts by introducing a theoretical foundation
followed by an explanation of what was studied and how it was done. Then, this
theory, often in the form of a simulation, and the experimental data is compared and
discussed. Finally a Conclusions chapter to summarize the achievements of the work.
Chapter 1
is the present chapter. The idea behind this chapter is to set an moti-
vational frame for the work and to explain its high relevance.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Chapter 2
introduces the framework of the experimental components, namely the
upconversion module. Here, the focus lies on the components of the module and thus
not on the working-principle. The setup is divided into three sections; The mid-IR
laser, the module and the detector region.
Each is individually explained and/or
investigated.
Chapter 3
presents the core elements of nonlinear optics which constitutes the
working-principle of the upconversion module. First, an examination of the general
physics theory that is needed for the remaining content, i.e. sum-frequency genera-
tion and phasematching, is conducted. Afterwards, two LiNbo4 nonlinear crystals in
different configurations are investigated, namely Periodical poled- and Chirped poled
lithium niobate.
Chapter 4
is dedicated to mid-IR spectroscopy with focus on diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy. Here, the wonders of upconversion based spectroscopy are performed
on two selected trial samples i.e. Paracetamol and Anti-histamine. Two diffuse re-
flectance spectra are carried out and compared to that of a FTIR system.
Chapter 5
summarizes the results and provides general conclusions to the thesis.
Lastly follows a section proposing what can be done for further investigation of the
system.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Characterization of Main
Components
All the experimental work done in this thesis relies on the upconversion module. This
chapter is dedicated to introduce this device, details of its components and associated
characteristics. Mid-IR lasers and different detectors are used as a part of the opera-
tion of the upconversion module, therefore these will be introduced as well.
The upconversion module is a key component, as all experiential work done
throughout this project relies here upon.
The working-principle in the module is
based on nonlinear upconversion, which will be introduced in chapter 3. This section
will focus on the individual components and their characteristics. A schematic of the
full setup is shown on fig. 2.1.
The setup in fig. 2.1 is illustrated in the most general form i.e. the configuration
Pump: 1064 nm
 
 
 Ge window
 (SHG: 532 nm)
 
SuperK
AR CaF2
Uncoated CaF2
PPLN
Spectrometer
Nd:YVO4
~750-850nm
BS: 3.5 - 4.5 µm
NS: 3.8 - 4.2 µm
Bandpass 
(750-900nm)
Upconverted
(IR collimation lens)
Collimation lens
(Fiber coupling lens)
Maya
810-982nm
Module
ave
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the upconversion module.
For clearance this chapter
divide the setup into three regions; Mid-IR lasers, the module and the
detection region.
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Characterization of Main Components
which will be used for the most parts of the thesis. The full setup consists of three
overall sections, each with its own individual components. The three sections here
being;
First section, lefthand-side of fig. 2.1 is the mid-IR laser. Here, a total of three
different lasers will be used in different parts of the thesis. The details of each IR-laser
will be introduced later in this chapter.
The second section of the setup is the center-part, on fig. 2.1, named Module.
The term module is used for both the upper and lower box on fig. 2.1. The two
boxes are individually referred to as mixing chamber and pump resonator for the
upper and lower box respectively. Inside the mixing chamber the working-principle
behind the system occurs. This region is thus responsible for the creation of a signal
which is radiated to the right and is colored purple on fig. 2.1. The pump resonator
is generating a high power mixing laser, which later will be examined in greater detail.
This brings us to the third section of the full setup on fig. 2.1, the detector region.
This region remains almost fixed for the most part of the thesis. A commercial spec-
trometer, Maya2000Pro with a detection range from 810-982nm, is used for detection
of upconverted spectrum. At times, another commercial spectrometer from the same
brand with a detection range from 628-815nm is used. When the power of a beam is
of interest, three different powermeters are available - one thermal and two electronic.
Other system configurations has been tried out to create the one present, a short
comment on this can be found in appendix A.
2.1
Mid-IR beam
Three different lasers will be used in different parts of the thesis. This section will
introduce these. In this way the exact specifications of the lasers are known when the
lasers are mentioned later in the thesis.
2.1.1
HeNe laser
A Helium-Neon (HeNe) laser is a type of gas laser which consists of a gas mixture of
helium and neon, with the most part of the gas being helium. By applying a voltage
between an anode and a cathode within the tube, an electrical discharge is produced,
exciting the He gas. When the excited He collides with a Ne atom, the Ne is excited
to a state which then radiates a wavelength determined by the transition state. For
the one used in this work, the wavelength is of 3.39µm. This excitation of the Ne
atoms needs to be done through a He collection, otherwise the Ne will only be excited
to the lower, non-radiating states. Multiple radiative transition states exist for a Ne
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Mid-IR beam
5
atom [8]. In this project, a commercial HeNe laser is used. It operates at a single
transition state and therefore emits a single wavelength of 3.39µm continuously (CW).
The emission spectrum of this HeNe have a very small linewidth (1.5 GHz or 0.002
nm [8]) which allows the operation at a single longitudinal mode1. The laser used in
this project has a single polarization state and was measured with a thermal detector
to have a power of ∼7.8-8.0mW. The wavelength and power for the HeNe are constant
and therefore when referring to the HeNe laser, this is always the settings.
2.1.2
Supercontinuum laser source
As mentioned in the introduction, three mid-IR lasers will be used. The first is the
HeNe, the two others are supercontinuum lasers and will be presented in this sub-
section.
SuperK is shorthand for supercontinuum lasers and will further only be
mentioned as SuperK. A SuperK’s signal originates from a pump pulse with a rela-
tive small linewidth and a high peak power. This pump pulse is sent through a fiber
which has a small fiber core. In this fiber core, a broad collection of nonlinear pro-
cesses cause a severe spectral broadening of the pump pulse’s spectrum. The result
of this is a smooth spectral continuous spectrum, therefore the name supercontinuum.
The SuperK in this project was fabricated and bought at NKT photonics. The
fiber (made of ZBLAN) is inside an armored cable and the laser’s outlet is the last
section of this nonlinear fiber. This fiber is strictly single mode for all wavelengths
longer than ∼2.3µm. Below wavelengths of 2.3µm, higher order modes might exist,
but fundamental mode is still dominant. The wavelength <2.3µm enters the visible
range and is therefore visible to the naked eye and appears green.
This can be
used as a guiding beam. Ultimately, the wavelengths below ∼1.9µm are removed by
absorption/scattering in a Germanium component2. The efficiency of the SuperK
is dependent on temperature, therefore the laser output will have a minor drop in
output power as the temperature increases. According to the manufacturer of the
SuperK, the pulse to pulse fluctuation results in the spectral power over a spectrum
varying approximately 10%. The pulse rate is controlled by an external trigger signal.
When the SuperK beam exits the fiber end it is non-collimated and randomly
polarized.
The random polarization state remains, but to collimate the beam an
uncoated CaF2 lens is used, this lens is named ”IR collimation lens” on fig. 2.1. The
wave-propagation through the fiber will vary depending on the frequency of the wave.
This means that the divergence of the signal from the fiber will vary somewhat with
wavelength. In effect this means that the green guiding beam can not be trusted while
collimating the beam due to the output angle for the IR signal and visible signal being
different. Therefore, the SuperK was collimated by measuring the variation of the IR
spot-size over a distance.
1The concept of longitudinal mode will be elaborated in section 2.2.1
2If not removed, a remnant of the SuperK spectrum will be measured as a part of the upconverted
signal
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Characterization of Main Components
The spectrum of the SuperK was provided by NKT photonics, but as the original
used SuperK broke down halfway through the thesis, two SuperK spectra are available
- one for the original and one for after the repair. The original has a broader spectrum
(BS) and is therefore referred to as BS-SuperK. The one after the repair has a narrower
spectrum (NS) and is therefore referred to as the NS-SuperK. Which source is used
in an experiment will be stated beforehand. The two normalized SuperK spectra can
be seen on fig. 2.2.
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wavelength, µm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized power
Spectrum of SuperK
BS-SuperK
NS-SuperK
Figure 2.2: The normalized spectra of the two SuperKs were provided by NKT
photonics.
On fig. 2.2 a significant difference in the emission spectra is seen. The BS-SuperK
has a broad spectrum compared to NS-SuperK, also, the energy is somewhat different.
The power was measured with a thermal powermeter at different powersetteings for
the SuperK, see table 2.1
Current setting [mA]
Raw (3100)
Raw (3400)
Ge-Window (>2µm) (3400)
BS-SuperK:
-
57.7mW
19.68mW
NS-SuperK:
28.9mW
68mW (NKT)
44mW (NKT)
Table 2.1: The output power of the two SuperKs was measured with a thermal
powermeter. Raw is signal directly at the fiber end and Ge-window is
the signal after CaF2 uncoated lens and a Ge-Window.
In table 2.1 there is only one power setting for the BS-SuperK and this is also the
==PAGE:19==
2.2 The Upconversion Module
7
only setting used for this laser. For the NS-SuperK, whether the current is at 3100mA
or 3400mA will be stated beforehand. Raw refers to the signal measured right after
the fiber end, whereas Ge-Window is the signal measured after propagating through
a lens (uncoated CaF2) and a Ge-window. Here any wavelength below ∼1.9µm is
removed in the Ge-window due to absorption/scattering.
2.2
The Upconversion Module
The module consists of two parts: the mixing chamber and the pump resonator. In-
side the mixing chamber is the nonlinear crystal, which is of great importance, as will
be investigated in chapter 3, but for now it is simply treated as a heated transparent
material with a reflective index. Assuming this, the two parts of the module are re-
ferred to as one. In essence, the module is a laser with an intracavity nonlinear media.
The core role of the module is to provide a high intensity field to the nonlinear media.
The module consists of a few different components; A pump diode, a Nd:YVO4
(Neodymium-doped yttrium orthovanadate) gain medium, a laser cavity and a nonlin-
ear crystal. The pump diode has a wavelength of 808nm and, as the name suggests,
is used for pumping the gain medium. This 808nm diode is selected because the
Nd:YVO4 has a high absorption for this wavelength. The gain medium Nd:YVO4
has a transition state that results in an emission wavelength of 1064nm, which will
be referred to as the mixing source. The Nd:YVO4 is placed inside the same laser
cavity as the nonlinear medium, therefore a high circulation intensity for the mixing
laser is desirable. The cavity’s mirrors has high-reflector coating at the wavelength
of the mixing laser (1064nm) to minimize mirror losses and increase the intracavity
power.
2.2.1
Resonator Configuration
The aim for the Nd:YVO4 crystal is to provide a high intensity at the nonlinear crystal.
Therefore, in this optical resonator, it is desirable to also have a high intensity at the
gain medium as both of the crystals are in the same cavity. A high intensity can be
achieved by a small spot-size at the medium, but decreasing the spot-size increases
the divergence, so this can only be done to some extent, as it is a trade-off. By having
a small spot-size at the gain medium, the overlap between the two can be designed
such that only the fundamental Gaussian TEM00 mode is supported.
A way of achieving this is by calculating the eigenmodes of a resonator config-
uration. Then design the cavity, such that the laser-pump only pumps the region
of the gain medium, which spatially overlaps with this selected eigenmode. In this
manner, the pump and circulating intracavity field is only exciting the part of the
gain medium that supports the fundamental mode. In practice, roughly 1/3 of this
area is pumped, because if the full TEM00 area was to be pumped, the gain medium
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Characterization of Main Components
would also support higher-order modes. The configuration chosen in this project is
adopted from [3] and is in literature described as a folded resonator configuration.
This resonator configuration can be seen in fig. 2.3.
Figure 2.3: (a) The resonator configuration used inside the module, fig. adopted
from [3]. (b) How the resonator looks inside the laboratory.
As seen on fig. 2.3 the module’s cavity consists of multiple mirrors. In effect, all
the mirrors can be viewed as three components i.e. two flat end-mirrors, M1 and M7,
separated by a double convex lens positioned at M3. In the actual design, the M3
is a concave mirror, but from a geometrical point of view this can be treated as a
spherical focus lens.
A consequence of this configuration is that the oblique angle of incidence on the
concave mirror M3 introduces astigmatism to the beam. This tilted angle of incidence
on the mirror is causing the beam to have an elliptical profile because of an offset of the
focus in the horizontal and vertical direction. This offset will thus cause a somewhat
different focal length in both directions. The more oblique the angle of incidence, the
higher the amount of astigmatism introduced [9]. While a complete compensation for
astigmatism is not included in this configuration, the angle of incidence on the concave
mirror is kept fairly small to reduce the impact of the astigmatism to a minimal. The
astigmatism is not considered to be significant and thus further neglected.
The only way for this cavity configuration to be stable is by having a beam-waist
at each of the end-mirrors. The pathlength from the spherical focus lens at M3, to
one of the beam-waist at M1 and M7 is different (M1-156mm-M3-202mm-M7). This
is a part of the design, as it allows for a tailored spot-size i.e. spatially overlap inside
both of the crystals, the gain medium (LC) and the nonlinear crystal (LN). When
the spot-size can be controlled, the gain medium can be designed such that is only
emits a single fundamental TEM00 mode.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 The Upconversion Module
9
When talking about modes, there are two kind i.e. transverse and longitudinal
modes. Both are relevant but right here, the transverse mode is referred to. If an
electromagnetic wave is observed in the plane perpendicular i.e. transverse to the
propagation direction, a pattern in the energy distribution is formed. The fundamen-
tal mode TEM00 have the distribution of a Gaussian beam. Any other distribution
are referred to as higher-modes and is to be avoided in this project as high-order
mode have a lower impedance than in fundamental mode.
The design for the folded-resonator used in this project was adopted from [3].
However, the position and the spot-size of the two beam-waists is still evaluated.
This is done with ABCD ray-transfer matrices. This technique is based on geometric
optics and allows one to track the Gaussian beam parameters throughout a cavity
configuration. Each optical element in the system is represented as a matrix element.
All the elements is then combined to create a single matrix representing one full
round-trip in the system. By this the beam-waist positions and the spot-sizes was
conformed to be at each of the end-mirrors (M1 and M7), with a spot-size of ∼130µm
and ∼180µm at M1 and M7 respectively.
A disadvantage for this configuration is the resonator is operating at the edge of
the optically stable region. Therefore the cavity is sensitive to misalignment and other
disturbance. A misalignment of the mirrors in the resonator leads to a displacement
of the output beam. This angular tilt of the output beam causes an reduction of
output power due to the diffraction losses [9].
By increasing the current for the 808nm pump diode, the gain medium is pumped
harder and a higher circulating intensity is obtained. On fig. 2.4 a detector (400-
1100nm) is measuring the beam through the end-mirror M7 of the cavity while the
pump current is varied from 0-3.5A. This end-mirror has a high transmittance for the
incoming IR beam while still maintaining a high reflectance for the mixing source.
On fig. 2.4 the pump current and the output power of the mixing laser is seen
to have a linear relationship. Bear in mind that only an amount of the circulating
power is transmitted through the end-mirror and therefore this measured number is
small compared to the intracavity field (99.98% reflecting for 1068nm mirror).
The pump wavelength of 808nm is in the detection range of the powermeter and
later the spectrum meter range. The pump beam is highly focused into the Nd:YVO4
where the most part of beam is absorbed. The remnant is very dispersive because of
the tightly focused spot-size. Therefore the power of the 808nm diode is small at the
detector site compared to that of the mixing source. However, this remnant is still
comparable to the intensity of the upconverted signal at the spectrum meter and is
therefore more severe. To further reduce this remnant, two walls are inserted inside
the cavity to physically block out some of the 808nm pump. The first wall is the
one between the mixing chamber and the pump resonator, the second wall is placed
between the two mirrors M2 and M4, both shown on fig. 2.1. Both walls have a
small hole to let the a beam pass through. To reduce the 808nm pump beam which
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Characterization of Main Components
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Pump diode, mW
0
5
10
15
20
Module, mW
Power 1064, IR side
1.741
8.3
14.35
17.04
Figure 2.4: The output power of 1064nm as a function of 808nm diodes pump cur-
rent.
The power was measured with a 700-1800nm detector at the
end-mirror with the nonlinear medium (PPNL) heated to T=74◦C. At
3.5A the diode is emitting roughly 4W.
is propagating in the same direction as the 1064nm mixing laser, the coating of the
mirror is chosen such that it is transparent for 808nm and highly reflective for the
1064nm.
When a gain medium is placed inside a laser resonator there will be a thermal
gradient inside that medium. This heat will induce thermally spatial variation of the
reflective index causing the medium to act as a lens. This thermal lens will cause per-
turbations in mode configuration and divergence of the beam. To prevent a thermal
lens from forming and causing changes in the optical system, the nonlinear crystal are
thermally controlled and kept thermally fixed. The optical pathlength of the cavity
is slightly altered by the temperature varaiation of crystals. There is two reasons for
this; The first reason is because of the material is physically thermal expanded. Sec-
ond reason is because of a reflective index in general is dependent on the temperature
[9]. The second reason will be further elaborated in equation 3.7 later in chapter 3.
Because of the alteration in the optical pathlength the temperature of the crystals
was set to a fixed temperature (74◦C for PPLN and 40◦C for CPLN) when the system
was aligned.
The temperature of the pump diode is slightly altering the amount of photons and
the emission wavelength delivered by the pump diode to the Nd:YVO4 [10]. Therefore
this diode temperature is slightly affecting the power produced by the 1064nm mixing
==PAGE:23==
2.2 The Upconversion Module
11
source. However, this effect is small and is therefore neglected. The temperature of
the pump diode is set at 25◦C for all experiments for the rest of the thesis.
Another temperature related factor is the temperature of the whole system. The
whole system is packed inside an aluminium box. This aluminium box and all the
components have to be in thermal equilibrium with the temperature of the surround-
ings to be total stable. To reduce the impact of temperature interference in the whole
system, the nonlinear crystal was placed inside an oven which shielded the surround-
ings from the heat. Also the walls play a part here as the temperature in a section
of the module quicker reached a local thermal equilibrium. The mixing laser will run
continuously during operation of the upconversion system. Therefore stability of the
mixing beam as a function of time is important. To test this stability, the mixing
lasers output power was measured continuously over a period of 60 minuets through
the end-mirror (M7). As just described, the temperature affect the stability of the
system, therefore two measures was done; First where the nonlinear crystal has been
pre-heated for an extended period of time prior to the experiment. Second where
the temperature was raised at a steady rate of 0.1◦C pr second. For both cases the
maximum temperature was at 74◦C, see fig. 2.5.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time, min.
11.5
12
12.5
13
13.5
14
Power, mW
Stability 1064, IR side
Cold to 74 oC
Pre-heated to 74oC
Figure 2.5: Crystal channel Λ = 21.5µm, with 750 FELH. The red star is where the
set temperature has reached 74◦C.
On fig. 2.5 it can be seen that the detector has a resolution of 0.1mW seen by
the sharp shift from one value to the next. It can further be seen that the power is
fluctuating by 0.2-0.3mW once stable. An explanation for this is might be that the
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Characterization of Main Components
temperature controller for the crystals are automatically turning on/off to maintain
a quasi-fixed temperature. It is seen that the duration of one period, an on/off cycle,
is roughly ∼50 minutes (seen between 5-55min. at the pre-heated case). For the
blue curve on fig. 2.5, cold to 74◦C, rapid fluctuations can be seen in the start of
the measurement. This fluctuation is believed to occur because the temperature rise
allows the laser to jump between modes.
In the module a single wavelength is dominating because of longitudinal modes.
Inside a cavity, multiple mode oscillates, if two waves are resonance frequencies (i.e.
phase shift is an integer of 2π) interference will occur. For constructive interference
this provide an optical feedback loop. At anti-resonance i.e. destructive interference
there is no emission field. The frequency of each longitudinal mode is given as ν =
q · (c/2L) where q is an integer corresponding to different longitudinal modes and L
being the distance between the two end-mirrors. The frequencies are equally spaced
where the separation between adjacent modes is ∆ν = c/2L [9]. As time increases
a single wavelength is naturally selected as the dominant because it is reinforced
by the constructive interference after multiple reflections inside the cavity. Other
wavelengths will be suppressed by the destructive interference. However, the single
dominant frequency which is a standing wave have certain node points inside the gain
medium will remain unused by this frequency. These node points is unused gain and
allow for other longitudinal modes to oscillate if that frequency is supported by some
of the node points. These other longitudinal modes is of much smaller intensity.
2.3
Detectors and noise
For the third and final part of the setup on fig. 2.1, the detector region. The signal
from the nonlinear crystal is in the near-visible region and is emitted as a diverging
Gaussian in this system. The signal is referred to at the upconverted signal as will
become clear why in the next chapter. The upconverted beam is first collimated by
a lens and then it propagates through a bandpass filter. This bandpass filter consists
of two components; A 750FELH which block everything below 750nm (the second
harmonics generated at the nonlinear crystal) and a 900FESH which block everything
above 900 (the 1064nm mixing source). Thereby an effective range from 750-900nm is
passing through to the spectrometer. Although these are high quality filters a minor
leakages still occurs. The upconverted signal is after the bandpass filter reaching the
fiber coupling lens. This lens is designed such that a collimated beam is efficiently
coupled into an attached fiber and therefore efficiently collects the signal. It is bene-
ficial to have the upconverted signal transferred by a fiber as this make is possible to
switch the spectrometer and thereby the detection range, very easy. In this project
two spectrometers has been used both is a Maya2000 Pro from Ocean Optics. These
spectrometer have a detection range of 628-815nm and 810-982nm.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Detectors and noise
13
If the power of a beam is of interest, three different powermeters are available -
one thermal and two electronic with a detection region from 400-1100nm (Thorlabs
S120C) and 700-1800nm (Thorlabs S122C). The drawback for the thermal detector
is that it has a low accuracy but because the two electronic are transparent for IR
wavelength the thermal one is used for measuring the mid-IR wavelength.
==PAGE:26==
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Device Characterization
The theory in this chapter is the basic principle of work for the upconversion module
and is thus essential for the rest of the work. The first section provide a basic for the
nonlinear optics with focus on the second order parametric processes. This is followed
by a section about phasematching and how to functionalize the applied theory by
different means i.e. angle tuning, temperature tuning and period tuning. Finally the
nonlinear material Lithium Niobate is introduced and elaborated upon.
3.1
Coupled Field Equations
From the very foundation of optics to nonlinear frequency-mixing is a long and com-
plex journey.
Therefore, the theory in the following chapter is merely presented
instead of proven since this is out of scope for this work. For a full derivation of the
formulas the reader is redirected to [8], [11] or [12] which does an excellent job here
upon.
As a light beam interacts with a dielectric material, a wave will propagate through
the material. As this wave propagates it introduces a displacement of the electrons in
the crystal lattice causing them to oscillate. This displacement of the electrons from
the atoms creates a dipole which on a macroscopic level manifests itself as an induced
polarization. For linear medias the amplitude of the induced oscillation grows linearly
with the electric field. However, by the invention of lasers and optical cavities, a high
intensity of laser fields lead to the discovery of nonlinear optics. Here the amplitude
of the induced oscillation is not proportional to the electric field. This is the reasoning
behind the name nonlinear optic [8, 9].
The magnitude of the induced polarization P is depend upon the magnitude of the
electric field E, this can be expressed in a power series as
P = ε0χ(1)E + ε0χ(2)EE + ε0χ(3)EEE + · · ·
(3.1)
Here the coefficient χ(n) is the electric susceptibilities of the medium. χ(1) represent
the linear response of the material i.e. linear coefficient, whereas the rest (n)-th is
referred to as the order of nonlinearity. The nonlinear coefficients are significantly
smaller than the linear coefficient, therefore it is necessary to have a high intensity of
the lasers field to have non-negligible nonlinear coefficients, this will be elaborated in
section 3.2.3.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Device Characterization
The work in this thesis is centered around the so-called parametric processes. These
are the nonlinear processes where light is exchanging energy between different fre-
quencies through the properties of a lossless nonlinear medium. The second-order
susceptibility χ(2) is used to describe phenomena such as second harmonic generation
(SHG) or sum-frequency generation (SFG) among others [11].
In SFG three different waves are involved. Consider two waves of different frequency
ω1 and ω2. By the properties of the nonlinear medium the two waves can interact
and create a third wave of frequency ω3 while preserving energy and momentum.
The three frequencies are exchanging energy back and fourth between one another
through the nonlinear properties of the medium, χ(2), without exchanging energy to
the material. Thus the energy will remain distributed between the three interacting
fields and never in the medium thereby obeying conservation of energy;
ℏω3 = ℏω1 + ℏω2
or
ℏωup = ℏωIR + ℏωp
(3.2)
In this work both the numbered and named notation will be used. Here the subscript
up is shorthand for upconverted and p for pump. The pump is sometimes referred to
as the mixing source.
The example above eq.
3.2 is for frequency upconversion and is the dominating
process involved throughout this work. Further specified, if the energy is transferred
from the frequencies with the lowest photon energies (ω1 & ω2) to that of the highest
photon energy (ω3) the process is known as upconversion. Thus the generated output
wave equals the sum of the pump and the IR-input frequencies as described in eq. 3.2
or illustrated in fig. 3.1.
ωIR
ωP
ωup
+
=
I
ω
Figure 3.1: Sum-frequency mixing (SFG). Two waves, ωIR and ωP , generates a
third, ωup, with the photon energy equals the sum of the indicating two
as seen in eq. 3.2.
Starting from Maxwell’s equations the nonlinear wave equation can be derived as
seen from source [11]. The nonlinear wave equation contains a source term because
of the higher orders of eq. 3.1. Under the assumptions that the system is lossless
and far from resonant transitions, the nonlinear wave equation for a second-order
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Coupled Field Equations
17
nonlinearity is
(
∇2 + ω2
upn2
c2
)
Eω0up = −µ0ω2
σ
(
Pω0up
)(2)
(3.3)
Three equations can be set up from this eq. 3.3 to describe the energy flow among
three waves – one equation for each of the interacting frequencies. To further derive
the three coupled wave equations certain approximations are used in analog with
source [11]. First assumption is the slowly varying envelope approximation (SVEA),
which states that the field amplitude varies slowly compared to the wavelengths length
of the electric field.
Secondly, for simplifying the calculation, the field is assumed to be a monochromatic
plane waves. This allows one to treat a broadband source as discrete values. This
also simplifies the equation by removing transverse components because the power is
assumed equally distributed in the transverse plane for a plane wave.
Finally is the so-called Manley-Rowe approximation, which is a relations that pre-
dict the amount of energy in a wave which has multiple frequencies. These relations
ensures that the amount of energy is conserved as in eq. 3.2. The amount of photons
are not conserved as two photons, ωP and ωIR can be upconverted into a single pho-
ton ωup [12].
This model only deals with photon loss from the transition from one frequency
to another. For real-life application absorption and scattering will always be present
in a crystal. However, by choosing an appreciate wavelength with a low absorption,
these factors will be of a neglectable size.
With the stated approximations, it is possible to proceed from eq. 3.3 to the
coupled wave equation. The notation of book [11] is followed.
daωIR
dz
= igaωupa∗
ωP exp(i∆kz)
(3.4a)
daωP
dz
= igaωupa∗
ωIRexp(i∆kz)
(3.4b)
daωup
dz
= igaωIRaωP exp(−i∆kz)
(3.4c)
Here the equations are stated in terms of ai i.e. the complex envelopes which also can
be written as |ai|2 = ϕωi = Iωi/ℏωi the photon flux density. ∆k(T, ωi, θ) = kup−kIR−
kP where ki = niωi/c = ni(2π/λi), is called phasematch which is the conservation of
momentum for optic. This parameter will be explained and investigated in greater
details in the following section 3.2. The gain, g, is given as
g = ε0χ(2)
eff
√
1
2η3ℏωIRωP ωup
(3.5)
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Device Characterization
which is related to the reflective index through the impedance parameter
η =
√
µ/ε =
1
ε0cni
.
(3.6)
ni is the refractive index, ωi is the angular frequency, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity,
c is the speed of light.
Gain at the upconverted frequency, ωup, leads to attenuation of the total photon
number of the two fields, but the total energy remains steady. This can be visualized
at fig. 3.2.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Interaction length, z
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Relative Power
Pump
IR
Upconv
Sum
Figure 3.2: The power distribution of the interacting field in SFG with perfect
phasematching. The power of ωIR and ωpump decreases as ωupconv in-
creases. The total sum of energy remains the same.
The temperature of the nonlinear material has a significant role through refractive
index, ni. To describe the temperature dependence of the refractive index the Sell-
meier equations are applied. These equations are found experimentally for specific
materials. For this work lithium niobate is the material for the nonlinear crystal. The
sellmeier equations has been found experimentally by Gayer et al. [13] as
n2
e(λi, T) = a1 + b1f +
a2 + b2f
λ2 −(a3 + b3f)2) + a4 + b4f
λ2 −a2
5
−a6λ2
(3.7a)
f = (T −24.5◦C) (T + 570.82)
(3.7b)
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Coupled Field Equations
19
For this equation 3.7 the wavelength is inserted in microns. The remaining param-
eters are experimental constants adopted from Gayer et al. [13] for lithium niobate
and displayed in table 3.11.
Parameters
5% MgO doped LiNbO3
ne
no
a1
5.756
5.653
a2
0.0983
0.1185
a3
0.202
0.2091
a4
189.32
89.61
a5
12.52
10.85
a6
1.32×10−2
1.97×10−2
b1
2.860×10−6
7.941×10−7
b2
4.700×10−8
3.134×10−8
b3
6.113×10−8
-4.641×10−9
b4
1.516×10−4
-2.188×10−6
Table 3.1: Experimental constants adopted from Gayer et al. [13].
Now that the conversion of energy between the three fields is described it is pos-
sible to derive an analytical expression for the conversion efficiency. To describe the
conversion efficiency analytical with perfect phasematching i.e. ∆k = 0, one defines
the ratio of the intensity input IR beam and the output upconverted beam at the
start and end of the system respectively [11]. Considering this in the weak coupling
regime allows one to consider two of the three components to be assumed constant,
a1 and a2 in this work. This reduces the three equations to just a single one, eq. 3.4c,
allowing one to write the efficiency conversion, in analog with [11], as
γSF G = Iωup(L)
IωIR(0) = 1
2η3ω2
up
(
ε0χ(2)
eff
)2
IωP (0)L2
(3.8)
The conversion efficiency from ωIR to ωup is proportional to the intensity of ωP i.e.
Iωup = γSF G · IωIR. This is interesting as the efficiency increases proportionally to
IωP and squared with the crystal length.
Equation 3.8 does not include phase mismatch i.e. ∆k ̸= 0. Evaluating over the
crystal length from 0 to L gives the conversion efficiency as a function of the phase
mismatch relative to the perfect phasematched.
γ∆k = sin2(∆kL/2)
(∆kL/2)2
= sinc2(∆kL/2).
(3.9)
Eq. 3.9 is thus a factor to describe the impact of imperfect phasematching on the
total conversion efficiency and is examined in greater details in the next section 3.2.
1Only the extraordinary axis is used in this work as that is the direction of all the interacting
fields as will be elaborated in section 3.2.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Device Characterization
In eq. 3.8 there was assumed perfect phasematch, this is now corrected with eq. 3.9.
When making an estimate of the SFG conversion efficiency a commonly used notation
is that deff = 1/2χ(2)
eff in the units of [m/V]. Implying the use of this notation and
eq. 3.6 the SFG conversion efficiency can be rewritten. The signal field is assumed
to be a top-hat function with the area A = π · r2, and by rewriting ω = 2πc
λ
and
c =
(√ε0µ0
)−1 the final equation for conversion efficiency is achieved, eq. 3.10, same
as in the source [14].
γ = γSF Gγ∆k =
8π2d2
effL2PP
ε0cnIRnP nupλ2
3Asinc2(∆kL/2)
(3.10)
The generated power is strongest when the phase mismatch is zero as expressed
by the sinc2. The methods to obtain this will be explored in the following section 3.2.
For arriving at the equations in this section plane waves was assumed, but in reality
the beam is this work has a Gaussian profile. The use of plane waves is justified by
the fact that the nonlinear crystal is longer than the Rayleigh length. Therefore the
beam can be treated as a plane wave as the intensity in the transverse plane is the
same because of the collinear nature while within the Rayleigh length. If the beam
was highly focused this would not be a good assumption as the divergence of the
focused beam would cause the intensity to nonuniform in the transverse direction.
3.2
Phasematch
The phase mismatch parameter i.e. ∆k = kup −kIR −kP with ki = 2πniωi/c, was
introduced in the previous section in connection with the coupled field equation 3.10.
The vector ki is formed by a plane wave corresponding to the frequencies ωi and is
dependent on the refractive index ni. The phasematch is crucial for obtaining a high
upconversion efficiency when doing upconversion. The parameter ∆k is describing
the interference between the induced polarization i.e. the waves generated by the
oscillating dipoles kup, and the incoming electric fields kIR + kP . If ∆k ̸= 0 the fields
will be out of phase in region of the nonlinear material, and destructive interference
will occur which results in a lower upconversion efficiency as the amount of generated
photons is decreased. This can be seen on fig. 3.3 where eq. 3.9 is plotted.
The coherence length is defined as the length in the crystal where the induced
field and the product of incoming fields has a 2π phase shift [9],
Lcoh = 2π
∆k .
(3.11)
As ∆k increases the coherence length Lcoh decreases eq. 3.11.
To elaborate, if the phasematch is fixed at zero ∆k = 0, the intensity of the
upconverted field will increase over the entire length of the crystal, the longer the
crystal the higher the power. In a real case where ∆k ≈0 the field will build up in
the first part of the crystal, but when the fields reaches half a coherence length of
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Phasematch
21
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Phasemismatch, 
kL/2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
upconversion efficiency, sinc2(
kL/2 )
Figure 3.3: Normalized sinc2 function illustrating the relative upconversion effi-
ciency as a function of phase mismatch. The conversion efficiency de-
cline rapidly as ∆k ̸= 0.
propagation the upconverted field starts to backconvert. This depletion is introduced
as the phase difference become ∆kL/2 = π and destructive interference starts occur-
ring. As the goal is to achieve a high upconversion efficiency this backconversion is
of course undesired. Therefore certain approaches are necessary to counteract this
backconversion. A method to ensure a continuous buildup throughout the crystal,
is to use a birefringent material for compensation of the natural dispersion in the
material.
3.2.1
Birefringent phasematching
When light is propagating through an anisotropic birefringent material, the beam
is decomposed into two directions through the material dependent on the state of
polarization of the beam. The two rays are referred to as ordinary and extraordinary
rays, likewise the material has an ordinary and extraordinary index of refraction. The
refractive index in general is dependent upon the temperature and the wavelength of
the propagating beam. A birefringent materials refractive index is further dependent
upon the polarization of the beam and for the extraordinary index, also the angle
between the propagation direction of the beam and optical axis in the material. The
reasoning behind this angle dependence is that the beam is separated into two direc-
tions dependent on the state of polarization, these two beams then propagate through
the material in different directions causing an geometrical offset, the so-called beam
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Device Characterization
walk-off [9, 11].
Frequency mixing is favorable i.e. most efficient, in the direction with the highest
deff and largest nonlinear coefficient. However, this direction may not be where it is
possible to have ∆k=0. If possible, then by choosing an appropriate polarization state
and propagation direction an ideal phasematching of ∆k=0 can be achieved. Here
each field is oscillating in-phase with the dipole within the material. The appropriate
conditions can be obtained in different manners, one is called critical-phasematching,
here the crystal is turned thus introducing the required angle for phasematching [15].
Another method, called non-critical phasematching, is by regulating the temperature
to meet the criteria for phasematching. Both cases have some drawback; For the
critical phasematching the propagation direction in the material is limited. Another
possible problem is that the phasematch direction does not necessary match with
the largest element of second order susceptibility. The disadvantage for non-critical
phasemathcing is the elevated temperature of the crystal. This temperature may not
be possible if the required temperature is above the damage threshold of the crystal
or coating, or if the temperature is unstable [9].
A third method is the so-called quasi-phasematching which can be used separately or
in a combination with the previously methods introduced in this section.
3.2.2
Quasi-phasematching
In some ferroelectric materials, like lithium niobate (LiNbO3), the whole ferroelectric
domain can be inverted corresponding to a change of sign in the effective nonlin-
ear susceptibility deff. The idea behind quasi-phasematching (QPM) is to do this
alteration of the domain for a fixed period, see fig. 3.4.
z
-deﬀ
deﬀ
Figure 3.4: Periodic structure for QPM with a periodic poling period of Λ. The
change of sign in deff introduces a phaseshift.
Each period, Λ, contain two domains with opposite signs of deff. The period can
be designed such that the domain is changed whenever the upconverted field is about
to backconvert i.e. at Λ = Lcoh. With QPM our structure can compensate for the
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Phasematch
23
dispersion in the material and a new phasematch condition is now written as
∆k = kup −kIR −kP ± kQP M
(3.12)
where kQP M = m · 2π/Λ with m being an integer. If m = 1 the structure is called
first order QPM etc. If integer m > 1 multiple cycles occurs before a phase change,
this is called higher order QPM, see fig 3.5. The period Λ can be calculated as,
Λ =
(nup
λup
−nIR
λIR
−nP
λP
)−1
(3.13)
with ni(λi, T) from the Sellmeier eq. 3.7. With QPM the phasematch propagation
direction can be chosen to be in the direction with the highest nonlinear coefficient.
This would typical be in the direction of a principal axes of the material with parallel
polarized interacting fields.
Distance in crystal, a.u.
0 
10
20
30
40
50
Upconverted power, a.u.
No phasematch, 
 10
Birefringent
QPM, m=1
QPM, m=3
Figure 3.5: Upconverted power for different phasematch cases i.e. birefringent, first-
order and third-order. The birefringent has been given the same χ(2)
eff
as the first-order poling. The ”No phasematch” curve is multiplied by
ten to make it visible.
On fig. 3.5, for “No phasematch” i.e. the yellow curve, the generated power of
the upconverted field reached a maximum and then is backconverted, same as seen
earlier on fig. 3.2. The yellow curve is times ten in intensity to make it visible. The
birefringent has here been given the same value of χ(2)
eff as the first-order poling. For
the birefringent phasematch the power is rapidly increasing, faster than the other
cases. However, this is for a numerical case and is not possible to achieve in a real
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Device Characterization
case scenario as the dispersion makes it impossible to access the larger nonlinear
coefficient. For QPM the generated power keeps increasing throughout the crystal,
most rapidly for first order m=1. The m=3 likewise increases throughout the crystal,
this just takes a longer crystal for the same power output. The build-up throughout
the entire length of an infinity crystal is only true due to the assumption that the
two fields are undepletable and the material lossless i.e. no scattering or absorption.
In a real scenario a material will have a range of wavelengths where it will be almost
transparent. Thus wavelengths will be absorb or scattered outside this range, and
limited absorption occurring within. Meanwhile scattering is unavoidable and occurs
to all of the fields which would eventually be depleted and defeated in an infinitely
long crystal.
3.2.3
Poled Lithium Niobate
In this work, there are used two nonlinear crystals, both of these are made of Lithium
Niobate, LiNbO3. LiNbO3 crystal is a negative uniaxial birefringence which depends
on temperature and transparent in the region from 0.42-4.2µm [9].
MgO doped
LiNbO3 has a low damage threshold 0.2 GW/cm2 compared to a material like KTP
which is 0.5 GW/cm2 [9]. The LiNbO3 material is susceptible to photorefractive dam-
age, especially from the visible and the UV region. The doping of MgO increases the
resistance for the photorefractive damage [9] and increase the stability of the output
power. There is a significant variation for the efficient nonlinear coefficients in pub-
lished literature. However, 5%MgO doped LiNbO3 without QPM has a high efficient
nonlinear coefficient of 5.1 pm/V compared to 3.64 pm/V for KTP (for a propaga-
tion wavelength of 1064nm) [9]. To perform non-critical phasematch for LiNbO3, the
crystal need to operate at elevated temperatures. This, combined with the low pho-
torefractive damage threshold have been limiting the practical use of this material
without QPM. If the domains are made in a periodical poled structure, as described
above in section 3.2.2 known as QPM, the LiNbO3 crystal can be operated only using
the propagation direction with the largest nonlinear index [9, 11, 16]. By doing this
the needed power is significantly reduced and a smaller power level below the dam-
aged threshold will be sufficient for efficient frequency upconversion. This is what
was done for this work and now the crystal is referred to as Periodic Poled Lithium
Niobate, PPLN for short. A PPLN has an effective nonlinear coefficient of 17.2 pm/V
[9, 11]. For a particular wavelength and temperature, the PPLN grating period, Λ,
can be calculated by eq. 3.13 to obtain phasematching, this is simulated in fig. 3.6.
The fabrication for this crystal is rather interesting but out of the scope for this
work, however, the reader is directed to [9] sec. 10.3 or the source [17] which makes
an interesting read.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Phasematch
25
0
50
100
150
200
Temperature, oC
20.5
21
21.5
22
22.5
23
23.5
24
Period , µm
IR=4.2 µm
IR=4.0 µm
IR=3.9 µm
IR=3.4 µm
IR=3.0 µm
Figure 3.6: Temperature as a function of period, Λ. Phasematch can be achieved
by either changing period or temperature (collinear phasematching for
this simulation). Here is phasematch simulated for discrete wavelengths.
At the lines ∆k = 0. λHeNe=3.39µm.
3.2.4
Non-collinear phasematching
Propagation parallel to the optical axis in the LiNbO3 is preferred as the effective
length thus become largest. However, this is not always a possibility for the phase-
match and when that is the case, angle turning is used. Angle turning is when there
is an angle between the optical axis of the crystal and the direction of propagation.
This angle turning can be done either by rotating the crystal physically or by altering
the angle between the two incoming beams. By changing the angle of the incoming
signal beam, the beam is exposed to a different effective refractive index. Thus for
a fixed period and temperature, it is possible to phasematch efficiently with a whole
range of wavelengths simultaneously dependent on the angle of incident, see fig. 3.7.
This is called non-collinear phasematching.
On fig. 3.7 a schematic of non-collinear phasematching is shown, sometimes re-
ferred to as non-collinear upconversion. The internal (θi) and external angles (αi) on
each sides is different, this change of direction is caused by the change of refractive
index and is related by Snell’s law. When the beam propagates through the crystal
with an angle, θ1, to the optical axis, the effective interaction length in the crystal is
reduced. This is true when considering Gaussian beams but not plane waves. This
is important as the power increases as the square of the interaction length L, as
described in eq. 3.10. This has the effect that a wavelength which has phasematch
condition at a high angle of incident,will have a shortened effective length reducing
overlap between the interacting beams. The result of this is a decrease in upcon-
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Device Characterization
PPLN
L
2
0
IR
U c n
Pump
θ1
θ2
KIR
KUpconv
Kmixing
KQPM
Figure 3.7: (a) Non-collinear phasematching.
The internal angle of incident,θ1,
though the PPLN allows for simultaneously phasematch with a range
for different wavelengths. (b) Phasematch with angle dependency and
QPM.
verted output power compared to another wavelength which has phasematch at a
more collinear angle. By observing fig. 3.7 the phasematch condition with an angular
dependency can be constructed along the z-axis and transverse direction
∆kz = 2π · ne(λup, T)
λup
cos(θ2)−2π · ne(λIR, T)
λIR
−2π · ne(λP , T)
λP
cos(θ1)−2π
Λ
(3.14)
∆kT = 2π · ne(λup, T)
λup
sin(θ2) −2π · ne(λP , T)
λP
sin(θ1)
(3.15)
The wavelength in the extraordinary refractive index, ne(λi, T), is calculated from
the Sellmeier equations. For plane waves, the transverse phase mismatch parameter
is uniform, therefore ∆kT = 0. Thereby one can isolate for an angle θi in eq. 3.15
and insert into eq. 3.14 to obtain the non-collinear phasematch curves. A simulation
of this is shown in fig. 3.8.
On fig. 3.8 it is seen that by focusing the IR beam inside the PPLN by a cone of
a half-angle present at the x-axis, upconversion can be achieved at a broad spectral
range extending between ∼3.65-4.75µm at T=70◦C. Thus for non-collinear phase-
matching a bigger bandwidth can be covered compared to the collinear phasematch-
ing case. On this figure it is seen that an increase in temperature will result in a
smaller bandwidth of phasematched wavelengths. However, as discussed earlier, the
bigger the angle the smaller the effective interaction length [18].
Another way of altering the angle dependence and acceptance bandwidth is by
changing the poling period. On fig. 3.8 the period is fixed at Λ = 23µm. By a
combination of temperature and period changes, it is possible to phasematch for the
wavelengths emitted by the IR source, this is done in fig. 3.6.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Phasematch
27
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Internal angle of incidence, deg
3.6
3.8
4
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
IR-wavelength, µm
T=70
T=80
T=90
T=100
T=110
T=120
T=130
T=140
T=150
T=160
Figure 3.8: IR-wavelength as a function of the internal incident angle, θ1.
The
period remains fixed at Λ=23µm.
By changing the temperature be-
tween 70-160◦C phase mismatch condition is altered.
At T=160 no
non-collinear phsaematching can occur.
The PPLN crystal used in this work is 20mm long, 5%MgO-doped and constructed
with five different poling periods separated into five channel each 1mm×1mm. The
poling periods are as seen in table 3.2.
Channel #
1
2
3
4
5
Period, Λ (µm)
21
21.5
22
22.5
23
Table 3.2: The period in each channel.
With this configuration it is simple to change from one period to another without
the need of exchange the whole crystal in and out of the system. The range from
21-23µm makes it possible to cover a wide bandwidth. The PPLN is mounted in
a temperature controlled stage and is kept below 200◦C to ensure that no thermal
damage is occurring. If the temperature is increased/decreased too fast a thermal
stress is introduced due to expansion, and may cause the coating of the components
to fracture. Therefore the alteration of temperature is limited to 2-3◦C/min.
The change of temperature is expected to change the upconversion efficiency as sim-
ulated in fig. 3.3. This was examined with the use of a HeNe laser with a single fixed
wavelength at 3.39µm propagating through the system with a period of Λ = 22.5µm
and a temperature between 50-100◦C, see fig. 3.9.
For both fig. 3.9 and fig. 3.10 the configuration in the system is; HeNe - focus
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Device Characterization
lens (f=50mm) - PPLN(Λ=22.5µm) - collimation lens - Bandpass filter (750FELH
- 900FESH) – Fiber coupling lens – Detector (Maya2000pro spectrum for fig. 3.9)
(400-1100nm powermeter for fig, 3.10).
Figure 3.9: Results of a HeNe propagating through a PPLN Λ=22.5µm crystal. The
results is a sinc2 function as expected from the simulation of fig. 3.3.
The red curve is the maximum value of each underlying spectrum.
As the temperature changes the phasematch conditions changes, forming a sinc2
function agreeing with the simulation in fig. 3.3. All upconverted wavelengths is at
810nm. While mixing with a pump laser at 1064nm this correspond to an IR wave-
length of 3.39µm. Thus only the intensity of the 810nm peak is changed with temper-
ature reason being that the phase mismatch increasing as T̸=74◦C. The optimized
phasematch condition was calculated to be at T=74◦C for a period of Λ=22.5µm
which can also be seen on fig. 3.6. However, the experiment showed that the optimal
temperature is at 78◦C. Possible reasons for this could be that the set temperature
on the controller was changed too quickly and thus the temperature of the PPLN
crystal would be lower than the controllers set temperature. Other possibilities being
the precision of the controller is inaccurate, the thermostat being too far from center
region of the crystal or an angled input for the HeNe.
To investigate this trend even further, the system was realigned and the temper-
ature was changed between 65-87◦C with a step interval for 0.2◦C. At each step the
system was left for 90 seconds to adapt to the temperature change. The controller
unit has two display, one is for set temperature and one is for actual measured at the
thermostat, both was registered. The results can be seen on fig. 3.10. On fig. 3.10 it
is seen that the change between set and actual is at maximum at lower T (0.8◦C at
T=65◦C) and become smaller as T increases (0.1◦C at T=87◦C). The results look like
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Phasematch
29
65
70
75
80
85
Temperature, °C
0
50
100
150
200
250
Power µw
Set temp.
Actual temp.
Figure 3.10: HeNe laser propagating through the PPLN. The period is fixed at Λ =
22.5µm while the temperature is changed between T=65-87◦C. The
temperature control unit has two displays, one for the set temperature
and one for the thermostat temperature, TActual.
a sinc2 function as expected from the simulations. The maximum upconverted power
is found at Tset=75.2◦C (Tactual=75.6◦C), which is in a more acceptable range of the
calculated compared to the different in fig. 3.9. The measured upconverted power
was at 260µW at maximum giving a conversion efficiency of Pup/PIR = 3.25%, simu-
lated according to eq. 3.10 a conversion efficiency of ∼10% is possible (PP ≃80[W],
L=20[mm], ne(810nm,74◦C)=2.1811, A=π·1802[µm], λ=810[nm], χ(2)
eff=17.2[pm/V]).
This is quite low as upconversion efficiency as high as 40% have been experimentally
proven [19] albeit with different parameters. The pump power was estimated based
on the transmittance of the end-mirror provided by the manufacture. .
The next thing to investigate is the upconversion for a broadband IR source, the
superK laser. For the following experiment the BS-superK was used for upconversion
with temperature from 70-180◦C with a stepsize of 10◦C, see fig. 3.11.
On fig. 3.11 the systems is as follows; BS superK – uncoated CaF2 collimation lens
– Ge window – Focus lens f=50mm – PPLN (Λ=23µm) – collimation lens – Bandpass
(750-900nm) – attenuation filter – fiber collection lens - Spectrometer (Maya2000Pro
810-982nm, 10ms integration time, 3 avg. pr. measure).
The large drop at the center part of the orange curve is caused by absorption of CO2
as it has an absorption peak at 4.3µm [14].
If the outer shape of all the measurements are combined, they will imitate the
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Device Characterization
830
840
850
860
870
Upconv. nm
0
5
10
15
20
25
Power, a.u.
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
3774
3989
4226
4485
4771
Figure 3.11: BS-superK upconverted signal. The temperature was changed from
70-180◦C with a stepsize of 10◦C. At the upper x-axis discrete points
is calculated for the corresponding IR wavelengths.
shape of the BS-superk.
If a single measurement was to be inspected it has two
upconversion peaks corresponding to the collinear phasematching. This can be seen
from the phasematch curve fig. 3.8 that a fixed T and Λ has two wavelengths has
optimized collinear phasematch condition i.e. θ=0. As the temperature is increased,
the peaks of the upconverted signal is approaching the center region of the BS-superK.
The same tendency is seen on the simulated fig. 3.8 where the collinear phasematch
condition becomes smaller as temperature becomes higher. This also explains why
the distance between the two peaks on fig. 3.11 is decreasing as the temperature is
increasing. The intensity of the peaks is increasing until T>160◦C where there is no
upconversion as there is no longer phasematching. From the simulated phasematch
curves it was found that the highest possible temperature with fixed parameters is
T=156.638◦C (λ=4.195µm).
The increase of intensity for the upconverted beam at elevated temperature has
two reasons. First is due to the BS-superk which has a higher intensity around the
center region at 4.2µm. Second reason is due to the non-collinear phasematching angle
dependency. As seen on the phasematch curves fig. 3.8, an increase in temperature
reduces the required angle of incident θ needed to perform non-collinear phasematch-
ing. When the required θ decreases, the interaction length increases which affects the
generated power by squared the length.
If a single peak was to be observed, the sides of the peak is not symmetrical. The
side away from the center of the sinc is dominated by the collinear phasematch as no
non-collinear can be phasematch here. Therefore this side is seen to have secondary
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Phasematch
31
lobes beside the maxima. The side turning towards the center of the sinc is dominated
by non-collinear phasematching. Here the shape is formed by multiple wavelengths
at different angles and the appearance is therefore a product of many contributions.
Next it would be beneficial to examine if non-collinear phasematching is the cause
of upconversion. A way to examine this is by introducing an aperture right after
the BS-superK is collimated before the focus lens. By closing the aperture the beam
diameter of the IR is reduced resulting in a smaller angle of incident. The smaller
angle will prevent the outermost angels to get upconverted. The effect of the aperture
is illustrated in fig. 3.12(a). For the actual measurements the temperature and period
was kept fixed (T=70◦C and Λ=23µm) and aperture was slowly closed at a quasi-fix
stepsize, see knobscale at table 3.3. The results is plotted in fig. 3.12(b). On fig.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Internal angle of incidence, deg
3.6
3.8
4
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
IR-wavelength, µm
T=70
T=80
T=90
T=100
T=110
T=120
T=130
T=140
T=150
T=160
Aperture
820
830
840
850
860
870
Upconv. nm
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Power, a.u.
=0.0
=0.5
=1.0
=1.5
=2.0
=2.5
=3.0
=3.5
=4.0
=4.5
=5.0
=5.5
=6.0
=6.5
=7.0
Figure 3.12: (a) Simulated phasematch curves with the aperture removing the
outer angles, knobscale position 4.0. (b) BS-superK upconverted sig-
nal, PPLN T=70◦C and Λ=23µm, focuslens=50mm. By closing the
aperture the outermost angles are blocked resulting in the center wave-
lengths which is depended on θ>2.5◦is blocked.
3.12(b) it is seen that by reducing the diameter gradually the wavelengths with the
dependency for the higher incidence angles disappear. Again the CO2 absorption is
clearly seen around the 850nm. The collinear upconversion i.e. θ = 0 has the longest
interaction length and are therefore stronger in signal even though the brightness at
the source is less.
To further test if these non-collinear phasematch curves at fig. 3.12(a) is to be
trusted, one can close the aperture until an affect in the upconverted signal occurs,
then fix the aperture and bring back the signal by increasing the temperature. This
was done with the temperature fixed at T=70◦C and an aperture fixed at position
4.0 as plotted in fig. 3.13(top). On this figure it is seen that the center wavelength
can be upconverted at a reduced incident angel θ<2.5◦by raising the temperature
from 70-100◦C, see fig. 3.13.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Device Characterization
Scale
Diameter, mm
Incidence angle, deg
0.0
20.00
5.48
1.0
18.05
4.96
1.5
16.75
4.61
2.0
14.80
4.09
2.5
13.75
3.80
3.0
11.75
3.26
3.5
10.50
2.91
4.0
9.00
2.50
4.5
7.50
2.09
5.0
6.00
1.67
5.5
4.75
1.32
6.0
3.00
0.84
6.5
1.35
0.38
7.0
0.15
0.04
Table 3.3: From knobscale converted to diameter and internal angle of incidence.
The knobscale was created by having 0.5mm between each position of
the handle and measure the diameter of the aperture by a caliper.
820
830
840
850
860
870
0
200
400
600
T=70oC
=1.0
=2.0
=3.0
=4.0
820
830
840
850
860
870
Upconv, nm
0
200
400
600
 =4.0
T=70
T=80
T=90
T=100
Power, a.u.
Figure 3.13: BS-superK upconverted signal. For upper T=70◦C is fixed whereas
for the lower the aperture is fixed at position 4.0.
By closing the
aperture, keeping it fixed and increasing the temperature, the signal
can be restored as the dependency of the incidence angle is reduced.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Phasematch
33
As seen above, the angle of incidence is of great importance. Another way of
altering this angle is simply by changing the focus lens for the IR input. For this
purpose, two different focal length lenses was use together with the NS-superk, one
at 50mm and one at 200mm. The f50 lens was placed with the same procedure as in
previous experiments i.e. the mount of the f50 lens was placed at a distance of 60mm
from the center of the crystal. This was done to compensate for the higher refractive
index of the crystal altering the optical pathlength for the beam, as explained in the
previous chapter. Additionally, the holder of the lens which attaches it to the mount
has a small thickness. This results in the lens ultimately being placed in a distance
between 55-60mm from the crystal center for a maximized output corresponding to
a IR beam waist at the center of the nonlinear crystal.
The distance was tested
at multiple places with small variations, however mount at 60mm and lens facing
towards the crystal was found to be the optimal. Same procedure was done for the
f200 lens i.e. mount at 210mm from crystal center. The spot-size at the center of the
nonlinear crystal can be calculated as
ωf = λIRf
πω0
= 4.2µm · f[mm]
π · 9mm
(3.16)
Here f is the focal length and ω0=9mm can be estimated from fig.
3.13 and
table 3.3 chapter 2. Each lens gave a spot size of ωf50 ≃7.4µm and ωf200 ≃29.7µm
respectively for f50 and f200 at the center of the nonlinear crystal.
The result of the two lenses is normalized and plotted at fig. 3.14.
825
830
835
840
845
850
Upconv. wavelength, nm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Power, a.u.
PPLN f50
PPLN f200
SuperK
Figure 3.14: PPLN tested with two different focal lengths. Λ=23µm and T=100◦C.
The NS-SuperK is calculated from the mid-IR spectrum. All signals
are normalized.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Device Characterization
On fig. 3.14 the red dashed curve is representing upconversion with a focal lens
of 200mm. As the focal length is large, the angle of incidence is narrow. This narrow
angle means that the upconversion process is dominated by collinear phasematching.
This statement is supported by the shape of the upconverted signal as it forms a sinc2
function and the fact that it is placed at the edge of the NS-superk bandwidth, the
θ ≈0 region. If the intensity of the two secondary peaks, the so-called shoulders, of
the sinc2 is compared a difference is seen. This can be explained by observing the
intensity profil of the NS-Superk the yellow curve has a higher intensity at 830-835nm
compared to 825-830nm.
This yellow curve is calculated from λup = (λ−1
IR + λ
−1
1064)
−1 and the IR spectrum
of the NS-superk seen on fig. 2.2. The yellow curve is used for comparison and is rep-
resents a normalized spectrum of NS-superk if the entire IR signal was upconverted.
The solid red curve on fig. 3.14 is representing the focus lens f50. As the focus
length is smaller than the f200 lens, the angle of incident into the crystal is largest for
f50. Therefore the f50 lens is able to support a larger range of the NS-superk spectrum.
This is clearly visible by comparing the f50 and Superk as the two spectrum are quite
alike, except for the fact that the whole graph is translated to the left. The reason for
this is caused by the CO2 absorption which peaks around 4.3µm corresponding to an
upconverted wavelength around 850nm [14]. This hypothesis was reinforced during
the experiment as exhaling near the NS-Superk i.e. increase the amount of CO2, is
causing a further left-offset of the upconverted signal. The increased angle of incident,
θ1, is reducing the effective interaction length between the interacting fields. This
turned out not to be a problem based on the range of upconverted signal of the f50 in
comparison with the NS-Superk. However, no upconverted signal of the f50 show any
sign of collinear upconversion. This indicate that a smaller angle of incident would
lead to a broader spectral range with the shape of fig. 3.11 i.e. high peaks at the
edges and a flat center region. Thus finding the right focus lens is a trade-off, a long
focal length ensure that the collinear upconversion occurs but lack the high angle of
incident required for non-collinear phasematching.
The PPLN has shown some promising results regarding the ability to upconvert a
mid-IR signal and covering a fair spectral bandwidth. A major drawback is the slow
nature of altering the temperature to be evenly distributed throughout the system.
Therefore another approached is tested without the need of temperature changes.
3.2.5
Chirped Poled Lithium Niobate
Chirped Poled Lithium Niobate (CPLN) is another method of achieving collinear
broadband upconversion. Here instead of having a fixed period throughout the crystal,
the period is gradually changed in linear steps. In this way, a single channel is capable
of covering a wide spectral range, such that different wavelength is phasematched at
different positions in the CPLN [16]. In this project the crystal (CPLN) covers the
periods 21-23.5µm evenly distributed in a 20mm long crystal. This eliminates the
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Phasematch
35
needs for angle or temperature tuning as collinear interaction will cover the full mid-
IR spectrum. The result is a broader and more uniform upconversion than possible
by using a PPLN crystal [20].
This is beneficial in an application like spectroscopy where a broad spectral band-
width with a high spectral sensitivity is desired.
The cost of this is a significant
reduction of the interacting length, which also reduces the upconversion efficiency.
However, this is compensated by the omnipresent periods which ensures an efficient
collinear upconversion for all available wavelengths. The narrower the chirped poling
range the longer the each domain for a fix crystal length. Because the longer mid-IR
wavelengths above 4µm is subject to a larger absorption in LiNbO3 [20], these are
phasematched first to reduce this impact i.e. the longest poling period is placed in
the beginning of the crystal.
To switch from the PPLN to the CPLN requires a realignment of intracavity field,
else both crystal is placed in a mount of equal size and therefore easily switched. The
two crystals can be seen on fig. 3.15.
Figure 3.15: Left: This is the CPLN, as this crystal only consists of a single period
the width of the crystal is smaller than the mount. Therefore a plastic-
spacer is custom made and placed beside the crystal. Right: This is
the PPLN crystal, the five channels is visible.
While angle tuning in a CPLN crystal is obsolete, the setup contains a 200mm
focusing lens. The reason for this is to decrease the beam waist of the mid-IR SuperK
source to efficient overlap the mixing sources beam size of 180µm. The f200 lens
is aimed to have a long focus length as this ensures that the mid-IR beam remains
fairly collimated. In the case of a change in the CPLN temperature, the only change
is the applied upconversion period in the crystal. Thus the spectral bandwidth of
the upconverted signal will remain the same at different temperatures. So as long as
the CPLN temperature remains fixed, the same spectral response is to be expected
regardless of the temperature. But bare in mind that the selected temperature should
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Device Characterization
be such that it is able to used the available period range Λ=22-23.5µm. However, to
compare the two spectral response of PPLN and CPLN, the temperature of the CPLN
was altered between 50-100◦C. The HeNe laser was used as IR source, see fig. 3.16(a).
50
60
70
80
90
Temperature, °C
0
1
2
3
4
5
Power, a.u
PPLN, f=50mm,  22.5µm
CPLN, f=200mm
Figure 3.16: (a) CPLN upconversion using a HeNe laser with temperature between
50-100◦C. Blue curve shows the actual result whereas the colored is the
underling data. All data points is of the same wavelength at ∼810nm.
(b) Comparison of the two crystal with unscaled y-axis.
On fig. 3.16(a) upconversion with the CPLN crystal was achieved. As it was
excepted, this crystal shows little variation for a change of temperature.
This is
because the crystal simply phasematch with a different period if the mismatch become
too significant in the current period. The flat response is more visible if compared
with the PPLN crystal response from fig.
3.9, this is done in fig.
3.16(b).
The
comparison of the intensity in this graphs is however unfair for the CPLN as the IR
source here is a single wavelength. The PPLN is optimized for the single wavelength
whereas the CPLN is optimized for a broad spectrum as provided by a SuperK laser.
Next the NS-superk mid-IR is used to test the effect of two focal lens i.e. f=50mm
and f=200mm. This was done with the same parameters as for the PPLN in fig. 3.14
except for the temperature for the CPLN which was T=40◦C. See fig. 3.17.
On fig. 3.17 the blue solid curve is representing upconversion with a focal lens of
50mm. Here the angle of incidence is large, this is not beneficial as the CPLN has
the best efficiency with a collinear interaction. For the 200mm lens, represented by
the dashed curve, has a narrow angle of incidence. This narrow angle means that the
upconversion process is dominated by collinear phasematching, which is why the f200
has the higher intensity. Again, this curve is shifted away from the 850nm because
of the CO2 absorption. The upconverted signal provided by the f50 has a very low
signal-to-noise ratio. When normalizing the upconverted signal of the CPLN f50, the
intensity of the noise is only slightly lower than the peak signal. This peak is very
broad which is a product of noise contributing to the signal.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Phasematch
37
825
830
835
840
845
850
Upconv. wavelength, nm
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Power, a.u.
CPLN f50
CPLN f200
SuperK
Figure 3.17: CPLN with two different focal length, normalized. As CPLN favors
the collinear phasematching a longer focus lens is preferred. There is
a very weak signal-to-noise ratio for f50 making the background noise
comparable to the upconverted signal.
Next the PPLN and CPLN is compared in a non-normalized version on fig. 3.18.
On fig. 3.18 the PPLN f50 (solid red) is seen the have an intensity comparable
to the one CPLN f200 (dashed blue). This is believed to be a coincidence based on
the choices (not optimal) of lenses and period. The CPLN f200 (dashed blue) is seen
to have a decent intensity even below 830nm. This is interesting as it proves that
the f200 CPLN has the broadest spectral signal of the tested configurations. For the
intensity in this area to be greater, a higher signal is need from mid-IR source, if this
was true a flat uniformly spectral response was to be expected.
The CPLN f50 (solid blue) is so weak that it is hard to compare and even hard
to notice on the graph.
The PPLN f200 (dashed red) has the highest intensity, however, this is only on
a very narrow bandwidth and is therefore not suited to use for microscopy without
temperature alteration.
From fig. 3.18 it is possible to estimate the effective interaction length, Leff, for
the CPLN. This can be done as the PPLN have collinear interaction at wavelength
829.5nm with an interaction length of 20mm. Therefore by comparing the intensity
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Device Characterization
825
830
835
840
845
850
Upconv. wavelength, nm
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Power, a.u.
PPLN f50
PPLN f200
CPLN f50
CPLN f200
Figure 3.18: PPLN and CPLN with different focal length. The generated power is
in arbitrary units by is comparable in size.
at this wavelength and solving for LCP LN
eff
an estimate is found;
IP P LN
Max
(T = 74◦C)
ICP LN
Max
(T = 40◦C) = 202
L2
eff
(3.17)
Some considerations have to be stated while doing this. First the temperature
should be the same, however, the temperature changes for the CPLN was tested
earlier to have negligible impact. Second, it is assumed that the PPLN has effective
interaction throughout the 20mm crystal length. By the numbers of fig. 3.18 an
effective interaction length of the CPLN is found to be
LCP LN
eff
≈4.65mm
(3.18)
This tells the length in the nonlinear crystal in-which the wavelength of 829.5nm is up-
converted. Even though the phasematch conditions makes one period more efficient
(∆k=0) than others, the non optimal periods still contributes to the total upconver-
sion. With this in mind eq. 3.18 is a reasonable number. Both compared system has
a f200 lens included which allows for a small degree of non-collinear phasematching
to occur. This leads to an overshoot of the effective interaction length.
Considering all of the test done in this chapter, the CPLN with a f200 was cho-
sen to be the better option to further proceed. Not only is this configuration not
dependent on the temperature, but is also showed the broadest spectral bandwidth.
Therefore this crystal will be used to investigate the possibility for diffuse reflection
mid-IR spectroscopy in the next chapter 4.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Spectroscopy &
Detection
Spectroscopy is a broad term that covers a great number of different techniques
for studying the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and matter. This is
commonly done in two ways. The first method uses a source which radiate a single
wavelength at a time, then this single wavelength is tuned over the spectral range
of interest while detecting. This makes the differentiating process of the content in
the signal easy, but requires a high power mid-IR source that can radiate a single
tune-able wavelength at a time over a range.
Therefore a more common approach is to use a broadband source i.e. a whole
spectrum of wavelengths simultaneously and then break the signal into components
of different energy. Especially absorption spectroscopy uses broadband sources. Here
the fundamental idea behind absorption spectroscopy is that a sample is exposed to
a spectrum of wavelengths. Here absorption of characteristic wavelengths across that
spectrum can be used to identify the nature of the sample.
4.1
IR spectroscopy
Spectroscopy that work with the infrared region is of great interest as this region con-
tains molecular vibration states and function regions with a very defined absorption
peak. Therefore absorption spectroscopy can be used to identify and study specific
chemicals and compounds within this region, according to their absorption properties.
Usually the IR region is divided into three regions i.e. near-IR 0.8-2.5µm (14000-4000
cm−1), mid-IR 2.5-25µm (4000-400cm−1) and far-IR 25-1000µm (400-10cm−1). Es-
pecially the mid-IR is of great interest as many fundamental vibration states and
associated rotational vibrations structure is placed here, see fig. 4.1. Thus molecules
can be excited by the absorption of photons within the IR spectrum.
The region of IR is so broad that a single system can not cover the whole spec-
trum. Therefore the system build in this project will be concerned with a defined
range within the mid-IR region. The possible range in this work is defined by a two
things; First the transparency region of the LiNbO3 crystal which is 350-5200nm [21].
However, due to phasematching this region is reduced to ∼2.8-5µm for the used peri-
ods. Secondly is the limits of the SuperK’s bandwidth, especially after the repair i.e.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Spectroscopy & Detection
700nm
14286cm-1
2500nm
4000cm-1
6897nm
1450cm-1
25µm
400cm-1
50µm
200cm-1
Infrared Region
0.7µm - 1.0mm
Functional Group
Region
Fingerprint
Region
Figure 4.1: Subdivision of the IR spectrum.
The mid-IR region contains many
fundamental vibration states. This can be used to identify the present
of a functional group or a chemical compound, therefore this region is
sometimes referred to as the fingerprint region.
NS-SuperK ∼3.2-4.2µm (3125-2380cm−1). Often the radiation energy is expressed in
the unit of cm−1 referred to as wavenumber, ν. Wavenumber is thus a measure for
the number of waves per unit distance and is converted to wavelengths by the relation
λ[µm] = 10000/ν[cm−1].
(4.1)
The most common method for performing IR spectroscopy is a technique known
as Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR) based on absorption. FTIR have
a wide spectral range and obtain a high spectral resolution. A disadvantage with this
technique is that the FTIR instruments are dependant on IR detectors [7]. The two
main types of detectors for IR spectroscopy are thermal and photonic. A thermal
detector has a very slow response time as it is dependent of temperature changes i.e.
a slow process. For photonic detectors a higher response time and sensitivity can be
achieved, but due to the thermal noise this requires cryogenic cooling and is therefore
often cooled by liquid nitrogen [7].
4.2
Upconversion based spectroscopy
To avoid the use of cryogenic cooling, one can use upconversion based spectroscopy.
Here instead of measuring the spectrum in the IR region, the region is transferred to
another region and detected. This is done by sum frequency generation as described
earlier in chapter 3. The region where the signal is detected is visible to near-IR. This
have some advantages, one is that the detection in this region can be done by a simple
CMOS detector. CMOS detectors is a very developed technique which is based on
the creation of an electron-hole pair in a pn-junction [8, 10, 22]. CMOS has a much
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Diffuse Reflection Spectroscopy
41
lower dark noise compared to that of an IR detector (e.g. an InGaAs photodetector).
This means that the systems can operate at room temperature without the need of
cryogenic temperature while still providing a high sensitivity and low background
noise [3, 23]. Another advantage is that the system doesn’t have any moving parts,
this makes it more fit to industrial applications. From an economic point of view, it is
also significantly cheaper both to buy and to operate. The upconversion base mid-IR
methods is thus providing a simple, low-noise, room-temperature detector compared
to the FTIR system.
When saying upconversion based spectroscopy, there is still a few parameters that
requires specification. As shown is chapter 3 simply by chancing the nonlinear medium
the properties differ quite a bit i.e. PPLN compered with CPLN. This alone doesn’t
provide any information on how the IR signal is created. In chapter 3 the signal
was emitted directly into the crystal where certain important parameters in relation
to the phasematch condition was optimize. However, for microscopy applications a
signal has to come from a sample. Methods for doing this will be the topic for the
next section 4.3.
4.3
Diffuse Reflection Spectroscopy
A signal can be acquired from a sample in multiple ways, one is to radiate the beam
through the sample, penetrating the object and proceed towards the module for up-
conversion etc. This is called a transmission spectrum and is a common approach
to measure the to an absorption spectrum of a sample. Another method to obtain
an absorption spectrum is based on scattering. When a beam reaches a target, the
light is scattered in different directions, this is the so-called diffused reflection and is
illustrated on fig. 4.2.
Di use 
Re ection
Figure 4.2: The light reaches a sample and is scattered in multiple directions. A
photons which is re-emitted from a scattering event inside medium is a
diffuse reflected photon.
On fig. 4.2 a beam reaches a target, here the light can undergo many different
events. Some of the light is reflected directly at the surface, some of the light pene-
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Spectroscopy & Detection
trates the surface and is scatter inside and is absorbed while other parts is re-emitted
from the target. The diffuse reflectance is the probability of photons re-emission per
unit surface area from a scatter event in medium [24]. Many parameters is involved
in the amount of scatter such as wavelength I ∝1/λ4 according to Mie theory [24].
Needless to say is that different materials scatter the light in different patterns and
therefore the intensity of the diffuse reflected light is highly dependent on the prop-
erties of the materials. Some intrinsic parameters which affect the amount of scatter
is the refractive index, size, density and weight of a material particle [24, 25].
When doing diffuse reflection spectroscopy, these diffuse rays are collected as the
signal and for this work upconverted. To avoid a specific interference pattern the
signal is averaged over multiple spots on the target sample. This can be done by
moving the sample while doing measure with a long integration time on the detector.
This way the dependency on the structural surface is averaged out and the signal
becomes a product of the sample scattering and absorption properties rather than a
product of the specific spots ability to diffuse reflected light.
To get an absorption spectrum when measuring on a sample, e.g. a powder with
an active ingredient, a reference spectrum without the active ingredient is needed.
This reference spectrum should ideally be the same powder but without the active
ingredient. This is because the reference powder still contains some spectral features
that affect the spectrum, and it may even be that these features are in the same
range as the features of the active ingredient. Second reason for the need of a reference
spectrum is due to the experimental condition and equipment will affect the spectrum.
One can determine the diffuse reflectance R, from a sample by combining the two
spectra as
R =
(Isample(λ)
Iref(λ)
)
(4.2)
here Isample is the diffuse reflected light from the sample, Iref is the diffuse reflected
light from the reference element.
The amount of diffuse light collected from an element undergoing a chemical
reaction can be used to measure the progress of the reaction [25].
In this work different spectra is obtained by measurements of diffuse reflectance
from different powder samples in the mid-IR region. Then the collected diffuse re-
flected light is upconverted by the system described and optimized in chapter 3 and
illustrated on fig. 4.3. A pill is pulverized to reduce the particle size for more scat-
tered signal. The sample powder is then placed on a moving diffuse reflector plate.
The NS-SuperK is focused with a 150mm germanium lens onto the sample powder.
This lens increases the beam intensity and decreases the spot size, and due to the
transparent region of Ge all wavelength below 2µm is removed. For collection as much
of the diffuse light as possible a collection lens is mounted. This lens is most efficient
at collecting the diffused reflected signal if the lens is placed at a distance equal to
the focal length (f=100mm), and if the focus of the lens is at the same location as the
focus of the NS-SuperK beam. From here the system is the same is described in pre-
vious chapter 3 i.e. focused with a 200mm lens into a CPLN (T=40◦C), upconverted
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Diffuse Reflection Spectroscopy
43
Figure 4.3: The setup used for measurements of diffuse reflection from a powder
sample.
The NS-SuperK is focused onto an in-motion diffuse reflec-
tor plate. Here the diffused scattered rays are collected and focused
(f=200mm) into the CPLN for upconversion.
and collimated into a fiber-coupling lens and finally into a Maya2000Pro (810-982nm)
detector, as seen on fig. 4.3.
Ideally to create a highly reliable reference, powder made of the same material as
the target pill but without the active ingredients is needed. As this was not available
for a reference was made from a diffuse reflector plat (Thorlabs DG10-120-M01 Diffuse
reflector). While making the reference measurement, the diffuse reflector plat was in-
motion, to make uniformly signal, while the signal was collected and averaged for
5 seconds. Afterwards the pill of choice was selected and grinded to a fine powder
and placed on the diffuse reflector plate. Then the measurement was made in the
same way as the reference i.e. averaged with a integration time of 5 seconds while the
reflector plate with the sample powder on, was in-motion. To plot the diffuse reflection
spectrum the reference and sample was combined to create diffuse reflectance R as
done in eq. 4.2. The primary data for all the sample spectra, the reference spectra
and noise spectra is available in appendix B. Then the data is normalized for a fixed
range between 2700-2400cm−1, set by the limit of the NS-SuperK spectrum, and
plotted.
To investigate the performance of the system a sample with well-defined spectral
features within the range of the bandwidth of the NS-SuperK was chosen. Different
mid-IR diffuse reflectance spectra measured with a FTIR system (Bruker Tensor 37)
was available from [26]. Here paracetamol was found to be within the desired range
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Spectroscopy & Detection
and available at the laboratory. The diffuse reflectance FTIR data on fig. 4.4 was
provided by [26] in a normalized format.
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Wavenumbers, cm-1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Diffuse reflectance
Paracetamol
2700-2400 cm-1
Figure 4.4: Diffuse reflectance spectrum of paracetamol measured with a FTIR sys-
tem. Adopted from [26]. The blue dots shows the region of interest for
the diffuse reflectance upconversion spectroscopy build in this work.
To compare the our diffuse reflectance upconversion system and the commercial
FTIR system (Bruker Tensor 37) from [26], data from 4.4 in a range between 2700-
2400cm−1 was selected and normalized. Paracetamol pills was investigated in three
different ways; For the first test a pill was sanded to create a flat surface with com-
pressed powder. Then the pill was placed at the diffused reflector plated, at the focus
of the NS-SuperK. The following procedure for the data collection is the same for all
samples and the reference alike. The procedure is that each presented spectrum is
created from an average of three spectra with an integration time of 5 seconds for
each of the three.
For the second investigation, the paracetamol pill was grinted to a fine mass and
simply placed on the diffuse reflector plate. The amount of powder was so that the
diffuse reflector plate still was partly visible. The powder is referred to coarse powder
because of the uneven surface as seen on fig. 4.5(a).
For the third investigation the grinted pill was densely placed on the diffuse reflector
plate. Any differences in height were flattened-out to make the focal plan of equal
height. This will further be referred to as dense powder. The powder is seen on fig.
4.5(b)
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Diffuse Reflection Spectroscopy
45
Figure 4.5: (a) Second treatment, the course powder placed on the diffuse reflector
plate. (b) Thrid threatment, the dense powder placed on the diffuse
reflector plate.
With the first treatment i.e. the full compressed pill, diffuse scattered signal was
simply too faint and therefore the upconverted signal was too weak to be separated
from the background noise. The second and third treatments are plotted on fig. B.3.
All samples are calculated as in eq.
4.2 with a substation of an noise spectrum.
This noise spectrum is created by turning off all laser except the mixing source and
collected with an integration time of 5 seconds and averaged three time. This will
remove noise from the experimental equipment. The primary data of the noise is
plotted in appendix B. On fig.
B.3 the coarse powder sample is seen to roughly
behave in the same manner as the FTIR. The signal is believed to be weak due to
three things; First the small amount of powder makes the diffuse reflector plate visible
to the mid-IR beam as seen on fig. 4.5(a). This result in a larger amount of the mid-
IR beam is reflected on the diffuse reflector plate and thus reduces the signal reflected
from the paracetamol sample. The primary data for the paracetamol sample can be
seen in appendix B.
Second, since the powder is not flattened before the measurement, the coarseness
of the powder results in a more diffused scattered directions of the light. This results
in a reduction of the amount of diffuse signal collected from the paracetamol.
The third reduction of special features in the spectrum is valid for both the coarse
and the dense powder. The paracetamol pill used in this test contains 500mg of the
active ingredient. The remaining pill consists of other ingredients such as starch and
a surface-film to make it easier to swallow. These ingredients will to some extent
affect the reflective properties of the powder. This can be avoided if a pill without
the paracetamol but otherwise consists of the same ingredients was available and used
as the reference spectrum.
On fig. B.3 there are two of graphs with dense power. This was done to test
if a produced spectrum of a sample is showing the same spectral features and thus
being repeatable. This indeed was the case. This was done in the sequence; Apply
powder, flatten powder, make a measurement, remove the powder, repeat. The same
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Spectroscopy & Detection
2400
2450
2500
2550
2600
2650
2700
Wavenumbers, cm-1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Diffuse reflectance
FTIR
Coase Powder
Dense Powder #1
Dense Powder #2
Paracetamol
4166
4081
4000
3921
3846
3773
3703
Figure 4.6: Diffuse reflectance spectrum of paracetamol measured with a FTIR sys-
tem [26] and the built system. ”Dense Powder” was done two times
in the sequence; Apply powder, measurement, removal of powder and
then the same procedure again. The upper x-axis is wavelength in nm
and is discrete values of the lower x-axis.
reference and noise spectra was used for the two. The two dense power samples shows
a very similar behavior and will further be referred to as one. If the dense powder is
to be compared with the coarse powder relative to the FTIR a great improvement is
seen, non-normalised raw data can be seen in appendix B. This is base on two thing;
First off the center-peak around 2525cm−1 is more dominant. If calculated back to
wavelength this correspond to 3960.4nm which is also the close to the center-peak of
the NS-SuperK i.e. ∼4µm. Second and more impressive is the ability to detect the
two peaks around 2634cm−1 and 2428cm−1 corresponding to 3796.5nm and 4118.6nm
respectively - 0.30% and 0.42% of the NS-SuperK’s maximum intensity respectively.
A notable trend is observed in fig. B.3 from 2700-2625cm−1. Here it is seen that
the signal stops following the curve of the FTIR system. This is due to the low bright-
ness of the NS-SuperK in this region. With brightness being the ration between the
optical power and the the product of the focused beam area [27].
To show that the build system is functional for different samples, another sample
was investigated. As the most accurate results was shown using the ”dense-powder”
method. The same procedure was followed in this investigation. The chosen pill is
Cetirizine Hydrochloride which is commonly known, and further referred to, as anti-
histamine. To summarize the anti-histamine was grinted to a fine powder, then placed
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Diffuse Reflection Spectroscopy
47
on the diffuse reflector plate and flattened. The NS-SuperK was focused onto the sam-
ple as illustrated in fig. 4.3. The diffuse reflector was used as reference spectrum and
all samples is collected with an integration time of 5 seconds while the sample plate
was in-motion and averaged three times. The produced diffuse reflectance spectra is
all subtracted an equipment noise spectrum. The diffuse reflectance can be seen on
fig. 4.7.
2400
2450
2500
2550
2600
2650
2700
Wavenumbers, cm-1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Diffuse reflectance
Dense Powder #1
Dense Powder #2
Anti-histamine
4166
4081
4000
3921
3846
3773
3703
Figure 4.7: (a) Diffuse reflectance spectrum of anti-histamine measured the built
system. Measurement was done two times in the sequence; Apply pow-
der, measurement, removal of powder, repeat.
The upper x-axis is
wavelength in nm and is discrete values of the lower x-axis. (b) trans-
mittance spectrum of Cetirizine Hydrochloride measured with a FTIR
system [28].
On fig. 4.7 the data for a FTIR diffuse reflection spectrum was unfortunately not
available for a direct comparison of Cetirizine Hydrochloride/antihistamine. However,
a transmittance spectrum was found. The two spectra has the overall same shape,
however a peak in the FTIR system is located at 2501.67cm−1 whereas our upcon-
version system the center peak located at ∼2525cm−1. This offset can be caused by
a number of different reasons. One being that the two spectra has the same active
ingredients, however, they are from two differences bands, therefore the remaining
ingredients in the pill might be different.
If fig. 4.7(a) is compared to fig. B.3 it can easy be seen that there quite a dif-
ference. Nevertheless conforms this that the system is enable to distinguish between
the diffuse reflection spectra of the two pills.
Further it would be interesting to investigate the spectral response of the material
in a pure form. A small investigation of the system in transmission-mode have been
tried and is shown in appendix C.
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Spectroscopy & Detection
Although it is not done in this work a signal from tissue can be upconverted [4].
This is highly relevant as it will provide valuable information about the state of the
tissue and underling structure. Nothing in this work prohibits the use of this system
for biomedical application and medical diagnostics. Imaging from incoherent source
and hyperspectral imaging has already been proven possible [4, 5], albeit not in a
diffuse reflection configuration.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusions
This chapter makes a summarising of the accomplished achievements in this work.
Then the possibilities for further investigation is discussed.
5.1
Summary and Conclusions
Already at the very beginning at the title of this thesis it is stated that the project aims
to investigate a diffuse reflection infrared spectroscopy using upconversion detection.
An upconversion mid-IR spectroscope are considered a game-changer in detection
of mid-IR signals. The mid-IR signals are of great interest as they can be used to
identify and study chemical components and functional groups. While mid-IR light
sources have recent advanced, detection systems lack behind. This thesis works to
minimize this gap and has proven that the regime of upconversion based on LiNbO3
is in definitely capable of doing so.
Initially an upconversion system was built based on a single wavelength of 3.39µm
from a HeNe through a PPLN crystal. This was done to show that a descent upcon-
version efficiency can be achieved and to investigate different system configurations
see appendix A. Here a characterization of the module was also performed investigat-
ing the output as a function of pump current and the stability of the system. After
this the HeNe was switched to a SuperK source which was used the make characteri-
zation and comparison of the PPLN and CPLN crystal. The parameters which was
investigated is the temperature dependency and the focus length of the focus lens
at both crystals. The experimental results was compared to one another and to a
theoretically simulated one.
Ultimately the CPLN was chosen with a f=200mm focus lens to keep a small spot-
size and a fairly collimated beam. This CPLN crystal is not temperature dependent,
not angle dependent, and showed a broad bandwidth with a uniformly upconverted
spectrum.
The choice of the CPLN crystal made it possible to proceed to the final setup.
A diffuse reflection infrared spectroscopy using nonlinear upconversion detection was
built and thus fulfilling the initial goal of the thesis. The system was then tested with
three samples of paracetamol pills which undergone different treatments. Here it was
proven that the most optimal result was achieved by grinding the pill to a fine mass,
apply a dense amount on the target plate i.e. the diffuse reflector plate, and then
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Conclusions
even-out any differences in height prior for the measurement. This spectrum was then
compared to a FTIR system in a selected range. the spectra showed a monotonous
spectral behavior. The measure was done twice to show that it is repeatable. To
ensure that the system works for different samples an anti-histamine was also tested
and showed spectral response.
5.2
Further investigation and final thoughts
In the case of our upconversion system, a limitation is the bandwidth of the mid-IR
source which sets the limit for how broad a signal can be upconverted. An interesting
though impossible study would have been to investigate the BS-SuperK ability to
upconvert on the diffuse reflection spectroscope setup. The BS-SuperK system has a
broader spectrum and therefore it would be interesting to see if the broader mid-IR
range would have been able to show spectral features of the Paracetamol pill in a
broader range, or if the decrease in power per wavelength is too significant to see
the spectral features. Therefore a further investigation with another broad spectrum
mid-IR laser with a broader range will be interesting.
Another interesting investigation would be if the spectra of the pill and refer-
ence powder was made from the same ingredients with the only difference being the
presents of the active material. This would remove a larger amount of noise from the
spectrum. The spectrum should then be compared to a measure of the ingredients in
pure state, measured with a FTIR and our upconversion system.
Finally it would be interesting to investigate other material than just the two
present in the work. Little has already been done in transmission mode and can be
seen in appendix B.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
1.
Amrania, H. et al. Digistain: a digital staining instrument for histopathology.
Optics Express vol. 20, 7290–7299 (2012).
2.
Daniel C. Fernandez Rohit Bhargava, S. M. H. & Levin, I. W. Infrared spec-
troscopic imaging for histopathologic recognition. Nature Biotechnology vol. 23,
469–474 (4 2005).
3.
Jeppe Seidelin Dam, P. T.-L. & Pedersen, C. Room-temperature mid-infrared
single-photon spectral imaging. Nature Photonics vol. 6, pp. 788–793 (2012).
4.
S. Junaid S. Chaitanya Kumar, M. M.M.H.-N.S.N.S.M.E.-Z.P.T.-L. & Pedersen,
C. Video-rate, mid-infrared hyperspectral upconversion imaging. Optica vol. 6,
pp. 702–708 (2019).
5.
Jeppe Seidelin Dam, C. P. & Tidemand-Lichtenberg, P. High-resolution two-
dimensional image upconversion of incoherent light. Optics Letters vol. 35, pp.
3796–3798 (2010).
6.
Baldelli, S. Sensing: Infrared image upconversion. Nature Photonics vol. 5, 75–
76 (2 2011).
7.
Smith, B. C. Fundamentals of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 2nd ed.
isbn: 9781420069297 (CRC Press, 2011).
8.
Saleh, B. E. A. & Teich, M. C. Fundamentals of photonics; 2nd ed. (Wiley, New
York, NY, 2007).
9.
Koechner, W. Solid-State Laser Engineering 6th ed. isbn: 978-0387-29094-2
(Springer, 2006).
10.
Larsen, R. S. Lys-Emitterende Dioder 1st ed. isbn: 978-87-994807-0-8 (Rune
Søgaard Larsen, 2011).
11.
Rottwitt, K. & Tidemand-Lichtenberg, P. Nonlinear Optics: Principles and Ap-
plications (CRC Press, 2014).
12.
New, G. Introduction to Nonlinear Optics isbn: 978-0-521-87701-5 (Cambridge
University Press, 2011).
13.
O. Gayer Z. Sacks, E. G. & Arie, A. Temperature and wavelength dependent
refractive index equations for MgO-doped congruent and stoichiometric LiNbO3.
Applied Physics B – Lasers and Optics, pp. 343–348 (2008).
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
14.
Lasse Høgstedt Andreas Fix, M. W.C. P. & Tidemand-Lichtenberg, P. Upconversion-
based lidar measurements of atmospheric CO2. Optics Express vol. 24. doi:10.
1364/OE.24.005152 (2016).
15.
Ajanta Barh Mahmoud Tawfieq, B. S.C. P. & Tidemand-Lichtenberg, P. Upcon-
version spectral response tailoring using fanout QPM structures. Optics Letters
vol. 44, pp. 2847–2850 (2019).
16.
Ajanta Barh Christian Pedersen, P. T.-L. Ultra-broadband mid-wave-IR upcon-
version detection. Optics Letters vol. 42, pp. 1504–1507 (2017).
17.
Ian E. Barry Graeme W. Ross, P. G.S.-R.W. E. & Cook, G. Microstructuring of
lithium niobate using differential etch-rate between inverted and non-inverted
ferroelectric domains. Materials Letters vol. 37, pp. 246–254 (1998).
18.
Sebastion Wolf Jens Kiessling, M. K.G.P.K. B. & Kuhnemann, F. Upconversion-
enabled array spectrometer for the mid-infrared, featuring kilohertz spectra ac-
quisition rates. Optic Express (2017).
19.
Christian Pedersen Emir Karamehmedovic, J. S.D.P.T.-L. Enhanced 2D-image
upconversion using solid-state lasers. Optics Express vol. 17, pp. 20885–20890
(2009).
20.
Friis, S. M. M. & Høgstedt, L. Upconversion-based mid-infrared spectrometer
using intra-cavity LiNbO3 crystals with chirped poling structure. Optics Letters
(2019).
21.
Pietro Ferraro Simonetta Grilli, P. D. N. Ferroelectric Crystals for Photonic
Applications Including Nanoscale Fabrication and Characterization Techniques
(Springer, 2009).
22.
Stuart R Wenham Alistair Sproul, M. E.W.R. C. & Green, M. A. Applied Pho-
tovoltaics 3rd ed. isbn: 9781849711425 (Taylor & Francis Ltd, 2011).
23.
L. Høgstedt J. S. Dam, A.-L.S.Z.L.M.A.C. P. & Tidemand-Lichtenberg, P. Low-
noise mid-IR upconversion detector for improved IR-degenerate four-wave mix-
ing gas sensing. Optics letters vol. 39, pp. 5321–5324 (2014).
24.
Lihong V. Wang, H.-i. W. Biomedical Optics: Principles and Imaging 1, pub-
lisher = John Wiley & Sons, isbn = 9780471743040 (2007).
25.
Eleftherios Diamandis, T. C. Immunoassay 1st ed. isbn: 9780122147302 (Aca-
demic Press, 1996).
26.
National institute of standards & technology u.s. department of commerce. NIST
Chemistry WebBook, SRD 69: Acetaminophen https://webbook.nist.gov/
cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C103902&Units=SI&Type=IR-SPEC&Index=2#IR-SPEC.
27.
P. Shukla, J. L. & Zhang, Y. Understanding Laser Beam Brightness: A review
and new prospective in material processing. Optics and Laser Technology vol.
75 (2015).
28.
Pharmacia, D. et al. Formulation and Evaluation of Cetirizine HCl Mouth Fast
Dissolving Tablets Mar. 2011.
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
Unused System
Configurations
Configuration on the current system is a product of several trials where mirrors and
lenses have been tested in various configurations. Other configurations for the setups
have for example been IR-coupling with a single lens. Here, one lens would both col-
lect the non-collimated IR laser and simultaneously focus the beam into the crystal.
Another example is a configuration with a flip-mirror to switch between two different
IR lasers.
Also, the collection of the upconverted signal at the detector side has been done in
several configurations such as; Non-collimated beam directly from the system, single
focusing lens with and without the fiber-coupling lens. The point of this being that
multiple configurations has been considered and tried to find the final configuration
which was introduced at the beginning of chapter 2 - fig. 2.1.
Examples of some of the obsolete configurations can be seen here on fig. A.1
PPLN-Crystal
BaF2- lens
IR : 3390 nm
Pump: 1064 nm
             +
   SHG: 532 nm
Module
Detector
HeNe
~ 810nm
Bandpass
Ge window
PPLN-Crystal
BaF2- lens
~ 810nm
Bandpass
Ge window
IR : 3390 nm
Pump: 1064 nm
+
   SHG: 532 nm
Module
HeNe
PPLN-Crystal
40 mm CaF2
(Uncoated)
Pump: 1064 nm
      
Module
~ 785 - 877nm
Bandpass
Ge - window
 (SHG: 532 nm)
50 mm CaF2
(Ag - Coated)
Aperture
 SuperK
 3 - 5 µm
Maya
810-982nm
40 mm N-BK7
Figure A.1: (a) Here is an older illustration where the system used a single lens to
focus the HeNe signal. Also, the upconverted signal is either collimated
or focused and no fiber-coupling lens is applied. (b) Here the upcon-
verted signal is focused into the detector and therefore no fiber-coupling
lens is used.
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX B
Primary Data
Throughout this thesis there have been produced a lot of data. In this appendix
the primary data is included i.e. the raw signal from the spectrometer before any
handling has been done. The spectra printed in chapter 4 has been handled as this
pseudocode shows
pseudocode:
sub(:, y) = Sample(:, y) −Noise(:, y)
ref(:, y)
(B.1)
Normsub(:, y) =
sub(:, y) −min(sub(:, y))
max(sub(:, y)) −min(sub(:, y)
(B.2)
plot
(
10000000
(−1064−1 + Normsub(:, x)−1)−1 , Normsub(:, y)
)
(B.3)
The spectra is printed below, the upper x-axis is in wavenumbers cm−1 and is discrete
values of the lower x-axis:
820
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
Upconverted wavelength, nm
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Counts, #
Electronic
Setup Noise
2796
2506
2229
1965
1712
1471
1239
1018
 805
820
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
Upconverted wavelength, nm
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Counts, #
Electronic + 1064nm
Module Noise
2796
2506
2229
1965
1712
1471
1239
1018
 805
Figure B.1: (a) Primary data with every laser turned-off (b) Primary data with
the SuperK turned-off.
==PAGE:68==
56
B Primary Data
820
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
Upconverted wavelength, nm
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Counts, #
104
DensePowder #1
DensePowder #2 - 10000
Paracetamol, Upconv. Raw
2796
2506
2229
1965
1712
1471
1239
1018
 805
820
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
Upconverted wavelength, nm
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Counts, #
104
DensePowder #1
DensePowder #2 - 10000
Anti-histamine, Upconv. Raw
2796
2506
2229
1965
1712
1471
1239
1018
 805
Figure B.2: (a) Primary data for Paracetamol (b) Primary data for Anti-histamine.
820
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
Upconverted wavelength, nm
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Counts, #
104
Diffuse reflector plate reference
Reference - SuperK Signal
2796
2506
2229
1965
1712
1471
1239
1018
 805
Figure B.3: Primary data for the reference, the SupeK and 1064nm.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX C
Transmission
Spectroscopy
When the diffuse reflection spectroscopy was constructed some initial measurements
was done. These measurement was performed on two types of plastic, namely polystyrene
and teflon. As these plastics are transparent for the mid-IR beam, the beam is pen-
etrating through the material instead of being back-scattered.
When the light is
transmitted through the plastic specific frequencies are absorbed. This is referred
to as transmission mode. Normally when referred to transmission spectroscopy, the
detector is placed behind the target. As our system is built for diffuse reflectance
measure and not transmittance mode, the beam is propagating towards a surface and
is specular reflected towards the detector. The transmission mode measure was so
done by inserting the plastic such that the beam will penetrate the material, specular
reflected and then penetrate the material once again before entering the detector.
Thereby transmission measurements are achieved with a diffuse reflectance configu-
ration.
The measured data was not handled manually but by an app OceanView. Here
a dark spectrum and reference spectrum was collected and then OceanView auto-
matically combined the two and a normalization of the result. The final absorption
spectra and the associated reference spectrum can be seen on fig. C.1.
On fig. C.1 spectral features of Polystyrene and Teflon is measured. The graph
is shown with a large interval compared to the diffuse reflectance graphs. This is
justified by the fact the a weak signal is required in transmission mode compared to
diffuse reflectance mode. Therefore the noise in the outer ranges i.e. >2700cm−1 is
larger and the signal more uncertain due to the weakening of the SuperK’s intensity.
The take-home messaged from this graph, fig. C.1 is that
==PAGE:70==
58
C Transmission Spectroscopy
2400
2500
2600
2700
2800
Wavenumber, cm-1
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Relative power
Reference
Polystyrene
Teflon
Transmission mode
Figure C.1: Polystyrene and Teflon was measured in transmission mode on the dif-
fuse reflectance spectroscopy.
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
