==PAGE:1==
Experimental analysis of ﬁre
properties of ﬁre protected wood,
using H-TRIS and PTHFM
Master’s Thesis, 31 January 2020
Jesper Antonius Wolters
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
JESPER ANTONIUS WOLTERS
Experimental analysis of ﬁre
properties of ﬁre protected wood,
using H-TRIS and PTHFM
-
Master’s Thesis, 31 January 2020
Supervisors:
Lars Schiøtt Sørensen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Frank Markert, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
External Supervisor:
Ulf Wickström, Professor, Luleå University of Technology
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Experimental analysis of ﬁre properties of ﬁre protected wood, using H-TRIS and
PTHFM
This report was prepared by:
Jesper Antonius Wolters
Supervisor(s):
Lars Schiøtt Sørensen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Frank Markert, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Ulf Wickström, Professor, Luleå University of Technology
DTU Civil Engineering
Fire safety engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
15 August 2019- 31 January 2020
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
MSc
Field:
Civil Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master’s thesis is the product of ﬁve and a half month’s work of 32.5 ECTS points,
written in the period between the 15th of August and 31st of January and it concludes the
authors study at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The author graduates with
a Master’s degree in Civil Engineering at the Department of Civil Engineering at DTU.
Throughout the creation of this master thesis, several people have been involved and
helped in making it all come together. I would like to thank my supervisors at DTU-
BYG, Lars Schiøtt Sørensen and Frank Markert, both Associate Professors at DTU for
their ever lasting commitment to the project, enthusiasm and through regular meetings in
helping keeping the project on track. To Ulf Wickström, professor at Luleå University of
Technology I also owe my sincerest gratitude. His engagement, inputs and suggestions
has been very helpful
Furthermore I would like to thank my fellow students for their continuous interest in the
thesis with whom I was able to discuss results and theories. Lastly I would like to thank
friends and family for their support through the sometimes stressful times and for their
help with proofreading the report.
Kgs. Lyngby January 31, 2020
Jesper Antonius Wolters (s143899)
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
This thesis aims to investigate the effect of applying intumescent paint to Cross Laminated
Timber (CLT) elements. In order to test the performance of the intumescent paint system,
54 specimen of 25x25cm were subjected to three distinctive heat ﬂuxes of 22kW/m2,
32kW/m2 and 45kW/m2 for 20 minutes in the Heat Transfer Rate Inducing System (H-
TRIS) setup.
Uncoated and specimen coated with between 1 and 4 layers of intumescent paint were
tested, with half the specimen containing a topcoat. The performance of the intumescent
paint has been assessed by analysing the surface temperature, initiation of charring, char-
ring rate, ignition time and heat release rate.
Uncoated specimen experienced high surface temperatures, charring rates and heat re-
lease rates as well as short ignition times and initiation of charring. Generally, the ap-
plication of just 1 and 2 layers of intumescent paint greatly decreased all indicators of
performance. Apart from time to ignition, additional layers beyond 2 layers yielded lim-
ited extra effect.
The charring layer that the intumescent paint produces expanded and maintained its ex-
pansion, reducing the charring of the CLT, at the 2 lower heat ﬂuxes. At 45kW/m2 how-
ever, the charring layer began to collapse after expanding, lowering the insulation ef-
fect. This phenomenon happened more rapidly with fewer layers and explains the relative
higher effect obtained for more layers at higher heat ﬂuxes.
The topcoat when applied is meant to protect the paint against sun, rain etc., but it also
impedes the intumescent paints’ ability to expand and thus decreases the effect obtained
from applying intumescent paint topcoat.
Furthermore, the Plate thermometer Heat Flux meter (PTHFM) was tested in the H-TRIS
iii
==PAGE:10==
setup. Exercising the Adiabatic Surface Temperature (AST) and a large surface area to
measure incident heat ﬂux, it was compared to a regular Heat Flux Meter (HFM).
Results from this thesis combined with the theory behind the PTHFM yielded on average
heat ﬂuxes of 4-5kW/m2 higher than those measured from the HFM. An altered formula
for calculating AST was proposed which results in almost exactly the same results as for
the HFM.
iv
==PAGE:11==
Resume
Målet med denne afhandling har været at undersøge effekten af brandmaling påført kryd-
slamineret tømmer. For at måle effekten af en type brandmaling beregnet specielt til
påføring på træ, blev 54 prøveemner af dimensionerne 25x25x5cm udsat for tre forskel-
lige varmeﬂux af hhv. 22kW/m2, 32kW/mm2 og 45kW/mm2 i 20 minutter i opstillingen
kaldet "Heat Transfer Rate Inducing System" (H-TRIS).
Ikke-behandlede emner og emner behandlet med 4 forskellige lagtykkelser af brandmal-
ing blev testet, med halvdelen også påført en topcoat. Brandmalingens ydeevne blev målt
på adskillige parametre. Overﬂadetemperatur, påbegyndelse af forkulning, forkuldning-
shastighed, antændelsestid og brandeffekt.
Ikke-behandlede prøveemner resulterede i høje overﬂadetemperaturer, forkuldningshastigheder,
brandeffekt, samt korte antændelsestider og påbegyndelse af forkulning. Generelt be-
virkede påførslen af bare 1 og 2 lag brandmaling meget positivt på alle førnævnte parame-
tre. Med undtagelse af for antændelsestid, gav det ikke den store effekt at påføre ﬂere lag
end 2.
Forkulningslaget hvilket brandmalingen danner udvidede sig og holdt sin form ved la-
vere varmeﬂux, men ved 45kW/m2 begyndte laget at kollapse indad hvilket forringede
den insulerende effekt og forhøjede indbrændingshastigheden.
Dette fænomen skete hurtigere med tyndere lag og forklare den relative højere effekt der
opnås ved højere varmeﬂux og tykkere lag.
Topcoaten er beregnet til at beskytte brandmalingen mod vind og vejr, men fra resul-
taterne bevirker den også at brandmalingen ikke kan virke optimalt og forringer dennes
effekt på alle aspekter.
v
==PAGE:12==
Ydermere er et Pladetermometer varmeﬂux meter (PTHFM) blevet testet og holdt
op imod en varmeﬂux måler under calibrationen af H-TRIS opstillingen. PTHFM der
benytter sig af adiabatisk overﬂade temperatur og et stort overﬂadeareal blev sammen-
lignet med et normalt HFM. Resultaterne fra denne afhandling kombineret med teorien
bag PTHFM gav gennemsnitlige varmeﬂux på 4-5 kW/m2 højere end dem der blev målt
med HFM. En ændret formel til at beregne AST er blevet forstillet, hvilken giver præcis
det samme resultater som HFM.
vi
==PAGE:13==
Table of Content
1
Introduction and hypothesis
1
1.1
Engineered wood as a building material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Fire protection of wooden structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Project objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theory an method for analytical investigations
11
2.1
CLT as a building material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
CLT in ﬁre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Intumescent paint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Theory and method for experimental investigations
19
3.1
Screening experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Mass loss cone calorimeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Preparation of specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results and discussion
35
4.1
General observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Surface temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Topcoat effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Temperature evolution within specimen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Charring rate and charring depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.6
Ignition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.7
Smoke production and heat release rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.8
Mass loss method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.9
Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
vii
==PAGE:14==
5
Conclusion
53
5.1
Further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Bibliography
57
Appendices
63
Appendix A
65
Appendix B
69
Appendix C
73
Appendix D
77
Appendix E
79
viii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and hypothesis
1.1
Engineered wood as a building material
Lately, the interest in wood and its usage in construction has been rapidly increasing, es-
pecially engineered wood, has seen a swift increase in production.
According to one study [1] it is projected that the Worldwide Engineered Wood Market
will "grow at a Compound Annual Growth Rate of 24.8% between 2016 and 2022 and is
expected to reach 40 Billion US$ by 2022.
Another study investigating solely the US market [2], shows that the Revenue from ve-
neer, plywood and engineered wood products is ever increasing in the US. which can be
seen from ﬁgure 1.1
Figure 1.1: Revenue of veneer, plywood and engineered wood products in the US.
The most popular type of engineered wood, CLT, which is the type of engineered
wood tested in this thesis, has seen a more than 10% annual increase in production in
1
==PAGE:16==
central Europe [3], as can be seen in ﬁgure 1.2 . The total production of CLT in Europe,
is in 2020 expected to reach 1.6 million cubic meters. That is double the production from
2017.
Figure 1.2: CLT production in Europe [3]
One major factor behind this sudden boom in interest is the encompassing focus on
climate change, and with the fact that general construction is responsible for around 23%
of the globally emitted CO2, or 5.7 billion tons, [4], the world has begun to turn its atten-
tion towards more responsible and environmentally friendly alternatives.
According to a study where a cradle-to-grave analysis was made[5], it was concluded
that by using CLT instead of concrete, one could reduce the amount of CO2 emission by
42.9%. This is supported by a study from Niras saying that building in wood reduces the
carbon footprint by around 50% [6]. A case study made in Denmark by New nordic tim-
ber [7] showed that replacing precast concrete with CLT would save 256kg CO2/m2/year
However, there is some dispute as to how the Life Cycle Assessments should be ap-
proached and calculated. According to other studies [8] made by Circular Ecology spe-
cialising in LCA, CLT has a signiﬁcantly lower effect, or even contributes more to CO2
emissions, where e.g. transport of wood from forests is a major inﬂuence.
Obvious bias in certain sources makes it even more difﬁcult to determine the exact carbon
footprint of materials. Though there is some dispute regarding the precise effect, wood
has some advantages that cannot be disputed. Unlike steel and concrete, it has the ability
to bind CO2 while growing, which is only expelled when the wood is burned or decom-
poses, making it a CO2 neutral material where CO2 can be stored. It is also a renewable
source of material.
2
==PAGE:17==
Another major factor behind the increasing popularity of engineered wood, is the fact
that it is possible to manipulate its capabilities in order to favour it in whatever way it is
meant to be used. The most well known and popular of these are Cross Laminated Timber
(CLT), Laminated Veneer Lumber (LVL) and Glued Laminated Timber (Glulam).
They have been modiﬁed in order to optimise their constructional abilities. By alternat-
ing the direction of the layers in CLT, shrinkage and expansion in the plane is minimised,
which increases the stability and structural capacity of the system. [9] [10]
These modiﬁcations have made it possible to expand the possibilities and push the bound-
aries in regards to complexity and scale with which wooden constructions can be build.
Wood has a more aesthetically pleasing appearance than concrete and steel, which makes
it a very popular choice for architects. Wood is also a very light material compared to
concrete and steel, which is a major advantage when building tall or large span structures.
From table 1.1 some densities of different building materials can be seen, with CLT being
far the lightest.
Table 1.1: Density of selected construction materials [11] [12]
Material
Density [kg/m3]
Concrete
2400
Steel
7850
Glass
2580
Masonry brick
1650
Aluminum
2740
CLT
490
While this is generally seen as an advantage, it also poses as a problem when con-
sidering the acoustic aspect. Light construction materials tend to isolate more poorly
against sound than heavier materials. Especially Airborne sound insulation level in the
low frequency bands is a critical point for light constructive systems [13]. According to
this source the performance of CLT combined with a wall lining system is at least 12dB
worse than that of traditional construction materials. A thesis on exactly this problem has
been written by Banda Logawa [14]. He recognises the problem and proposes a solution
involving a Helmholtz Resonator sound-absorber design.
In March 2019 the 85.4m tall wooden tower, "Mjøstårnet", was constructed in Oslo made
entirely out of Cross Laminated Timber and Glulam[15], which has been illustrated in
ﬁgure 2.2a. The building has been designed to withstand a burnout ﬁre, which means that
it should be able to resists a ﬁre without any active extinguishing[16] Such a tall building
3
==PAGE:18==
made entirely out of wood has yet been unthinkable, in part because of strict ﬁre regu-
lations. "Eksempelsamling om brandsikring af bygninger" [17] is the guideline used in
Denmark when designing buildings in wood, which contains some pre-accepted solutions
about constructions made of wood, but it is still only allowed to build wooden buildings
in 4 stories. This is a major problem when trying to promote the use of wood as a building
material in large cities.
In this thesis, CLT is the type of engineered wood that has been investigated. It is a rela-
tively new form of building material that was invented in Germany in the 1990’s [9], but
it was not before 2015 that it was incorporated into the International Building code[10]
Being such a relatively young building material, it has not been as thoroughly tested in
ﬁre as concrete and steel, which in part is the motivation behind this thesis. CLT has
the strength abilities to be used in medium to high rise buildings, which would solve the
dilemma that is, the demand for more living space in the already crowded cities.
1.2
Fire protection of wooden structures
When deciding to build with wood, a major concern is the fact that, unlike concrete and
steel, wood is a combustible material that can add fuel load to an existing ﬁre which can
result in shorter time to ﬂashover, shorter evacuation time and more dangerous conditions
for ﬁreﬁghters.
The two main kinds of systems that can be used in order to comply with the codes are an
active system or a passive system, with examples of such presented in ﬁgure 1.3
The active system usually consists of sprinklers, extinguishers and smoke alarms sys-
tems. These instruments focus on actively dealing with the situation that a ﬁre is ongoing,
either by ﬁghting it or ﬂeeing the building.
The passive system on the other hand is designed to limit and control the ﬁre once it has
begun. It requires no input or action from people in order to be effective, for example, a
ﬁre proof wall needs no activation, but will still prevent spreading of ﬁre between com-
partments. The main objective of the passive ﬁre protection is to give people more time
to react to the ﬁre and evacuate [18]. A system containing both active and passive ﬁre
protection methods is usually the most optimal, complementing one another. In this the-
sis, the main focus has been on the passive system, which, if optimised, makes it possible
to deviate from the building codes in regard to the active system if the same requirements
regarding evacuation time can be fulﬁlled.
4
==PAGE:19==
(a) Sprinkler, active ﬁre protection
(b) Extinguisher, active ﬁre protection
(c) Firedoor, passive ﬁre protection
(d) Intumescent paint, passive ﬁre protection
Figure 1.3: Fire protection examples
One way of achieving a passive ﬁre protection system is to cover the wooden walls
with gypsum plaster-boards which isolates the wood from the ﬁre and thus decreases the
charring rate of the wooden element. This is a very cost-effective and environmentally
friendly way of ﬁre prooﬁng and its effects have been investigated since the 1960s [19]
Gypsum plaster-boards have a ﬁrm place in Eurocode 5, are light and very easy to install.
However, they hide the wooden construction from sight, which may be the very reason as
to why a wooden construction was chosen to begin with.
This has led to several alternative ways of ﬁre prooﬁng. BM Trada mentions that there
are 3 main types of ﬂame retardant treatments for wood [20]
• impregnation with inorganic salt solutions or leach-resistant chemicals
• chemicals inherently incorporated into the product at point of manufacture
• surface coatings
The latter way of doing so has been around for some time and is very popular in the steel
industry, but after conducting a literature review, it was concluded that there is lacking
research in its effect on wood, which is a major motivator behind this thesis.
Intumescent coatings are a type of coating that swells to many times (50-100) its
original thickness and creates a thick layer of char, which has very poor heat transferring
5
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.4: Application of Intumescent Paint
abilities. It insulates the underlying material from the external heat and prevents the
rise in temperature behind the char. The principles behind the paints are the same, but
they have different objectives. When applied to steel, it is meant to prevent the steel
from reaching its failure temperature of around 550-600◦C, and when applied to wood,
it is meant to delay the initiation of charring by lowering the surface temperature and to
prevent ignition.
1.3
Literature review
Regarding intumescent paint and its chemistry, several studies have been made in order
to quantify how it works and to optimise its effect. Vandersall [21] was the ﬁrst to publish
an extensive review of the chemistry behind intumescent paint in 1971. Edward D. Weil
made a state-of-the-art review on ﬂame-retardant coatings [22] in 2010, partly based on
the previous study of Vandersall. A more recent PhD study made at DTU by Kristian
Petersen Nørgaard [23] investigates intumescent coating systems in furnaces. He has de-
veloped a mathematical model that can describe intumescent coatings development in a
cellulosic ﬁre. This model however only applies to coatings applied to steel and no equiv-
alent has been found for wood.
More focus on steel than wood seems to be a continuous trend throughout literature,
most likely because the application of intumescent paint, as stated in the introduction, is
more widespread in the steel industry.
Andrea Lucherini wrote an experimental MSc. thesis [24] at DTU about the behaviour of
steel when applied with intumescent coatings, testing intumescent paint in different ﬁre
6
==PAGE:21==
scenarios. He concluded that the effect is strongly inﬂuences by many parameters such
as heating rates, thickness of paint and chemical composition.
A few studies exist [25] [26] [27]on the detailed description of how intumescent paint
works on wood. Russel L.J [25] gives a comprehensive literature review on the possi-
bilities of ﬁre retarding wood, but also mentions that more research is needed into the
subject. T. Mariappan and T. Hakkarainen [26] [27] urges the timber industry to pursue
the concept of intumescent paint as an alternative to cladding with ﬁre resistive boarding.
The literature on experimental studies of intumescent paint on wood is limited, but the
study by T. Hakkarainen [26] is one of two articles that describes the experimental studies
of a thin thermal barrier on wood.
Using LVL and a cone calorimeter, the charring rate and the depth of charring with an
intumescent coating was brieﬂy investigated, and a certain effect was found. The study
however only tests a heat ﬂux of 50kW/m2, a single specimen per coating and measures
charring depth depending on 2 thermocouples.
Another study made by Andrea Lucherini and Christian Maluk in September 2019 [28]
investigated the ﬁre behaviour of thin intumescent coatings on timber. In this study, the
H-TRIS setup was used as well as CLT elements. Using 3 different heat ﬂuxes, the
swelling of intumescent paint, the temperature within the CLT and charring rates were
determined. They concluded that the delay of charring is directly proportional to the Dry
Film Thickenss (DFT) of the intumescent paint and that intumescent coatings on timber
reduce timber charring and charring rate signiﬁcantly. As their approach has been rather
similar to that of this thesis, the results that could be compared have been so.
Bahrani [29] has made an article on the effect weathering has on intumescent paint ap-
plied to wood. Specimen were subjected to solar radiation, moisture and temperature for
12 months, and a clear effect on primarily time to ignition could be seen. A topcoat can
help to reduce these negative effects signiﬁcantly, which is why the effect this in turn has
has on the effect of intumescent paint is interesting to consider.
The investigation of a topcoat’s effect on intumescent paint has only been examined for
the application onto steel. Xu Q. et al. [30] describe that the application of a topcoat has
a substantial negative effect in terms of reduced expansion and increased thermal conduc-
tivity which on average was 20% higher than without a topcoat.
Finally, the literature on the PTHFM has mainly been reported by Ulf Wickström in,
among others, his 3 papers [31] [32] [33], where the theory behind and arguments for it
are described. An accuracy and calibration study by C. Gustavsson [34] of Luleå Univer-
7
==PAGE:22==
sity concluded that the PTHFM could compliment or even replace the HFM in the future.
However, there exists some difﬁculties in accurately deﬁning the parameters used in the
formulas.
1.4
Project objective
The literature review shows a clear lack of research into the effect of intumescent paint
on wood.
Though it plays a major part in passive ﬁre protection on steel constructions, the use of
intumescent paint on wooden constructions is, to say the least, modest. More knowledge
about the behaviour and effect of intumescent paint applied to wood is critical in order to
promote its advantages.
Studies investigating intumescent paint subjected to outside environment (sun, rain and
temperature) suggests that a topcoat protecting the underlying layer is essential. How-
ever, no studies have been done on the effect that applying a topcoat has on the underlying
wood. Finally, as intumescent paint is a rather expensive material, it is worth trying to
optimise the ratio of Wet Film Thickness (WFT) to actual effect obtained.
In order to accomplish the project objective, 27 different combinations of different DFT,
heat ﬂux and application of topcoat were prepared which serves to investigate every of
the aforementioned parameters. The combinations have been illustrated in ﬁgure 1.5
Deemed the most relevant indicators of the parameters’ effect on the CLT specimen, have
been the surface temperature after 20 minutes of heat exposure, time to start of charring,
depth of charring, ignition time and heat release rate.
In ﬁgure 1.5 the 4 thicknesses are multiples of the manufacture’s recommended layer
thickness (125µm). The three heat ﬂuxes represent a "low, medium and high" heat ﬂux
of 22kW/m2, 32kW/m2 and 45kW/m2 respectively. The tests were executed using the
H-TRIS setup initially developed by Maluk [35]. The speciﬁc H-TRIS used in the DTU-
Firelab was made by Pierrick Mindykowski [36].
The calibration of the H-TRIS, determining the required distances between heating panel
and specimen, made it possible to incorporate the new PTHFM developed by Ulf Wick-
ström, which relies on adiabatic surface temperature. The thermometer was tested along-
side a regular HFM and results compared in order to determine the effect of the PTHFM.
Ideally, the PTHFM would yield the same results, making it a possible alternative to HFM
that does not need water-cooling.
8
==PAGE:23==
Figure 1.5: Test overview
The specimen could in the H-TRIS not be subjected to the standard ISO834 curve temper-
ature/time because the temperature limit was to low. 3 different heat ﬂuxes were chosen
instead, as a low, medium and high heat ﬂux.
According to W. Beikircher [37], backed by A. Lucherini [28], the charring of wood is
higher at a constant heat ﬂux of around 50kW/m2 than for an ISO834 test, making the
tests of 45kW/m2 for 20 minutes in this thesis approximately conservative.
9
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Theory an method for analytical
investigations
2.1
CLT as a building material
The test specimen which were used in this project, were the types of engineered wood
called CLT. Engineered wood as a whole is a type of wood that is modiﬁed by means of
binding or ﬁxing ﬁbres together so as to gain structural advantage over normal wood. For
example LVL, (Laminated Veneer Lumber), is a type of engineered wood that is made by
bonding veneers together into a large billet, so they are all parallel. [38] This offers the
possibility of creating structures that are much longer, wider and deeper than what can be
obtained with regular wood, while still being structurally sound.
Different kinds of engineered wood, including CLT can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Types of engineered wood
11
==PAGE:26==
(a) Mjøstaarnet
(b) Large CLT element
Figure 2.2: CLT examples
CLT, called "concrete of the future" [39], is a type of engineered wood, where several
layers, usually 3, 5 or 7, of lumber boards are stacked on top of each other and glued or
nailed together, with each layer having a thickness anywhere from 16mm to 51mm [40].
For every layer, the direction of the grains is changed with 90 degrees as illustrated in
ﬁgure 2.1.
This cross laminating yields high in plane and out of plane strength and stiffness abilities,
which again yields two-way action capabilities, just like reinforced concrete. Mjøstaarnet
which can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2a is made entirely out of Glulam and CLT
It varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, but a major advantage of CLT is the sheer
size of elements that can be produced, namely a width of up to 3 meters and a length of
up to 18 meters. A large CLT element can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2b.
The specimen used in this project are CLT elements produced by Züblin Timber with a
produt name of LENO CLT 100 [41]
The most relevant parameters have been presented in table 2.1
The specimen had three layers, each with a thickness 33.3mm thickness for a total of
10cm as can be seen in table 2.1. As the experiments were no longer than 20 minutes,
reducing the charring depth, it was deemed appropriate to cut the specimen in half, thus
yielding twice as many test specimen. Smaller specimen of 10x10x4cm were also cut,
12
==PAGE:27==
Table 2.1: CLT specimen data sheet
Product name
Layers
Composition [mm]
Moisture content
Timber species
LENO 100
3
33.3 - 33.3 - 33.3
12+-2%
Softwood
Density [kg/m3]
Thickness
Atot [cm2]
Wtot [cm3]
Itot [cm4]
350
100
1000
1667
8333
as it was chosen to do screening experiments with the mass loss cone calorimeter before
using the H-TRIS.
2.2
CLT in ﬁre
2.2.1
Background
A ﬁre in a wooden building might seem like a more serious scenario than a ﬁre in a steel
or concrete building, as wood is a combustible material capable of adding fuel load to
the ﬁre. However, wood is better at resisting a ﬁre than most would think, because of the
charring layer that forms when wood is exposed to a ﬁre. This charring layer acts as an
insulator and protects the rest of the wood from the ﬁre, delaying the decreasing of the
cross section.
When exposed to a ﬁre, the temperature inside the wood begins to rise at steady rate.
At 100 ◦C, the water molecules inside the wood begins to evaporate and the temperature
reaches a plateau before continuing its ascent. When the temperature reaches 200-300 ◦
C, gaseous and ﬂammable compounds are created that reacts with the oxygen in the air
and combusts [42] [10]
Figure 2.3: Charring of wood [43]
A pyrolysis layer spreads along the wood and forms a layer of char. Underneath this layer
is a warmed up layer of about 35mm, where pyrolysis characteristics can be seen, called
13
==PAGE:28==
the pyrolysis zone. Underneath this layer is the layer where water has evaporated (T>100
◦C), and lastly the wood that is still intact, as can be seen in ﬁgure 2.3.
2.2.2
Charring
Charring is generally assumed to begin when wood reaches 300 ◦C [44] where rapid
pyrolysis begins, though with prolonged exposure charring is also possible to happen at
lower temperatures. [45]
After a charring layer has formed on the outside of the wood, the underlying wood is
somewhat protected against the higher temperatures, as the newly formed charring layer
has a low conductivity. The charring layer also limits the access of oxygen to the pyroly-
sis zone, slowing down the charring rate.
The charring rate can be assumed constant and is given in Eurocode 5 [44] table 3.1
to be 0.65mm/min. This can though be affected by factors such as the density of the
wood and the moisture content of the wood.
The relation between water content, density and charring rate was examined in a study
[46] which concluded that a higher density and higher water content lowered the charring
rate. The specimen in this thesis have an average moisture content of around 6% and
a density of around 290kg/m3 which are typical values, so equation 2.1 can be used to
determine the charring depth of a specimen after time t
dchar,0 = β0t
(2.1)
If the structural integrity of a building element is wanted, the charring rate and char-
ring depth are used in the reduced cross section method [47] to determine cross sectional
properties of an element. As the pyrolysis zone is also assumed to have zero strength and
stiffness, the depth of this zone is added to the depth of charring in order to determine the
remaining cross section containing full strength, written in formula 2.2
dpy =
(
7
20 · t
if
0min < t < 20min
7
if
t ≥20min
)
(2.2)
The charring depths in these experiments have been investigated using two different ap-
proaches. First, the depths were measured by pressing a ruler through the specimen,
assuming that the point of resistance was the ﬁnal charring line. This is a rough estimate
and an alternative method would be to slice the specimen and visually inspect them.
14
==PAGE:29==
The second assessment method was to assume that the charring line would be at the po-
sition of the 300 ◦C isotherm. By interpolating between thermocouple measurements, it
was possible to determine the position of the charring line.
2.2.3
Ignition
Ignition can be piloted where a small spark is introduced close to the specimen which is
usually done when testing with a cone calorimeter or mass loss cone calorimeter.
Silcock G.W.H. deﬁned it as Ignition by piloted ignition occurs when the rate of pyrolysis
is sufﬁcient to allow the establishment of a diffusion ﬂame, when a spark or small pilot
ﬂame is introduced into the boundary layer close to the irradiated surface [48].
Auto-ignition on the other hand, is ignition that happens spontaneously when the spec-
imen is subjected to e.g. a hot surface. According to Jaskoowski [49], the process of
auto-ignition follows the development of a ﬁre better than piloted ignition, and around a
heat ﬂux of 50kW/m2 the time to ignition difference is insigniﬁcant. It is however pos-
sible to lower the temperature where ignition of the wood occurs with a piloted ignition
when heat ﬂuxes are lower.
Unpiloted ignition might not occur before pyrolysis in the wood is happening, and the
right mixture of violatiles and air is present, which is usually around 400-500 degrees.
The criteria before ignition can occur is either described as the "Critical surface tempera-
ture" or "Critical heat ﬂux" [45]. The most well deﬁned is the latter, and according to two
articles by Bartlett A.I. and Hadden R.M [45] [50], the general agreement is that this for
wood is around 25-33kW/m2 and 28kW/m2 for CLT, whereas results for critical surface
temperature are not as well deﬁned.
The ignition time is dependent on the amount of heat ﬂux and the exposure time. In
this thesis relatively high heat ﬂuxes (45kW/m2) have been used and thus relatively short
ignition times are to be expected.
2.2.4
Delamination
An important factor for CLT that is not relevant for normal hard- or softwood, is delam-
ination between lamellae. It can be characterised as when a lamellae detaches from the
rest of the specimen, when the glue holding them together is heated up. As described
previously, the char layer forming on the outside of the wood acts as an insulator, and
15
==PAGE:30==
when a lamellae and its char layer falls of, a whole new lamellae of virgin CLT is exposed
to the ﬁre. This has a negative effect on the charring rate, but also on the heat release
rate. A test on the effect of delamination [51] of CLT showed an increase of 5kW in heat
release rate and a charring rate increasing to 2mm/min after major delamination.
It is something that has not been tested in this thesis as only short tests of 20 minutes have
been performed, which is not enough for delamination to occur.
However, this is a very relevant topic, as delamination and subsequent falloff of lamellae
also results in the intumescent paint to become void. Increasing the number of lamel-
laes for a specimen in turn decreases the thickness of each lamellae. This can increase
the strength, but also makes delamination more likely to occur. This balance should be
investigated in future studies.
2.3
Intumescent paint
As described in the introduction of this thesis, several ways of ﬁre protecting CLT exists,
but few are aesthetically pleasing. When the wooden structure itself is an aesthetic fo-
cal point, one choice is to cover it with a thin ﬁlm of intumescent coating, which can be
transparent.
Intumescent paint has been around since 1938 [23] when H. Tramm obtained a patent on
the product. Even though it has been around for a long time, it was not until around 1980
that the building industry really took notice of the great potential of it as an alternative to
the existing methods of ﬁre prooﬁng. Today, it is the most popular way of protecting steel
structures
In principle, intumescent paint can be used on many different kinds of material, but it is
by far most popularly used on steel structures, as steel structurally does not resist ﬁre as
well as wood.
By extension, as mentioned in the literature review, more research has been done on the
effect of intumescent paint applied to steel compared to wood. In the state-of-the-art re-
port by Weil in 2010 [22]. wail says that Wood coatings more often are designed to retard
ignition and rate of burn rather than to provide the ﬁre-resistive barrier which is more
typical of steel coatings and refers to a description made by the USDA Forest Laboratory
in the 2010 Wood handbook [52], stating that the main focus point of using intumescent
paint on wood, is to delay ignition, slow down the spread of ﬁre in a structure and delay
the onset of charring and charring rate.
16
==PAGE:31==
Intumescent coatings can be solvent-based, water-based or two-part epoxy [53] [54].
Solvent-based are used both outside and inside and performs well against temperature
and weather variations. The water-based coating is the most common type of coating,
which has also been used in this thesis. It is well proven in cellulosic type ﬁres and pro-
duces less odour, however, it is not as resistant against weathering, low temperatures and
humidity. The last, epoxy based coatings is mostly used in very harsh environments such
as on offshore constructions where hydrocarbon ﬁres can happen
The paint looks like regular paint at lower temperatures, but when exposed to temper-
atures of 200-250 ◦C , a series of chemical reactions begin to occur, causing it to expand
up to 100 times its original thickness. The chemical reactions that occur is rather com-
plex, and has only brieﬂy been described here.
According to Camino G. Et al. [55] the intumescent effect is obtained with the following
4 components: An acid source, a carbonaceous compound, foaming compounds and a
binding resin. The PhD thesis written by Nørgaard K.P. of DTU on intumescent painting
systems [23] contains a comprehensive description of the chemical process.
In short, when the paint is heated up, the acid reacts with the carbonaceous compound and
produces ester and the binder starts to melt. When reaching the critical temperature of
around 250 ◦C, gasses are produced that inﬂate the mixture, creating the char that can be
seen in ﬁgure 2.4 The char layer that forms has very good insulating properties and pro-
tects the underlying material. A simple illustration showing the process of intumescent
paint subjected to a ﬁre can be seen in ﬁgure 2.4
A more detailed description of the chemical process can be read from [55]
Figure 2.4: Development of Intumescent Painting [55]
By applying an intumescent paint system it is possible to obtain certain classiﬁcations.
According to the manufacturer, [56] applying 1 layer of intumescent paint would give the
system a classiﬁcation of B-s1, d0. Another layer would give it a classiﬁcation of K1,10
B-s1, d0. In the old danish class system this would equal a class 1 material.
B-s1, d0 means that it is a combustible material, but that it has limited heat release and
ﬂame spread during the growth stage of a ﬁre. The extra K1 means that the paint has been
17
==PAGE:32==
tested to protect the underlying material for at least 10 minutes[57]
A major advantage of intumescent paint is the fact that it is possible to apply to already
existing structures and that it is possible to reach otherwise hard-to-reach places.
It can also serve to conserve the look of conservation-worthy buildings that need im-
proved ﬁre resistance. It is aesthetically pleasing and there exists systems that have the
ability to resist a ﬁre for up 60 minutes.
The major disadvantage is the cost. Intumescent paint is rather expensive compared to
other ﬁre prooﬁng methods.
18
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Theory and method for
experimental investigations
In this project, numerous experiments have been conducted. The following chapter aims
to explain and illustrate the methods used to reach the goal of the thesis; research the ﬁre
protection that intumescent paint gives CLT elements, when changing different kinds of
parameters such as heat ﬂux, thickness of intumescent paint and application of topcoat.
3.1
Screening experiments
Before conducting the ﬁnal experiments on which the results and discussion have been
based, a series of screening experiments were done ﬁrst. This served several purposes.
First of all, the proposed setup for the experiments could be tested and altered if needed.
The practicality of conducting the 54 impending experiments was to be tested which
would serve as to optimise the repeatability of the experiments. Secondly, the func-
tionality of all equipment such as thermocouples, extension wires, cassette ports, HFM,
PTHFM and the H-TRIS could be veriﬁed.
3.2
Mass loss cone calorimeter
Before conducting the experiments on the H-TRIS that will be used to answer the prob-
lems stated in this thesis, a few experiments were done on the mass loss cone calorimeter
in order to determine the most relevant parameters to change, e.g. what heat ﬂuxes would
yield the most interesting results.
A heat ﬂux too high, of 70kW/m2 would for example not be interesting as the intumescent
layer would not do any difference in respect to time to ignition or charring. A too low
heat ﬂux would result in experiments either taking too long to conduct, or it would be
19
==PAGE:34==
hard to conclude something from the relative short experiments.
In ﬁgures 3.1a and 3.1b and the mass loss cone calorimeter and the gas analyser used for
the experiments can be seen
(a) Mass loss cone calorimeter
(b) Gas analyser
Figure 3.1: Mass loss cone calorimeter setup
CLT specimen, with different compositions of intumescent paint, were placed in the
sample container on top of a layer of mineral wool used in order to make the CLT speci-
men reach the top of the container. According to previous calibrations measuring the heat
ﬂux as a function of the temperature in the Cone calorimeter, which graph can be seen
in Appendix D, the distance between the top of the container and the bottom of the cone
heater should be 25mm, which was veriﬁed with a ruler. A more detailed illustration of
the experimental setup can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2
Figure 3.2: Mass loss cone calorimeter setup
In order to measure the temperature through the CLT specimen, thermocouples were
placed at different depths through the specimen. This process was identical to the one
done from the H-TRIS and has more thoroughly been described in the section 3.3
20
==PAGE:35==
The specimen were subjected to various heat ﬂuxes, paint thicknesses and topcoat for
20 minutes, which results deemed a "low", "medium" and "high" heat ﬂux of 22kW/m2,
32kW/m2 and 45kW/m2 respectively, and 4 different paint layer thicknesses as suitable.
3.3
Preparation of specimen
The CLT specimen used in this thesis were produced by LENO and their product info
can be seen from table 2.1. The CLT specimen had been stored for a longer period of
time at room temperature in the DTU ﬁrelab. The moisture content of all specimen was
measured to be around 5-8% and showed no signs of being subjected to water.
The next step in the preparation of the specimen was to drill holes into them where the
K-type thermocouples were to be inserted. A drilling template of steel was made which
could ﬁt on top of the CLT specimen for more efﬁcient drilling, which can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.3b The chosen thermocouples were type-K OMEGA with a diameter of 2mm.
The model number and illustration can be seen from ﬁgure 3.3a.
(a) Thermocouple
(b) Drilling
Figure 3.3: Thermocouple and drilling
The thermocouples would have to ﬁt snugly into the drilled holes without the risk of
falling out, but also loose enough so that they could be pulled out and reused in the pro-
ceeding experiment. The drill with a diameter of 2mm only had a length of 4cm, and as
the thermocouples measuring surface temperature had to be near the surface, the speci-
men were cut to a thickness of 4cm.
21
==PAGE:36==
1mm behind the surface, 5 thermocouples were placed. 1 at the very center and 4 around
the middle of each quadrant. Furthermore, 4 thermocouples were placed around the cen-
ter. The ﬁrst was placed 5 mm from the surface with each following thermocouple 5mm
further away from the surface. This was done in order to measure the point of charring
through the specimen and thus the charring rate. An illustration of the surface placement
and depth placement of the thermocouples can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4 and table 3.1. "TL"
refers to "Top left", "CT" to "Center top" etc.
(a) Surface placement of thermocouples
(b) Depth placement of thermocouples
Figure 3.4: Thermocouple placement (measurements in mm)
Table 3.1: Depths of thermocouples
Thermocouple
TL
TR
BL
BR
C
CT
CL
CR
CB
Depth [mm]
1
1
1
1
1
5
10
15
20
After drilling, the specimen were ready to be painted. The ﬁre protection system was
obtained from Scandi Supply A/S, which consists of a primer, the intumescent paint itself,
and a topcoat. As the primer consisted of epoxy constituents a very careful application
of the primer was done with protective clothing. The intumescent paint itself was water
based like regular paint and was applied by roller.
From the supplier, a recommended DFT (Dry Film Thickness) and WFT (Wet Film Thick-
ness) of primer, paint and topcoat has been recommended. The thicknesses that have been
applied can be seen from table 3.2
22
==PAGE:37==
Table 3.2: Coating thickness approximation
Primer
IC1 Layer
IC 2 Layers
IC 3 Layers
IC 4 Layers
Topcoat
WFT [µm]
100
125
250
325
500
100
Weight [g/m2]
105
169
338
507
676
105
This can be accurately measured with a sophisticated device like the Positector 6000
[58], however no such apparatus was readily available. Instead the recommended us-
age of paint in litre per square meter was used. Along with the density of the paint and
some simple calculations, it was possible to obtain the recommended amount of coating
in grams per specimen in order to obtain the recommended WFT. The calculations can be
seen in Appendix C
Only 1 layer of primer and topcoat was used, but the intumescent paint thickness var-
ied from 1 to 4 layers. There was allowed drying of at least 4 hours between each layer.
During application, each specimen was ID’d in order to keep track of the changing pa-
rameters that each specimen were subject to
The specimen has been ID’d in the following way:
• First the amount of heat ﬂux that the specimen has been subjected to: e.g. 22kW
• Next, the amount of intumescent paint layers: e.g. 3L
• Next, if there was a topcoat applied, a T will be present, otherwise no topcoat has
been applied
• Lastly, as each experiment has been conducted twice, the ﬁrst experiments will have
a 1 in parenthesis and the second a 2. Thus the ﬁrst specimen tested, subjected to
32kW of heat ﬂux, with 2 layers of intumescent paint and a topcoat will have the
ID: 32kW-2L-T-(1)
A complete list of specimen tested and their ID can be seen in Appendix A
3.4
Setup
In this section, the experimental tests that act as the foundation of the further discussion
have been described in detail. Beside the setup, theory behind the instruments used is
presented. A detailed description of the execution of the tests step by step can be seen in
Appendix B.
23
==PAGE:38==
3.4.1
H-TRIS
The H-TRIS setup used in in this project can be seen from ﬁgure 3.5. The distance from
the panel to the specimen, noted x in equation 3.1, and the burner intensity, noted BI in
equation 3.2 and 3.3 The burner intensity can be set from 0-100% on the control panel.
The distance between the 0.5x0.5m heating panel and the specimen can be controlled by
manually rolling the panel back and forth which can be seen in ﬁgure 3.5 along with the
rest of the setup.
The original H-TRIS was developed by Maluk [35], but the H-TRIS at DTU ﬁre-
lab has been designed and calibrated by Pierrick Mindykowski [36] and the theoretical
heat ﬂux that a specimen is subjected to, can be seen from equation 3.1. A and B are
dimensionless factors that are calculated from equations 3.2 and 3.3
qs+k = A · xB
(3.1)
A =
(
2500
if
0 < BI < 0.5
2500 + (720 · BI)
if
BI > 0.5
)
(3.2)
B = −1.66 −0.31 · BI
(3.3)
The setup of the H-TRIS has been illustrated in ﬁgure 3.5
Figure 3.5: Setup of H-TRIS
On the end of the H-TRIS, a frame consisting of aluminium bars was ﬁxed. Onto
the frame was ﬁxed non combustible boards with a cut-out of 25x25cm meant to contain
24
==PAGE:39==
the specimen. As the specimen were not all cut exactly the right size, problems occurred
when ﬁtting specimen, leading to an altered specimen setup. Both setup used in the
experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6
(a) Initial specimen setup
(b) Altered specimen setup
Figure 3.6: Specimen setup
It was important to center the cut-out directly to the other side of the heating-panel.
As the H-TRIS would have to heat up for a couple of minutes to allow an even distribution
of heat along the surface, there was a chance of heating up the intumescent paint before
the experiment had really begun. Thus a non combustible board attached to a bracket was
placed in front of the specimen during the initial heating of the H-TRIS. This can also be
seen in ﬁgure 3.5.
3.4.2
Heat Flux Meter (HFM)
In order to measure the amount of heat ﬂux that the CLT specimen were subjected to
throughout the experiments, in regard to the heating panels distance to the specimen, a
calibration was made. For this, a Heat Flux Meter (HFM) and a Plate Thermometer Heat
Flux Meter (PTHFM) have been used and compared with each-other as well as with the
theoretically calculated heat ﬂux from Mindykowski mentioned in the previous section.
The HFM used in this thesis was the water cooled heat ﬂux sensor Schmidt-Boelter BG01
from hukseﬂux that can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7
It is designed to measure in environments where the main source of heat ﬂux comes
from radiation, which is why it has a small black absorber on the front. The contribution
25
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.7: Heat Flux Meter
from convection is usually small enough to ignore, as it depends on the difference in
temperature between the HFM and the gasses around it. The speciﬁc HFM used in this
thesis was rated to be most precise around 50kW/m2. All experiments were stopped
around 45kW/m2 in order to obtain the most accurate data for the calibration. In order to
have a constant reference temperature, the HFM was supplied with a continuous ﬂow of
cold water. The water keeps the HFM cool and the surrounding high temperatures do not
have an inﬂuence on the readings.
The HFM measures a difference in voltage which has to be converted into the respective
heat ﬂux, which is done using formula 3.4
φ = U
S
(3.4)
where φ is heat ﬂux in W/m2, U is the amount of voltage in Volt and S is the calibration
factor, which is speciﬁc for each HFM and comes with a range of margin. The calibration
factor for the HFM used in this thesis can be seen from formula 3.5
S = 0.149 · 10−6 V
W
m2
(3.5)
This is then inputted into the program LabVIEW and heat ﬂux in W becomes the
output.
In the calibration, the H-TRIS was placed at the furthest distance, allowing it to heat
up for about 5 minutes. Hereafter, it was rolled to a distance of 73cm from the HFM,
which was set up as can be seen from ﬁgure 3.8a. The HFM was allowed to measure
for 2 minutes, before the H-TRIS was moved 5cm closer. This was then repeated until a
measurement of 45kW/m2 could be read from LabView. The setup for the calibration can
be seen from ﬁgure 3.8
26
==PAGE:41==
(a) Front of hukseﬂux
(b) Backside of Hukseﬂux
(c) Watercooling of hukseﬂux
Figure 3.8: Hukseﬂux setup
In ﬁgure 3.9 the measurements from the HFM calibration can be seen, as well as the
rough estimate of heat ﬂux according to Mindykowski. In the next ﬁgure 3.10, the heat
ﬂux as a function of the distance from the heating panel can be seen, again with the rough
estimated value from Mindykowski.
Figure 3.9: Hukseﬂux and Mindykowski calibration
27
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.10: Hukseﬂux measurements and Mindykowski predictions as a function of
distance
Mindykowski underestimates the heat ﬂux when the distance is higher than 20cm.
According to his description[36], the formula is only a rough estimate and should only be
regarded as such
In the next section, another calibration has been described, this time with both the HFM
and the PTHFM. The results from this calibration should agree with the ones from the
ﬁrst calibration
3.4.3
Plate Thermometer Heat Flux Meter (PTHFM)
The Plate Thermometer Heat Flux Meter (PTHFM) developed by Ulf Wickström is an
altered, updated version of the existing Plate Thermometer (PT), also developed by Ulf
Wickström in 1994, in order to measure and control temperatures in ﬁre resistant furnaces
[33] [31]. It is based on the concept of measuring the adiabatic surface Temperature
(AST) which can then be used to calculate the incident radiant heat ﬂux imposed from
a heat source at both ambient temperature, but also when exposed to hot gasses of up
to 850 ◦C. There already exists several types of Heat Flux Meters (HFM), such as the
water cooled heat ﬂux meter described previously. These HFM’s are adequate to use at
room temperature, but at higher temperatures, such as those that occur inside furnaces,
they yield somewhat inaccurate data according to Wickström [32] In this thesis the two
instruments have been compared when used at ambient temperature.
28
==PAGE:43==
The Plate Thermometer can be seen in ﬁgure 3.11a and the PTHFM can be seen in ﬁgure
3.11b
(a) Plate Thermometer
(b) Plate Thermometer Heat Flux Meter
Figure 3.11: PT and PTHFM
Its dimensions are 10x10x0.1cm. It consists of a 0.4mm thick nickel alloy sheet with
an attached thermocouple in order to measure the surface temperature of the nickel plate.
In comparison with earlier PT’s it has been made 0.3mm thinner in order to reduce the
impact from stored heat in the metal sheet. The insulation pad behind the plate has also
been updated, with an increase in thickness from 10mm to 30mm in order to decrease the
heat loss from conduction. The PTHFMeters had already been tested, which might be the
reason for the surface being ﬂaky. It is not known if this had inﬂuence on the measure-
ments.
3.4.3.1
Adiabatic Surface Temperature (AST)
As previously mentioned, the PTHFM is based on the adiabatic surface temperature,
which is the average value between the radiation temperature and the gas temperature,
depending on the heat transfer coefﬁcients [33] Derived from basic theory in [31] by
combining the three following equaitons, black body radiation temperature
Tr ⌘
4
r
˙q00
inc
σ
(3.6)
total heat transfer to an arbitrary surface
˙q00
tot = "s( ˙q00
inc −σ · T 4
s ) + hc · (Tg −Ts)
(3.7)
and the surface equilibrium equation
0 = "s( ˙q00
inc −σ · T 4
AST) + hc · (Tg −TAST)
(3.8)
29
==PAGE:44==
the TAST can be deﬁned and found from a series of PT temperature measurements
T i+1
AST =
✓˙q00i+1
inc
σ
+ hc · (Tg −T i
AST
"sσ
◆1
4
(3.9)
3.4.4
Obtaining incident ﬂux
With the adiabatic surface temperature deﬁned and measured from the plate thermometer,
some formulas have to be utilised in order to arrive at the incident heat ﬂux. First of all,
the incident radiant heat ﬂux is deﬁned in equation 3.10
˙q00
inc = σ(TPT + 273)4 −hPT + K + H
"PT
· (Tg −TPT) + C(T i+1
PT −T i−1
PT )
"i
PT(ti+1 −ti−1)
(3.10)
with parameters are deﬁned as
σ = Stefan Boltzmann constant (5.67E−8
W
m2·K4)
TPT = Measured Plate Thermometer temperature at respective time step
K = Conduction loss, set to 1 for PTHFM
H = Wind effect, set to 0
"PT = min(C0 + C1 · TPT, 1)
C0 = factor (1.03)
C1 = factor (-0.436E-3)
Tg = gas temperature, or ambient temperature, set to 20 degrees celsius
C = Heat capacity of PT (2000)
hPT = convection heat transfer coefﬁcient calculated from formula 3.11
hPT = 76.0 ·
✓TPT + Tg
2
+ 273
◆−0.66
· (TPT −Tg)
1
3 + H
(3.11)
Next, the adiabatic surface temperature is calculated for each time step from the fol-
lowing formula
T i
AST =
✓✓
˙q00
inc
i −hi
PT
"i
PT
· (Tg −T i−1
AST)
◆
/σ
◆1
4
−273
(3.12)
With the Adiabatic Surface Temperature, it is possible to calculate the total heat ﬂux
from the following formula
˙q00
flux
i = "PTσ((TAST + 273)4 −(20 + 273)4) + hPT(TAST −20)
(3.13)
Another calibration of the H-TRIS was done, this time with both the PTHFM and the
HFM installed side by side. The setup was similar to the one described in the previous
30
==PAGE:45==
section, with the center of both instruments being equal distance from the center of the
non-combustible board. The execution was similar to the calibration execution described
in the previous section. However, the distance between measurements was doubled to
10cm, as the PTHFM took some time to reach a plateau where the same temperature is
continuously measured, as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.12. Worth noticing is the fact that the
higher the heat ﬂux, the faster the PTHFM reaches its plateau.
Figure 3.12: Temperature measurements of PTHFM
From the measured temperatures and calculations made, it was possible to com-
pare the incident heat ﬂuxes measured from the HFM with the ones measured from the
PTHFM, which has been illustrated in ﬁgure 3.13. The PTHFM continuously measures
higher heat ﬂuxes than the HFM until it reaches a heat ﬂux of around 27.5kW/2 where it
converges to the same measurements as the HFM.
However, by making a small change to the Adiabatic Surface Temperature formula, and
inserting the room temperature instead of ASTi-1, it was possible to create the graph that
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.14. It follows the HFM measurements very closely until it reaches
27.5kW/m2 where the measurements begin to divert.
31
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.13: Incident heat ﬂux of PTHFM and HFM
Figure 3.14: Incident heat ﬂux with modiﬁed AST
As can be seen in ﬁgure 3.15, both graphs have been plotted, by combining the two
and using the modiﬁed graph until 27.5kW/m2 and then shifting to the original graph
would ﬁt almost perfectly with the HFM.
By analysing the intersection where the original AST calculation ﬁts better than the mod-
iﬁed AST calculation, the following formula has been proposed to better be in accordance
32
==PAGE:47==
with the HFM.
T i
AST =
8
<
:
( ˙q00
inc
i/σ)
1
4 −273
if
0◦C<TPT < 460◦C
⇣⇣
˙q00
inc
i −
hi
P T
"i
P T · (Tg −T i−1
AST)
⌘
/σ
⌘1
4 −273
if
460◦C < TPT
9
=
;
(3.14)
Figure 3.15: Combined heat ﬂuxes for PTHFM
Figure 3.16: Heat ﬂux as a function of distance for PTHFM and HFM
33
==PAGE:48==
3.4.5
H-TRIS calibration
The ﬁnal calibration has been done after the results obtained from ﬁgure 3.16. A heat
ﬂux of 45kW/m2 has been measured at a distance of 18cm, in both calibrations, which is
why this is chosen as the highest heat ﬂux that the specimen are subjected to. The two
lower heat ﬂuxes have been calculated based on the equation from the graph in the second
calibration. 3.3 shows the chosen heat ﬂuxes specimen have been subjected to .
Table 3.3: Heat ﬂuxes
Distance [cm]
Heat Flux [kW/2]
18
45
25
32
33
22
34
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results and discussion
4.1
General observations
Before going in depth with the results from the experiments, a brief summary of the
general observations made during the tests is presented
• The intumescent paint on all specimen, weather or not topcoat was applied and at
all heat ﬂuxes, began reacting within 10 second of starting the H-TRIS
• For the two lower heat ﬂuxes, the topcoat would detach from the specimen and fall
off in thin layers as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2a
• For the highest heat ﬂux, the topcoat would ignite and burn for a small period of
time for thin layers of intumescent paint
• The non-combustible boards began to crack after having been heated up and cooled
down about 5 times. This meant several extra boards with holes had to be made and
continuously substituted.
• Specimen were not all of identical size and would therefore have to be modiﬁed in
order to ﬁt the setup.
• Because of shrinkage of the wood during experiments, gaps of air were noted
around the edges
• Because of the two points mentioned above, charring was allowed to happen on the
sides of the specimen. These were stopped with smaller pieces of non-combustible
boards and mineral wool. The extra charring might have had inﬂuence on the smoke
production, but it was deemed to not have had inﬂuence on the temperature mea-
sured with the thermocouples.
35
==PAGE:50==
(a) Film from topcoat
(b) Ignition and cracking
Figure 4.1: Observations during tests
(a) V-Flux1
(b) V-Flux2
(c) V-Flux3
(d) L1-Flux1
(e) L1-Flux3
(f) L1-T-Flux2
(g) L1-T-Flux3
(h) L4-Flux1
(i) L4-Flux3
(j) L4-T-Flux1
(k) L4-T-Flux3
Figure 4.2: Specimen after test
36
==PAGE:51==
Figures 4.2a through 4.2k illustrates selected specimen after testing. It is clear that by
applying just 1 layer of intumescent paint an even distributed insulating layer of char is
formed. With the lower heat ﬂux it remains intact, whereas at a higher heat ﬂux charring
of the wood seems to be visible. Applying a topcoat creates a thin ﬁlm that slowly peels
of at the two lower heat ﬂuxes, but burns away at the higher heat ﬂux.
By applying 4 layers, a thicker layer of char is created and the underlying wood is less
affected, even with the highest heat ﬂux. Furthermore, by applying 4 layers, the topcoat
remains completely intact at lower heat ﬂuxes, and partly intact at the highest heat ﬂux.
4.2
Surface temperature
The surface temperature, or the temperature 1mm from the surface of the specimen, was
measured with 5 thermocouples. This meant that a simple statistical analysis could be
made in order to ﬁnd and eliminate large deviations, e.g. thermocouples not fastly se-
cured. This was done with the standard deviation which is calculated from formula 4.1.
s =
sPN
i=1(xi −¯x)2
N −1
(4.1)
s = sample standard deviation
N = number of observations (5 thermocouples)
xi = Observed values of the 5 thermocouples
¯x = mean value of observations
If unusually large deviations were found during an experiment it was an indication of
a faulty thermocouple installation. These were then removed from the average surface
temperatures calculations and lower standard deviations were obtained.
As all experiments were conducted twice, it was then also possible to compare and val-
idate the results of each experiment. The experiment with the lowest standard deviation
have been chosen for analysis. For the tests at 45kW/m2, the ﬁrst experiment was, as the
ones for the lower heat ﬂuxes, conducted for 20 minutes, however, the second experiment
was stopped at ignition, as these were meant to be used for heat release rate analysis.
All graphs showing temperature development throughout all specimen can be seen in
Appendix E. The most relevant will be discussed in this section.
37
==PAGE:52==
4.2.1
Virgin specimen
The virgin specimen without any applied intumescent coating is the base point that the
effect of the intumescent paint is compared to throughout the results, which can be seen
as the blue line having the highest average surface temperature in each of the 3 graphs
below
The higher the heat ﬂux, the higher the ﬁnal temperature is after 20 minutes. Charring
of the CLT already begins after 205 seconds at 45kW/m2, after about 250 seconds at
32kW/m2, and after 370 seconds at 22kW/2
After 20 minutes, the specimen subjected to 22kW/m2 has reached 500 ◦C at the sur-
face, whereas the specimen subjected to 45kW/m2 has reached 628 ◦C. The plateau that
all experiments experience at 100 ◦C is the moment where the water inside the CLT be-
gins to evaporate, thus lowering the initial steep temperature gradient.
Some specimen such as the 32kW/m2 virgin specimen and the 45kW/m2 1 Layer were
stopped to early. In these cases, a predicted temperature proﬁle based on the initial mea-
surements have been made, shown as a dotted line.
Table 4.1: Virgins specimen readings
Heat ﬂux [kW/m2]
Final temperature [◦C]
Onset of charring [s]
22
500
370
32
(600)
250
45
628
205
38
==PAGE:53==
(a) Surface temperature at 22kW/m2
(b) Surface temperature at 32kW/m2
(c) Surface temperature at 45kW/m2
Figure 4.3: Surface temperature of specimen subjected to different heat ﬂuxes
39
==PAGE:54==
4.2.2
Intumescent paint applied specimen
From ﬁgures 4.3a, 4.3b and 4.3c it can clearly be seen that the intumescent paint has a
certain effect. As described in the theory section, the paint begins reacting around 200-
250 ◦C . The increase of temperature decreases for all graphs around 225◦C, which is
more visible for specimen with fewer layers of paint applied.
Tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 presents the effect that the intumescent paint has on the speci-
men, in terms of reduction of ﬁnal temperature and delay of charring
At 22kW/m2, the temperature after 20 minutes is reduced with a whole 175 ◦C with
just 1 layer of intumescent paint and a further 33 ◦C with 2 layers. Applying 3 or 4 layers
decreases the temperature a further 35 ◦C, indicating that no effect is obtained by apply-
ing more than 3 layers.
The most optimal effect, in regards to paint usage, seems to be to apply 1 layer of paint,
with the option to apply a maximum of 3 layers to fulﬁl a certain requirement.
For the 45kW/m2 experiments, the effect of applying 1 layer is not as drastic as for the
22kW/m2 experiment, but it still decreases the ﬁnal temperature with 108 ◦C. Another
layer decreases it a further 80 ◦C, and a further 101 ◦C with 3 layers.
Again, applying the 4.th layer does not make a difference, if anything, a slightly higher
temperature is measured.
Generally, applying a larger number of layers of intumescent paint does not matter if
the heat ﬂux is not high enough. By applying just one layer of intumescent paint, it is
possible to more than double the time before charring occurs and triple it with another
layer.
Table 4.2: Effect of intumescent paint on temperature and onset of charring at 22kWm2
22kW/m2
20min temperature [◦C]
Effect [%]
Onset of charring [s]
Effect [%]
Virgin
500
-
370
-
1L
325
35
946
156
2L
292
42
-
-
3L
257
49
-
-
4L
259
48
-
-
40
==PAGE:55==
Table 4.3: Effect of intumescent paint on temperature and onset of charring at 32kWm2
32kW/m2
20min temperature [◦C]
Effect [%]
Onset of charring [s]
Effect [%]
Virgin
600
-
250
-
1L
427
29
516
106
2L
337
44
938
275
3L
292
51
-
-
4L
283
53
-
-
Table 4.4: Effect of intumescent paint on temperature and onset of charring at 45kWm2
45kW/m2
20min temperature [◦C]
Effect [%]
Onset of charring [s]
Effect [%]
Virgin
628
-
205
-
1L
520
17
486
128
2L
440
30
608
197
3L
339
46
964
370
4L
360
43
892
335
4.3
Topcoat effect
From the initial theory section, it was proposed that the application of a topcoat might
restrict the intumescent paint’s ability to expand, leading to a thinner char layer which
would again lead to higher temperatures in the wood as well as earlier charring. From
ﬁgures 4.4a, 4.3b, 4.3c and the following tables it can be seen that this is true for every
layer thickness and heat ﬂux. Thus applying a topcoat has a negative inﬂuence on the
temperature development at the surface of the specimen in all cases. It seems that the
intumescent paint has a better chance to react to the heat to which it is exposed, when
it is not covered with a topcoat, with the difference seemingly very dependent of the
thickness of the intumescent coating. Close to no negative effect is measured when 4
layers of intumescent paint is applied, but if fewer layers is applied the effect on surface
temperature is decreased with up to 20%, and the effect on onset of charring with up to
177%
According to the supplier a topcoat is recommended to protect the underlying intumescent
paint from e.g. rain. If the paint is applied somewhere it is not subjected to external factors
that may affect it and a certain code has to be fulﬁlled, it would be advised to not a apply
a topcoat.
41
==PAGE:56==
(a) Surface temperature 22kW/m2
(b) Surface temperature 32kW/m2
(c) Surface temperature 45kW/m2
Figure 4.4: Surface temperature of specimen with topcoat
42
==PAGE:57==
Table 4.5: Effect of intumescent paint+topcoat on temperature and onset of charring at
22kW/m2
22kW/m2
20min temperature [◦C]
Effect [%]
Onset of charring [s]
Effect [%]
Virgin
500
-
370
-
T1L
351
30
902
144
T2L
389
22
737
99
T3L
305
39
1147
210
T4L
270
46
-
-
Table 4.6: Effect of intumescent paint+topcoat on temperature and onset of charring at
32kW/m2
32kW/m2
20min temperature [◦C]
Effect [%]
Onset of charring [s]
Effect [%]
Virgin
600
-
250
-
T1L
-
-
-
-
T2L
427
29
717
187
T3L
366
39
780
212
T4L
313
48
1015
306
Table 4.7: Effect of intumescent paint+topcoat on temperature and onset of charring at
45kW/m2
45kW/m2
20min temperature [◦C]
Effect [%]
Onset of charring [s]
Effect [%]
Virgin
628
-
205
-
T1L
591
6
590
188
T2L
506
19
439
114
T3L
417
34
600
193
T4L
340
46
852
315
4.4
Temperature evolution within specimen
The temperature evolution within specimen was registered by 5 thermocouples situated
at depths of 1, 5, 10, 15 and 20mm from the surface of the specimen. Figures 4.5-4.8
illustrate the temperature proﬁles of selected specimen at 4 different times, 5, 10, 15 and
the 20 minute mark
43
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.5: In-depth temperature proﬁle after 5min
Figure 4.6: In-depth temperature proﬁle after 10min
Figure 4.7: In-depth temperature proﬁle after 15min
44
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.8: In-depth temperature proﬁle after 20min
The effect of the intumescent paint is evident at all depths and time points, though
mostly so at the end of the experiments and at the surface. The gradients of all coated
specimen are very close to being the same, indicating the effect of the intumescent paint.
The negative effect of the topcoat can only be seen for the 2 layer specimen, with the 4
layer specimen not being affected.
4.5
Charring rate and charring depth
According to DS/EN 1995-1-2 [44], the start of charring, or the location of the charring-
line, is where the 300 ◦C isotherm is measured. In these experiments, thermocouples
have been placed with a mutual distance of 5mm which makes it possible to interpolate
between thermocouple measurements and estimate the depth of charring and charring
rate. Measuring charring depth with a ruler, as described in section 2.3 proved to be too
inaccurate. This was in part because of difﬁculty in separating the charring of CLT from
the expansion of intumescent paint and pyrolysis zone which caused continuously higher
readings
As the temperature greatly decreases with the depth, as can be seen from the in-depth
temperature proﬁles in ﬁgures 4.5-4.8, it was deemed most relevant to analyse the speci-
men subjected to 45kW/m2. Figure 4.9 illustrates the charring depths and table 4.8 both
ﬁnal charring depths and charring rates
45
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.9: Charring depths following the 300 ◦C isotherm
Table 4.8: Charring depths and charring rates
Specimen
Virgin
1L
2L
3L
4L
T1L
T2L
T3L
T4L
Charring depth
[mm]
16.2
8.1
6.0
3.5
3.1
11.1
8.6
5.8
2.5
Charring rate
[mm/min]
0.98
0.49
0.36
0.2
0.19
0.67
0.52
0.35
0.15
Effect red.[%]
-
50
63
78
81
31
47
64
85
Worth noting is the fact that the reference charring rate of the virgin specimen is al-
most 1mm/min, whereas the standard Eurocode rate of charring is set to be 0.65mm/min
for CLT. Exactly 1mm/min of charring was though also measured by Maluk and Lucherini
in their experiments [28] which makes the results obtained on the safe side when compar-
ing to an ISO834 test.
Applying just 1 layer of intumescent paint reduces the charring rate with 50%, with each
additional layer lowering it further, but with a less prominent effect. Applying a topcoat
increases the charring rate with .16mm/min if one, two or three layers is applied, further
conﬁrming the trend that a topcoat has negative effects on ﬁre parameters of CLT. How-
ever this negative effect becomes smaller the more layers of intumescent paint is applied,
and is almost gone when 4 layers are applied.
46
==PAGE:61==
4.6
Ignition
As mentioned in the theory section, one of the major reasons to apply intumescent paint
to wood is to delay the time to ignition (TTI) of the wood specimen. This is to give people
inside a building more time to escape before ﬂames and critical conditions occur.
In this thesis, ignition only occurred for the virgin specimen at 32kW/m2 and for all
specimen subjected to 45kW/m2, conﬁrming the critical heat ﬂux of 28kW/m2 stated in
the theory section. Therefore, as with the charring rate, only the specimen subjected to
45kW/m2 have been analysed. In table 4.9 the ignition times and effect of intumescent
paint is presented and ﬁgure 4.10 illustrates the expansion and ignition of a test specimen.
(a) 0 sec
(b) 20 sec
(c) 30 sec
(d) 40 sec
(e) 8 min
(f) 12 min
(g) 14 min (ignition)
(h) 20 min
Figure 4.10: Expansion of intumescent paint and ignition (45kW/m2, 3 layers)
47
==PAGE:62==
Table 4.9: Ignition times
Specimen
Virgin
1L
2L
3L
4L
T1L
T2L
T3L
T4L
TTI [s]
80
160
420
750
1031
120
184
300
1020
Effect [%]
-
100
425
838
1180
50
130
275
1175
By applying just one layer of intumescent paint, it is possible to double the TTI. The
real effect though seems to come with 2 and 3 layers as these prolong the ignition time
4 times and 8 times respectively. The effect between layers seem to be almost constant
with and increase of 400 % between layers with 4 layers almost extending the TTI with
1200 %.
As with charring depth, surface temperature, and charring rate the negative effect of
using a topcoat is evident. The TTI is much lower for topcoat applied specimen, with 4
layers being the exception as ever. When investigating the specimen after end test, it was
noted that these specimen had a topcoat which was still somewhat intact, whereas the top-
coat of other specimen had crumbled from the heat. By applying 4 layers of intumescent
paint, the topcoat seems to have a much more evident effect against ignition.
4.7
Smoke production and heat release rate
The main aim of using intumescent pain as described earlier is to limit spread of ﬁre
and reduce charring of wood. However, as mentioned by John F. Krasny [59], Heat Re-
lease Rate gives indicators of smoke and toxic gas concentrations, the rate at which these
toxic gasses are transported around a building and how a material behaves during a ﬁre.
Babrauskas V. [60] went as far as to describes HRR as "The single most important vari-
able in ﬁre hazard" Thus the intumescent paint’s effect on the HRR of CLT has shortly
been analysed in this section.
As described in the state-of-the-art review by Yoshio [61], there exists a number of ways
to determine the heat release rate of a material. In this thesis the oxygen depletion method
with the measuring technique developed by Marc L. Janssen and the weight loss methods
have been used.
4.7.1
Oxygen depletion method
When conducting the experiments, the gas analyser which can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1b was
used. The gas analyser measures the amount of CO, CO2 and O2 that ﬂows through the
air duct illustrated in ﬁgure 4.11
48
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.11: Janssen measuring technique
Equation 4.2 is for estimating the HRR measured by oxygen depletion calorimetry
˙Q = E( ˙ma · Y a
O2 −· ˙me · Y e
O2)
(4.2)
E = Heat release per mass unit of oxygen consumed by fuel (13.1kJ/g O2)
˙me = Mass ﬂow rate in the exhaust duct of the calorimeter in g/s
Y a
O2 = mass fractino of oxygen in the combustion air (0.232 g/g in dry air)
Y e
O2 = mass fractino of oxygen in the combustion products in g/g
The measuring technique by Janssen proposes the following equation for HRR, with a
depletion factor φ deﬁned in [62] as the fraction of the incoming air that is fully depleted
of its oxygen during the combustion process, which is represented in equation 4.4
˙Q =

E · φ −(ECO −E)1 −φ
2
XAe
CO
XAe
O2
1
˙me
1 + φ(↵−1)
MO2
Ma
(1 −XAa
O2 )
(4.3)
φ = XAa
O2 (1 −XAe
CO2 −XAe
CO) −XAe
O2(1 −XAa
CO2)
(1 −XAe
O2 −XAe
CO2 −XAe
CO)XAa
O2
(4.4)
With the data obtained from the gas analysis through the airduct during the H-TRIS
experiments, it is possible to apply Janssens formula and calculate the heat release rate
that occurs during the experiments. Figures 4.12 and 4.13 illustrate the HRR for selected
specimen and table 4.10 the average HRR for all specimen.
49
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.12: HRR at 32kW/m2
Figure 4.13: HRR at 45kW/m2
As the H-TRIS itself also contributes to the HRR through burning propane to fuel the
heating panel, the average HRR of the initial warming up period of the H-TRIS has been
subtracted from the total HRR measured, which was around 39kW/m2.
However, it was very difﬁcult to isolate the HRR of the specimen from the HRR of the
H-TRIS, as the HRR of the H-TRIS was far from constant. This, as can be seen from
the results, had a prominent effect. Furthermore, as the results are not per specimen, but
50
==PAGE:65==
Table 4.10: Average HRR, oxygen depletion method
Average HRR
[kW/m2]
Virgin
1L
2L
3L
4L
T1L
T2L
T3L
T4L
22kW/m2
17
12
31
28
43
36
25
43
29
Effect [%]
-
30
-83
-65
-153
-112
-47
-153
-71
32kW/m2
58
45
25
20
69
28
32
84
77
Effect [%]
-
22
57
66
-19
52
45
-45
-33
45kW/m2
87
121
94
78
49
123
99
81
47
Effect [%]
-
39
-8
10
44
-41
-14
7
46
per square meter, small deviations in the H-TRIS subtraction yield more noticeable devi-
ations in the results.
From the attempt to try and isolate the HRR of the specimen from the HRR of the H-
TRIS it is not possible to conclude an effect. Another way of estimating the HRR is the
mass loss method where the specimen are weighed before and after tests, which has been
described in the following section
4.8
Mass loss method
An alternative, though not as accurate, way of measuring heat release rate is by measuring
the mass that a material loses through an experiment. The equation for HRR is then given
by equation 4.5
˙Q = ˙m · ∆Heff
(4.5)
˙m = mass loss in kg/s
∆Heff = Effective heat of combustion
According to Hadden R.M Et al. [50], the effective heat of combustion of CLT can be
assumed to be 17.5MJ/kg, however this can vary a lot between specimen.
Heat of combustion can be found through calorimetric measurements in a bombcalorime-
ter, where the CLT is burned at high pressure in pure oxygen. A previous master project
made at DTU [63], using the exact same specimen, with a moisture content of 5.75%,
measured the heat of combustion to be 18.14KJ/kg, using the bomb calorimeter.
The heat of combustion is not 100% representative of what happens in a real ﬁre though,
as it assumes that all potential energy in the material is released. Therefore a combustion
51
==PAGE:66==
efﬁciency factor, χ, is applied in order to determine the effective heat of combustion, thus
equation 4.5 can be rewritten into equation 4.6
˙Q = ˙m · ∆Hc · χ
(4.6)
From the same thesis, this was found to be 65% yielding an effective heat of combus-
tion of 11.85MJ/kg which has been used in order to calculate the heat release rates which
are shown in table 4.11
Table 4.11: Average HRR, mass loss method
Average HRR [kW/m2]
Virgin
1L
2L
3L
4L
T1L
T2L
T3L
T4L
22kW/m2
63
23
19
18
14
28
35
26
16
Effect [%]
-
63
70
71
78
56
44
59
75
32kW/m2
65
35
25
21
17
17
43
32
26
Effect [%]
-
46
62
68
74
74
34
51
60
45kW/m2
69
31
41
34
29
62
51
41
31
Effect [%]
-
55
41
51
58
10
26
41
55
These results are much more in agreement of what could be expected compared to
the results in the previous section. The average HRR of virgin specimen rises slowly
with increasing heat ﬂux, which would be expected based on the initiation of charring
described in a previous section. The effect of applying intumescent paint is very clearly
rising with thickness of layer, reducing the HRR up to 78%, and its effect reducing with
increasing heat ﬂux.
With 4 layers of intumescent paint being the exception, as was the same for charring
rates, applying a topcoat decreases the effect obtained from the intumescent paint. In
fact, it reduces the effect with up to 45% when the specimen are subjected to high heat
ﬂuxes.
4.9
Errors
Because of the accuracy needed to make the thermocouples reach exactly 1mm below
the surface, this is a factor that could have major inﬂuence on the results. Even though
great care was taken to make each drilling as precise as possible, there is always a chance
that some thermocouples were placed 2mm or more from the surface which would have
inﬂuence on the results. The heating panel of the H-TRIS was not perfectly ﬂat. This
meant that the center of the heating panel was 2 centimetres closer to the setup than the
edges of the heating panel. Ideally the heating panel would have been perfectly ﬂat. The
fact that several thermocouples around the specimen have been used to determine the
surface temperature somewhat makes up for this.
52
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The study presented in this thesis aimed to increase the knowledge about the effect of
intumescent paint applied onto Cross laminated timber elements. The approach has been
experimentally orientated, conducting 54 tests. CLT specimen, uncoated and coated with
4 different paint thicknesses, have been tested at 3 different heat ﬂuxes using the H-TRIS
setup. Half of the specimen had a topcoat applied in order to tests its inﬂuence on the
intumescent paint. The tests lasted 20 minutes, which made it possible to execute several
experiments in a relatively short amount of time, taking advantage of the high degree of
repeatability that the H-TRIS offers.
3 different heat ﬂuxes were chosen, based on complimentary experiments performed
with a mass loss cone calorimeter, as well as on other studies. The main performance-
parameters chosen to analyse have been: Surface temperature, charring rate, time to igni-
tion, onset of charring, charring depth and heat release rate.
From the results and comparison between previously mentioned parameters the following
could be concluded.
By applying just 1 layer of intumescent paint, the average surface temperature after 20
minutes dropped with 175◦C, 173 ◦C and 128 ◦C, or 45%, 29% and 17% for the three
different heat ﬂuxes, respectively. Adding another layer lowers the temperature further,
but the effect is less prominent, and close to negligible for 3 and 4 layers, unless exposed
to the highest heat ﬂux. Generally the thicker layers can better showcase their potential
temperature-reducing qualities at higher heat ﬂuxes
Adding a topcoat to the intumescent paint is meant to protect the paint from sun, rain and
generally the external environment. However, it also has a negative effect on the intumes-
cent paint’s ability to expand and thus opposes the effect obtained on the performance-
parameters mentioned earlier. Compared to specimen without topcoat, the effect of the
53
==PAGE:68==
intumescent paint on surface temperature is lowered with as much as 20%.
Onset of charring has been assumed to start at 300◦C according to the Eurocode, and
the intumescent paint also has a noticeable effect on this. The time before charring for all
cases, topcoat or not, was at least doubled compared to the virgin tests and increased with
as much as 370%. The topcoat however was able to reduce the intumescent effect up to
177%
The depth of charring and charring rate has been measured with embedded thermocou-
ples for each 5mm from the surface. Interpolating between thermocouples, the depth of
charring and subsequent charring rate have been calculated.
Applying 1 layer of intumescent paint cut both parameters in half with 2 and 3 layers
reducing it with around a further 15%. No effect came from applying a 4.th layer. A
topcoat increased the charring rate and depth, apart from when 4 layers of intumescent
paint was applied. This was credited to the fact that the topcoat for the most part stayed
intact.
One of the most important aspects that intumescent paint is meant to limit is the spread of
ﬁre which begins at ignition, thus making time to ignition (TTI) an important parameter
to limit.
From the results, the greatest effect was to be seen in this aspect. TTI was delayed as
much as 1180 seconds, or almost 20 minutes if 4 layers was applied. Even 1 layer ex-
tended the ignition time with 100%, which again was cut in half by applying a topcoat.
Lastly, the heat release rate was measured by using a gas analyser and the oxygen de-
pletion theory with Janssen’s technique. Due to the H-TRIS propane fuelled heating
panel contributing to the HRR measurements, it was not possible to deduce the HRR of
the specimen with the oxygen depletion technique.
However, using the mass loss method, though being less precise, effects of intumescent
paint could be measured. This was the most constant effect of all parameters measured,
with an average effect of 55-65%, with increasing layer thickness having very little addi-
tional effect.
During the calibration of the H-TRIS the PTHFM was tested, in order to compare it
against a regular HFM. Utilising adiabatic surface temperature and a larger surface area
than the HFM, the theory was that the PTHFM should be as reliable as the HFM. How-
ever, throughout the calibration, the PTHFM showed consistently higher heat ﬂuxes than
the HFM until reaching 27.5kW/m2 after which it was generally in good agreement. A
54
==PAGE:69==
new formula for calculating adiabatic surface temperature below 460◦C was proposed,
which yielded results identical to the ones obtained from the HFM.
5.1
Further work
As mentioned in the thesis, delamination can be a major problem when intumescent paint
is applied on Cross Laminated Timber. Delamination is already a known problem for
CLT that accelerates charring by exposing virgin wood that would otherwise be protected
by a charring layer.
This problem is emphasised when using intumescent paint, as all ﬁre protection will fall
off as soon as delamination of the ﬁrst lamellae occurs. A study investigating this problem
would beneﬁt from adding additional thermocouples such as 1 per millimetre in order to
more precisely measure the charring rates
Another interesting topic is testing intumescent paint on wood which is subjected to load.
It is known in the steel industry that intumescent paint can lose contact with steel, when
this is subjected to external forces such as compression, tension and bending.
Testing the "wrong" application of intumescent paint, such as intumescent paint meant
for steel on wood and vice versa. This is already a proposed thesis subject that could give
insight into the effects should this happen on the building site.
Finally, as the primer is not mandatory to use, it could be interesting to tests its effect. Pre-
vious tests show that intumescent paints lose a great amount of their insulation effect, if
they are applied to an existing layer of regular paint. This is because the underlying paint
begins to expand due to the heat, thus removing the intumescent paint applied above. It
would be very interesting to see if the primer would be able to negate this negative effect.
55
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Sharma Y. Engineered Wood Market Size, Share and Trends | Industry Report
2022. Last accessed 30 January 2020. URL: https://www.alliedmarketresearch.
com/engineered-wood-market.
[2]
Zendehrouhkermani F. Industry revenue of “veneer, plywood and engineered wood
products “ in the U.S. 2011-2023. Last accessed 30 January 2020. 2019. URL:
https://static1.statista.com/forecasts/907552/veneer-
plywood-and-engineered-wood-products-revenue-in-the-
us.
[3]
Jauk G. CLT market keeps growing briskly. Last accessed 30 January 2020. 2018.
URL: https://www.timber-online.net/holzprodukte/2018/
11/CLT-production-2017-growing-market.html.
[4]
Huang L et al. Carbon emission of global construction sector. Vol. 81. Elsevier
Ltd, Jan. 2018, pp. 1906–1916. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.06.001.
[5]
Liu Y et al. “Assessing cross laminated timber (CLT) as an alternative material
for mid-rise residential buildings in cold regions in China-A life-cycle assessment
approach”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 8.10 (Oct. 2016). ISSN: 20711050. DOI:
10.3390/su8101047.
[6]
Olesen M.B. Cross Laminated Timber gør bæredygtigt byggeri i træ muligt. Last
accessed 30 January 2020. 2019. URL: https://www.niras.dk/indsigt/
cross-laminated-timber-goer-hoejt-stort-og-baeredygtigt-
byggeri-i-trae-muligt/.
[7]
New Nordic Timber. In detail: Cross-laminated timber. Last accessed 30 January
2020. 2019. URL: https://newnordictimber.com/articles/in-
detail-clt.
57
==PAGE:72==
[8]
Jones C and Allen S. About Circular Ecology. Last accessed 30 January 2020. URL:
http://www.circularecology.com/about.html.
[9]
Træ.dk. CLT - Cross laminated timber - krydslamineret tømmer - Træ.dk. Last
accessed 30 January 2020. URL: https://www.trae.dk/leksikon/
clt/.
[10]
Karacabeyli E and Douglas B. CLT CROSS-LAMINATED TIMBER Handbook. US
Edition. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2013. ISBN: 978-0-86488-553-1.
[11]
Greenspec. CLT Performance Characteristics. Last accessed 30 January 2020.
2020. URL: http://www.greenspec.co.uk/building- design/
crosslam-timber-performance-characteristics/.
[12]
Density of Construction Materials in kg/m3 and lb/ft3. Last accessed 30 January
2020. URL: https://theconstructor.org/building/density-
construction-materials/13531/.
[13]
Pagnoncelli L and Morales F. Cross-laminated timber system (CLT): laboratory
and in situ measurements of airborne and impact sound insulation. Tech. rep. 2016.
[14]
Logawa. B. Improving the sound absorption of cross-laminated timber panels us-
ing resonant absorber layers. Tech. rep. 2017.
[15]
Franklin S. Mjoestaarnet by Voll Arkitekter is the now the world’s tallest timber
tower. Last accessed 30 January 2020. 2019. URL: https://archpaper.
com/2019/03/mjostarnet-by-voll-arkitekter/.
[16]
Ensuring ﬁre safety at world’s tallest timber building Mjøstårnet – Timber Con-
struction. Last accessed 30 January 2020. URL: https://www.timbermedia.
co.uk/ensuring-fire-safety-at-worlds-tallest-timber-
building-mjostarnet/.
[17]
Traﬁk- og Byggestyrelsen. Eksempelsamling om brandsikring af byggeri. 2nd ed.
Traﬁk- og Byggestyrelsen, 2016. ISBN: 9788791769733.
[18]
Sørensen L.S. Fire-safety Engineering. 1st ed. Polyteknisk Forlag, 2014.
[19]
Just A et al. “Gypsum plasterboards used as ﬁre protection-Analysis of a database”.
In: 2010. ISBN: 978-91-86319-67-0.
[20]
Trada Technology. Wood Information Sheet Flame-retardant treatments for timber
products. Tech. rep. TRADA Technology, 2013.
[21]
Vandersall H. “Intumescent coating system, their development and chemistry”. In:
Journal of Fire and Flammability 9.2 (1971), pp. 97–140.
[22]
Weil E.D. “Fire-protective and ﬂame-retardant coatings - A state-of-the-art re-
view”. In: 29.3 (May 2011), pp. 259–296. DOI: 10.1177/0734904110395469.
58
==PAGE:73==
[23]
Nørgaard K.P. “General rights Investigation of an Intumescent Coating System in
Pilot and Laboratory-scale Furnaces”. PhD thesis. DTU, 2014.
[24]
Lucherini A. Experimental study of the behaviour of steel structures protected by
different intumescent coatings and exposed to various ﬁre scenarios. Tech. rep.
DTU, 2016.
[25]
Russell L.J et al. Combining ﬁre retardant and preservative systems for timber
products in exposed applications-state of the art review Forest and Wood Products
Research and Development Corporation. Tech. rep. 2007.
[26]
Hakkarainen T. Thin thermal barriers for wood based products to improve ﬁre
resistance. Tech. rep. 2010, pp. 1–11.
[27]
Mariappan T. “Fire Retardant Coatings, New Technologies in Protective Coat-
ings”. In: ed. by Carlos Giudice and Guadalupe Canosa. IntechOpen, 2017. Chap. 6.
DOI: 10.5772/67675.
[28]
Lucherini A, Razzaque Q.S., and Maluk C. “Exploring the ﬁre behaviour of thin
intumescent coatings used on timber”. In: Fire Safety Journal 109 (Oct. 2019).
ISSN: 03797112. DOI: 10.1016/j.firesaf.2019.102887.
[29]
Bahrani B et al. “Effects of natural weathering on the ﬁre properties of intumescent
ﬁre-retardant coatings”. In: Fire and Materials 42.4 (June 2018), pp. 413–423.
ISSN: 10991018. DOI: 10.1002/fam.2506.
[30]
Xu Q et al. “Experimental study of the inﬂuence of topcoat on insulation perfor-
mance of intumescent coatings for steel structures”. In: Fire Safety Journal 101
(Oct. 2018), pp. 25–38. ISSN: 03797112. DOI: 10.1016/j.firesaf.2018.
08.006.
[31]
Wickström Ulf. “The adiabatic surface temperature and the plate thermometer”. In:
Fire Safety Science. 2011, pp. 1001–1011. DOI: 10.3801/IAFSS.FSS.10-
1001.
[32]
Wickström Ulf. Temperature calculation in ﬁre safety engineering. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, Jan. 2016, pp. 1–243. ISBN: 9783319301723. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-319-30172-3.
[33]
Wickström Ulf, Anderson J, and Sjöström J. Measuring incident heat ﬂux and adi-
abatic surface temperature with plate thermometers in ambient and high tempera-
tures. Vol. 43. 1. Jan. 2019, pp. 51–56. DOI: 10.1002/fam.2667.
[34]
Gustavsson C. The Plate thermometer heat ﬂux meter-an Accuracy and Calibration
Study. Tech. rep. Luleå University of Technology, 2017.
59
==PAGE:74==
[35]
Maluk C et al. “A Heat-Transfer Rate Inducing System (H-TRIS)Test Method”.
In: Fire Safety Journal 105 (Apr. 2019), pp. 307–319. ISSN: 03797112. DOI: 10.
1016/j.firesaf.2016.05.001.
[36]
Mindykowski P. Annex G: Fire Resistance for small scale composite specimen On
the use of the H-TRIS. Tech. rep. DTU, 2016.
[37]
Beikircher W, Hartmann P, and Kögl J. “Charring rate of intumescent ﬁre protec-
tive coated Norway spruce (Picea abies L.)” In: 2014, pp. 1–5.
[38]
Glued Laminated Timber (Glulam), Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT), Laminated
Veneer Lumber (LVL), Laminated Strand Lumber (LSL), and Parallel Strand Lum-
ber (PSL). Last accessed 30 January 2020. URL: https://ownwoodenhouse.
com/index.pl?act=PRODUCT&id=227.
[39]
Franco J.T. Is Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT) the Concrete of the Future? | Arch-
Daily. Last accessed 30 January 2020. 2019. URL: https://www.archdaily.
com/922980/is-cross-laminated-timber-clt-the-concrete-
of-the-future.
[40]
K Sanborn et al. “Ballistic performance of Cross-laminated Timber (CLT)”. In:
(2019). DOI: 10.1016/j.ijimpeng.2018.11.007.
[41]
LENO Cross Laminated Timber (CLT) ZÜBLIN Timber. Tech. rep. URL: www.
zueblin-timber.com/downloads.
[42]
Lowden L and Hull T. “Flammability behaviour of wood and a review of the meth-
ods for its reduction”. In: Fire Science Reviews 2.1 (2013), p. 4. ISSN: 2193-0414.
DOI: 10.1186/2193-0414-2-4.
[43]
Bartlett. I.A et al. “Analysis of cross-laminated timber upon exposure to non-
standard heating conditions”. In: 2015. URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/270875737_Analysis_of_cross-laminated_
timber_upon_exposure_to_non-standard_heating_conditions.
[44]
EN 1995-1-2: Eurocode 5: Design of timber structures - Part 1-2: General - Struc-
tural ﬁre design. Tech. rep.
[45]
Bartlett A.I, Hadden R.M., and Bisby L.A. A Review of Factors Affecting the Burn-
ing Behaviour of Wood for Application to Tall Timber Construction. Vol. 55. 1.
Springer New York LLC, Jan. 2019. DOI: 10.1007/s10694-018-0787-y.
[46]
Cachim P.B. and Franssen J.M. “Assessment of Eurocode 5 charring rate calcu-
lation methods”. In: Fire Technology 46.1 (2010), pp. 169–181. ISSN: 00152684.
DOI: 10.1007/s10694-009-0092-x.
60
==PAGE:75==
[47]
Lineham S.A. et al. “Structural response of ﬁre-exposed cross-laminated timber
beams under sustained loads”. In: Fire Safety Journal 85 (Oct. 2016), pp. 23–34.
ISSN: 03797112. DOI: 10.1016/j.firesaf.2016.08.002.
[48]
Silcock G.W.H. and Shields T.J. “A protocol for analysis of time-to-ignition data
from bench scale tests”. In: Fire Safety Journal 24.1 (1995), pp. 75–95. ISSN:
03797112. DOI: 10.1016/0379-7112(95)00003-C.
[49]
JASKÓŁOWSKI W, OGRODNIK P, and CHMIELEWSKA A. “The study of time
to ignition of woods under external heat ﬂux by piloted ignition and autoignition”.
In: (2014).
[50]
Hadden R.M et al. “Effects of exposed cross laminated timber on compartment ﬁre
dynamics”. In: Fire Safety Journal 91 (July 2017), pp. 480–489. ISSN: 03797112.
DOI: 10.1016/j.firesaf.2017.03.074.
[51]
Bartlett A et al. “Fire-Induced Delamination of Cross-Laminated Timber”. In:
2015.
[52]
USDA Forest Service and Forest Products Laboratory. Wood Handbook, Wood as
an Engineering Material. Tech. rep. 2010.
[53]
Intumescent Coatings - Performance of Intumescent Fire Protection Coatings in
Non-Standard Heating Scenarios. Last accessed 30 January 2020. URL: http://
playingwithfires.weebly.com/intumescent-coatings.html.
[54]
Helsel J. Intumescent Coatings: A Review of Current and New Technologies. Last
accessed 30 January 2020. 2016. URL: https://kta.com/kta-university/
intumescent-coatings-technologies-review/.
[55]
Camino G, Costa L, and Martinasso G. “Intumescent ﬁre-retardant systems”. In:
Polymer Degradation and Stability 23.4 (1989), pp. 359–376. ISSN: 01413910.
DOI: 10.1016/0141-3910(89)90058-X.
[56]
Scandi Supply. HW-systemet Vandbaseret brandmaling til trae. Tech. rep.
[57]
DBI and NPI. Brandklasser. 2008.
[58]
Intumescent Fire Resistive coating Thickness Measurement. Last accessed 30 Jan-
uary 2020. URL: https://www.defelsko.com/resources/intumescent-
fire-resistive-coating-thickness-measurement.
[59]
Krasny J.F., Parker W.J., and Babrauskas V. “Fundamentals”. In: Fire Behavior
of Upholstered Furniture and Mattresses. Elsevier, 2001, pp. 18–82. DOI: 10.
1016/B978-081551457-2.50003-6.
61
==PAGE:76==
[60]
Babrauskas V and Peacock R.D. “Heat release rate: The single most important
variable in ﬁre hazard”. In: Fire Safety Journal 18.3 (1992), pp. 255–272. ISSN:
03797112. DOI: 10.1016/0379-7112(92)90019-9.
[61]
Tsuchiya Y. “Methods of determining heat release rate: State-of-the-art”. In: Fire
Safety Journal 5.1 (1982), pp. 49–57. ISSN: 03797112. DOI: 10.1016/0379-
7112(82)90006-6.
[62]
Biteau H et al. “Calculation Methods for the Heat Release Rate of Materials of
Unknown Composition”. In: (2008). DOI: 10.3801/IAFSS.FSS.9-1165.
[63]
Werenberg S.K. and Johansen M.S. Experimental investigation of ﬁre properties
for CLT with ﬁre retardant. 2019.
62
==PAGE:77==
Appendices
63
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Specimen ID’s with relevant parameters noted before and after test
65
==PAGE:80==
Specimen ID
Weight
[g]
Moisture content
[%]
Flux
[kW/m2]
Amount of layers
 of IP
Topcoat
Weight
[g]
Mass loss 
[g]
Foam depth
[mm]
Charring depth 
[mm]
V-Flux1 (1)
1045.30
6.12
22.00
0.00
0.00
553.40
491.90
-
25.00
V-Flux1 (2)
1053.35
7.00
22.00
0.00
0.00
751.00
302.35
-
20.00
L1-Flux1 (1)
1044.00
6.90
22.00
1.00
0.00
894.00
150.00
2.00
0.80
L1-Flux1 (2)
1143.00
6.30
22.00
1.00
0.00
1003.00
140.00
2.00
0.50
L1-T-Flux1 (1)
1006.00
6.43
22.00
1.00
1.00
844.00
162.00
2.00
0.50
L1-T-Flux1 (2)
1084.00
5.00
22.00
1.00
1.00
894.00
190.00
2.00
0.40
L2-Flux1 (1)
1125.00
7.40
22.00
2.00
0.00
1029.00
96.00
10.00
2.00
L2-Flux1 (2)
1199.00
6.20
22.00
2.00
0.00
1051.00
148.00
7.00
2.00
L2-T-Flux1 (1)
1120.00
7.90
22.00
2.00
1.00
912.00
208.00
0.00
3.00
L2-T-Flux1 (2)
1125.00
7.80
22.00
2.00
1.00
896.00
229.00
0.00
3.00
L3-Flux1 (1)
1233.00
6.10
22.00
3.00
0.00
1122.00
111.00
2.00
1.00
L3-Flux1 (2)
1178.00
7.50
22.00
3.00
0.00
1057.00
121.00
1.60
1.00
L3-T-Flux1 (1)
1160.00
7.40
22.00
3.00
1.00
1000.00
160.00
5.00
4.00
L3-T-Flux1 (2)
1160.00
6.10
22.00
3.00
1.00
990.00
170.00
3.00
4.00
L4-Flux1 (1)
1040.00
6.10
22.00
4.00
0.00
940.00
100.00
15.00
1.00
L4-Flux1 (2)
1030.00
6.40
22.00
4.00
0.00
951.00
79.00
20.00
0.00
L4-T-Flux1 (1)
1118.00
7.20
22.00
4.00
1.00
1020.00
98.00
15.00
1.00
L4-T-Flux1 (2)
1061.00
5.10
22.00
4.00
1.00
962.00
99.00
12.00
1.00
V-Flux2 (1)
1242.00
7.20
32.00
0.00
0.00
1188.00
54.00
-
30.00
V-Flux2 (2)
978.00
6.80
32.00
0.00
0.00
828.00
150.00
-
28.00
L1-Flux2 (1)
933.00
6.10
32.00
1.00
0.00
717.00
216.00
3.00
9.00
L1-Flux2 (2)
1045.00
6.40
32.00
1.00
0.00
821.00
224.00
5.00
7.00
L1-T-Flux2 (1)
1160.00
5.00
32.00
1.00
1.00
1064.00
96.00
0.00
3.00
L1-T-Flux2 (2)
1150.00
5.00
32.00
1.00
1.00
1035.00
115.00
0.00
3.00
L2-Flux2 (1)
1056.00
6.10
32.00
2.00
0.00
908.00
148.00
12.00
3.00
L2-Flux2 (2)
938.00
6.20
32.00
2.00
0.00
765.00
173.00
11.00
6.00
L2-T-Flux2 (1)
1217.00
6.20
32.00
2.00
1.00
948.00
269.00
0.00
5.00
L2-T-Flux2 (2)
1122.00
6.20
32.00
2.00
1.00
843.00
279.00
1.00
7.00
Before test
After test
==PAGE:81==
L3-Flux2 (1)
1104.00
6.10
32.00
3.00
0.00
992.00
112.00
15.00
3.00
L3-Flux2 (2)
1187.00
6.10
32.00
3.00
0.00
1034.00
153.00
13.00
5.00
L3-T-Flux2 (1)
969.00
5.00
32.00
3.00
1.00
759.00
210.00
1.00
10.00
L3-T-Flux2 (2)
1051.00
5.00
32.00
3.00
1.00
857.00
194.00
3.00
9.00
L4-Flux2 (1)
1080.00
6.20
32.00
4.00
0.00
962.00
118.00
12.00
2.00
L4-Flux2 (2)
1136.00
7.50
32.00
4.00
0.00
1042.00
94.00
25.00
1.00
L4-T-Flux2 (1)
1129.00
6.10
32.00
4.00
1.00
968.00
161.00
6.00
4.00
L4-T-Flux2 (2)
1124.00
6.50
32.00
4.00
1.00
960.00
164.00
7.00
5.00
V-Flux3 (1)
1050.00
6.20
45.00
0.00
0.00
940.00
110.00
-
1.00
V-Flux3 (2)
1070.00
6.20
45.00
0.00
0.00
965.00
105.00
-
1.50
L1-Flux3 (1)
1010.00
6.40
45.00
1.00
0.00
818.00
192.00
3.00
3.00
L1-Flux3 (2)
1035.00
6.10
45.00
1.00
0.00
1008.00
27.00
5.00
1.00
L1-T-Flux3 (1)
1003.00
6.10
45.00
1.00
1.00
951.00
52.00
0.00
12.00
L1-T-Flux3 (2)
1168.00
6.10
45.00
1.00
1.00
777.00
391.00
0.00
2.00
L2-Flux3 (1)
1030.00
6.10
45.00
2.00
0.00
773.00
257.00
5.00
12.00
L2-Flux3 (2)
1231.00
6.10
45.00
2.00
0.00
1170.00
61.00
9.00
1.00
L2-T-Flux3 (1)
1152.00
6.30
45.00
2.00
1.00
827.00
325.00
0.00
10.00
L2-T-Flux3 (2)
1070.00
6.10
45.00
2.00
1.00
1034.00
36.00
2.00
2.00
L3-Flux3 (1)
1776.00
6.10
45.00
3.00
0.00
961.00
815.00
7.00
6.00
L3-Flux3 (2)
1116.00
6.20
45.00
3.00
0.00
1000.00
116.00
7.00
4.00
L3-T-Flux3 (1)
1027.00
6.20
45.00
3.00
1.00
770.00
257.00
3.00
10.00
L3-T-Flux3 (2)
1090.00
6.30
45.00
3.00
1.00
1043.00
47.00
8.00
1.00
L4-Flux3 (1)
1071.00
6.20
45.00
4.00
0.00
888.00
183.00
13.00
8.00
L4-Flux3 (2)
1094.00
6.30
45.00
4.00
0.00
958.00
136.00
11.00
2.00
L4-T-Flux3 (1)
1137.00
7.30
45.00
4.00
1.00
942.00
195.00
8.00
5.00
L4-T-Flux3 (2)
1176.00
7.20
45.00
4.00
1.00
1116.00
60.00
15.00
1.00
V full flux 3
1100.00
6.30
45.00
0.00
0.00
666.00
434.00
-
35.00
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
Appendix B
In this section, the way the experiments have been conducted has been de-
scribed.
Initial preparation
First of all, the H-TRIS setup was placed under the large hood in the Fire-
Lab. Next, a 25x25cm hole was cut in a non-combustible board to facilitate
the specimen. This non-combustible board was then securely fastened to
the test frame. On the H-TRIS, distances were measured from the heat-
ing panel to the front of the non-combustible board and these were then
marked with tape.
Pre-test
• Connect the H-TRIS to gas and power and open the 5 gas valves
• Insert thermocouples into specimen and insert specimen into hole in
non-combustible board
• Cover the specimen with another non-combustible board
• Start up the H-TRIS with BI at 10% increasing to 50% and letting it
heat up for 5 minutes
69
==PAGE:84==
• While H-TRIS heats up, LabView is initiated. Ports utilised for mea-
surements are activated.
• H-TRIS is rolled into predeﬁned position after having heated up
• Camera, large hood and LabView are started.
• Finally the non-combustible board is removed and thus the experi-
ment has started.
During test
• Note down something unusual happens in order to explain any devi-
ation of expected results.
• Be on the ready with water diffuser, should specimen fall down.
• Continuously check LabView results during test in order to ﬁnd pos-
sible errors
• After 20 minutes of test, the H-TRIS is turned of and rolled back.
Post-test
• The camera is turned of
• The datalogger was allowed to run for about 3-5 minutes after stop-
ping H-TRIS, in order for the gas analyser to measure post-test, after
which it was turned off.
• Using ﬁre gloves and mask, the specimen and thermocouples were
removed.
• Pictures were taken of each specimen
• Mass of specimen, expansion of intumescent layer and depth of char-
ring was measured.
70
==PAGE:85==
• If being the last experiment of the day, the gas and power supply to
the H-TRIS is turned off.
• Data from LabView is saved
• The large hood is turned off
Notes to setup during experiments
One major disruption factor during the experiments were the non-combustible
insulation boards’ tendency to crack when subjected to high temperatures.
After about 4-5 experiments cracks like can be seen in ﬁgure 3.8a would
start to form around the cut out square and a few experiments later would
fall apart. This meant that a lot of time was used in cutting out additional
boards. After a visit to DBI and talking with previous students conduct-
ing experiments on CLT as well, they could conﬁrm that they had exactly
the same problem. For upcoming experiments, another material should be
used.
Another problem during testing was the fact that not all CLT specimen
were cut exactly out to be 25x25cm, but some were a bit wider and some
a bit slimmer. This posed as a problem for the cut out as too big specimen
would not ﬁt and had to be honed. Too slim specimen meant that charring
and ignition could occur on the side of the specimen as these would be
exposed. A solution was made as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6b. By cutting
the hole two centimeters larger on either side, thus 27x27cm and adding a
protection cover of 23x23cm, all specimen were able to be ﬁtted quickly.
71
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
Appendix C
Calculation of primer, paint and topcoat usage as an alternative to the
Posisector 6000
73
==PAGE:88==
(6)
(6)
(1)
(1)
(4)
(4)
(3)
(3)
(2)
(2)
(5)
(5)
Paint usage calculation
The density of the primer is 1.05g/cm^3 thus, which in g/l is
1.05 1000
1050.00
Thus 1050g/l
If the layer according to the producer has to be applied in 0.1 liter per m^2, the following amount of grams
for 1 layer of primer is needed
1050 g
L
0.1 L
m2
105.0
m2
 g
Thus 105g/m^2
The folliowing amount of square meters is each specimen
0.25 0.25
0.0625
Thus the following amount of grams to fulfill the requirement of 1 layer of primer is needed
105 g
m2
0.01m2
1.05 g
The same formula is then used for the intumescent paint
The density of the intumescent paint is 1.35g/cm^3 thus, which in g/l is
1.35 1000
1350.00
Thus 1350g/l
If the 1 layer uses 0.125 liter per m^2, to use this many grams for 1 layer
1350 g
L
0.125 L
m2
168.750
m2
 g
Thus 168.750g/m^2
==PAGE:89==
(10)
(10)
(7)
(7)
(12)
(12)
(8)
(8)
(9)
(9)
(11)
(11)
Again the same specimen size yields 
0.25 0.25
0.0625
Square meters, thus the following amount of grams to fulfill the requirement of 1 layer of intumescent 
paint is
168.750 g
m2
0.0625m2
10.5468750 g
The same formula is then used for the topcoat paint
The density of the topcoat paint is 1.05g/cm^3 thus, which in g/l is
1.05 1000
1050.00
Thus 1050g/l
If the 1 layer uses 0.1 liter per m^2, to use this many grams for 1 layer
1050 g
L
0.1 L
m2
105.0
m2
 g
Thus 105g/m^2
The size of the specimen is
0.25 0.25
0.0625
Square meters, thus the following amount of grams to fulfill the requirement of 1 layer of topcoat is 
needed
105 g
m2
0.0625m2
6.5625 g
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Appendix D
Calibration curve of the mass loss cone calorimeter
Figure 1: Mass loss cone calorimeter calibration curve
77
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
Appendix E
Thermocouple measurements for all experiments
Figure 2: 22kW/m2 virgin
79
==PAGE:94==
Figure 3: 22kW/m2 1L
Figure 4: 22kW/m2 2L
80
==PAGE:95==
Figure 5: 22kW/m2 3L
Figure 6: 22kW/m2 4L
81
==PAGE:96==
Figure 7: 22kW/m2 T1L
Figure 8: 22kW/m2 T2L
82
==PAGE:97==
Figure 9: 22kW/m2 T3L
Figure 10: 22kW/m2 T4L
83
==PAGE:98==
Figure 11: 32kW/m2 virgin
Figure 12: 32kW/m2 1L
84
==PAGE:99==
Figure 13: 32kW/m2 2L
Figure 14: 32kW/m2 3L
85
==PAGE:100==
Figure 15: 32kW/m2 4L
Figure 16: 32kW/m2 T1L
86
==PAGE:101==
Figure 17: 32kW/m2 T2L
Figure 18: 32kW/m2 T3L
87
==PAGE:102==
Figure 19: 32kW/m2 T4L
Figure 20: 45kW/m2 virgin
88
==PAGE:103==
Figure 21: 45kW/m2 1L
Figure 22: 45kW/m2 2L
89
==PAGE:104==
Figure 23: 45kW/m2 3L
Figure 24: 45kW/m2 4L
90
==PAGE:105==
Figure 25: 45kW/m2 T1L
Figure 26: 45kW/m2 T2L
91
==PAGE:106==
Figure 27: 45kW/m2 T3L
Figure 28: 45kW/m2 T4L
92
