==PAGE:1==
DTU Bioengineering, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
Master Thesis
35 ECTS
Towards high-throughput assay
platforms for immunogenicity
assessment of peptide-based drugs
Camilla Marie Weis-Banke
s144527
Novo Nordisk, Department 2431.04 Immunogenicity Assay Development
Submission date: 05-Feb-2020
Supervisors, Novo Nordisk: Senior Scientists Kirsten Reichwald & Michael K. Rasmussen
Supervisor, DTU: Professor Peter M. H. Heegaard
==PAGE:2==
1
ABSTRACT
1
Abstract
Patient safety is essential within the pharmaceutical industry. Mainly to ensure the well-being of the
patients, but also because the approval of a drug by health authorities depends on it. Immununogenicity
assessment, which includes detection and characterisation of anti-drug antibodies, is an integrated part
of the safety section of a drug application. If anti-drug antibodies occur, these can have a range of eﬀects
varying from no impact to severe life-threatening conditions such as a severe systemic hypersensitivity
reaction, loss of drug eﬃcacy, or cross-reactivity to an endogenous counterpart. Consequently, the devel-
opment and validation of assays that can provide a reliable assessment of an anti-drug antibody response
is important. To avoid delays in the strict timelines for non-clinical and clinical studies, which are a result
of the competitive pharmaceutical industry, it is desirable to have high-throughput assays. Assays used
for detection of anti-drug antibodies against peptide-based drugs are often based on radioactivity and
require a lot of manual work. Preferably, these assays should be transformed into plate format to allow
for automation. If possible, the use of radioactivity should be avoided.
This project investigated two diﬀerent assay platforms, a plate-based radioimmunoassay and an electro-
chemiluminescence assay, and evaluated their applicability for high-throughput assessment of anti-drug
antibodies against an insulin analogue. The development of the plate-based radioimmunoassay involved
transformation of an existing radioimmunoassay conducted in tubes to a plate format by the use of liquid
scintillation counting. Following the satisfactory transformation, certain assay reagents were tested and
a proper detector protocol with incorporation of crosstalk correction was established. The electrochemi-
luminescence assay involved testing of sample to acid ratios, conjugate concentrations, incubation time,
and hook eﬀect. Following the successful development of the assays, these were compared based on assay
performance parameters including sensitivity, drug tolerance, drug interference, and capability to detect
all clinically relevant antibodies. The assays performed almost equally good in terms of assay sensitivity,
drug tolerance, and interference from drug. However, the electrochemiluminescence assay was not able to
detect all clinically relevant antibodies due to epitope shielding, which makes it unsuitable for monitor-
ing immunogenicity. Thus, the plate-based radioimmunoassay currently seems to be the best choice for
high-throughout assessment of anti-drug antibodies against peptide-based drugs.
Page 1 of 66
==PAGE:3==
2
PREFACE
2
Preface
Since I attended the ”Assay Technology” and ”Immunology” course at Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) followed by ”Advanced Course in Immunology” in Boston in 2018, I have been eager to learn
even more about immunology and technologies applied within the immunological ﬁeld. In August 2018, I
was fortunate to be employed as an intern in Immunogenicity Assessment (after September 2018 named
Immunogenicity Assay Development) at Novo Nordisk for four months where I worked on a new single
molecule counting technology from Merck known as SMCxPRO. My employment as intern was extended
for six months which gave me the opportunity to obtain a greater knowledge about immunogenicity
assessment and additionally, it gave me the chance to make initial proof-of-concept experiments with
plate-based radioimmunoassay (RIA). Since 05-Aug-2019 and six months onwards I have been a master
thesis student in the department.
This master thesis project, which was conducted in a collaboration between DTU and Novo Nordisk, con-
stitutes the completion of ﬁve and a half years of studying at DTU to obtain a MSc degree in Pharmaceuti-
cal Design and Engineering. As indicated by the project title, ”Towards high-throughput assay platforms
for immunogenicity assessment of peptide-based drugs”, the purpose of the master thesis project was
to investigate and develop high-throughput assay platforms for detection of anti-drug antibodies (ADAs)
against peptide-based drugs. The main objective of the project was to develop and optimise a plate-based
RIA. Another project objective was to develop a bridging electrochemiluminescence (ECL) assay using
Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) if speciﬁc chemical labelling of a peptide-based drug was possible. Immuno-
genicity assessment constitutes an important part of safety monitoring and therefore has to comply with
strict guidelines that are issued by health authorities such as U.S. Food & Drug Administration (FDA)
or European Medicines Agency (EMA). Another project objective was to assess important validation
parameters of the developed assays, according to current guidelines. Furthermore, the assay performance
of the developed assays were compared and evaluated using commercially available samples from type 1
diabetic (T1D) individuals.
The thesis starts with a background section which introduces the reader to important principles within
immunogenicity assessment such as general immunogenicity, assay types, and a presentation of current
guidelines. The thesis focuses on immunogenicity assessment during drug development rather than basic
immunology and therefore, it only contains a short review of the immunological background behind an
anti-drug antibody (ADA) response.
The results from the development of the plate-based RIA and
a bridging ECL assay will constitute the main part of the thesis.
Furthermore, the results from the
assessment of important assay validation parameters will be examined and the two assay platforms will
be compared. Naturally, a discussion of the results and comparison to other studies is included. In the
end, a conclusion and future perspectives wraps up the project.
Page 2 of 66
==PAGE:4==
2
PREFACE
From my very ﬁrst day in Immunogenicity Assessment I have been grateful for the great atmosphere within
the departments which can be attributed to all my helpful, kind, smiling, and intelligent colleagues. Each
and everyone have been keen on answering the questions I had throughout the process which is very nice
for a student who starts as a rookie within the ﬁeld of immunogenicity assessment. Additionally, my
colleagues have given me moral support and created physical surroundings that have led to a positive
learning environment. Thank you to each and everyone in department 2431.04 and 2431.05 for being so
great colleagues.
My two supervisors from Novo Nordisk, Senior Scientist Kirsten Reichwald and Senior Scientist Michael
Koefoed Rasmussen, have contributed with indispensable help, support, inputs, and guidance throughout
my time at Novo Nordisk. For that reason I would like to express my gratitude for the exceptional eﬀort
you have put into my project - it is truly appreciated! A special thank should also be given for Manager
Madeleine Dahlb¨ack for allowing me to conduct my master thesis project within the department.
Owing to Peter Heegaard, my supervisor from DTU, this master thesis project has become a reality and
thus, Peter deserves a thank you for the supervision throughout the project period. Additionally, I think
it is appropriate to thank my ﬁanc´e and family for bearing over with me for the last six months where
this master thesis project has taken a lot of my time and thoughts.
Last but not least I would like to express a huge gratitude to Senior Principal Scientist Lauge Sch¨aﬀer
from the Research Chemistry department. Lauge worked hard on the alternative chemical labelling of
the peptide-based drug so that I could experiment with a bridging immunoassay format. Unfortunately,
Lauge fought against cancer and passed away 27-Aug-2019. He was employed at Novo Nordisk for more
than 35 years and held a huge amount of knowledge and experience with peptide-based drugs; a knowledge
and experience that is indispensable for my master thesis project and for Novo Nordisk in the future. A
huge thank you should be given to Alice Ravn Madsen from Research Chemistry who was very kind to
keep on working on the labelling so that a bridging ECL assay could be investigated.
Camilla Marie Weis-Banke
s144527
Page 3 of 66
==PAGE:5==
3
ABBREVIATIONS
3
Abbreviations
%B/T
%Bound/Total
125I
Iodine-125
3H
Tritium
ADA
Anti-Drug Antibody
ADAs
Anti-Drug Antibodies
APC
Antigen Presenting Cell
BLA
Biologics License Application
CPM
Counts Per Minute
ECL
ElectroChemiLuminescence
ELISA
Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay
EMA
European Medicines Agency
FDA
U.S. Food & Drug Administration
HLA
Human Leukocyte Antigen
HRP
Horse Radish Peroxidase
ISI
Integrated Summary of Immunogenicity
LC-MS
Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
mAbs
Monoclonal Antibodies
MAD
Median Absolute Deviation
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MRD
Minimal Required Dilution
MSD
Meso Scale Discovery
pAb
Polyclonal Antibody
PEG
PolyEthylene Glycol
QCs
Quality Controls
QC high
High positive Quality Control
QC low
Low positive Quality Control
QC neg
Negative Quality Control
rHuEPO
Recombinant Human ErythroPOietin
RIA
RadioImmunoAssay
Ru(bpy)2+
3
Ruthenium(II) tris-bipyridine
SD
Standard Deviation
SPR
Surface Plasmon Resonance
T1D
Type 1 Diabetic
TFH
T follicular helper
TPA
Tripropylamine
UPLC
Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography
Page 4 of 66
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Preface
2
3
Abbreviations
4
4
Introduction
7
5
Introduction to immunogenicity assessment
8
5.1
Immunogenicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.1.1
Cellular and molecular mechanisms of immunogenicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.1.2
Factors inﬂuencing immunogenicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.1.3
Prediction and mitigation of immunogenicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Immunogenicity assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.2.1
Tier 1 - Screening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.2.2
Tier 2 - Conﬁrmation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2.3
Tier 3 - Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.4
Immunoassays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.5
Parameters assessed during development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Validation of immunoassays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3.1
Cut-point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3.2
Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3.3
Drug tolerance and drug interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.4
Other assay validation parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3.5
Assay controls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.6
A harmonised immunogenicity assessment approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Introduction to utilised assays
26
6.1
Radioimmunoassay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
RIA in plate format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
Electrochemiluminescence assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4
Conjugation strategy for an insulin analogue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Results
31
7.1
RIA in plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.1.1
Downscaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.1.2
Switching to liquid scintillation counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.1.3
Assay optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.1.4
Assay performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Electrochemiluminescence assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2.1
Assay development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2.2
Assay performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Page 5 of 66
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
7.3
Comparison of RIA in plate format and ECL assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Discussion
46
9
Conclusion
51
10 Materials and methods
52
10.1 Radioimmunoassay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.1.1 Materials and technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.1.2 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.2 Electrochemiluminescense assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.2.1 Materials and technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.2.2 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.3 Statistical analysis and software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
11 Appendix
61
11.1 Conjugation strategy of insulin 965 with biotin or sulfo-tag
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
11.2 Pellet opaqueness experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
11.3 Detector protocol assay principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
11.4 Development of the electrochemiluminescence assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Page 6 of 66
==PAGE:8==
4
INTRODUCTION
4
Introduction
Suddenly, Matthew starts to feel dizzy and fatigue. His head feels like it is about to explode. As the
symptoms continue for several days, Matthew decides to see his doctor. Several blood samples, a bone
marrow aspirate, and numerous doctor visits later, the diagnosis is clear; Matthew has developed pure red
cell aplasia. Back in May 1995 Matthew was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and has since then
received subcutaneous administrations of recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO), known as epoetin
alfa (Eprex®), supplied by Ortho-Biotech as treatment of the anemia that is often related to chronic renal
failure. The tests reveal that Matthew has developed antibodies against the rHuEPO that is administered
to compensate for the low number of red blood cells. However, not only do the antibodies eradicate the ad-
ministered rHuEPO - they also neutralise the endogenous counterpart. Before administration of rHuEPO
Matthew had low levels of erythropoietin in his body but now this level is negligible - all of this owing to
antibodies being both cross-reactive and drug-neutralising [1–3].
Unfortunately, other chronic kidney disease patients suﬀer the same fate as Matthew. Research groups
seek to identify potential explanations for the development of anti-rHuEPO antibodies [3, 4]. A change in
a stabiliser is identiﬁed as the root cause. Ortho-Biotech, who supplies Eprex® for Matthew, has changed
their formulation to consist of Tween 80 (polysorbate 80) instead of human serum albumin which was
done upon request from the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal products in order to avoid
potential contamination by Creutzfeld-Jacob disease-causing prions or HIV [5]. The changed formulation
has resulted in the formation of ADAs.
This ﬁctitious tale, based on a true story, about Matthew is presented to emphasise the importance of
immunogenicity assessment.
The ﬁrst biopharmaceutical was launched back in 1982 and since then, many more biopharmaceuticals
have been developed and reached the market [6, 7]. In 2018, the number of individual biopharmaceuticals
having a current active license in Europe and/or USA totals 316 [8]. Unfortunately, administration of bio-
pharmaceuticals comes with a risk of unwanted immunogenicity, more speciﬁcally production of ADAs. In
fact, the majority of biological drug products causes ADAs. However, the clinical eﬀects of these vary very
much from no clinical eﬀects to more serious clinical consequences such as loss of eﬃcacy, neutralisation of
an endogenous factor, or hypersensitivity reactions. Prediction, detection, and characterisation of ADAs
is thus of great importance during drug development, clinical trials, and post-marketing surveillance.
The ﬁrst guidelines on immunogenicity assessment issued by health authorities, including EMA and
FDA, were published in 2007 and 2014, respectively [9, 10].
The objective of the guidelines was to
standardise immunogenicity assessment across pharmaceutical companies thereby ensuring appropriate
detection, measurement, and characterisation of ADAs. Scientiﬁc challenges in interpretation of results
was a widespread issue before guidelines were implemented [11]. Today immunogenicity testing is based
on a multi-tiered approach starting with a screening assay having a false positive rate on 5%. If a sample
is detected antibody positive during screening, a conﬁrmatory assay is carried out. Samples that are
conﬁrmed positive are characterised further in a cell-based neutralisation assay [12, 13].
This master thesis project focuses on the development of high-throughput screening assays for a peptide-
based drug.
Page 7 of 66
==PAGE:9==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
5
Introduction to immunogenicity assessment
Immunogenicity in general, immunogenicity assessment, and the guidelines that describe the assessment
of immunogenicity throughout the drug life cycle are some of the topics that will be described in this
section. Section 5.3 explains some of the important assay performance parameters that are necessary
for developing a valid assay. These assay parameters are important to understand as they disclose assay
performance and applicability.
5.1
Immunogenicity
Immunogenicity is the ability of a molecule or substance to provoke an immune response [13]. Biophar-
maceuticals provide targeted and highly eﬀective treatment for numerous life-threatening and chronic
diseases [14]. However, as opposed to small molecule drugs, biopharmaceuticals are often large and highly
complex resulting in an increased risk of immunogenicity [15]. Immunogenicity is exploited in vaccina-
tion, where the development of a strong immune response is important for adequate protection against
certain diseases. However, an unwanted immune response against a biopharmaceutical can be potentially
life-threatening, as illustrated by the case of Matthew in section 4.
5.1.1
Cellular and molecular mechanisms of immunogenicity
ADAs are developed as a result of a humoral immune response. Prediction, monitoring, and characteri-
sation of ADAs is of great importance during drug development, clinical trials, and also post-marketing.
To ensure safety and eﬃcacy in the patients, possible immunogenicity risks should be identiﬁed already
during early research.
Two typical ways of ADA generation exists; a T cell dependent or independent humoral immune response.
A T cell independent response is generated as B cells recognise a polyvalent antigen (repeated motif) in
the biopharmaceutical which will lead to a transient production of low-aﬃnity antibodies that generally
does not lead to the generation of memory B cells. On the other hand, a T cell dependent response,
which involves antigen presenting cells (APCs), T cells, cytokines, and B cells, results in the generation of
high-aﬃnity, long lasting antibodies due to aﬃnity maturation, isotype switching, and the development
of B cell memory. The activation of T cells that subsequently can lead to secretion of ADAs requires the
following steps:
• Uptake of drug by an antigen presenting cell (APC).
• Proteolytic processing of the drug into peptides.
• Binding of peptides to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules that are presented
on the surface of the APC.
• Engagement of CD4+ T cell having a T-cell receptor (TCR) speciﬁc for the peptide-MHC-class II
complex presented by the APC.
• T cell activation, proliferation, and diﬀerentiation due to upregulated expression of co-stimulatory
molecules on the T cell and APC.
The subsequent activation of B cells requires T follicular helper (TFH) cells. This collaboration between
TFH cells and antigen-speciﬁc B cells takes place in germinal centers of lymphoid tissues. Upon successful
Page 8 of 66
==PAGE:10==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
B cell activation, proliferation, and diﬀerentiation, the B cells diﬀerentiate into either antibody-secreting
plasma cells or memory B cells (ﬁgure 1) [14, 16–19].
Non-specific uptake
and digestion of
antigen by APC
Presentation of
peptide-MHC-class II
and engagement of
CD4 + T cell
APC
Cytokines
APC
Naïve
T cell
MHC
class II
CD4
TCR
CD80/CD28
Active T
helper cell
CD40/CD40L
MHC
class II
CD4
TCR
T-cell epitope
Antigen
Naïve 
B cell
Specific uptake and
processing of cognate
antigen by naïve B cell 
B cell
epitope
Memory T
helper cell
Activated B cell
Germinal
center B cell
Plasma
B cell
IgM
TFH
Follicular
DC
Affinity
maturation
Memory B
cell
Plasma
B cell
IgG
Figure 1: Induction of na¨ıve B cells to produce ADAs requires coordination of several events. The ﬁrst event
is uptake and proteolytic processing of the antigen by APC followed by presentation of the peptide-MHC class II to na¨ıve
T cells. The interaction of the T cell receptor and peptide-MHC class II complex should be accompanied by co-stimulatory
molecules to activate the na¨ıve T cell and diﬀerentiate them into T helper cells that produce an array of cytokines with
various activities. The activation of a na¨ıve B cell requires interaction between the B cell receptor (IgM or IgD) and the
cognate antigen whereupon the antigen-Ig complex is internalised, processed, and presented on MHC class II on the B cell
surface. Interaction between the peptide-MHC class II and T cell receptor of the T helper cell and concurrent delivery
of co-stimulatory molecules drive the B cells to become activated and diﬀerentiate into germinal center B cells or plasma
cells secreting low-aﬃnity antibodies. The B cells that enter the germinal center undergo aﬃnity maturation and isotype
switching which ultimately leads to memory B cells and plasma cells producing higher aﬃnity antibodies. Figure adapted
from [17, 20].
ADAs are binding antibodies, which can be either non-neutralising or neutralising. Non-neutralising anti-
bodies bind to antigenic sites in the therapeutic protein, however, without aﬀecting the therapeutic eﬀect
[21]. The main clinical eﬀect of non-neutralising antibodies is the possible formation of immune complexes
that can alter the bioavailability and thereby indirectly aﬀect the eﬃcacy due to changed pharmacokinetic
[22].
Page 9 of 66
==PAGE:11==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Neutralising antibodies are characterised by binding epitopes of the biopharmaceutical that are essential
for the clinical eﬀect of the drug. Not only the biopharmaceutical is at risk of being neutralised by neu-
tralising antibodies - endogenous counterparts of the protein are also at risk of being neutralised due to
cross-reactivity [2, 12, 13, 23].
Diﬀerent mechanisms of ADA formation exists. One mechanism is a normal physiologic immune response
in individuals who are treated with a certain protein that they completely fail to produce themselves
(e.g. a coagulation factor). In this case, the injected protein will be recognised as completely foreign
and ADAs will be generated [24]. The magnitude of the response will depend on many factors, and the
clinical eﬀect may vary greatly between drugs. Often, a drug has an endogenous counterpart, e.g. insulin,
growth hormone etc. This presents a considerable risk in immunogenicity due to cross-reactivity and
epitope spreading [12]. Since a drug often has a minor change in structure compared to the endogenous
counterpart, a single new epitope in the drug can result in ADA generation that not only targets the drug
but also the endogenous counterpart, thereby eliminating both [25].
5.1.2
Factors inﬂuencing immunogenicity
Generally speaking, factors inﬂuencing immunogenicity of a drug can be categorised as either product-,
patient-, or treatment-related [24]. Protein structure, post-translational modiﬁcations, formulation, pack-
aging, aggregation, and impurities are all factors that potentially can lead to a product-related immuno-
genic response.
Patient-related factors include genetic factors, disease type and status, concomitant
disease and medications, prior exposure and sensitisation, and immune system function. Route of admin-
istration, frequency of administration, and duration of administration are factors connected to treatment-
related immunogenicity [12, 15, 24, 26]. Table 1 explains some of the factors that might inﬂuence on
immunogenicity.
Page 10 of 66
==PAGE:12==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Table 1: Explanation of factors inﬂuencing immunogenicity [12, 15, 24, 26].
Category
Factor
Example/explanation
Product-
related
Protein structure
The protein structure can contain immunogenic epitopes.
Post-translational modiﬁcations
Glycosylation - presence or absence may have a direct or indirect
impact on the immunogenicity of therapeutic proteins.
Formulation and packaging
Non-human substances or leachables from primary packaging compo-
nents can act as immune stimulators or aﬀect the higher-order struc-
ture of the protein product and induce an immunogenic response.
Aggregation
Aggregation can lead to disclosure of new epitopes or formation of
multivalent epitopes, which potentially can stimulate the immune
system. Size matters; higher-molecular weight aggregates are more
prone to elicit an immune response as compared to lower-molecular
weight aggregates.
Impurities
Impurities such as host cell DNA, proteins, or endotoxins can serve
as adjuvants and provoke an immune response.
Patient-
related
Genetic factors
Variability in MHC molecules is a genetic factor that, despite ad-
ministration of the same drug product, can cause diﬀerent immune
responses amongst a population.
Disease type and status
Patients having an activated immune system (e.g. allergies or chronic
inﬂammation) may be more prone to develop ADAs to therapeutic
proteins.
Concomitant
disease
and
medication
Immunosuppressive agents can potentially reduce the risk of forma-
tion of ADAs.
Prior exposure and sensitisation
Endogenous, pre-existing antibodies can be speciﬁc or cross-reactive
for epitopes on proteins or glycans overlapping the therapeutic protein
epitopes.
Treatment-
related
Route of administration
Subcutanous or intramuscular administrations are typically more im-
munogenic as compared to intravenous injection.
Frequency of administration
The immune system requires a prime followed by a boost to ensure a
robust immunogenic response. A one-time administration of a single-
dose is less likely to induce an immunogenic response as compared to
multiple-dose administrations.
Duration of administration
If the exposure is chronic, the likelihood of induction of the immune
system is greater since multiple exposures can lead to a strong memory
T cell response.
5.1.3
Prediction and mitigation of immunogenicity
Prediction of immunogenicity can be an important tool to increase patient safety and validate poten-
tial drugs. The applicability of preclinical prediction tools is demonstrated in a post hoc assessment of
immunogenicity of vatreptacog alfa (bioengineered recombinant factor VIIa), whose clinical study was
discontinued in phase III due to development of ADAs. The post hoc assessment revealed that the three
amino acid substitution introduced in the molecule (as compared to the native FVIIa) resulted in neoepi-
topes that caused a T-cell dependent immune response, ultimately leading to ADAs.
Page 11 of 66
==PAGE:13==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
This case proves that even minor changes to the primary structure of a drug can have profound eﬀects on
immunogenicity. Furthermore, the case demonstrates how the immunogenic potential of these neoepitopes
could have been assessed before study initiation without compromising patient safety [25, 27]. Prediction
tools might not be able to forecast the incidence rate of immunogenicity, however, they might be able
to rank the immunogenicity of several drug candidates. Immunogenicity prediction can consist of three
diﬀerent approaches that are often conducted step-wise; in silico screening of the binding strength between
HLA (human leukocyte antigen) class II and linear T-cell epitopes, in vitro T cell assays, and in vivo
immunogenicity assays using humanised animal models.
If a drug turns out to be immunogenic, it is relevant to prevent the establishment of an ADA response.
This can e.g. be done by modiﬁcation of HLA class II anchor residues of immunodominant epitopes within
the molecule, as long as these epitopes do not aﬀect drug eﬃcacy. Additionally, it is relevant to modify
the formulation so that aggregate formation is prevented. Co-administration of immunomodulatory drugs
could be a possible way to mitigate immunogenicity [14, 24].
Predictive immunogenicity is now routinely used and might in future improve as more preclinical im-
munogenicity testing is performed and correlated to clinical outcomes.
5.2
Immunogenicity assessment
Immunogenicity is a safety concern in all clinical trials. Consequently, assessment of immunogenicity
throughout the development of a drug is required by health authorities as a part of the approval process
for biopharmaceuticals. An Integrated Summary of Immunogenicity (ISI) including a risk assessment is
included in the Common Technical Document and is thus a part of the application dossier for a new
biopharmaceutical. An ISI is included for authorities to easier understand the immunogenicity program,
which is based on a multidisciplinary exercise [12]. Since the consequence of an immunogenic response
can range from no clinical eﬀects to severe clinical outcomes such as neutralisation of an endogenous
counterpart or a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction, it is relevant to adopt a risk-based approach
during immunogenicity assessment. The ISI should justify the risk-based approach which is adopted to
evaluate and manage an immune response or immunologically related adverse event caused by the ther-
apeutic protein [12, 13]. A risk-based approach entails that parameters such as risk of immunogenicity
and severity of its potential are evaluated. The risk assessment includes many factors, e.g. alternative
treatment options if neutralising antibodies are developed. Since each and every biopharmaceutical and
biosimilar are diﬀerent, the risk assessment is done case-by-case [18].
The pharmaceutical industry is highly dependent on approval from health authorities before a drug can
enter clinical trials and subsequently the market. Health authorities issue guidelines on immunogenicity
assessment which reﬂect the current thinking of the regulatory bodies. The guidelines do not establish
legally enforceable responsibilities but rather contain non-binding recommendations. FDA speciﬁes that
their guideline describes something that is suggested or recommended, but never required [13]. Similarly,
EMA states that the scope of their guideline is recommendations that should be applied on a case-by-case
basis [12]. However, it is well-known in the pharmaceutical industry, that guidelines must be followed to
Page 12 of 66
==PAGE:14==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
the letter if you want a drug approved. Consequently, the following subsections describing immunogenicity
assessment, which is a multi-tiered procedure, are based on current guidelines issued by EMA and FDA
in 2017 and 2019, respectively [12, 13].
5.2.1
Tier 1 - Screening
Immunogenicity assessment relies on a risk-based, multi-tiered approach with a screening assay consti-
tuting the ﬁrst tier (ﬁgure 2). The purpose of the screening assay is, as the name implies, to screen for
ADA positive samples. A screening assay should be highly sensitive and capable of detecting all clini-
cally relevant immunoglobulin isotypes independent of aﬃnity. Obviously, false negative results are not
accepted during the screening assay. The assay should be developed to have a false positive rate of approx-
imately 5%. Typically used assay platforms for screening assays include enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA), ECL assay, RIA, and surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Choosing the appropriate assay
is important and confounding factors should be carefully considered as they might impact the results.
Each assay platform has its own attributes and inherent limitations (see section 5.2.4).
To evaluate if a sample is ADA positive it is relevant to diﬀerentiate a positive response from background
noise. The result of a screening assay is qualitative entailing that individuals either have a positive or
negative antibody response. In order to diﬀerentiate between negative and positive, a screening cut-point
is established during assay validation. The assay cut-point is statistically determined using samples from
the target population and act as a decision threshold to discriminate between ADA positive and negative
samples (see section 5.3.1 for a more thorough description of establishment of an assay cut-point) [12, 13,
26].
Page 13 of 66
==PAGE:15==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Test samples
Screening Assay
Negative samples
Positive samples
Archive
Confirmatory Assay
Confirmed positive samples
Negative samples
Characterisation
e.g. titer, affinity, isotype,
antigen epitopes
Neutralisation Assay
Correlation of produced antibodies
with clinical responses
Assays for clinical markers (including PK, PD)
& assessment of clinical responses in patients
Tier 1 - Screening 
Tier 2 - Confirmation
Tier 3 - Characterisation
Figure 2: A multi-tiered strategy for immunogenicity assessment. Tier 1 is the screening assay. If a sample is
positive in the screening assay, a conﬁrmatory assay should be conducted (Tier 2). Samples that are conﬁrmed true positives
proceed to the third and last tier (Tier 3) which involves a characterisation of the antibody response including neutralising
potential, persistence, titer, and isotype. Lastly, the clinical response is taken into account and correlated to the produced
antibodies. Figure adapted from EMA ”Guideline on Immunogenicity assessment of therapeutic proteins” [12].
5.2.2
Tier 2 - Conﬁrmation
The second tier of immunogenicity assessment is a conﬁrmatory assay. The purpose of this assay is to
eliminate false positive results and determine whether a sample that was identiﬁed as antibody positive
during the screening contains drug-speciﬁc antibodies. Since the purpose is to eliminate false positive
samples, which are detected due to non-speciﬁc binding, a 1% false positive rate is recommended by the
regulatory authorities for the conﬁrmatory cut-point. A common approach to conﬁrm the presence of
drug-speciﬁc antibodies is to add excess amounts of drug to the sample and then compare the spiked
Page 14 of 66
==PAGE:16==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
sample with the non-spiked sample from the screening assay. A true positive will result in a reduction of
signal in the spiked sample since the antibodies speciﬁcally binds to the drug that was added in excess
(ﬁgure 3). In certain cases, unwanted immunogenicity is related to process-related components such as
host cell proteins. In such cases, it is important to develop and validate assays for detection of antibodies
against such impurities.
Samples that are conﬁrmed positive should be characterised further to assess aﬃnity, isotype, titer, and
the neutralising potential of the antibodies (section 5.2.3).
CP
Screening for individuals with
response above CP
Response
Samples above
screening CP
Confirmed
positive
samples
Screening
Confirmation
CP
Another round of screening for
individuals with a response above CP
Response
Samples below
screening CP
Negative samples
Excessive amount
of un-labelled
drug is added
Confirmation of ADA positive samples
Response
Negative sample
Characterisation
Specific inhibition of
response. These samples
are confirmed positive.  
A
B
Figure 3: Screening and conﬁrmatory assay. The ﬁrst tier is the screening assay (A). Samples having a response below
the screening cut-point are classiﬁed as negative samples and are therefore not subject to further testing. However, positive
samples are tested in a conﬁrmatory assay (B). In this assay, the samples are tested once more in a screening assay followed
by a competition assay where an excessive amount of drug has been added to the samples. If the responses decrease when the
screening results are compared to the competition assay results, then the samples are conﬁrmed positive. Conﬁrmed positive
samples should be further characterised (section 5.2.3). Samples that remain at the same response even though unlabelled
drug is present (due to unspeciﬁc binding) are not tested any further. CP = cut-point.
Page 15 of 66
==PAGE:17==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
5.2.3
Tier 3 - Characterisation
The third and last tier of immunogenicity assessment, which is characterisation, is divided in two parts.
One part is a neutralisation assay, which usually is either a cell-based bioassay or competitive ligand-
binding assay [12]. Since neutralising antibodies are capable of triggering clinical eﬀects it is important
to have speciﬁc and sensitive in vitro assays. The other part is characterisation which varies on a case-
by-case basis. Titre, incidence, neutralising capacity, and persistence of ADAs are normally required in
the third tier. In certain cases it is also relevant to characterise antigenic epitopes, determine the isotype
or IgG-subclass, and evaluate potential cross-reactivity to an endogenous counterpart if cross-reactivity
is expected. Finally, correlations between the produced antibodies and the clinical responses, which e.g.
include pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, should be made [12, 13, 26]. ADA responses can vary
a lot amongst individuals. Reporting antibody levels as speciﬁc mass units is not completely correct since
this approach rely on a surrogate positive control (see section 5.3.2). Due to the quasi-quantitative nature
of immunoassays, titer, which is the reciprocal of the highest dilution factor of the sample that yields a
positive result, has become a common approach to report relative antibody levels. The typical approach
to assess titer is by serially diluting a conﬁrmed ADA positive sample and then report the titer value below
which further serial dilution produces an assay result below the titration cut-point. The titer cut-point
can be calculated using pre-dose sample results from the screening cut-point experiment, however, with
a false positive rate on 0.1% instead of approximately 5% (see section 5.3.1 for an elaborate description
of cut-point). A high titer value entails high antibody levels since the ADA needs to be diluted a lot in
order to produce a response just above the titration cut-point [23].
5.2.4
Immunoassays
Direct/indirect ELISA
A direct ELISA in immunogenicity assessment is a format that by most people is known as an indirect
ELISA. However, since the focus is on detection of ADAs it will never be possible to make a direct ELISA
since it requires that the ADA is conjugated. A secondary conjugated antibody is thus needed in a direct
immunogenicity ELISA (ﬁgure 4). A direct immunogenicity ELISA is an inexpensive assay that uses
generic reagents and instruments which is an important advantage to highlight. Furthermore, the assay is
easy to use and automate, and has a good drug tolerance. On the other hand, the disadvantages include
the risk of high background and non-speciﬁc binding. Furthermore, a direct ELISA comes with a risk of
altered antigen conﬁrmation or masked epitopes as the drug is immobilised. Due to excessive washes, the
assay risks not to detect low-aﬃnity antibodies. Lastly, the secondary reagent is species speciﬁc [12, 26].
Page 16 of 66
==PAGE:18==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Conjugated secondary antibody
Drug-coated plate 
ADA
Figure 4: Assay principle of a direct ELISA. The drug is coated to the wells of a microtiter plate. If ADAs are present,
these will bind to the drug. A secondary antibody capable of binding to the Fc region of the ADA will give rise to an assay
signal. Drug, ADA, or secondary antibody that are not able to bind are removed during the assay by washing steps.
Bridging ELISA
An ELISA done in a bridging format requires two drug-conjugates. One drug-conjugate (e.g. biotinyla-
tion) is responsible for the capturing on the plate whereas the other drug is labelled with a detectable label
such as horse radish peroxidase (HRP). If ADAs are present these will bridge the two drug-conjugates
via dual-arm binding and thereby give rise to a signal (ﬁgure 5). The advantages of a bridging ELISA
format are almost similar to the advantages of the direct/indirect ELISA format, however, an additional
advantage related to the bridging ELISA is high speciﬁcity resulting from the need for dual-arm binding
for a response to be generated. Another advantage related to the bridging format is that it is independent
of species. A common disadvantage related to a bridging ELISA is that the labelling of the drug may
alter the antigenic epitopes and potentially mask epitopes. As dual-arm binding is needed, the assay may
have reduced ability to detect IgG4 and low-aﬃnity antibodies such as IgM. Additionally, the assay may
be susceptible to interference from drug and serum components [12, 26].
Secondary drug conjugate
Biotinylated drug
Streptavidin-coated plate 
ADA
Figure 5: The assay principle of a bridging ELISA. Using a streptavidin-coated plate allows for easy capture of the
biotinylated drug. If ADAs exist these will bind with one arm to the biotinylated drug and the other arm to a secondary
drug conjugate which e.g. can be labelled with HRP. ADA presence will thus give rise to a signal.
Surface plasmon resonance
SPR is a powerful optical detection technique that can study biomolecular interactions in real time with-
out the need of labelling. SPR occurs when polarised light strikes an electrically conducting surface at
the interface between two media. The SPR generates electron charge density waves, known as plasmons,
which reduces the intensity of reﬂected light in proportion to the mass binding to the surface of the sensor.
In an SPR immunogenicity assay, the drug of interest is immobilised on a gold sensor surface followed by
injection of a solution that potentially contains ADAs. If ADAs are present, these will interact with the
immobilised drug. Polarised light is directed towards the sensor surface and the angle of minimum inten-
sity reﬂected light is detected during the course of interaction. When a molecule binds to the drug-coated
Page 17 of 66
==PAGE:19==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
sensor surface, the angle changes and the interaction proﬁle can thus be recorded in real time (ﬁgure 6).
This means that SPR can be used both for determination of the concentration of speciﬁc antibodies, as
well as describing their relative aﬃnity [28].
The SPR assay platform comes with the advantage that it is label-free and detection of early low-aﬃnity
antibodies is possible. Additionally, SPR comes with the advantage of high drug tolerance and the method
allows for detection of all isotype responses and is not species-speciﬁc [29]. Disadvantages related to this
assay platform includes the fact that the technology requires vendor-speciﬁc equipment and reagents,
making it an expensive choice of platform. Furthermore, the assay comes with a disadvantage of alterations
in the immobilised molecule since the linking chemistry might aﬀect the molecule and cause masking of
epitopes [12].
Detector
Reference
channel
Sample
channel
Angle shift
Polarised light
Prism
Flow channel 
Drug-coated
sensor surface
Figure 6: The principle of a label-free immunoassay utilising SPR. The drug of interest is coated to the surface of
a gold sensor chip and the sample is injected to the system. If ADAs are present in the sample these will bind to the drug
which result in an angle shift in the reﬂected light allowing real-time interaction proﬁling. Figure adapted from [28].
RIA
A RIA is a highly sensitive assay. However, it requires the use of radiolabelled drug and the throughput
sometimes limits the utility of the assay in a clinical setting. A further examination of RIAs and sugges-
tion for a more automation-friendly, high-throughput method is given in section 6.1 and 6.2.
ECL assay in bridging format
The ECL platform, provided by MSD, utilises a ruthenium-conjugated protein as the secondary drug-
conjugate for a bridging ADA assessment. The technology will be examined further in section 6.3.
Other technologies within immunogenicity assessment includes AlphaLISA, Gyrolab, immunoPCR, SQI
Squidlite Technology, Genalyte Maverick System, and immunocapture-LC/MS [30].
Page 18 of 66
==PAGE:20==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
5.2.5
Parameters assessed during development
Minimal required dilution and hook eﬀect
Matrix components can give high assay background and cause high intra/inter-individual variations.
Therefore, it is relevant to assess the minimal required dilution (MRD) in the early stage of assay de-
velopment.
MRD refers to the lowest serum sample dilution that gives adequate reduction in assay
background and intra/inter-individual assay variation without compromising assay sensitivity. Ideally,
the assay response in matrix should be equal to the response when the assay is conducted in buﬀer with-
out interfering matrix components. MRD is assessed by testing a serial dilution of a reference antibody
at diﬀerent matrix levels ranging from 0% (assay in buﬀer) up to approximately 50%. Sensitivities or
signal-to-noise ratios are evaluated, while keeping in mind that the assay should be able to detect the
lowest possible concentration in patients samples [12, 13, 26].
If an analyte is present in concentrations above the dynamic range, an artefact, known as hook or prozone
eﬀect, might sometimes be observed (ﬁgure 7). The hook eﬀect occurs when excess antibodies are unable
to form stable complexes in the assay, which causes a decrease in signal. To detect such hook eﬀects,
samples should be tested undiluted and after higher dilutions. Ensuring a proper MRD that is adequate
to avoid a prozone/hook eﬀect is thus of great importance [13, 26].
Signal
ADA concentration
Hook
= primary drug conjugate
= secondary drug conjugate
= ADA
Apparent response
Figure 7: Hook eﬀect. If samples are not diluted properly and the concentration of ADAs is too high it might result in
a hook/prozone eﬀect. High concentrations of ADAs can result in untruthful low responses due to no formation of bridging
complexes as only one arm is bound to the labelled drug.
Pre-treatment and conjugate levels
Pre-treatment of samples is carried out to dissociate ADAs from any interfering substances. Often, the
main interferent is presence of the drug itself in patient samples. This is especially the case when the
drug has a long therapeutic half-life. To mitigate the risk of inaccurate data, pre-treatment steps should
be evaluated during assay development. A common pre-treatment is acid dissociation [26]. During de-
velopment of a bridging ECL assay it is important to test diﬀerent sample to acid ratios and varying
concentrations of the biotin- and sulfo-tag-conjugates [31].
Page 19 of 66
==PAGE:21==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
In-use stability of critical reagents
As a part of the assay development process it is relevant to investigate storage conditions and stability
of critical reagents. Critical reagents include drug, positive control antibodies, drug conjugates, matrix,
tracer, and so forth.
The number of freeze/thaw cycles, storage times, and temperatures should be
assessed according to the expected use and storage of the reagents during analysis. However, stability
testing can indirectly be done by monitoring of the assay controls. If their response suddenly changes it
could indicate that some of the critical reagents are not stable [13, 26].
5.3
Validation of immunoassays
All clinical immunogenicity data incorporated in a marketing authorisation application or biologics license
application (BLA) should be obtained using validated assays. Assay validation is carried out to demon-
strate that the performance characteristics (e.g. sensitivity, cut-point, speciﬁcity, precision, robustness,
and drug tolerance) of the assay are suitable for its intended purpose. Hence, assay validation is an
essential part of immunogenicity assessment [12, 13].
Numerous parameters should be tested during a validation of an immunogenicity assay used for non-
clinical and clinical studies. Typically, a complete validation takes six to eight weeks (subsequent to
development of the assay) and requires at least two analysts. As the scope of this project was development
and examination of diﬀerent high-throughput assay platforms it was not relevant to test all validation
parameters but rather investigate the ones that reveal something about the general assay performance.
Such parameters include an estimate of sensitivity and cut-point, drug tolerance, and drug interference.
These parameters are examined thoroughly below. Table 2 in section 5.3.4 describes other validation
parameters from guidelines. However, these are only brieﬂy described as they are not in scope of this
project.
5.3.1
Cut-point
Establishment of cut-point is crucial to classify samples as antibody positive or antibody negative. The
cut-point is statistically determined using samples from treatment-na¨ıve subjects that as far as possible
resembles the patient population. If the drug thus seeks to treat obese type-2 diabetic patients, it is
relevant to establish the cut-point using matrix from obese type-2 diabetic individuals. Establishment of
a screening cut-point requires at least 50 individuals that are tested by at least two analysts on at least
three diﬀerent days entailing a total of six assay runs. If the data is normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilks
p>0.05), the screening cut-point is calculated as: (mean of individuals) + 1.645 x (standard deviation).
The mean response of the individuals might be constant or vary between analysts, plates, and assays.
Generally, the mean varies but the variance around the mean is constant entailing that a ﬂoating cut-point
can be applied in-study (ﬁgure 8). A ﬂoating cut-point consists of the negative quality control (QC neg),
which represents the biological background, plus a normalisation factor which is statistically determined
during validation.
Dynamic and ﬁxed cut-points are other types of cut-point that can be utilised, however, a ﬂoating cut-
point reﬂects a robust assay [13, 26, 32, 33].
Page 20 of 66
==PAGE:22==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Run 4
Run 5
Run 6
0
2
4
6
8
Response of 50 individuals
%B/T
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Run 4
Run 5
Run 6
0
2
4
6
8
Mean and SD of individuals
%B/T
A
B
Figure 8: Data that supports the use of a ﬂoating cut-point. (A) The response of 50 individuals tested in six assay
runs. (B) Illustration of the mean and variance around the mean. As the variance around the mean is not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between the assay runs, the validation cut-point should therefore be a ﬂoating cut-point. A ﬂoating cut-point is
comprised by a statistically calculated normalisation factor that is added to QC neg measured in the individual assay runs.
The response unit is in this example %bound/total (%B/T) which is used for a RIA. SD = standard deviation
When a ﬂoating cut-point is applied, an in-study validation is made to ensure that the mean of the
individuals enrolled in the clinical trial is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the individuals used for the
pre-study validation. This is very important to test since the ﬂoating cut-point is based on QC neg. If
the in-study mean varies signiﬁcantly from the mean of the six pre-study validation assay runs, a new
QC neg should be prepared to ensure that it is representative for the in-study individuals [32].
5.3.2
Sensitivity
Assay sensitivity refers to the lowest concentration of antibody preparation that consistently gives either
a positive result or a response equal to the assay-speciﬁc cut-point. Immunoassays are quasi-quantitative
meaning that the sensitivity relies on control antibodies that are produced by hyperimmunisation of non-
human species or by phage display [11, 34]. Sensitivity (expressed as mass of antibody detectable per mL
of undiluted matrix) of a screening and conﬁrmatory assay should be at least 100 ng/mL. As sensitivity
can be interpreted as the lower limit of detection it entails that the more sensitive an assay gets, the
lower the number of ng/mL. Thus, 10 ng/mL signiﬁes a better sensitivity than 200 ng/mL - the higher
the sensitivity, the lower the number. As the positive control often is developed under conditions that
favour high-aﬃnity antibodies, there is a risk of overestimating the sensitivity of the assay. Consequently,
assay sensitivity is not a way to determine absolute mass of ADAs but rather a contribution to an overall
understanding of how the assay performs. Assay sensitivity is assessed by two- or three-fold dilutions of
the positive control in pooled matrix from treatment-na¨ıve individuals. A recommended way to calculate
the sensitivity is by interpolation of the linear portion of the dilution curve (with a minimum of ﬁve data
points) to the assay cut-point (ﬁgure 9) [13, 26].
Page 21 of 66
==PAGE:23==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
50 individuals
To the lab
x6
Drug
8 weeks
To the lab
Check for normal
distribution using
S-W
Analyse data.
Remove analytical
and biological
outliers
If S-W p>0.05
calculate screening
cut-point as: 
 Mean +1.645 x SD  
Antibody levels 
Cut-point
Report assay
sensitivity
Positive
control
antibody
Response
Figure 9: Approach to establish an assay cut-point and report sensitivity. The cut-point is established by samples
from 50 individuals which are tested in six individual assay runs by at least two analysts. If the response of the individuals
follows a normal distribution (tested by Shapiro-Wilk test) after removal of biological and analytical outliers, then the
screening cut-point can be calculated as: mean + 1.645 x SD. To report assay sensitivity, a non-human species (e.g. a
rabbit) is hyperimmunised with the drug of interest and antibodies are harvested after approximately 8 weeks. A dilution
curve of the positive control antibody is made and analysed in at least six individual assay set-up by at least two analysts.
Assay sensitivity is reported as the antibody level that is just above cut-point [13, 26]. SD = standard deviation. S-W =
Shapiro-Wilk test.
5.3.3
Drug tolerance and drug interference
The drug or its endogenous counterpart present in serum have the potential to interfere with the assay
sensitivity.
Therefore, it is relevant to assess the sensitivity of assays in the presence of drug at the
expected therapeutic levels. Examination of drug tolerance is done by adding known amounts of the
positive control antibody into an ADA negative control and then titrate the drug into the controls having
a speciﬁc amount of ADAs. As an example, the drug could be two-fold diluted in serum pools spiked with
antibody levels corresponding to the low positive control, 100 ng/mL, and 250 ng/mL. To improve drug
tolerance diﬀerent pre-treatment methods such as acid dissociation should be investigated. Drug tolerance
is reported as the drug concentration that still gives rise to a response equal to or above cut-point at the
tested antibody concentrations [13, 26].
Another way of investigating the interference from drug is to test sensitivity curves at diﬀerent ﬁxed levels
of drug. The result of a drug interference study is thus similar to the sensitivity, however, increasing drug
levels might result in decreasing sensitivity. The drug concentrations that are worth testing are determined
during toxicity studies where the maximal drug concentration in serum (Cmax) is estimated. The assay
should ideally be capable of detecting at least 100 ng/mL in the presence of a drug concentration at Cmax.
Figure 10 demonstrates how free drug in a sample can impact a RIA and ECL assay.
Page 22 of 66
==PAGE:24==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Cut-point
Antibody levels
Response
Antibody levels
Response
Cut-point
= Tracer
= Drug
= Drug
Sensitivity curve without drug present
Sensitivity curve with drug present
RIA without drug present
RIA with drug present
ECL assay without drug present
ECL assay with drug present
Supernatant
Supernatant
= Biotinylated drug
= Sulfo-tagged drug
Loss in assay
sensitivity
A
B
Figure 10: Interference from drug can result in loss of assay sensitivity. (A) Sensitivity curve from an assay
without drug present. In a clinical setting drug is often present and it is therefore necessary to evaluate assay performance
in the presence of drug. (B) The sensitivity curve in presence of drug is represented by the green graph. To compare, the
sensitivity without drug presence (red dotted line) is drawn in the plot as well. As indicated on the sensitivity curve in (B),
assay sensitivity is decreased due to the presence of drug. In the RIA, the ADAs will bind to the drug instead of the tracer
(which is discarded as supernatant and therefore not accounted for) and thereby cause a lowered sensitivity. In the ECL
assay the presence of drug can interrupt the bridging format and give rise to lowered sensitivity. ADAs that are accounted
for are coloured red, whereas those that are not accounted for due to the presence of drug are coloured black.
5.3.4
Other assay validation parameters
Besides the assay validation parameters described above, several other parameters are included in a
validation of an ADA assay for immunogenicity testing. Some of these parameters are brieﬂy described
in table 2.
Page 23 of 66
==PAGE:25==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Table 2: Other assay validation parameters [13, 26]. QC low=low positive quality control. CP=cut-point. CV=coeﬃcient
of variation. CV is calculated as: CV=(SD/mean)*100. SD=standard deviation.
Validation
parameter
Purpose
Experiment
Requirements
Speciﬁcity
and
selectivity
Ensure exclusive detection of
drug-speciﬁc ADA in pres-
ence of matrix interfering
substances.
Individual
samples
are
spiked
with ADA corresponding to QC
low level.
The spiked samples
are compared to samples from
the same individuals spiked with
ADA and drug and buﬀer spiked
with ADA.
Samples spiked with ADA should
be similar to spiked buﬀer and be
≥CP. When drug is present, the
samples should be < CP.
Intra assay pre-
cision
Test repeatability within an
assay.
The same sample is tested within
the same assay (e.g. ﬁrst and last
on a 96-well plate).
CV<20%.
Inter assay pre-
cision
Test repeatability between
assays.
The same samples (e.g.
assay
controls) are tested in numerous
individual assay set-ups.
CV<20%.
Reproducibility
Ensure
reproducibility
if
samples are run by two or
more independent laborato-
ries.
Establish acceptance criteria for
assay controls in the originator
lab.
Test assay controls in the
other laboratories.
The assay controls ran in the other
laboratories should fulﬁl the ac-
ceptance criteria established in the
originator laboratory.
Robustness
of
assay features
Test if assay features are ro-
bust to small but deliber-
ate variations during routine
laboratory practice.
Varying temperature, incubation
time, reagent lot, buﬀers and so
forth should be tested.
The assay should remain unaf-
fected by realistic variations of pa-
rameters.
5.3.5
Assay controls
For the establishment of an assay baseline it is necessary to include a negative quality control (QC neg).
Ideally, the QC neg should consist of pooled samples from treatment-na¨ıve subjects having the medical
condition being studied. However, access to representative negative controls might be limited during
development and pre-study validation and samples from healthy individuals might be used in such cases.
When pre-dose study samples become available, assay parameters such as sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and cut-
point should be conﬁrmed and if these vary from the validated assay parameters (e.g. due to the presence
of pre-existing antibodies), it might be necessary to re-evaluate these parameters. The value of a QC neg
should be close to, but still below, the cut-point that is established [11–13, 26].
ADA positive controls are important to track over time to ensure that a method performs suitably. A
low positive quality control (QC low) should produce a reproducible response above the cut-point and is
mainly included to ensure that an assay remains sensitive during validation and clinical phases. If the
signal of QC low is below cut-point, the assay fails. However, an unreasonably high concentration of a
QC low is inappropriate - if the assay signal is substantially above cut-point, the assay control will not
reveal if the sensitivity is distorted. A reasonable rejection rate for QC low is 1%. This entails that
QC low theoretically in 99% of the cases will produce a response at or above the cut-point and in 1%
of the cases fail because it is below cut-point. Hence, the antibody level for QC low is determined as:
QClow=mean+t0.01,df*SD. Mean and standard deviation (SD) originates from sensitivity experiments
and other assay development data [11, 13, 26].
Page 24 of 66
==PAGE:26==
5
INTRODUCTION TO IMMUNOGENICITY ASSESSMENT
Inclusion of a high positive quality control (QC high) can be useful e.g. to monitor assay performance.
The antibody concentration for QC high should be chosen as the concentration found in the upper end
of the linear range of the sensitivity curve, just below the upper plateau of the curve [26]. Figure 11
illustrates approximate antibody levels for assay controls (QC neg, QC low, and QC high) as determined
from several sensitivity runs.
Antibody levels 
Response
Cut-point
QC neg
QC high
QC low
Figure 11: Assay controls. The QC neg should be below the cut-point whereas the QC low should be just above cut-point.
The QC high should be chosen to have an antibody concentration in the upper end of the linear range of the sensitivity
curve.
5.3.6
A harmonised immunogenicity assessment approach
Immunogenicity is recognised as a major safety and eﬃcacy concern that potentially can be fatal for the
patient. Prior to the implementation of guidelines, product immunogenicity was understood to diﬀerent
extent and the evolving lexicon on immunogenicity created confusion in the ﬁeld. However, during the last
10-15 years, guidelines issued by FDA and EMA have standardised immunogenicity assessment. These
provide a systematised strategy for assessment of immunogenicity and the terminology used within the
ﬁeld, which clearly beneﬁt health regulatory authorities, medical practitioners, and ultimately the patients
[23]. The applicability of an immunogenicity assay is based on its capability to fulﬁl the validation pa-
rameters described above. Consequently, this project includes examination of selected assay performance
parameters as these are essential for the development of a valid and sensitive assay. Familiarity with the
parameters described above is crucial to understand the line of thoughts behind the conducted assays.
Page 25 of 66
==PAGE:27==
6
INTRODUCTION TO UTILISED ASSAYS
6
Introduction to utilised assays
The choice of platform for screening and conﬁrmatory assays is primarily based on the size of the drug.
Smaller peptide-based drugs are often diﬃcult to conjugate with biotin, HRP, or sulfo-tag which excludes
assay formats such as ELISA and ECL assay for the immunogenicity assessment of such drugs. However,
these assay platforms are widely used for immunogenicity testing of larger biopharmaceuticals such as
antibody-based therapeutics which possess numerous conjugation sites. RIA is often applied for peptide-
based drugs, however, this assay requires the use of radioactivity which is inconvenient.
Throughout this section, the RIA principle is introduced along with a motivation for a plate-based RIA
format. Additionally, the theory about and motivation for an ECL assay for a peptide-based drug is
given.
Conducting an ECL assay requires biotin- and sulfo-tag-conjugation of a peptide-drug which
requires special knowledge and skills within synthetic chemistry. Therefore, the conjugation method will
only brieﬂy be explained in the end of this section.
6.1
Radioimmunoassay
Solomon A. Berson and Rosalyn S. Yalow pioneered the development of radioimmunoassays (RIAs) back in
the 1950s. Originally, RIAs were applied for determination of concentrations of plasma peptide hormones,
among these the anabolic peptide hormone insulin. The assay principle relies on a competitive inhibition.
Thus, the ability of an unlabelled hormone to compete with labelled hormone for a speciﬁc antibody is
exploited to determine the concentration of hormone within a sample as demonstrated by the equilibrium
in equation (1) shown below:
H∗
+
Ab
⇌
H∗−Ab
(1)
+
H
↿⇂
H −Ab
H∗=radioactively labelled hormone, Ab=antibody, H∗−Ab=radioactive-labelled hormone bound to antibody, H=un-labelled
hormone, and H −Ab=un-labelled hormone bound to antibody.
A RIA is based on a competition between a radioactively-labelled antigen and an unlabelled antigen for
speciﬁc epitopes on an antibody [35]. The competitive RIA principle is at present applied in immuno-
genicity assessment for quasi-quantitative measurement of antibodies [11]. Thus, the objective of a RIA in
an immunogenicity setting is to quantify antibodies and not peptides or hormones, which was the original
objective as this assay was developed.
The immunogenicity RIA is based on a serum or plasma sample which is incubated with radioactively
labelled antigen/drug, known as tracer. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is added to decrease water activity,
which precipitates larger molecules such as antibody-bound tracer [36]. Unbound tracer will be washed
away and remaining radioactivity in the precipitate will reﬂect the binding capacity of antibodies present
in the original sample (ﬁgure 12).
Page 26 of 66
==PAGE:28==
6
INTRODUCTION TO UTILISED ASSAYS
PEG-6000
Centrifugation
Wash
Read in
γ-counter
=
125I-labelled drug
=ADA
Figure 12: Assay principle of a RIA with PEG precipitation. Firstly, ADAs bind to radioactively-labelled drug
(tracer). Secondly, tracer molecules that have bound to ADAs are PEG-precipitated. Lastly, a wash is carried out to remove
unbound tracer and the precipitated tracer bound to ADAs is counted in a gamma counter.
The typical way of reporting RIA results is as %Bound/Total (%B/T), where the ”Total” represents the
total amount of radioactivity added in a RIA tube. The ”Total” is thus a reference that constitutes the
maximal radioactivity in an assay.
Iodine-125 (125I), which has a half-life of 60 days, is a typically used radioisotope for a RIA. A typical
approach for labelling of peptide-based drugs is iodination of tyrosine which due to its phenol chemistry
is the only amino acid that can be iodinated. This is commonly done by lactoperoxidase catalysed io-
dination followed by high-performance liquid chromatography [37].
125I is known as a gamma-emitting
radioisotope. Detection of gamma emission can be done in a scintillation counter that uses a thallium-
activated sodium iodide crystal as the detecting element. A ﬂash of light, which is proportional to the
energy of the incoming gamma ray, is induced as gamma rays interact with the atoms of the crystal. The
light results in emission of electrons that are ampliﬁed through a photomultiplier tube until they reaches
the anode and are converted into an electrical pulse that is reported as a count rate [38]. Gamma rays
possess a high penetration power entailing that gamma counters are designed with lead that separates
samples to minimise crosstalk and keep background levels constant [39].
RIAs are especially utilised for ADA assays for peptide-based drugs since these often have few labelling
sites leading to a high risk of masked epitopes if alternative ADA assays are used. Generic advantages
related to a RIA is good sensitivity, moderate throughput, reasonable drug tolerance, and the fact that
the assay is inexpensive and in a soluble-phase. On the other hand, generic disadvantages of a RIA imply
the use of radioactivity leading to radioactive waste, aﬀected antigen stability due to decay of radio-label,
frequent manufacturing of new tracer (as it is often short-lived), and risk of not detecting low-aﬃnity
antibodies [11, 12, 26, 34].
Page 27 of 66
==PAGE:29==
6
INTRODUCTION TO UTILISED ASSAYS
6.2
RIA in plate format
Validated RIAs at Novo Nordisk are currently subject to a lot of handling since the analyses are based
on gamma rays emitted from 125I. This implies that assays are conducted in tubes that are separately
transferred to the gamma counter. In a ﬁeld where new technology and automation is in rapid devel-
opment, it is important to investigate alternative methods for the original RIA, which is more than 60
years old. An obvious possibility to make RIA more automation-friendly and allow for high-throughput
is transfer of the assay from tubes to a plate format which will eliminate the tube handling. Since gamma
radiation comes with a high penetration power, it is not possible to continue gamma counting and simply
just shift from tubes to plate. However, 125I decays by a process of electron capture which causes the
release of Auger electrons, that are identical to beta particles. Due to the identical nature of beta particles
and Auger electrons, 125I is detectable by liquid scintillation counting, which is the standard method for
quantiﬁcation of beta-emitting isotopes [40]. This detection method requires a scintillation cocktail which
is capable of absorbing energy and convert it into detectable light pulses. A typical scintillation cocktail
for aqueous-based samples consists of an aromatic organic solvent, the scintillator (a ﬂuor molecule), and
surfactants. Liquid scintillation counting is based on a radioactive molecule which emits beta particles
that cause an excitation of an aromatic organic solvent. An internal energy transfer from the solvent to
the scintillator results in a scintillator in an excited state. As the scintillator decays to its ground state,
a light pulse is produced and detected by a photomultiplier tube in a liquid scintillation counter such as
a TopCount® NXT™or MicroBeta2® (ﬁgure 13) [41].
β
*
(    )
Radioactive 
molecule
Solvent
molecule
Fluor
molecule
Scintillation
cocktail
hv
Photomultiplier
tube
Figure 13: Principle of liquid scintillation counting. An incoming beta-barticle excites the solvent molecule of the
scintillation cocktail and an internal energy transfer from the solvent molecule to the ﬂuor molecule (the scintillator) results
in an excited scintillator which dissipates the excess energy by light emission. The light pulse is detected by a photomultiplier
tube. Figure adapted from [41].
Both of these instruments are for radiometric detection of plate-based liquid scintillation assays. Poten-
tial optical crosstalk in liquid scintillation counting is prevented due to the use of reﬂective optics and a
patented photomultiplier tube technology that prevents light transmission between wells. However, using
gamma-emitting radioisotopes such as 125I comes with a risk of isotopic crosstalk [42].
It might seem odd to use a radioisotope that is known as a gamma-emitter for liquid scintillation counting
which relies on a beta-emitting radioisotope as source of radioactivity. An alternative possibility to 125I is
labelling of the drug with tritium (3H) which comes with the advantage of a signiﬁcantly longer half-life
of 12 years.
However, there are some disadvantages of 3H-labelling; Despite the long half-life of 3H, the half-life of
the tracer will also depend on the stability of the drug. Also, 3H-labelling is much more time-consuming
Page 28 of 66
==PAGE:30==
6
INTRODUCTION TO UTILISED ASSAYS
than 125I-labelling, which could cause problems during assay development and sample analysis as these
are often time-limited [43].
Since a RIA involves the use of radioactivity it is relevant to study alternative methods for immuno-
genicity assessment of peptide-based drug. However, peptide-based drugs comes with a challenge as they
might be diﬃcult to label and ELISA and ECL are thus not the ﬁrst choice of assay platform to use in
a clinical setting where the time for assay development is short. However, this project allowed time for
assay development and a bridging ECL assay was therefore investigated.
6.3
Electrochemiluminescence assay
As the name indicates, an ECL assay is based on three reactions; electro-, chemi-, and luminescence.
The ECL reaction is initiated by an electrochemical reaction involving a carbon electrode which excites
tripropylamine (TPA) when electricity is applied to the electrode. The excited TPA excites ruthenium(II)
tris-bipyridine (Ru(bpy)2+
3
= the sulfo-tag label) and in order for ruthenium to return to its base state,
light is released. The ECL cycle repeats as long as voltage is applied which results in an ampliﬁcation of
the light signal. The intensity of light is proportional to the quantity of the analyte in the sample [34].
An ECL ADA assay is based on a bridging format, where the drug in question is either biotinylated
or labeled with an electrochemiluminescent label known as a sulfo-tag.
The electrochemiluminescent
label will generate light when situated in an appropriate chemical environment. The proper chemical
environment is provided by the use of speciﬁc microplates having carbon electrodes in the bottom and the
use of read buﬀer containing TPA. Streptavidin-coated wells allow for speciﬁc binding of the biotinylated
drug. If antibodies are present, they will form a bridge, which brings the sulfo-tag in close proximity to
the carbon-electrode plate. When electricity is applied to the carbon electrodes in the MSD instrument,
light will be emitted by the electrochemiluminescent sulfo-tag label (ﬁgure 14) [44]. The assay response
is given as relative light units (RLU).
Sulfo-tag
labeled drug
Biotinylated drug
Carbon electrode
streptavidin-coated plate 
ADA
*Ru(bpy)3
2+
Ru(bpy)3
2+ Ru(bpy)3
3+
e
-
TPA•
TPA•*
TPA
LIGHT
-H+
Figure 14: Principle of a bridging ECL ADA assay. The bridged complex is transferred onto a streptavidin-coated
plate with carbon electrodes in the wells. The secondary drug conjugate which is labelled with sulfo-tag contains Ru(bpy)2+
3
which by the aid of voltage-generated electrons and TPA emits light. The intensity of light is proportional to the quantity
of ADA in the sample. Figure adapted from [45].
Page 29 of 66
==PAGE:31==
6
INTRODUCTION TO UTILISED ASSAYS
Some of the advantages related to the use of a bridging ADA assay are mentioned in section 5.2.4. To
summarise, the advantages include that the assay is independent of species, highly speciﬁc due to dual-
arm binding, and able to detect all isotypes, except for IgG4. Furthermore, an ECL assay has a high drug
tolerance, can be conducted in high throughput, and has a large dynamic range. The assay is quite robust
to matrix interference and the detection signal is consistent during the life of the sulfo-tag conjugate [12,
34].
A disadvantage related to the ECL assay is that two drug conjugates should be prepared and the labelling
could potentially alter the antigen. Additionally, vendor-speciﬁc equipment and reagents are required [11,
12]. Naturally, it is also a disadvantage that the assay may not detect IgG4 [12, 34].
6.4
Conjugation strategy for an insulin analogue
The scope of this project was to investigate high-throughput assay platforms for peptide-based drugs.
The drug applied in this project is insulin 965 which resembles human insulin, however, with certain
modiﬁcations. The diﬀerence between insulin 965 and human insulin includes some amino acid modiﬁ-
cations in the A- and B-chain and the addition of a fatty acid chain. Since the structure of the drug is
not in scope of this project, and to make sure that any conﬁdentiality agreements are not violated, the
applied molecule will not be described further.
Insulin 965 has a molecular weight close to 6 kDa. The molecular weight of sulfo-tag is approximately
1 kDa whereas the biotin is fairly smaller and adds a molecular weight on 340 Da to the target upon
successful conjugation. Conjugation of biotin or sulfo-tag requires the presence of primary amines, which
means either lysine or N-terminal amines. As compared to an antibody, the number of conjugation sites
are limited on peptide drugs. Insulin 965 consists, just like human insulin, of an A- and B-chain which
means that two conjugation sites, in the form of N-terminal amines, exist. As the peptide drug is small
in size, a successful addition of sulfo-tag and biotin comes with a risk of epitope shielding. In an attempt
to avoid epitope shielding, the two N-terminals were conjugated and puriﬁed separately and a 1:1 mix of
conjugated A- and B-chain was utilised in the ECL assay. Figure 15 illustrates what is meant by a 1:1
mix.
Biotin conjugate: 
Sulfo-tag conjugate: 
B-chain
A-chain 1:1
A-chain
B-chain
1:1
Figure 15: 1:1 mix of conjugated A- and B-chain. The biotinylated conjugate was actually a 1:1 mix of insulin 965
biotinylated in the N-terminal of the A-chain and N-terminal of the B-chain. Similarly, the sulfo-tag conjugate consisted of
a mixture of A- and B-chain sulfo-tag-conjugated insulin 965.
A more elaborate description of the conjugation strategy can be found in appendix 11.1. Epitope shielding
should be avoided as the ECL assay should be able to detect all clinically relevant antibodies. If epitopes
are shielded it could result in decreased assay sensitivity or false negative results.
Page 30 of 66
==PAGE:32==
7
RESULTS
7
Results
The objective of this project was to examine two high-throughput assay platforms, a plate-based RIA
and an ECL assay, and evaluate their performance as ADA assays compared to an established RIA
platform. First, the development of the plate-based RIA will be examined (section 7.1). The section
includes downscaling, switching to scintillation counting, assay optimisation, and lastly, assessment of
assay performance. Throughout section 7.2, the development of an ECL assay will be examined and the
assay performance assessed. Section 7.3 contains a comparison of the two assay platforms with regards
to sensitivity, drug tolerance/interference, and epitope shielding.
7.1
RIA in plates
Preliminary experiments were conducted prior to study initiation to investigate if plate-based RIA was
at all possible. The results of these are described in section 7.1.1, 7.1.2, and appendix 11.2. Materials
and methods for the plate-based RIA developed in this project is found in section 10.1.
7.1.1
Downscaling
Current in-house validated RIAs are conducted in tubes with a reaction volume close to 700 µL, a volume
which is of course not compatible with possible automation solutions.
Therefore, the ﬁrst and very
essential experiment included a downscaling of a validated RIA to a volume of 200 µL. The only volume
that was kept constant in the downscaling experiment was the sample volume.
A sensitivity curve,
ten individuals, and quality controls (QCs) at low and high antibody levels were included. Figure 16A
demonstrates a sensitivity curve tested in an assay with normal volume and the downscaled, low volume
format. Figure 16B illustrates the response of ten healthy individuals.
1
10
100
1000 10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sensitivity curve
[Ab] ng/mL
%B/T
Normal volume
Low volume
0
2
4
6
Individuals
%B/T
Normal volume
Low volume
A
B
Figure 16: Results from preliminary experiment with downscaling of a traditional RIA. (A) Sensitivity curve
starting at 8000 ng/mL with the dotted lines illustrating the cut-points for the two assays. (B) The response of ten healthy
individuals in the normal and low volume assay. These responses were used to estimate the assay cut-point.
Page 31 of 66
==PAGE:33==
7
RESULTS
As evident from the graph, the response in the sensitivity curve of low volume was shifted to higher values.
However, the response of the individuals was likewise increased entailing that despite higher background
levels, the assay sensitivity was not inﬂuenced. In line with this observation, QC neg failed in the low
volume assay (table 3). However, it should be beared in mind, that the acceptance criteria for the controls
are based on the normal volume assay. QC low and QC high were both accepted according to the normal
volume acceptance criteria. Thus, the initial data pointed towards the possibility of making a downscaled
RIA without aﬀecting sensitivity.
Table 3: The table shows the acceptance criteria for the normal volume assay. Additionally, the response of QCs in the
normal and low volume assay are shown. The response unit is %B/T.
QC neg
QC low
QC high
Acceptance criteria
≤2.7
≥7.7
≥82.6
Normal volume
2.2
10.9
86.4
Low volume
4.1
26.1
94.5
7.1.2
Switching to liquid scintillation counting
As previously mentioned, the plate-based RIA was based on beta radiation instead of gamma radiation.
Therefore, an initial test was carried out to see if counting eﬃciency of the two types of radiation diﬀered.
A sensitivity curve was prepared using the low volume protocol and measured on the gamma counter.
Subsequently, the pellet was mixed with scintillation cocktail and measured on the liquid scintillation
counter. The results are illustrated in ﬁgure 17.
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
50
100
Low volume RIA
Gamma counting
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
50
100
Low volume RIA
Beta counting
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
Figure 17: Comparison of counting eﬃciency using gamma counting or beta counting. The counting eﬃciency
was lower when applying beta counting.
The results indicated a loss in counting eﬃciency when the assay was transferred to beta counting and the
lower responses came with a higher coeﬃcient of variation. The decrease in counting eﬃciency could be
explained by the incomplete dissolving of the pellet. The scintillation cocktail used was based on organic,
hydrophobic compounds that are insoluble in water which could explain the issue with lack of dissolving.
Page 32 of 66
==PAGE:34==
7
RESULTS
To overcome the problem of poor dissolution of the pellet, solubiliser was applied. The main components
of solubiliser are sodium hydroxide and surfactants. These components ensured that the pellet was more
easily dissolved in the scintillation cocktail.
As new variables such as scintillation cocktail and solubiliser were introduced by the transfer to a plate-
based format, it was relevant to investigate and optimise certain parameters.
7.1.3
Assay optimisation
The objective of this project was to develop a plate-based RIA. If successfully developed, it should be
investigated if the plate-based RIA was competitive with the current in-house RIA in terms of key valida-
tions parameters such as sensitivity and drug tolerance. Since the signiﬁcant changes to the in-house RIA
was in the last part of the analysis (assay readout), this part was in focus. The optimisation experiments
can be divided in two parts; Assay reagents and Detector protocols.
Assay reagents
Investigating an appropriate ratio of solubiliser to scintillation cocktail was important. One could imagine
that too high ratios of solubiliser to scintillation cocktail would result in lowered counting eﬃciency due
to the decreased levels of scintillation cocktail. The total volume in the wells was 200 µL. To make the
assay manageable, the samples were comprised by assay controls. As evident from the bar chart shown in
ﬁgure 18, increasing levels of solubiliser caused increased counting eﬃciency. As the amount of solubiliser
exceeded 50 µL, there was no longer a remarkable eﬀect of adding more solubiliser. A ratio of 50:150 was
therefore deemed appropriate for the future experiments.
QC neg
QC low
QC high
0
50
100
4.8
17.0
93.6
5.0
17.0
94.5
4.4
17.1
91.4
5.0
16.5
79.6
4.5
13.9
70.4
4.9
14.6
83.0
%B/T
0:200
10:190
25:175
50:150
75:125
100:100
Figure 18: Test of diﬀerent ratios of solubiliser:scintillation cocktail. Samples were comprised by assay controls
and ratios from 0:200 to 100:100 were tested. 50:150 was chosen as an appropriate ratio.
Due to the costs of the solubiliser it was tested if a total volume of solubiliser and scintillation cocktail
of 100 µL could be used without major eﬀects to the assay. As the most remarkable eﬀect probably
would be evident at lower responses, the responses (%B/T) of 20 healthy individuals were investigated
and plotted with the full volume (200 µL) on the x-axis and the half volume (100 µL) on the y-axis (ﬁgure
19). If the few outliers (marked with blue circles) are disregarded, the results show that %B/T is similar
regardless of whether the ﬁnal volume is 100 µL or 200 µL. To justify the removal of outliers, Tukey’s
outlier criteria was used [32]. Three technical outliers were removed as they were above Q3+1.5*IQR.
A Shapiro-Wilk test was conducted to ensure that the data was normally distributed. Both sets of data
Page 33 of 66
==PAGE:35==
7
RESULTS
passed the normality test and following the outlier removal, a two-sided, unpaired t-test was conducted.
The statistical test revealed that the two groups were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (p = 0.20) and an F-test
(p = 0.58) disclosed that the variances were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
Half volume test, %B/T
200µL, %B/T
100µL, %BT
200 µL 100 µL
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Half volume test
%B/T
A
B
Figure 19: Graphs showing the eﬀect on %B/T when the total volume was changed from 200 µL to 100 µL.
(A) Illustration of %B/T for 20 individuals with the response at 200 µL on the x-axis and the response at 100 µL on the
y-axis. Technical outliers are marked with blue circles. (B) Illustration of the distribution of %B/T for the tested individuals.
The response of three individuals (marked in (A)) were removed as they were technical outliers.
Additionally, the response of a sensitivity curve made with 200 µL and 100 µL as ﬁnal volume was tested
and plotted in a similar way. As evident from the graph shown in ﬁgure 20, the response in the two assays
are similar.
0
50
100
0
50
100
Half volume test, Sensitivity curve
%B/T, 200 µL
%B/T, 100 µL
R2=0.9979
Figure 20: Test of eﬀect on sensitivity curves when half volume of solubiliser and scintillation cocktail was
utilised. The graph demonstrates %B/T when the total volume of solubiliser and scintillation cocktail was either 100 µL
or 200 µL. The straight line having an R-squared (R2) on 0.9979 indicates that the assays are similar.
Page 34 of 66
==PAGE:36==
7
RESULTS
Altogether, the data showed that it was possible to use a total volume of solubiliser and scintillation
cocktail on 100 µL without aﬀecting the eﬃciency of the assay. However, as the detector protocol was
generated for a volume on 200 µL at the time, it was decided to move on with this volume in the subse-
quent experiments.
Even though varied volumes of solubiliser and scintillation cocktail did not aﬀect assay readout, data
shown in ﬁgure 21 demonstrates that the volume of tracer added has an eﬀect on the counting eﬃciency.
As shown in ﬁgure 21A the response exceeded 100 %B/T at the highest antibody levels tested. This
observation indicated that the counting eﬃciency was inﬂuenced by the presence of buﬀer. However,
if a buﬀer volume corresponding to the tracer volume (14 µL) was added to the samples, the response
decreased.
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
50
100
150
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
No buffer
With 14 µL buffer
5
10
15
20
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Water content [%]
CPM
A
B
Figure 21: Test of the eﬀect of buﬀer volume. (A) Sensitivity curves that underline the necessity of presence of equal
volumes of buﬀer in all wells and not just the wells with tracer. If 14 µL buﬀer was not present it entailed that the high
antibody levels exceeded 100 %B/T. (B) Illustration of decreased counting eﬃciency upon increased volumes of buﬀer. CPM
= counts per minute.
To test if the volume of tracer had an eﬀect on the counting eﬃciency, the same speciﬁc radioactivity per
well was added to a plate, however, with varying volumes of buﬀer. As evident from ﬁgure 21B, increasing
amount of buﬀer comes with a decrease in counting eﬃciency. These data thus underline the necessity of
using low volumes of tracer. Furthermore, the importance of using even volumes of either buﬀer or tracer
(diluted in buﬀer) in all wells to obtain reliable results was demonstrated.
Detector protocols
The other part of the assay optimisation was more of a technical kind and focused on the detector protocol
for the TopCount® NXT™Scintillation and Luminescence Counter. The counter required a normalisation
of the detectors as the ﬁrst thing before counting was possible. The normalisation procedure was conducted
to determine a factor for each of the twelve detectors that compensated for counting diﬀerences between
the detectors. If necessary, a crosstalk correction could be carried out.
During the development of the plate-based RIA, QCs positioned ﬁrst and last on the plate revealed the
necessity of a crosstalk correction to be established.
The controls deviated a lot dependent on their
Page 35 of 66
==PAGE:37==
7
RESULTS
position in the plate relative to the position of the ”totals” or samples with high antibody levels. This
phenomenon was suspected to be due to isotopic crosstalk. For establishment of the crosstalk correction,
the procedure was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction [46]. To verify that the crosstalk
correction was well-established, numerous experiments were carried out. The crosstalk correction was
veriﬁed by testing a plate having QC low in all wells except from eight randomly chosen wells. The eight
randomly chosen wells contained tracer (”totals”) instead of QC low (the assay principle can be seen in
appendix 11.3). Figure 22 demonstrates a heatmap showing counts per minute (CPM) before (A) and
after the crosstalk correction (B).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
 A
B
 C
D
 E
F
 G
H
No crosstalk correction
200
250
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
 A
B
 C
D
 E
F
 G
H
With crosstalk correction
200
250
A
B
Figure 22: Heat map showing CPM before (A) and after crosstalk correction (B). The X’s illustrate the ”totals”.
Before the crosstalk correction, higher CPM were obtained around the ”totals”. However, the distribution of higher CPM
was more random after the crosstalk correction.
The response from the samples neighbouring to ”totals” was statistically compared to samples away from
”totals”. Before the crosstalk correction (ﬁgure 22A), the two groups were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (two-
sided, unpaired t-test, p <0.0001). However, applying the crosstalk correction resulted in no statistical
signiﬁcance in mean response between the two groups (two-sided, unpaired t-test, p = 0.44). As no statis-
tical signiﬁcance between the grouped samples was found, the crosstalk correction was deemed successful.
The experiment was also conducted using QC neg as sample. Since isotopic crosstalk was observed it
was important to incorporate the crosstalk correction into the counting protocol that was used for the
subsequent experiments.
Following the successful assay development, some of the most important validation parameters were
examined to evaluate the performance of the newly developed plate-based RIA. These parameters are
assay sensitivity, drug tolerance, and drug interference. The results will be presented in the following
section.
7.1.4
Assay performance
A clinical validation requires a lot of man power, working hours, blood samples, and so forth. Therefore,
the assay performance was evaluated based on estimates of sensitivity, cut-point, drug tolerance, and
drug interference. Estimation of the validation parameters e.g. entails that a smaller number of healthy
individuals were used for cut-point establishment.
Page 36 of 66
==PAGE:38==
7
RESULTS
Sensitivity
According to health authorities and current guidelines, the assay sensitivity is recommended to be at least
100 ng/mL. An assessment of the assay sensitivity was therefore examined for the newly developed plate-
based RIA. A typical clinical validation requires at least 50 individuals to establish a cut-point. However,
an estimation of a cut-point can be done using at least 10 individuals. Consequently, the number of indi-
viduals varied between 10 and 22, dependent on the number of available wells in a plate, for the cut-point
estimation that was used for the evaluation of the assay sensitivity. The cut-point was determined as
a plate-speciﬁc cut-point and calculated using the robust approach as described by Devanarayan et al.
(2017) [32]: Cut-point = median + 1.645 * 1.4826 * MAD. This robust approach is recommended as the
new standard for cut-point calculations and should be used when there is insuﬃcient data to adequately
assess for outliers. The calculation utilises the median and the median absolute deviation (MAD) of
the data instead of the mean and SD as described in section 5.3.2. The robust median/MAD cut-point
calculation is less sensitive to outliers compared to the mean/SD method [32].
Figure 23 demonstrates the data from three independent sensitivity runs utilising the plate-based RIA as
assay platform. The sensitivity in all three runs was signiﬁcantly below the limit on 100 ng/mL, which is
recommended by the health authorities.
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
5
10
20
40
60
80
100
Sensitivity curves for RIAs
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
Sensitivity = 2 ng/mL
Sensitivity = 1 ng/mL
Sensitivity = 4 ng/mL
Figure 23: Sensitivity curves for three independent RIA runs. The dotted lines demonstrate the assay-speciﬁc
cut-points. The assay sensitivity was estimated to be in a range between 1 ng/mL and 4 ng/mL.
Since a traditional RIA was validated concurrent with this project, it was possible to compare the sensi-
tivity of the two diﬀerent RIAs. The traditional RIA had a sensitivity of 3.9 ng/mL and the plate-based
RIA thus holds a great potential as competitor to the traditional RIA [47]. At least when the assay is
conducted without major interferents. Even though the sensitivity was really good, the positive control
antibody samples did not really reﬂect the real world. Typically, patient samples contain drug that might
interfere with the ADA detection. Therefore, it was relevant to evaluate the assay performance in the
presence of drug which, as described in section 5.3.3, is known as drug tolerance and drug interference.
Page 37 of 66
==PAGE:39==
7
RESULTS
Drug tolerance and interference
A drug tolerance assay includes dilution curves of the drug at diﬀerent antibody levels. In this project,
antibody levels corresponding to 250 ng/mL, 100 ng/mL, and QC low (6 ng/mL) were tested. The drug
tolerance at a speciﬁc antibody level is reported as the drug concentration that gives rise to a response
just above cut-point. The assay was very drug tolerant since the highest drug concentration on 500 nM
did not give responses below cut-point at antibody levels on 250 ng/mL and 100 ng/mL (ﬁgure 24).
However, at an antibody level corresponding to QC low (6 ng/mL) the drug tolerance was 31 nM. It is
still a very good drug tolerance, though.
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0
5
10
15
20
40
60
80
Drug tolerance, RIA
Drug level [nM]
%B/T
250 ng/mL
100 ng/mL
6 ng/mL
Figure 24: Drug tolerance tested at antibody levels of 250 ng/mL, 100 ng/mL, and 6 ng/mL. The dotted line
demonstrates the cut-point. The drug tolerance at antibody levels of 250 ng/mL and 100 ng/mL was 500 nM. The drug
tolerance was 31 nM at an antibody level corresponding to QC low (6 ng/mL).
A drug interference assay resembles a sensitivity run with the addition of a ﬁxed level of drug in the
sample. The drug levels tested were 100 nM, 50 nM, and 22 nM (ﬁgure 25). The maximal level of insulin
965 in a clinical sample (Cmax) was predicted to be 22 nM [48].
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
2
4
6
8
10
20
40
60
80
100
Drug interference, RIA
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
100 nM drug
50 nM drug
22 nM drug
No drug
Figure 25: Drug interference tested at drug levels of 100 nM, 50 nM, and 22 nM. The dotted line demonstrates
the cut-point. The sensitivity at drug levels of 100 nM and 50 nM was 125 ng/mL. As 22 nM drug was present, the assay
sensitivity was 2 ng/mL whereas the sensitivity was 1 ng/mL when no drug was present.
Page 38 of 66
==PAGE:40==
7
RESULTS
The assay sensitivity in the presence of 100 nM or 50 nM drug was 125 ng/mL. These drug levels were
considerably higher than the maximal predicted level, though. It was therefore expected that the good
assay sensitivity could not be maintained. However, at the predicted maximal drug level on 22 nM, the
assay sensitivity was 2 ng/mL which is a satisfying result at such drug levels. For comparison, a sensitivity
curve without any drug present was also included. The assay sensitivity was 1 ng/mL.
Compared to the validated RIA in tubes, the sensitivity in the presence of 100 nM drug was 62.5 ng/mL
and 15.7 ng/mL when 50 nM drug was present. It should be noted that this experiment was conducted
during the assay development e.g. before crosstalk correction and it is therefore possible that the drug
interference could be improved.
The assay performance parameters described above indicate that the plate-based RIA holds a great
potential as a future high-throughput assay platform for immunogenicity assessment of peptide-based
drugs.
7.2
Electrochemiluminescence assay
As a competitor to the plate-based RIA, an ECL assay was tested. The assay was highly dependent
on the successful conjugation of biotin and sulfo-tag to insulin 965. Despite fairly low yields on 17%
(A-chain) and 13% (B-chain) for the sulfo-tag conjugates (yield of the biotinylation is not available),
the conjugation and following characterisation were deemed successful and an ECL assay was therefore
developed. A detailed method for the ECL assay is found in section 10.2.
7.2.1
Assay development
Identifying an appropriate concentration of the insulin 965 conjugates was an essential experiment during
the development. Additionally, the sample to acid (sample:acid) ratio was determined. Three conjugate
concentrations were tested: 1000 ng/mL, 500 ng/mL, and 250 ng/mL. Two sample:acid ratios were tested:
10:90 and 30:70. As the assay was in the very early development phase, the incubation was done over
night in the fridge. When identifying the proper sample:acid ratio and conjugate concentration it was
important to look for the parameters that gave the lowest background concurrent with a large dynamic
window. Since a lower limit in conjugate concentration was not identiﬁed at ﬁrst (results are shown in
appendix 11.4), it was relevant to test an even lower conjugate concentration (ﬁgure 26). Simultaneously,
it was tested if one hour incubation at room temperature was suﬃcient, allowing the ECL assay to be
performed on a single day. A sensitivity curve and ten individuals were included in the assay to estimate
a plate-speciﬁc cut-point.
Page 39 of 66
==PAGE:41==
7
RESULTS
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100
150
200
250
300
5000
10000
15000
Test of lower biotin/sulfo-tag concentration
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
250 ng/mL, 1 hour
250 ng/mL, O/N
125 ng/mL, 1 hour
125 ng/mL, O/N
Figure 26:
Testing of a proper conjugate concentration and shortened incubation time.
A low conjugate
concentration (125 ng/mL) caused a lowered background, and thus this concentration was chosen for future experiments.
The results did not change signiﬁcantly dependent on the incubation time. The red dotted line illustrates the cut-point for
the assay conditions 125 ng/mL and one hour incubation which gave a sensitivity of 8 ng/mL.
As the conjugate concentration of 125 ng/mL turned out as the one giving the lowest background and
largest dynamic window, this was chosen as the concentration for the subsequent experiments. Comparison
of the incubation periods revealed that one hour incubation was suﬃcient. The plate-speciﬁc cut-point
was estimated and resulted in a sensitivity of 8 ng/mL.
It should be noted, that the sensitivity curve shown in ﬁgure 26 do not reach a plateau at the higher
antibody concentrations. Since a bridging immunoassays comes with a risk of hook eﬀect it was relevant to
investigate even higher levels of antibody. Therefore, a sensitivity curve starting at 60000 ng/mL followed
by a two-fold dilution was tested. Figure 27 demonstrates that a plateau was not reached even at the
highest antibody level. This meant that clinically relevant antibody levels would be measured correctly
by the ECL assay.
Page 40 of 66
==PAGE:42==
7
RESULTS
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
0
50000
100000
150000
Hook effect test
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
Figure 27: Testing of potential hook eﬀect. As the response keeps increasing upon increasing antibody levels and do
not reach a plateau, it indicates that extremely large antibody levels should be tested to obtain a hook eﬀect. However, such
extreme antibody levels are not clinically relevant.
7.2.2
Assay performance
Similarly to the plate-based RIA, it was important to estimate the most important validation parameters
being sensitivity, drug tolerance, and drug interference.
Sensitivity
The assay sensitivity was estimated in numerous separate runs. The data are presented in ﬁgure 28. The
assay sensitivity varied between 4 ng/mL and 8 ng/mL which was signiﬁcantly below the recommended
sensitivity limit of 100 ng/mL.
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100
150
200
250
300
10000
20000
30000
Sensitivity curves for ECL assays
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
Sensitivity = 8 ng/mL
Sensitivity = 8 ng/mL
Sensitivity = 4 ng/mL
Figure 28: Sensitivity curves for three independent ECL assay runs. The dotted lines demonstrate the assay-speciﬁc
cut-points. The assay sensitivity was estimated to be in the range from 4 ng/mL to 8 ng/mL.
Page 41 of 66
==PAGE:43==
7
RESULTS
Drug tolerance and interference
As a continuation of the testing of important validation parameters, it was relevant to estimate the drug
tolerance and drug interference. One of the advantages related to an ECL assay is high drug tolerance.
Therefore, it was interesting to have two diﬀerent assay platforms and being able to compare the results
of the two (see section 7.3).
The drug tolerance was tested at the same antibody levels as in the plate-based RIA. The drug tolerance
tested at antibody levels of 250 ng/mL and 100 ng/mL was 500 nM (ﬁgure 29). For QC low, which had
an antibody level corresponding to 6 ng/mL, the drug tolerance was 125 nM.
0.1
1
10
100
1000
100
150
200
250
300
400
600
800
Drug tolerance, ECL assay
Drug level [nM]
RLU
250 ng/mL
100 ng/mL
6 ng/mL
Figure 29: Drug tolerance tested at antibody levels of 250 ng/mL, 100 ng/mL, and 6 ng/mL in an ECL
bridging assay. The dotted lines demonstrate the assay-speciﬁc cut-point. The drug tolerance at antibody levels of 250
ng/mL and 100 ng/mL was 500 nM. The drug tolerance was 125 nM at an antibody level corresponding to QC low (6
ng/mL).
Additionally, the drug interference was examined for the bridging ECL assay. The drug concentrations
used in the plate-based RIA was applied for the bridging ECL assay, however, with the exception of a
drug level on 22 nM. As the drug tolerance at higher drug levels (100 nM and 50 nM) turned out to be
very good it was not necessary to test the lower concentration on 22 nM. The results are shown in ﬁgure
30.
Page 42 of 66
==PAGE:44==
7
RESULTS
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100
150
200
250
300
10000
20000
30000
Drug interference, ECL assay
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
100 nM drug
50 nM drug
No drug
Figure 30: Drug interference tested at drug levels on 100 nM and 50 nM. The dotted line demonstrates the
cut-point. The sensitivity at drug levels of 100 nM and 50 nM was 31 ng/mL and 16 ng/mL, respectively. When no drug
was present in the sample, the cut-point was estimated to 8 ng/mL.
The estimation of the assay sensitivity, drug tolerance, and drug interference for the bridging ECL assay
indicated that it could be a worthy opponent to the plate-based RIA.
7.3
Comparison of RIA in plate format and ECL assay
In summary, the estimations of assay sensitivity, drug tolerance, and drug interference for the two high-
throughput platforms are presented in table 4. As evident from the table, it is fair to say that the two
assays perform equally good with the plate-based RIA having a fairly better sensitivity but the ECL assay
having a better tolerance towards drug present in samples. So how to compare the two assays?
Table 4: Summary of estimated validation parameters. The table summarises the data from the estimation of some
of the most important validation parameters being sensitivity, drug tolerance, and drug interference. Sensitivity refers to the
antibody level just above cut-point. Drug tolerance was tested at three antibody levels and refers to the drug concentration
that give a response above cut-point. Drug interference gives the sensitivity in the presence of a ﬁxed drug level. Antibody
levels is reported in ng/mL whereas the drug concentration is given in nM.
Sensitivity
Drug tolerance
Drug interference
Plate-based RIA
2 ng/mL
1 ng/mL
4 ng/mL
250 ng/mL: 500 nM
100 ng/mL: 500 nM
6 ng/mL: 31 nM
100 nM: 125 ng/mL
50 nM: 125 ng/mL
22 nM: 2 ng/mL
ECL assay
8 ng/mL
8 ng/mL
4 ng/mL
250 ng/mL: 500 nM
100 ng/mL: 500 nM
6 ng/mL: 125 nM
100 nM: 31 ng/mL
50 nM: 16 ng/mL
22 nM: -
The ECL assay does not rely on radioactivity and thereby has a huge advantage over the plate-based
RIA. However, epitope shielding is a main concern related to bridging assays of peptide-based drugs and
it was therefore very important to investigate any potential epitope shielding.
Page 43 of 66
==PAGE:45==
7
RESULTS
Epitope shielding
To test for epitope shielding numerous T1D individuals were screened for ADAs using both the plate-based
RIA and the ECL assay. The majority of the individuals were expected to have pre-existing anti-insulin
antibodies that could cross-react with insulin 965. Based on previous ADA assessments, it was expected
that up to 98% of the tested T1D individuals could be antibody positive [49, 50]. To evaluate if the
individuals were antibody positive, 20 healthy individuals were included to establish a cut-point. If the
T1D individuals had a response above cut-point, they were categorised as antibody positive. Surprisingly,
90% of the T1D individuals were antibody positive according to the plate-based RIA whereas only 28%
were antibody positive in the ECL assay. Figure 31 illustrates the response of the individuals in the
two assays. The assay response is diﬀerent in the two assays being either %B/T or RLU, but the QCs
could be used for benchmarking.
Figure 31A emphasises that the RIA is capable of detecting many
antibody positive individuals and some of them have a response way above QC low 2 (10 ng/mL), which
is represented by a purple square. On the other hand, only a few antibody positive individuals were
identiﬁed in the ECL assay (ﬁgure 31B) and their response was just above QC low 2 (purple square). The
assay-speciﬁc cut-point is demonstrated with a dotted line.
0
20
40
60
80
RIA
%B/T
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
ECL assay
RLU
80
100
120
140
160
180
RLU
A
B
Figure 31: Assay responses of 39 T1D individuals in a RIA (A) and ECL assay (B). The assay-speciﬁc cut-
point is demonstrated by the dotted line. QC neg (red), QC low 1 (green) corresponding to 6 ng/mL, QC low 2 (purple)
corresponding to 10 ng/mL, and QC high (brown) are demonstrated in both graphs. Each individual is represented by a
black dot.
These results thus indicate that epitope shielding might be a critical issue for the ECL assay. However, to
be more certain that the diﬀerence between the two assays was due to epitope shielding, three monoclonal
anti-insulin antibodies (mAb 1, mAb 2, and mAb 3) were tested. These monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
were predicted to bind to three diﬀerent sites on insulin and could potentially give more information about
shielded epitopes. As with the previous epitope shielding assay it was expected that the monoclonal anti-
insulin antibodies were able to cross-react with insulin 965 to a certain extend. The predicted binding
sites of the three mAbs are shown in ﬁgure 32.
Page 44 of 66
==PAGE:46==
7
RESULTS
F V N Q H L C G S H L V E A L Y L V C G E R G F F Y T P K T
5                     10                   15                   20                    25                   30
G I V E Q C C T S I C S L Y Q L E N Y C N
S
S
S
S
S
S
N-term.
N-term.
5                     10                  15                    20
mAb 1
mAb 2
mAb 3
A-chain
B-chain
Figure 32: Epitopes targeted by three monoclonal anti-insulin antibodies. mAb 3 binds to the A-chain of the
insulin molecule, whereas mAb 1 and mAb 2 binds to the B-chain. Note that mAb 1 binds close to the N-terminal of the
B-chains. Antibodies are not directed against sequential but rather conformational epitopes. Figure adapted from [51].
Sensitivity curves of the three mAbs were tested and serum from healthy individuals were included for
cut-point estimation. However, the data clearly demonstrated that epitope shielding was a true issue for
the ECL assay. Figure 33 shows the sensitivity curves of the polyclonal antibody (pAb) and the three
mAbs. The estimated sensitivities of the these are shown in table 5. Clearly, mAb 2 does not bind to
insulin 965 either in the RIA or the ECL assay. This observation could be explained by the fact that
insulin 965 has a quite huge mutation in the C-terminal of the B-chain where mAb 2 was predicted to
bind. Binding of mAb 1 to insulin 965 was demonstrated in the RIA but not in the ECL assay. Since
mAb 1 was predicted to bind to the N-terminal part of the B-chain, the data strongly indicated that the
ECL assay came with a severe disadvantage in the form of epitope shielding. mAb 3 was predicted to
bind to the middle of the A-chain and both assays were capable of detecting this binding.
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
RIA
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
mAb 1
mAb 2
mAb 3
pAb
1
10
100
1000
10000
100
200
300
400
50000
100000
ECL assay
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
mAb 1
mAb 2
mAb 3
pAb
A
B
Figure 33:
Comparison of the RIA (A) and ECL assay (B) with regards to epitope shielding.
To assess
potential epitope shielding three mAbs were tested using the two platforms.
Table 5 shows the assay sensitivities of the mAbs in both assays. The comparison in sensitivity of mAb
1 in the two assays clearly demonstrate a diﬀerence in assay performance.
Table 5: Sensitivity of mAbs and pAb in the plate-based RIA and ECL assay.
Plate-based RIA
ECL assay
mAb 1
2 ng/mL
500 ng/mL
mAb 2
-
500 ng/mL
mAb 3
8 ng/mL
2 ng/mL
pAb
2 ng/mL
4 ng/mL
Page 45 of 66
==PAGE:47==
8
DISCUSSION
8
Discussion
The pharmaceutical market is highly competitive. Consequently, timelines are trimmed to a minimum
to get a drug to the market faster. To support the accelerated non-clinical and clinical phases, high-
throughput assays for immunogenicity assessment are needed. At present, the preferred assay platform
for ADA assessment of peptide-based drugs is a RIA. However, this platform requires a lot of manual work
and is not automation friendly. A way to convert the RIA to a high-throughput assay could be to trans-
form it into a plate-based format by the use of liquid scintillation counting. Therefore, one main project
objective was to develop a plate-based RIA and assess its applicability for ADA screening. Preferably, the
high-throughput assay should be conducted without the use of radioactivity. Accordingly, another project
objective was to develop an ECL assay and evaluate and compare its applicability for ADA assessment
with the plate-based RIA. The project objectives were successfully achieved as two high-throughput assay
platforms were developed. Furthermore, important validation parameters were assessed and their assay
performance and applicability as ADA assays in a clinical setting was evaluated.
To the best of our knowledge, a plate-based RIA for ADA assessment is not described in scientiﬁc lit-
erature. The invention that might be closest to the plate-based RIA includes a micro-plate that can be
dismantled and divided into multiple wells [52]. This invention is patented by Fu et al. (2013), but relies
on gamma ray emission only and can therefore not be compared to the plate-based RIA developed in this
project. Due to the novelty of the plate-based RIA using liquid scintillation counting, numerous potential
problems were envisaged before the development of the assay. The ﬁrst concerns in the development of
this platform were downscaling of the assay and switching to liquid scintillation counting. These parame-
ters were investigated prior to project initiation as they were critical for further development of the assay.
The preliminary results were encouraging and it was therefore decided to move on with assay development.
Despite the reduction in handling of individual tubes, the plate-based RIA still requires a lot of manual
work. Especially the centrifugation steps are cumbersome. A possible alternative to centrifugation could
be the use of magnetic beads. Such a scenario could entail a short acid-treatment followed by neutralisa-
tion while adding protein A/G coated magnetic beads. The beads would capture all the antibodies within
the sample. When the beads are magnetised, the unbound tracer would be discarded as supernatant.
Finally, scintillation cocktail would be added and the presence of ADA in a sample could thereby be
determined. The use of magnetic beads would increase assay costs by more than 100-fold, though. At
present, such an optimisation is therefore not economically feasible. However, the successful downscaling
and transformation of the assay to a plate format is an important ﬁrst step towards automation.
Shielded epitopes can result in false negative results and health authorities therefore require that epitope
exposure is considered in the design of ADA assays. Relevant antibody binding sites should not be mod-
iﬁed, obscured, exposed, or destroyed during binding to plastic or coupling to other agents such as biotin
or sulfo-tag. If guidelines are rephrased, the health authorities basically require that all clinically relevant
antibody binding sites are exposed so that both low- and high-aﬃnity antibody responses can be detected
[12, 13].
Page 46 of 66
==PAGE:48==
8
DISCUSSION
The literature within the ﬁeld of assays used speciﬁcally for immunogenicity assessment is quite lim-
ited with the main literature constituted by white papers or guidelines issued by health authorities.
The absence of scientiﬁc literature on alternative assays for immunogenicity assessment of peptide-based
drugs could be due to the competitive nature of the pharmaceutical industry, where knowledge shar-
ing across companies is not necessarily beneﬁcial. It has been challenging to ﬁnd other pharmaceutical
companies that have applied plate-based RIA or a bridging ECL assay for immunogenicity assessment of
peptide-based drugs. Thus, benchmarking to previous studies has not been possible. A search through
Pharmapendium, which is a database providing FDA/EMA drug approval documents, revealed a few
pharmaceutical companies that have used a bridging ECL assay for immunogenicity assessment of a drug
that is similar in size to insulin 965 [53–55]. As the ECL assay comes with a risk of epitope shielding it
was especially interesting to look for the health authorities’ viewpoint on this topic.
Amongst some of the interesting documents is a response from FDA to Amgen Inc., which is the inventor
of palifermin. This drug has an approximate size on 16 kDa and is administered for stimulation of growth
of cells lining the mucosa to decrease the duration and incidence of severe oral mucositis [56]. Amgen Inc.
requested a meeting with FDA prior to the submission of the BLA, where they asked whether their im-
munoassay, being a bridging ECL assay, was suﬃcient for validation. The response from FDA did include
a request for Amgen Inc. to address if the conjugation of the drug, probably with biotin or sulfo-tag,
aﬀected the higher order structure of the drug [57]. Consequently, a section addressing the risk of epitope
shielding was included in the Immunogenicity Review which was a part of the BLA that lead to approval
of the drug back in 2004 [58]. Unfortunately, certain parts of the Immunogenicity Review are erased
and marked with conﬁdentiality or trade secret. Therefore, it was not possible to unravel how the assay,
which rejected the suspicion about reduced or abrogated binding of ADAs, was optimised, conducted,
and evaluated.
In this project, epitope shielding was limited in the plate-based RIA by the application of a tracer which
was a 1:1:1 mixture of insulin 965 labelled with 125I at the three diﬀerent tyrosine residues present in the
molecule. The same strategy was applied in the ECL assay for the conjugation of insulin 965 with biotin
or sulfo-tag. However, as the peptide only possesses two N-terminals, the risk of epitope shielding was still
high even though a 1:1 mixture of conjugated A- and B-chain was utilised, especially considering the fact
that the addition of biotin or sulfo-tag is a much larger alteration of the molecule than simply adding 125I.
To test for epitope exposure and obtain a real-life variation in antibody responses, T1D individuals
were tested in both assays. It was anticipated that the T1D individuals had a certain level of anti-insulin
antibodies that could cross-react with insulin 965. The same anticipation of cross-reactivity was applicable
for the mAbs that were tested. The modiﬁcation in insulin 965 could result in lowered or absent binding
to insulin 965 by anti-insulin antibodies or the mAbs, though. The lack of binding to insulin 965 was
exempliﬁed by mAb 2 that was not able to cross-react with insulin 965 in the previously validated RIA.
This observation was likely due to the modiﬁcation introduced in the C-terminal part of the B-chain in
insulin 965 [47]. Consequently, mAb 2 could be used as a negative control in the test of the three mAbs.
Both mAb 1 and mAb 3 were able to cross-react with insulin 965 in the plate-based RIA. However, only
mAb 3 cross-reacted with insulin 965 in the ECL assay (ﬁgure 34).
Page 47 of 66
==PAGE:49==
8
DISCUSSION
C
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
20
40
60
80
100
RIA
Antibody level [ng/mL]
%B/T
mAb 1
mAb 2
mAb 3
pAb
1
10
100
1000
10000
100
200
300
400
50000
100000
ECL assay
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
mAb 1
mAb 2
mAb 3
pAb
A
B
F V N Q H L C G S H L V E A L Y L V C G E R G F F Y T P K T
5                     10                   15                   20                    25                   30
G I V E Q C C T S I C S L Y Q L E N Y C N
S
S
S
S
S
S
N-term.
N-term.
5                     10                  15                    20
mAb 1
mAb 2
mAb 3
A-chain
B-chain
Figure 34: Reproduction of the results from the experiment with three monoclonal antibodies merged with
the map of their predicted epitopes. (A) Representation of the results as %B/T for increasing antibody levels in the
plate-based RIA. Both pAb (purple), mAb 1 (green), and mAb 3 (red) were able to bind to insulin 965. (B) Illustration of
RLU as a function of antibody levels expressed in ng/mL. Only pAb (purple) and mAb 3 (red) were able to bind to insulin
965 in this assay. (C) Demonstration of the epitopes that the mAbs are predicted to bind to. It should be noted that B-cell
epitopes are conformational rather than sequential.
As mAb 1 could be detected in the plate-based RIA but not in the ECL assay it indicates that some sort of
epitope shielding occurs in the N-terminal part of the molecule. Consequently, the ECL assay should not
be used for monitoring of ADAs during clinical trials as the assay is not capable of detecting all clinically
relevant antibodies. There are diﬀerent possible scenarios that can explain the lack of cross-reactivity of
mAb 1 to insulin 965 in the ECL assay. These scenarios are described below and demonstrated in ﬁgure 35.
The crystal structure of biotin bound to streptavidin reveals that biotin is almost completely embedded
in streptavidin upon their interaction [59]. This embedding could result in shielded epitopes in the N-
terminal part of the drug where mAb 1 was predicted to bind to (ﬁgure 35A). In the assay, the antibody
is allowed to react with the biotinylated and sulfo-tagged insulin 965 before the transfer to the strep-
tavidin coated well. However, it is possible that the biotin-ADA-sulfo-tag complex is split due to the
biotin-streptavidin interaction which is known as one of the strongest non-covalent interactions. Another
explanation could be that the binding of mAb 1 to biotinylated insulin 965 prevents the biotin from
accessing the biotin binding site in streptavidin.
The ECL assay is a bridging format which means that a signal only occurs when the ADAs simultaneously
bind the biotin- and sulfo-tag-conjugate. It could be envisaged that mAb 1 could not be detected in the
ECL assay due to sterical hindrance caused by either biotin or sulfo-tag that are present in the N-terminal
part of insulin 965 (ﬁgure 35B).
Page 48 of 66
==PAGE:50==
8
DISCUSSION
Another possible explanation of epitope shielding, or rather epitope modiﬁcation, could be that the intro-
duction of biotin or sulfo-tag resulted in conformational changes within the peptide (ﬁgure 35C). If such
conformational changes are introduced within an epitope it could result in decreased or lack of binding
of ADAs and thereby lowered sensitivity.
A
B
C
mAb 1
mAb 1
mAb 1
mAb 3
mAb 3
mAb 3
Figure 35: Possible scenarios that could explain the lack of cross-reactivity to insulin 965 in the ECL assay.
(A) Demonstration of how biotin is embedded in streptavidin upon their interaction and thereby hinders the binding of mAb
1 to insulin 965. (B) Illustration of how the presence of a large group, in this case illustrated by sulfo-tag, cause sterical
hindrance that abrogate binding of mAb 1. (C) Representation of how the conjugation, in this case illustrated by biotin,
cause a conformational change within insulin 965 and thereby prevent binding of mAb 1 to insulin 965.
It is important to mention that the three scenarios described above are fairly interrelated. It might there-
fore be diﬃcult to develop assays that tests only one of the three hypothesis at a time.
A possible way to investigate if embedding of biotin could explain the observed epitope shielding could
be to test an even longer spacer arm on the biotin. The applied biotin had a medium length of spacer
arm of 22.4 angstrom which should be suﬃcient to avoid sterical hindrance from the streptavidin-biotin
interaction. However, a biotin with a spacer arm length of 30.5 angstrom is commercially available and
could be worth testing [60]. Even though it might not be possible to distinguish between sterical hin-
drance and embedding of biotin, a longer spacer arm could potentially result in cross-reactivity of mAb
1 to insulin 965.
It could be relevant to test if the biotin- or sulfo-tag conjugation impacted the three-dimensional structure
of insulin 965. To test this, the conjugates should be labelled with 125I and tested in the plate-based RIA
format. The assay would require labelling with 125I for each conjugate in order to pinpoint if it is the
location of the conjugate, the biotin, sulfo-tag, or both the biotin and sulfo-tag that cause abrogated
binding of mAb 1 to insulin 965. If mAb 1 can bind to all four 125I-labelled conjugates (being insulin
965 with biotin on the A-chain, insulin 965 with biotin on the B-chain, insulin 965 with sulfo-tag on the
A-chain, or insulin 965 with sulfo-tag on the B-chain) it could indicate that the lack of binding in the
ECL assay is most likely caused by the embedding of biotin in streptavidin. However, if mAb 1 is not
Page 49 of 66
==PAGE:51==
8
DISCUSSION
able to bind any of the conjugates it indicates that the binding of mAb 1 is hindered either due to sterical
hindrance or conformational changes within the epitope.
Unfortunately, labelling of the four conjugates with 125I would be very comprehensive and time-consuming.
However, it should be possible to test the same hypothesis without the use of radioactivity using a direct
ELISA instead. The assay should test and compare ﬁve diﬀerent antigens being un-labelled insulin 965
and the four diﬀerent conjugates. Un-labelled insulin 965 should be included as a positive control. As
with the RIA-based experiment, it is not possible to distinguish between the sterical hindrance or confor-
mational change scenario if mAb 1 is not able to bind any of the conjugates.
It could be interesting to investigate alternative conjugation sites within insulin 965 aside from the N-
terminals suggestion only. The best option is probably the C-terminal of the A-chain which theoretically
could be conjugated using sulfo-tag amine or amine-PEG2-biotin. In order to make the conjugation, the
C-terminal carboxylic acid should be activated, yet this would result in simultaneous activation of the
glutamic acid residues within the molecule. Upon activation of these, free amines within insulin 965 (the
N-terminals) would react with the activated acids and result in multimers of the peptide. Therefore, pro-
tection of the N-terminals should be carried out before the activation of the acids. After all, conjugation
to acids within the molecule would result in numerous diﬀerent conjugates as the reaction could not be
controlled and a labor-intensive process of puriﬁcation and characterisation of the conjugates would follow
[61]. Currently, alternative conjugation strategies like this are not feasible.
Patient safety is the most important parameter in the pharmaceutical industry. Consequently, health
authorities have speciﬁc requirements for ADA assay performance in terms of sensitivity in the presence
of drug, robustness, precision, speciﬁcity, selectivity, and reproducibility. For a pharmaceutical company
to make proﬁt of research and development of a new drug, it is important to get a drug fast to the market
before granted patents expire, however, without compromising safety. Automation of assays supports this
aspiration and is desirable as it gives the possibility of a higher through-put. Furthermore, data integrity
is improved by automation which ultimately leads to enhanced patient safety.
Transforming the RIA to a plate-based format comes with many beneﬁts and is an important step towards
automation of ADA assays. The plate-based RIA is currently not fully automated, however, plate-based
RIA has paved the way for a bright future of ADA assessment requiring a minimum of manual work.
Contrary to the bright future of the plate-based RIA, the potential of the ECL assay is highly dependent
on the root cause for epitope shielding. If a longer spacer arm easily can solve the epitope shielding issue,
then the assay holds great potential as it is sensitive, avoids the use of radioactivity, and is plate-based
which is desirable for automation. However, it is still important to emphasize the potential issue with
epitope shielding. The only reason that it was possible to deem the ECL assay inappropriate in this
project was the comparison of antibody positive T1D individuals using two platforms. However, if a
novel peptide-based drug only was tested in the ECL assay and obtained a sensitivity below 100 ng/mL,
the assay could falsely have been deemed appropriate for ADA assessment. Consequently, it might be
more reasonable to stick to the plate-based RIA if immunogenicity assessment of a new peptide-based
drug is needed.
Page 50 of 66
==PAGE:52==
9
CONCLUSION
9
Conclusion
This project focused on the development of high-throughput assay platforms for ADA assessment of
peptide-based drugs.
Two assays, a plate-based RIA and an ECL assay, were successfully developed
and their applicability in immunogenicity assessment was evaluated.
Generally seen, the two assays
performed equally good. However, testing of T1D individuals and three monoclonal antibodies revealed
that epitope shielding was a signiﬁcant problem for the bridging ECL assay. This epitope shielding limits
the applicability of the ECL assay in ADA assessment. If the bridging ECL assay should be applicable
in future, alternative labelling is needed to avoid epitopes being shielded. Meanwhile, one should be able
to purify and characterise the conjugates properly. At present the plate-based RIA might be the best
alternative to the conventional RIA which is conducted in tubes. However, radioactivity is still needed
for this assay and it is therefore still very relevant to work on an assay platform that does not require
radioactivity.
Page 51 of 66
==PAGE:53==
10
MATERIALS AND METHODS
10
Materials and methods
10.1
Radioimmunoassay
10.1.1
Materials and technology
Human serum pools from healthy individuals (lot number BRH1510523 and HMN113971) were purchased
from BioIVT. The serum pools consisted of human serum (pooled gender) that was recovered from whole
blood donations from 10 donors [62, 63]. Human individual serum was recovered from whole blood dona-
tions from European donors, both males and females, varying in age and race.
Insulin 965, tracer, and polyclonal antibody (pAb) were obtained from in-house departments at Novo
Nordisk [64, 65]. The pAb originated from immunisation of a New Zealand White rabbit with insulin 965
coupled to keyhole limpet hemocyanin [66].
MicroBeta2® Microplate Counter System and TopCount® NXT™Scintillation and Luminescence Counter,
both provided by PerkinElmer, were used for liquid scintillation counting. Both counters have 12 detec-
tors which were normalised when a new protocol was established. A crosstalk reduction ﬁlter was likewise
established.
300 mM Glycine-HCl pH 3.0 (300 mM Glycine-HCl pH 3.0, and 0.25% gammaglobulin), 16% PEG-6000
(PEG-6000 in TBS,tween (0.010 M TRIS, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, pH 8.6)), NaFA2 buﬀer (0.040
M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.5% BSA, 0.25% gammaglobulin, 0.010 M EDTA, 0.5 % Tween-20, pH
7.4) and 1M TRIS pH 9.5 were prepared by the helpful lab technicians in Immunogenicity Assessment
according to internal procedures. Scintillation cocktail (ProSafe TS+) and solubiliser (AquiGest) were
purchased from Meridian Biotechnologies Ltd.
10.1.2
Method
Sample preparation
Sensitivity curves were prepared by a two-fold dilution of pAb in human serum pool starting at a con-
centration of 4000 ng/mL. The samples were incubated for one hour followed by freezing for at least one
hour. The freeze-thaw cycle of samples was carried out to mimick the reality of sample collection in the
clinic and subsequent analysis in Immunogenicity Assessment as much as possible. Quality controls with
pAb levels at 250 ng/mL (QC high), 10 ng/mL (QC low 2) and 6 ng/mL (QC low 1) were prepared in the
same way. Drug tolerance and interference samples were prepared in a similar way, however, with varying
drug concentration at maintained pAb levels and varying pAb levels at maintained drug concentrations,
respectively.
Assay procedure
Figure 36 illustrates the workﬂow of the plate-based RIA. 10 µL of sample was added to a white round-
bottom 96-well microplate (Eppendorf, Microplate 96/U-PP, white wells) in duplicate followed by addition
of 11.2 µL 300 mM GlycinHCl pH 3.0. The plate was incubated for 15 minutes on an orbital plate shaker
(120 rpm) at room temperature whereupon 112 µL of cold 1M TRIS diluted 10X in 16% PEG-6000 was
added. The plate was vortexed on a multi-tube vortexer for 1 minute and centrifuged at 1500xg for
Page 52 of 66
==PAGE:54==
10
MATERIALS AND METHODS
15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the precipitate was dissolved in 28 µL NaFA2
buﬀer followed by 14 µL 428.6 nCi/mL tracer after which the plate was vortexed on a multi-tube vortexer
and centrifuged for a second at 1000xg prior to incubation for 16-24 hours in the fridge (4°C). On day
two of the analysis, 151 µL cold 16% PEG-6000 was added to the plate which was vortexed on a multi-
tube vortexer and centrifuged at 1500xg for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, 151 µL
cold 16% PEG-6000 was added, and the plate was centrifuged at 1500xg once again for 15 minutes at
4°C. After discarding the supernatant, 14 µL ”totals” (428.6 nCi/mL) were added to speciﬁc wells that
had not received tracer on day one and 14 µL NaFA2 buﬀer was added to the remaining wells. 50 µL
solubiliser was added and the plate was incubated on a plate shaker (750 rpm) at room temperature for
20 minutes. Subsequently, 150 µL scintillation cocktail was added, the plate was sealed with TopSeal
A-plus (PerkinElmer), and another 30 minutes of incubation on a plate shaker (1000 rpm) was carried
out. Lastly, the plate was counted in the TopCount® NXT™system.
Page 53 of 66
==PAGE:55==
10
MATERIALS AND METHODS
300 mM 
GlycinHCl
10 µL
11.2 µL
120 rpm
15
minutes
0.1M TRIS 
pH 9.5
14.4%
PEG-6000
112 µL
15
minutes
1500 xg
1 minute
14µL
NaFA2
28µL
1 minute
1
second
1000 xg
16-24
hours
4
oC
16%
PEG-6000
151 µL
1 minute
15
minutes
1500 xg
Supernatant
16%
PEG-6000
151 µL
15
minutes
1500 xg
Supernatant
Supernatant
Solubiliser
50 µL
750 rpm
20
minutes
150 µL
Scintillation
cocktail
1000 rpm
30
minutes
TopCount
NXT
14µL
14µL
NaFA2
Figure 36: Workﬂow for the plate-based RIA.
Page 54 of 66
==PAGE:56==
10
MATERIALS AND METHODS
10.2
Electrochemiluminescense assay
10.2.1
Materials and technology
Human serum pool from healthy individuals (lot number HMN113971) was purchased from BioIVT. The
serum pools consisted of human serum (pooled gender) that was recovered from whole blood donations
from 10 donors [63]. Human individual serum was recovered from whole blood donations from European
donors, both males and females, varying in age and race.
Assay dilution buﬀer (0.010 M phosphate, 0.65 M NaCl, 0.05% Tween-20, 0.00025% phenol red, 0.2% ﬁsh
gelatine, pH 7.2), PBSx1 (0.010 M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.2) and wash buﬀer (0.010 M phosphate,
0.15 M NaCl, 0.05% Tween-20, pH 7.2) were prepared by the helpful lab technicians in Immunogenicity
Assessment according to internal procedures.
10.2.2
Method
Conjugation of insulin 965 was kindly conducted by Lauge Sch¨aﬀer, Alice Ravn Madsen, and Hanne
Kronstrøm from Research Chemistry at Novo Nordisk. The conjugation method will only be described
brieﬂy. In an attempt to avoid that epitopes were shielded on insulin 965 by the conjugation, a 1:1 mix of
conjugated A- and B-chain was utilised. The primary amine group on the A-chain N-terminal is known
to be approximately ﬁve times more reactive than the primary amine on the B-chain N-terminal. Conse-
quently, it is necessary to protect the primary amine group on the A-chain while the reaction (conjugation
with either biotin or sulfo-tag) on the B-chain occurs.
Biotinylation
Insulin 965 was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) followed by N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DI-
PEA) and 2-acetyldimedone.
To ensure that the N-terminal of the A-chain was protected, Liquid
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) and Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC)
was conducted. As the protection of the free amine on the A-chain was veriﬁed, EZ-Link™NHS-LC-biotin
was added. Base (Na2HPO4, pH 9-10) was added to deprotect the A-chain N-terminal and LC-MS and
UPLC was utilised to verify the formation of a biotinylated B-chain.
Sulfo-tag
Insulin 965 was dissolved in DMSO followed by addition of DIPEA and 2-(methylsulfonyl)ethyl N-
succinimidyl carbonate.
To verify the protection of the N-terminal A-chain LC-MS and UPLC was
applied. The protected insulin 965 was puriﬁed and freeze-dried. To prepare for the sulfo-tag conjuga-
tion, the freeze-dried drug was dissolved in 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer pH 7.9 and the sulfo-tag NHS ester
was added. After 1 and 2 hours, UPLC and LC-MS were applied to ensure that no further reaction took
place and ﬁnally pH was raised to 9.8 by addition of Na2HPO4 to allow for deprotection of the A-chain
N-terminal.
Assay procedure
Figure 37 illustrates the workﬂow of the ECL assay. 30 µL sample was added in duplicate to a U-bottom
Greiner plate (plate A) followed by addition of 70 µL 300 mM acetic acid. The plate was incubated
Page 55 of 66
==PAGE:57==
10
MATERIALS AND METHODS
on a plate shaker (300 rpm) at room temperature for 15 minutes. Meanwhile, a solution of 125 ng/mL
biotinylated insulin 965 (being a 1:1 mixture of biotinylated A- and B-chain) and 125 ng/mL sulfo-tagged
insulin 965 (being a 1:1 mixture of sulfo-tagged A- and B-chain) in assay dilution buﬀer was prepared.
During the last 5 minutes of the incubation time 1 M TRIS pH 9.5 was added to the conjugate solution to
a ﬁnal concentration on 0.048 M. 70 µL of the solution was added to a new plate (plate B). 30 µL of the
acid treated sample was pipetted from plate A to plate B which incubated for 1 hour at room temperature
at 300 rpm. 150 µL assay dilution buﬀer was added to a MSD GOLD streptavidin plate (plate C) and
the plate incubated for 1 hour. Plate C was washed three times in wash buﬀer and 40 µL of sample from
plate B was transferred to plate C. Plate C incubated for 1 hour at 600 rpm on a plate shaker. Thereafter,
the plate was washed three times in wash buﬀer followed by addition of 150 µL MSD Read buﬀer T with
surfactant (2x). Within 10 minutes the plate was read on the MSD instrument (SECTOR Imager 6000).
300 mM
Acetic
Acid
30 µL
70 µL
300 rpm
15
minutes
A
A
Assay
dilution
buffer
20 mL
9 µL
5 µL
1M
TRIS
pH 9.5
1 mL 
70 µL
B
B
30 µL 
300 rpm
1
hour
Assay
dilution
buffer
C
150 µL
C
3x wash
B
C
washed
40 µL
600 rpm
1
hour
C
3x wash
C
washed
150 µL
Read plate
within 10
minutes
Read
buffer
Figure 37: Workﬂow for the ECL assay.
10.3
Statistical analysis and software
All statistical analyses were performed using Graphpad Prism (version 8.0.2) or SAS JMP (version 12.2.).
Figures are created with Biorender.com or Graphpad Prism.
Page 56 of 66
==PAGE:58==
REFERENCES
References
1.
Eckardt, K. U. & Casadevall, N. Pure red-cell aplasia due to anti-erythropoietin antibodies. Nephrology
Dialysis Transplantation 18, 865–869 (2003).
2.
Casadevall, N. et al. Pure Red-Cell Aplasia and Antierythropoietin Antibodies in Patients Treated
with Recombinant Erythropoietin. New England Journal of Medicine 346, 469–475 (2002).
3.
Boven, K. et al. The increased incidence of pure red cell aplasia with an Eprex formulation in
uncoated rubber stopper syringes. Kidney International 67, 2346–2353 (2005).
4.
Hermeling, S., Schellekens, H., Crommelin, D. J. A. & Jiskoot, W. Micelle-Associated Protein in
Epoetin Formulations: A Risk Factor for Immunogenicity? Pharmaceutical Research 20, 1903–1907
(2003).
5.
Rossert, J., Casadevall, N. & Eckardt, K. U. Anti-Erythropoietin Antibodies and Pure Red Cell
Aplasia. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 15, 398–406 (2004).
6.
Junod, S. W. Celebrating a Milestone: FDA’s Approval of First Genetically-Engineered Product.
U.S. Food & Drug Administration (2007).
7.
Walsh, G. Biopharmaceutical benchmarks 2006. Nature Biotechnology 24, 769–776 (2006).
8.
Walsh, G. Biopharmaceutical benchmarks 2018. Nature Biotechnology 36, 1136–1145 (2018).
9.
European Medicines Agency. Guideline on Immunogenicity assessment of therapeutic proteins. Com-
mittee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (2007).
10.
U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Immunogenicity Assessment for Therapeutic Protein Products.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food & Drug Administration, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (2014).
11.
Mire-Sluis, A. R. et al. Recommendations for the design and optimization of immunoassays used in
the detection of host antibodies against biotechnology products. Journal of Immunological Methods
289, 1–16 (2004).
12.
European Medicines Agency. Guideline on Immunogenicity assessment of therapeutic proteins. Com-
mittee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (2017).
13.
U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Immunogenicity Testing of Therapeutic Protein Products - De-
veloping and Validating Assays for Anti-Drug antibody Detection. U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Food & Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, and Cen-
ter for Biologics Evaluation and Research (2019).
14.
Jawa, V. et al. T-cell dependent immunogenicity of protein therapeutics: Preclinical assessment and
mitigation. Clinical Immunology 149, 534–555 (2013).
15.
Pineda, C., Casta˜neda Hern´andez, G., Jacobs, I. A., Alvarez, D. F. & Carini, C. Assessing the
Immunogenicity of Biopharmaceuticals. Biodrugs 30, 195–206 (2016).
16.
Moussa, E. M. et al. Immunogenicity of Therapeutic Protein Aggregates. Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences 105, 417–430 (2016).
Page 57 of 66
==PAGE:59==
REFERENCES
17.
De Groot, A. S. & Scott, D. W. Immunogenicity of protein therapeutics. Trends in Immunology 28,
482–90, 482–490 (2007).
18.
Rosenberg, A. S. & Sauna, Z. E. Immunogenicity assessment during the development of protein
therapeutics. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 70, 584–594 (2018).
19.
Murphy, K. & Weaver, C. Janeway’s Immunobiogoly. Garland Science, Taylor & Francis Group
(2017).
20.
Heesters, B. A., Myers, R. C. & Carroll, M. C. Follicular dendritic cells: Dynamic antigen libraries.
Nature Reviews Immunology 14, 495–504 (2014).
21.
Shankar, G., Pendley, C. & Stein, K. E. A risk-based bioanalytical strategy for the assessment of
antibody immune responses against biological drugs. Nature Biotechnology 25, 555–561 (2007).
22.
Schellekens, H. Immunogenicity of therapeutic proteins: Clinical implications and future prospects.
Clinical Therapeutics 24, 1720–1740 (2002).
23.
Shankar, G. et al. Assessment and reporting of the clinical immunogenicity of therapeutic proteins
and peptides - Harmonized terminology and tactical recommendations. Aaps Journal 16, 658–673
(2014).
24.
Dingman, R. & Balu-Iyer, S. V. Immunogenicity of Protein Pharmaceuticals. Journal of Pharma-
ceutical Sciences 108, 1637–1654 (2019).
25.
Lentz, S. R. et al. Recombinant factor VIIa analog in the management of hemophilia with inhibitors:
Results from a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial of vatreptacog alfa. Journal of Thrombosis
and Haemostasis 12, 1244–1253 (2014).
26.
United States Pharmacopeia. Immunogenicity Assays - Design and Validation of Immunoassays to
Detect Anti-drug Antibodies. The United States Pharmacopeial Convention (2017).
27.
Lamberth, K. et al. Post hoc assessment of the immunogenicity of bioengineered factor VIIa demon-
strates the use of preclinical tools. Science Translational Medicine 9 (2017).
28.
Szabo, A., Stolz, L. & Granzow, R. Surface plasmon resonance and its use in biomolecular interaction
analysis (BIA). Current Opinion in Structural Biology 5, 699–705 (1995).
29.
Lofgren, J. A. et al. Comparing ELISA and surface plasmon resonance for assessing clinical immuno-
genicity of panitumumab. Journal of Immunology 178, 7467–7472 (2007).
30.
A. Partridge, M., Purushothama, S., Elango, C. & Lu, Y. Emerging Technologies and Generic Assays
for the Detection of Anti-Drug Antibodies. Journal of Immunology Research (2016).
31.
Meso Scale Discovery. Bridging Immunogenicity Assays - Guidelines for Assay Development. Meso
Scale Discovery (2011).
32.
Devanarayan, V. et al. Recommendations for Systematic Statistical Computation of Immunogenicity
Cut Points. Aaps Journal 19, 1487–1498 (2017).
33.
Shankar, G. et al. Recommendations for the validation of immunoassays used for detection of host
antibodies against biotechnology products. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis 48,
1267–1281 (2008).
Page 58 of 66
==PAGE:60==
REFERENCES
34.
Wadhwa, M., Knezevic, I., Kang, H. N. & Thorpe, R. Immunogenicity assessment of biotherapeutic
products: An overview of assays and their utility. Biologicals 43, 298–306 (2015).
35.
Berson, S. A. & Yalow, R. S. General principles of radioimmunoassay. Clinica Chimica Acta 22,
51–69 (1968).
36.
Desbuquois, B. & Aurbach, G. Use of Polyethylene Glycol to Separate Free and Antibody-Bound
Peptide Hormones in Radioimmunoassays. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 33,
732–738 (1971).
37.
Lagersted, G. Batch certiﬁcate. Novo Nordisk, Chemistry and Isotope Lab. (2019).
38.
Wilde, C. & Ottewell, D. A practical guide to gamma-counting in radioimmunoassay. Annals of
Clinical Biochemistry 17, 1–9 (1980).
39.
PerkinElmer. Wizard2 Automated Gamma Counters - Take command of your gamma counting.
PerkinElmer (2013).
40.
Herscowitz, H. B. & McKillip, T. W. A simple method for liquid scintillation counting of 125Iodine
and 51Chromium used in antigen binding and cytotoxicity studies. Journal of Immunological Methods
4, 253–262 (1973).
41.
PerkinElmer. Liquid Scintillation Counting. PerkinElmer - Radiometric Knowledgebase - Liquid
Scintillation Counting (online) (2019).
42.
TopCount Topics - Crosstalk. Packard Instrument Company (1992).
43.
Fristrup, P. & Kristensen, J. B. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Isotope Chemistry and
Chemical Development (2019).
44.
Grabert, R. et al. Assays for detecting the presence or amount of anti-drug antibody, EP Patent
No.: EP 3,105,592 B1. European Patent Oﬃce (2018).
45.
Meso Scale Discovery. MSD® Technology Platform. Meso Scale Discovery (2013).
46.
PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences. TopCount® NXT™Microplate Scintillation & Lumines-
cence Counters - Operation Manual.
47.
Wassmann, H. & Loftager, M. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Immunogenicity Assay De-
velopment (2019).
48.
Kristensen, N. R. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Quantitative Clinical Pharmacology (2019).
49.
Mianowska, B. et al. Immunogenicity of diﬀerent brands of human insulin and rapid-acting insulin
analogs in insulin-na¨ıve children with type 1 diabetes. Pediatric Diabetes 12, 78–84 (2011).
50.
Jørgensen, L. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Clinical Immunogenicity Analysis (2019).
51.
Toft-Hansen, H. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Clinical Immunogenicity Analysis (2019).
52.
Fu, M.-J. et al. Radioimmunoassay with a 96-welled micro-plate, US Patent No.: US 8,569,075
B2. Oﬃcial Gazette of the United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce Patents. US Patent App.
US13/232,928 (2013).
53.
Dyax Corp. Ecallantide, Chemistry review 125277/S-000. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Center
for Drug Evaluation and Research (2009).
Page 59 of 66
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
54.
Dyax Corp. Ecallantide, Prescribing Information. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research (2009).
55.
Pﬁzer (Hospira Inc.) Filgrastim, Non-Clinical Review BLA761080. U.S. Food & Drug Administration,
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (2017).
56.
U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Palifermin - Prescribing Information (2016).
57.
U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Palifermin, Pre-BLA CMC meeting Letter of 02-Dec-2003. U.S.
Food & Drug Administration, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (2003).
58.
Amgen Inc. Palifermin, Immunogenicity Review BLA125103/0. U.S. Food & Drug Administration,
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (2009).
59.
Pazy, Y., Kulik, T., Bayer, E. A., Wilchek, M. & Livnah, O. Ligand exchange between proteins:
Exchange of biotin and biotin derivatives between avidin and streptavidin. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 277, 30892–30900 (2002).
60.
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc. User guide: EZ-link NHS-Biotin Reagents (2019).
61.
Madsen, A. R. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Research Chemistry (2019).
62.
BioIVT. Certiﬁcate of Analysis, Human Serum lot no. BRH1510523 (2018).
63.
BioIVT. Certiﬁcate of Analysis, Human Serum lot no. HMN113971 (2019).
64.
Certiﬁcate of Analysis, Peptide drug insulin 965. Novo Nordisk, Metrology (2018).
65.
Tracer Batch Certiﬁcate. Novo Nordisk, Chemistry and Isotope Lab. (2019).
66.
Polyclonal Antibody Batch Certiﬁcate. Novo Nordisk, Antibody Technology (2018).
67.
Sch¨aﬀer, L. & Madsen, A. R. Personal communication. Novo Nordisk, Research Chemistry (2019).
Page 60 of 66
==PAGE:62==
11
APPENDIX
11
Appendix
11.1
Conjugation strategy of insulin 965 with biotin or sulfo-tag
To explain the conjugation strategy, human insulin can be used as a model molecule. The chemistry
behind the conjugation with biotin and sulfo-tag does in both cases involve N-hydroxysuccinimide ester
which readily reacts with primary amines of proteins under basic conditions. In antibody-based drugs
lysine residues are targeted as they contain a primary amine. However, since insulin 965 is a peptide
drug it has none lysine residues entailing that the conjugation should be done on the N-terminal of the
A- and B-chain that the molecule possess. However, the reactivity of the two N-terminals diﬀer with
the A-chain being approximately ﬁve times more reactive than the B-chain due to sterical diﬀerences
[67]. This means that protection of the A-chain N-terminal should be carried out before conjugation to
the B-chain occurs (ﬁgure 38). The conjugation starts with dissolution of drug in DMSO followed by
addition of DIPEA and 2-(methylsulfonyl)ethyl N-succinimidyl carbonate to protect the N-terminal on
the A-chain. Subsequently, sulfo-tag N-hydroxysuccinimide ester is added and will by time react with the
unprotected N-terminal on the B-chain. Upon completion of the reaction, base (Na2HPO4, pH 9-10) is
added to deprotect the A-chain.
Page 61 of 66
==PAGE:63==
11
APPENDIX
CO2
....
.....
....
.....
.....
.....
DIPEA
Figure 38:
Conjugation strategy for N-terminal of B-chain.
The A-chain is protected by addition of 2-
(methylsulfonyl)ethyl N-succinimidyl carbonate. Sulfo-tag N-hydroxysuccinimide ester is added and reacts on the unprotected
N-terminal of the B-chain. Upon reaction, the N-terminal of the A-chain is deprotected by base.
Page 62 of 66
==PAGE:64==
11
APPENDIX
11.2
Pellet opaqueness experiment
During the development of the plate-based RIA, it was suspected that the opaqueness of the pellet upon
dissolution in scintillation cocktail inﬂuenced the counting eﬃciency. It was envisaged that the opaque
solution could quench some of the emitted light and thereby decrease the counting eﬃciency. To test this
hypothesis, a pellet of serum with tracer was prepared followed by solubilisation in scintillation cocktail.
This response was compared to a transparent solution that solely contained tracer and scintillation cock-
tail. The result shown in ﬁgure 39 clearly demonstrates that the counting eﬃciency was not reduced due
to the opaqueness of the pellet.
Serum pellet tracer
(Opaque)
Only tracer
(Transparent)
4300
4400
4500
4600
4700
4800
4900
Pellet opaqueness effect
CPM
Figure 39: Test of the eﬀect of pellet opaqueness on counting eﬃciency. An opaque serum solution with tracer was
compared to a transparent solution that only contained tracer. The dots represents replicates. CPM = counts per minute.
Page 63 of 66
==PAGE:65==
11
APPENDIX
11.3
Detector protocol assay principle
In an assay involving radioactivity, there is a risk of isotopic crosstalk, which can result in elevated signals
from wells neighbouring high-positive samples. Issues with isotopic crosstalk were detected and conse-
quently, crosstalk correction was needed. After establishing a crosstalk correction protocol, a veriﬁcation
of the crosstalk correction was performed. The assay principle behind the veriﬁcation relies on a com-
parison in CPM for subsets of samples with the only diﬀerence between the samples being their position
relative to the ”totals”. Samples were grouped in three; Serum samples neighbouring to ”total” (green in
plate A, ﬁgure 40), serum samples away from ”total” (yellow in plate A, ﬁgure 40), and serum samples
in a plate without any tracer (yellow in plate B, ﬁgure 40). The ”totals” were positioned randomly in
plate A. Plate B only contained serum samples and was used for benchmarking of a response without any
inﬂuence from isotopic crosstalk.
 = Serum (QC neg or QC low) 
= Neighbour to "total"
= "Total"
B
A
 = Serum (QC neg or QC low) 
Figure 40: The assay principle behind the veriﬁcation of proper crosstalk is demonstrated by the positioning
of the samples in a 96-well plate. Plate A contained serum samples (either QC neg or QC low) in 88 wells with the
remaining 8 wells constituted by tracer/”total”. Plate B contained serum samples and no tracer.
One-way ANOVA was used to compare the means of the three groups before and after crosstalk correction.
Before crosstalk correction, a statistical analysis revealed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the means of the
samples neighbouring to ”totals” as compared to samples away from totals or samples in the plate with
just serum (p <0.0001). However, if crosstalk correction was applied and data re-evaluated, there was
no longer a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in mean between the three groups (p = 0.70). This is also evident from
ﬁgure 41 where the CPMs for the three groups are illustrated before and after crosstalk correction.
Page 64 of 66
==PAGE:66==
11
APPENDIX
Neighbour to "total"
Away from "total"
No tracer
150
200
250
300
Before crosstalk correction
CPM
p <0.0001
ns
Neighbour to "total"
Away from "total"
No tracer
150
200
250
300
After crosstalk correction
CPM
ns
A
B
Figure 41: CPM for the three groups of QC low before and after crosstalk correction. (A) Illustration of CPM
for the three groups of samples before crosstalk correction. As evident, the samples neighbouring to ”total” come with higher
CPM than samples positioned further away from the ”totals”. (B) Representation of data after crosstalk correction. As
a consequence of the correction, there is no longer statistical signiﬁcance between the three groups. The dots represents
replicates. ns=not signiﬁcant.
Page 65 of 66
==PAGE:67==
11
APPENDIX
11.4
Development of the electrochemiluminescence assay
The initial development of an ECL assay required that a proper sample:acid ratio was found. Furthermore,
the conjugate concentration should be tested. Conjugate concentrations of 1000 ng/mL, 500 ng/mL, and
250 ng/mL were tested along with sample:acid ratios of 10:90 and 30:70. As evident from ﬁgure 42, the
lower conjugate concentration gave lower background response and a larger dynamic range. However, a
lower limit in conjugate concentration was not identiﬁed and even lower concentrations were therefore
tested (see section 7.2.1).
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
1000
2000
3000
5000
10000
15000
Test of sample:acid ratio and biotin/sulfo-tag concentration
Antibody level [ng/mL]
RLU
10:90, 1000 ng/mL
10:90, 500 ng/mL
10:90, 250 ng/mL
30:70, 1000 ng/mL
30:70, 500 ng/mL
30:70, 250 ng/mL
Figure 42: Testing of sample:acid ratio and screening of a proper conjugate concentration. The lower back-
ground, the better. However, it was also important to have a certain dynamic range. A sample:acid ratio of 30:70 and a
conjugate concentration of 250 ng/mL seemed promising.
Page 66 of 66
