==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
Submission
Alex Kimber
S171773
Design of a Prototyping Tool for Engaging with the Maker Movement
Design af et prototyping værktøj til at engagere med maker bevægelse
==PAGE:2==
© Alex Kimber 2020
This master thesis was prepared at the DTU Management department at 
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements 
for acquiring an MSc in Design and Innovation.
This master thesis was written by Alexander Kimber, under the 
supervision of (formerly) Ali Gürcan Özkil, (currently) Niels Henrik 
Mortensen and (currently) Camilla Arndt Hansen.
This document is submitted on 6th February 2020, via DTU Inside, by 
Alexander Kimber (S171773). Attached with this submission are all 
other artefacts and source files related to the project.
The Prototyping with Makers Canvas and supporting materials are 
publicly available at: www.prototypingwithmakers.com
Alex Kimber
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
6th February 2020
==PAGE:3==
I would like to express my gratitude to my loving and supporting 
girlfriend, Meri Vaija, for her excellent proofreading and patience.
A warm thank you to my dear friends, Sarah Cole, AmirAli Pourmani, 
Christian Degnbol Madsen, Eric Rose and Marcia Brinck, for their 
continued companionship and advice.
Thanks to Camilla Arndt Hansen for her supervision, encouragement 
and insight.
Thank you to all the participants of the surveys, interviews and 
workshop. You’re contribution and feedback has been invaluable to this 
project.
Finally, I wish to recognise my family, especially mum, dad, granny and 
granddad and everyone else who has helped me in my journey - thank 
you.
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:4==
This thesis project began with an open mind and a keen interest in 
the relationship between professional design practice and the maker 
movement. After much investigation, the following thesis proposal was 
formulated:
The Design of a Prototyping Tool for Engaging with the Maker Movement
This naturally lead the project to explore both the problem space and 
the solution space. In other words, the first aim of the project was to 
explore what the impact of such a tool would be and how it should 
manifest itself. The second was to develop and propose the tool 
itself. I can write with pride that, despite its flaws, I have delivered a 
prototyping strategy tool for engaging with the maker movement.
The final artefact, along with the supporting material of a guidebook, is 
submitted together with this thesis document through DTU Inside, but 
is also publicly available at: prototypingwithmakers.com
The format for this thesis submission comes in two publishable papers, 
rather than a conventional long form thesis. At the time of writing, the 
first of the two papers presented here has been accepted, with major 
revisions, to the Design 2020 conference proceedings. Hence it is 
presented in this document with the exact same layout and formatting 
required of the conference proceedings. The second paper, although not 
submitted, is formatted the same way for consistency and clarity.
The two papers, merged in this document for the final thesis 
submission, are individually titled:
Making the Most of Makers: An Exploration of the Need for a Prototyping 
Tool for Companies to Engage with the Maker Movement
and
Making the Most of Makers: A Proposal of a Prototyping Tool for 
Companies to Engage with the Maker Movement
If you have any questions or issues regarding the project or this 
submission, please do not hesitate to get in touch.
Alex Kimber
S171773@student.dtu.dk
Foreword
==PAGE:5==
The purpose of this study is to explore the problem space surrounding 
company engagement, to gain insights into prototyping, with the maker 
movement. Makers in the maker movement are typically, although 
not exclusively, associated with digital fabrication, open source 
platforms and DIY. The main research question is: How beneficial 
would a tool to help companies engage and collaborate with makers, 
in prototyping in product development, be for companies and makers? 
Knowing that prototyping is critical to product development, and that 
makers are adept at hardware prototyping, the possibility of a tool 
to help facilitate collaboration with makers could have far reaching 
impact on prototyping capabilities. This study draws upon literature 
on prototyping, the maker movement, innovation, open design, co-
creation and design tools. The methodology comprises of a fully 
mixed concurrent dominant status design, whereby semi-structured 
interviews are used to collect qualitative data, and online surveys for 
quantitative. The nature of being an exploratory study, investigating 
a niche without much existing literature, meant interviews were the 
most appropriate method. The analysis shows the benefits of such a 
tool for companies include: range of materials, prototyping capabilities 
and sources of inspiration. The benefits to makers include: experience, 
creative confidence and job opportunities. The challenges for the tool 
development centre around communication and motivation. These 
findings, along with design considerations proposed by this study, could 
provide the foundation for the development of a tool which would 
ultimately improve prototyping norms in industry, contribute to the 
discourse on opening up the design process and integrate with a system 
of prototyping strategy tools.
Abstract
Paper 1: An Exploration of the 
Need for a Prototyping Tool for 
Companies to Engage with the 
Maker Movement
==PAGE:6==
 
Introduction  
Prototypes play a critical role in product development and innovation (Gengnagel, Nagy and 
Stark, 2016). In the context of the design of physical prototypes, they can be defined as an 
embodiment of critical elements of the intended design, to enhance communication, enable 
learning, and inform decision-making (Lauff, Kotys-Schwartz and Rentschler, 2018). 
Prototyping has been shown to be beneficial to many successful organisations, in various ways 
(Coutts, Wodehouse and Robertson, 2019), and is being applied earlier and earlier in the 
development process (Elsen et al., 2012; Neeley Jr. et al., 2013), despite potential design 
fixation (Gerstenberg, Sjöman and Steinert, 2019). Since the barriers of entry into prototyping 
are dramatically lowering (Camburn et al., 2017) due to the proliferation of open source 
materials and digital fabrication, it should be asked; to whom can companies turn to increase 
their prototyping capabilities? The maker movement has many lessons to teach (Singh, 2018), 
particularly in prototyping (Camburn et al., 2016). Makers apply DIY principles when they 
make, which can have a positive impact on designing with low cost prototypes (Camburn and 
Wood, 2018). In this sense, makers can be seen as adaptive experts who share practices with 
engineers (Larson et al., 2017), indicating there is much to be gained from observing and 
collaborating with them. There are also opportunities for companies to improve their 
prototyping in makerspaces (Jensen, 2017), which has led to many organisations setting up their 
own internal makerspaces (Rieken et al., 2019). Moreover, individual makers, applying DIY 
principles and using modular components, are very effective at producing prototypes and have 
==PAGE:7==
enhanced creative confidence (Sadler et al., 2016). If designers could engage with, or open up 
to, some of the entrepreneurial (Hui and Gerber, 2017; Browder, Aldrich and Bradley, 2019), 
technological (Richardson, Elliott and Haylock, 2013) and educational (Papavlasopoulou, 
Giannakos and Jaccheri, 2016) aspects of the maker movement, then they might achieve real 
benefits and increase their prototyping capabilities. In light of the changing role of the designer 
as a facilitator for collaboration (Baldwin and von Hippel, 2011; Wilson and Zamberlan, 2015), 
the importance of prototyping in product development (Wall, Ulrich and Flowers, 1992), and 
the rise of the maker movement (Dougherty, 2012), this study asks if a tool to help companies 
open up their design process and engage with makers in prototyping would be beneficial and if 
so, how should such a tool be developed?  
Background 
Open Design and Co-Creation 
Open design has a key role in the broader open paradigm in the field of design, where the 
“collaboration” and “access” characteristics of which could be used to bring makers into the 
fold of prototyping (Gasparotto, 2019b, 2019a). Open design of hardware products is 
increasingly meaningful and continues to be experimented with in product development 
(Raasch, Herstatt and Balka, 2009). Different models of innovation, relating to open design, 
could be employed to engage others outside the firm in the design process, such as: participatory 
design and co-creation (Sanders and Jan Stappers, 2008); open innovation (Chesbrough, 
Vanhaverbeke and West, 2006); and collective/distributed design (Özkil, 2017). These models 
constitute the theoretical landscape surrounding open design and its potential application to 
makers and prototyping. Especially since open innovation and co-creation are measurably 
successful in industry (Dervojeda et al., 2014). Within this space of open design and co-
creation, there are a number of tools and frameworks, which companies could tap into.  
Current Tools and Frameworks 
Design toolkits offer a plethora of generative tools (Sanders, 2000) and methods, and there are 
many frameworks to help understand and communicate how these tools are applied. Despite 
this diversity of tools, methods for engaging with makers are under explored in design 
research (Smyth and Helgason, 2017), despite the potential opportunities. The designer has 
many open source toolkits to hand, such as the REMODEL kit (REMODEL, no date), 
developed by the Danish Design Centre, who also integrated the Open-O-Meter tool 
(Bonvoisin and Mies, 2018). Another tool, related to prototyping strategy, is the Prototyping 
Canvas (Lauff, Menold and Wood, 2019). Some of these toolkits, tools, and methods would 
be in part applicable for engaging with makers, but there is no tool specifically designed to 
engage with the maker movement that exists. Nor has there been an explorative study on the 
potential offerings such a tool might provide, and how the tool should manifest itself. 
Purpose and Research Questions 
Given this gap in the research, this study proposes the following research questions (RQs):  
1. How beneficial would a tool to help companies engage and collaborate with makers in 
prototyping in product development be for companies and makers?  
2. What would be the design considerations for a tool to help companies engage and collaborate 
with makers in prototyping in product development?  
These RQs are the foundation for this explorative study to investigate the problem space for a 
prototyping tool, which facilitates engagement, collaboration and co-creation with makers. If 
both these questions are answered, then this study will be useful in developing a tool. 
==PAGE:8==
Methods 
Research Design 
This is an exploratory study, which lends itself to qualitative methods to provide insights into 
answering the RQs. The research design is a fully mixed concurrent dominant status design 
(Leech and Onwuegbuzie, 2009). In practice, this means that both qualitative and quantitative 
methods were applied in the study whereby one type of method, in this case qualitative, was 
dominant in the analysis. This study used interviews as a qualitative method, and online 
questionnaire surveys as a quantitative method. As seen in Figure 1, a preliminary and 
exploratory literature review was conducted to identify a gap in knowledge, i.e. prototyping 
tools that encourage engagement with makers. Then interviews and surveys were carried out 
concurrently. Data from the interviews and surveys were analysed individually and finally 
compared to answer the RQs.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Research methodology 
Definitions 
There are three key terms needing delimitation for this study: companies, prototyping, and 
makers. The companies concerned in this study develop hardware products, or in other words 
physical consumer goods. Within the companies, the employees of interest are design and 
engineering practitioners, or anyone involved with prototyping activities within the firm. With 
regard to prototypes, this study discusses only physical artefacts, as opposed to digital, virtual 
or hybrid prototyping, at any level of fidelity. The focus within prototypes may be on, but not 
limited to, low fidelity, low cost and early design stage models. Makers are defined as people 
who identify themselves as makers, although colloquially a maker is someone with an interest 
in digital fabrication, open source platforms and DIY.  
Interviews 
Seven semi-structured interviews were carried out, each lasting an hour. Three sample groups 
were identified: Experts, makers, and companies. Three experts, two makers and two 
companies were interviewed either via Skype or in person. There were two women and five 
men, across five different nationalities and a range of professions. Every interview was 
recorded, transcribed and analysed. Experts were selected using non-probability judgmental 
sampling, chosen at the discretion of the authors based on convenience, relevance, and 
usefulness. The experts included a Project and Events Manager at a Makerspace, a Project 
Assistant involved in the design of an Open Source tool and a professor specialising in 
generative design tools. The companies were represented by senior designers working for two 
Danish design consultancies. The two makers were found through the Distributed Design 
Market Platform (About - Distributed Design Market Platform, no date). The experts were 
interviewed using tailored interview guides, because the variation of their expertise would make 
it unproductive to write comparable questions. Interviewees were sampled using non-
probability, convenience sampling. These interviews were semi-structured, with one guide for 
the makers and one guide for the companies, for comparability. The maker guide primarily 
concerned itself with motivation, capabilities and willingness to collaborate, whereas the key 
themes for the company interview guide were current prototyping activities, challenges to 
collaboration and advantages of working with makers. 
==PAGE:9==
Interview Analysis 
The semi-verbatim transcriptions were coded and analysed using NVivo 12, a qualitative 
analysis software. The approach for coding the transcripts was both open and axial, as concepts 
and themes formed during the analysis. The seven interview transcripts were coded into 50 code 
tags, which were clustered into nine code sets. 
There are two clear analysis goals, derived directly from the RQs: 1) Identify if and how 
beneficial the tool might be and 2) Identify the design considerations for such a tool. 
Consequently, the analysis took a two-pronged approach, which will hereafter be termed the 
‘How analysis’ and the ‘What analysis’, after the prefacing interrogatives of the RQs. Figure 2 
shows a model for the analysis. 
 
Figure 2: Analysis model. The left-hand side shows the code sets and the analysis approaches. 
Thin arrows indicate to which concept map themes from each set was fed. Company and maker 
related nodes informed both concept maps. The large arrows on the right of the concept maps 
are approximately proportional in scale to the number of findings that entered each outcome. 
 
The goal of the How analysis is to identify if and how the tool would be beneficial to companies 
and makers. As for the What analysis, the primary goal is to identify what the design 
considerations should be, to help facilitate the possible development of the tool. These 
considerations are presented as design specifications that could be used in future concept 
synthesis (Service Specifications | Service Design Tools, no date). To ensure the two goals of 
the analysis are met effectively, two main approaches are used, in both the How and What 
analyses, to mitigate oversight of key themes from the data: Quasi-statistical and constant 
comparison (Ratcliff, no date). The quasi-statistical approach means conducting a word 
frequency query and determining the top ten keywords from a given code set or transcript and 
thereafter extracting themes. This way the themes are data driven and less biased. The constant 
comparison approach meant analysing sets of nodes determined by the researcher, comparing 
and contrasting node from node, until common themes that arose from the data could be 
formulated. This approach relies heavily on the insights of the researcher but provides greater 
flexibility. Both approaches together afford the analysis good coverage of the data. Figure 2 
shows a model of the exact division of the two approaches across the different code sets and 
how those findings are split between the two goals. 
 
==PAGE:10==
Surveys 
Two surveys were made, one for makers and one for companies. Both the makers and 
companies were sampled using non-probability convenience sampling. They were distributed 
online via several social media platforms. The anonymous maker survey was published on 
several subreddits on reddit.com, over 10 maker related Facebook groups, and emailed directly 
to a number of Fablabs and makerspaces. The survey targeted towards companies was 
distributed by posting on LinkedIn, messaging relevant participants directly on LinkedIn, 
posting on relevant subreddits, and emailing businesses directly to share among their 
employees. There was a concerted effort to reach out to makers and companies globally to get 
a good sample distribution and therefore more representative results. The maker differentiated 
inputs from people who self-identified as makers from those who did not, by asking the question 
“Do you identify with being a maker?”. This way, all participants were directed to the relevant 
questions. The company survey posed the question “Does your company engage in prototyping 
during product development?” This way, companies that do not prototype were excluded. The 
questioning, in both the maker and company surveys, aligned in subject matter with the 
interview guide questions, so that the results can be more easily compared in the analysis. 
Survey Analysis 
The sample sizes were 39 for the maker survey and 28 for the company. These sample sizes 
followed the pragmatic approach (Denscombe, 2014), by ensuring there were approximately 
30 usable results or more, which is similar in scale to relevant studies, albeit lower than desired. 
The maker survey produced several results, which highlighted attitudes towards identity and 
community within the maker movement and ascertained the demographics. The makers 
represented 11 nationalities, although 71% were either American, Danish or British. The mean 
average age was 34 years old. 81.6% of participants identified as male and over half worked as 
engineers, technicians, managers, or were students. This may not be representative of the maker 
movement overall, but it does indicate that the sample was predominantly male and technically 
oriented. 80.8% of respondents came from SME’s and the vast majority were designers or 
design engineers (71.4%), but the sample also included engineers, management and directors. 
Interviews Vs Survey 
After analysing the interviews and surveys, the results were compared. Results from the 
interviews provide a qualitative understanding on the topics in focus, which is supplemented 
by a quantitative perspective from the surveys. The mixed method research design means the 
surveys can advocate for the suitability and representativity of the interviews. As the results of 
the survey align with that of the interviews it can be said that the analysis was representative of 
the respective populations. 
Results 
The aforementioned goal of the How analysis is to address the first RQ by determining how 
beneficial the tool might be. Table 1 provides an overview of the identified benefits and 
compares results from the qualitative and quantitative research. 
 
Table 1: Benefits to companies and makers 
Benefits to companies 
Benefits identified in the interviews 
Benefits identified in the surveys 
Companies could widen their range of materials and 
their capabilities in prototyping. 
“Makers could use alternative prototyping methods” 
(59.3%) 
“Makers could reduce prototyping costs” (63%). 
==PAGE:11==
By observing the way makers solve the same design 
problems, new inspiration can be found, like simpler 
and more elegant solutions. 
“Makers could help to reframe the design problem” 
(29.6%) 
“Makers could create novel solutions” (44.4%) 
The benefit to companies, if wider prototyping 
capabilities and new solution inspiration can be 
found, could be improved products, improved 
innovation and ultimately greater revenue. 
3 out of 4 respondents said prototyping was a “Very 
important” activity 
92.8% answered either “Yes” or “Maybe” to the 
question, “Do you believe your company could 
benefit from collaborating with others...?” 
Even if no collaboration happens, the tool may still 
help them better understand their own shortcomings 
in their prototyping process and capacity. 
“Makers could improve company creative culture” 
(40.7%) 
Other benefits of collaboration with makers includes: 
talent hunt, reduction in development costs, unknown 
unknowns and connections with other competitors 
products and industries. 
57.1% perceived the maker movement as an 
opportunity for their business 
Benefits to makers 
Benefits identified in the interviews 
Benefits identified in the surveys 
Makers could experience the satisfaction in making, 
in contributing and in learning by prototyping. 
“I enjoy turning ideas into a physical object.” 
“I enjoy learning new skills” 
“It’s a wholesome activity” 
By being involved in such a collaboration and being 
seen as/treated as a ‘Lead user’, ‘expert’ and ‘maker 
doctor’, could lead to greater self-efficacy and 
subsequently better creative confidence. 
“motivated by my desire to deepen my understanding 
of the built environment and the materials, tools, 
philosophies, and politics that have shaped it.” 
Other maker benefits: Job opportunities, paid 
subcontractor work and new contacts in industry. 
90.6% said “Yes” to, “Do you think makers would 
benefit from collaborating with companies in the 
product development process?” 
Design Specifications 
The purpose of the What analysis is to answer the second RQ, by finding out the design 
considerations that may be necessary for the development of a tool for engaging with makers 
in prototyping. The design specifications, derived from the qualitative data, are: 
1. The tool should use makerspaces as a channel, but it cannot be the only channel. Other channels 
must be available to reach out to makers who do not use or have access to these spaces. 
2. The tool should help makers understand, quantify and communicate their limitations, 
expectations and commitment to the collaboration, in order to maintain a lifestyle balance. 
3. The tool should communicate to the maker the concrete outcomes and benefits, in terms of their 
contribution to the design, the level of creativity required, the opportunities for them to learn 
and the level of commitment required. 
4. The tool should support or encourage self-efficacy in the makers. 
5. The tool should facilitate fair pay and/or compensation for the maker, in all collaborations. 
6. The tool should target SME’s, whereby small companies are defined as having up to 50 
employees and medium companies are defined as having up to 500. 
7. The tool should help companies assess and diagnose their own prototyping capabilities and 
identify what expertise and level of engagement they might need. 
8. The tool should communicate to the company the concrete outcomes of the collaboration and 
benefits to innovation from doing this - which is often best done with examples and case studies. 
9. The tool should be adjustable/agile to the needs and understanding of the company. 
10. The level of engagement needs to be clearly defined at the outset and the subsequent IP 
protection necessary for that level of engagement. 
11. The tool should be applicable within a 2-3 week design sprint and should not take more than 
half a day, defined here as 4 hours, out of a designer’s day and should not take more than two 
days out of a designer’s week. Eg. maximum 16-24 hours across 2-3 weeks. 
==PAGE:12==
12. The level of commitment of the maker should be led by the maker and should respect the 
maker’s “balance”. 
The results from the survey support some of the design specifications. 65.6% of respondents 
said they had used a makerspace in the last 6 months, suggesting specification number 1 is 
appropriate. The makers that commented, “the end result should be satisfactory and usable” 
and, “I feel I have ownership into the product” showed that specification 3 is relevant. 
Intellectual property concerns, relating to specification 10, were critical in the survey, as shown 
by 64.3% agreeing that, “Intellectual property issues” was a challenge. Finally, since 32.1% of 
survey respondents would need a new prototyping strategy to fit within an agile or lean 
framework, specification 12 affords companies that flexibility, without excluding other firms. 
Discussion 
Commonalities in Literature 
This analysis aligns with the culture of innovation in the maker movement and the impact of 
the maker movement in general. As Camburn and Wood (2018) discuss, the DIY principles 
makers apply in their work could translate into positive design outcomes due to effective low-
cost prototyping, such as the principle of repurposing functional blocks. This point is echoed in 
the analysis, where companies could widen their range of materials and their prototyping 
capabilities, which was summed up by one interviewee, “just getting the idea that we could use 
another material…could be beneficial.” Further to the immediate benefits to prototyping 
practices, Hui and Gerber (2017) demonstrate that there is a culture of entrepreneurship within 
makerspaces, which fosters skill development and self-efficacy, both of which appear in this 
analysis. This symmetry with the literature and the analysis indicates that the findings presented 
here do have a place in the discourse on learning new ways of prototyping from makers.  
Challenges to Overcome 
However, there are challenges and barriers to collaboration between makers and companies, 
such as cultural differences, perceptions, intellectual property, and motivation. Part of the 
motivation for makers to engage is knowing that their work contributes to something greater 
and will not be shelved. This is a communication challenge for companies, to reassure the 
makers that their work is valued and implemented. Furthermore, it can be challenging for 
companies to connect with makers, because most makers communicate in local communities 
and over platforms like Facebook and WhatsApp. Singh (2018) writes that organisational norms 
need to be re-examined if companies are to adopt a similar culture and mindset as makers. This 
was put quite simply by an interviewee, “Companies just don’t get how they work”. This culture 
shift could be good for the company to embrace, but it is nonetheless challenging. Also, as 
Baldwin and von Hippel (2011) express, deeply rooted assumptions regarding the virtues of 
intellectual property, particularly in larger organisations, are being challenged by open 
innovation. A collaboration between makers and companies would fall within this paradigm, 
the concerns of which were poignantly deliberated on by one of the designers interviewed for 
this study, “You have no clue how those NDA's look. It's 20 pages of some psycho lawyer stuff.” 
Another challenge which was made clear in the analysis was motivation - how do you motivate 
makers to participate? Makers involved in open source hardware development are not driven 
by extrinsic motivations like pay but are in fact motivated by internalised intrinsic factors like 
personal use, reputation and learning, as well as joy (Hausberg and Spaeth, 2018). One of the 
makers interviewed for this study mirrored this finding, “If I get paid without any meaning or 
meaningful approach, I don't want to do that.” One interesting contradiction is that makers are 
motivated by self-expression, creativity and self-efficacy, however the company prototyping 
==PAGE:13==
needs, especially within a corporate context, may not allow for such maker autonomy. On the 
other hand, SME’s are more likely to share cultural norms with makers and will have less IP 
protection, however they lack the time and resources to engage properly with makers. In sum, 
this analysis implies that a tool designed to aid companies in opening up their prototyping 
process to makers could be beneficial and that the development of such a tool should aim to 
resolve the trade-off relationships addressed in the challenges. 
Shortcomings of the Study 
The core shortcomings of this study lie in the methodology, nevertheless the RQs were 
satisfactorily addressed. The surveys should have had much more than approximately 30 
respondents each, to be more statistically significant. In the interview samples, there should 
have been one or two more makers interviewed for a greater range of perspectives, and within 
the companies sample there should have been one or two more participants representing larger 
companies that developed their own products in house. Despite the sub-optimal sampling, 
enough credible results were produced to carry out a thorough analysis. This study does not 
recommend that further research or tool development be exclusively justified by the results of 
this study but should seek to validate any proposition by a more contextual and empirical means. 
Further Research 
Firstly, the position of this study is that a prototyping strategy tool, designed for engagement 
and collaborations with makers and the maker movement at large, should be developed, tested 
and proposed. This study has laid out some of the potential benefits of a tool and what the 
design considerations should include. The development of the tool should also consider: co-
designing with makers, companies and relevant experts; validating empirically with a test 
involving real stakeholders, i.e. makers; and presenting the tool and the findings to gather 
feedback and peer review. Ultimately, this tool would be used in conjunction with other tools, 
or a system of tools, and strategies to suit the requirements of the company’s situation, and 
therefore should be designed with applicability and compatibility in mind. 
Conclusion 
The capacity to prototype is becoming democratised, with ever greater accessibility to digital 
fabrication and technical knowledge. As a result, the role of the designer and their relationship 
to the consumer is changing, from a prescriptive stance to a collaborative one. Concurrent to 
this new paradigm arises the maker movement, where passionate and creative people have 
banded together to connect with each other over their love for making. They have proven to be 
skilled at prototyping and therefore present a unique opportunity for companies, who seek to 
improve their capabilities, to learn from them. It is in that context that this study has asked how 
companies might benefit from a tool to help facilitate that learning, and what design 
considerations should be made in the development of such a tool for collaboration. The 
qualitative exploration of this space has resulted in the understanding of possible benefits to 
both companies and makers, and a set of design considerations, which could guide future 
research. These findings were supported by a survey and align well with the literature on 
prototyping, the maker movement, innovation, co-creation, and design tools. The results specify 
that collaborating with makers could widen the range of materials used in prototyping, produce 
more elegant solutions and a reduce development costs. Therefore, it can be said that despite 
clear challenges to collaboration, a tool designed to help companies engage with makers in 
prototyping in product development could be beneficial and should be developed. 
 
==PAGE:14==
References 
About - Distributed Design Market Platform (no date). Available at: https://distributeddesign.eu/about/ 
(Accessed: 28 May 2019). 
Baldwin, C. and von Hippel, E. (2011) ‘Modeling a paradigm shift: From producer innovation to user and open 
collaborative innovation’, Organization Science, 22(6), pp. 1399–1417. doi: 10.1287/orsc.1100.0618. 
Bonvoisin, J. and Mies, R. (2018) ‘Measuring Openness in Open Source Hardware with the Open-o-Meter’, in 
Procedia CIRP. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2018.08.306. 
Browder, R. E., Aldrich, H. E. and Bradley, S. W. (2019) ‘The emergence of the maker movement: Implications 
for entrepreneurship research’. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2019.01.005. 
Camburn, B. et al. (2017) ‘Design prototyping methods: state of the art in strategies, techniques, and guidelines’, 
Design Science, 3(13). doi: 10.1017/dsj.2017.10. 
Camburn, B. A. et al. (2016) ‘The Way Makers Prototype: Principles of DIY Design’, (September), p. 
V007T06A004. doi: 10.1115/detc2015-46295. 
Camburn, B. and Wood, K. (2018) ‘Principles of maker and DIY fabrication: Enabling design prototypes at low 
cost’. doi: 10.1016/j.destud.2018.04.002. 
Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W. and West, J. (2006) Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm. Oxford 
University Press. 
Coutts, E. R., Wodehouse, A. and Robertson, J. (2019) ‘A Comparison of Contemporary Prototyping Methods’, 
in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED19). Delft. doi: 
10.1017/dsi.2019.137. 
Denscombe, M. (2014) The Good Research Guide: For small-scale social research projects. 5th edn. New 
York: McGraw-Hill Education. 
Dervojeda, K. et al. (2014) ‘Design for Innovation: Co-creation design as a new way of value creation’, Business 
Innovation Observatory, p. 20. 
Dougherty, D. (2012) ‘The Maker Movement’, Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 7(3), pp. 
11–14. doi: 10.1162/inov_a_00135. 
Elsen, C. et al. (2012) ‘Representation in Early Stage Design: An Analysis of the Influence of Sketching and 
Prototyping in Design Projects’, in ASME 2012 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & 
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference. Chicago. 
Gasparotto, S. (2019a) ‘A framework analysis of the “open paradigm”. Four approaches to openness in the field 
of design.’, in International Association of Societies of Design Research Conference 2019. Manchester.  
Gasparotto, S. (2019b) ‘Open Source, Collaboration, and Access: A Critical Analysis of “Openness” in the 
Design Field’, Design Issues, 35(2).  
Gengnagel, C., Nagy, E. and Stark, R. (eds) (2016) Rethink! Prototyping: Transdisciplinary Concepts of 
Prototyping. Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24439-6. 
Gerstenberg, A., Sjöman, H. and Steinert, M. (2019) ‘Fixation on premature concept choices - a pitfall of early 
prototyping?’, Procedia CIRP, 84, pp. 33–37. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2019.04.246. 
Hausberg, J. P. and Spaeth, S. (2018) ‘Why makers make what they make: motivations to contribute to open 
source hardware development’, R&D Management. doi: 10.1111/radm.12348. 
Hui, J. S. and Gerber, E. M. (2017) ‘Developing Makerspaces as Sites of Entrepreneurship’, in Proceedings of 
the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. Portland: ACM, 
pp. 2023–2038.  
Jensen, M. B. (2017) ‘Opportunities of Industry-Based Makerspaces: New Ways of Prototyping in the Fuzzy 
Front End’. 
==PAGE:15==
Larson, J. et al. (2017) ‘Makers as Adaptive Experts-in-Training: How Maker Design Practices Could Lead to 
the Engineers of the Future’, in ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, Conference Proceedings. 
Lauff, C. A., Kotys-Schwartz, D. and Rentschler, M. E. (2018) ‘What is a Prototype? What are the Roles of 
Prototypes in Companies?’, Journal of Mechanical Design, 140(6). doi: 10.1115/1.4039340. 
Lauff, C., Menold, J. and Wood, K. L. (2019) ‘Prototyping Canvas: Design Tool for Planning Purposeful 
Prototypes’, in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED19). Delft. doi: 
10.1017/dsi.2019.162. 
Leech, N. L. and Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2009) ‘A typology of mixed methods research designs’, Quality and 
Quantity, 43(2), pp. 265–275. doi: 10.1007/s11135-007-9105-3. 
Neeley Jr., W. L. et al. (2013) ‘Building Fast to Think Faster: Exploiting Rapid Prototyping to Accelerate 
Ideation During Early Stage Design’, in 25th International Conference on Design Theory and Methodology; 
ASME 2013 Power Transmission and Gearing Conference. ASME International.  
Özkil, A. G. (2017) ‘Collective design in 3D printing: A large scale empirical study of designs, designers and 
evolution’, Design Studies, 51, pp. 66–89. doi: 10.1016/j.destud.2017.04.004. 
Papavlasopoulou, S., Giannakos, M. N. and Jaccheri, L. (2016) ‘Empirical studies on the Maker Movement, a 
promising approach to learning: A literature review’, Entertainment Computing, 18, pp. 57–78. doi: 
10.1016/j.entcom.2016.09.002. 
Raasch, C., Herstatt, C. and Balka, K. (2009) ‘On the open design of tangible goods’, R&D Management 3, 
39(4).  
Ratcliff, D. (no date) ‘15 Methods of Data Analysis in Qualitative Research’. Available at: 
https://www.psychsoma.co.za/files/15methods.pdf (Accessed: 6 October 2019). 
REMODEL (no date). Available at: https://remodel.dk/ (Accessed: 9 October 2019). 
Richardson, M., Elliott, S. and Haylock, B. (2013) ‘This home is a factory: Implications of the Maker movement 
on urban environments’, Craft+ design enquiry, 5, pp. 141–153.  
Rieken, F. et al. (2019) ‘Corporate makerspaces as innovation driver in companies: a literature review-based 
framework’, Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management.  
Sadler, Joel et al. (2016) ‘Building Blocks of the Maker Movement: Modularity Enhances Creative Confidence 
During Prototyping 1 Introduction: Modules for Makers’, Design Thinking Research . Understanding 
Innovation. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-19641-1_10. 
Sanders, E. B.-N. and Jan Stappers, P. (2008) ‘Co-creation and the new landscapes of design Co-creation and the 
new landscapes of design’, CoDesign, 4(1), pp. 5–18. doi: 10.1080/15710880701875068. 
Sanders, E. B. N. (2000) ‘Generative Tools for CoDesigning’, in Collaborative Design. London: Springer, pp. 
3–12.  
Service Specifications | Service Design Tools (no date). Available at: https://servicedesigntools.org/tools/service-
specifications (Accessed: 9 October 2019). 
Singh, S. P. (2018) ‘Lessons From the Maker Movement’, MIT Sloan. Available at: 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/lessons-from-the-maker-movement/ (Accessed: 1 June 2019). 
Smyth, M. and Helgason, I. (2017) ‘Making and unfinishedness: Designing Toolkits for Negotiation’, The 
Design Journal, 20. doi: 10.1080/14606925.2017.1352899. 
Wall, M. B., Ulrich, K. T. and Flowers, W. C. (1992) ‘Evaluating Prototyping Technologies for Product Design’, 
Research in Engineering Design, 3(3). doi: 10.1007/BF01580518. 
Wilson, S. and Zamberlan, L. (2015) ‘Design for an Unknown Future: Amplified Roles for Collaboration, New 
Design Knowledge, and Creativity’, Design Issues, 31(2). doi: 10.1162/DESI_a_00318. 
 
==PAGE:16==
This paper is a continuation from the paper “Making the most of makers: 
An Exploration of the Need for a Prototyping Tool for Companies to 
Engage with the Maker Movement” which concluded that despite clear 
challenges to collaboration, a tool designed to help companies engage 
with makers in prototyping in product development could be beneficial 
and should therefore be developed. As such, the purpose of this paper 
is to propose a new and novel prototyping tool for engaging with the 
maker movement and to discuss further development and application. 
The method to develop the tool was fundamentally iterative. 
Qualitative data was used to formulate the initial tool proposal, 
followed by indicative expert feedback and literature analysis to iterate 
the concept to a final proposal. The proposal is a visual canvas, suitable 
for a small team of design practitioners, called The Prototyping with 
Makers Canvas. The tool is publicly available at: prototypingwithmakers.
com. Due to the low quantity of data, this study cannot claim to have 
empirically verified the effectiveness of the tool in a proprietary design 
owning SME context. However, the design decisions taken throughout 
the development of the tool are justifiable based upon the literature 
and feedback received. When compared to the design specifications 
set out in the first study, the tool satisfies or partly satisfies over 
three quarters of the specifications. This study recommends that the 
proposal is applied to a real-world project in a company context, to 
validate and improve the tool. The companies may see improved design 
outcomes from greater prototyping capability inspired by the skills and 
experience found in the maker movement.
Abstract
Paper 2: A Proposal of a Prototyping 
Tool for Companies to Engage with 
the Maker Movement
==PAGE:17==
MAKING THE MOST OF MAKERS: PROPOSAL OF A 
PROTOTYPING TOOL FOR COMPANIES TO ENGAGE WITH THE 
MAKER MOVEMENT 
 
Introduction 
It is well established that prototyping is critical to the design process (Gengnagel, Nagy and 
Stark, 2016; Coutts, Wodehouse and Robertson, 2019) and that makers are adept at prototyping 
(Sadler et al., 2016; Camburn and Wood, 2018). Companies could benefit from learning from 
the experience, skills and culture found in maker movement (Larson et al., 2017; Singh, 2018). 
This backdrop, together with the evolving role of the designer as facilitator (Lee, 2008; 
Baldwin and von Hippel, 2011; Wilson and Zamberlan, 2015), suggests that designers should 
engage with the maker movement as it could be beneficial for prototyping capability and 
outcomes, which in turn affects the design process. There are a number of tools and toolkits 
available to designers in the field of open design and co-creation, such as the IDEO Design Kit 
(IDEO, no date) to aid collaboration and participatory design. However, there are no such tools 
to help plan engagement with the maker movement in prototyping activities specifically. 
 
This paper is the second of two papers, titled “Making the Most of Makers”, with the goal of 
investigating the potential for a tool to help designers facilitate engagement with the maker 
movement in prototyping. The previous paper, hereafter referred to as paper 1 (Kimber, 
Hansen and Özkil, 2020), used primarily qualitative data to determine the impact of such a 
tool, on companies and makers alike, as well as the design considerations for the tool itself. 
The reason for researching a tool follows the logic that prototyping is good for design 
companies, makers are adept at prototyping and tools can aid collaboration, therefore a tool to 
help companies collaborate with makers could be good for companies. Since this precise tool 
does not exist in the literature, there is an opportunity here to improve prototyping outcomes 
in industry. The main conclusion of paper 1 was that despite the challenges, a tool for 
collaboration with makers could be beneficial for companies and should therefore be 
developed. Some of the identified benefits included widening the range of materials used in 
prototyping, more elegant solutions and a reduction in development costs. In order to achieve 
this, the tool would need to overcome challenges in communication and motivation, which led 
to the formulation of design specifications for the tool in paper 1. These specifications have 
been applied to the development of the proposal in this paper. 
Purpose 
Upon the foundation of paper 1 and related literature, the purpose of this paper is to propose a 
new prototyping tool for engaging with the maker movement and to discuss its further 
development and application. This paper will first outline the methods used to develop, gather 
feedback and iterate on the tool concept, then propose the tool and its underlying framework 
and finally discuss the application and usefulness of the tool.  
Methods 
Development process 
The process for developing the tool proposal was primarily based upon the qualitative data 
collected for paper 1, then iterated using expert feedback and academic literature collected 
for this study. Figure 1 shows a model of the development process for the tool in this study. 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
Figure 1: Conceptual model of the development process of the tool proposal 
 
Firstly, the raw data from paper 1 had to be sorted and clustered in a way that made sense when 
determining what a company would need to consider when planning and executing a 
collaboration or engagement with the maker movement. Like the method used in paper 1, the 
initial phase of the tool development used affinity diagrams, also known as clustering, to 
conceptualise a working ontology of what makes a successful collaboration with makers. This 
resulted in a three-phase framework called: Identify, Method, Apply (later changed to Why, 
What, How). Thereafter, as indicated in Figure 1, ideation on how the framework should be 
manifested as a tool began. Many options were explored, such as idea cards, matrices and flow 
diagrams, but in the end a worksheet/canvas was determined to be the most appropriate. This 
was due to the familiarity companies might have with the Business Model Canvas and the time 
and budget constraints on the user. Additionally, the breadth of possible collaboration 
outcomes called for a tool that was more flexible and adaptable. This resulted in the initial tool 
concept being developed, shown in Figure 2, so that it could be iterated and developed further. 
 
 
Figure 2: The Initial Tool Concept, based on data from paper 1 (A3 paper size) 
Indicative expert feedback 
After the initial tool concept had been developed, feedback from design consultancies and 
relevant experts was collected to inform further iterations of the tool. The motivation for 
targeting consultancies specifically was the likelihood of their familiarity with similar 
tools/strategies. Over 80 consultancies were contacted, including those who were interviewed 
for the qualitative research for the previous study. A survey was sent out, asking a range of 
questions relating to the usability, clarity and relevance of the tool. Unfortunately, there was 
only two responses to the survey and two unstructured email responses, meaning there was 
little data. Therefore, the data that was obtained was only taken as indicative feedback, rather 
than evidential justification for design decisions. This indicative feedback came from the 
Danish Design Centre and three design consultancies, and it was condensed into broad points 
to guide and inform design iterations. The feedback included targeting the tool towards “ODM 
You know the level of engagement required?
You know how open your design concept is?
You know the purpose of your prototype?
You know which channels you will use to connect?
You know what kind IP protection you need?
You know how you will ensure autonomy in prototyping?
Engagement Level
Prototyping with Makers Planning Tool
Openness
Purpose
What is the goal/purpose of your prototyping activity?
Consider applying the Prototyping for X framework.
Autonomy
Motivation
How will you aﬀord the makers autonomy, encourage creative 
conﬁdence, and get them making quickly?
How will you communicate and guarantee to the makers that:
a) They will be fairly compensated for their time
b) All their work will be used and will impact to the design
c) They will have the opportunity to master/learn skills
d) You will maintain the relationship and support the local maker community
What is the degree of openness of the design? 
Consider applying the Open-O-Meter tool.
IP
How will you ensure the greatest level of creativity, while satisfying 
your IP protection concerns?
Remember, you don’t have to open up the concept, only the prototyping.
Sharing
Can we avoid an NDA? If not, what can the makers share? 
Consider Creative Commons protection
What level of creativity and commitment is needed?
What prototyping capabilities would be interesting to you?
Channels
How will you connect with makers, who are available to engage with 
your process and bring new and interesting prototyping capabilities?
Balance
How will you ensure the commitment required respects the work/life 
balance of the maker, and how will you adapt to that?
Start the next stage, if:
Start the next stage, if:
1 ) Identify
2) Method
3) Apply
A worksheet for designers to help  facilitate engagement with makers in hardware prototyping.
Start at section 1, 2 or 3, if you can answer the stage questions. You will need 2-3 team members and a pen. 
==PAGE:19==
type companies”, improving the hierarchy of the sections of the tool and providing an 
explanation as to why the user should fill in each box, all of which were implemented in the 
tool. Another change that was implemented from the feedback, was changing the three phases 
of the underlying framework from Identify, Method, Apply to Why, What, How. This was done 
because the original terms were too abstract and using interrogatives might be more intuitive 
and prompt better discussion from the users. The feedback from experts lead to design changes 
and contributed to the final proposal but did not constitute testing or validation of the tool. 
 
There was also an attempt to hold a design workshop, to test and co-create the tool with makers 
and designers together applying real world design challenges, but there was only one attendee. 
Therefore, the results from this exercise were negligible and any learnings were taken as 
anecdotal and subsequently dismissed in the analysis. 
Relevant tool and literature analysis 
The initial tool concept was derived from primary qualitative data, but to ensure the pertinence, 
usefulness and credibility of the final proposal, key components in the development of the tool 
came from peer review literature and existing innovation tools. Literature concerning relevant 
tools and their development, judged by the researcher, was analysed and appropriated to inform 
design decisions in the iterative process of the study. The tools included in the analysis were: 
the Prototype Canvas, iD Cards, the Business Model Canvas, the Team Alignment Map, the 
Workspace Catalyst Canvas, the Brand Identity (tool), the Hackathon Canvas and the Idea Arc. 
 
The results and sources from the analysis and how they were realised into the design 
considerations, are presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Table detailing how findings from the tool and literature analysis translate into design 
considerations for the final tool concept 
Design 
Considerations 
Findings from Tool and Literature Analysis 
Sources 
Helps establish 
a common 
language 
Prototyping methods are multitudinous, which 
can be problematic in a multi-disciplinary 
environment. Establishing a common language 
and making it easily referenceable will help 
designers, engineers and other stakeholders 
communicate and engage. 
Pei, Campbell, & 
Evans, 2010. 
Lauff, Menold, & 
Wood, 2019. 
Coes, 2014. 
Formatted for 
use and 
iteration with 
Post-it® notes 
A number of canvases encourage the use of 
Post-it® notes, in order to easily allow the 
rearranging of ideas or whole iterations. Not 
only was this a common feature but also a 
source for positive feedback in the literature. 
Avdiji, Elikan, 
Missonier, & 
Pigneur, 2018. 
Thoring, Mueller, & 
Badke-Schaub, 2020. 
Apply the three 
design 
principles for 
Visual Enquiry 
Tools 
1) Frame the problem into an ontology in 
which the main components and their 
relationships are modelled 
2) Represent this ontology into a shared 
representation 
3) Instantiate it into a shared support tool, 
in order to use it as a problem space in 
which solutions can be prototyped 
Avdiji et al., 2018. 
Elikan & Pigneur, 
2019. 
==PAGE:20==
Use 
real/applicable 
examples for 
each section 
An example of a poignantly relevant tool which 
uses real world examples for each section of the 
canvas is the ‘Hackathon Canvas’. This input is 
similar to the indicative expert feedback 
regarding understandability. 
Duchateau, 2018. 
Suitable for 
graphic/visual 
facilitation  
Visual tools, designed for graphic facilitation, 
can be catalysts for collaboration and are 
appreciated by participants. 
 
Eppler, Oste, & 
Bresciani, 2013 
Aguerrevere, 
Thoring, & Mueller, 
2019 
Uses the 
morphology of 
canvas design 
parameters 
This morphology, derived from an analysis of 
123 existing canvases, guided the visual 
structure of the Workplace Catalyst Canvas, 
which can also be applied to inform the graphic 
design of this study’s tool 
Thoring, Mueller, & 
Badke-Schaub, 2019. 
Thoring et al., 2020. 
 
Tool Proposal 
The tool and supporting material 
The tool proposed by this study, shown in figure 3, called the Prototyping with Makers Canvas, 
is a paper based visual innovation tool. It is to be used by a small team of designers to help 
facilitate the generation and external storage of ideas regarding how to plan and execute a 
collaboration or engagement with the maker movement in prototyping activities. It has been 
formatted for A3 and A2 sized papers so that the whole team can contribute, with boxes large 
enough to fit post-it® notes for easy iteration of canvases. A small guidebook has also been 
developed in conjunction with the tool, as supporting material. The guidebook is written in an 
informal language style and in plain English, for accessibility and practicality. The tool and the 
supporting materials can be downloaded for free, under a creative commons Attribution-
ShareAlike 4.0 International licence, from: www.prototypingwithmakers.com 
 
 
Figure 3: The Prototyping with Makers Canvas (A3 paper size) 
==PAGE:21==
The Underlying Framework 
The nine sections of the tool are derived from the qualitative analysis of the previous study, to 
form a working ontology of engagement with makers. This has been formulated into a three-
phase structure, termed: Why, What and How. The three-phase framework is a practicable way 
to formulate the sections chronologically, memorably and with added meaning. 
 
The WHY column 
Purpose: The ultimate goal of this tool is to harness the insights makers might have in relation 
to prototyping activities, through effective engagement and collaboration. As such, it is 
important for the designer to articulate the motive and purpose of the prototyping activity, to 
communicate effectively and convincingly to the management within the firm and the makers 
they wish to collaborate with. This statement of purpose can be formulated within the Prototype 
for X framework (Menold, Jablokow and Simpson, 2017) or in the users’ own words, so long 
as it can be used as a common reference point for the team and the makers. 
 
Engagement: The level of engagement refers to what is required to fulfil the prototyping 
activity, in terms of creativity and time. The users of this tool must ask themselves, what level 
of creativity is required to problem solve for this task? And, how much time and commitment 
is required to be effective? The level of creativity can be described within the four levels set 
out by Sanders and Stappers (2008) or generalised in colloquial terms. Likewise, the time 
commitment can be precisely described in workhours or loosely described in plain language, 
so long as it is understood and communicable to the team. 
 
Capabilities: Here, the users are told to consider the company’s own prototyping capabilities 
and what they think makers might have to offer their project. This includes skills, experience, 
tools, materials, processes and other prototyping capabilities. This is important, so that they 
can target the right maker and maximise learning. 
 
The WHAT column 
Method: This section allows the users to specify or ideate upon which method of engagement 
they plan on employing. Methods include but are not limited to: design workshops, hackathons, 
consulting/contracting, shadowing, ethnographic research and design competitions. 
 
Openness: Openness refers to how suitable a design or business model is to being made 
opensource. The paradigm of open design is not new to academia (Gasparotto, 2019), but might 
be a mystery to users of the tool. This was made plain in the indicative feedback on the first 
iteration of the concept. To ensure the meaning and the purpose of this section is clearly 
understood, users are directed to the supporting material, such as the guidebook, for additional 
information. 
 
As for the measurement of openness, in the name of building a common language between 
team members, the supporting material recommends applying the Open-O-Meter (Bonvoisin 
and Mies, 2018). The discrete increments of the Open-O-Meter can help companies determine 
how open their design is, compare it to others and identify how they might further open up the 
design. This exercise is critical, in relation to engagement with makers, because one of the key 
concerns of businesses is Intellectual Property (IP) protection, which could be at odds with the 
sharing and open source culture of makers. Therefore, being transparent about the prospective 
design’s openness and having a common yardstick to communicate that openness can help the 
==PAGE:22==
team decide upon the appropriate IP protection, such as creative commons licences, while 
negotiating what can be shared with makers or even developed into an open source business 
model (REMODEL, no date). 
 
Connection: Connections, otherwise known as channels, describe how you establish and 
maintain relationships with the makers you intend to collaborate with. In other words, how you 
reach out to makers. This is important to discuss, since the maker movement is a distributed 
network (Richardson, Elliott and Haylock, 2013), with no central organisation or hierarchy. 
New partnerships within the maker movement are often local, personal and informal, so the 
company needs to ideate on how they intend to navigate this field. Recommendations for 
making new connections include: social media, community groups, public events, Maker Fairs, 
the FabLab network, Thingiverse.com, Instructables.com and even music festivals 
(Copenhagen Maker, 2017). 
 
The HOW Column 
Balance: One of the primary concerns of the makers in the qualitative study was balance. 
Makers are typically hobbyists and have to balance their lifestyle with work, which means a 
collaboration with a company could be demanding. Not only might engaging with a design 
team take time, but it might damage the passion and enthusiasm a maker has for their craft if it 
is seen as an obligation. This is why companies should open a dialogue with the maker with 
regard to their commitment to the project, which also takes transparency on the part of the 
company about the level of engagement required. 
 
Sharing: Connection, sharing and community are core aspects of the maker movement 
(Gauntlett, 2018), and they are pivotal in what motivates makers. Sharing your work and 
receiving positive reinforcement from the community you identify with can greatly improve 
self-efficacy, so the design team must consider what they are prepared to share with the wider 
community. This ties together the concepts of openness and motivation, in that the company 
might be constrained by IP protection but the maker is rewarded when they share their process 
and work with the wider community. Designers must keep an open mind but also be clear about 
what elements of the prototyping activity can be shared publicly. 
 
Motivation: Firstly, makers must be fairly compensated for their time, materials and work – it 
is a moral obligation. However, makers are not motivated by pay, so companies must consider 
what would appeal them in a collaboration. Makers are invariably driven by enjoyment-based 
intrinsic motivation and the opportunity to learn new skills (Hausberg and Spaeth, 2018), which 
should be taken into account by the company. One applicable framework for understanding 
motivation is autonomy, mastery and purpose (Pink, 2009), but users are free to discuss maker 
motivation in their own terms. 
Discussion and Roadmap 
Comparative Assessment 
When the final tool proposal is assessed using the design specifications set out in paper 1, it 
performs well. The tool provides space and facilitates a discussion covering specifications one 
to five, in sections such as: Connection, Balance, and Motivation. The tool meets the practical 
requirements of specifications six and eleven, by targeting SME’s and only requiring a limited 
time to complete. Specifications seven and ten are touched upon in the sections Capabilities 
==PAGE:23==
and Engagement, however the tool is not designed as a diagnostic tool and therefore partly 
satisfies these two specifications. Lastly, specifications eight and nine are not explicitly 
addressed, as it does not express an outcome for the collaboration nor is the tool adjustable. 
That being said, the tool as a blank canvas is flexible for companies with varying needs and 
might implicitly encourage the user to consider the concrete outcome of the engagement. 
Contextualisation and application 
At the outset of this project, the goal was to explore the potential of and propose an aid for 
almost all design and engineering practitioners in any size firm. That idea was soon curtailed 
by the cold stare of reality, and the delimitation for this tool was set to designers in Small and 
Medium Enterprises (SME’s) who own the IP and manufacturing of the product they are 
designing, e.g. a furniture design studio. This scope was decided upon due to the design 
specifications from paper 1 and the indicative feedback of this study, which was critical of the 
applicability to consultancies. As a result, the tool is better suited to a proprietary design 
owning SME. SME’s often cannot afford management or design consultancy fees, so an open 
source tool like this breaks down the barrier of exclusivity. Time is also a factor for a company 
pressed for resources, so this tool takes less than an hour to complete. Finally, the three-step 
process, which takes the user right to the very purpose of the prototype, makes this tool suitable 
for any level of competency, especially since it is accompanied by supporting materials, to 
explain the relevant terms. 
 
More broadly speaking, this tool plays a part in the evolving role of contemporary designers to 
adapt to a role as co-creator and collaborator in interdisciplinary groups (Wilson and 
Zamberlan, 2015), while leveraging the skills and methods used for prototyping in the maker 
movement. This could have both internal and external consequences for the firm. If companies 
can reduce development costs, widen prototyping capabilities earlier on in the design process 
and use makers as an invaluable source of inspiration, then there could be tangible benefits to 
innovation and product design. Externally, makers in the maker movement might find a new 
channel to apply their talents and contribute positively to the wider open design paradigm.  
 
This tool could be highly applicable and compatible in both the academic and industry spheres. 
This study contributes to the literature on the subject by laying the foundations for further 
development, providing data and insight into collaborations with the maker movement and 
proposing a tool that can be appropriated and adopted in a wider selection of prototyping tools. 
Such prototyping tools also have their place in industry. This proposal is applicable and useful 
to the business case of proprietary design owning SME’s for three key reasons: improved 
design outcomes, lower development costs and a low risk approach to optimising the design 
process. If, as it has been suggested in paper 1, makers can inspire a wider prototyping material 
selection and alternative methods, this could lead to new learnings from prototyping activities 
and subsequently improved design outcomes. If the quality of the product can be improved, 
the company might have a stronger value proposition for the customer. Makers could also 
lower development costs through low fidelity prototyping earlier in the process, cutting the 
overall budget. Lastly, using the Prototyping with Makers Canvas is a low risk strategy for 
companies who wish to optimise their design process, because it is free to download, requires 
minimal workhours to complete and only aims to expand upon the prototyping activities 
companies carry out anyway. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Shortcomings of methods 
Ideally, this study would have collected enough survey data to be statistically meaningful and 
validated the final outcome with an empirical or real-world test. The discussion section from 
paper 1 remarked, “The development of the tool should also consider: co-designing with 
makers, companies and relevant experts; validating empirically with a test involving real 
stakeholders” (Kimber, Hansen and Özkil, 2020). Despite the best efforts of the researcher, 
only one maker turned up to the design workshop that was organised, only two out of 88 design 
consultancies responded to the survey and only two experts responded via email to give 
personal feedback. This resulted in the development of the tool depending heavily on the data 
from paper 1 and the literature on relevant tools. This is arguably sufficient information needed 
to develop the tool and justify the design decisions taken, but this study cannot claim evidential 
validation. Hence, the purpose of this paper is to propose and discuss the tool, rather than to 
report and assert its effectiveness. 
 
Shortcomings of the proposal 
Two drawbacks of this tool, in its current iteration, are likely to be the lack of intuitive 
terminology and the lack of a concrete outcome. The terms engagement and openness on the 
canvas might be new and unknown to the users, which would require a more detailed 
explanation. Particularly the Open-O-Meter tool, which is best for measuring the openness 
concept, would in itself need explaining to the unfamiliar. This shortcoming is difficult to 
avoid, since the concept is closely related to the success of working with makers. Therefore, it 
should be remedied by effective communication and education. Although the function of the 
tool is to facilitate discussion and to store and share ideas regarding engagement with makers, 
the outcome of the canvas is unsatisfyingly intangible. The outcome of many similar canvases 
is some kind of decision, new concept or completed framework, whereas upon completing the 
Prototyping with Makers Canvas you are left with a page of discussion points. That is not to 
say this is useless or inconsequential, since the tool does provoke ideas which can maximise 
the outcome of working with makers, but the lack of a concise and definitive artefact could 
leave users feeling confused about which actions to take next. It is a balancing act between the 
flexibility of the tool and the specificity of the outcome. This is a point which would need 
further development, after collecting real world feedback. 
 
Roadmap to Further Development 
Moving forward, the tool proposed by this study should be tried and tested with design 
companies applying live projects to the canvas. This could be conducted in many ways, to 
make changes to the tool. Firstly, the canvas is allocated a creative commons Attribution-
ShareAlike 4.0 International licence, which allows companies to use it commercially and adapt 
it to their needs. This means the tool could be applied and amended organically and uniquely 
to each company case. This path would not guarantee documentation of the findings and 
feeding them back to the researcher to iterate the concept centrally, nor would it even need to 
be shared at all. Another option for further development is to continue this research project, 
which would start by pushing for a qualitative observation and survey of a small number of 
proprietary design owning SMEs, in order to iterate the concept. After which, some kind of 
empirical study of collaborations with makers, comparing those that applied the tool, those that 
applied similar tools in their process and those that did not apply any would be made. Lastly, 
this proposal is available for assessment and scrutiny among academics and peers, who are 
welcome and encouraged to review these papers and the tool itself in their own studies. 
 
==PAGE:25==
This tool, as suggested in paper 1, could be used in conjunction with other tools, to form a 
toolkit of prototyping tools, to help companies find the right prototyping strategy for their 
needs. This might require further adaptation in order to fit with the system of tools, which is 
afforded by the creative commons licence. 
 
Conclusion 
After identifying an opportunity for a new and novel tool to help designers engage with the 
maker movement in prototyping, this paper has proposed the Prototyping with Makers Canvas. 
Despite the final proposal not being sufficiently validated under empirical conditions, the 
justification for the design choices made throughout the development comes from qualitative 
data, expert feedback and a literature review of relevant tools. This constitutes a reasonable 
approach to the development of a tool and leaves it open to further improvement. The tool 
itself, accompanied by the supporting materials, can help designers facilitate a useful 
discussion on how best to collaborate with makers and what considerations need to be made, 
to ultimately improve prototyping capabilities. This collaboration with makers could improve 
design outcomes, lower development costs and therefore positively impact the business case 
of design firms. The design of the canvas has been formatted to accommodate the needs of a 
small design team, based on expert feedback and academic literature. In sum, this project has 
produced a tool which is ready for taking into industry to be tested with live projects and should 
ultimately improve the prototyping capability of design firms, by engaging with talented 
makers. 
References 
Aguerrevere, A. L., Thoring, K. and Mueller, R. M. (2019) ‘The Idea Arc: Designing a Visual Canvas for Fuzzy 
Ideas’, in Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences |, pp. 551–560. 
Avdiji, H. et al. (2018) ‘Designing Tools for Collectively Solving Ill-Structured Problems’, in Proceedings of 
the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Hilton Waikoloa Village, Hawaii, pp. 400–409. 
Baldwin, C. and von Hippel, E. (2011) ‘Modeling a paradigm shift: From producer innovation to user and open 
collaborative innovation’, Organization Science, 22(6), pp. 1399–1417. doi: 10.1287/orsc.1100.0618. 
Bonvoisin, J. and Mies, R. (2018) ‘Measuring Openness in Open Source Hardware with the Open-o-Meter’, in 
Procedia CIRP. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2018.08.306. 
Camburn, B. and Wood, K. (2018) ‘Principles of maker and DIY fabrication: Enabling design prototypes at low 
cost’. doi: 10.1016/j.destud.2018.04.002. 
Coes, B. (2014) Critically Assessing the Strengths and Limitations of the Business Model Canvas. University of 
Twente. 
Coutts, E. R., Wodehouse, A. and Robertson, J. (2019) ‘A Comparison of Contemporary Prototyping Methods’, 
in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED19). Delft. doi: 
10.1017/dsi.2019.137. 
Duchateau, M. (2018) Hackathon Canvas - Download the free tool - The Hackathon Canvas. Available at: 
http://hackathoncanvas.co/ (Accessed: 19 January 2020). 
Elikan, D. and Pigneur, Y. (2019) ‘A Visual Inquiry Tool for Brand Identity’, in Proceedings of the 52nd 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 571–580. 
Eppler, M. J., Oste, H. F. and Bresciani, S. (2013) ‘An experimental evaluation on the impact of visual 
facilitation modes on idea generation in teams’, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Information 
Visualisation, pp. 339–344. doi: 10.1109/IV.2013.43. 
Gasparotto, S. (2019) ‘A framework analysis of the “open paradigm”. Four approaches to openness in the field 
of design.’, in International Association of Societies of Design Research Conference 2019. Manchester. 
Available at: https://iasdr2019.org/uploads/files/Proceedings/op-f-1302-Gas-S.pdf (Accessed: 9 October 2019). 
==PAGE:26==
Gauntlett, D. (2018) Making is Connecting: The Social Power of Creativity, from Craft and Knitting to Digital 
Everything. 2nd Ed. Medford: Polity Press. 
Gengnagel, C., Nagy, E. and Stark, R. (eds) (2016) Rethink! Prototyping: Transdisciplinary Concepts of 
Prototyping. Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24439-6. 
Hausberg, J. P. and Spaeth, S. (2018) ‘Why makers make what they make: motivations to contribute to open 
source hardware development’, R&D Management. doi: 10.1111/radm.12348. 
IDEO (no date) Design Kit. Available at: http://www.designkit.org/ (Accessed: 19 May 2019). 
Kimber, A., Hansen, C. A. and Özkil, A. G. (2020) ‘Making the Most of Makers: An Exploration of the Need 
for a Prototyping Tool for Companies to Engage with the Maker Movement’, in INTERNATIONAL DESIGN 
CONFERENCE – DESIGN 2020. Dubrovnik. UNPUBLISHED as of 6 February 2020 
Larson, J. et al. (2017) ‘Makers as Adaptive Experts-in-Training: How Maker Design Practices Could Lead to 
the Engineers of the Future’, in ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, Conference Proceedings. 
Lauff, C., Menold, J. and Wood, K. L. (2019) ‘Prototyping Canvas: Design Tool for Planning Purposeful 
Prototypes’, in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED19). Delft. doi: 
10.1017/dsi.2019.162. 
Lee, Y. (2008) ‘Design participation tactics: the challenges and new roles for designers in the co-design process 
Design participation tactics: the challenges and new roles for designers in the co-design process’, Co-Design, 
4(1), pp. 31–50. doi: 10.1080/15710880701875613. 
Maker, C. (2017) Makerspace Roskilde Festival 2017, YouTube. Available at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C040RaH1n4Y (Accessed: 3 February 2020). 
Menold, J., Jablokow, K. and Simpson, T. (2017) ‘Prototype for X (PFX): A holistic framework for structuring 
prototyping methods to support engineering design’, Design Studies. Elsevier, 50, pp. 70–112. doi: 
10.1016/J.DESTUD.2017.03.001. 
Pei, E., Campbell, I. and Evans, M. (2010) ‘Development of a tool for building shared representations among 
industrial designers and engineering designers’, Co-Design, 6(3), pp. 139–166. doi: 
10.1080/15710882.2010.510197. 
Pink, D. (2009) Dan Pink: The puzzle of motivation | TED Talk, TED. Available at: 
https://www.ted.com/talks/dan_pink_on_motivation#t-755913 (Accessed: 6 October 2019). 
REMODEL (no date). Available at: https://remodel.dk/ (Accessed: 9 October 2019). 
Richardson, M., Elliott, S. and Haylock, B. (2013) ‘This home is a factory: Implications of the Maker 
movement on urban environments’, Craft+ design enquiry, 5, pp. 141–153. 
Sadler, Joel et al. (2016) ‘Building Blocks of the Maker Movement: Modularity Enhances Creative Confidence 
During Prototyping 1 Introduction: Modules for Makers’, Design Thinking Research . Understanding 
Innovation. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-19641-1_10. 
Sanders, E. B.-N. and Jan Stappers, P. (2008) ‘Co-creation and the new landscapes of design Co-creation and 
the new landscapes of design’, CoDesign, 4(1), pp. 5–18. doi: 10.1080/15710880701875068. 
Singh, S. P. (2018) ‘Lessons From the Maker Movement’, MIT Sloan. Available at: 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/lessons-from-the-maker-movement/ (Accessed: 1 June 2019). 
Thoring, K., Mueller, R. M. and Badke-Schaub, P. (2019) ‘Exploring the Design Space of Innovation 
Canvases’, in Conference Proceedings of the Academy for Design Innovation Management. doi: 
10.33114/adim.2019.06.243. 
Thoring, K., Mueller, R. M. and Badke-Schaub, P. (2020) ‘Assessing and Changing an Organization’s 
Innovation Culture with the Workspace Catalyst Canvas’, in Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. 
Wilson, S. and Zamberlan, L. (2015) ‘Design for an Unknown Future: Amplified Roles for Collaboration, New 
Design Knowledge, and Creativity’, Design Issues, 31(2). doi: 10.1162/DESI_a_00318. 
 
==PAGE:27==
