==PAGE:1==
Multi Platform and NLP Capable
Chatbot for Process Mining
Rasmus Blumensaadt (s141653)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
When performing process mining tasks, one would have to install and use dif-
ferent frameworks in order to use these. This is not only restrictive in the sense,
that only frameworks of which knowledge of usage exists can be used. But also
in the sense that only the given system, where the frameworks have been set
up can be used for these tasks. Process mining in this states does not allow for
collaboration. This work proposes a solution to this, by presenting a chatbot ca-
pable of performing process mining tasks instantiated by the user. These tasks
could either be instantiated using natural language or direct commands. By
presenting such a chatbot, collaboration would become possible as users of the
chat, could use the chatbot as a shared resource. By implementing a chatbot,
the requirement of using the same system is also obsolete, as the chatbot can
be used from multiple instant messaging platforms and devices being laptops or
mobile devices.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Andrea Burattin, for his guidance and
feedback during the weekly meetings, which were held for the entirety of this
project. These provided invaluable help and advice in all of the processes during
this thesis.
I would also like to thank my family for the support during the hard times of the
project and throughout my studies. Finally, I would like to thank my girlfriend
Ida, for her support and helping with the proofreading in the ﬁnal stage of this
thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Analysis of Requirements
5
2.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Deﬁning MVP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Deﬁning Nice To Have . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Design of Chatbot
13
3.1
Class Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Context Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
ER Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Sql Injection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.3
Hashing of Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Design of Natural Language Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Extensibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
IM Handler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Overall Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.8
Designing the States of the Chatbot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.9
Design of Special Conversation Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.10 Dialogs with the Chatbot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
4
Implementation of Application
31
4.1
Deciding Chatbot Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Deciding on Natural Language Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Deciding on Instant Messaging Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Deciding on Process Mining Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Deciding on Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Database Security
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Hashing of Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.8
Extensibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.9
Logging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.10 File Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.11 Special Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.12 Third Party modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.13 Implementation of Intents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
51
5.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6
Conclusion
75
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A Project Plan
81
B Detailed Class Diagram
87
C Dialog Flow Diagram
89
D Slack Testing
93
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Process mining is the study of event data and process models e.g. petri nets. It
can be seen as an extention to machine learning and data mining with a process
perspective.
Event data are associated with explicit process models, e.g. a process model
could be discovered from event data or event data could be compared to a process
model to check performance and compliance, e.g. by checking for deviations,
ﬁnding bottlenecks, prediction of ﬂow times, recommend actions or possible
improving performance. [2, p. 20]
Some of the general purposes of process mining is the possibility to discover
process models from event data, which in turn can be used to gain insight into,
analyse the performance of or verify the process from which the event data are
derived from.
Process mining makes use of both traditional model-based process analysis and
data-centric analysis techniques.[2, p. 17]
The techniques are generic, meaning that they can be applied across a wide
variety of application domains. The ﬁeld of process mining may be perceived as
bridging the gap between process science and data science, as data science tends
to be process agnostic, and process science often puts more focus on modeling
rather than examining the event data.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
Within the ﬁeld of process mining many techniques exist, e.g. Aplha miner,
Heuristics miner, Inductive miner etc.
Aplha miner generates a model by ordering the relations with the eventlog e.g.
if event B always follows event A, the two events would be connected by a
transition in the generated model such that B follows A.
Other algorithms such as the Heuristics miner takes frequencies of events and
sequences into account when generating the model. The idea behind this is that
paths which are not frequently represented, should not make it into the model.
[2]
There exists various frameworks in the ﬁeld of process mining, however, each
one might be written in a diﬀerent language e.g. the BupaR framework written
in R1 or the PM4Py framework written in Python2.
This means that if a person wishes to use these frameworks, knowledge of the
frameworks as well as a basic understanding of the language in which the frame-
work are written, is a must.
For a general user, this could pose a problem, since each of the frameworks
can have a steep learning curve, if no previous knowledge of the framework or
language exists.
Even when being able to use the frameworks, it would time and eﬀort to keep
track of which functionality resides in a given framework.
Therefore, the aim of this thesis will be to explore and answer the question
of whether or not it is possible to design and develop a chatbot which can
be implemented to more than one instant messaging application and that can
perform process mining tasks instantiated by a user using natural language or
direct commands.
This will be done by designing and implementing a chatbot capable of handling
process mining requests by the user. By using a chatbot, the user will be able
to use the application, with the only requirement being, an internet connection.
This means that the user will be able to connect via desktop, laptop or even a
phone. As long as a connection to the chatbot can be made, it can be used.
This allows users across platforms and geographical location to collaborate, as
the chatbot will serve as a shared resource between the collaborators, and the
computation will take place on the server hosting the chatbot. As computation
will take place within the bot, no real requirements according to computational
power is required by the user.
1https://www.bupar.net/
2https://pm4py.ﬁt.fraunhofer.de/
==PAGE:11==
3
The focus in this thesis is on Process Mining but one could imagine an abstrac-
tion from this ﬁeld of study, making the chatbot become a general scientiﬁc aid
in collaborative projects of all sorts.
The current state of chatbots can be seen by looking at applications such as
Google Assistant, Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana. These
are normally referred to as digital assistants, however the basic concept are the
same whether it is a digital assistant or a chatbot, namely to achieve some
sort of results from conversational interaction, using natural language, with the
application. [5]
These can be seen as partly voice-driven and partly text-driven, as they do
accept both. Besides these, many chatbots have appeared capable of processing
natural language. However, many of these chatbots specializes in ﬁelds such
as product and service industry or education [14]. For education purposes the
chatbots task is to solve the problem of individual student support, e.g.
in
scenarios where the ratio between lecturers and students makes it impossible to
provide each student with support of a reasonable quality. [14]
There exist some previous work, aiming to solve the problems which this thesis
focuses on. A prototype of a chatbot has been created, capable of aiding a user
with process mining tasks [4]. However the chatbot in the given prototype, are
only able to support a single ﬁle, making tasks such as conformance checking
impossible. The chatbot in the previous work only worked within a single instant
messaging application, namely Telegram, and it only accepted direct commands
given by the user, not natural conversation. [4]
This thesis is therefore making a contribution to the ﬁeld, by advancing the state
of such a bot, in a way that it will be able to support multiple ﬁles in order to
aid the user in tasks such as conformance checking, being able to understand
and process natural language and be able to be implemented in multiple instant
messaging applications.
This thesis will present a proposed solution to this problem in the following
manner. Chapter 2 will analyze the requirements of the proposed application,
chapter 3 will focus on the design of the proposed application and chapter 4 will
go through the implementation of the application. Chapter 5 will then showcase
and test the application to make sure that it fulﬁlls the requirements discovered
in chapter 2. Finally chapter 6 will conclude this thesis with a summary along
with a list of future work to be done on the application.
An overview of the project plan, both initial and revised along with a short text,
can be found in Appendix A, along with the risk analysis.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
Word/
ab-
breviation
Description
Example
IM
Instant Messaging Applica-
tion
Telegram
NLP
Natural Language Process-
ing
Google’s Dialogﬂow
PM
Process Mining
Chatbot/ Ap-
plication
The
chatbot
application
which is the focus of this
thesis
Throughout the report chat-
bot and application will be
used interchangeably.
User
The person connected to the
chat writing to the chatbot
Chat
A single instance of a chat
which the chatbot is a part
of
A single instance of a chat in
Telegram including the user
and the chatbot.
Intent
The intention behind the
users message discovered by
the NLP module within the
chatbot
An
intention
could
be
’Greeting’ if the user writes
’Hello’.
Action
The action executed as a re-
sult of the users intent
If
the
users
intent
are
’Greeting’ the action could
be for the chatbot to greet
the user back.
Owner
The owner and or developer
of the chatbot
Server
The
server
or
computer
where the chatbot resides
Table 1.1: Glossary
1.1
Glossary
Throughout this thesis, special words and abbreviations will be used. In order to
let the reader get a grasp of these, they are stated and explained in the glossary
in table 1.1 with a possible example if any exists.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Analysis of Requirements
The use cases of this system is very limited and not very telling of the require-
ments and complexity of the system e.g. sending a message/ﬁle to the chatbot.
Therefore, the focus will be on compiling a list of requirements that will fulﬁll
the requirements of the proposed application in this thesis, rather than trying
to visualise these requirements using use case diagrams.
Two lists of requirements will be made, one for functional requirements to state
what will be required of the system, and one for non-functional requirements to
show speciﬁc properties or constraints of the system.
These lists have been compiled according to the standard described in [3].
First the functional requirements will be presented, followed by the non-functional.
Then these requirements will be used to deﬁne the Minimum viable product as
well as a set of nice to have features.
The list of functional requirements are comprised of the sections Must Have
(Critical to the system), Could Have (optional requirements) and Want to
Have (intended for a future release).
The Must Have requirements, along with the non-functional requirements have
been deduced from the minimum requirements this chatbot will have to fulﬁll,
in order to make it an acceptable solution for this thesis.
==PAGE:14==
6
Analysis of Requirements
2.1
Requirements
Functional
Must Have:
• FR1 - The chatbot shall be able to perform at least two discovery tasks
within a process mining scope.
• FR2 - The chatbot shall be able to perform at least two conformance
checking algorithms within a process mining scope.
• FR3 - The chatbot shall be able to perform at least one ﬁltering tasks
within a process mining scope.
• FR4 - The chatbot shall be able to be instantiated on at least 2 IM’s.
• FR5 - The chatbot shall be able to process natural language.
• FR6 - The chatbot shall be able to receive, store and modify ﬁles from
the user.
• FR7 - The chatbot shall be able to handle multiple ﬁles.
• FR8 - The chatbot shall be able to keep track of ﬁles used in a chat.
• FR9 - The chatbot shall be able to execute direct commands e.g. text
that are preceded by a slash.
The functional requirements have been compiled according to the goal of this
thesis, namely to design and implement a chatbot capable of aiding the user
in process mining tasks such as discovery of models (see FR1), conformance
checking (see FR2) or ﬁltering (see FR3).
FR4 is derived from the requirement to diﬀerentiate this project from the related
work. Therefore, this chatbot shall not be designed with a single IM in mind,
but should rather be designed as a general chatbot capable of being implemented
in multiple IM’s without altering any logic within the core of the chatbot.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Requirements
7
FR5 is stated to keep this chatbot in line with the state of the art of current
chatbots, it should be able to take text-based input in form of natural language
from the user.
FR6 is stated as the user should be able to perform process mining tasks on
e.g. eventlogs. the chatbot should be able to handle such ﬁles. This means
that it should be able to receive the ﬁles through the chat and store them for
possible future tasks. As ﬁltering is also a requirements, the chatbot should also
be capable of modifying the ﬁles.
FR7 is stated as a requirement as the chatbot shall be able to perform con-
formance checking. This requires both a model and an eventlog, therefore the
chatbot should be able to handle multiple ﬁles in order for the conformance
checking to be possible.
FR8, as the chatbot shall be able to store ﬁles received from the user, it is likely
that multiple ﬁles will by uploaded to the chatbot in a given chat. Therefore,
the chatbot shall be able to keep track of which ﬁles has been uploaded to the
chat if the user wishes to switch ﬁles in the chat.
FR9 - To make the task of initiating a speciﬁc process mining task faster, the
chatbot should be able to take direct commands as input for speciﬁc cases.
This concludes the Must Have requirements of the application. If these were
to be implemented, the application would satisfy the goal of this thesis.
Could Have:
• FR10 - The chatbot shall keep track of misunderstood messages from the
user in order to make further improvements to the application.
• FR11 - The chatbot shall keep track of unforeseen behavior in order to
error correct possible problems in the application.
• FR12 - The chatbot shall be able to send ﬁles back to the user when
requested.
• FR13 - The chatbot shall be able to distinguish between messages meant
for other users and messages meant for the chatbot itself.
• FR14 - The chatbot shall be able to detect if a ﬁle has been uploaded
before, in order to avoid storing of identical ﬁles.
Below follows a brief explanation of the Could Have requirements. As these
==PAGE:16==
8
Analysis of Requirements
are not critical to the application they should only be taken into consideration
if time allows for it.
FR10 and FR11 - In order to identify improvements to the chatbot for future
development, the chatbot should keep track of weaknesses in the conversational
logic along with unwanted behaviour such as exceptions being thrown.
FR12 - Say for example a user would like to have an eventlog ﬁltered in order to
use it locally on his computer. To allow for such scenarios the chatbot should
be able to send back ﬁles when the user request it.
FR13 - If the chatbot were to be used in a setting where many users were con-
nected to the chat, one could imagine that the users would like to communicate
with each other in this chat as well. Therefore, a way of communicating without
the chatbot processing the message should be implemented.
FR14 - When being able to receive ﬁles from the user, one could imagine that
over time, chances are that identical ﬁles can be uploaded. To keep the appli-
cation space eﬃcient, it should be able to detect whether or not a ﬁle already
exists within the application.
Want to Have:
• FR15 - The chatbot shall be able to be controlled and managed by an
administrator.
• FR16 - The chatbot shall authenticate users to ensure that only registered
users are allowed.
• FR17 - The chatbot shall be able to communicate between diﬀerent IM’s
in the same context.
• FR18 - The chatbot shall be able to enter a pause mode, so it won’t reply
to user messages until resumed.
As the Want to Have requirements are purely for future extensions of the
chatbot these will also only be brieﬂy summarized in the paragraphs below.
FR15 - Over time a lot ﬁles and functionality may be accumulated in the chat-
bot, therefore an administration module, could make it possible to maintain the
chatbot e.g. by adding or removing ﬁles, or even functionality such as algo-
rithms.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Requirements
9
FR16 - In order to commercialize the chatbot some sort of registration of users
should be implemented to only allow genuine customers to make use of the
application.
FR17 - If a team of users were using diﬀerent IM’s, it would be an idea to
extend the functionality of the chatbot such that it could connect to multiple
IM’s at once, making it possible for the individual user, in the team, to choose
the preferred IM.
FR18 - As an extension of FR13, a ’pause’ mode could be implemented such
that the chatbot will not reply to any messages as long as it is paused, making
it possible for the users to have a conversation in the chat.
Non-Functional
Performance
• NFR1 - The chatbot shall be able to assist the user in a humanly accept-
able time.
• NFR2 - The chatbot shall reply to all requests by the user intended for
the chatbot.
Capacity
• NFR3 - The chatbot shall be somewhat extendable in the sense that
widening the understanding of natural language should be a light task.
Availability
• NFR4 - The chatbot shall always be available at the chosen IM’s when
running.
• NFR5 - The chatbot shall be accessible from various devices e.g. desktop,
laptop, tablet and smartphone.
Compliance to Standard
==PAGE:18==
10
Analysis of Requirements
• NFR6 - The chatbot’s database shall follow the standard of fourth nor-
malization form.
Security
• NFR7 - The chatbot shall be resistant to attack, such as sql injections.
By deﬁning these requirements, a clear image of the required abilities for the
chatbot, have been achieved.
2.2
Deﬁning MVP
To deﬁne the scope of this project, we will have to deﬁne the minimum viable
product that will meet the requirements set in the functional requirements sec-
tion.
The MVP should satisfy all of the Must Have requirements, FR1 - 9, as well
as the non-functional requirements. By doing so, the MVP will satisfy the goal
of this thesis.
Therefore, the minimum viable product will be deﬁned as follows:
A working chatbot that can be integrated to at least 2 instant messaging appli-
cations, which is capable of interpreting and acting upon natural language or
direct commands in written form provided by the user.
It should be able to execute diﬀerent tasks within the process mining domain,
at least two discovery tasks, two conformance tasks and one ﬁltering task.
The chatbot shall be able to receive, store and modify multiple ﬁles. Files which
the chatbot shall keep track of, such that a user can see the ﬁles which have
been uploaded to the chat.
2.3
Deﬁning Nice To Have
When the requirements for the minimum viable product has been met, areas
where improvements can be made to the system as well as the user experience,
will then be deﬁned from the Could Have requirements, but not the Want to
Have requirements, as these are well outside the scope of this thesis.
If time allows, these items will be implemented, otherwise they will be stated
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Deﬁning Nice To Have
11
as items for future work.
The following makes up the Nice to Have list:
• A way of keeping track of the natural language which the bot, for some
reason, does not understand.
• A way of communicating with other users without the chatbot.
• Being able to download the ﬁles in the chat from the chatbot.
• Ensuring robustness and keeping track of edge cases where the system is
experiencing unwanted or unforeseen behavior.
• Ensuring space eﬃciency by not allowing identical ﬁles to be stored on the
server.
==PAGE:20==
12
Analysis of Requirements
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Design of Chatbot
When designing the application, diﬀerent aspects must be taken into consid-
eration. First, an overview of the application will be established. For this an
architecture diagram will be used. Then a more detailed representation of the
application will be made with the use of a class diagram.
As it will require some complex conditional conversation with the chatbot to be
able to execute the commands supplied by the user, an overview of a possible
conversation and states of the chatbot will have to be made. A diagram show-
ing the possible conversation patterns along with state machine diagrams will
illustrate this.
To be able to create an application that is capable of processing natural lan-
guage, handling multiple ﬁles, aiding the user in tasks withing the process min-
ing realm and that can be integrated to multiple instant messaging applications,
there are a few things to consider.
First and foremost, the user’s input has to be processed, in order to recognize
the intent behind the message. For this some form of framework may have to
be applied.
Secondly the ﬁles has to be managed in order to keep track of ﬁles and relation-
ships between messaging platforms, users and ﬁles.
==PAGE:22==
14
Design of Chatbot
Then the application should be able to execute the desired intent of the user,
be that a process mining task or the handling of a ﬁle.
It should be possible to integrate all of this to any instant messaging application
one would want to.
The application should consist of some instant messaging module which will
be interchangeable to make the application able to run on multiple messaging
applications.
Figure 3.1 is an attempt to envision the general architecture of the application.
The application will have a core in which the functionality of the chatbot resides.
This will then implement the process mining frameworks, use a Context Manager
which controls the handling of the ﬁles and the database. It will also use a
wrapper for the processing of natural language, which then uses the NLP Module
to retrieve the intent of the user. A IM Wrapper will be used for ensuring the
right format for the chosen IM Module which then connects to the chats.
Figure 3.1: General Architecture of the application
3.1
Class Diagram
[h] Figure 3.2 shows a high level class diagram of the system and the design will
be explained in the following text.
The main class of the system will be the ’Controller’ class, which will serve as
the initial setup of the system, by deﬁning which IM wrapper the chatbot will
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Class Diagram
15
Figure 3.2: High Level Class Diagram
be using.
Ideally this will be done by supplying an extra argument when initializing the
chatbot. e.g. by writing ’Controller Telegram’ when starting the chatbot from
a terminal.
These IM wrappers should comply with the architecture of the AbstractMes-
sagingWrapper class.
The idea behind the class IMHandler will be to handle the logic for the messag-
ing. That way the logic will be decoupled from the speciﬁc classes handling the
connections to the IM applications. This means that new IM wrappers will be
able to be added with minimal eﬀort. e.g. The only logic that should reside in
the wrapper should be to receive and send ﬁles and messages from a given IM.
So when a wrapper receives a message, it calls the IMHandler which then will
handle the recognition of the users intent and make sure that the appropriate
reply will be made. So by simply changing the wrapper, the chatbot can be
integrated to another IM.
The application uses three diﬀerent enumeration classes, ReplyType, Execution-
State and BotState respectively. ReplyType is an enum that will describe the
type of reply that the chatbot will do, for example when the chatbot has solved
a task for the user, the type of reply will be reﬂected by ReplyType to show
==PAGE:24==
16
Design of Chatbot
if the chatbot should handle the reply as a ﬁle, a text message or as multiple
replies.
The BotState Enumeration will be used to describe the state of the chatbot:
whether it is idle, occupied or waiting for input of some sorts. The Execution-
State will then be used to tell what the chatbot should expect as input for the
diﬀerent types of executions available for the chatbot. The idea behind Execu-
tionState is to describe the input necessary for the functionality of the objects
in the collection class ExecutionObjects.
ExecutionObjects is a class containing a collection of objects of the class Exe-
cutionObject. The ExecutionObject are the functionality of the chatbot itself.
By creating objects of the type ExecutionObject in the ExecutionObjects class,
functionality can be added to the chatbot. The objects will contain the possi-
ble intents of the user, the reply of the chatbot, information about whether or
not the chatbot will change state with this action and possibly a script if the
execution will require a script.
The user’s intention will be recognized by the chatbot via the NLPWrapper
Class which wraps the input from the user and retrieves the intent from the
NLP of choice.
When the intent has been retrieved, the ExecutionObject which matches the
intent can be retrieved from the ExecutionObjects class.
If the intent of the users input requires the chatbot to execute logic, the object
will contain either a reference to the Execution class or the PM class depending
on the intent.
If the execution requires a ﬁle or other type of context, the Execution Class will
make use of the ContextManager to retrieve and handle the context.
Depending on the type of computation required by the chatbot in regards to
the PM class, Wrappers will be used to execute logic from diﬀerent types of
frameworks via scripts stored in the database.
The class of Globals will contain all information and variables which are global
in the chatbot. e.g. the state of the chatbot and environment speciﬁc variable
such as connection strings to the database etc.
Due to the complexity of a detailed class diagram, only a high level diagram will
be included in this thesis. However the detailed class diagram has been included
in the appendices and can be found in Appendix B.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Context Manager
17
In the following sections the design of the key parts and concepts of the system
will be explained in detail.
3.2
Context Manager
Figure 3.3: Section of class diagram relating to context manager
The concept of the Context Manager is to handle ﬁles, scripts etc.
for the
chatbot to process. In ﬁgure 3.3 the section of the class diagram relating to the
Context Manager can be seen.
Say for example the user requests an action of the chatbot, which requires the
chatbot to execute logic from a third-party, as the idea of the chatbot is to
create a layer of abstraction between the user and the ﬁeld of study in which
the chatbot is operating.
The chatbot will then have to retrieve the script
executing the requested action, and pass it on to the appropriate wrapper.
If the user has requested a ﬁle or manipulation of a ﬁle, the context manager
will have to retrieve information about the right ﬁle from the database based
on the user, the chat, and the type of ﬁle in question.
The next section will focus on the design of the database of this application.
3.3
Database
A database should be designed and implemented for the application to store
data such as ﬁle information and scripts. The database should comply with
fourth form normalization. [11]
==PAGE:26==
18
Design of Chatbot
The database should contain information of the ﬁles stored in the application,
e.g.
which user has provided this ﬁle and at what time, along with speciﬁc
information about the ﬁle e.g. Hash value of content, size and type.
To model such a database an E-R diagram has been created and is shown in
ﬁgure 3.4.
3.3.1
ER Diagram
Figure 3.4: ER Diagram for the database
The ER diagram in ﬁgure 3.4 has been created according to the standards
described in [11]. It shows the design of the database for the chatbot.
The database should contain a table for scripts. These scripts are for the chatbot
to use if functionality should be invoked in third party frameworks. The desired
functionality should then be written as a script for the chatbot to execute on
command. To store the scripts, the design has been chosen such that for the
given table information will be contained such as an id of the script, the name
of the given script, the script itself and then a variable, here called Language,
which states in what context the script should be executed e.g. if the script
contains Java code, R code etc. then it would be speciﬁed here.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Database
19
The table of Files will contain all necessary information of the ﬁles.
These
informations would be the Id of the ﬁle, the hash value, which will be explained
later, but is for the purpose of avoiding multiple identical ﬁles to be stored on
the server. It will then also contain the path to the ﬁle itself, the size of the ﬁle
and the type of the ﬁle. For this application, two types of ﬁles are used, models
and logs.
The Files_in_chat table will contain an id and the id of the chat. Each chat has
its own unique id for the chatbot to recognize the given chat, this Id can then
be used to group the ﬁles for each chat. The table will also contain information
of the user who uploaded the ﬁle along with a timestamp of this upload. A
ﬁlename will also be stored in this table rather than in the Files table, as each
person might name their ﬁles diﬀerently even though it might be the exact
same ﬁle. The table will also keep information of whether or not the ﬁle has
been ﬁltered in the chat. Lastly as shown by the relation between the tables
Files_in_chat and Files, the Id of the given ﬁle in the Files table will be stored
in Files_in_chat as a foreign key to reference the given ﬁle.
The Current_ﬁle table will then keep track of which ﬁles are currently used in
the chat. Again, an Id attribute is present to keep track of each single entry,
then the Chat_id is also recorded to keep track of the speciﬁc chat. A type
is also recorded and the idea is that each chat will have exactly one of each
type of ﬁle as current ﬁles e.g. in this application each chat will have exactly
one current log and one current model, but should the number of types change,
the amount of current ﬁles would change with it. Of course this table will then
also have a reference to the given ﬁle in chat by having the Id of an entry in
Files_in_chat as foreign key.
In relation to the multiplicities shown on the diagram they will be described
as follows. Current_ﬁle will be related to Files_in_chat so that each entry in
Current_ﬁle will reference one, and only one, entry in the Files_in_chat table
and each entry in this table can be associated with zero or one entry in the
Current_ﬁle table.
For the relation between the tables Files_in_chat and Files each entry in
Files_in_chat will reference exactly one entry from the Files table and as an
arbitrary number of identical ﬁles could be uploaded each entry in the Files
table could be associated with zero or more entries in the Files_in_chat table.
==PAGE:28==
20
Design of Chatbot
3.3.2
Sql Injection
Sql injections are one of the most devastating vulnerabilities in an application as
this can lead to exposure of sensitive information such as usernames, passwords
etc. As sql injection is possible through a standard website, this also makes it
a widespread vulnerability. [7]
This application does not directly store any sensitive data in the database in
regards to the users such as names, passwords, addresses etc. It does however
store the eventlogs in which sensitive information can occur, such as names,
places or even trade secrets. Therefore, there are a major security risks asso-
ciated with the data stored in the application. To make the chatbot robust to
these vulnerabilities, steps shall be taken to avoid the risk of injecting sql into
the chatbot. A possible scenario of sql injection could be where the chatbot are
waiting for an answer from the user before retrieving some information from the
database, the user then proceeds to type in sql code directly in the chat, such
that the chatbot mistakenly would run this code exposing sensitive information.
This should be looked at with great severity and should be avoided.
3.3.3
Hashing of Content
To avoid storing multiple identical ﬁles in the application, hashing will be im-
plemented to cope with this. As the idea is to avoid identical ﬁles, it should be
the contents of the ﬁles alone which should be used for generating a hash value,
as ﬁles with diﬀerent names can still be identical. Therefore, abstractions from
the ﬁlename should be made when storing a ﬁle, such that the name is local to
the chat.
This use of hashing requires a hash function with minimal collisions, for this
cryptographic hash functions such as MD5 or SHA-256 would be ideal as cryp-
tographic hash functions have very few collisions by design.
Imagine two users, independent of each other, connecting to the chatbot in
diﬀerent chats. They both talk to the chatbot and eventually uploads the exact
same ﬁle to the chatbot. This ﬁle will then be processed by the chatbot and
ﬁnally stored on the server where the chatbot resides. This would not be optimal,
to store the exact same ﬁle multiple times on the server, especially if it is a large
size ﬁle.
To avoid the problem of multiple identical ﬁles stored on the server, the chatbot
will examine the ﬁle upon receiving it, by computing the hash value of the
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Design of Natural Language Processing
21
content of the ﬁle and comparíng it to the computed hash values of ﬁles already
stored on the server.
If a collision is found, the ﬁle should not be stored on the server, in stead a
reference should be created to the ﬁle already existing on the server.
If no collisions are found, the ﬁle can be stored on the server and the chatbot
should now store the hash value for future comparisons when ﬁles are received.
3.4
Design of Natural Language Processing
To retain as much of the functionality in the chatbot itself, the NLP framework
will be used only to recognize the users intent and nothing else to make the
chatbot less dependent on the choice of framework for NLP.
The NLP frameworks each have their own functionality and ideas how to make
the chatbot more intelligent e.g. Microsoft Bot Framework’s QnA Maker, which
allows the owner to, quickly and without coding, specify possible questions and
answers to these questions. That way the chatbot quickly builds up a lot of
functionality with minimal eﬀort. [12]
Google’s Dialogﬂow implements their own module called ’Small Talk’. This also
provides the owner with an interface to quickly setup some functionality for
the chatbot, however in the Small Talk module the questions from the user are
predeﬁned and grouped into sections. e.g. ’About Agent’ (Google refers their
instances as agents), ’Courtesy’ etc.1
To use such functionality of the NLP framework, however, will limit the applica-
tion when choosing framework or when switching framework in a possible later
stage. Therefore, only minimal functionality will be used, namely the intent
recognition of the frameworks, as the only part of the application that will have
to change, in order to adapt to a new NLP framework, will be the NLP Wrapper
of the application.
1https://cloud.google.com/dialogﬂow/docs/agents-small-talk
==PAGE:30==
22
Design of Chatbot
3.5
Extensibility
To ensure the extensibility of the application, the logic of the chatbot should be
implemented in such a way that additional functionality relatively quickly can
be added or removed from the application.
To ensure this, the functionality has to be structured in such a way that the
task of adding or removing will be rather simple.
ExecutionObject
Figure 3.5: Section of the class diagram relating to ExecutionObject
The list of objects containing all of the chatbots functionalities will contain
objects of the class ExecutionObject.
Figure 3.5 shows the section of the class diagram relating to the ExecutionObject
class.
Objects of this class should contain all the information required to implement
the functionality of the object. e.g. if an object were to contain the functionality
for helping the user understand what could be done in the system, this object
would have to contain the intent captured by the NLP module. The possible
command for the functionality (This could be something like /help), the answer
to the user either by direct text or by referencing the function providing the
answer. As the help function would have to explain the functionality of the
system by iterating through the ExecutionObjects, this would likely be done
by a function, and to make this function retrieve useful information from the
objects, the objects will also have to contain a help-text, explaining the usage
of the functionality within the object.
==PAGE:31==
3.6 IM Handler
23
The object should in addition to the above, also contain information of the
expected reply type to the user by having a ReplyType speciﬁed and information
of the ExecutionState of the functionality of the object, to let the chatbot know
what kind of input the functionality requires. If the chatbot enters a new state
as a consequence of the object, this should also be stated in the object along
with the new state of the chatbot.
Finally, if the functionality requires some third party framework, the execution
of this would likely be stored as scripts, and the object should then contain
information about the need of a script along with the speciﬁc script needed to
be used.
3.6
IM Handler
Figure 3.6: Section of the class diagram relating to the IMHandler class
The IM Handler should contain the functionality for handling the inputs from
the user so the wrappers for the speciﬁc IM’s contain as little functionality as
possible, that way the diﬀerent wrappers can be implemented in a uniform way
as the functionality are shared across the wrappers by using the same handler.
In ﬁgure 3.6 the section of the class diagram relating to the IM Handler can be
seen.
Depending on the type of input from the user e.g. ﬁle or message, the handler
should retrieve the intent from the NLP module and depending on the state
of the chatbot, act accordingly. E.g. if the chatbot is currently occupied, no
action should be taken, but a message explaining to the user, that the chatbot
is currently otherwise occupied should be sent. If the chatbot is currently idle
it should try to fulﬁll the desired intention of the user.
==PAGE:32==
24
Design of Chatbot
IM Wrappers
The IM Wrappers should each contain functionality for receiving input from the
user, this should be directed to the IM Handler to retrieve the intent of the user.
Once the intention has been identiﬁed and the necessary steps has been taken
by the chatbot, a reply should be sent back to the user. Depending on the type
of reply, the Wrapper should be able to handle this. For this chatbot diﬀerent
scenarios are possible.
Either the reply consists of a simple text message in which case the wrapper
should contain functionality for sending text, or the reply could consist of a ﬁle
in which case the wrapper should be able to uploading ﬁles to the chat.
Alternatively a reply could consist of multiple replies of these two types e.g.
a text message followed by a ﬁle followed by a text message. In this case the
wrapper should be able to handle these cases, preferably by recursivity.
3.7
Overall Robustness
When dealing with user inputs, one must take into account, scenarios where the
chatbot experiences non-rational behavior from the user, along with answers
and behavior that are not predicted by the chatbot.
In such cases the chatbot should be robust and able to handle the situation and
in worst cases be able to catch the exceptions and return back to a stable state.
An example could be the user supplying a wrong ﬁle but with the right suﬃx
such that the ﬁle looks to be of the right format. But when it comes to use the
ﬁle by the users request, the chatbot would not be able to use the ﬁle properly.
This should be handled by the chatbot, by telling the user that something has
gone wrong, and preferably store some information for the owner to let him
know that unintended behaviour has been registered.
Exception Catching
By implementing exception catching the above functionality can be implemented,
and the steps necessary for the chatbot to recover itself can be taken whenever
an exception has been catched.
==PAGE:33==
3.8 Designing the States of the Chatbot
25
Logging
To be able to store information for the owner, logging can be implemented.
This will allow all information of the exceptions to be stored with timestamps
and references to the code, making it easy for the owner to troubleshoot the
given exception.
3.8
Designing the States of the Chatbot
As the design requires the chatbot to keep track of its state in order to distinguish
between diﬀerent conversational context. It would make sense to create state
machine diagrams depicting the states in these cases, and the actions resulting
in the states. Therefore, multiple diagrams has been produced below. It would
be a possibility to have a single diagram showing all the states, but as this will
make the diagram much more complex, the states have been divided into several
diagrams to keep them somewhat simple.
It is important to note that the Idle state is the same for all diagrams therefore
it will be possible to enter all the states that emanates from the idle state.
As the state of the chatbot is global it will make sense to model the state machine
diagrams for the application as a whole, rather than for the speciﬁc classes.
It is also important to note that no matter which state the chatbot is in, the
user will always have the possibility to abort the current context and make the
chatbot return to the idle state. As this is true for all diagrams, it is being
stated here, in stead of showing it in every diagram.
Since the chatbot is designed to always be available for the user, the state
machines will be modelled as Moore Machines [13]. These are machines with an
accepting state shown by a double circle. This state is where the chatbot waits
for the user i.e. the Idle state.
Figure 3.7 shows the case of general conversation. Here the transition "Receive
message" is triggered whenever the user inputs a message or command such as
"Help" or "Hello".
The chatbot then processes the message, and if it should make a simple reply e.g.
say hello back, the transition "Reply" will trigger. If the message received was
something like, "Do alpha miner", then the transition "Mining request" would
==PAGE:34==
26
Design of Chatbot
Figure 3.7: State Machine of General Conversation
trigger, making the chatbot go to the state of Mining, where the chatbot would
produce the result of running the alpha miner algorithm on the current log in
the chat. While in the state of Mining the chatbot can not take any further
requests until the task has been completed. If a user was to write the chatbot
while it is in the Mining state, a message should be sent to the user letting him
know that the chatbot is currently otherwise engaged. Once the mining is done,
the transition of "Notify mining completion" will trigger, making the chatbot
process the result and reply to the user by triggering the "Reply" transition.
Figure 3.8: State Machine of File Received
Figure 3.8 shows the case where the chatbot receives a ﬁle from the user, this
triggers the "Receive ﬁle" transition. In this case the chatbot should enter the
state of Replacing ﬁle, where it will prompt the user for additional information
of what to do with the ﬁle e.g. should the newly received ﬁle replace the current
ﬁle in the chat or should it just be stored as part of the ﬁles in the chat.
Once the user has chosen what to do with the ﬁle, the chatbot should make
this happen, making the transition "Action chosen" trigger, and returning the
chatbot to the Idle state.
Figure 3.9 shows the case when the user wishes to replace a ﬁle in the chat.
When the user tells the chatbot that a ﬁle should be replaced, the transition
==PAGE:35==
3.8 Designing the States of the Chatbot
27
Figure 3.9: State Machine of Replacing File
"File replacement request" triggers and the chatbot will then change state to
Waiting for ﬁle, where it is waiting for the user to tell which ﬁle will replace
the current ﬁle in the chat. The user will then be able to choose between the
ﬁles existing in the chat and by supplying the chatbot with the ﬁle that should
replace the current ﬁle, the transition of "File chosen" should trigger, making
the chatbot replace the ﬁle and returning to the state of Idle.
In ﬁgure 3.9 the ﬁle in question have not been speciﬁed by type, since this event
can happen for each of the ﬁle types that the chatbot will support. e.g. this
chatbot will support both logs and models.
Figure 3.10: State Machine of Filter Request
Figure 3.10 shows the case of a user requesting a ﬁltering of the current log. Once
the request has been received by the chatbot, the transition "Filter request"
should trigger making the chatbot changing state to Waiting for ﬁlter input as
it requests further input for the ﬁltering action from the user. Once the user has
supplied the chatbot with the information necessary to complete the ﬁltering
e.g. which activities the ﬁltering should keep in the log, the transition of Filter
input chosen should trigger and the chatbot should then change state to Mining
while it is doing the ﬁltering.
When the ﬁltering is done, the transition of
Notify mining completion should trigger, triggering the transition of Reply and
the chatbot should change state back to Idle as the reply is being sent to the
==PAGE:36==
28
Design of Chatbot
user.
Figure 3.11: State Machine of Conformance Request
Figure 3.11 shows the case of a conformance request by the user.
As there
are multiple ways of performing a conformance check, once the transition of
Conformance request triggers, the chatbot should change state to Waiting for
conformance input and prompt the user for which type of conformance check is
wanted. When the user has chosen the desired type, the transition Conformance
chosen should trigger, making the chatbot go to the state of Mining as it per-
forms the conformance check. Once the computation is done, the transition of
Notify mining completion should trigger, which in turn should trigger the Reply
transition, making the chatbot change back to the state Idle, as the result of
the conformance check is replied to the user.
3.9
Design of Special Conversation Cases
When designing a chatbot application, there are multiple scenarios to take into
consideration, and choices to be made. Imagine a case where the user wants to
ask the chatbot for help, but will not take the time to have a full conversation
with the application about the task to be done. As a solution the chatbot should
accept direct commands from the user, so the user will be able to let the chatbot
know what should be done in single line commands.
Another case for the chatbot could be that multiple users are in the same chat
and at some point in time they would like to text each other and not the chatbot.
In this case the chatbot should be able to detect this and ignore theses messages.
When designing the chatbot to cope with the ﬁrst case, rules for writing com-
mands should be made. The idea for this case is that a certain character should
precede the command, so the chatbot will be able to distinguish commands from
normal conversation.
The character chosen to precede the commands will be a slash "/". The choice
==PAGE:37==
3.10 Dialogs with the Chatbot
29
of using slash partly derives from Telegram, as it is an integrated part of Tele-
gram chatbots to be able to use commands. When developing a chatbot, fully
integrated with Telegram, it is possible to deﬁne the command for the chatbot
in such a way that Telegram registers them and will be able to give the user
tooltips for what commands are available.
This chatbot, however, will not use the functionality of telling Telegram the
possible commands for a tooltip to be shown, because the chatbot should be
able to have new IMs integrated in the future without the logic of the chatbot
having to change. Therefore, speciﬁc functionality for IM applications should
be avoided and the functionality to be used, should reside in the chatbot itself.
For the second case where the user would write messages in the chat directed at
other users and not the chatbot, the chatbot should also be able to distinguish
between these messages. To make the chatbot able to distinguish between the
messages, a concept of chatbots in streaming services, such as Twitch2, will be
used. In Twitch, chatbots can be implemented in a given chat for viewers to
interact with, if questions arise. For the Twitch case however, the main focus
of the chat is for users to communicate with each other and not the chatbot, so
communication with the chatbot are being preceded by an exclamation mark
"!" to let the chatbot know that the message is meant for it.[10]
In the chatbot being designed here, the focus however is with the user to chatbot
communication, and not the user to user communication. So this chatbot will be
designed in a similar way as a Twitch chatbot, in the sense that an exclamation
mark is being used to direct a message to a speciﬁc section of the chat. In
this chatbot the exclamation mark will be used to let the chatbot know that a
message is intended for another user and not the chatbot, so no reply should be
sent from the chatbot. An example of such a message could be, "!Hello Bob,
what should we ask the chatbot for today?".
3.10
Dialogs with the Chatbot
When designing the chatbot the possible dialog paths must be taken into con-
sideration, as these should be modelled and integrated in the NLP module for
the chatbot to use.
Say for example that the scenario of a greeting, or a request for help should be
possible, then the NLP module should contain these, so the correct intent could
be recognized. Without it being contained in the NLP module, the chatbot will
not be able to recognize the intent.
2https://www.twitch.tv/
==PAGE:38==
30
Design of Chatbot
So part of the design will be to model the expected and possible paths of con-
versation. These will be designed at the initial state of the chatbot, but will
most likely expand as functionality is added and new paths are discovered.
For an overview of the possible paths for this chatbot, a diagram has been made.
This can be found in Appendix C
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Implementation of
Application
When implementing the chatbot, it should adhere to the choices made in the
design phase.
This means that decisions must be made in relation to the diﬀerent sections of
the application such that these fulﬁll the requirements stated in Chapter 2.
This chapter will cover the implementation of the application in the following
way.
First, choices will be made and argued for regarding the fundamental functional-
ities of the chatbot in order to fulﬁll the functional requirements. e.g. choosing
a framework for natural language processing.
Then choices for the database and the security of the database will be stated
to show the fulﬁllment of functional and non-functional requirements regarding
the database.
Then some general implementation, such as Hashing of the content of ﬁles,
logging, ﬁle storage etc. will be shown in order to give an idea of other parts of
the implementation.
Lastly, a short overview of how the natural language processing of the chatbot
==PAGE:40==
32
Implementation of Application
is trained will be shown.
In the following sections the diﬀerent decisions will be shown and explained.
This will be done by showing a decision matrix for each of the decisions.
In these matrices, diﬀerent symbols are used such as "?", "X" and "%", these
are being explained in table 4.1.
Symbol
Description
?
Represents the fact that no knowledge of the given feature of the
framework could be found, e.g. an "?" in the "Latest Commit"
row, means that no information of last commit could be found.
X
Represents the value "True", e.g.
an "X" in the "Well Doc-
umented" row, means that the given framework is well docu-
mented.
%
Represents the value "False", in a similar example as for "X", "%"
would mean that the given framework is not well documented.
Table 4.1: Explanation of matrix symbols
The common criteria for these matrices are shown in table 4.2. If special criteria
exists for a decision matrix, these will be explained when presented.
Criterion
Description
Easy to use
This can be perceived as a somewhat subjective cri-
terion, however this should more be seen as the sum
of the other criteria, as they each deﬁne some form of
ease of use e.g. if a framework is well documented,
it would be easier to use than one which is not well
documented.
Latest Commit
Represents last time a commit have been made to the
framework. It is used to give a notion of the activ-
ity level of the framework. These may be somewhat
misleading, as these were recorded during the ﬁrst it-
eration of the project (See appendix A) and therefore
there may have been additional commits since.
Free to use
Describes whether or not the framework is a paid ser-
vice. As this is not commercialized application, it is of
high importance that the frameworks are free to use.
Well documented
Describes if the amount of documentation available
are satisfactory.
Table 4.2: Explanation of matrix criteria
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Deciding Chatbot Framework
33
Figure 4.1: Decision matrix of chatbot frameworks
4.1
Deciding Chatbot Framework
Before diving into the requirements, a suitable framework for implementing the
chatbot shall be chosen.
Two frameworks of particular interest were picked, as these seems to have the
necessary qualities.
The frameworks along with the criteria can be seen in the decision matrix in
Figure 4.1.
Description of criteria
In the matrix in ﬁgure 4.1, three criteria are shown which are not common.
Therefore, these will brieﬂy be explained.
Possibility of multiple IM’s: Notes whether or not the framework can be instan-
tiated with diﬀerent types of instant messaging frameworks.
Possibility of implementing PM frameworks: Notes whether or not it is possible
to implement the process mining frameworks, which is critical to this applica-
tion.
Built-in IM support: Notes if the framework have built in wrappers for the
instant messaging applications.
Below the two frameworks will be reviewed and compared.
==PAGE:42==
34
Implementation of Application
Xatkit
Xatkit1 is a free to use, open source framework for making chatbots.
The
framework has been developed to allow for platform-independent chatbot devel-
opment.
By using the frameworks “platforms”, the framework can easily integrate to
multiple IM’s without having to rewrite the chatbot. [1]
As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1, Xatkit have had a recent commit and are both free
to use and well documented, which contributes to the criterion of easy to use.
Xatkit also allows the possibility for implementing multiple IM’s which it does
by the built in support for the IM’s.
It does however not allow for implementation of process mining frameworks, as
these would have to be implemented in the "platforms" which Xatkit uses.
Microsoft Bot Framework
Microsoft Bot Framework2 is a comprehensive framework advertised as being
enterprise-grade, coming from Microsoft it’s using the same high standard of
documentation and support.
As seen in ﬁgure 4.1, this framework allows for multiple IM’s as well as it has
built in support for the IM’s and in addition it would be possible to implement
the process mining frameworks. But as the framework uses C, wrappers would
have to be made.
Being a Microsoft product it is very well documented, but are aimed at com-
mercialized products and are therefore not free to use. No information could
be found on the last update/commit to this framework. As a result of these
criteria, the ease of use criterion is unknown.
Summary of Chatbot Framework
The two frameworks which have been compared both lack key criteria, Xatkit
with the inability of implementing process mining frameworks and Microsoft
Bot Framework which is a paid service.
Therefore, the decision has been made to not use any of these, but in stead
implement a chatbot from scratch in Python as this will allow for unlimited
1https://xatkit.com
2https://dev.botframework.com
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Deciding on Natural Language Processing
35
customisation of the chatbot.
Going forward, focus will therefore be on frameworks aimed at Python, however
some matrices also shows some options for Xatkit and Microsoft Bot Framework.
This is done to shown the possible potential of these.
4.2
Deciding on Natural Language Processing
To fulﬁll the requirements of processing natural language (FR5), the application
should make use of a framework capable of this.
Figure 4.2 shows the frameworks which have been taken into consideration for
this chatbot.
Figure 4.2: Decision matrix of NLP framework
Description of criteria
In the matrix in ﬁgure 4.2, a criterion, named Aimed at NLP, is shown which
is not common.
The description of this criterion is whether or not the main purpose of the
framework is natural language processing.
PyTorch
PyTorch3 is an open source machine learning framework for Python. It is free to
use, well documented and has been recently updated by a commit. It is however
3https://pytorch.org
==PAGE:44==
36
Implementation of Application
a general machine learning framework and are therefore not aimed at natural
language processing, but at machine learning in general. As it is not aimed at
NLP, it is uncertain how easy it is to use for this purpose.
TensorFlow
TensorFlow4 is also an open source machine learning platform for Python. A
recent commit has been made. It is similar to PyTorch as this is also a general
machine learning framework.0 The same criteria are therefore met, which means
that this ease of use is also uncertain for this framework.
As both the above frameworks are universal machine learning frameworks, these
are not speciﬁcally aimed at natural language processing. Therefore, it would
require a dedicated eﬀort to implement one of these successfully.
Google Dialogﬂow
Google Dialogﬂow5 is Google’s own Natural Language Platform that runs on
Google’s Cloud Platform, making use of their own machine learning experience
and products.
It works by using their web interface to deﬁne desired NLP
behavior, training is then done in a matter of seconds as the base of the NLP
functionality is already deﬁned by Google. The Platform can then be accessed
via their API.
Being Google this platform gives the possibility of using other tools from Google
such as Analytics and speech recognition.
As can be seen, it is unclear when the last update/commit has been done.
However, it is free to use, very well documented as it is a Google product and
directly aimed at natural language processing. Therefore, the criterion of easy
to use is also met.
Xatkit
Xatkit6 is a framework as explained in the Framework part. This has an existing
integration to Google Dialogﬂow but have moved the training of the NLP Agent
4https://tensorﬂow.org
5https://dialogﬂow.com
6https://xatkit.com
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Deciding on Natural Language Processing
37
directly into the framework making Google Cloud redundant. Therefore, most
of the functionalities oﬀered by Google’s Dialogﬂow can be used with Xatkit.
Training of the NLP is therefore very similar to Google Dialogﬂow.
As Xatkit is both free to use, well documented and directly aimed at NLP, the
criterion of easy to use is therefore also met. It can also be seen that a recent
commit has been made to the framework.
Azure Cognitive Services
Azure Cognitive Services7 is a comprehensive family of AI services and cognitive
API’s which are also able of processing and understanding natural language.
Azure is Microsoft’s cloud platform and therefore it would make sense to use
this with the Microsoft Bot Framework.
Being a Microsoft product, support and documentation are guaranteed, there-
fore the well documented criterion is met. It is also aimed at natural language
processing.
It is, however, like their Bot Framework, aimed at commercialized applications
and are therefore not free to use. No information of last commit/update could be
found, and as a result of the other criteria, the ease of use criterion is unknown.
Summary of NLP Frameworks
For the frameworks compared in this section Xatkit and Azure Cognitive Ser-
vices are not relevant, as the implementation focuses on a implementation from
scratch in Python.
Therefore, the choice is between PyTorch, TensorFlow and Google Dialogﬂow.
Most of the criteria are met by all three frameworks, but as Google Dialogﬂow
is the only one directly aimed at natural language processing, this will be the
choice of framework for handling the processing of natural language.
7https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitive-services
==PAGE:46==
38
Implementation of Application
4.3
Deciding on Instant Messaging Frameworks
To meet the requirement of being able to instantiate the chatbot to multiple
instant messaging applications (FR4), the following frameworks capable of this,
have been taken into consideration.
They can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3
Figure 4.3: Decision matrix of IM wrappers
Description of criteria
In the matrix in ﬁgure 4.3, a criterion, named Possibility for Multiple IM Sup-
port, is shown which is not common.
The description of this criterion is whether or not the the framework contains
wrappers for multiple instant messaging applications.
Python Telegram Bot API
Python Telegram Bot API8 is an open source framework for Python in which
communication with the application, Telegram, is possible. Essentially, it’s a
wrapper for Telegram.
It has recently been committed to, it is free to use and well documented. Based
on these criteria, the criterion of easy to use is therefore met.
Is it however, as the name proposes, only a wrapper for Telegram, which does
not meet the criterion of support for multiple IM’s.
8https://python-telegram-bot.org
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Deciding on Instant Messaging Frameworks
39
WhatsApp API
WhatsApp API9 is an open source framework for Python allowing communica-
tion with the WhatsApp API through a wrapper.
A commit to this framework has recently been done.
The same criteria have been met as for the Telegram Bot API, as these two are
similar frameworks, but for diﬀerent instant messaging applications.
Slack API
Slack API10 is a wrapper for Python allowing communication with the slack
API. This is also an open source framework.
Much like the previous two modules this is a similar framework, but for yet
another instant messaging application. Therefore, the same criteria have been
met.
It has also recently been committed to.
Xatkit
Xatkit has it’s own "platforms" in which wrappers for multiple IM’s are already
deﬁned. This means that Xatkit will be able to work with multiple IM’s right
out of the box.
There has recently been a commit to the Xatkit framework and as stated before,
this framework is both free to use and well documented, making it easy to use.
As mentioned, the "platforms" allow for Xatkit to support implementation of
multiple IM’s.
Microsoft Bot Framework
Microsoft Bot Framework are not so diﬀerent from Xatkit, as it also has wrap-
pers integrated out of the box, allowing it to connect to multiple IM’s.
9https://github.com/mukulhase/WebWhatsapp-Wrapper
10https://github.com/slackapi/python-slackclient
==PAGE:48==
40
Implementation of Application
As stated before Microsoft Bot Framework are well documented, but not free
to use which makes the ease of use unknown. The latest commit/update are
unknown. As stated, it does however support the possibility for multiple IM’s.
Summary of Instant Messaging Frameworks
As before, Xatkit and Microsoft Bot Framework are not of relevance as the im-
plementation focuses on a Python implementation from scratch.
Each of the three remaining frameworks, Python Telegram Bot API, WhatApp
API and Slack API, meets the same criteria and can therefore be seen as equiv-
alent frameworks.
From these three the Python Telegram Bot API and the Slack API were chosen
to be used for the implementation of IM frameworks.
4.4
Deciding on Process Mining Frameworks
For the frameworks containing process mining, three are taken into account.
These can be seen in the decision matrix in ﬁgure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Decision matrix of process mining frameworks
PM4Py
PM4Py11 is a well documented and free to use framework written in Python.
It contains process mining functionality. The latest commit has been rather
recently and all of this makes the easy to use criterion being met.
11https://pm4py.ﬁt.fraunhofer.de/
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Deciding on Process Mining Frameworks
41
BupaR
BupaR12 is a framework for R it is free to use and well documented which is
why the criterion of easy to use is also met. The most recent commit was quite
some time ago, but still within a year of registering the date, so this is deemed
acceptable.
ProM
ProM13 is a framework written in Java. Like the other two, this framework
are also free to use. However, it is not very well documented which makes it
uncertain how easy this framework is to use.
The last commit found for this framework is almost three years ago.
4.4.0.1
Summary of Process Mining Frameworks
All of the three stated frameworks are pretty similar, only ProM being not so
documented making it uncertain how easy it is to use. Each framework oﬀers
something diﬀerent, either visually or computationally. As there does not exist
a limit of the number of process mining frameworks, which can be implemented
to the chatbot, all three will be implemented.
The implementation of these frameworks requires the chatbot to be able to
execute tasks in the diﬀerent languages e.g. R and Java. For this sub-processes
in Python will be used, which essentially is running a shell command from
Python.
Summary
Going forward the implementation will be focusing on a python implementation
from scratch using Google Dialog Flow, Python Telegram bot API and Slack
API. The chatbot will implement both PM4Py, BupaR and ProM.
PM4Py can be implemented directly into the chatbot, as both will be written
in Python. BupaR and ProM will be executed via scripts, using sub-processes
in Python.
12https://www.bupar.net/
13http://www.promtools.org/doku.php
==PAGE:50==
42
Implementation of Application
4.5
Deciding on Database
For the database implementation, multiple database options has been taken into
consideration. Below is a decision matrix showing the diﬀerent options which
were taken into consideration along with the parameters by which they were
measured.
Figure 4.5: Decision Matrix for Database
Description of criteria
In the matrix in ﬁgure 4.5, a criterion, named Relational, is shown which is not
common.
The description of this criterion is whether or not the the structure of the
database is relational.
It should also be noted that in this decision matrix no Latest commits are shown,
as these will not make sense to use for databases.
MySql
MySql14 is both free to use, well documented and relational, all of this makes it
meet the criterion of easy to use.
The MySql databases requires client-server architecture and can be used in a
Python application with a simple module import. The client-server architecture
14https://www.mysql.com/
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Deciding on Database
43
are great for scenarios where multi user access are required. Also MySql supports
datatypes such as: Enum, Set, Date etc.
SQLite
SQLite database15 are like MySql also free to use, well documented and rela-
tional, also making it meet the criterion of easy to use.
As opposed to MySql, SQLite is a server-less, self-contained database.
This
means that it is embedded in the application in which it is used. This also
means that it works best for scenarios where a single user access the database.
SQLite only support standard datatypes such as: Integer, Blob, Text and Real.
MongoDB
MongoDB16 is a non-relational database which stores its data in JSON-like
objects. It is well documented and free to use. However, as it is non-relational,
it is uncertain if the ease of use criterion are met for the implementation in this
application.
Summary of Database Decision
For the databases compared in this section the choice is between MySql and
SQLite. But as the database should only be accessed by the chatbot itself i.e.
not a multi user access setup, and as the data stored in the database will be text
and integers, there is no need for a database such as MySql which requires a
client-server architecture, when SQLite can be used embedded in the application.
The decision is therefore to implement the database using SQLite.
Focus of the Database
The main focus of the database will be to store ﬁles, which will be touched
on later. Another feature of this chatbot is the ability to use diﬀerent frame-
works in the ﬁeld of study regardless of the language etc. of course having a
15https://sqlite.org/
16https://www.mongodb.com/
==PAGE:52==
44
Implementation of Application
Python framework the scripts will be obsolete as the framework can be directly
implemented.
To be able to use these frameworks, the desired functionality will then be written
into a script which can be run by the chatbot when the user requests the speciﬁc
task.
The script will then be run by a Python sub process and the result of the script
e.g. a ﬁgure or a ﬁle will then be returned for the chatbot to process or simply
return to the user.
These scripts can each be related to a diﬀerent framework, so besides name
and the script itself, the database will have to store which language the given
framework is written in, in order for the chatbot to pass the script on to the
right wrapper so it will be run correctly.
The process of showing that the database satisﬁes 4NF [11] is not a priority in
this thesis, and as database design is not the main subject of this thesis, the com-
pliance to 4NF will just be stated as there exists no multi-valued dependencies
in the database.
4.6
Database Security
Sql injections are, as mentioned in chapter 3, a major threat to this application.
To defend against such types of attack, the amount of scenarios in which the
user will be in ’direct’ contact with the database are minimal, as most of the
calls to the database happens as a consequence of a request, in which the current
ﬁles should be retrieved. For this, only the Id of the chat is necessary.
A case where the user has ’direct’ contact with the database, are when the user
requests the current log/model changed. Here the chatbot prompts the user for
which ﬁle to use as replacement, however, as a security precaution it only accepts
integers. Therefore, the user will have to provide the Id of the desired ﬁle. This
makes it so that the user is restricted to only write integers and therefore cannot
inject SQL into the chatbot.
For an example see ﬁgure 4.6. Here the user requests to change the current log.
When prompted for which log should replace the current, the user types in SQL
that states that the Id should be zero or that 1 should be equal to 1, essentially
making this true for all entries in the database. By ending with ’–’ which deﬁnes
a comment in SQLite, the user the comments out any possible trailing SQL in
==PAGE:53==
4.7 Hashing of Files
45
the application after the input given by the user, to avoid any exceptions being
thrown by the application,
This is a very common way of injecting SQL, e.g. if injecting into a site where
username can be shown, this could result in making the entire table visible for
the person injecting it, and then makes it possible to ﬁnd sensitive information.
By only accepting integers this injection however is unsuccessful, as it can be
seen in the ﬁgure where the chatbot prompts the user that only integers are
accepted for the chatbot to change the log.
Figure 4.6: Attempt to inject SQL into the chatbot
4.7
Hashing of Files
The idea behind computing the hash value of the ﬁles, is to eliminate redundancy
in the ﬁle storage, e.g. if two diﬀerent users in diﬀerent chats uploads the exact
==PAGE:54==
46
Implementation of Application
same ﬁle, it would not be eﬃcient to store both ﬁles separately. In stead it would
be a good idea to only store one of the ﬁles and store the other a reference to
the ﬁrst. That way, from a user perspective, it would look like the ﬁle has been
stored even if there is an existing ﬁle similar to the one uploaded, but really the
ﬁle will not be saved but instead will be replaced by a reference to the existing
ﬁle.
When selecting a hashing algorithm to use, there is multiple aspects to take
into consideration. Most important is the probability of collisions for the given
algorithm. Another key aspect is time of computation, but is not as important
as avoiding collisions, as the system should be robust rather than fast.
Since the hashing is not used for security reasons, the metrics on which the
hashing algorithms will be evaluated on are therefore time of computation and
probability of collisions.
For this project the following two algorithms have been taken into consideration:
MD5 and SHA2 with the SHA-256 variant.
It is stated that 264 bit operations are needed to produce the same hash value
when using MD5. For the SHA algorithm, 280 bit operations are needed. The
speed of MD5 are faster than SHA-256 as it only requires 64 iteration where
SHA-256 requires 80. This means that the time for computing the hash value
will be faster when using MD5. [6]
As mentioned, the focus on the performance of the hashing algorithm will be
more on the probability of getting collisions in hash values rather than the
performance measured in speed. Therefore, going forward SHA-256 will be the
hashing algorithm of choice to be implemented in this project.
As a service to the user however the chatbot will inform the user if a identical
ﬁle already exists. That way the user knows that his ﬁle is not stored in the
system but a reference to the original ﬁle is instead.
4.8
Extensibility
As mentioned as part of the design of the chatbot, a key aspect of this appli-
cation is extensibility, so that new functionality rather easily can be added and
maintained.
By storing all of the intents of the chatbot in a collection class the task of
==PAGE:55==
4.9 Logging
47
adding, removing or altering a speciﬁc intent is straight forward as each intent
essentially is an object in a list.
By writing helping text within each object the chatbot can easily write out
explaining text to the user when requested as there will be a function collecting
all helping texts from the intent objects, so when a new object is added the
helping text will automatically be added to the chatbots explanation whenever
a user requests help.
Another part of the chatbot which is extendable are the enums. The fact that
replies uses enums to deﬁne reply types, makes it easy to add new functionality
e.g. to be able to send a video. More complex execution states and chatbot
states are also an option when adding functionality to the chatbot in the future.
4.9
Logging
To keep track of unwanted behavior and in order to ﬁnd and act upon undesired
events within the chatbot, logging will be implemented. The logging will consist
of two logs, one for the general events in the chatbot e.g. if any exceptions
where raised. These will then be logged in a log called Bot.log for the owner
to investigate. That way the log can be used to further the robustness of the
chatbot, making it less fragile to unwanted behavior.
The second log will keep track of the intention recognition within the chatbot
and log all events where the conﬁdence is below a certain threshold. E.g. if a
user with the intention of saying hello to the chatbot types "Heeloo", this will
then be wrapped and sent to Google Dialogﬂow in order to be recognized as an
intent. However, as the input from the user is misspelled and not close to the
training phrases, the chatbot might not be able to identify the intent with high
conﬁdence. The intent of the user are then received from Dialogﬂow along with
diﬀerent parameters where the conﬁdence is one of them. If the conﬁdence is
below the threshold, the chatbot will then log the intent in a log called dialog.log
and continue on.
The owner will then be able to check this log in order to see which intents may
experience many cases of low conﬁdence. With this knowledge the owner can
then add additional training phrases to the chatbots NLP module in order to
make it identify intents with a higher conﬁdence in the future.
==PAGE:56==
48
Implementation of Application
4.10
File Storage
For storing ﬁles which the chatbot has received, the application will save these
ﬁles in a folder on the server. There will be no structure to the folder, instead
the database will keep track of all the ﬁles e.g. which ﬁles has been uploaded
to which chat and by whom. As mentioned before, this is done so that ﬁles
potentially can be shared between chats, in the sense that the same ﬁle can be
used by two independent chats, if they have uploaded the exact same ﬁle. To
the user this will look like they each have their own ﬁle, but it will be space
eﬃcient for the server, as the sizes of the ﬁles potentially could be rather large.
As the name of the ﬁle is speciﬁc to the chat, the name is not important for the
ﬁle saved. Therefore, the ﬁles will be named using their hash value. This also
ensures that no ﬁles will be overwritten by a ﬁle with the same name, as two
ﬁles with a hash collision would mean that it is the same ﬁle and only one of
them should be saved on the server. Hence each name of the ﬁles are unique.
4.11
Special Messages
To cope with the scenarios for the chatbot where the user either inputs a direct
command, a ﬁle or a message either intended for the chatbot or another user,
the application should then check for each of these scenarios. This is partly done
in the IM Handler where messages not intended for the chatbot are ﬁltered out,
so the chatbot wont reply to these e.g. if a message starts with "!". Files are
also handled in the IM Handler. If it is a message or command intended for the
chatbot, the Execution class will handle this by ﬁnding the matching intent in
the collection of all the chatbots intents.
Standard Files
If a new user connects to the chatbot then as no ﬁles has been uploaded, the
user will not be able to request any of the services the chatbot oﬀers. To solve
this, a standard log and a standard model has been added to the application.
If no ﬁles were found for the chat, the application will fall back and add the
standard ﬁles to the chat, such that ﬁles now exist in the chat and the user then
will be able to requests process mining tasks from the chatbot.
These standard ﬁles are placed within the application folder, and are named
’Standard Log’ and ’Standard Model’ respectively. To change the standard log
==PAGE:57==
4.12 Third Party modules
49
or model, one would just have to replace one of these ﬁles and keep the naming
convention.
Starting the chatbot
The chatbot has been implemented with the functionality allowing it to be
started from a terminal. This functionality resides in the ﬁle Controller.py.
The application takes an argument for which IM should be used, i.e. "Con-
troller.py slack" would make the chatbot start up with the Slack API imple-
mented. Likewise Telegram or any other platforms which could be implemented
in the future, could be speciﬁed as the argument.
If no argument are given, the application will use Telegram by standard.
4.12
Third Party modules
As mentioned when deciding the Database, scripts can be stored in order for
the chatbot to use third party frameworks. In this speciﬁc implementation third
party frameworks in R (BupaR17) and Java (ProM18) will be used. This means
that scripts will be written for the functionality of these frameworks. These
scripts will have information specifying their name, the script itself and which
language are being used e.g. R or Java in this case.
When the chatbot retrieves the script it will then have to use it in the right
context.
For this, Wrappers are being used, which creates a subprocess in
Python with the given language and/or framework, the script itself and an
output. Once the script has been executed by the subprocess, the chatbot will
then be able to return the result to the user.
4.13
Implementation of Intents
This section provides a short overview of the implementation of the intents.
Explaining the functionality of the recognition is beyond the scope of this thesis,
so only the training of the chatbot will be shown. Figure 4.7 shows the intent of
17https://www.bupar.net/
18http://www.promtools.org/doku.php
==PAGE:58==
50
Implementation of Application
’Welcome’ in Google Dialogﬂow. Here the name of the intent is speciﬁed at the
top, this is the text received in the chatbot if the intent has been recognized.
Below the name of the intent are training phrases, which are used to train the
chatbot for what patterns and word to look for.
Figure 4.7: Example of intent
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
This chapter aims to showcase, demonstrate and test the implemented applica-
tion. For testing some unit-tests has been made within the chatbot. For the
functional requirements where unit-tests have been done, test descriptions will
be shown. But since this is a chatbot which integrates to a messaging platform,
the majority of tests will be done by black box testing in form of system tests
of the application as a whole [9]. This will be done using the Telegram Applica-
tion and also serve as showcasing and demonstration of the application, however
Slack could just as easily have been used. Therefore, the screenshots presented
in this chapter can be found for Slack in Appendix D.
The requirements of the chatbot were set in chapter 2, during the analysis phase.
We now use the tests to see if these requirements have been met by the applica-
tion. When mentioning the requirements in this chapter they will be described
by their Id’s, so please refer to the list of requirements in chapter 2 if necessary.
The ﬁles used for testing have been generated by the use of the process random-
ization and simulation tool PLG. 1
Below the requirements are being tested chronologically, ﬁrst functional require-
ments, then non-functional. The description of the unit tests will be comprised
1https://plg.processmining.it/
==PAGE:60==
52
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
of a table with pre- and post-conditions along with the test itself.
Unless explicitly stated, all tests have passed.
FR1
Figure 5.1: Figure showing System test of FR1
Figure 5.1 shows the chatbot aiding the user with a discovery task. Here it is
performing the alpha miner algorithm on the current log in the chat.
FR2
Figure 5.2 shows the user requesting conformance checking, to which the chatbot
replies with 3 diﬀerent types of check. Once the user has decided on a check, the
chatbot then continues to ask which type of model to use, as the chatbot could
perform alpha miner or inductive miner on the current log in order to generate
a model with which to perform the conformance check, alternatively the current
log and current model could be used for the check by writing ’current’ to the
chatbot as seen in the ﬁgure.
Please note that the user could request a speciﬁc type of conformance check by
deﬁning it in the initial message.
==PAGE:61==
53
Figure 5.2: Figure showing System test of FR2
==PAGE:62==
54
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.3: Figure 1 of 5 showing System test of FR3
==PAGE:63==
55
Figure 5.4: Figure 2 of 5 showing System test of FR3
Figure 5.5: Figure 3 of 5 showing System test of FR3
FR3
Figure 5.3 shows the process of getting the chatbot to ﬁlter the activities. for
this the user has to input which activities, by typing their id given in the list.
Once it is done the user should write ’done’ as seen in ﬁgure 5.4. The chatbot
will then perform the ﬁltering and save the result in the chat.
For a visualisation of the ﬁltering, ﬁgure 5.5 shows the alpha miner performed
on the original log. Figure 5.6 then shows the process of changing the current
log. This is done by providing the id of the ﬁle which should replace the current
log.
Once replaced, ﬁgure 5.7 shows the alpha miner performed on the ﬁltered log.
As it is seen here, only the activities chosen in the ﬁltering are in this model.
==PAGE:64==
56
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.6: Figure 4 of 5 showing System test of FR3
Figure 5.7: Figure 5 of 5 showing System test of FR3
==PAGE:65==
57
Figure 5.8: Figure showing System test of FR4
FR4
The ﬁgures, 5.8 and 5.9, shows the implementation of the chatbot in Telegram
and Slack respectively.
As it can be seen both instances of the chatbot replies to the message with the
exact same reply, the only diﬀerence being the platform which the users contacts
the chatbot e.g. Slack or Telegram.
FR5
Figure 5.10 shows that the chatbot are able to understand and process natural
language however throughout the other tests, natural language has been used
to communicate with the chatbot. Therefore the test of FR5 can be seen as
distributed across all the other test cases.
Figure 5.11 shows the unit-test description where the chatbot recognizes the in-
tent of the message from the user, and ﬁgure 5.12 show the unit-test description
where the intent is not recognized.
==PAGE:66==
58
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.9: Figure showing System test of FR4 for Slack
Figure 5.10: Figure showing System test of FR5
==PAGE:67==
59
Figure 5.11: Description of unit-test 1 for FR5
Figure 5.12: Description of unit-test 2 for FR5
==PAGE:68==
60
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.13: Figure showing System test of FR6
FR6
As the chatbot should be able to handle ﬁles received from the user, ﬁgure 5.13
shows this scenario, where the user has uploaded a ﬁle. Upon receiving this
ﬁle the chatbot prompts the user for further action, as the ﬁle could potentially
replace the current model of the chat. If the user were to not replace the current
model, this could later be done by telling the chatbot to switch ﬁles as as can
be seen in RF3.
FR7
To show that the chatbot are able to handle multiple ﬁles, ﬁgure 5.14 shows
that a user can both have a log and a model in the chat. This means that for
every chat the chatbot keeps track of multiple ﬁles in form of logs and models.
==PAGE:69==
61
Figure 5.14: Figure showing System test of FR7
Figure 5.15: Figure showing System test of FR8
==PAGE:70==
62
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.16: Figure showing System test of FR9
FR8
To show that the chatbot keeps track of the ﬁles in the chat ﬁgure 5.15 shows
the reply from the chatbot, when the user requests a list of all ﬁles in his chat.
Here we see 4 ﬁles total. 3 logs and 1 model.
FR9
Besides being able to understand natural language, the chatbot should also be
capable of understanding commands. Figure 5.16 shows such a scenario, where
the user request the precedence matrix for the current log by a command and
the chatbot replies back computed matrix. This is done with the use of the
BupaR framework2.
As seen in the ﬁgure, commands are made by text with a preceding slash "/".
Figure 5.17 shows the unit-test of sending a command to the chatbot and re-
ceiving the correct reply.
==PAGE:71==
63
Figure 5.17: Description of unit-test for FR9
Figure 5.18: Figure showing System test of FR10
==PAGE:72==
64
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.19: Figure showing the log of misunderstood message
Figure 5.20: Figure showing System test of FR11
FR10
Figure 5.18 shows the event where the chatbot did not understand the user.
Figure 5.19 then shows the entry in the log, where the intent has been registered
with the given conﬁdence. As can be seen, the conﬁdence is zero as the message
from the user are not similar to any of the intent, which the chatbot are trained
to recognize.
FR11
When registering some problems within the chatbot, it should be robust enough
to stay stable. A message to the user should be sent with the registration of
unforeseen behavior as seen in ﬁgure 5.20 and the incident should be registered
within the chatbot as can be seen in ﬁgure 5.21.
2https://www.bupar.net/
==PAGE:73==
65
Figure 5.21: Figure showing the log of incidents
Figure 5.22: Figure showing System test of FR13
FR13
Figure 5.22 shows the event where the users wishes to text another user without
the chatbot being part of the conversation. By starting the message with "!",
the chatbot will not process that message. As the ﬁgure shows several seconds
after the message, a message greeting the chatbot are sent which the chatbot
replies to, as this message is meant for the chatbot.
Figure 5.23, shows the unit-test for sending a message which should be ignored
by the chatbot.
==PAGE:74==
66
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.23: Description of unit-test for FR13
FR14
Figure 5.24 shows the process where the users uploads a ﬁle, but a collision in
hash values are detected, meaning that an identical ﬁle already exists within
the chatbot, and the chatbot therefore creates a reference to the existing ﬁle in
stead of saving the received ﬁle.
Figure 5.25 shows the unit test of checking the hash value of a ﬁle that is
currently in the database, which will therefore yield a collision of hash values.
Figure 5.26 show the unit test of checking the hash value of a ﬁle that is not in
the database, therefore not yielding any collisions.
Fulﬁllment of Non-Functional Requirements
Besides the testing of the functional requirements, the following text and ﬁg-
ures shows the fulﬁllment of the non-functional requirements deﬁned for this
application.
NFR1
By looking at all of the tests which have been completed it can be seen that
the chatbot answers almost instantaneously every time. The longest reply time
recorded are in ﬁgure 5.16, which is 7 seconds. This is within the deﬁnition of
a reply in humanly acceptable time.
==PAGE:75==
67
Figure 5.24: Figure showing System test of FR14
Figure 5.25: Description of unit test 1 of FR14
==PAGE:76==
68
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.26: Description of unit test 2 of FR14
NFR2
As shown by all the tests performed, the chatbot replies to all messages intented
for it. Figure 5.22 shows that the chatbot will not reply if the message is not
intented for the chatbot.
What remains to be shown is the case where the bot is currently busy.
Figure 5.27 shows the case where a user tries to contact the chatbot when it is
busy. Here the user requests the precedence matrix, which requires an R script
to run, therefore taking time. During this time, the user will be able to send
multiple messages to the chatbot before it ﬁnishes. This is shown in the ﬁgure
by the user typing ’hello’ to the chatbot. The chatbot then replies that it is
busy and the user should try again later.
Once the chatbot ﬁnishes the task requested by the user, the chatbot replies
with the result and is then ready to accept further requests from the user.
NFR3
The exandability has been shown by design, both in chapter 3 and 4.
NFR4
By all of the tests which have been done, it is shown that the chatbot is available
at the chosen IM. Appendix D can be referenced for the Tests performed in Slack.
==PAGE:77==
69
Figure 5.27: Example of the chatbot being busy
==PAGE:78==
70
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
NFR5
All the functional requirements have been tested using a desktop computer and
as NFR5 states that the chatbot shall be accessible from various devices. It
should be shown that the chatbot can be accessed from a mobile device.
Figure 5.28 shows the chatbot being accessed using a mobile device, instantiating
both the alpha miner and the inductive miner.
NFR6
As stated in chapter 4 the database complies with the fourth normalization
form.
NFR7
The resistance to sql injections have been shown fulﬁlled in chapter 4 by ﬁgure
4.6. This requirements has therefore been fulﬁlled.
As a short showcase of another functionality the chatbot is capable of, ﬁgure
5.29 shows an example of the help text, which is sent when the chatbot registers
the intent of help. This is only part of the help text, as there are a lot of intents
to cover in the helping text. The helping text will dynamically change if the
features of the were to be extended.
The helping text shows all available commands, and tells the user how to com-
municate with other users without the chatbot interfering. There is no extensive
help of how to communicate with the chatbot in natural language, as this would
get complicated. However the idea of this help text is that, what is listed as a
command, the user could also write to the chatbot in natural language.
5.1
Summary
In this section a summary of the fulﬁllment of the functional- and non-requirements
will be given. This can be seen in Table 5.1.
As the Want to Have requirements are well outside the scope of this thesis,
they will not be included in this summary.
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Summary
71
Figure 5.28: Example of communication with the chatbot using a mobile de-
vice
==PAGE:80==
72
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
Figure 5.29: Example of the helping text
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Summary
73
Requirement
Met
FR1
✓
FR2
✓
FR3
✓
FR4
✓
FR5
✓
FR6
✓
FR7
✓
FR8
✓
FR9
✓
FR10
✓
FR11
✓
FR12
FR13
✓
FR14
✓
NFR1
✓
NFR2
✓
NFR3
✓
NFR4
✓
NFR5
✓
NFR6
✓
NFR7
✓
Table 5.1: Fulﬁllment of requirements
==PAGE:82==
74
Fulﬁllment of Requirements
As testing the correctness of the PM processes will require testing of the correct-
ness of the frameworks themselves, this is outside of the scope of this project.
Therefore, testing has only be done by checking if the results seems plausible.
Source code for the unit-tests can be found in the application within the Test
folder 3.
3https://github.com/TonserTorben/ProcessMiningBot
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to explore and answer the question of whether or not
it would be possible to make a chatbot, which can be implemented into more
that one instant messaging application and that can perform tasks in the ﬁeld
of process mining. Tasks that should be initiated by the user, either by direct
commands or by natural language.
The work of this thesis shows the design for an implementation of a chatbot
which is capable of just this, as it can process natural language and direct
commands. When initiated by the user, the chatbot can perform process mining
tasks such as conformance checking, ﬁltering of logs etc. This chatbot are not
restricted to a single instant messaging platform, but have been implemented to
multiple platforms, and can be implemented to another chosen platform with
minimal eﬀort.
To support this, table 5.1 can be seen in chapter 5. Here it is shown that all of the
non-functional, along with the Must Have functional requirements have been
met by this implementation as well as multiple of the Could Have requirements.
This means that the minimum viable product has been implemented along with
many of the nice to have features.
The chatbot can be instantiated in Telegram or Slack, making it a multi platform
bot. It is capable of understanding and processing natural language and perform
process mining tasks requested by the user.
==PAGE:84==
76
Conclusion
However there are still some limitations to this application, as functionality
still need to be improved in order to make it an application that will be truly
seamless to use. Some of this functionality are support of more types of ﬁles,
and the possibility of retrieving ﬁles from the bot. These are discussed below in
the section of Future Work.
Despite its limitations, this application is a great implementation of the proposed
design and have fulﬁlled the aim of this thesis. It can serve as a proof of concept
that chatbots can be a great advantage in scientiﬁc ﬁelds.
The complete source code can be found at GitHub: https://github.com/
TonserTorben/ProcessMiningBot
6.1
Future Work
Below are the list of possible future work to be done on this application, some of
which are the functional requirements that has not been met by this application
and some are additional topics for future work.
Sending ﬁles back - FR12
By allowing the user to ﬁlter ﬁles, the application helps the user to alter existing
ﬁles and store it in a new ﬁle essentially generating new ﬁles within the bot.
Cases may arise where the user would want these ﬁles sent back so they can be
downloaded.
An implementation of this has been made in this chatbot when asking for the
current log or model, but as the module used to making the ﬁles, is naming
them with arbitrary names, the user will receive a ﬁle with an arbitrary name
in stead of the chosen name. As this is not optimal, the requirement have been
evaluated as not being met by the current implementation.
This functionality may not be useful in a process mining context, but if the
chatbot where to be implemented with another ﬁeld of study, this might become
useful. Say for example an engineer with a 3d model of a building uses a chatbot
which have been implemented with 3D tools. If the chatbot were to alter the
model, e.g. upscale it, then it would be useful for the user to be able to download
again for further designing or showcasing.
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Future Work
77
Admin Module - FR15
If one were to imagine the state of the chatbot when being scaled or used for
some time, one could imagine that ﬁles would clutter the server. Therefore, it
might be useful to implement a rolebased user system where elevated users such
as administrator would have rights to delete ﬁles on the server.
Administrators could also be seen as content maintainers, which will be able to
alter scripts in the database or even add new ones, along with new intents for
the chatbot to use.
That way the functionality of the chatbot would be expandable from the chat-
bot interface itself, making it less reliant on developers to write code for these
expansions.
Authentication - FR16
Once the chatbot are at a state where the user base is at a state where commer-
cialization would make sense, one could consider making the chatbot somewhat
subscription based.
By doing this revenue will be generated in order to ﬁnance further development
of the bot. One way of going about this would be to give the users registration
codes for the chatbot to check on initial contact. Then a table of registered users
could be created in the database for the chatbot to check, if say for example
one user are a part of multiple chats, then registration will only have to be done
once, as the user then will be registered in the database.
Message Table - FR17
To be able to make users across messaging platforms cooperate the chatbot will
have to keep track of multiple platforms at once. Alternatively every instance
of the bot, given that they reside on the same server, will share the database.
In here one could create a table containing messages which have been sent in
the diﬀerent chats. The chatbot will then be able to quickly check or be notiﬁed
whenever a message has been sent in another chat and notify the users in the
current chat either be informing the users that there has been activity in the
other chat or by repeating the message in the current chat. That way users
across messaging platforms will be able to communicate. e.g. Given Chat A
containing Alice and Chatbot A and Chat B containing Bob and Chatbot B. If
==PAGE:86==
78
Conclusion
Alice writes ’I need the latest log for my test’ then Chatbot B in Chat B will
register this message which has been added to the Message table in the database
and repeat the message in Chat B in some way e.g. "Alice from Chat A has
said: I need the latest log for my test’. Then in a similar way Bob will be able
to reply ’Ok, I’ll send it as soon as I get home’ and Chatbot A will register and
repeat this message in Chat A.
This will ensure that users who prefer diﬀerent messaging platforms won’t have
to agree on a speciﬁc platform but will be able to cooperate, each on their
favorite platform.
Another way of implementing this functionality, would be to change the design
of the bot such that two or more IM’s could be instantiated on startup. That
way one bot would keep track of one or more IM’s meaning that it can receive
and send ﬁles in chats on the instantiated IM’s e.g. a bot instantiated with
Telegram and Slack would be able to send and receive ﬁles in both Telegram
and Slack all in the same context. So if a user on Telegram writes the bot, it
would be able to send the reply both in Telegram and in Slack. The message to
Slack, or in any other instance the IM which didn’t receive the message from a
user, could then be implemented such that the users message would be contained
in the bots message. That way all users on all IM platforms will have the full
context of a conversation.
This however would cause the bots scalability to heavily deteriorate, as multiple
bots would be required for e.g. Telegram as not all users on this platform would
like a connection to Slack.
Pausing of chatbot - FR18
As communicating with other users in the chat without the chatbot interfering
are possible, one could imagine an extension of this functionality.
By implementing new states of the chatbot, the chatbot will then be able to
enter a ’paused’-state where users can communicate freely without the chatbot
being a part of the conversation. Then by typing some command, the chatbot
will then exit the state and become part of the conversation once again.
This would require functionality to be implemented, not only for the state of
the bot, but also for the handling of the messages. It also raises the question:
Should everyone be able to pause the bot, or should this be implemented in
continuation of the roles described in the section above about admin modules,
so that only elevated users will be able to pause and unpause the bot.
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Future Work
79
Besides the above points of future works which relates to the functional require-
ments that have not been fulﬁlled, the following points are also possible elements
for future work.
From Robust to Antifragile
As mentioned in the implementation of the bot, steps has been made to keep
track of intent recognition with low conﬁdence. This is part of the Nice To Have
part of the application. However this also states that misunderstood messages
could be acted upon, and so a possible task in the future work of this chat-
bot could be to implement antifragile behavior into the system, which is the
capability of improving when being exposed to faults. [8]
This could be done in relation to intent recognition as the intents with low
conﬁdences are being registered and can therefore be acted upon. Training of
the NLP module with the recorded user inputs could then be done, making it
possible for the chatbot to recognize future intents with better conﬁdence.
Asking for ﬁles
As the implementation are right now, the chatbot always performs the actions
on the current ﬁle/ﬁles in the chat, but one could imagine that a user was to
perform a set of operations, all with diﬀerent ﬁle inputs.
To ease the process of the above stated scenario, functionality could be added to
the chatbot in order to make it ask for which ﬁle the speciﬁc task should be using.
e.g. with each discovery operation requested by the user, the chatbot would
prompt the user whether to use the current log or to use another. Essentially
making it able to get the work done in less steps, as the user would not have
to change the current log before each operation and thereby almost cutting the
interaction with the chatbot in half.
Possibility of saving results of mining operations
When requesting a discovery operation, such as alpha miner, by the chatbot,
the result yielded by the chatbot could be an image of the discovered model.
However the user might want to use the model itself and not just the picture of
it.
==PAGE:88==
80
Conclusion
Therefore, an extension to the chatbot could be to sent back the discovered
model as well as the image where it makes sense, so the user can retrieve this
model if needed.
Supporting more types of logs and models
One of the drawbacks of the application is the limited support of ﬁle types.
A possible future task could therefore be to extend the set of types which the
chatbot accepts and are able to process. Either by using additional functionality
in the frameworks or by processing the ﬁles received, converting them to types
usable by the frameworks.
Possibility for naming the ﬁles created
When the chatbot processes ﬁles and creates new ones e.g. when ﬁltering or if
above task of saving results of mining operations where implemented, it could
be possible for the user to name the ﬁles created.
This would strictly be a service to the user, as they could enforce a certain nam-
ing convention if wanted, instead of just have ﬁltered ﬁles named with ’_ﬁltered’
appended to the original name.
Implementing additional features from the PM tools
Due to time constraints only a subset of possible features within the ﬁeld of
Process Mining where implemented. However, there still exists a lot of func-
tionality which have not been implemented, making this a possible task for the
future.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Project Plan
When working on a project of this magnitude, organizing by planning the project
ahead of time, even though this can be an impossible task at times, is crucial.
It not only helps in visualising the project as a whole during the period of time
available, but also helps deﬁning each sub task and ranking these by importance.
The project plan of this thesis are structured as such that there are two main
iterations, one for implementing the MVP and one for extending the MVP if
time allows.
It can be seen as sort of an agile approach as each iteration has been segmented
into activities of length of 7-14 days, making these sort of sprints. Each activity
of an iteration has the goal of having the deﬁned functionality implemented at
the end of that activity.
Each activity consist of 1-2 days of initial planning and research and ending with
1-2 days of testing and gathering of notes and results for the current activity.
Figure A.1 show the initial project plan and here a general idea of the course
of the project can be obtained. The project starts with preliminary research
and then goes into the ﬁrst iteration of the development in order to complete
the MVP. Second iteration aims at developing the extended capabilities of the
application, and ﬁnally testing will be done. A buﬀer has also been included in
order to cope with unforeseen events and incidents.
The last two activities relates to the process of writing the report. The ﬁrst one
is just a visualisation of the writing of notes as mentioned before. The last one
is time speciﬁcally dedicated to writing the thesis.
==PAGE:90==
82
Project Plan
Figure A.2 shows the ﬁnal revised project plan. Here it can be seen that at
the activity of MVP Multi-input support the ﬁnal project plan diﬀers from the
initial, this is because the implementation of multi-platform support showed to
be more complex than ﬁrst anticipated. The eﬀect of this can be seen as the
rest of the ﬁnal project plan has been altered to take the time needed from the
buﬀer in the end.
Another thing that diﬀers from the initial project plan are the red markers on
the expected end dates. These mark events that happened that are described
in the risk analysis which can be found in ﬁgure A.3.
The markers shown in the activity of MVP Multi-Platform support, not only
shows the event that the deadline has been missed. This is also where the event
described in ﬁgure A.3 with Id 7 happened.
Originally the framework of Xatkit were chosen but as time progressed and the
activity of implementing process mining capabilities came up, it became clear
that Xatkit were not the right framework to use as it was no easy task of im-
plementing custom features to the chatbot along with third party frameworks
for process mining.
Therefore, the chatbot needed to be reinitialized along with the NLP implemen-
tation and the Multi-Platform support. This has been added as an activity in
the ﬁnal project plan and the time required for this has once again been taken
from the buﬀer.
The above goes to show that including a buﬀer in the project plan was the right
decision.
Since the activities of NLP and multi-input support were recently ﬁnished when
the event happened, the re-initialization could be done rather quickly as rela-
tively short time has passed since the knowledge of the implementation of these
activities achieved and some of the previous implementations could also be used
in the new initialization. These are the reasons that the re-initialization could
be done in such a short amount of time.
Going forward to the activity of implementing extended NLP capabilities an-
other incident, described in the risk analysis, happened.
The event of Id 2
happened as physical injury made me bedridden for fourteen days. This was
quite serious as that is more time than is left in the buﬀer. Ultimately this made
me apply for an extension of the thesis for the two weeks I were unable to work
on it, which were granted and the hand-in date is therefore changed in the ﬁnal
project plan.
These were just the major diﬀerences between the two project plans in ﬁgure A.1
and ﬁgure A.2. From the ﬁnal project plan several of the deadline were missed,
==PAGE:91==
83
but eventually completed due to small but unforeseen events in the project and
in life. This meant that in the end, the entirety of the buﬀer was consumed by
the project, leaving no spare time in the project.
==PAGE:92==
84
Project Plan
Figure A.1: Figure showing the initial project plan
==PAGE:93==
85
Figure A.2: Figure showing the revised project plan
==PAGE:94==
86
Project Plan
Figure A.3: Figure showing the devised Risk Analysis
==PAGE:95==
Appendix B
Detailed Class Diagram
==PAGE:96==
88
Detailed Class Diagram
Figure B.1: Detailed Class Diagram
==PAGE:97==
Appendix C
Dialog Flow Diagram
The ﬁgure above is an attempt to visualise the possible ﬂows of the convertation
with the chatbot.
This text is a short explanation of the ﬁgure. The box in the center of the ﬁgure
named ’Bot’ shall be seen as the point where you make initial contact.
This means that every intent connected to the ’Bot’ will be reachable from the
initial state of the chatbot e.g. no preceding conversation has to take place for
these intents to be available. One could connect to the chatbot for the ﬁrst time
and directly ask the chatbot to do the inductive miner without having to greet
the chatbot or write anything else.
Intents that are not connected to the bot, but to other intents, are intents
that are only available once the user has moved down the given conversational
branch. e.g. the decision of a Relative or Absolute Dotted Chart are only avail-
able once the Dotted Chart intent has been registered. However as an attempt
to make the application intelligent, intents directly for relative dotted chart and
absolute dotted chart has been added, making the user able to requests these
tasks directly without having to use the conversational branching. This is done
to make conversation with the bot seem as seamless as possible, so the bot won’t
force the user down a branched conversation if this is not strictly needed.
Another part of the ﬁgure is the top where conformance selection is stated,
this is put at the top to make the ﬁgure more comprehensible. The confor-
==PAGE:98==
90
Dialog Flow Diagram
Figure C.1: Figure showing the possible ﬂow of conversation
==PAGE:99==
91
mance selection should be seen as a continuation of the conversational branches
of: Conformance -> Precision, Conformance -> Fitness, Conformance -> Com-
plete, Conformance Fitness, Conformance Precision and Conformance Complete
respectively.
Lastly I would just like to draw attention to the intent Abort, as this is a special
intent. Whenever this intent is registered the bot will drop whatever it is doing
and return to its idle state unless it is in the state of mining, in which case it
will ignore this intent.
Say for example a user through conversation with the bot has requested confor-
mance followed by precision. The bot is not in a state of ’Waiting for Confor-
mance Input’, and the user are at the conformance selection part of the conver-
sation where he should choose between alpha, inductive or Current model. If the
user were to send a message to the bot with the intent of ’Abort’, the conversa-
tional path would then be dropped and the bot would return to the state of idle.
==PAGE:100==
92
Dialog Flow Diagram
==PAGE:101==
Appendix D
Slack Testing
==PAGE:102==
94
Slack Testing
Figure D.1: Figure of Test FR1 in Slack
Figure D.2: Figure of Test FR2 in Slack
Figure D.3: Figure of Test FR3 in Slack
==PAGE:103==
95
Figure D.4: Figure of Test FR4 in Slack
Figure D.5: Figure of Test FR5 in Slack
==PAGE:104==
96
Slack Testing
Figure D.6: Figure of Test FR6 in Slack
Figure D.7: Figure of Test FR7 in Slack
==PAGE:105==
97
Figure D.8: Figure of Test FR8 in Slack
==PAGE:106==
98
Slack Testing
Figure D.9: Figure 1 of 4 of Test FR9 in Slack
==PAGE:107==
99
Figure D.10: Figure 2 of 4 of Test FR9 in Slack
Figure D.11: Figure 3 of 4 of Test FR9 in Slack
==PAGE:108==
100
Slack Testing
Figure D.12: Figure 4 of 4 of Test FR9 in Slack
Figure D.13: Figure of Test FR10 in Slack
Figure D.14: Figure of Test FR11 in Slack
==PAGE:109==
101
Figure D.15: Figure of Test FR13 in Slack
Figure D.16: Figure of Test FR14 in Slack
==PAGE:110==
102
Slack Testing
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1] Article about jarvis framework,
now renamed to xatkit.
https:
//modeling-languages.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/
JarvisCaise2019.pdf. Accessed: 16/01/2020.
[2] Wil Van Der Aalst. Process mining - data science in action. Springer-verlag
Berlin And Hei, 2 edition, 2016.
[3] Jim Arlow and Ila Neustadt. UML 2 and the uniﬁed process : practical
object-oriented analysis and design. Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, 2005.
[4] Andrea Burattin. Integrated, ubiquitous and collaborative process mining
with chat bots. In 17th Int. Conference on Business Process Management,
pages 144–48. CEUR-WS, 2019.
[5] Robert Dale. The return of the chatbots. Natural Language Engineering,
22(5):811–817, 2016.
[6] Piyush Gupta and Sandeep Kumar. A comparative analysis of sha and
md5 algorithm. architecture, 1:5, 2014.
[7] William G Halfond, Jeremy Viegas, Alessandro Orso, et al. A classiﬁcation
of sql-injection attacks and countermeasures. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international symposium on secure software engineering, volume 1, pages
13–15. IEEE, 2006.
[8] Martin Monperrus.
Principles of antifragile software.
In Companion to
the ﬁrst International Conference on the Art, Science and Engineering of
Programming, pages 1–4, 2017.
==PAGE:112==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Abhijit A Sawant, Pranit H Bari, and PM Chawan. Software testing tech-
niques and strategies. International Journal of Engineering Research and
Applications (IJERA), 2(3):980–986, 2012.
[10] Joseph Seering, Michal Luria, Connie Ye, GeoﬀKaufman, and Jessica Ham-
mer.
It takes a village: Integrating an adaptive chatbot into an online
gaming community.
[11] Abraham Silberschatz, Henry F. Korth, and S. Sudarshan. Database system
concepts. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 2011.
[12] Abhishek Singh, Karthik Ramasubramanian, and Shrey Shivam. Introduc-
tion to microsoft bot, rasa, and google dialogﬂow. In Building an Enterprise
Chatbot, pages 281–302. Springer, 2019.
[13] Ferdinand Wagner, Ruedi Schmuki, Thomas Wagner, and Peter Wolsten-
holme. Modeling software with ﬁnite state machines: a practical approach.
Auerbach Publications, 2006.
[14] Rainer Winkler and Matthias Söllner. Unleashing the potential of chatbots
in education: A state-of-the-art analysis. 2018.
