==PAGE:1==
Rethinking products for a sustainable
take-back service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Author: Rasmus Peter Østerlund, s135151
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Department: Department of Technology, Management and Economics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Study line: Industrial Engineering and Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Supervisor:Associate Professor Melanie Kreye
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
09-02-2020
DTU management
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This master thesis is a case study, which analyses the take-back service provided by the
case company. The case study looks into the subject of servitisation as a way to promote
sustainability at the case company, which includes the take-back service, product design
and expansion of the take-back service to existing channels. The thesis also looks at a
new perspective on product-service systems, expanding on the current research on leasing
and results-oriented services, as the case company acts as a manufacturer and supplier of
products as a part of a larger service system provided by the OEM appliances that the
products are a part of. The result of the ﬁndings of the case study recommend a product
design for remanufacturing, enabling better extraction of reusable parts and recycling of
products returned with the take-back service. The success of expanding the take-back
service and the design for remanufacturing therefore directly enforce each other, making
the overall service system reinforced with great possibilities to scale up.
This thesis emphasises a new perspective of a product-service system based on the chal-
lenges at the case company, building capabilities within product knowledge and relation-
ship management, and the eﬀect of these on the expansion of the take-back service and
sustainability.
Resumé
Dette kandidatspeciale er et case-studie, som analyserer den tilbagetjeneste, der er lev-
eret af case-virksomheden. Casestudiet omhandler emnet om servization som en måde at
promovere bæredygtighed hos case-virksomheden, som inkluderer tilbagekaldelsesservice,
produktdesign, og udvidelse af tilbagetagelsestjenesten til eksisterende kanaler. Specialet
ser også på et nyt perspektiv på produkt-service systemer og udvider den nuværende
forskning på leasing og resultat orienterede tjenester, da case-virksomheden fungerer som
en producent og en leverandør af deres produkter som en del af et større service system,
leveret af OEM apparaterne som produkterne er en del af.
Resultatet af undersøgelsen af casestudiet er en anbefaling af et nyt produktdesign til
genproduktion, hvilket muliggøre bedre udvinding af genanvendelige dele og genanven-
delse af produkter, som returneres med tilbagetagelsestjenesten. Succesen med at udvide
tilbagetagningstjenesten og designet til genproduktion påvirker hinaden direkte, hvilket
gør det overordnede servicesystem styrket med store muligheder for at opskalere. Dette
speciale lægger vægt på et nyt perspektiv af et produkt-service system baseret på ud-
fordringerne hos case-virksomheden, opbygning af kapaciteter inden for produkt kend-
skab, relationshåndtering og eﬀekten af disse på udvidelsen af tilbagetagelsestjenesten og
bæredygtighed.
1
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This case study thesis for the Master degree in ’Industrial Engineering and Management’
(Master of Science in Engineering) in agreement with the guidelines at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis was written for 30 ECTS point in the fourth
semester of the master degree, with a starting period of the project 09-09-19 with a project
deadline 09-02-2020.
Keywords: Product-service systems, PSS, Relationship management, product manufac-
turer, case study, sustainability
Signature:
Rasmus Peter Østerlund
2
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
I wish to thank my supervisor during this project, associate professor Melanie Kreye, who
guided and encouraged me during each phase of the project, without the feedback and
support she provided this project could not have been realised, as her guidance helped
me move forward and not get stuck on certain areas of the project.
I would like to express my gratitude towards the case company and each of the participants
who were a part of either the interviews, presentations, meetings, referenced to and replied
on my emails. The passion and the feeling of being welcome in this project were above and
beyond and provided a pleasant atmosphere for a nervous outsider. Without these people,
this project and these experiences that I got during the company visits and interactions
could have never happened.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends and family for supporting me, always interested in
however much I could tell them due to the conﬁdentiality of the project, but the interest
in listening and making the free time more enjoyable and motivating helped me move
forward without losing track of friends and family during the project.
3
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
2
Literature Review
6
3
Research Method
9
3.1
Case Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Findings
12
4.1
Product Performance and Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Internal Restrictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
External Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Discussion
27
5.1
Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Impact on Supply Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Conclusion
29
6.1
Company Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Connecting the Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.3
Proposal to Case Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Limitations and Future Work
34
4
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The importance of servitisation has become more and more apparent in the manufacturing
ﬁrms, manufacturing and service are often viewed as separate, however, manufacturers
can base their strategies around services. The process of adding services is known as servi-
tisation [1], this strategy is often used to diﬀerentiate themselves from their competitors,
creating new revenue streams and creating barriers in the market.
Servitisation is a proven concept that has provided several opportunities for transforming
a manufacturing companies business model from selling goods, to providing a combination
of goods and services. This transition also provides the opportunity to establish a more
sustainable supply chain by redesigning the existing supply chain by redesigning products
for enhancing the take-back service.
The purpose of adding servitisation in the case company is to both be better to comply
with regulations and legislation, but also to diﬀerentiate from its competitors and open
new market opportunities.
The main purpose of the case company is to provide more sustainable products, so they
are looking at servitisation as a way to make more sustainable solutions. The case com-
pany is currently looking at diﬀerent scenarios of possible future requirements of their
products and services and what they can do to inﬂuence these requirements in a direction
that favours the case company, granting the case company with a sustainable competitive
advantage by being able to comply faster to new regulations and diﬀerentiating them-
selves from their competitors. Vurro et al. [2] examine the practices and beneﬁts of a
sustainable supply chain management to increase the buyer-seller relationship, these sus-
tainable supply chains are further investigated by Gillespie & Rogers [3], who addresses
the downstream activities necessary to increase consumer brand-recognition based on the
connection that the consumer makes to the brand.
The unique situation that the case company is in is diﬀerent from current research, since
the case company has two distinct supply chains, one as a supplier to direct customers,
and the second being a manufacturing supply chain with relationships with distributors,
wholesalers, service technicians and end-customers. The case company is in an interest-
ing situation, as they are seeking to create servitisation on several diﬀerent markets and
relations to their customers, providing a complex situation in terms of legislation, design
of products and services, relationship management and supply chain management.
5
==PAGE:7==
2
Literature Review
In this case, the formal deﬁnition as deﬁned by Goedkoop et, al. [4] is used, this deﬁnes a
product service system as a combination of products and services in a system that delivers
user functionality in a sustainable approach that reduces the impact of the environment.
This deﬁnition is widely used amongst multiple authors within the ﬁeld of research, and
many associates the term PSS with sustainability [5]. Wang et al. [6], [4] summarise the
key aspects of the deﬁnition of a PSS by stating the elements and goals of a PSS: The
elements being product, service and supporting infrastructure; the goals being competi-
tive, sustainability and customer value.
With this change on focus from being the traditional producer of high-quality products
towards providing services supplementing the life-cycle of their products, this transition
will lead the case company towards a product-service system (PSS). PSS is a method
used to extend traditional manufacturing functionality of a product by incorporating ad-
ditional services. This concept is usually something that embodies sustainability, as PSS
usually transfers responsibilities and ownership that diverge from traditional manufactur-
ing. PSS has a potential value towards manufacturers that are increasingly challenged by
competitors who oﬀer the same product at a lower cost due to low labour costs and ma-
terial choices. PSS helps manufacturers by sustaining competitiveness as they transition
in the value chain to provide new services based on the knowledge of the products, which
in terms will subsequently reduce costs of future production [5].
Toﬀel [7] examines the management of durable product manufactures products at their
EOL, his research is based on the legislators in European countries that emphasise more
responsibility from manufacturers with their products at their EOL, the legislation is
used to encourage design changes to lower the environmental impact of products at EOL,
as well as saving costs of waste management from municipalities. The take-back motive
provides opportunities to refurbish, remanufacture and recycle products, avoiding inciner-
ation and scrapyards. The combination of remanufacturing added to a take-back service
adds to greater responsibility in more sustainable solutions to EOL products, but also
provide ﬁnancial opportunities in reduced use of virgin material and energy use. Lund &
Hauser [8] show that there are several beneﬁts of remanufacturing both in manufactur-
ing but also to society and the environment. In a competitive market, remanufacturing
can contribute to a broader available product at a lower price, reduce material usage
in production, enabling more employment and training in industrial skills. Additionally
remanufacturing can increase expertise in several areas in current manufacturing areas,
where knowledge acquired from remanufacturing can further improve on developing new
technology, rethinking manufacturing processes and continue improving supply chain lo-
6
==PAGE:8==
gistics. [8]
Baines et al. [5] describe some of the features required for designing an eﬀective PSS,
here they propose that a PSS should be designed on a case-by-case basis, and be designed
on a perspective of the client. To move towards a PSS, Manzini et al. [9] propose that
companies need to change perspective from product thinking to system thinking. This
involves the extension and responsibility of the product life-cycle beyond the buyer-seller
relationship. Changing towards a PSS means that the case company have to go beyond
the mind-set of oﬀering solutions to also assist in the changes of the current system based
on the solutions that the case company wishes to oﬀer with the take-back service.
UNEP clarify that assessment tools are a necessity to reveal whether or not the PSS
has a sustainable impact, this assessment will help companies provide more information
to base their decisions on an environmental perspective [10]. For the assessment of the
take-back service at the case company, several factors are to be assessed, as transportation
and costs of returned products shouldn’t exceed the cost of manufacturing new products,
both ﬁnancially but also environmentally, such as water consumption and material usage.
Sjödin et. al. [11] study how the relational governance strategies can be used for manu-
facturing companies that use advanced services added to their products, they study the
connection between advanced service provision, relational governance strategies and the
ﬁnancial performance of manufacturing ﬁrms. In their studies, they highlight that service
innovation is important, where innovative strategies involve an ability to design value
propositions that are crucial to beneﬁting from service propositions.
In this study, four governance strategies are analysed, as these show what types of factors
that are aﬀected by a choice of strategy. when selecting conditions for the product and
market, the companies have to consider which ﬁts the best to capture the value of the
innovation. Besides the conditions, Sjödin et. al. summarise three strategies for bet-
ter ﬁnancial performance of the advance service oﬀering, these advanced service oﬀerings
are based on innovation-, relational- and market-based strategies. [11] The literature on
servitisation, like in a PSS, [11] examine multiple studies on the performance eﬀects on
advanced service provision. Fang, Palmatier & Steenkamp; Kohtamäki, Partanen, Parida
& Wincent; Visnjic Kastalli & Van Looy [12], [13], [14], studies imply that the relation-
ship between servitisation and performance is complex and non-linear, and is inﬂuenced
by several factors. Fiss [15] show that the mixed results show the existence of equiﬁnality,
meaning that optimal outcomes can be obtained by several conﬁgurations of a service
system. Vesalainen & Kohtamäki [16] look at research on buyer-supplier relationships,
where they acknowledge multiple authors contributions to diﬀerent relationships from
discrete to concrete [17]; [18], transactional to relational [19] and arm’s length associa-
7
==PAGE:9==
tions to functional coordination [20]. The relational relationship is appropriate to use in
the servitisation, as there are several forms of equity arrangements in relational governed
systems [19]. This literature on servitisation and buyer-supplier relationships show that
there is a clear connection between relational relationship and the equiﬁnality of service
systems. Therefore looking into governance where both parties have a common interest is
key to becoming more sustainable. Rinehart et al. [19] further elaborates on the alliance
as a partnership associated with ﬁnancial investments by the parties to achieve mutual
beneﬁts. This relationship is based on a high level of trust between the two partners,
which is based on the capabilities of the organisations. This type of relationship is known
for high levels of trust, regular interactions and commitment.
Vurro et al. [2] discuss the emergence of sustainable supply chain management, high-
lighting potential beneﬁts of sustainable practices through collaborative governance on
the supply chain. These sustainable practices within the supply chain may strengthen
the buyer-seller relationship, connecting the interaction within the product-service sys-
tem with supply chain management.
However, simply implementing a take-back system is not enough to perform in a competi-
tive environment, the case company needs to build on its strategic capabilities, Johnson et
al. [21] show three concepts of strategic capabilities, the ﬁrst being that the organisations
aren’t identical and have diﬀerent capabilities. Secondly that these capabilities are diﬃ-
cult to obtain or copy. The third concept building on taking advantage of these capabilities
for competitive advantage that their competitors currently do not have. These concepts
are known as the resource-based view (RBV). This theory shows that tacit knowledge and
competencies are easier to use within companies, creating organisational principles that
enable companies to outperform their competitors by sharing knowledge by individuals
and groups within the organisation [22]. This RBV gives an understanding of how each
take-back service can diﬀer amongst diﬀerent product manufacturers, and show that each
company have diﬀerent capabilities to create a service that ﬁt its customers.
8
==PAGE:10==
3
Research Method
For the research on the case company, the case study seemed ﬁtting to investigate the
"how" questions for the take-back service and the design approach for the products oﬀered
at the case company [23]. In this case study, the exploratory approach to the case study
to the contribute to current knowledge of related research. The exploratory approach also
suits the collection of data at the case-company and combining it with existing knowledge
on the subjects.
This study looks into exploring the connection between products and services on mul-
tiple levels of the supply chain from the perspective of the case company being a man-
ufacturer and a supplier. The purpose of this is to expand on knowledge in the ﬁeld or
product-service systems (PSS) for manufacturers in a more distant supply chain. To do so,
research on alliance management and existing knowledge of traditional PSS will be used
to make a recommendation and make suggestions for continued research on the study.
The criteria for a successful case-based study is to identify missing gaps in the existing
literature of product-service systems, and a recommendation of action in how to expand
on the existing take-back service provided by the case company through the lens of a PSS.
3.1
Case Selection
The case was deﬁned at the start of the project, where multiple employees of the case
company presented their description of the case from their point of view. From there
the idea of serviceability was described, the purpose of the study is to introduce a more
circular economy to the products oﬀered at the case company through product- and ser-
vice design. This case focuses on the overall system and takes product design, marketing,
relationship management and legislation into considerations, this analysis is intended to
give a clear perspective of the eﬀect of serviceability on a broader scale.
3.2
Data Collection
In order to prepare for the data collection through the qualitative interviews with the
case company, a literature review on several subjects regarding product-service systems
and alliance management was conducted, these topics provided an understanding of some
of the topics that were discussed in a pre-project meeting with the case company. This
literature contributed to creating the interview questions for the participants at the case
company. The aim of the literature reviews on the topics mentioned above was to gain in-
sight into the current knowledge and challenges on current research. These insights were
9
==PAGE:11==
also used to understand what some of the concerns that the case company potentially
could be dealing with or potentially have to carry out.
The aim of the qualitative interviews at the case company is to collect enough data from
the perspective of the employees to create a recommendation based on a mix between
existing literature and the challenges and capabilities discovered from the perspective of
the case company
In order to collect data on the current performance and the planned direction for ser-
viceability, a series of semi-structured interviews were conducted with several employees
at the case company. The participants’ for the interviews were selected by the contact
person and organiser of the case study at the case company, during the visit at the case
company, who wishes to remain conﬁdential, 14 employees were interviewed with roles in
several business units, a full list of the departments and title of the employees can be seen
in Table 1.
The qualitative interviews with the employees provided some generalised knowledge of
where the case company currently are in the process of servitisation and provided an
understanding of the participants perception and motivation on servitisation. From the
interviews, a general view of what the issues are, which ideas they have, which restrictions
they have to adhere to and make a valid and reliable recommendation based on these pa-
rameters.
The duration of the interviews was in the range of approximately 30-60 minutes each,
several of the interviews were conducted on the location, and three interviews conducted
online. In order to document and analyse the data collected, all of the interviews were
recorded and transcribed.
10
==PAGE:12==
Table 1: List of participants department and role at the case company
Department
Title
Product compliance
Senior standardisation specialist
Serviceability
Senior service manager
Service business development
Senior director, service product management
HVAC-OEM projects and engineering department
Senior director, products and projects
HVAC-OEM technical department
Director innovation
Group EHS
Lead project manager
HVAC-OEM division
Senior product specialist
BS - [product]
Senior product line manager, [product]
Group public aﬀairs
Senior marketing manager
Product compliance
senior sustainable product specialist
Flex department recycling
Production supervisor
Product compliance
Director of product compliance
Development quality
Senior quality manager
WU program management - [product]
Senior product line manager, [product]
3.3
Data Analysis
The goal of the data collection and analysis is to combine the internal ﬁndings at the case
company and use the external research within the selected ﬁelds to perform the analysis
and create a recommendation to the case company. After the initial interviews with the
participants from the case company, the ﬁndings and initial ideas for recommendations
were then presented to the available participants that were selected most suitable for the
presentation. These two presentations further veriﬁed the ﬁndings and a discussion of the
initial solution proposal further clariﬁed the direction of the recommendation for the case
company.
The overall structure of the case study have been split up into multiple phases, start-
ing with the identiﬁcation of the case and the research question that the work was based
upon, subsequently, a review of literature on topics relevant to the case and the semi-
structured interviews was then conducted. The next step of the research was presenting
the recommendations for the case company, both to show the outcome of the interviews,
but also receive more feedback to further carry on with the study. The case study in-
cluded multiple visits and conversations with the participants for the case study at the
case company. These visits were advantageous for the case study, as these meetings con-
tinuously revising the ﬁndings and recommendations through feedback. This feedback
loop resulted in a case study to ﬁt the desired output for a recommendation for the case
company.
11
==PAGE:13==
4
Findings
The following section will show the understanding of the current situation and the future
state that the case company wants to reach, these ﬁndings are based on the analysis of the
interviews with the employees at the case company. The results of this from a perspective
of relations in the supply chain, product design, product performance and internal- and
external restrictions.
4.1
Product Performance and Design
Currently the case company has a system in place for taking back defect products, how-
ever, this is currently being done to products that are still in warranty period.
The
returned products are then sent back to the case company and will then go through a
Failure Analysis System (FAS) to analyse whether it was a product failure, a misuse of
the product or transport damage that caused the product to fail. The purpose of this
return system is to increase the quality of new products, correcting errors in design in the
early stages of a product launch.
Currently, the case company have a low return rate of their products sold in their di-
rect customer channel to their OEM customers, who are a large part of the products
sold at the case company. The OEM customers are where the products sold are being
installed in the customers’ applications. The defect products sent back from major OEM
customers will receive a full analysis at the case company, otherwise, most of the products
returned from other customers being analysed for their defects. After the analysis, the
products are being taken apart at the case company and the materials are sent back in
the supply chain to be recycled.
“[in comparison to the trade channel] ... But in relation to OEM, where our customers
are very focused on return percentages, it is often that we get everything back for analysis,
we have much more control over the application than we have in the trade business, if we
deliver a part like this here [example of product is shown during interview], we know the
application really well and we make sure that everything is properly assembled, so that is
why the [product] usually has reasonably optimal operating conditions, and therefore we
see that our return rate on [products] identical to those we sell in our trade channels are
much smaller, we may talk about [low] return rates even though we sell so many [products]
1”
1men i forhold til OEM hvor vores kunder går meget op i returprocent, der er det ofte at vi får alting
tilbage til analyse, vi har jo meget mere styr på applikationen end man har i vores Trade forretning, hvis
vi levere en del som denne her [endnu et eksempel ved interviewet], så kender vi applikationen rigtigt godt
og vi sørger for at alting er ordentligt samlet, så derfor så har [produktet] som oftest rimligt optimale
12
==PAGE:14==
— Senior Director, Products and Projects
Usually the direct customers contact the case company regarding requirements of the
products as a part of their list of speciﬁcation with a requirement to last at least 12 years,
however, usually the appliances that the product is a part of last for approximately 10
years, resulting in functional products from the case company being scrapped as their
OEM products are being replaced with new products. Having the customers full trust in
product speciﬁcations, the case company can work oﬀof that relation to implement new
product designs in the OEM segment, and possibly further their build on their relations
with the OEM customers.
“Our products are designed to last for 12 years, that is our time frame, that is what
our customers require from us, the customers send a list of speciﬁcations and they tell us
that “your product needs to fulﬁl” many times that list is made by us because they want
to use our [case company] product, so they tell us what is your speciﬁcations and they
put that in their own speciﬁcation. But usually, a product is designed to last 12 years,
the problem as I said, the appliances usually last less, so they usually last for 10 years,
sometimes 15, sometimes... But in average 10 years so most of the time the product is
not replaced because the appliances break earlier, then from a business point of view you
can argue it is not good to make a product that is that good, we should make products that
would last only 8 years, so we have more replacement business, that might be something
that our competitors are doing, but of course, we are [case company] we are a premium
brand and we always have the best components and the best product, but it is something
that is tricky, sustainability vs money business, tough question.”
— Senior Product Specialist
Another point for the products are that they are now being sold at such a low cost,
both on the direct OEM customer channel and through distributors in the trade chan-
nel. The issue with the low costs of the products is that the time it takes for a service
technician to repair the product exceeds the cost of simply replacing the product, leaving
the option to simply replace the product and scrap it for the scrap metal price, resulting
in the products being shredded. Other factors that inﬂuence the decision making for the
service technician and the end-user is the eﬃciency of the current product or appliance,
if the eﬃciency is too low it is a cheaper and more environmental option to replace the
product.
driftsbetingelser, og derfor så ser man at vores returrate på [produkter] som er identiske med dem vi
sælger i vores Trade kanaler de er meget mindre, vi snakker måske på [lave] returrater selvom vi sælger
så rigtig mange [produkter
13
==PAGE:15==
“The service we have on DBS (Domestic Building Service) [products] is typically a re-
placement on almost the entire [product] in a way so that you do not need to screw in the
pipe systems, but you still have to turn oﬀthe water in the system in order to replace the
vital parts. But this is where we think if there could be something in replacing single parts
compared to what we do today. But so far it has turned into a pretty bad business case
because on these smaller [products] it is more the time it takes for a service technician to
come out and replace it than it is the parts costs, you can say, most often you just choose
to so ‘Then replace the large part instead of replacing the smaller things’ 2”
— Senior Service Manager
Table 2: Findings on product performance and design
Findings
Products are more durable than the OEM appliances they are part of
Cost of repair is greater than cost of replacement
Product performance is good, direct customers are happy with current products
Relation with direct customers are good, collaboration on requirements for products
Current product take-back are part of a FAS
Recent developments of products have been focused on cost reduction and energy eﬃciency
Large distance in supply chain to end-user
challenges
Create a design that does not aﬀect current performance
Expanding relationships with customers in OEM and trade channel
Design for repairability/disassembly/remanufacturing
4.2
Internal Restrictions
Through the questions asked for each of the employees, several of them are echoing the
same sentiment of the current sustainability situation, and show diﬀerent ideas for so-
lutions and have provided some restrictions that needs to be considered for the imple-
mentation of the servitisation strategy. A major reason why the case company wishes to
have their products designed around the take-back system is, that they know that their
products are currently being sold as scrap metal, where most of the components of the
product will go to waste in the shredding process, where the case company knows the
2Det service vi har på DBS [produkter] det er typisk sådan noget erstat næsten hele [produktet] på en
måde således at man ikke skal ind og skrue i rørsystemer, men du skal alligevel have vandet af systemet
og så kan du erstatte de vitale dele her, men det er så her vi tænker om der kunne være noget i bare at
erstatte dele af [produktet] i forhold til det vi gør i dag, men indtil videre har det vist sig at være en ret
dårlig business case, fordi på de her mindre [produkter] er det mere tiden det tager for en VVS-tekniker
eller en servicemand at komme ud og udskifte det end det er delenes costs, kan man sige, så oftest vælger
man bare at sige ‘så erstat den store del i stedet for at erstatte de mindre ting.’
14
==PAGE:16==
materials used in the products and can split it into original components rather than the
ineﬀective shredding process. The reason why the shredding is ineﬃcient for the product
is that during the shredding, some of the components of the product may contaminate
the steel that is being recycled, reducing the quality of the end materials gathered from
shredding.
“[question regarding shredding] You take the whole appliance and throw it into something
that cuts it into small pieces, and then you make material separation as best as possible
afterwards, and if you are not careful to have your electronics separated from before mak-
ing metal separation then you get polution from some of the substances that are in the
electronics, then you get pollution of the material you separate with, but they also pollute
each other, a good example is that you see lead accumulates in aluminium and copper
accumulates in stainless steel in the process, partly because one does not always have a
true separation mechanically possible, and that is probably where we will be able to [get
started] as much as possible in the future so that we can largely separate the product back
to the original materials3”
— Director Innovation
The case company is currently working on creating their strategy for 2025, this has a
goal of improving in their business parameters of prioritising market leadership, innovat-
ing to diﬀerentiate as the main source of competitiveness and operational excellence in
doing business operations. The take-back service is a part of their sustainability index,
and a baseline and goal are currently being discussed. This shows that there is a strategy
towards being more sustainable, but a lack of direction how it should be done, and how
much of an impact that the case company believes that they can have with the take-back
service.
“[We believe in three fundamental ways to do business: We want to be market leaders, we
innovate to bring diﬀerentiated solutions to our customers and we constantly strive to do
things better, faster and simpler. If we follow this compass, we will be successful.”
— Strategy 2025 presentation
This added focus will work as a driver for promoting new business strategies for the
3[spørgsmål angående shredding]Du tager hele apparatet og smider det op i noget der hakker det i
småstykker, og så laver man materiale separation bedst muligt bagefter, og hvis man ikke er omhyggelig
med at få sit elektronik separeret fra inden man laver metal separering så får man forurening af nogle af
de stoﬀer der er i elektronik så får man forurening af det materiale man separerer med, men de forurener
også hinanden, et godt eksempel er at man ser bly akkumulerer i aluminium, og kobber akkumulerer i
rustfrit stål når man kører den proces der, delvis skyldes det at man ikke altid har en ægte separering
mekanisk muligt, og det er nok der vi kommer til at te os [gå i gang med] mest muligt i fremtiden sådan
at vi kan separerer produktet i vid udstrækning tilbage til de originale materialer
15
==PAGE:17==
companies and legislators that the case company are working with and complying to in
terms of pushing circular economy onto the market.
The following quote shows how the mindset and direction of the case company strategy
towards sustainability have an impact on legislation.
“[On sustainability] If there is no movement of the market then nothing happens to legis-
lation4”
— Director Innovation
The case company believes that they can recycle most parts of the products returned
to its original components, providing a more sustainable solution than the current recycle
chain where the products end up getting shredded in a scrap yard, this recycling can be
used for multiple sustainable solutions for remanufacturing and reuse of raw materials.
“When we get them [the products] back, we divide them into fragments i.e. diﬀerent cast
iron, stainless steel, copper and whatever else is the metals in our [products], and what we
do is we separate them into fragments and then it is delivered. We have a collaboration
with a scrap dealer who comes and retrieves [the separated product]... [question regarding
recycling] ... I think I have a ﬁgure of about 98% there may be some individual packages
or something that can’t be used again, but otherwise, all the components are transformed
into reusable parts.5”
— Lead Project Manager
The take-back solutions is the attention of a lot of the employees at the case company,
however, the preparation for a concept that can take that many products back are not
currently ready, so a lot of considerations as to costs, environmental impact of transport-
ing end-of-life products, which parts can be reused, which should be recycled, research in
creating an automatic process and convincing service technicians is something that needs
to be considered at the case company in order to make the servitisation work.
“Right now we do not focus on getting more back, we have no concept at all that can
carry the quantities we could get back, but there have been ideas to say ‘well, they are not
very sustainable in that way, but the idea has been to say, all these blacksmiths can get a
4[Om bæredygtighed] Hvis der ikke er noget der bevæger sig på markedet så sker der ikke noget for
lovgivningen
5... Når vi får dem tilbage [produkterne] så skiller vi dem ad i fragmenter, altså forskellige støbejern,
rustfrit stål, kobber og hvad der ellers er af metaller i vores [produkter], og det vi gør er at vi skiller dem
ad, deler dem op i fragmenter og så bliver det så leveret ud. Vi har et samarbejde med en skrothandler
som kommer og henter [det adskilte produkt]... [spørgsmål om genbrugelighed] ... Jeg tror jeg har et tal
på omkring 98%, der kan være nogle enkelte pakninger eller noget som ikke kan bruges igen, men ellers
alt det indgår jo, ikke som komponent men som materiale
16
==PAGE:18==
fee to send back.’ That way we can say ‘We have a [product], we are responsible, we are
sustainable, we are environmentally conscious, instead of taking it and selling it like old
iron that will be shredded somewhere, then we would like them to bring it back’ 6”
— Senior Product Line Manager, Small UP
Therefore the case company wants to have the products come back to the factory at
the end-of-life to be better recycled by separating and recycling each component individ-
ually, this is a key driver for the servitisation strategy that the case company are currently
looking to improve.
Currently, the take-back system that is implemented is based on the trade channel, where
distributors and wholesales oﬀer a product take-back to the service technicians, this take-
back service is currently in eﬀect in three countries where the case company has set up
a disassembly line. The current business case for the current take-back service show at
least cost neutral performance of the recycling of all materials in the products that have
been taken back. This has been further researched and has shown that the addition of
remanufacturing, would increase the economic beneﬁts are expected to be quadrupled
with using certain parts of the products in remanufacturing.
The case company are currently looking into expanding the take-back service into new
countries and onto its OEM channel, as the beneﬁts of a take-back service has shown
that it has a solid business case in the take-back. Currently, the case company is setting
up a partnership with one of its OEM customers to look into remanufacturing and take-
back, this partnership is based on a pull from the EU to focus on the circular economy.
This pull provides an opportunity for the case company to take advantage of, as they
are looking into adding more OEM customers, that way the case company can increase
the numbers of products in the take-back system to promote sustainability, which could
subsequently result in redesigning their production to include remanufacturing with parts
from the take-back service.
“In the three countries where we currently have a take-back service, we have an at least
cost neutral business case, this is only recycling the parts in the product, with remanu-
facturing we could expect up to at least quadruple the value of the parts we can use for
remanufacturing.”
— Lead Project Manager
6Lige nu har vi ikke noget fokus på at få mere tilbage, vi har slet ikke noget koncept der kan bære de
mængder vi kunne få tilbage, men der har været ideer om at sige ”Jamen, de er ikke særligt bæredygtige
på den måde, men tanken har været at sige, alle de her smede kan få en fee for at sende tilbage.” Således
at man kan sige ”vi har et [produkt], vi er ansvarlige, vi er sustainable, vi er miljøbevidste, i stedet for
i tager det og sælger det som gammelt jern og de blever shreddet et eller andet sted så ville vi egentlig
gerne have dem tilbage”
17
==PAGE:19==
“We currently have a sustainability deal with an OEM partner who has won a sustainabil-
ity award and our sub-goal is to get two more OEM partners to join in in 2020”
— Director Innovation
One important aspect that needs to be ﬁgured out to set up a functional take-back system
is the relations in the supply chain, currently the case company are pretty distant from
the end-users and the service technicians buying the products from wholesalers, therefore
the case company needs to move their inﬂuence on their products further down in the
supply chain to better implement a take-back system in collaboration with wholesalers
and distributors, that way the case company can set up a system with them to send a
sustainable message for their products further down the supply chain. Considering the
case company having two distinct relations with its customers, meaning that they have
diﬀerent relations with the customers (OEM & Trade). The following quote shows the
relationship with the OEM customers.
“What is a little special to us is that we have an internal distribution to our customers,
but distribution from there to wholesaler and distributor we are not incorporated with that,
so in our business, we do not have a relationship with the wholesaler, it is our customers
who have that relationship. So it is not in our part of the business that we have a relation
with the wholesaler, we have 100% of that in our trade channel where the relationship with
the wholesaler is extremely important, and some of our biggest customers in the company
is the wholesalers, a very large part of [case company] business goes through wholesalers,
so it is logical that their relationship with them is super important, and some that that is
used a lot of resources on, but here in OEM it is not as important an issue as it is our
customers who have that relationship.7”
— Senior Director, Products and Projects
The following quote shows the relation on the trade channel showing the focus on eﬃciency
and cost of the product on the market that the case company is currently competing in.
These channels are important to understand as they will have a large role in the expansion
of the current take-back, so the inﬂuence that the case company can have on its part-
ners is crucial for the take-back system to perform to the expectations of the case company.
7Det der er lidt specielt for os, vi har en intern distribution til vores kunder, men distribution derfra
ud til grossist og distributør er vi ikke blandet ind i, så i vores forretning har vi ikke et relationship til
grosisten, det er vores kunder der har det relationship. Så det er ikke i vores del i forretningen vi har det,
det har vi 100% ovre i vores tradeforretning hvor vores relationship med grossisten ekstrem vigtig, og
nogle af vores største kunder i biksen det er grossister, en rigtig stor del af [case virksomheden] forretning
går igennem grossister, så det er naturligt nok, og der er det klart at relationen til dem er super vigtig
og noget der bliver brugt utroligt meget krudt på, men her i OEM er det ikke så vigtigt et issue da det
er vores kunder der har den relation.
18
==PAGE:20==
“So our relationship with our distributors is very much in this category focused on price,
these [products] are being considered commodities, so there are a lot of players around the
sale of such a simple product we deliver in the DBS channel, and our wholesalers know
this, squeezing the prices to increase the margin that they most likely can put on their
overhead for each product. The price becomes more and more important within this seg-
ment where you can say we’ve been through a historical development where 4-5 years ago
we went through this conversion, just as you know from electric bulbs where you convert
to a new saving bulbs, the same was done on products within these products.8”
— Senior Service Manager
The next consideration that there are concerns internally about the take-back system
regarding the cost and ﬂow of the returned products. This is discussed in the next quote
that gives the cost estimates of reused materials, what is required in the supply chain
and some of the considerations regarding the reverse supply chain for disassembling and
selling recycled products. The potential of the returned products is deﬁnitively high, and
the uncertainty of the ﬂuctuations of products returned is a concern, as ﬁtting production
and the logistics behind getting products back is complicated.
“[about reusability and cleaning of take-back products] ... Then this would cost, instead of
100 indexes, then it would cost maybe 45? And that is a lot of money for [case company]
to save, but the supply chain is very uncertain, and that is how some things play into this
problem, how to deal with it because the second thing is that we are number one when it
comes to building automatic production line ups, I guess we could also be number one in
building a production line up where you pick them up and have a machine look at them
and disassemble them and sort them out for descaling, degreasing etc. and then you got
new items, and those that could not be used they were sorted into a rubbish bin which
turned into stainless steel, copper etc. that way you could get more money.9”
8Altså vores relationship med vores distributører det er meget inden for denne kategori fokuseret på
pris, de her [produkter] er ved at være commodities, så der er rigtig mange aktører omkring salget af et
så simpelt produkt vi leverer i DBS kanalen, og det ved vores grocister godt, desto mere de kan presse
prisen desto størrer margin kan de højest sandsynligt få med det lille overhead der ligger på hvert produkt
ikke os? Prisen bliver mere og mere vigtig inden for det her segment hvor man kan sige vi har været
igennem en historisk udvikling hvor vi for en 4-5 år tilbage var igennem den her konvertering, ligesom
man kender fra elpærer hvor man konverterer til nye spare pærer, det samme er ligesom foregået på de
her produkter
9[omkring genanvendelse og rengøring af take-back produkter]... så ville det her koste, i stedet for 100
index, så ville det koste måske 45?. Og det er jo mange penge for [case virksomheden] at spare, men
supply chainen er meget usikker, og det er sådan nogle ting der spiller ind i den her problematik, hvordan
man kan håndtere det, fordi det andet, vi er verdensmestre i at bygge automatiske produktionslinjer op,
jeg tror sagtens vi kunne være verdensmestre i at bygge en produktionslinje op hvor man tog de her og
have en maskine der kom ind og kiggede på dem satte en skruetrækker ind og skille dem ad og sorteret
dem ud til afkalkning, aﬀedtning osv. og så ﬁk du nye emner ud, det ville jeg tro, og dem der ikke kunne
bruges de blev sorteret i en skraldekasse der så blev til rustfrit stål, kobber osv. der ﬁk du ﬂere penge
19
==PAGE:21==
— Senior Product Line Manager, Small UP
Table 3: Findings on internal restrictions
Findings
Current design is hard to disassemble
Relation with direct customers are good, collaboration on requirements for products
Relation with distributors and wholesales based on price
Development of business case and expansion of take-back in progress
Products getting shredded ineﬃciently
challenges
Create sustainable marketing strategy in collaboration with trade channel and direct customers
Service technicians get more value from scrapping products than returning them
4.3
External Restrictions
The current legislation that the case company adheres to is in regards to the eﬃciency of
the products being below a market threshold in EU, this legislation has been the main
focus of the development teams for 10-15 years building up to the legislation being phased
in, and the result has put the case company as one of the top products in terms of high-
eﬃciency.
“I think it is about the importance of [the case company], and you could say through
the ’00s when we were competing on and focused on the agenda of energy eﬃciency, that
was simply what it was all about, to make more energy-eﬃcient [products], that was where
our environmental contribution was and it continued up to about 2015, where this ERP
legislation around our products was completely phased in, and stringent requirements were
set for the eﬃciency of such product types. And that was something that we were lobbying
on right from the beginning, there were was also an energy labelling on such products in
the late ’00s that we helped to make. So constantly pushing for energy eﬃciency, and
with the introduction of the legislation in ’13 for our trade products and ’15 for these
[OEM products] we have reached a level where, ﬁrstly, it is diﬃcult to do much better,
and secondly, it is no longer a competitive parameter because everyone is good to comply
with the legislation you have to have a reasonable energy eﬃciency.10”
10Jeg tænker at det er lidt omkring vigtigheden for [virksomheden] af det her, og man kan sige hele
vejen op igennem 00’erne så var det vi konkurrerede på og det vi snakkede om og det der var på agendaen
det var energi eﬀektivitet, det var simpelthen det det drejede sig om det var at lave mere energirigtige
produkter, det var ligesom der vi satte vores miljømæssige biddrag, det var at lave [produkter] der var
mere eﬀektive, og det er egentlig fortsat og hele vejen op til omkring 2015, hvor den her ERP lovgivning
omkring [vores produkter] var helt indfaset, og der var sat ret skrappe krav til virkningsgraden af sådan
20
==PAGE:22==
— Senior Director, Products and Projects
Another legislation that is aﬀecting the case company is the WEEE directive, which
means that the case company have a responsibility to get rid of a certain amount of
electronic waste, corresponding to the amount of electronic waste that they put into the
market.
“We have responsibility under WEEE directive to get rid of a certain amount of elec-
tronic waste which corresponds to the amount of electronic waste that we put into the
market. To the best of my understand of how that works is that we have an external
company that has access to our ERP system, so SAP, and they can see how much we
are selling in which market, they have then a network of waste and resource management
companies throughout the EU, where they take over our responsibility for handling a
certain amount of electronic waste in a responsible way”.
— Lead Project Manager
This is something that the case company currently are paying external partners to remove
themselves from the obligation of the WEEE in countries where they do not have a take-
back service of the products in warranty. With a fully implemented take-back system this
directive is no longer a huge concern and cost for the case company, as the waste will be
returned to the case company and recycled. This will reduce the cost of having external
partners involved in managing the products at end-of-life.
“[regarding current take-back system]I believe that it is only in Denmark, but maybe there
has been something in England, it has not been something that has been a good business
case, and with the WEEE legislation we use external partners to manage the [products]
where we have a ‘no-wastebin/crossbin’ symbol on, so that is something that we pay other
people to deal with because we do not have a take-back system in all countries11”
— Senior Director, Products and Projects
The supply chain of the case company is split into two major sectors, one sector for
standalone products that are being sold to wholesales through distributors, and the other
nogle produkttyper. Og det var noget som vi var med til at lobbye på helt fra starten af, der var også en
energimærkning på sådan nogle produkter her i slutningen af 00’erne som vi var med på at få lavet, så
hele tiden presse på energieﬀektivitet, der kan man sige med introduktionen af den der lovgivning i ’13
for vores trade produkter og i ’15 for dem her så er vi egentlig nået på et niveau der hvor for det første,
det er svært at gøre det meget bedre, og for det andet, det er ikke længere en konkurrenceparameter,
fordi alle er gode, for at overholde loven skal du have en rigtig fornuftig virkningsgrad.
11Jeg mener det kun er i Danmark, men måske har der været noget i England, det er ikke noget som
der er en voldsomt god business case i, og nu med WEEE lovgivningen så bruger vi jo eksterne partnere
til at behandle de [produkter] hvor vi har ”no-wastebin/crossbin” symbol på, så der betaler vi os fra den
forpligtigelse, fordi vi ikke har take-back systemer i alle lande.
21
==PAGE:23==
sector the products are sold directly to its customers. For both of these sectors, several
factors regarding servitisation apply in terms of relations management, design of the prod-
uct and market legislation. The subsequent ﬁgure (Figure 1), show a basic supply chain
and each transition the product is made from each step before reaching the end-user of the
supply chain. Additionally, the ﬁgure also shows the extent to which the case company
currently is being inﬂuenced by or inﬂuence.
Figure 1: Current supply chain
The case company is currently looking at the current focus on repairability from the Eu-
ropean Commission, currently there is no direction in terms of requirements from the
category of products that the case company currently oﬀers, however, the beliefs are that
the development of the repairability of products will have an inﬂuence on the products at
the case company.
“So the point of testing the standard is also to ﬁgure out where we are with the products
now and do we like it where we are or do we want to inﬂuence so it’s been changed more
toward product-friendly version if you want to call it that, because certain things might
not make sense, because the standard – the people, the companies that were included in the
standardisation work was everything from Apple to Velux Windows to Siemens Medical
equipment which is huge, to products and you name it so everybody trying to ﬁgure out
how repairability and re-manufacturing works together, so you need to split it out into
product speciﬁc standards, and then testing it, basically until now we don’t really have a
position on it as [case company], so when I went into the standardisation work I came
22
==PAGE:24==
with my opinion, so that might be ﬁne that might not be ﬁne, but I did not know where
[case company] is at so it was more like listening and ﬁguring out what is going on and
I think we need to test all the diﬀerent standards and see where we are at, to then ﬁgure
out how we want to work with it in the future and be prepared for it also.”
— Senior Sustainable Product Specialist
This is not the ﬁrst time that the case company have been required to improve their
products to comply to legislation and they are expecting a faster implementation of the
legislation to come from EU, as the new requirements can be added to the current legis-
lation.
“...
And it is expected to move into legislation faster than with the energy eﬃciency
because they can just kind of add it into the eco-design directive, which is already existing,
so it is faster to integrate it there than to have a whole new law, so it is expected that it
will come.”
— Senior Sustainable Product Specialist
The current process of redesigning the product is slowly being added to the current de-
velopment of new products but is not being focused on due to internal concerns regarding
the risks and costs involved in making major changes in the current design, this shows
that even with the willingness of becoming more sustainable, the case company still does
not have a clear strategy set in place to take action in developing new product designs
and services to become sustainable.
“The thing about repairability is slowly being added to the list of things that we would
like to become sustainable as a company, so we are trying to bring it in, especially on our
products, so our small [products]. But we have not seen it in the projects right now, but
I am thinking that it will be slowly added in the new projects. 12”
— Senior Quality Manager
“If you are asking about what I was reﬂecting before I came here about what do I think.
[The] biggest issue is I mean my short experience as a product manager has been internal
problems. That we are ﬁxing our design, we are not willing to change, it is risk it costs
money, and then of course markets, it is really hard for me to argue to my boss ‘we should
have a product that can be disassembled by pushing a button’[answer to the question] ‘[Se-
nior Product Specialist] can you make money out of it, is any of our competitors doing
12Det kommer lige så stille med repairability med alle de her ting over vi gerne ville være sustainable
som virksomhed, så vi forsøger også at bringe det ind, specielt på vores produkter, altså vores små
[produkter]. Men vi har ikke set det i projekterne endnu, jeg tænker at det kommer lige så stille ind i de
nye projekter.
23
==PAGE:25==
that? Is any of our customers requiring that? No. Then why should we do it? I am sorry
to say it cost money and it does not add anything that our customers are asking, not only
directly but indirectly.’”
— Senior Product Specialist
The last ﬁnding is the vision of designing products to become more sustainable, the
case company has been looking into repairability, re-manufacturing and disassembly as
possible options for their future product design, choice of materials in products and ser-
vice oﬀerings.
“[question on reverse logistics] ... The purpose of it is to be able to detect on the ma-
terial properties whether it can actually be recycled, either in re-manufacturing or in a
recycling situation, and it is quite exciting because there are new thought within it, but it is
still not decidedly repairability, it is more re-manufacturing or subsidised, and I personally
believe that that is the strategy that [my co-worker] in our small innovation department
who have the future responsibility for sustainability 13”
— Director Innovation
“There are many challenges to it, but there are two things clear: It is incredibly im-
portant that the product is designed so that it can be separated in all its sub-components,
so it is important going forward that we design our products so they can be fairly divided
into components, for example, there is such a plastic component here [product shown at
the interview] where there are embedded conductor tracks, we use it a lot because it is
smart from a technical point of view, but if you look at reusability that there is a challenge
with parts of the basic components needs to be crushed in order to pull out the components
of the conductor, so there are some challenges [with materials and design].14”
— Senior Director, Products and Projects
13[spørgsmål om reverse logistics] ... Formålet med det er at kunne detekterer på materiale egensk-
aberne om det egentligt kan genbruges, enten i remanufacturing eller recycling situation, og det er ret
spændende fordi det er nye tanker inden for det, men det er stadig ikke decideret repairability, det er mere
remanufacturing eller subsidieret, og jeg tror personligt på og det er den strategi som [min medarbejder]
vi har her i vores lille innovationsafdeling det fremadrettede ansvar for bæredygtighed
14Der er mange udfordringer i det, men det er klart, to ting: Det er ufattelig vigtigt at [produktet] er
designet sådan at den kan skilles ad, og rigtig gerne i alle delkomponenter, så det er vigtigt fremadrettet
at vi designer sådan, vores [produkter] er ikke de værste, det kan nogenlunde deles ad i komponenter,
men for eksempel så er der sådan et plastemne her [vist til interviewet] hvor der er indstøbte lederbaner i,
det bruger vi meget fordi det er smart set fra et teknisk synspunkt, men hvis man kigger på reuseability
at dele den her i sine grundkomponenter så er det selvfølgelig en udfordring, så skal du på en eller anden
måde kunne kvase den her og trække lederbanerne ud af det, så der er nogle udfordringer [med materialer
og design].
24
==PAGE:26==
Table 4: Findings on external restrictions and future vision
Findings
Future legislation is diﬃcult to predict
Case company have been ahead of the curve for previous legislation
Current design is hard to disassemble
No concept of which design to go for
No strategy from top management at the case company
No clear diﬀerentiating factors in current market
High buy-in on take-back products can be reused
challenges
Design and material choice needs to be considered for recycling and remanufacturing
Identify new market parameters for implementing take-back system
Product and supply chain design to better ﬁt take-back system and resale
Creating a company-wide approach to repairability/serviceability/remanufacturing
4.4
Summary
After the implementation of the legislation with requirements of eﬃciency of the products,
the market has reached a point where the diﬀerentiation between producers of products
are based mostly on price, even though the case company is in a good place on the
market they are looking into moving a more sustainable direction with the inclusion of
a take-back service due to the vision of being more sustainable. The take-back option
is used to remove their products from the scrapyards where the products are currently
being recycled ineﬃciently. The case company is currently at a standstill with the added
future concerns regarding repairability of the products and lack of company-wide vision,
making development of product design diﬃcult, as the current approach to redesigning the
products is to base the design of the product on repairability, however, concerns regarding
the risk and cost of changing the current products are keeping the case company from
implementing a new design, another factor for the case company being reluctant to the
change is that the current market parameters are products being eﬃcient enough to pass
legislation and being as low cost as possible. Therefore the case company is reluctant
to force a change of the design of the product, as it will be a huge investment into the
current market.
There is a huge potential in expanding the take-back system to include end-of-life products
from their OEM customers, as a large part of the products sold by the case company are
in the direct customer channel of their business. However, with the role of supplier to the
OEM customers, the case company does not have any insight in the supply chain and the
disposal of these appliances, so by getting insights and involvement in the supply chain
the case company can increase the take-back returns from multiple supply chains. To
implement this at the OEM customers the relationship will have a huge impact on how
25
==PAGE:27==
well received this system will be, and how big of an impact it will have on the customers’
supply chain.
The relationship between the case company and their customers is diﬃcult to manage, as
the relation with the direct customer focus on the performance of the products as part of
the application made by the customer, the case company is not involved with the distri-
bution and sales of the appliances sold by their customers. However, in the trade channel,
the relationship with the wholesaler and distributor is extremely important, as a good
relationship with the wholesalers will allow the case company to sell and receive products
through distribution and take-back. The case company is already well-established with
the take-back on the trade channel but are still looking for ways to improve the number
of products returned to the wholesalers.
The challenge for the case company consists in creating a way of setting up a take-back
system on diﬀerent markets as each actor will require a solution that is tailored to their
needs, so having a good relationship will help with the negotiations and implementation
of the take-back solution.
26
==PAGE:28==
5
Discussion
Throughout the case study several areas have been addressed with regards to product-
service systems and ideas for the relationship management has been proposed. The study
of the take-back system and product design there are some limitations, as this case study
is based on interviews with the case company, meaning that the ﬁndings of this research
are not generalised for future research.
5.1
Legislation
With the increased focus on product-service systems, the main concern regarding the leg-
islation is how well it is implemented on the "external" environment in a country setting,
and how well each company has incorporated these legislation’s within their organisation.
Since this take-back concept and the impact of a circular economy are in the early imple-
mentation stages in the current market that the case company are in, a lot of challenges
will arrive regarding understanding legislation, WEEE, EU directives and more. The con-
cerns of the case company are the knowledge of the supply chain on the OEM channel,
currently the lack of knowledge on the appliances EOL is unknown, as well as knowledge
on how the OEM appliances are being handled at their EOL. Current issues are to know
what parts of the appliances are under which legislation, and work around that to propose
the take-back service at the OEM customers.
5.2
Impact on Supply Chain
As the move to a circular economy is recent on this market, each company is looking into
its way of handling the transitions that are unique to them. The challenge for the case
company is to be able to have an impact in terms of the procurement of the appliances and
products in the OEM and channel for the take-back system, as the distributors and OEM
customers have a large inﬂuence on the case company. A barrier in the implementation of
servitisation for the case company is to present the ambitions and value of the take-back
service to the trade and OEM channel, leaving it unrecognised by the OEM and distribu-
tion relationships. The implementation of PSS is however still not mainstream amongst
practitioners [24], so capabilities and knowledge are required to reduce the discrepancies
between the case company and its partners in the OEM and trade channel.
The addition of a pamphlet with the sold product will beneﬁt the case company as these
downstream activities in the supply chain will help increase the perception of the sustain-
able approach of the case company, and may result in a more recognisable brand on the
27
==PAGE:29==
market [3]. However, there are several factors to consider as the expectations, pressure
and power are uneven in a supply chain network [2]. These factors need to be addressed in
alliance relationship to manage the interactions along the supply chain when implement-
ing the take-back service, ensuring that the context and expected results are in accord
between the case company and their business partners. Naturally, with the addition of
a take-back service, the case company need to consider how to take advantage of their
current knowledge and learning, as the expansion of the take-back service to OEM will
increase the complexity of the relationship for the service, increasing the uncertainty of
the implementation.
28
==PAGE:30==
6
Conclusion
This case study examines the case company concerned with the environmental impact of
their products EOL, based on the ﬁndings, a recommendation based on Product-service
system, relationship management and redesign of products for higher quality & lower
cost of disassembly was proposed. PSS is by deﬁnition been associated with sustainabil-
ity, so the transformation from a transactional manufacturing perspective to a relationship
perspective to increase the performance of the take-back system is necessary for more sus-
tainable recycling and remanufacturing opportunity at the case company. The challenges
of the development of a PSS with the focus on the take-back service is the external bar-
riers of legislation and market conditions in the channels that the case company provides
products in.
6.1
Company Recommendations
Based on the ﬁndings it is noticeable that there are several factors involved when looking
at the products that the case company oﬀers on the market.
Looking at the current oﬀering and performance of the products it is associated with
a high standard in terms of performance of the products, something that is valued on
the market, even with the considerate lack of market parameters. This is something that
shows the involvement between the case company and its direct OEM customers and their
relationship with its distributors to wholesalers on the trade channel of its business. The
goal for the internal restrictions is to keep the product quality high while moving towards
a new service oﬀering that impact both the case company, but also the market that the
service will inﬂuence.
6.2
Connecting the Findings
From an internal point of view there are concerns regarding the products in take-back
and reuse of the parts, this is a concern that both quality and safety needs to be veriﬁed
for the remanufacturing to take place.
With the knowledge of the current take-back system the case company can, however,
reassure that the products returned are being recycled and disposed of more eﬃciently
than the shredding process at the scrap yard where most of the products from both the
trade channel, and OEM channel end up.
The case company got a good foundation set in place in the trade channel, where the
existing take-back oﬀering is currently in eﬀect. in this channel the case company are
looking at ways of increasing its presence further down the supply chain to advance the
29
==PAGE:31==
take-back service.
For the direct customers in the OEM channel, the challenges remain in getting into the
supply chain and retrieving the products installed in the appliances. Based on the insights
regarding the direct customers requesting the case company for speciﬁc requirements of
products in the applications that they sell, this provides the opportunity for the case
company to make a collaboration with their direct customers to implement take-back
with the appliances. This also creates opportunities to promote new product oﬀerings
with the remanufactured parts as an additional feature of the take-back system, creating
an opportunity to show an impact on a wider range of appliances that the case company
provides products to in the market. This is exactly what is needed for the case company
to also aﬀect legislative forces to make a legislative push on this area.
The case company do need time to convince more of their partners on both the trade
channel and OEM channel to further advance themselves onto potential new market pa-
rameters, some of the key takeaways that are under consideration for the recommendation
is the following:
• Promoting a sustainable service to products, both in the usage phase and EOL will
provide the case company with a new sustainable marketing parameter
• Designing an easier repairable product will also work in the take-back system by
having an easier to disassemble product for remanufacturing or recycling at the case
company
• Developing and enabling technologies to create a market and legislative pull
as the case company has a clear 2025 sustainable strategy in place, development of new
ideas and designs should be more accessible for the employees working with sustainable
solutions to support the established take-back system.
This will also provide an opportunity for new concepts to emerge that can help to accom-
plish these goals over the next years.
6.3
Proposal to Case Company
The design for serviceability will, in this case, look into combining the product design
around remanufacturing to better adjust their products to the take-back system, this will
allow for better and easier access to the parts that are used in the remanufacturing pro-
cess. The proposal will look into multiple stages and examine current research in these
areas to carry out the recommendation.
The proposition of an expanded take-back service share the ideas oﬀof one of the pro-
posed governance strategies proposed by Sjödin et. al. [11], this relational governance
30
==PAGE:32==
strategy involved a high service innovation, through long relationships through trust and
openness, high switching costs and low use of explicit contracts. This research shows that
this strategy beneﬁts advanced service propositions where a lot of interaction is required,
and based on trust and openness, facilitating eﬀective and eﬃcient service transactions.
In this case, this requires the case company to present a sustainable vision for the take-
back system to its direct customers and its distributors. This will help create interactive
relationships based on needs and market mechanisms of the unique relationship. For this
solution, it is recommended that the case company provides its customers with a platform
where knowledge of the take-back system from multiple relationships can be provided to
create a solution that provides value to both parts. The idea of building relationships
based mostly on trust and openness is to avoid hindering relationships through limitations
of an explicit contract, as the advanced service oﬀering is usually associated with com-
plexity and uncertainty. Therefore a relationship based on cooperation on an advanced
service should rely on goodwill and trust to capture the value of the service provided, in
this case, the take-back system. The relational governance strategy ﬁts well with the case
company, as the sustainable product oﬀerings are based on the success of the take-back
system, as an increase in returned products will make more materials available to reman-
ufacturing and recycling.
Hauser & Lund [8] present several beneﬁts of using remanufacturing in industrialised
countries, as they are being more aware of the need for sustainable solutions. The re-
manufacturing process demands less resource usage while providing beneﬁcial returns. By
designing products to enable an easier remanufacturing process, the case company can
reduce the disassembly time as well as getting easier access to materials and parts to be
reused and recycled. This will allow for an increase in capacity at the disassembly points,
which will be necessary with the proposal of expanding the take-back to additional cus-
tomers in the trade channel and OEM channel. To make a successful take-back service,
the case company need to leverage on the capabilities and competencies that they already
have access to, these skills are necessary to gain a competitive advantage to competitors
trying to mimic the remanufacturing or take-back system. Since the case company is
already committed to their current take-back system, they are already creating compe-
tencies in activities in product disassembly and expanding their take-back service. This
knowledge will further increase the take-back system as the case company build skills and
knowledge to fully take advantage of take-back service for product recovery [7].
With the circumstances that the case company is in, the proposal of standard agreements
and templates for the take-back service is recommended, that way the case company
can provide a service with no contractual restrictions as to speciﬁc numbers. Building a
relationship based on functional coordination to build a take-back system to ﬁt each cus-
31
==PAGE:33==
tomer. That way the relationship will remain high, as the development of the take-back
service will take place. The case company already have the knowledge and capabilities
of the disassembly, and with the possible expansion of the take-back system, they can
begin using the observations and capabilities acquired from the disassembly line to im-
prove product design to reduce the time of disassembly, decrease the chance of fracturing
reusable parts during the disassembly process, identify more parts for remanufacturing
and improve material selection for recycling, as the case company can focus on material
choices for the take-back service and remanufacturing knowing that the future amount of
products ending up shredding processes will be reduced.
Figure 2: Product-service system
The case company can use its competencies as a high-quality product manufacturer and
its sustainable vision to its OEM customers looking into options of a circular economy.
The proposal for the case company is to approach its trade channel and OEM customers
with the proposition of an alliance partnership based on the sustainable vision from the
case company and the circular economy pull from the EU. By oﬀering an alliance partner-
ship the case company can use its knowledge of the current take-back service they provide
to show the economic and environmental beneﬁts of the product take-back and oﬀer to
use the knowledge gained from the disassembly to use parts of the products in remanu-
facturing. One concern that needs to be addressed is the quality of the remanufactured
products using reused parts, however, this is where the trust aspect of the alliance partner-
ship comes in, as they need to trust in the capabilities of the case company to adjust their
products, similarly what they have shown with the eﬃciency of their products, to the high
standard that they oﬀer, while moving towards oﬀering a sustainable product and service.
32
==PAGE:34==
Finally to address the issue of distance from the company as a manufacturer to the
decision-maker and purchaser of their products. Currently, the decision making is solely
on the service technician installing the product at the end-user. For this the case company
need to ﬁnd a way to communicate at the level of the decision-maker and the end-user of
the product, an approach to this issue could be to include a pamphlet with the product,
showing the commitment to sustainability by the case company with a message of sus-
tainability for both the service technician and the end-user to recognise. That way the
end-user will have an opportunity to inﬂuence how the product should be disposed of at
the product EOL.
Figure 3: Eﬀect of PSS on supply chain
A successful implementation of such a PSS does have a potential value to the case company
[5] , as building a PSS help building capabilities for operational excellence, relational
performance and reducing environmental impacts. The most important challenge is how
to eﬃciently and eﬀectively transforming the case company to build these competencies.
Implementing these services is a challenge as conﬁgurations and external considerations
for the take-back service is unique for the OEM channel, further increasing the complexity
of the implementation.
The organisational learning from the implementation of the take-back service is needed for
creating capabilities of sustainable operations, such as strategic focus, external contacts,
processes and resources, which can be used for competitive advantage. The combination
of the capabilities, redesign of product and expansion of the take-back service have huge
potential in scaling to multiple countries, which with the capacities and relationships in
place should be implemented swiftly with fewer concerns.
33
==PAGE:35==
7
Limitations and Future Work
Current research into product-service systems current look into manufacturers oﬀering
services through their products. An example of this is the ownership of the products.
In this case, the case company oﬀers a product that is a component of a larger system
controlled by other companies, which removes the opportunity to take advantage of a
"traditional" leasing or sharing service that is usually provided in a user-oriented PSS [5].
Tukker [25] Show three main categories of a PSS, these being classiﬁed as product-oriented,
use-oriented and result-oriented, however, these categories mostly support added services
through product-related services such as maintenance contracts, product leasing or by
delivering the result of the products. However, in this case of a take-back service with the
remote distance to the end-user and having a product that is a small part of larger system
in the usage phase makes these options far from accessibly in the case of the case com-
pany, therefore research into service systems to show options for a "contributing" product
manufacturer is required.
In this case, the term PSS looks into providing services at the EOL of a traditional
purchasing system where ownership of the product remains at the end-user, but the re-
sponsibility of disposal shifts back to the manufacturer. This change is the main focus of
this research and needs further research into more improvements and information regard-
ing the product at the end-user, such that the system can be further improved upon.
More research within the ﬁeld of managing collaborative approaches to sustainability
within a PSS and in SCM would expand current knowledge on management within the
relationship management ﬁeld, and provide companies to identify and coordinate the dy-
namic changes in relationship management with governance approaches to product-service
systems that primarily focus on take-back services. Future research might also be applied
to the OEM manufacturing ﬁrms, where product take-back and remanufacturing require a
focus on the upstream and downstream relationship management aspect of the take-back
system, expanding on the contrast of the downstream management focused in this case
study.
34
==PAGE:36==
References
[1] Baines T. S.; Lightfoot Howard W. Servitization of the manufacturing ﬁrm - explor-
ing the operations practices and technologies that deliver advanced services. Inter-
national Journal of Operations and Production Management, 2014.
[2] Vurro Clodia; Russo Angeloantonio; Perrini Francesco. Shaping sustainable value
chains: Network determinants of supply chain governance models. Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics — 2009, Volume 90, Issue 4, pp. 607-621, 2009.
[3] Gillespie Brian; Rogers Mary Margaret. Sustainable supply chain management and
the end user: Understanding the impact of socially and environmentally responsible
ﬁrm behaviors on consumers’ brand evaluations and purchase intentions. Journal of
Marketing Channels — 2016, Volume 23, Issue 1-2, pp. 34-46, 2016.
[4] Goedkoop M. J.; Van Halen C. J.; Te Riele H. R.; Rommens P. J. Product service-
systems, ecological and economic basics. Report for Dutch Ministries of Environment
(VROM) and Economic Aﬀairs (EZ), 1999.
[5] Baines T. S.; Lightfoot H. W.; Evans S.; Neely A.; Greenough R.; Peppard J.; Roy R.;
Shehab E.; Braganza A.; Tiwari A.; Alcock J. R.; Angus J. P.; Basti M.; Cousens A.;
Irving P.; Johnson M.; Kingston J.; Lockett H.; Martinez V.; Michele P.; Tranﬁeld D.;
Walton I. M.; Wilson H. State-of-the-art in product-service-systems. Proceedings of
the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture
— 2007, Volume 221, Issue 10, pp. 1543-1552, 2007.
[6] Wang P.P.; Ming X.G.; Li D.; Kong F.B.; Wang L.; Wu Z.Y. Modular development
of product service systems. Eng. Res. Appl. 19 (1), 2011.
[7] Michael W. Toﬀel. Strategic management of product recovery. California manage-
ment review, 2004.
[8] Lund Robert T; Hauser William M. Remanufacturing - an american perspective. Iet
Conference Publications, 2010.
[9] Manzini E.; Vezzoli C.; Clark G. Product service systems: using an existing concept
as a new approach to sustainability. J. Des. Res, 2001, 1(2).
[10] UNEP. The role of pss in a sustainable society. 2001.
[11] David Sjödin, Vinit Parida, and Marko Kohtamäki. Relational governance strategies
for advanced service provision: Multiple paths to superior ﬁnancial performance in
servitization. Journal of Business Research, 101:906–915, 2019.
[12] Eric (Er) Fang; Robert W. Palmatier; Jan-Benedict E.M. Steenkamp.
Eﬀect of
service transition strategies on ﬁrm value. Journal of Marketing — 2008, Volume
72, Issue 5, pp. 1-14, 2008.
35
==PAGE:37==
[13] Marko Kohtamäki; Jukka Partanen; Vinit Parida; Joakim Wincent. Non-linear rela-
tionship between industrial service oﬀering and sales growth: The moderating role of
network capabilities. Industrial Marketing Management — 2013, Volume 42, Issue
8, pp. 1374-1385, 2013.
[14] Visnjic Kastalli Ivanka; Van Looy Bart. Servitization: Disentangling the impact of
service business model innovation on manufacturing ﬁrm performance. Journal of
Operations Management — 2013, Volume 31, Issue 4, pp. 169-180, 2013.
[15] Peer C. Fiss. A set-theoretic approach to organizational conﬁgurations. Academy of
Management Review — 2007, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 1180-1198, 2007.
[16] Jukka Vesalainen; Marko Kohtamäki. Toward a typological view of buyer–supplier
relationships: Challenging the unidimensional relationship continuum.
Industrial
Marketing Management — 2015, Volume 49, pp. 105-115, 2015.
[17] DWYER F.R.; SCHURR P.H.; OH S. Developing buyer-seller relationships. Journal
of Marketing — 1987, Volume 51, Issue 2, pp. 11-27, 1987.
[18] Macneil Ian R. The new social contract: An inquiry into modern contractual rela-
tions. Michigan Law Review — 1981, Volume 79, Issue 4, pp. 827, 1981.
[19] Rinehart L. M.; Eckert J. A.; Handﬁeld R. B.; Page T. J.; Atkin T. An assessment
of supplier-customer relationships. Journal of Business Logistics — 2004, Volume
25, Issue 1, pp. 25-62, 2004.
[20] Lambert D. M.; Emmelhainz M. A.; Gardner J. T. Developing and implementing
supply chain partnerships.
International Journal of Logistics Management, 7(2),
1–17., 1996.
[21] Johnson Gerry; Scholes Kevan; Whittington Richard. Fundamentals of strategy. Pear-
son Education Limited, 2009.
[22] Bruce Kogut; Udo Zander. Knowledge of the ﬁrm, combinative capabilities, and the
replication of technology. Knowledge in Organisations, 1992.
[23] Robert K. Yin. Case Study Research - Design and Methods. SAGE Publications,
2003.
[24] Baines Tim; Ziaee Bigdeli Ali; Bustinza Oscar F.; Shi Victor Guang; Baldwin
James; Ridgway Keith. Servitization: revisiting the state-of-the-art and research pri-
orities. International Journal of Operations and Production Management — 2017,
Volume 37, Issue 2, pp. 256-278, 2017.
[25] Arnold Tukker. Product services for a resource-eﬃcient and circular economy - a
review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 2013.
36
