==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Evaluating Potential Electricity Generation using Wind 
Estimates from the Global and New European Wind 
Atlases 
 
 
Aki Pian 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0338 
February 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Aki Pian 
Title: Evaluating Potential Electricity Generation using Wind Estimates 
from the Global and New European Wind Atlases 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03388 
February 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
September 2019 – February 2020 
 
 
 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Andrea N. Hahmann 
Steffen Rasmussen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark
Evaluating potential electricity
generation using wind estimates from
the Global and New European Wind
Atlases.
Master Thesis
Aki Pian
Supervisors: Andrea N. Hahmann, Steﬀen Rasmussen
February 2020
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
High-resolution wind resource atlas have been released in the last recent years, there-
fore, despite the large number of studies addressing the estimation of wind potential,
the use of these wind atlas has not been performed yet on a large scale. This Master
thesis presents a methodology for the estimation of wind power resource at a country
level applying high-resolution wind atlas.
First, a methodology is presented to apply diﬀerent layers of constraints for wind
energy and to mask the areas, optimizing the accuracy of the masking process with
the limited time and computer source. This methodology can be applied either at
local areas, considering more layers of constraints, or can be applied at a global scale,
relying on super computers. In this thesis, the European and neighbouring countries
are investigated.
Diﬀerent constraints are applied to three high-resolution wind atlas: New European
Wind Atlas, Global Wind Atlas 3 and Global Wind Atlas 2.
The diﬀerent wind
atlas provide slightly discrepancy, observed larger in the mean power density. The
higher wind resource produced by high-resolutioned wind atlas is due to the ability in
capture the eﬀects of terrain orography on the local wind ﬂow. At the same time, the
eﬀect of overestimation due to the limitation of the linear ﬂow model of the microscale
modelling is observed in countries deﬁned by a particular complex terrain, with an
increase in the mean power density of 10–50% over these complex areas.
Further investigations are realized to understand the feasibility of diﬀerent future
scenarios for the EU countries. The scenarios for 2030 investigated, require a low
share of the suitable area demonstrating the feasibility of these predictions. Applying
10% of the suitable area for wind energy results in an estimation of 5 times the
actual EU wind capacity installed with the estimation of almost the entire EU energy
consumption. Considering the good wind resource area available a potential of 26
times the actual installed capacity, associated to 4 times the EU energy consumption
is available. These results show an improvement compared to a study from the EU
were reanalysis wind data was applied, underling again the improvement that high-
resolution wind atlas produce in the estimation of wind resources.
i
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This work deﬁnes the end of my Master studies in Wind Energy and the end of a
long cycle of studies, through diﬀerent universities in diﬀerent countries. The achieve-
ment of a dream since I was a child that brought me to move to Denmark.
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors for guiding me in
these ﬁve intense months. Thank you for your constant availability, the interesting
inputs and the constructive discussions. Thank you Andrea, for making me discover
this side of the wind energy in which I found my interest, I admired you and your
great contribution to the wind energy industry. Thank you Steﬀen, for your ded-
ication, and your diﬀerent point of view, it made me understand things I gave for
granted. Furthermore, I want to thank Neil, for teaching me how to dive in coordi-
nates, raster, wind maps, this has saved me. Finally, a big thank to my friend and
colleague Dui, your insights have been really helpful.
I want to express my endless gratitude to my incredible parents. All my achievements
would have not been the same without your boundless love, supporting me in my pas-
sion and dreams across the mountains and diﬀerent countries, guiding me through the
diﬃculties and leaving me the freedom to explore. Thank you for imparting me love
and respect for the other and the environment, that has brought me here, achieving
a Master in Wind Energy with the hope to make this world a better place. Thank
you from the deepest of my heart, I am grateful to you for what I have done, and this
achievement is in part also yours.
Finally, I want to thank all the awesome people I met through this journey. I have
been surrounded by wonderful friends, great colleagues with a big heart, whom I
admire and I am sure will contribute to create a better world. Thank you for having
made these years really special in my heart. A special thanks to my friends Athish,
Charlie, Costi, Erica, Paul, Quentin, the Soire Meuf and Helge, to whom I am grateful
to have shared our master thesis time, it would have been harder alone.
ii
==PAGE:6==
Dedication
To my beloved zia Laura,
blowing in the wind.
iii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
The problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
The solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Current status of renewable energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Purpose of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Wind climate datasets
6
2.1
Wind climate datasets description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Preliminary Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Phase 1: Wind Atlases comparison by country . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Phase 2: Wind Atlases comparison with topographical constraints . .
14
3.4
Phase 3: Wind Atlases comparison for suitable terrain
. . . . . . . .
16
4
Wind Atlas comparison
23
4.1
Preliminary Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Investigation of wind climatology at diﬀerent resolutions
. . .
23
4.1.2
Elevation Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Wind Atlases comparison by country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Wind Atlases comparison with topographical constraints . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Wind Atlases comparison for suitable terrain
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
iv
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
4.4.1
Analysis of the eﬀect of area with high RIX values in the statistics 52
4.4.2
Capacity Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Potential wind capacity and production estimation
62
5.1
Analysis applying diﬀerent share of available terrain . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2
Analysis applying a ﬁxed capacity factor level and comparison with
EU Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.2.1
Computation of the needed variable: comparison of the results
between the three datasets NEWA, GWA3 and GWA2
. . . .
72
5.2.2
Results Comparison with the EU study . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.2.3
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.3
Comparison with WindEurope predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.4
Installed capacity comparison for diﬀerent scenarios . . . . . . . . . .
90
6
Summary
93
7
Conclusions
96
7.1
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A Table and Figure appendix
103
v
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
1.1.1
The problem
Climate change has ﬁnally become an actual and imminent problem for global society.
Earth’s climate is rapidly changing, the global average temperature is increasing,
NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) tracked above 1° C increase in
the global average temperature since 1880 [1], the polar ice caps are melting and the
sea level is rising, more and more often diﬀerent extreme weather events occurs in
unusual regions, and their power and frequency grow in areas where these events are
more common. Furthermore we are experiencing ecosystems loss and a biodiversity
crisis, an acidiﬁcation of the oceans, and drought and scarcity of water around the
world [2].
These eﬀects have given rise to more awareness regarding climate change with a clear
need for change in society. International bodies such as the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) organize meetings and summits, where scientiﬁc stud-
ies are discussed and suggestions are put forward to countries. The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) elaborates policies, regula-
tions and pledges that each country will have to realize to tackle climate changes.
In the Paris Agreement reached in 2016, UNFCCC member countries, set a goal for
keeping the increase of the average temperature below 1.5 °C above pre-industrial
levels [3].
People around the world are rising, targeting governments for not doing enough, and
demanding a declaration of climate and ecological emergency, more concrete actions
and drastic changes. Most scientists agree that human activities are the primarily
cause for climate change and we have reached a point of no return. From now on,
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
a drastically shift in human behaviour and mentality is needed, and act to make
this world and its ecosystem survive. To reach these changes it is essential to have
a radical transition to a low greenhouse gasses emission economy, which requires
changes in both society behaviour and in the energy production system itself. It is
obvious that there is a need for an increase in the penetration of renewable energy
sources in the energy mix [2].
1.1.2
The solution
Moving towards a low greenhouse gas emission economy is of fundamental importance
to relieving the impact of human activities on the environment. In order to stop, or
at the least slow down the process of global warming, it is crucial to accelerate the
transition towards a carbon-free economy, increase the awareness of the population,
and establish a strong political involvement regarding the future steps that have to
be taken to support this global transition. Diﬀerent actions have to be taken, in
particular regarding the energy sector. Renewable energy represents the next step,
which will strongly impact the energy system, playing a crucial role in the climate
change mitigation solution.
Economical growth is highly linked to the energy demand.
The structure of the
energy production, in order to avoid a collapse, needs to move from a fossil fuel
energy based source to a carbon-free one. A variety of energy sources are currently
available, from hydropower, solar energy, bio-energy, geothermal energy, wind energy
and ocean energy. The oﬀer is widely broad, and many of these resources are fairly
unexploited compared with their own full potential, around the globe.
1.1.3
Current status of renewable energy
The last decades have been characterized by an increase in the development of renew-
able energies. Over the 10 past years alone, the total installed capacity around the
world has doubled, reaching in 2018 more than 2300 GB compared to the 1300 GB
installed in 2009 [4]. In particular, a huge increase in the development has occurred in
the solar and wind energy industries, which are constantly increasing their installed
capacity [4]. This is largely due to a decrease of the cost of these technologies, driven
mainly by a combination of technological improvements such as eﬃciency and size
optimization, as well as an industrialization methods such as the development of an
economy of scale that brought the cost to competitiveness.
For wind energy in particular there have been huge technological advancements: the
hub heights have grown as well as the blade lengths, leading to higher capacity factors
and lower costs. The rate of the cumulative wind capacity has annually increased by
2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
an average of 15%. The leading countries for total capacity installed are China (184
GW), United States (94 GW), Germany (58 GW), India (35 GW) [4]. Wind energy
can play an important role in the transition towards a low greenhouses gasses emission
energy system. It has rapidly developed in the last years, achieving big improvement
in the technologies, allowing a decline of the cost of wind energy compared to other
solutions. For these reasons, it can be seen as one of the viable solution to achieve a
reduction in the emission of greenhouse gasses and reduce the use of fossil fuels.
1.2
Purpose of this study
In order to accomplish an ambitious low-carbon, ideally zero carbon, emission econ-
omy by 2050, renewable energies have to become the major share of energy production.
Its exploitation requires, nonetheless, a deeper investigation in the technologies, to
reach more eﬃcient energy production system and on the other side decrease the cost
of the energy.
It is important for policy makers to have a clear understanding of of the actual po-
tential of these resources to be able to implement the necessary measures. Thus, it
is important to produce transparent and clear predictions which will have to be con-
sider to produce the polices and the plans to continue the exponential development
of renewable energies. Therefore, in particular for the wind energy sector, it is funda-
mental to highlight the possible areas for wind exploitation and the actual capacity
potential available per each country.
The study of the favorable areas usually requires years of measurements and analysis,
but new technologies oﬀer a wide range of wind information around all the globe
with high accuracy.
An example is the Global Wind Atlas [5], which covers the
entire globe, and the New European Wind Atlas [6] for the EU countries and Turkey.
These databases oﬀer a preliminary analysis of the wind resource for any areas of the
world at a high accuracy, the Global Wind Atlas oﬀers a wind climate at 250 meter
resolution, whereas the New European Wind Atlas at 50 meters.
The challenges in wind farm planning can largely be divided in two: dealing with area
restriction criteria and making accurate assessments of the wind resource. The ﬁrst
issue of criteria restrictions, has a main eﬀect on the availability of areas where wind
farms can be planned and built. These criteria vary between countries and change
in time.
New policies can modify these restrictions, increasing or decreasing the
available areas. The second issue, being the quality of the wind resource assessment,
is of fundamental importance because it can overestimate or underestimate the wind
potential leading to highly wrong wind resource estimations.
To support the development of wind energy, particular attention must be given to the
3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
wind energy assessment. Nowadays, newer and more accurate data is available than
before and these data can be used to obtain predictions, plans and information for
a future development. In relation to the need of transparent and clear information
about the actual potential of wind energy this study aims to highlight the potential
for wind energy deployment in the EU and neighbouring countries.
A preliminary analysis of the state of the art literature regarding the potential wind
energy available around the globe revealed noticeable discrepancies in the results of
the studies depending on the methods used and on the diﬀerent assumptions applied,
mainly concerning the diﬀerent constraints considered for the calculations. According
to the IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change [3],
the range of the global technical potential of wind energy production lays between 19
and 125 PWh/year for the those studies where more constraints are considered, and
a range between 19 and 840 PWh/year for the limited constraint studies. Therefore,
considering the 160 PWh, total energy consumed in 2018 [7], this should provide an
idea of the high potential available.
Therefore, the ﬁrst part of this thesis will focus on the comparison of diﬀerent wind
atlases datasets, in particular the two available version of the Global Wind Atlas
(GWA2, GWA3) [5], the New European Wind Atlas (NEWA) [6], the Weather Re-
search and Forecasting (WRF, [8]) model simulations of NEWA and the ERA5 Re-
analysis. The statistics are made only on a geographical potential level, meaning that
constraints, such as the socio-economical and technical ones, are not considered for
this ﬁrst part of analysis. The aim is to show that using diﬀerent datasets can already
lead to diﬀerences in the results. For this part, since it is a geographical potential
analysis, the entire available land covering the countries investigated is taken into
account for the calculations.
After the ﬁrst more general comparison between the diﬀerent data available, the
project is then focused on the feasible areas where wind farms can be developed. The
aim is to highlight the feasible potential of wind energy on a country’s point of view.
Diﬀerent criteria are considered, producing diﬀerent scenarios. The available areas
are selected according to the current constraints applied nowadays, such as distance
to buildings, slopes, protected areas. Particular attention will be given to the wind
assessment, the analysis will be done based on the windiest area available from the
high-resolution wind atlas. This is considered to be a more realistic estimate of the
actual potential of the speciﬁc country rather than averaging over an area, since in
reality the wind is deployed in the optimal wind resource locations.
This should
result in higher available energy values per area, and in more realistic prediction.
Furthermore, diﬀerent assumptions and predictions on the future wind development
required to reach the next renewable energy goals for the next years will be realized.
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2.1
Research questions
Considering the purpose of this Master thesis, three main core questions will be
addressed:
• What are the eﬀects in wind power resources resulting from applying high-
resolution wind atlas data when investigating wind power resource?
• Are the wind energy scenarios developed to fulﬁl the the goal of the European
Commission for 2030 doable?
• How high-resolution wind atlas diﬀer from each other? How is the uncertainty
translated into wind power resources?
5
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Wind climate datasets
2.1
Wind climate datasets description
In this thesis diﬀerent datasets are analyzed and compared. This section presents a
description and the procedure through which these are produced.
The comparison is shown in Table 2.1.1, which mostly divides the datasets based on
the type: reanalysis and downscaling process, and a further comparison related to
the scale: large, medium and micro scale.
Dataset
Process
Scale
Domain
ERA5
Reanalysis
Large
Globe
WRF
Downscaling
Medium
Globe
NEWA
Downscaling
Micro
EU plus Turkey
GWA3
Downscaling
Micro
Globe (except the North and South
Poles and oﬀshore ocean areas)
GWA2
Downscaling
Micro
Globe (except the North and South
Poles and oﬀshore ocean areas)
Table 2.1.1: Comparison of datasets based on the process, scale and domain.
6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. WIND CLIMATE DATASETS
Figure 2.1.1: Mean wind speed at 100 m over the period 1989–2018 derived from:
(a) ERA5 Reanalysis; (b) NEWA Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) simula-
tions. The zoom-in shows the results for the island of Crete. Figure reproduced with
permission from Bjarke Olsen, DTU Wind.
Figure 2.1.2: Comparison of the long-term mean wind speed at 100 m from: (a)
ERA5 Reanalysis period 1989–2018, (b) NEWA Weather Research and Forecasting
(WRF) simulation over the period 1989–2018, and (c) Global Wind Atlas 3 (2009–
2018).
The details of the high-resolution Wind Atlas methodology is now introduced.
• Reanalysis: Large scale wind climate dataset
This process combines numerical model data with continuously updated obser-
vation into a dataset. It gives the state of atmosphere on a time space base
7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. WIND CLIMATE DATASETS
and on a coarse horizontal resolution. The ERA5 Reanalysis is produced by
the European Center of Medium Range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) using
data assimilated since 1979, applied in a ﬁxed numerical model [9]. Due to its
coarse resolution, the details of the terrain are misrepresented and the eﬀects
of the surface depending on the local and mesoscale are lacking. The average
over 30 years of period (1989–2018) will be used to force the mesoscale model
simulation for GWA3 and NEWA. Whereas, ERA-Interim, the old version of
ERA5 has been applied in GWA2.
• Mesoscale Modelling: Mesoscale wind climate
It is a downscaling process, producing simulation from the global wind climate
(Reanalysis) considering the atmosphere’s complex ﬂows and weather features
in order to describe and model the weather systems and weather fronts [10].
The Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model is the numerical weather
prediction system which simulates a wind climate data applying terrain features
to the Reanalysis data. The simulations were carried out by the New European
Wind Atlas (NEWA) project.
• Generalization: Generalize wind climate
In order to apply the microscale modelling to the mesoscale wind climate, a
generalization of the wind climate is necessary to remove the local WRF terrain
eﬀects. The reason is to avoid their double counting, which are modelled in
both the mesoscale modelling and in the microscale modelling, with the dif-
ference on the resolution. Hence in the mesoscale modelling the atmosphere’s
complex ﬂows and weather features are taken into consideration on a more
coarse resolution, whereas with the microscale modelling this happen at high
resolution.
• Microscale modelling: Microscale wind climate
It is a higher resolution downscaling process, based on the WAsP model. Start-
ing from the generalized wind climate, the terrain features are applied at high
resolution producing a high resolution wind climate, this makes possible the
capture of changes in wind speed and direction and local wind feature due to
the terrain characteristics.
NEWA, GWA3 and GWA2 are the results of microscale modelling. The diﬀer-
ence between the three datasets are shown in Figure 2.1.3.
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. WIND CLIMATE DATASETS
Figure 2.1.3: Flow diagrams of the creation of the GWA2, GWA3 and NEWA wind
atlas. The datasets are produced following the same procedure, the reanalysis data
are downscaled through mesoscale simulation, the results are then generalized and a
microscale simulation is realized. Notes for GWA2: (i) the 30 years were sub-sampled,
only two year representative have been selected; (ii) as consequence the simulation
with WRF do not cover the entire period but still are representative of the period;
(iii) the generalization has been applied with conservative parameters compared to
the generalization in GWA3 and NEWA where these parameters have been optimised.
[11]
The diﬀerences between the three high resolution wind atlas are illustrated in Figure
2.1.3. For GWA2, Reanalysis ERA-Interim [12] was used, which mainly diﬀers from
ERA5 for the lower spatial resolution. Furthermore, from the 30 years of reanal-
ysis only two years of representative months have been selected to force the WRF
mesoscale modelling. WRF, on consequence, represents the 10 years of simulation
although it does not cover the entire period, and diﬀerently from GWA3 and NEWA
it has a lower resolution of 9 km. Finally, the generalization process has been re-
alized conservatively, compared to GWA3 and NEWA where it has been optimised.
On the other side GWA3 and NEWA diﬀers principally for the length of mesoscale
simulation, 10 years for GWA3 and 30 years for NEWA. They have a diﬀerent high
resolution as results of the microscale modelling, 250 meters for GWA3 and GWA2,
and 50 meters for NEWA. Furthermore, diﬀerent terrain and roughness maps have
been applied in the microscale modelling phase. The mean wind speed at 100 meters
from GWA3 and NEWA are illustrated in Figure 2.1.4. It can be observed that the
two datasets slightly diﬀers from each others, GWA3 (a) shows higher wind speed
9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. WIND CLIMATE DATASETS
in Ireland and UK, and lower wind speed in north Italy and along the Balkan area
compared to NEWA (b).
Figure 2.1.4: Mean wind speed at 100 m for GWA3 (a) and NEWA (b).
10
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Methodology
Data base
Source
Resolution
New European Wind Atlas
https://data.dtu.dk/
50m
Global Wind Atlas 3
https://data.dtu.dk/
250 m
Global Wind Atlas 2
https://silo1.sciencedata.dk/
250 m
WRF
https://data.dtu.dk/
3 km
ERA 5
https://data.dtu.dk/
27.5 km
Elevation
https://data.dtu.dk/
50 m
Slope derived from EU-DEM
https://land.copernicus.eu/
25 m
RIX
https://data.dtu.dk/
50 m
Corine Land Cover (CLC) 2018,
https://land.copernicus.eu/
25 ha
World Database on Protected Areas
https://www.iucn.org/
1 km
Elevation map
https://data.dtu.dk/
50 m
Table 3.0.1: Data description.
In this study ﬁve diﬀerent datasets are compared and analyzed. The datasets are
provided on a GeoTIFF format, which is a useful format to store and organize raster
data. The main analysis and statistics are computed with Python (Python 3.7.0 64-
bit), the Rasterio library is used to open and read the GeoTIFF format ﬁles, while
the statistical computation are realized through a diﬀerent library, GDAL, a library
developed to translate and process raster images and geospatial vector data formats.
Furthermore, the handling of the datasets has been realized through the open source
QGIS (version 3.8 Zanzibar). QGIS is an application through which geospatial data
can be handled, viewed and modiﬁed, this application has been used in particular to
prepare the data for the analysis. This open source application is free and is structured
with a plugin architecture. Hence new features and functions can be added to enrich
its functionalities. For this study two main plugins were used: SAGA and GRASS.
The methodology for this study can be divided in diﬀerent phases, which correspond
11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
to diﬀerent layers applied to the data in the study. The procedure of each phase is
covered in detail below.
3.1
Preliminary Analysis
A preliminary analysis investigates the eﬀect of the spatial resolution of the three
datasets: GWA2, GWA3 and NEWA, as they are provided at diﬀerent spatial resolu-
tion. High resolution results in high computational loads. For this particular study,
an hypothesis is carried out and investigated in the relative section. Being this study
a general evaluation of the wind potential along the European countries, it is as-
sumed to be not necessary a resolution of the wind atlas at 50 or 250 meters. Hence,
a spatial resolution of 1 kilometers is considered a balance between a valid quality of
the wind atlases, without aﬀecting the results of the statistics, and requiring lower
computational loads. This hypothesis is therefore investigated in chapter 4.1.1.
Figure 3.1.1: Procedure applied in chapter 4.1.1.
The analysis is processed on Python through the gdalwarp tool. Gdalwarp is used to
mosaic, re-project and warp images, like raster maps. Before computing the analysis,
the raster map with the data of mean wind speed and mean wind power density
are prepared through the open source QGIS, see Figure 3.1.1. The raster maps are
extracted within the countries’ borders. The borders are described by polygons in the
World Map, a vector map download by: www.naturalearthdata.com. It delineates a
10 m Cultural Map representing a vector layer in the form of geospatial shape ﬁle
which contains all the countries in the world. Once the map is uploaded to QGIS, the
shape ﬁle of the desired areas are extracted using the "Select features by area
12
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
or single click" tool and the vector is saved as a new shape ﬁle. It has to be
appended a further analysis required by the countries which own overseas territory.
This is to say for e.g. France and Norway. In this case an additional border extraction
is required in order to select only the areas on the European continent. Therefore,
from the same source of the world map, www.naturalearthdata.com, a map including
the internal administrative boundaries is downloaded. Thus, it is possible to select
the speciﬁc provinces on the European continent and create the relative vector ﬁle.
These shape ﬁles are then used to mask the Geotiﬀﬁles of the datasets through the
gdalwarp tool in Python. In speciﬁc, the command "-crop to line" option is used
to extract the raster maps following the shape ﬁle coordinates. A raster map in the
format of a Geotiﬀﬁle with the shape of each country is then created.
Once the countries maps are produced, the data are averaged, using from the gdalwarp
tool the "re-sampling" method "-r:average" with diﬀerent resolution levels. The
average is done in degrees for the GWA datasets which are provided in CRS 4326,
and in kilometers for the NEWA one, since its coordinate system is the CRS 3035 in
kilometers.
Finally, all the Geotiﬀﬁles of all the countries at diﬀerent resolutions are generated,
hence, a statistical comparison in Python is performed and the diﬀerences are then
inspected and the results showed.
A further analysis is realized in this chapter regarding the correlation between the
elevation of a country and the behavior of the mean wind speed and power density
curves.
Therefore, an elevation map provided by the DTU data archive, is used.
The map covering the European countries is again extracted within the countries’
boundaries, through the gdalwarp "-crop to line" and the relative shape ﬁles.
Once the raster ﬁles are generated, the statistics are computed through Python and
the results are analyzed, see chapter 4.1.2.
3.2
Phase 1: Wind Atlases comparison by country
In chapter 4.2 all the datasets are analyzed to investigate the similarity of the data.
The comparison is carried out at a geophysical potential level, meaning that all the
land available is used to produce statistics and no constraints are applied. Conse-
quently, the raster ﬁle for each country referring to the mean wind speed and the
mean wind power density are produced as described previously from the vector ﬁles
and averaged through the gdalwarp tool, see Figure 3.2.1. The statistics and the
comparison are realized in Python and illustrated in the corresponding section.
13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.2.1: Procedure applied in chapter 4.4.
3.3
Phase 2: Wind Atlases comparison with topo-
graphical constraints
Not all the areas are suitable for wind power development. The diﬀerent constraints
are investigated as individual layers, then depending on the phase study, this layers
are combined together to extrapolate the suitable areas for this analysis. In chapter
4.3, the physical characteristics are examined, such as slope and the ruggedness index,
RIX. These two layers are applied to the countries’ maps. The explanation of the
parameter and of the values selected for the masking procedure are described in the
relative chapter, here only the technical methodology is presented. The raster maps
with the wind speed and wind power density for the three datasets, GWA3, GWA2
and NEWA, are then masked with the two layers of slope and RIX as described in
Figure 3.3.1.
For this analysis the maps are provided in the CRS 3035 projection. The RIX map
is downloaded from the DTU data archive. This raster maps contains the informa-
tion of the RIX values as a pixel grid, where each pixel contains a value. There-
fore, to remove the areas which not fulﬁll the requirements chosen for this study,
these areas are ﬁrst selected and then removed from the dataset map. The "Raster
Calculator" tool is used to select the areas where the RIX is larger than 5%, the
chosen parameter for this analysis, see chapter 4.3.
Trough the algebraic expres-
sions line: (Raster(RIX) < 0.05) the map will give a value of 1 for the areas below
5% and 0 to the area which contains larger values. Subsequently, the areas covered
by 0 are removed, again applying the "Raster Calculator" tool: ( Raster(RIX)
/ (Raster(RIX)>0)). This method assigns a NAN value for the area of the map
where the RIX is larger than 5%. Next, QGIS is used to mask the RIX mask to the
NEWA mean wind speed map, following the procedure "Raster Calculator" tool:
14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
((Raster(RIX) =1)*Raster(NEWA).
Figure 3.3.1: Slope and RIX maps are analyzed and two layers are created in order
to create an exclusion map for each country. The wind atlas are then masked by this
exclusion map and the resulting data are analyzed and compared.
A similar approach is used to produce the slope layer. A slope map is provided by the
European system Copernicus [13], it oﬀers processed data with the slope information
along Europe on a CRS projection 3035, the same as the NEWA one. The map is in a
Geotiﬀformat. The ﬁle contains the information of the slope along all the European
area in a pixel grid, giving a value to each pixel between 0 to 250, where 0 is a 90
degree steep slope, and 250 illustrates a 0 degree steep terrain. A table illustrating
the conversion can be founded on the Appendix.
For this layer a slope steeper than 20% is selected, again here is illustrated only
the procedure to extract the area, an explanation and reference can be found in the
relative chapter. The "Raster Calculator" tool is used to select the areas with
values larger than 245, equal to 11.5 degrees, the equivalent of a slope of 20%. The
new raster ﬁle produced after the calculation is a map where the areas that have to
be removed are masked as 0 and the areas that fulﬁll the requirement has 1 as value.
Again, the areas covered by the 0 values are removed and the raster maps of wind
speed for the NEWA datasets, where the RIX constrained area was before removed,
is now masked with the slope map and the masked terrains are ﬁnally extracted.
Once the masked NEWA map is produced, the map is converted into a vector map
by the "Polygonize (Raster to Vector)" tool. Now, a vector map with diﬀerent
classes is produced.
This map and the countries’ vector ﬁles are then opened in
QGIS and the relative countries maps are created extracting the area fulﬁlling the
requirements. To each country the RIX-slope vector map is subtracted applying the
geoprocessing vector tool: "Overlay" where the input layer is the country’s vector ﬁle
15
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
and the overlay layer is the NEWA RIX-slope previously converted to a vector map.
The output is a map showing the areas overlapped by the NEWA map. Figure 3.3.2
illustrates an example of the processed zone over Geramany, the area illustrated are
the area where the RIX provides values lower than 5% and the slope does not exceed
the 20% of steepness. The shape ﬁle containing the polygons of the masked areas for
each country is ﬁnally ready to be used to mask the Geotiﬀmaps of NEWA, GWA2
and GWA3 as it has been done in the previous section using the gdalwarp -cutline
in Python. These new extracted wind atlases are then analyzed and compared, see
Figure 3.3.1.
Figure 3.3.2: Vector ﬁle of Germany where RIX and slope constraints have been
removed.
3.4
Phase 3: Wind Atlases comparison for suitable
terrain
In chapter 4.4 additional layers are removed in order to obtain the suitable area for
wind power development, the methodology describing the technical procedure through
QGIS is hence presented.
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.4.1: Several layers are applied in this phase producing an exclusion map.
The countries’ areas are then extracted and applied to wind atlas maps of NEWA,
GWA3 and GWA2 for mean wind speed, mean power density and capacity factor atlas.
Note that RIX is not consider in this phase, as it does not represent a constraint for
wind energy development.
A map illustrating the land cover of the European countries is downloaded from the
Eionet network National Reference Centres Land Cover, which produces the national
Corine Land Cover databases, a database with a description of the land cover into
44 classes [14]. For this study the update of 2018 has been used. A ﬁst inspection of
the layers is needed to select the most relevant for this study. Therefore, from these
44 classes, 10 are chosen. (See the relative chapter and for the classes’ selection ).
The following Figure illustrate the land cover map where each class is described by a
color, see table on the bottom left of Figure 3.4.2.
The map is uploaded to QGIS. The projection is CRS:3035. It is important that all
the ﬁles are in the same projection, therefore, the shape ﬁle consisting of the countries’
borders, which are given in the CRS:4026, are converted into the same projection,
and the raster ﬁle with the Corine data are extracted for each country. Furthermore,
CRS:3035 is given in kilometers which is easier to handle when applying buﬀer zones.
An example of the German country’s area extracted by the Corine land cover map is
shown in Figure 3.4.3.
17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.4.2: Corine Land Cover map illustration from QGIS.
Figure 3.4.3: German Corine land cover raster map.
The 10 classes selected for this study are then divided into three main lists: Urban
fabric (111, 112), Water bodies (411, 412, 421, 422, 423, 511, 512) and Transport unit
(124), see chapter 4.4 for further description.
18
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.4.4: Production of diﬀerent layers of constraint from the Corine land cover
raster map. Each layer is ﬁrst extracted within the country, then a buﬀer area is
applied and ﬁnally a vector exclusion map is produced. The diﬀerent layers are then
combined together generating the exclusion map used to extract the suitable area for
each country.
These classes are extracted using the raster tool "Raster calculation". For ex-
ample the Urban fabric are selected through the following statement in the "Raster
Calculation" tool: (Corine map != 111)+(Corine map != 112), the results for
Germany are illustrated in Figure 3.4.5, where the black pixel correspond to the Ur-
ban fabric. Hence, three new raster maps are created, one for each main list of classes
(Urban fabric, Water bodies and Transport unit).
The raster maps are then converted, using the SAGA tools "Vectorising Grid
Classes" into a vector ﬁle. The raster map contains two types of pixel values, one
refers to the constrained area and one to the rest of the country area. The pixel show-
ing the constrained areas is selected as "Class Identifier", this value is therefore
vectorised as "One single class specified by class identifier" into a class
as "Single multy-polygon object". This shape ﬁle represents the constraints as
vector, see the results in Figure 3.4.6. Note that although the vector map seems to
have more area than the raster map, Figure 3.4.5, this is only a visual eﬀect as the
vector map when zoomed out highlights the border of the vectors area making the
areas larger from a visual aspect.
This vector map is now buﬀered, following the selected criteria explained in the
relative chapter, through the vector tool "Buffer". A ﬁxed distance in meters is
applied and the results are then "Dissolved" in this way there will not be overlapping
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
area as the buﬀer’s boundaries are dissolved merging in an unique area, Figure 3.4.7.
Again this is realized to each layer (Urban fabric, Water bodies and Transport unit).
Finally, the three layers are subtracted from the original country border shape ﬁle by
applying the vector tool "Difference" through an iterative procedure for each layer,
Figure 3.4.8 shows the German areas masked by the urban constraints, whereas Figure
3.4.9 illustrates the German areas masked considering the three classes of constraints:
Urban fabric, Water bodies and Transport unit. At the end a shape ﬁle of the masked
area is obtained for each country.
Figure
3.4.5:
Urban fabric:
raster map.
Figure 3.4.6: Urban fabric: vec-
tor map.
Figure
3.4.7:
Urban
fabric
buﬀered: vector map.
Figure 3.4.8: Suitable area with
urban area removed.
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.4.9: Suitable areas with urban area. transport units and water bodies
constraints layer removed.
A number of characteristics of certain countries, for example the Water bodies in
Finland, tend to create large ﬁles and require high computational loads translate in
extremely long computation time. In order to solve this problem, from the source
www.naturalearthdata.com, the World Map representing internal administrative bound-
aries is downloaded. This map allows to divide a country into its provinces, creating
smaller areas, sub-regions. This reduces the size of large ﬁles. These layers, once the
vectorising and buﬀering procedure is applied, are then subtracted from the complete
area, see Figure 3.4.9.
In a second stage a new layer is added to the exclusion map: the protected areas. The
map data are provided by the World Database on Protected Areas. The vector ﬁle
is again uploaded to QGIS. Since it covers the entire world, a ﬁrst extraction of the
area of interest is applied. The map is overlapped by the European map, including
all the countries of this analysis, and the area overlapped are extracted through the
QGIS vector tool "Clip". The WDPA map is in CRS: 4326, therefore it is extracted
and saved as a new ﬁle in CRS:3035 projection.
The map is then subdivided in smaller zone. Once the sub-zones of Protected areas are
extracted, a distance buﬀer is applied through the "Buffer" vector tool. Again this
chapter provides only the methodology, the explanation and justiﬁcation of diﬀerent
criteria applied are explained in the reference chapter. This new layer is combined
with the ones previously extracted, Figure 3.4.12. A ﬁnal layer representing the slope
is ﬁnally removed from the area obtained. Figure 3.4.13 shows the ﬁnal vector ﬁle
for Germany: all the exclusion layers have been applied and removed, the remaining
area represents the suitable terrain for wind development applied in this study.
21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.4.10: Protected areas
buﬀered: vector map
Figure 3.4.11: Socio suitable ar-
eas: vector map
Figure 3.4.12:
Topographical
constrain: vector map.
Figure 3.4.13: Socio-technically
suitable areas: vector map.
22
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Wind Atlas comparison
4.1
Preliminary Analysis
4.1.1
Investigation of wind climatology at diﬀerent resolutions
The data used in this study were produced at diﬀerent resolutions: GWA2 and GWA3
at 250 m resolution, whereas NEWA has a resolution of 50 m. To analyze and produce
the statistics, high resolution data as 50 m, or 250 m, requires heavy computational
loads. Therefore, a pre-analysis is realized to inspect and quantify diﬀerences given by
averaging the wind atlas values at diﬀerent resolutions. Furthermore, it was used as a
learning phase, to get familiar with the type of data and with the databases. In this
section the NEWA raster maps of the mean wind speed and mean power density are
averaged at diﬀerent resolutions. The diﬀerent resolutions are the following: 100 m,
250 m 500 m, 1000 m.
The hypothesis is that an average of 1 km can be chosen without aﬀecting strongly
the results. Two countries have been selected for this analysis, taking into account
their terrain characteristics: Poland and Switzerland. Poland represents a ﬂat terrain
with good wind resource, Switzerland on the other side represents a very complex
mountainous terrain, with good wind resources.
After the new Geotiﬀﬁles of wind atlas raster maps representing the countries’ area
are created, a statistical comparison is carried out, the rolling mean is computed for
all the sub data sets at a country level and the diﬀerence are then inspected.
The rolling mean, represents a moving average. The values of each grid point inside
the raster map, are sorted in a descending order. The data are then subdivided in
diﬀerent subsets and the average mean is computed. This statistic is applied along
all this thesis in each analysis. The reason is because it allows to extract the windiest
23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
sites over the area inspected. Over an area, places can have low or high wind speed,
but the area subjected to wind development should be the most favourable one,
therefore, the areas deﬁned by the highest wind resource. Hence, if we look at the
average computed over the total area we will obtain the average of the wind atlas for
the entire area, considering low and high wind resource places. Whereas, when we
look at the 10%, only the 10% most windy area will be considered in the average.
This permits to the higher resources to emerge in the averages. Now, the rolling
mean of the diﬀerent resolution for both countries and both statistics are illustrated
in Figures 4.1.1 and 4.1.2.
Figure 4.1.1: Rolling mean of the wind speed for Poland (a) and Switzerland (b)
at diﬀerent resolution: 1000m, 500m, 250m, 100m.
Figure 4.1.2: Rolling mean of the power density for Poland (a) and Switzerland (b)
at diﬀerent resolution: 1000 m, 500 m, 250 m, 100 m.
The two ﬁgures (Fig. 4.1.1 and Fig. 4.1.2) do not show particularly large diﬀerences
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
between the curves. The diﬀerence in the mean wind speed between the 100 m average
resolution and the 1km average resolution is 0.11 m s−1 for Poland and 1.47 m s−1
for Switzerland for the windiest values, whereas it decreases substantially at the 50%
windiest areas, with 0.01 m s−1 for Poland and 0.14 m s−1 for Switzerland. The same
analysis is carried out for other countries regarding the mean wind speed. In general
the countries with higher variation between the resolutions are the one characterized
by mountainous terrain, whereas countries with lower diﬀerences in the variation,
are characterized by a simpler terrain. Furthermore it is observed that this diﬀerence
drastically decrease for the 50% windiest areas, this leads to a conclusion that the more
data are used to compute the mean the less impact will have a diﬀerent resolution.
Regarding the mean power density shown in Figure 4.1.2, the diﬀerence for Poland
is actually low, 6.43 W m−2 at the 10% windiest area and 1.26 W m−2 at the 50%
windiest area, Switzerland on the other side shows higher diﬀerences, 307.38 W m−2
at the 10% windiest area and 25.34 W m−2 at the 50% windiest area. Once more,
is clear also for the mean power density that the more values are considered for the
average the lower will be the diﬀerence between the averaged resolution, and the
complex the terrain the higher the diﬀerences will be.
4.1.2
Elevation Analysis
In this section a deeper analysis regarding the eﬀect of the terrain characteristics on
the results of the wind climatology is carried out.
Figure 4.1.3: Rolling mean for diﬀerent countries: Denmark, Lithuania, Spain and
Switzerland. For the wind speed (a) and for the power density (b).
From Figure 4.1.3 the diﬀerent behaviour of the rolling mean for wind speed (a) and
the power density (b) are clearly visible between the countries. The curves showing a
25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
more ﬂat curve are Lithuania and Denmark, compared to the ones from Switzerland
and Spain, where the the curves show a steeper slope in the ﬁrst half of the values.
An analysis of the elevation map is now realized in order to understand the eﬀect
that diﬀerent terrain characteristics could have on the wind atlas.
The elevation map is downloaded from the DTU data archive. The country border
shape ﬁle are used again, as explained in the methodology section, to extract the
elevation characteristics within the country’s area. From these ﬁles, the standard
deviation of the values is then computed. The standard deviation is chosen as statistic
for this analysis, as it gives an idea of the variations in terrain height. Now, the
correlation between the behavior of the rolling mean slope and the standard deviation
of the terrain is investigated. The standard deviation is plotted against the diﬀerence
between the 10% and 50% windiest area values.
Figure 4.1.4: Example of elevation map downloaded form DTU data archive: Aus-
tria elevation map [m].
Figure 4.1.5, shows the diﬀerence between the mean power density of the 10% windiest
areas and the one at 50% windiest area, plotted per each country against the standard
deviation of the terrain. The results seem to follow a linear trend, where a large
standard deviation related to high variation of the terrain, seem to lead higher values
in the mean power density diﬀerence, which indicates a steeper curve in the ﬁrst half
of the rolling mean as shown by Switzerland and Spain in Figure 4.1.3 (b). On the
other side, ﬂat terrain have a low standard deviation and seem to have also a low
diﬀerence in the mean power density, as shown by Lithuania and Denmark in Figure
4.1.3 (b). Furthermore, from Figure 4.1.5 the higher diﬀerences in the values of the
mean power density are shown by the points laying in the upper right part of the
ﬁgure, and as a matter of facts these points represent the countries characterized by a
26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
more complex terrain, such as Switzerland (che), Austria (au), Italy (it), Slovenia (sl),
Croatia (cr), Albania (al) Montenegro (mo), Greece (gr) and Bosnia (bo). Whereas
countries with a simple and ﬂat terrain, such as Lithuania (li), Estonia (es), Latvia
(la), Denmark (dk) and Hungary (hu), show small diﬀerences along the mean power
density, reason of a ﬂat behaviour of the slope.
Figure 4.1.5: Relationship between the standard deviation of the terrain and the
diﬀerence between the 10 and 50% windiest areas of the mean power density per each
country.
Performing the same procedure, diﬀerent areas, manually selected along Europe, are
analyzed. These areas are extracted following the terrain characteristics. From the
European Mountain Areas in Europe – Final Report [15], the terrain is inspected and
the following parameters are observed: mountainous elevation and standard deviation
of altitude. On this base 11 areas are extracted trying to optimize the area in order
to include similar terrains and diﬀerent wind climatology, see Figure 4.1.6. Therefore
the area selected follow in broad terms three main categories:
• High mean and high standard deviation ( zones number 2: the Alps, 5: the
Apennines, 11: the Balkan area)
• High mean low standard deviation ( zones number 3: central Spain, 6: Slovakia,
8: north Portugal)
• Low mean and low standard deviation ( zones number 1: Poland, 4: north
Germany, 7: Finland, 9: south UK, 10: Hungary)
27
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
The zones are illustrated in Figure 4.1.6 and their speciﬁc characteristics are described
in Table 4.1.1. For this analysis the data to compute the diﬀerence in the power
density results are computed from the GWA3 dataset.
Zone
mean
sd
Coordinates
[m]
[m]
[xmin ymin xmax ymax]
1
129.50
43.78
[16 51 23 54]
2
1276.67
697.65
[8 46 15 48]
3
859.47
289.37
[-4 38 -1 43]
4
222.48
184.47
[7 50 14 53]
5
328.87
403.34
[11 41 15 44]
6
411.43
260.43
[16 48 23 50]
7
121.95
36.09
[23 61 28 64]
8
747.37
299.64
[-8 40 -6 43]
9
96.46
56.95
[-3 51 0 53]
10
134.67
72.42
[17 46 22 48]
11
401.99
472.38
[22 41 36 43]
Table 4.1.1: Description of the zones selected: mean and the standard deviation of
the elevation data and the coordinates of the area selected.
The points in Figure 4.1.7 represent the results of the diﬀerent zone analyzed, and
seem to follow a narrower path along the linear correlation line, as shown by the
orange line. The three diﬀerent categories seem to be grouped together. In conclusion,
a relationship is shown between the terrain characteristics and the behavior of the
mean wind power density. This will be addressed in the next section.
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.1.6: Elevation map representing the selected area of study: 1-11.
Figure 4.1.7: Relationship between the standard deviation of the terrain and the
diﬀerence between the 10 and 50% windiest areas of the mean power density per each
country for the 11 zones.
29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
4.2
Wind Atlases comparison by country
In this section 5 diﬀerent database are investigated and compared: New European
Wind Atlas (NEWA), Global Wind Atlas 3 (GWA3), Global Wind Atlas 2 (GWA2),
the average of the 30 years (1989–2018) of WRF simulation and the average of the
30 years of reanalysis (1989–2018) from ERA5.
For this analysis NEWA, GWA2 and GWA3 are averaged at a 1 km × 1 km resolution,
whereas WRF is used at the given 3 km × 3 km resolution and ERA5 at 31 km × 31 km
resolution. The diﬀerence in the resolution can be observed in Figure 4.2.1, where
the mean wind speed from the 5 datasets over Ireland is illustrated as an example.
The diﬀerence in the mean wind speed between the diﬀerent resolution wind atlas is
evident. For ﬁgure (e), the coarse resolution of ERA5 is visible in the lack of terrain
details which aﬀects the wind speed, hence local ﬂows are not shown. On the other
side, ﬁgure (d) captures these local wind ﬂows, although still in a lower resolution
compare to (a), (b) and (c) which show higher details of the terrain eﬀect along the
wind ﬂows.
Figure 4.2.1: Mean wind speed map representing Ireland for the 5 datasets: NEWA
(a), GWA3 (b), GWA2 (c), NEWA WRF (d) and ERA5 (e). It can be observed the
diﬀerent resolution in the missing of local wind feature details for the low resolution
for ERA5 and the diﬀerences in the mean wind speed between the datasets with same
resolution for (a) (b) and (c), where (c) shows lower values.
30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
The comparison between the diﬀerent datasets is carried out on a geophysical poten-
tial, this means that all the area available are taken into account, without considering
any constraints. The data sets are extracted within the countries’ border, following
the procedure explained in the Methodology chapter. The rolling mean of the wind
speed and power density is computed for each country at each database. To under-
stand the magnitude of the variables for each country (mean wind speed and mean
power density), ﬁrst, a map showing the GWA3 results for the 10% and the 50%
windiest value is illustrated, Figure 4.2.2 and Figure 4.2.6. The diﬀerences along the
database for each country are shown by a bar plot where the rolling mean values for
10% windiest and 50% windiest areas are grouped by country, Figure 4.2.3 and Figure
4.2.4 for the wind speed and Figure 4.2.7 and Figure 4.2.8 for the power density. A
table showing the respective values can be found in the Appendixes. Whereas, to
investigate which data set provides the highest value per each country at the 10%
and the 50% windiest value, a colour map representing the European countries shows
the colour of the database with the highest value, Figure 4.2.5 and Figure 4.2.9. The
results are now presented for the mean wind speed analysis.
Figure 4.2.2: The mean wind speed for the 10% windiest areas (left map) and at
50% windiest areas (right map) are illustrated per each country. The GWA3 has
been selected to illustrate these color maps. The same color scale is used in both
maps, lighter blue for lower values, darker blue for higher values. Higher mean wind
speeds are located around the North sea, where the colors tend to dark blue. The
East Europe shows lower mean wind speed characterized by a light blue color.
31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.2.3: Bar plot with the comparison of the mean wind speed values ( m s−1),
for the 10% windiest areas for each database. The bar plot allows a more visible
comparison between the diﬀerent database. Each color corresponds to a determined
database, blue for the NEWA, orange for the GWA3, green for GWA2, red for the
WRF and purple for the ERA5.
32
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.2.4: Bar plot illustrating the same results of Figure 4.2.3 with the mean
wind speed for the 50% windiest areas.
33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.2.5: Highest data set for 10% windiest area (left map), 50% windiest area
(right map), each color corresponds to a determined database: white NEWA, light
green GWA3, green GWA2, dark green WRF. In general is visible a predominance of
highest results for the GWA 3 in central European countries, and of NEWA in the
east European countries
In Figure 4.2.2, the darker areas denote higher wind speeds and prevail in the Nordic
countries around the North sea. The countries over Central Europe show similar val-
ues, on the other side a lower wind speed is encountered in the East Mediterranean
area and in particular in the Balkan zone. Figure 4.2.3 and Figure 4.2.4 show the
diﬀerences among the database. A ﬁrst clear evidence are the lowest values obtained
in some countries by ERA5, in some cases it gives almost half of the wind speed mea-
sured by the other four data sets. GWA3 and NEWA show often close results whereas
GWA2 has slightly lower values except for countries particularly mountainous: Alba-
nia, Austria, Norway and Switzerland. WRF follows the trend of GWA3 and NEWA,
it gives higher values for Ireland, United Kingdom, Italy and Czechia, see Figure
4.2.5. In general the diﬀerences between the database shown in Figure 4.2.3 and in
Figure 4.2.4, excluding ERA5, lay in a range of 1 m s−1, see also Table in the Appendix.
Minimal diﬀerences for countries like Greece, Italy, Norway and Cyprus where it ex-
tends in a range of 0.1 −0.5 m s−1, and higher for countries like Ireland and United
Kingdom where the values spread in a range larger than 2 m s−1. The aforementioned
low values provided by Reanalysis ERA5 are found in the countries characterized by
complex terrain, such as Albania, Austria, Bosnia, Italy, Kosovo, Macedonia, Mon-
tenegro, Slovenia and Switzerland. This reﬂects the results presented in [11], where
an underestimation of the average mean wind speed by ERA5 against the 291 masts,
validated in the study. [11] measure an average of −1.50 ± 1.30 m s−1 bias, compared
to the 0.02±0.78 m s−1 for WRF and 0.28±0.76 m s−1 for NEWA. This bias increases
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
for ERA5 in location deﬁne by complex terrain, reaching a −2.64±1.17 m s−1 bias. At
the same time, this behaviour is not presented in the countries characterized by a ﬂat
and simple terrain, such as Denmark, Estonia, Latvia and Netherlands, here ERA5
provides results close to the other database, Figure 4.2.3 and in Figure4.2.4. There-
fore, these lower values provided by ERA5 can be linked to the lack of information
related to variation in the terrain complexity, which can be observed in Figure 4.2.1.
The coarse resolution misses the higher wind speed in particular along the mountain
ridges and the coastline, measuring lower values in the rolling mean. Finally, the
slightly lower results observed for GWA2 in Figure 4.2.3 and in Figure4.2.4, can be
explained by the diﬀerences in the generalization process applied to GWA2 compared
to the other database, and in the diﬀerent mesoscale modelling, described in Figure
2.1.3.
Now the same statistics are produced for the mean power density for the same data
sets except for ERA5, as it was not available.
Figure 4.2.6: The mean wind power density for the 10% windiest areas (left map)
and at 50% windiest areas (right map) for each country. The GWA3 has been selected
to illustrate these color maps. The same color scale is used in both maps, lighter
orange for lower power density values, darker orange for higher power density values.
Higher mean wind speed are located around the North sea and in the Alpine countries,
where the colors tend to a darker orange. East Europe countries show lower values
characterized by a light orange color.
35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.2.7: Bar plot illustrating the same results of Figure 6.4 with the mean
power density for the 10% windiest areas per country
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.2.8: Bar plot illustrating the same results of Figure 4.2.7 with the mean
power density for the 50% windiest areas per country
37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.2.9:
Highest data set for 10% windiest area (left map), 50% windiest
area (right map). It illustrates the same analysis of Figure 4.2.5 for the mean power
density. In general a predominance of highest values for the GWA 3 except for the
most mountainous countries, where NEWA tends to higher values.
Figure 4.2.6 represents the mean values of the power density for the 10% and 50%
windiest areas. Again, higher means are given by the countries around the North sea,
moreover, other two Alpines countries show high values, Switzerland and Austria.
Lower power density is founded in the East European countries, the Balkan area
and in Finland. The two bar plots, Figure 4.2.7 and Figure 4.2.8, illustrate a clear
diﬀerence between GWA2 and the other three data sets, GWA2 has lower values
along the majority of the countries, in particular for United Kingdom and Ireland,
whereas it shows closer values to the other data sets in Norway and Switzerland,
where it gives also the highest results, and Austria, Albania, Montenegro and Italy,
again, all countries characterized by a more complex terrain. WRF tends to lower
values compared to GWA3 and NEWA, in particular in countries characterized by
a more complex orography, which can be referred to the previous observation of
overestimation of WAsP modelling in complex terrain. Overall, GWA3 tends to higher
values than NEWA.
38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
4.3
Wind Atlases comparison with topographical con-
straints
The comparison between the data sets is now realized taking into account the topo-
graphical constraint. The purpose is to investigate how the terrain aﬀects the wind
atlas. As previously observed, in section 4.1.2, it seems to be a correlation, wheres
the more complex the terrain is, the larger spread on the distribution of the variables
lays.
This analysis will provide a more realistic view of the data, as some of the area not
suitable for wind development are removed and not considered in the statistics. The
comparison is now produced for the only three high resolution data sets: NEWA,
GWA3 and GWA2.
Figure 4.3.1: Countries’ vector map with slope and RIX constraint area removed.
Each country is represented by a diﬀerent colour. These countries vector maps are
used to mask the wind atlas.
39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
The ﬁrst constraint investigated is the slope of the terrain. Steep terrains are not
suitable for wind development as wind turbines cannot be build. There are several
reasons.
First, in a technical-economical point of view the installation is diﬃcult
and expensive, the construction of the foundation is almost impossible and the costs
required for the transportation to the site would be extremely high, therefore it is
not economical convenient [16]. Secondly, the complex terrain and in particular steep
slopes produce dangerous phenomena for wind turbines, such as ﬂow separation,
change in direction, increase in speed and in the occurring of strong turbulence, and
it has been tested that wind turbines on steep terrain are subject to higher loads
[17]. Therefore, steep terrains are removed from the area available. For this analysis,
slopes steeper than 20% are selected [18]. A slope map is provided by the European
system Copernicus [13], which oﬀers processed data with the slope information along
Europe. The procedure is addressed in the Methodology section 3.3.
A further parameter considered in this analysis is the ruggedness index, the RIX
parameter. It represents a measure of the terrain complexity and it is deﬁned as the
fraction of the terrain around a given site steeper than a critical slope (Bowen and
Mortensen, 1995). In this case, the RIX has been computed averaging the slopes
within a radius of 3.5 km, and it measures the percentage of the terrain which is
over 16.7◦steep [11]. This parameter is examined together with the slope analysis
because it relates to the terrain complexity. However, it has to be noted that this
parameter does not represent a constraint for the extraction of suitable areas for
wind development. The RIX parameter provides information about the quality of
the estimation of the wind atlas itself, an idea of its uncertainties. Hence, a RIX close
to 0 represents low or smooth hill terrain, where no ﬂow separation occurs, therefore
WAsP, the microscale model, leads to accurate results. Whereas, for larger values of
RIX, in particular larger than 5%, the terrain is considered as steep hills or slopes
and therefore a ﬂow separation is expected, aﬀecting the ﬂow model in WAsP and an
overestimation due to the orographic speed-ups is expected [11].
Diﬀerent studies have been carried out to measure the accuracy of the prediction under
rugged terrains, with the conclusion that complex terrain can lead to large prediction
errors [19] [20]. Hence, it is recommended to do further analysis in the case where
the RIX index is higher than 5%. In this section, the areas covered by a RIX over 5%
are selected and removed from the analysis. This will remove areas not constrained
for wind energy development, instead it will remove the area that could be aﬀected
by larger uncertainties in the wind atlas, in particular by overestimation of the wind
climatology. The RIX map is downloaded by the DTU data archive. Through QGIS
open source, the European area is selected and the areas over 5% RIX value are ﬁrst
extracted and then removed from the data sets map. The procedure is described in
the Methodology section 3.3. The terrain masked by the slope and RIX constraints
are illustrated in Figure 4.3.1. To better understand the eﬀect of the RIX and slope
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
constraints for each country, the total area extracted is measured and expressed as a
share of the total country area. The results are illustrated in the Figure 4.3.2.
Figure 4.3.2: Countries’ area comparison between the country’s total area and the
extracted area after the the slope and RIX constraints have been applied. The Figure
illustrates the amount of area available extracted and the relative share of the total
country area is showed in the percentage above each bars.
From Figure 4.3.2, the most mountainous and complex terrains are Albania, Austria,
Bosnia, Greece, Macedonia, Montenegro, Norway, Slovenia and Switzerland, where
the areas are more than halved after the masking procedure. At the same time also
France, Italy and Spain undergo to a strong reduction of the available areas. This is
related to the location of the major mountain ranges: the Alps, the Pyrenees and the
Balkans. Contrarily, the centre Europe is characterized by ﬂat terrain, therefore, for
the rest of the countries, the available areas are reduced for only a small percentage.
Being completely unaﬀected for countries like Denmark, Estonia and Latvia.
Now, the same analysis to compare the data sets realized in the previous section, is
reproduced. The wind climatology covering the areas not suitable due to the slope
constraint and with high uncertainties due to high RIX values are removed. Following
the previous study where the elevation was investigated to ﬁnd some correlation
with the behaviour of the parameters, and where a correlation between the standard
deviation of the elevation and the diﬀerence between the power output was founded,
it is now interesting to see how these behaviours change once the complex a steeper
terrains are removed.
41
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.3.3: Comparison of the mean wind speed values ( m s−1), at the 10% (left
ﬁgure) and 50% (right ﬁgure) windiest areas for each database. A fourth datasets
is illustrated by the red bar and it provides the results of the same analysis for the
GWA3 database but considering all the area covering the country.
42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.3.4: Comparison for the mean power density for the 10% (left ﬁgure) and
50% (right ﬁgure) windiest areas. The diﬀerence with the complete GWA3 database
along the most mountainous countries are clearly visible. This can be justiﬁed by
wind speed which in the power density it varies with the cube.
43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.3.5: Highest data set for 10% windiest area (left picture), 50% windiest
area (right picture) for mean wind speed. GWA3 has in both % the highest values,
except for Scandinavia countries and Central-East Europe.
Figure 4.3.6: Highest data set for 10% windiest area (left picture), 50% windiest
area (right picture) for mean power density. GWA3 has the most highest values,
except for Scandinavia countries and Central-East Europe for the %50.
From these results, it is clear that the exclusion of mountainous terrain decreases
the mean statistics, Figure 4.3.3 and Figure 4.3.4. The three datasets are compared
with the results of the same analysis run over the entire area available for GWA3
dataset and illustrated by the red bar. For the wind speed, the diﬀerence is little,
comparing the amount of terrain removed for some countries.
Larger diﬀerences,
44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
between 1.5−2 ms−1, are visible for Austria, Albania and Switzerland in Figure 4.3.3
on the 10% windiest values. Whereas, on the 50% windiest values this diﬀerence
is slightly visible along with the countries. Meaning that the exclusion of complex
terrains does not aﬀect particularly the statistics of the mean wind speed, furthermore,
this diﬀerence is slightly visible when a larger share of area is applied.
On the contrary, Figure 4.3.4 shows the comparison for the mean power density, and
it is clear that removing mountainous areas from the terrain investigated, reduces
strongly the results. This is evident in Albania, Austria and Switzerland in Figure
4.3.4, where the mean power density of the 10% of the windiest areas decreases of
more than halved. Others countries, where this drop in the mean power density is
visible, are Greece, Italy, Kosovo, Norway and Slovenia. Therefore, when only the
mean wind speed is analyzed the diﬀerence between the computation realized on the
entire area available and the ones realized on the terrain masked, are not particularly
visible, whereas these diﬀerences are signiﬁcantly strong for the statistics of the mean
power density. An explanation can be the cubic wind speed applied in the power
density, which can aﬀect larger the statistics.
Moreover, Figure 4.3.5 and Figure
4.3.6 show diﬀerent paths compared to the previous analysis, here NEWA tends to
give the highest value in the Scandinavia countries, in the north side of the Alps:
Switzerland and Austria, and in the Central-East European countries. For the rest of
Europe GWA3 is the database which oﬀers highest values once the terrains have been
masked. It could be added that when NEWA provides higher results, these values
are always close to the one of GWA3. Whereas in the cases where GWA3 provides
the highest results, the diﬀerence between GWA3 and the other two database is
often larger. Therefore, overall NEWA seems to be more aﬀected by the masking of
steep and complex terrain. An additional comment is done between the comparison
of Figure 4.2.7 and 4.3.4.
In section 4.4 it was observed lower results for WRF
compared to GWA3 and NEWA, in particular in countries with complex terrain, like
Albania, Austria, Italy, Kosovo, Macedonia, Norway, Slovenia and Switzerland. Now,
after removing from the wind atlas the areas with high RIX and steep terrain, the
countries showing the strongest reduction in the means are the those aforementioned.
This again can be linked to the limitation of WAsP modelling in complex terrain
which leads to an overestimation of the wind resource.
4.4
Wind Atlases comparison for suitable terrain
When investigating areas suitable for the development of wind energy it is fundamen-
tal to consider diﬀerent constraint factors. The selection in this study was based on
the literature examined. As the aim of this study is to give an overview on the eﬀect
of diﬀerent wind atlas in order to make wind energy prediction, only the main con-
45
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
straints will be applied to extract suitable areas closer as possible to the real suitable
areas actually available combining a feasible load of computation. Therefore, from all
the constraints factors the ones considered as more relevant and inﬂuential are then
selected and removed. The results are illustrated in Table 4.4.1. A real assessment
for a wind farm projects requires accurate studies with a meticulous environmental
impact assessment, a process which was not possible in this Master thesis. Therefore,
a selection of the main criteria has been carried out, considering the diﬀerent classes
of the Corine Land Cover map, CLC [14]. A technical description can be found in the
methodology chapter section . The 10 classes selected for this study can be grouped
in three main lists. To each list, a buﬀer distance is then applied. These parameters
are selecting taking into account diﬀerent policies and standards, and mostly referring
to the available literature [21], [22].
These classes are selected as representing the main constraint areas for wind develop-
ment and as considered the classes which aﬀect more the reduction of suitable areas.
In addition to the land cover layers, the protected areas are obtained from a speciﬁc
map, the World Database on Protected Areas map, WDPA. Therefore, the constrained
areas are selected, buﬀered and removed from the suitable terrain.
A schematic description of the constraints selected and the buﬀer distances applied
in this analysis can be found in the following table.
Constraint
Source
Classes
Buﬀer Distance
Urban Fabrics
CLC
111 Continuous urban fabric
112 Discontinuous urban fabric
1000 m [21]
Wet Lands
CLC
411 Inland marshes
412 Peat bogs
421 Salt marshes
422 Salines
423 Intertidal ﬂats
511 Water courses
512 Water bodies
500 m [22]
Transport Units
CLC
124 Airports
3000 m [22]
Protected Areas
WDPA
-
500 m [22]
Table 4.4.1: Table illustrating the type of constraints considered in the analysis, the
source map used to calculate the areas, the class information for the CLC database
and the buﬀer distance [m] applied to each constraints.
Above these layers, the slope constraint, previously extracted in section 4.3 is also
applied as it limits the areas suitable for wind development. On the other side, the
RIX parameter is not considered when masking the maps in this process as it does
not represent a constraint for wind development, it provides the quality of the wind
atlas, which is now not considered.
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
All these layers, applied to each country, produce a map showing the ﬁnal approximate
suitable areas for wind development for this study. These maps are then used to mask
the wind atlas and to extract only the wind potential of the suitable terrain, see an
example in Figure 4.4.2. Thus, a realistic prediction can be computed and compared
to similar studies. Figure 4.4.1 illustrates the total amount of extracted terrain and
its percentage compared to the total country area.
Figure 4.4.1: Total area suitable for wind energy development per country. The
suitable terrain percentage compared to the total area per country is illustrated above
the bar for each country.
Figure 4.4.2: Mean wind speed from the suitable terrain for Ireland (b) compared
to the total area analyzed in the ﬁrst section (a).
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.3: Comparison of the mean wind speed values [ms−1], at the 10% windi-
est (left ﬁgure) and at the 50% windiest areas (right ﬁgure) for each database. It
shows the results of the wind atlas applying only the suitable area. A fourth datasets
is illustrated by the red bar and it provides the results of the same analysis for the
GWA3 database but considering all the area covering the country.
48
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.4: Same as Figure 4.4.3 for the mean power density for the 10% windiest
areas (left ﬁgure) and for the 50% windiest areas (right ﬁgure). A fourth datasets
is illustrated by the red bar and it provides the results of the same analysis for the
GWA3 database but considering all the area covering the country.
49
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.5: Highest data set for 10% windiest area (left picture), 50% windiest
area (right picture) for mean wind speed. GWA3 has in both ﬁgures the highest
values, except for Nordic countries and Central-East Europe where NEWA shows
higher values, and the Balkan area which shows highest values from GWA2 for the
50% share and Norway.
Figure 4.4.6: Highest data set for 10% windiest area (left picture), 50% windiest
area (right picture) for mean power density. GWA3 has the most highest values,
except for Nordic countries and Central-East Europe for the %50.
Concerning the mean wind speed, not particular diﬀerences are illustrated in Figure
4.4.3. Diﬀerently, from Figure 4.3.3, where only mountainous countries were masked,
here all the countries investigated have been masked with constraints areas, as Figure
50
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
4.4.1 shows, where the countries less aﬀected by the masking process are Bosnia
and Herzegovina with a 53% and Spain with 45% of the total terrain left. Thereby,
it is particular to observe how the mean wind speed is slightly aﬀected although
the amount of terrain removed can be really elevated, as for Denmark. Belgium,
Switzerland and Slovenia, see Figure 4.4.1. This can lead to an interesting conclusion
referring to the mean wind speed (rolling average). The extraction of suitable terrain,
leading to an exclusion up to 95% of the total terrain, does not aﬀect particularly the
rolling mean for the mean wind speed. Whereas, a larger diﬀerence is illustrated in
the mean power density, larger for mountainous countries. Furthermore, an additional
observation is done on the impact of diﬀerent share of terrain used to produce the
statistics. The diﬀerence between the mean power density computed over the suitable
area only against the one computed over the entire area available, decreases as larger
is the share of terrain applied to compute the rolling mean, see the mean power density
for 50% windiest areas in Figure 4.4.4 right ﬁgure compared to the 10% windiest areas
in Figure 4.4.4 left ﬁgure. Moreover, few countries seem particularly aﬀected by a
decrease of the mean power density, these are Austria, Croatia and Slovenia. Overall,
GWA3 shows higher results in most of the countries and GWA2 gives in general the
lowest.
Further analysis can be done comparing these results with the ones obtained in the
previous chapter, where slope and RIX were applied as exclusion areas. In partic-
ular, a diﬀerence can be observed in the mean power density, Figure 4.3.4 for the
slope and RIX exclusion areas and Figure 4.4.4 for the suitable areas. When the RIX
constraint is applied in the exclusion map, Albania, Austria, Bosnia, Greece, Italy,
Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Norway and Switzerland show evidently lower re-
sults in the mean power density. Once again, the RIX parameter does not represent a
limitation for wind development, it provides a parameter of the accuracy of the wind
resource investigated. Therefore, these areas of the aforementioned countries deﬁned
by high RIX values, seem the areas which provide higher power density averaged.
This large diﬀerence can be link to the overestimation of WAsP downscale modelling
described in [20], and at the same time can be linked to the wind proprieties of the
terrain removed, suggesting that these areas with high RIX values seem to be also
good wind resource areas. This particular aspect is further investigated in the follow-
ing section.
51
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
4.4.1
Analysis of the eﬀect of area with high RIX values in
the statistics
In this section the eﬀects on the mean power density by masking the area applying a
RIX constraint are investigated. As mention before, the RIX parameter represents a
value of the accuracy of the microscale modelling. It does not represent a constraint
for wind development. It has been proved that high RIX levels lead in general to an
overestimation of the wind resource [20]. This eﬀect can be reﬂected by the results
here obtained, between section 4.3 and section 4.4.
Comparing the mean power
density in Figure 4.3.4 and Figure 4.4.4, Albania, Austria, Bosnia, Greece, Italy,
Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Norway and Switzerland show a strong decrease
in the mean power density when the RIX parameter is considered.
Hence, these
countries are the ones more aﬀected in the masking of RIX and slope, see Figure
4.3.2, for all these countries the total area available has been more than halved. It
can be observed that in general, the masking process of suitable areas, does not aﬀect
the results in the mean wind speed and mean power density. As shown in Figure
4.4.3 and Figure 4.4.4, where the results, although some areas have been left with
a 5–10% of suitable area, do not show particular diﬀerences for the majority of the
countries investigated, see Denmark, Netherlands, Poland.
Therefore, this strong
diﬀerence illustrated between Figure 4.3.4 and Figure 4.4.4 leads to some questions
addressed in the following analysis. First, for Albania and Norway the areas suitable
extracted in section 4.4 are masked by the 5% RIX constraint applied in the masking
procedure of section 4.3. The area resulting is the area suitable for wind development
where areas characterized by RIX parameter larger than 5% have been removed. This
results in 20% of the total suitable area for Albania, and in 54% for Norway, these
areas are illustrated by the red map in Figure 4.4.7 and Figure 4.4.8.
52
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.7: The three masking map of Albania are illustrated: yellow map (a) is
the area extracted in section 4.3 applying the RIX and slope constraints, the green
map (a) represents the suitable area extracted in section 4.4, the red map (b) shows
the area in common between the two maps, therefore it represents the suitable area
masked by the RIX constraint. The red area measures 20% of the suitable area.
Figure 4.4.8: Masking map of Norway: yellow map (a) is the area extracted in
section 4.3 applying the RIX and slope constraints, the green map (a) represents the
suitable area extracted in section 4.4, the red map (b) shows the area in common
between the two maps, therefore it represents the suitable area masked by the RIX
constraint. The red area measures 54% of the suitable area.
53
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
The rolling mean of the mean power density is then compared for the three maps: area
with RIX and slope constraint applied, area suitable extracted for wind development,
area suitable for wind development masked by the RIX constraint. Clearly, the rolling
mean of the last map follows the behaviour of the ﬁrst, as it is represented in the
following graph.
This means that when the suitable area is masked by the RIX
constraint, the results are similar to the one obtained in section 4.3.
Figure 4.4.9: Rolling mean of the mean power density for the NEWA wind at-
las masked by the the three maps: red line are the suitable areas masked by RIX
constraint, green line are the suitable area and yellow line are the area masked by
RIX and slope constraints. (a) shows the results for Albania and (b) the results for
Norway.
Subsequently, the mean power density of the 10% and 50% windiest area are compared
between the value obtained in the analysis of chapter 4.4 and the results from section
4.3. Then the diﬀerence is divided by the values of section 4.4 to provide an idea of
the percentage of the overestimation in the mean wind power that can be observed
due to the eﬀect of high RIX areas along all the countries deﬁned by complex terrain.
These percentages are illustrated in the table shown in Figure 4.4.10
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.10: Table showing the percentage of overestimation in the analysis where
the suitable terrain was considered without taking into account the constraint RIX
areas.
It can be concluded that large area characterized by high RIX leads to higher wind
atlas, in particular for the power density. This eﬀect is shown by the countries char-
acterized by complex terrains, the percentage of overestimation is shown in Figure
4.4.10. This overestimation is very large for Albania, Kosovo and Switzerland, be-
tween 40-50%; and lower for the rest of the countries investigated, in a range of
10-40%. In general, GWA3 shows lower diﬀerences for all the countries except Nor-
way. This can be linked to the observation in section 4.3, where the NEWA wind atlas
seem to be more aﬀected by the exclusion of complex areas, compared to GWA3.
Finally, this overestimation can be referred to the eﬀect of complex terrain in the
linear ﬂow model of WAsP which tends to overestimate the wind resource [20]. At
the same time, removing the areas with high RIX values can lead to removing a high
portion of areas suitable for wind energy that can be characterized by a favourable
wind resource. It is diﬃcult to understand how these eﬀects aﬀect diﬀerently, further
investigation should be realized. In this analysis is concluded that an overestimation
along the countries with complex terrain has to be accounted in the wind resource
analysis for suitable areas.
4.4.2
Capacity Factor
Heretofore, to sum up, the three diﬀerent wind atlas, showing the mean wind speed
and the mean wind power density, have been investigated in three analysis. A ﬁrst,
referring to a geographical potential, where all the areas covering each country were
considered; a second where the steep terrain and complex areas were removed from
55
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
the wind atlas maps, and a third ﬁnal one where the actual real wind potential is
investigated, as only the area covering the suitable terrain for wind development are
considered.
Now, the comparison is realized for the capacity factor produced by each of the wind
atlas. The capacity factors is a measure of the power produced by a wind turbine.
It combines the technology used to extract the energy, in this case the type of wind
turbine, and the wind proprieties, since the wind does not blow constantly all the
time but it has a frequency. Hence, the capacity factor is measured as ratio between
the average power generated by the rated peak power. The power is provided by the
type of wind turbine, in this case three diﬀerent types have been used, producing
three classes of capacity factors. In particular a turbine type IEC classes of 3.45 MW
is applied with three diﬀerent rotor diameters: 112 m, 126 m, and 136 m [5]. The same
technology is applied to compute the capacity factor for the three database.
The power curve are illustrated in Figure 4.4.11. This power curve is then multiplied
by the wind probability distribution function of each point, which is obtained by
the mean wind speed and the Weibull parameters: A- scale parameter and k- shape
parameter. Consequently, each mean wind speed with its frequency is multiplied by
the power obtained at the relative wind speed resulting in the total energy extracted
by that wind speed [23].
CF = 1
Pr
Z ∞
0
P(v) f(v) dv,
(4.1)
where the wind turbine characteristics are described by the Pr, the power rated and
P(v), the power curve. While the wind speed probability distribution function is
given by the frequency f(v) of a certain valued dv.
As a result, three classes of
capacity factors are computed for each wind atlases assigning the same technology.
56
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.11: Power curve for the three wind turbines applied in the calculation
of the Capacity Factor: IEC I , IEC II and IEC III
Figure 4.4.12 illustrates the capacity factors for the three classes for each of the
datasets. The upper maps shows the capacity factors class I, of NEWA (a), GWA3
(b) and GWA2 (c). The second line of pictures, represents the capacity factor class
II, NEWA (d), GWA3 (e) and GWA2 (f), the same for the bottom line of pictures,
which illustrates the capacity factor from class III, NEWA (g), GWA3 (h) and GWA2
(i). From these pictures, representing the countries subjected to this investigation,
higher values of capacity factor can be obtained along the countries in the north of
Europe, Ireland, United Kingdom, Denmark, the Scandinavia peninsula, the north
area of France, Germany an Poland where a lighter colours tending to yellow is shown,
meaning a capacity factor leading to 60–70% with peak around 80%. Whereas the
western and central-south area seems characterized by lower capacity factors, with
lower capacity factors.
Areas like in south of Spain, the entire Italian peninsula,
with the exception of the Alps elevation, and the Balkans area show colors tending to
purple/blue meaning a capacity factor around 10-20%. A lighter area is identiﬁes also
around the Pyrenees elevation, on the Spanish side and on the French basin. Further,
it can be observed an increase along the three classes, in particular on the northern
countries, for the area surroundings the North Sea. Whereas, a diﬀerence between
the datasets, from the same class, is slightly visible. Norway shows lighters colors,
meaning higher values of capacity factor, for the GWA2 dataset from class I, and
on the other sides, it shows lower results for the rest of the classes, class II and III,
hence the colors are darker for the area covered by the GWA2 data. GWA3 seems to
show higher capacity factor class II and III in the north countries: Denmark, United
Kingdom, Ireland and north of Germany.
57
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
To compare the database, the capacity factors maps are extracted following the coun-
tries’ vector maps realized for the previous analysis, where only the suitable area are
selected. As the results shows similar patterns between the three classes, with the
only diﬀerence in the mean value, only the results from the capacity factor of class
II is here illustrated, Figure 4.4.13 and Figure 4.4.14. The results for capacity factor
class I and III can be found in the Appendix.
Figure 4.4.13 represents the 10% and 50% windiest areas for the three wind atlas.
GWA3, the orange bar, shows higher values for the majority of the countries. GWA2
tends to lower results, whereas NEWA shows results closer to GWA3, giving higher
values in particular in complex terrain countries, Albania, Austria, Czechia, Italy,
Slovakia and Switzerland. Overall, higher values of capacity factor are provided by
Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, Norway and United Kingdom with an average around
55–60% for the 10% windiest areas and around 50–55% for the 50% windiest areas.
Figure 4.4.14 illustrated the diﬀerence between the 10% values and the 50% one. It
describes the shape of the rolling mean distribution, the countries in the upper part of
the plot have a lower diﬀerence, around 5–10% points. This means that the capacity
factor remains relatively constant when more area is consider in the average. On
the other side for the countries in the bottom part of Figure 4.4.14, this diﬀerence is
larger, 10-20% points, meaning that the capacity factor will show a stronger decrease
as the terrain took in consideration for the analysis increases. It can be concluded that
when prediction will be made based on the share of terrain considered, Greece, Bosnia
and Norway will be more impacted compared to Belgium, Netherlands, Hungary or
Ireland by the share of terrain considered.
58
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.12: Capacity factor maps for diﬀerent classes (I, II, III) and for the
three wind atlas analyzed (NEWA, GWA3 and GWA2). Capacity Factor Class I: (a)
NEWA, (b) GWA3, (c) GWA2; Capacity Factor Class II: (d) NEWA, (e) GWA3, (f)
GWA2; Capacity Factor Class III: (g) NEWA, (h) GWA3, (i) GWA2.
59
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.13: Capacity Factor class II comparison between NEWA, GWA3 and
GWA2 results. 10% windiest area, left ﬁgure, 50% windiest areas, right ﬁgure
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 4. WIND ATLAS COMPARISON
Figure 4.4.14: Diﬀerence between the Capacity Factor at 10% windiest area and
50% windiest area, for class II. In order of magnitude.
61
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5
Potential wind capacity and
production estimation
The land surface availability for each country over Europe has been computed in
the previous section. From the total area available a general estimation of the wind
potential capacity belonging to each country can be computed. the methodology is
based on the existent literature available. The procedure is summarised below.
Information
Unit
Capacity Density
CD
Capacity installed per unit land surface area
Rated power/Area
MW km−2 ^2
Capacity Factor
CF
Ratio between the average power generated
and the rated power
AEP/Rated power
%
Production Density
PD
Average electricity produced per unit land
surface area
CD*CF
MW km−2 ^2
Potential Capacity
Capacity installed over an area
CD*Area
MW,GW
Potential Power
Power production over an area along a
period of time
CD*Area*CF*time
MWh,GWh,TWh
Table 5.0.1: Parameters investigated in this section
A ﬁrst observation is made to diﬀerentiate power capacity density, CD, and power
production density, PD. The former describes the nominal capacity installed per unit
land surface area and is computed as the total wind turbine rated power over the
area occupied by the wind turbine, as shown in Table 5.0.1 in CD. The latter repre-
62
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
sents an average of the power produced per unit land surface area, again see PD in
Table 5.0.1. Therefore, the ﬁrst parameter provides an idea of the power that can be
installed over an area, hence it is related to the wind turbine rated power and the
distance at which each turbines can be placed without aﬀecting each others’ eﬃciency.
This value can be estimated comparing the diﬀerent layouts of existing wind farms
and referring to the current literature reports. An example is given in the report
published by the National Renewable Energies Laboratory of United States where
analysing 161 wind projects in the Unites States area, the capacity density of 125 of
them came out to be ranging between 2–10 MW km−2 [24]. Lu et al [25] assumed a
capacity density of 3.6 MW km−2, Archer and Jacobson [26] 6 MW km−2, Hoogwijk et
al. [27] 4 MW km−2, Baldur Eliasson [28] estimates a range between 5—8 MW km−2
for European wind farms and the report from the European Union [21] applied a ca-
pacity density of 5 MW km−2 to compute the potential wind capacity. Finally, Master
in [29] suggests a spacing between wind turbines of 28 times the rotor diameter, in
particular siting the wind turbine 4D in the main cross-wind direction and 7D in the
main downstream wind direction, where D represents the rotor diameter.
On the other side, once the capacity density parameter is selected for a certain unit
area, a production density can be extracted. Again it represents a value per unit land
area investigated. It is obtained multiplying the capacity factor with the capacity
density. This capacity factor, described in the previous chapter, can be assumed as
an average ﬁxed value, or investigated from the wind atlas of the region analyzed.
This still provides a measure in W m−2 or MW km−2. These measures are per unit
area, usually km−2.
Finally, from these parameters, total potential capacity and
power can be obtained simply multiplying the aforementioned capacity density and
production density for the total area available. In particular, to measure the total
electricity produced along a period over an area, the above mentioned power density
is multiplied by the area covered and by the length of the period, usually the hours
in a year. This provides a measure in MWh, as described in Table 5.0.1 in Potential
Capacity and Potential Power.
In this case, the value obtained can have a strong relevance on the results needed. It
denotes the amount of electricity that will be generated by the wind farm project and
its relevance can be implied on polices or project planner phases as it provides an idea
of the productivity of the area. Generally, it gives an idea of the potential electricity
that can be produced by a determined amount of installed capacity. In this phases,
several methodologies are followed, mostly related to the value of capacity factor to
be applied.
An initial assumption considered is related to the economic feasibility of a wind farm
project. Since areas with low capacity factor are usually not economically convenient,
a minimum of capacity factor is factored when computing the power potential. Lu
[25] applied a limit of the capacity factor > 20% to estimate a worldwide annual wind
energy potential onshore of 690 PWh; similar to the 586 PWh predicted by Bosch et
63
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
all. where they considered as suitable area for wind development areas characterized
by a capacity factor larger than 15% [30]. Hoogwijk et al. in [27] computed the
capacity factor as the results of three diﬀerent parameters: the average availability of
the wind turbine, mainly due to maintenance, ﬁxed at 0.95; the array eﬃciency, due
to wind turbine interaction, ﬁxed at 0.90 and the full load hours operation, which
presents the total hours at which the wind turbines are supposed to work at full load
depending on the location, the average wind speed and its probability distribution.
Furthermore, to produce a more reliable prediction of electricity production, a per-
centage of losses due to wake’s eﬀects are also added, it has been founded ranging
between 15% to 25%, e.g. 15% in Wind potentials for EU and neighbouring countries
[21], 15% in Julien Armijo et al. in [31] and 25% in Grubb and Meyer [32].
The aforementioned comparison provides an interesting future analysis, necessary to
understand how predictions are made and how close these predictions are to the re-
ality. Unfortunately these hypotheses cannot be investigated in this projects, which
main aim is the investigation of the eﬀect of diﬀerent wind atlas on this prediction.
Therefore, after this currently available literature investigation, the following param-
eters are selected and applied to compute the prediction of potential capacity and
potential power production of the countries investigated in this study:
• 5MW km−2 is assumed as wind capacity density.
• the capacity factor is obtained by the wind atlas investigated, taking into ac-
count a 15% of losses related to wake’s losses.
Now, the total area available per country has been computed in the previous chapter,
from these areas, the capacity factor from the three wind atlas, NEWA, GWA2 and
GWA3 are applied in diﬀerent scenarios and the results are presented below.
5.1
Analysis applying diﬀerent share of available ter-
rain
In this section, the potential power produced by country is investigated for diﬀerent
scenarios considering the diﬀerent share of the total available land: 10%, 30%, 50%
and 100% of the total area. For this study, the mean capacity factor corresponding
to the share of area is applied referring to the windiest areas. Therefore, this analysis
only depends on the share of terrain considered, which is represented by a ﬁxed value
for all the country at each scenario. The idea is to provide an overview of the wind
potential for the countries investigated just relaying on the percentage of area that
could be covered by wind turbines. Vice versa it provides an idea of the terrain that
64
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
has to be covered by wind turbines to produce a certain yearly amount of potential
power production.
Figure 5.1.1:
Procedure applied in this section.
From the total available area
covered by the capacity factor maps the windiest areas are extracted based on diﬀerent
share percentage. A potential capacity installed is then computed based on the area.
The relative capacity factor referring to the share of terrain used is used to obtain a
prediction of the potential power production.
First, the total potential capacity, in GW, is computed per each country, multiplying
the share of the area available by the selected capacity density of 5 MW km−2, see
above. Four diﬀerent potential capacity predictions are then realized, using diﬀer-
ent share of available terrain: 10%, 30%, 50% and the total area. The results are
illustrated in Figure 5.1.2, the countries are presented in order of potential capacity.
The order follows the order of magnitude of the terrain available of Figure 4.4.1. The
larger share of the total potential capacity installed along all the countries is repre-
sented by Spain, France and Sweden, which together provide the 35% of the total
share, see Figure 5.1.3. Varying the percentage of terrain used in the computation
does not aﬀect the results between the states as the potential capacity installed in-
creases proportionally for each country, the same can be said for the share of each
country over the total amount. Hence the order of the country and the shape of the
bar plot remain unchanged, the only diﬀerence lays in the y-axis scale which changes
considerably proportionally to the share of the area used for the computation.
This potential installed capacity is now applied to obtain the potential power produc-
tion. As explained previously, this computation is realized multiplying the potential
65
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
installed capacity by the capacity factor of the area and the total amount of hours,
usually the hours in one year: 8760, see Table 5.0.1. The capacity factor relevant for
the scenarios investigated (10%, 30%, 50% and 100% of the total amount of available
area) is obtained by the computation carried out in the previous chapter, where the
rolling mean was applied and the mean capacity factor corresponding to a share of
the total available area is computed. Therefore, when investigating the scenario rep-
resenting the 10% of the total available area, the mean capacity factor of the area
selected is provided by the values representing 10% windiest area. To this capacity
factor a loss of 15% is applied considering wake’s losses, the results are multiplied
by the 8760 hours in one year and then divided by 1000 in order to obtain the TWh
potentially produced by the 10% windiest area of the total available areas. The follow-
ing formula shows the computation applied to obtain the estimation of the potential
power production. The same procedure is applied to the diﬀerent share of terrain.
PP = CI · 0.85 · CF · 8760
1000
(5.1)
PP represents the potential power in TWh and the CI is the installed capacity in
GW, considering a 15% of loss [21], and 8760 represents the total hours in one year.
Figure 5.1.3 represents the share of installed capacity for each country using the data
of the scenario where 10% of the total suitable area are used. Almost the half of the
total capacity installed, 841 GW, is provided by 5 countries: Spain, France, Sweden,
Finland and Norway. The countries with a share lower than 2% have been grouped
in "Others" and they represent the 12.6% share.
Again, these values are highly
correlated with the area available per each country. On the other side, Figure 5.1.4
represent the share of power produced by country applying the capacity factor class II
from the GWA3 datasets. From the total 2877.50 TWh predicted, more than half are
again produced by Spain, France, Sweden, Finland and Norway. Whereas, the order
of the other countries changes, this is due to their capacity factor, United Kingdom,
Germany and Poland produce more than Italy. Again, the countries producing less
than 2% of the total power production are grouped together in "Others".
66
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.1.2: Potential capacity installed, GW, per country applying diﬀerent sce-
narios: 10% of the total available terrain (top ﬁgure), 30% (second top ﬁgure), 50%
(third top ﬁgure) and using the entire area available 100% (bottom ﬁgure). The values
express in GW are the results of the multiplication of the 10%, 30%, 50% or 100% of
the total available area times the capacity density used in this study of 5 MW km−2.
The countries are presented in order of magnitude. Note that the x-axis remains
constant, only the values along the y-axis change according the % of the terrain used.
67
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.1.3: The share of capacity installed for each country at the 10% of available
land scenario is illustrated in this pie chart. Almost half of the total 841 GW installed
capacity is provided by Spain, France, Sweden, Finland and Norway. Others groups
all the countries with a share smaller than 2%, in order Lithuania, Ireland, Hungary,
Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Estonia, Czechia, Croatia, Austria, Macedonia,
Slovakia, Netherlands, Montenegro, Albania, Switzerland, Denmark, Belgium and
Luxembourg.
Figure 5.1.4: The share of power production for each country at the 10% of avail-
able land scenario is illustrated in this pie chart. In this case half of the total 2877.50
TWh produced are provided by Spain, France, Sweden, Finland and Norway. Others
groups all the countries with a share smaller than 2%, in order Republic of Serbia,
Kosovo, Hungary, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Estonia, Czechia, Croatia, Aus-
tria, Netherlands, Macedonia, Slovakia, Montenegro, Albania, Switzerland, Denmark,
Belgium, Slovenia, Luxembourg.
68
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.1.5: Annual potential power produced by each country using the windiest
10% of the available terrain. The capacity factor class II is applied for the three
datasets investigated. Blue: NEWA, orange: GWA3 and green: GWA2. A general
trend can be observed from the GWA3 which provide slightly higher results for the
most of the countries, in particular for the one producing the larger amount of power.
GWA2 provides lower results.
69
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.1.5 illustrates the speciﬁc power production for each country when the 10%
of the suitable areas is covered by wind turbines, applying the capacity factor, corre-
sponding to a class II, for all of the three datasets. In general, GWA3 provides higher
results, see Spain, France, Sweden, United Kingdom, Poland, Germany, Romania and
others from Figure 5.1.5. It can be observed that the share of each country is diﬀer-
ent from the one in Figure 5.1.2. This because countries with a lower available area
can produce higher results if they are characterized by high capacity factors. This
can be observed for United Kingdom, Germany and Poland, which even though they
have less available area, and relatively lower potential capacity installed, they still
potentially produce more power than Italy. The same procedure can be investigating
applying the other two capacity factors provided by the wind atlas, capacity factor
class I and capacity factor class III. They provide lower and higher results respec-
tively. An example is showed in Figure 5.1.6, where the three capacity factors, class
I, II and III, from the GWA3 datasets are applied to compute the total potential
power production as described in the formula 5.1. The three values per each country
are then illustrated in the same plot to observe the diﬀerent behaviours. It has to
be remembered that diﬀerent capacity factors are produced by diﬀerent wind turbine
varying in their size, this diﬀerence is made to oﬀer diﬀerent choices of technology to
be applied in diﬀerent wind atlas characteristics. This study is not investigating the
speciﬁc behaviour related to diﬀerent capacity factors.
Figure 5.1.6: Power production produce by the three classes of capacity factor for
GWA3: Green: class I, Yellow: class II and Red: class III. The results are obtained
applying the capacity installed obtained by the 10% windiest areas.
70
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
5.2
Analysis applying a ﬁxed capacity factor level
and comparison with EU Report
In the previous analysis, the power potential was investigated based on a diﬀerent
share of terrain applied in the computation. Now, the same power predictions are
produced but selecting the areas based on their capacity factor. Hence, the amount
of area used for wind energy production is extracted applying a ﬁlter provided by a
level of capacity factor, in this case, a capacity factor of 20% is selected. Figure 5.2.1
illustrates the procedure implemented in this section. The two constraints are the
total area available and the capacity factor. This means that all the area covered by
a capacity factor equals or larger than 20% are extracted. The relative area in km2
and the percentage of share of the total area is computed, and the same calculation
above presented are realized.
Figure 5.2.1:
Procedures applied in this section: from the total available area
covered by the capacity factor maps the areas are extracted based on their capacity
factor level, CF > 20%. A potential capacity installed is then computed based on the
area extracted. The capacity factors are averaged over the area extracted and used
to obtain a prediction of the potential power production.
This capacity factor limit has been settle in order to compare the results of this
study with the results obtained in the European Technical report: Wind potentials
for EU and neighbouring countries: Input datasets for the JRC-EU-TIMES Model
[21]. This report carries out a similar analysis to the one realized in this thesis, with
the diﬀerence being the way it approaches the problem. It considers as the main
71
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
problem for wind energy development, the availability of suitable areas. Hence it
examines, for two types of wind turbines’ size, three main scenarios based on diﬀerent
extraction’s methods of available terrain for wind energy: one Reference Scenario
where the current legislation of each country is applied, a Low Scenario where all
the setback distances will supposed to meet in 2030 the highest setback currently
observed, and on the other side a High Scenario where all the 2030 setback distances
will meet the lowest one currently applied. Therefore, it focuses its predictions on
precise setback distances investigation from countries’ legislation, literature review
and experts’ assumptions. Once the suitable areas are extracted, they produce power
predictions applying capacity factors computed combining MERRA reanalysis data
and Global Wind Atlas 1 (GWA1) used to correct the wind speed [21]. In order to
compare the results obtained in this study with the current available literature the
"Surface use, as share of the surfaces for CF > 0.2" Scenario was reproduced and
compared with tho one presented in the EU report [21]. In particular the scenario
from [21] assumes a speciﬁc power rating of 300 W m−2, meaning that per m2 the wind
turbine is suppose to have a nameplate generation capacity of 300 W. The capacity
factors available for GWA3 are divided in three classes related to the rotor diameter,
as mentioned in the previous chapter: a turbine type IEC classes of 3.45 MW with
three diﬀerent rotor diameters: 112 m, 126 m, and 136 m. Therefore, to compare the
results with [21], the capacity factor from class II, which will have a speciﬁc power
rating of 276 W m−2, is selected as the closest to the one referenced in [21].
In the comparison with [21] the results will be ﬁrst aﬀected by the suitable area
extracted by the two studies and secondly by the capacity factors applied. In order
to evaluate the results, the total suitable area extracted and the total area covered by
a capacity factor larger than 20% are compared between the studies. Subsequent, a
capacity installed is computed and the relative power prediction is obtained. In this
analysis only the eU-28 countries are investigated, with the exception of Malta and
Cyprus. Finally, to produce the results only one wind atlas is selected. Therefore,
ﬁrst an investigation of the diﬀerence between the wind atlas is presented.
5.2.1
Computation of the needed variable: comparison of the
results between the three datasets NEWA, GWA3 and
GWA2
The maps used in the previous analysis, where the capacity factor was compared be-
tween the three datasets are now handled to produce the needed parameters through
a Python script as described in Figure 5.2.1. The procedure is ﬁrst applied to all
three datasets in order to investigates any particular diﬀerences. Figure 5.2.2 shows
the percentage of the total area covered by a capacity factor larger than 20%. NEWA
72
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
gives in general higher share, whereas the lowest is provided by GWA2. This be-
haviour can be further understanding observing the mean capacity factor illustrated
in Figure 4.4.13, the 10% windiest values are higher for GWA3, thus for the 50%
windiest areas NEWA tends to higher values. This can be reﬂected in the larger
share of terrain for NEWA compare to the other datasets in Figure 5.2.2. On the
other side the average mean of the capacity factors larger than 20%, Figure 5.2.3,
shows close values between the three datasets, with a general trend of GWA3 provid-
ing slightly higher results. Figure 5.2.4 shows the total potential installed capacity,
which is related to the share of terrain available. The total capacity installed is equal
to 5325 GW for NEWA, 5021 GW for GWA3 and 3639 GW for GWA2. Referring
to the potential power produced, Figure 5.2.5 GWA3 gives slightly higher values of
capacity factor compared to NEWA, which on the other side provided higher share
on the terrain suitable. The total power produced by the three wind atlas is: 15200
TWh for GWA3, 15938 TWh for NEWA and 10390 TWh for GWA2. Dividing the
total power production by the total hours assumed and the capacity installed pro-
vide an average capacity factor for each dataset. This produces the following average
capacity factors: 34.55 for GWA3, 34.16 for NEWA and 32.33 for GWA2.
Therefore, in conclusion, the share of terrain characterized by a capacity factor larger
than 20% is slightly diﬀerent along the three wind atlas, nevertheless, NEWA and
GWA3 show the closer results, as it can be observed in the total potential capacity
installed in Figure 5.2.4, where the larger diﬀerence is given by Finland and Sweden.
In general GWA3 has a lower share of terrain but a higher average of capacity factor.
As no particular diﬀerences are shown between the database, at least between GWA3
and NEWA, no reasons justify the selection of one database over the other, therefore
the database selected for the comparison with [21] is GWA3.
73
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.2: Percentage of the total suitable area with a Capacity Factor class II
larger than 20%.
74
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.3: Mean of the Capacity Factors larger than 20%.
75
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.4: Potential capacity installed applying the areas covered by a Capacity
Factor larger than 20%
76
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.5: Potential power production applying the areas covered by a Capacity
Factor larger than 20% and a loss of 15%
77
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
5.2.2
Results Comparison with the EU study
GWA3 is now selected for the comparison with the EU analysis [21], note that only
the countries presented also in [21] are presented in this comparison. The data are
obtained from the "ENSPRESO - WIND - ONSHORE and OFFSHORE" Excel doc-
ument [33] as described in Table 5.2.1.
Data
Unit
Excel sheet name
Info
Total suitable area
km^2
Raw data
Sum of the areas below the
category: "Setback distance
for 3MW turbines"
Total area with CF>20%
km^2
Wind Potential
Pivot Countries
Computed as the sum of the
potential capacity GW
divided by the capacity
density of 5 GW/km^2
Potential capacity
GW
Wind Potential
Pivot Countries
For the area with a CF larger
than 20%
Potential production
TWh
Wind Potential
Pivot Countries
For the area with a CF larger
than 20%
Average Capacity Factor
with 15% losses
%
Manually Computed
TWh / (8760*GW installed)
Table 5.2.1:
Variables extracted and computed from the Excel document 5.2.1
related to the "European Technical report: Wind potentials for EU and neighbouring
countries".
A ﬁrst comparison is made on the total amount of potential capacity installed over
the suitable areas characterized by a capacity factor larger than 20%. A diﬀerence of
1149 GW is showed by Figure 5.2.6, left ﬁgure, where the capacity installed obtained
in this study is 4566 GW compared to the 3147 GW in [21].This is simply related to
the total amount of area applied in the calculation of the potential installed capac-
ity. The predicted power production diﬀerence illustrated in the right ﬁgure, Figure
5.2.6, shows again a higher prediction from the data of this study, with a value of
13816 TWh against the 8395 TWh of [21]. This is ﬁrst related to the total capacity
installed predicted and second to the capacity factors applied. Now, the statistics are
investigated more in the detailed, comparing country by country and the results are
illustrated in the following.
78
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.6: Comparison between results computed in this study and the once
obtained in [21].
The total area suitable for wind development obtained in this study in section 4.4 is
by all means diﬀerent from the one extracted in [21], and this diﬀerence will aﬀect
the later predictions. Therefore, a ﬁst comparison between the suitable area for wind
development extracted in this study are compared with the area extracted in the
Reference Scenario of [21], see Table 5.2.1.
Figure 5.2.7: Total suitable terrain for wind energy development.
79
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.8: Diﬀerence of the area from Figure 5.2.7 between the area extracted
in this study in section 4.4 and the one of the EU reference study [21]. When GWA3
gives higher results the bar plot is showed in blue. On the other side when the amount
of terrain extracted from [21] is larger, the diﬀerence is negative and it is shown by
the pink bar.
Figure 5.2.7 and Figure 5.2.8 illustrate the diﬀerences between the two analysis. The
area extracted is similar for many countries, in particular for larger countries as
France, Italy and Spain, and for smaller as Austria, Belgium, Czechia, Netherlands
and Slovenia. Figure 5.2.8 illustrates the diﬀerence between the one obtained in this
study, in section 4.4, and the one from [21], showing a blue bar when this diﬀerence
is positive, and a pink bar when is negative. The majority of the countries show close
results. This is not true for Finland and Sweden. This huge diﬀerence between the
two Nordic countries is odd as no particular legislation have been applied in [21].
Figure 5.2.9: Area characterized by a capacity factor larger than 20%.
80
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.10: Diﬀerence of the terrain extracted shown in Figure 5.2.9 between
GWA3 and EU reference study [21].
The area characterized by a capacity factor larger than 20% is dependent on the wind
atlas investigated and on the amount of suitable terrain. Therefore, it is interesting
to compare Figure 5.2.8 with Figure 5.2.10. If the bar plot in Figure 5.2.8 is small
it means the area extracted is slightly diﬀerent. Hence, it makes sense to compare
weather the amount of area with a CF > 20% in Figure follows the trend of Figure
5.2.8.
This similarity between the two bar plots is observed for the majority of
the countries, e.g. Austria, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Latvia, Poland, Sweden and
others. On the other side, Croatia, Czechia, France and Italy give diﬀerent results.
They have a larger amount of suitable area extracted in this study, see Figure 5.2.8,
where the bar plot is shown in blue.
Whereas, in Figure 5.2.10 the diﬀerence is
described by the pink bar, meaning a larger share of terrain in [21]. The opposite of
the aforementioned behaviour is shown by Belgium. Lastly, it is interesting to note
how the total available area of Spain is close between the two studies in Figure 5.2.8,
contrarily, the area with a capacity factor larger than 20% is halved for the GWA3
extraction, meaning a larger area characterized by a low capacity factor in GWA3
compared to [21].
81
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.2.11: Average capacity factor over the area extracted taking into account
a 15% of losses.
Figure 5.2.12: Diﬀerence between the average capacity factor computed from GWA3
and from the EU reference study [21].
Concerning the capacity factor, it can be observed in Figure 5.2.11 and 5.2.12 that
the average mean capacity factor is larger for the GWA3 data. This will aim to larger
power production results for GWA3, see Figure 5.2.14. The diﬀerence of the average
capacity factor is lower than 5% for many countries, Finland, Ireland, Slovenia and
Sweden are the ones with the closer average. A particular exception is represented by
Slovenia, the only country with an average of a capacity factor larger for [21], see Fig-
ure 5.2.12. This behaviour could be linked to the low share of suitable area extracted
in section 4.4, where Slovenia provided only a 12% of suitable terrain compared to the
total area, see Figure 4.4.1. Figure 5.2.13 provides the capacities installed for each
country, which are the results of the total area extracted time the capacity density
82
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
selected for this study of 5 MW km−2 [21]. Finally, Figure 5.2.14 illustrates the power
produced by applying the area extracted in Figure 5.2.9 and the average capacity fac-
tor of Figure 5.2.11. The eﬀect of larger capacity factors applied in the computation
of the power produced can be observed in France and Netherlands. Both countries
have a smaller share of terrain extracted in this study compared to [21], see Figure
5.2.9. By contrary, the capacity factor described by GWA3 is larger, of 7% for France
and 14% for Netherlands. Therefore, in Figure 5.2.14 France and Netherlands pro-
duce more power in the GWA3 analysis compared to [21] although the area applied
is smaller, this is due to the diﬀerence in capacity factors applied.
Figure 5.2.13: Predicted capacity installed for each country taking into account the
area with a CF larger than 20% and a capacity density of 5 MW/k2.
Figure 5.2.14: Potential power production obtained from the potential capacity
installed of Figure 5.2.13 and the CF of Figure 5.2.11.
83
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
5.2.3
Conclusions
This analysis can be summed up by the following points. Referring to Figure 5.2.6,
the total capacity installed in the GWA3 analysis is 1.33 times the one predicted in
[21]. This is related to the total suitable area extracted, which is larger for GWA3,
in particular for Finland, Poland and Sweden, see Figure 5.2.8. At the same time,
it is correlated to the area available after been masked by the 20% capacity factor
limit. Again the total area in GWA3 is larger. Concerning the total power produced,
Figure 5.2.6 right plot, GWA3 provides 1.65 times the power predicted in [21]. This
is ﬁrstly related to the area used, and secondly to the capacity factor applied. Being,
in general, the area used and the average capacity factors for each country larger for
GWA3, it is obvious that the total power produced will be higher in the GWA3 results.
Overall, the two analysis have produced comparable results. To better compared the
two results, an average capacity factor can be computed as follow:
CF =
PP
CI · 8760
(5.2)
where PP is the predicted power production in TWh and CI the total capacity
installed in GW. This extracts a capacity factor of 28 for [21] and a capacity factor
of 34 applying the GWA3 data, clearly larger with the GWA3 data.
Therefore,
it is demonstrated that applying the high resolution wind atlas, in this case GWA3,
compared to corrected reanalysis data in [21], lead to higher results in the computation
of power prediction. It is diﬃcult to measure the impact of the high resolution maps
over reanalysis for the extraction of the area with a capacity factor larger than 20%
as the areas compared are diﬀerent between the studies. However, it is proved that
leads to larger average capacity factors.
In conclusion, this analysis reﬂects the potential of wind energy along with the EU-28
countries. Exploiting all the area suitable for wind energy with a capacity factor larger
than 20% would provide, just referring to onshore wind energy, the development of
20 times the currently installed capacity (171 GW installed of onshore wind energy
[34] in 2018) in the Reference Scenario of [21] and 26 times applying the data from
this study for the extraction of area suitable and the high resolution wind climatology
of GWA3. These numbers should give the idea of the potential of wind energy when
only the good wind resource areas are considered, as a 20% capacity factor limit is
usually linked to an economically feasible limit for wind development.
84
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
5.3
Comparison with WindEurope predictions
In this section the predictions in the WindEurope reports will be reproduced applying
the wind atlas previously investigated: NEWA, GWA3 and GWA2. WindEurope is
an association based in Brussels, which aim is to promote the development of wind
energy in Europe.
It has published two reports for the 2030 prediction for wind
energy development in the EU countries for both onshore and oﬀshore wind energy.
The two reports are: Wind energy scenarios for 2030 published in August 2015 [35]
and Wind energy in Europe: Scenarios for 2030 published in September 2017 [34].
Being the comparison of the results the reason of this analysis, only the onshore data
are investigated. Three diﬀerent scenarios are then illustrated in these report for the
onshore production:
• Central Scenario : total capacity installed 253.6 GW, producing 533.1 TWh for
[35] and total capacity installed 253 GW, producing 599 TWh for [34]
• Low Scenario: total capacity installed 206.3 GW, producing 440.2 TWh for [35]
and total capacity installed 207 GW, producing 453 TWh for [34]
• High Scenario: total capacity installed 294 GW, producing 627.5 TWh for [35]
and total capacity installed 299 GW, producing 706 TWh for [34]
The two reports mainly diﬀers in the shared of capacity installed between the EU
countries and in the total power production, whereas, the total capacity installed
slightly changes. The capacity installed is provided for each country, on the other
side the power produced is available only as total generation for all the EU countries.
The procedure carried out in this section is now illustrated.
85
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.3.1: Procedures applied in this section: from the capacity installed by
country stated in [35] and [34], the area needed to fulﬁll the capacity installed is
calculated and then is apply to extract the relative capacity factor to compute the
total power production.
The capacity installed by country according to [35] and [34] are used to extract the
share of suitable area necessary to obtain the determined installed capacity, see Figure
5.3.1. Note that Malta and Cyprus are not considered in this analysis. This is realized
applying the 5 MW km−2 of capacity density from [21]. The share of suitable area
is then applied to obtain the relative capacity factor from the wind atlas: from the
rolling mean of the capacity factor measured over the suitable area, the mean referring
to the share of area is then extracted. Therefore, if for example 7% of the suitable area
is necessary to obtain the capacity installed provided by the scenario, that area will
be characterized by the capacity factor of the 7% windiest areas, as it is assumed that
the windiest area will be taken into consideration when building wind farms. To those
capacity factors a loss of 15% [21] is then applied to consider the wake’s loss, and the
total power produced is obtained applying the formula 5.1. The results of total power
production are compared with the one given in [35] and [34]. The share of suitable
area in the Central Scenario in [34] is illustrated in Figure 5.3.2. For the majority
of the countries the share of suitable area is lower than 5%, only Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Germany Luxembourg and Netherlands show higher share, in particular
Belgium and Denmark go beyond the 40% of the total suitable area. These values do
not change drastically between the diﬀerent Scenarios in both [35] and [34]. These
low percentage give an idea of the potential of each country which still could be
exploited compare to the WindEurope Scenarios. Now, the total power produced in
each scenario by the installed capacity mention in [35] and [34] are computed. The
capacity factors applied in [35] and [34] are not provided, therefore is ignored the
way they have obtained those results. The power produced in the Central Scenario
86
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
from [34], applying the capacity factor from GWA3 are illustrated in Figure 5.3.3 as
example.
Figure 5.3.2: Share of suitable area available needed to fulﬁll the installed capacity
presented in the Central Scenario by [34].
Figure 5.3.3: Power produced by country for the Central Scenarios of [34] applying
the capacity factor from GWA3.
The results obtained applying the capacity factors from the wind atlas investigated,
give for all the three wind atlas particularly higher results compared to [35] and [34].
Report [35] and [34] do not provide the procedure and the data used to produce the
power production statistics. It can be assumed they have applied diﬀerent capacity
factors. Hence, it has to be underline, that in the analysis carried out in this section,
only the losses from wake’s eﬀect are considered, whereas during the normal operation
87
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
of wind turbines diﬀerent losses should be counted. These losses have been grouped in:
availability, electrical eﬃciency, turbine performance, environmental, curtailments.
Therefore, it can be assumed that [35] and [34] have taken in consideration this losses
in order to produce a close-to-real prediction. Whereas, this analysis provides an
estimation of the potential of wind energy. As the terrain required is particularly
low, see Figure 5.3.2 where the majority of the countries in the Central Scenario
required less than 5% of the available area, it is assumed that the area used for wind
energy will be the most favourable windy areas. In both Figure 5.3.4 (a) and (b)
GWA3 shows always the highest results in all the scenarios, GWA2, on the other side
gives always the lowest results. In Figure 5.3.4 (b), the blue bar represents the results
obtained applying the capacity factors from NEWA and it provides respectively +65%
in the Low Scenarios, +51% in the Central Scenario and +50% in the High Scenario
compared to the data given in [34], red bar. GWA3 results are shown by the orange
bar, and they illustrate a +74% in the Low Scenarios, +59% in the Central Scenario
and +58% in the High Scenario compared to the data given in [34]. GWA2, on the
other side, is shown by the green bar, and it illustrates a +48% in the Low Scenarios,
+35% in the Central Scenario and +34% in the High Scenario compared to the data
given in [34]. These results diﬀer from Figure 5.3.4 (a) only for few TWh diﬀerence.
Respectively, NEWA gives +67% in the Low Scenarios, +69% in the Central Scenario
and +65% in the High Scenario compared to the data given in [35]. GWA3 gives +76%
in the Low Scenarios, +77% in the Central Scenario and +73% in the High Scenario
compared to the data given in [35]. GWA2 gives +50% in the Low Scenarios, +52%
in the Central Scenario and +49% in the High Scenario compared to the data given in
[35]. These larger power prediction provides an image of the potential of wind energy
between the European countries, they are providing an upper limit of wind potential.
It is obviously not representing of a real production, due to the fact that the capacity
factor applied in the computation counts only an assumption of 15% losses duo to
wake’s eﬀect and does not count other losses.
88
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.3.4: Comparison of the total power produced by the EU-28 countries for
NEWA, GWA3, GWA2 data and the results provided in [35] (a) and for [34] (b) for
the three Scenarios investigated
Furthermore, it is interesting to observe the diﬀerences along the wind atlas. They
provide diﬀerent predictions, GWA3 and NEWA tend to diﬀer of 40-50 TWh whereas
GWA3 and GWA2 give a total production with a diﬀerence between 100-170 TWh,
e.g. in the [35] Central Scenario, GWA3 shows about a 15% larger power produced
compare to the one predicted with the GWA2 data. This is an interesting results to
understand a level of uncertainties of the high resolution wind atlas it self. Comparing
to the results applying GWA3 wind data, NEWA produces a power prediction 5%
lower, and GWA2 15% lower.
Conclusions
The main diﬀerence with the previous comparison with [21] is the approach to the
data. In [21] a total potential of wind energy is investigating limiting the source by
a minimum of 20% of capacity factor, this shows huge potential with discrete wind
resources, measuring 20/26 times the currently capacity installed. Whereas, in this
chapter a more feasible prediction is investigated. The total installed capacity ranges
between 206 GW in the Low Scenario [35] to 299 GW in the High Scenario [34].
This Scenarios diﬀers from the actual onshore wind capacity installed of 171 GW
[34] in 2018 for only 35 GW in the Low Scenario and 128 GW in the High Scenario.
The resource required to fulﬁl the Scenario are not particularly large, therefore it is
assumed that the most favourable areas will be exploited. the share of suitable area
needed is extremely low for the majority of the countries, representing an average
89
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
below the 5% of the suitable area for the Central scenario of [34], see Figure 5.3.2. This
low share justiﬁes the assumption of applying the relative capacity factor to the share
of the area assuming the windiest areas will be used ﬁrst. This assumption leads to
signiﬁcantly high power potential for the European countries. The results are clearly
larger than the ones from [35] and [34]. The main reason is the diﬀerent approach
to the calculation, the prediction in [35] and [34] provide a realistic estimation of the
wind production, therefore it is assumed that they have considered diﬀerent losses
for the production’s computation. Contrarily to this study where only the losses due
to wake’s eﬀect were considered. Nonetheless, the aim of this comparison was to
provide an estimation of the wind power potential that would be generated if the
wind scenario for the European countries were fulﬁlled, showing an upper limit. The
conclusion is that the potential is large and still a huge potential can be exploited.
The scenarios for 2030 shows very low impact to the used of suitable areas, concluding
that a large impact can be fulﬁll through wind energy in the transition from a fossil-
fuel driven economy to a main green base one. Finally, a last interesting observation
are the diﬀerences obtained between the diﬀerent datasets. GWA3 is the wind atlas
which provides the highest results, NEWA shows a 5% less, therefore, it can still
be compared to GWA3. On the other side, GWA2 has 15% less power production
compared to GWA3. Once again it reports lower values. Lastly, it should be noted
that this analysis considers only EU countries, therefore seven out of the 10 complex
terrain countries investigated in the section 4.4.1 are not here considered. reducing
the impact of overestimation due to the WAsP modelling of the high resolution wind
atlas.
5.4
Installed capacity comparison for diﬀerent sce-
narios
Here the capacity installed in the EU-28 countries is compared with the capacity
installed predicted in the other sections. First the total capacity installed by country
in 2018 [4] is illustrated in Figure 5.4.1. Germany has the highest share, 31%, of wind
energy with 52.9 GW installed, followed by Spain with 23.5 GW, UK with 12.8 GW,
France 15.3 GW and Italy 10 GW. In total it provides a total capacity installed of
171 GW. This installed capacity is then compared to the installed capacity predicted
by the Scenario where the 10% of the available suitable areas per country were used
for wind development, from section in section5.1, referring to Figure 5.1.2 upper
ﬁgure.
This scenario proposes the used of the 10% windiest areas among all the
countries and it predicts a total capacity installed of 841 GW, almost 5 times the
currently install capacity. Here, only the EU countries are compared, whereas in the
841 GW predicted all the 34 countries studied in this thesis were considered. However
90
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
from this comparison it results that Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg and
Netherlands have a penetration of wind energy larger than the one predicted using the
10% of the available area, therefore no data are shown in Figure 5.4.2, which shows
the missing GW that are necessary in order to reach a 10% of share of available area
for wind energy by each country, the countries where no data are available are the
once which have already reach a larger share of area used referring to the installed
capacity. Finland, France, Spain, Sweden and united Kingdom are the countries with
still high potential, hence, the countries with still a large share of available area. it
has to be noted that this scenario proposes an extreme prediction, where the capacity
installed would be almost 5 times the actual one.
Referring to a more feasible scenario, Figure 5.4.3 illustrate the GW needed to be
installed in order to satisfy the Central Scenario of [34] prediction for 2030 and reach
253 GW installed. Here, France, Germany and Spain are the countries which are
expected to have the highest development of onshore wind energy. in this case almost
the countries are expected to installed less than 5 GW, less than 2.5 GW for the
majority.
Figure 5.4.1: Total installed capacity for onshore wind energy by country in 2018
[4]
91
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 5. POTENTIAL WIND CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION
ESTIMATION
Figure 5.4.2: Installed capacity miss to reach a 10% of the available area applied
for wind energy.
Figure 5.4.3: Installed capacity miss to reach the prediction for 2030 in the Central
Scenario of [34]
92
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 6
Summary
The results of this thesis could be summarized as follows.
• In section 4.2 the average mean wind speed is compared for 5 database: New
European Wind Atlas (NEWA), Global Wind Atlas 3 (GWA3), Global Wind
Atlas 2 (GWA2), the average of the 30 years (1989-2018) of WRF simulation and
the average of the 30 years of reanalysis(1989-2018) from ERA5 by country. In
general, ERA5 presents considerably lower results in countries characterized by
complex terrain. Overall, higher results are given by GWA3 in Central Europe
and by NEWA in the countries deﬁned by a more complex terrain; WRF shows
close results to GWA3 and NEWA. Whereas GWA2 presents lower results, with
the exception of mountainous countries. Referring to the mean power density,
only NEWA, GWA3, GWA2 and WRF are investigated. Once again, higher
values are presented by GWA3, NEWA shows slightly lower result compared
to GWA3 except again for the mountainous countries.
WRF provides also
slightly lower results compare to GWA3 and NEWA in particular in complex
terrain countries. GWA2 illustrates the lowest results. These results reﬂect the
validation carried out in [11] where ERA5 seem aﬀected by the coarse resolution
in particular over complex terrain, whereas microscale modelling wind climate
are subject to an overestimation of the wind resource over complex terrain.
• In section 4.3 slope (>20%) and RIX (>5%) parameters are applied to mask
the wind atlas of NEWA, GWA3 and GWA2. This masking aﬀects strongly the
area available in some countries, reaching a 95% of area masked. Although these
high share of area masked, the mean wind speed is not particularly aﬀected,
whereas the mean power density shows a strong decrease in some countries for
the 10 windiest areas. The countries more aﬀected are Albania, Austria, Bosnia,
Croatia, Greece, Italy, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Norway, Slovenia and
Switzerland. This high decrease can be linked to the eﬀect of overestimation
93
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 6. SUMMARY
of the microscale modelling over complex orography [11].
This eﬀect is less
noticeable for the 50% of windiest areas, suggesting that the larger share of
values applied in the average decrease the impacts of masked areas.
Again
GWA2 shows the lowest results, NEWA seems to be more impacted producing
lower results compare to GWA3, which shows the highest results.
• In section 4.4 the area suitable for wind energy development are extracted ap-
plying diﬀerent layers of constraints. Although the area of some countries is
strongly reduced, this does not seem correlated with a strong response in the
wind atlas investigated. More signiﬁcant diﬀerences are shown by the mean
power density. Once again, GWA3 shows higher results, NEWA lower results
compared to GWA3, except in the most mountainous countries, and GWA2 has
the lowest one. As additional comparison with the results obtained in section
4.4, an increase is shown in the mean power density compared to the one of
those countries particularly aﬀected by the masking in section 4.3. This in-
crease in the mean power density is investigated for the countries more aﬀected.
It results in an increase of the mean power density by a 10-50%, this can be
mainly justiﬁed to the overestimation of WAsP modelling [20]. Regarding the
capacity factors, GWA3 has the highest values, for all the three classes. This
diﬀerence is clear for the 10% windiest area and it reduces when looking the the
50% windiest areas.
• From section 5 the wind potential estimation is investigated by country. First,
in section 5.1 diﬀerent share of suitable area are considered for wind energy
development. Already from the scenario where only 10% of the suitable area
per country is used for wind energy, the capacity installed reaches 841 GW,
5 times more the actual installed capacity of the only EU countries, with a
power production estimation over 2500 TWh, this is produced by a capacity
factor from class II and taking into account only the losses related to wake’s
eﬀect. Therefore,it provides a upper limit of the wind potential. Half of the
production is expected by Spain, France, Sweden, Finland and Norway. The
capacity installed reaches more than 2500GW applying the 30% of suitable area
reaches, 4000 GW with the 50% and 8400 GW in the 100% scenario.
• In section 5.2 a comparison with the results from [21] is reproduced applying
the wind atlas from GWA3. The subject of this investigation are the area with
a capacity factor >20%. First the total area suitable extracted in section 5.2.8
is larger, followed by a similar share of area masked by the capacity factor
limit. This leads to larger capacity installed predicted, +33%. Furthermore,
the capacity factors obtained in GWA3 are in general larger, compare to [21].
This provides higher power production predicted compare to [21], +64%. The
average capacity factor extracted from this results results in a total capacity
94
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 6. SUMMARY
factor of 34 for GWA3 and 28 for [21]. This larger production can be justiﬁed
by the improvement in the wind resource due to high resolution wind atlas.
Although it has to consider the overestimation eﬀect over complex, nevertheless,
of the 8 countries veriﬁed in the previous analysis as the ones more aﬀected
in the overestimation eﬀect, only 3 are considered in this analysis, leading to
sustain that high resolution do bring an improvement in the wind resource
estimation. Considering the area with a capacity factor >20%, 4566 GW of
capacity installed would be available, more than 27 times the actual capacity
installed in Europe, and 13816 TWh of potential power, again only wake’s losses
are counted.
• In section 5.3 the three scenarios of WindEurope in [35] and in [34] are re-
produced applying the three wind atlas: NEWA, GWA3 and GWA2. These
scenarios require a limited increase of capacity installed, linked to very low
share of available area, less than 5% for the majority of the countries. The
estimation of the power production achieved by the wind atlas is larger than
the one predicted in the two reports, in a range of 34-77 % larger. This because
the capacity factor applied from the wind atlas take in consideration only an
average of losses due to wake eﬀect, diﬀerently from [35] and [34] which provide
a realistic prediction. Particular is the diﬀerence in the prediction between the
wind atlas, NEWA give a production 5% lower and GWA2 15% lower compare
to GWA3.
95
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
Wind potential estimation has been addressed in diﬀerent studies from a global to
a local point of view, nonetheless low-resolution wind atlas have been applied to
investigate the wind resource [21] [25] [26] [27]. Recently, new high-resolution wind
atlas have become available. This high-resolution wind data allow the observation of
local wind features and the capture of particular wind speed variation due to diﬀerent
terrain features, eﬀects that are not recorded by the low resolution of Reanalysis data.
The few studies that have applied high-resolution wind climate to the wind resource
assessment, show an increase of the wind potential [36]. Inasmuch, these analyses
restricted the area of study to a local zone, therefore country base analyses are still
not available.
Overall, the high-resolution wind atlas provides higher wind resource compared to
reanalysis ERA5 and NEWA WRF. This occurs principally over the countries deﬁned
by a more complex terrain. This is linked to the coarse resolution of low-resolution
wind atlas which do not allow the capture of local ﬂows due to orography and terrain
features decreasing the average wind atlas.
In parallel, an overestimation of the
wind resource eﬀect due to the limitation of the WAsP microscale model simulation
over complex terrain has to be taken into account in countries deﬁned by complex
terrain. Pointed out these two main aspects of high-resolution wind atlas, it can be
concluded that overall high-resolution seem to provide higher wind power prediction.
This is clear in the comparison of the results from the European study [21], where
the average capacity factor, over the entire area of study applying the high-resolution
wind atlas, results in a capacity factor of 34, contrarily to the capacity factor of 28
obtained applying Reanalysis data corrected with high-resolution wind atlas (GWA1).
Among the 26 countries investigated, GWA3 provides a higher capacity factors for 25
countries between 3 to 19 % points of increase. Hence the hypothesis addressed at the
beginning of this thesis is veriﬁed. Applying high-resolution wind data to estimate
the wind energy potential provide an improvement in the results, leading to a larger
96
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSIONS
estimation.
Regarding the potential available between the European countries, diﬀerent scenarios
are investigated. The scenarios presented by WindEurope for the 2030 EU horizon
seem to be all doable. The share of terrain needed to fulﬁl the capacity installed
predicted results very low for the majority of the countries, leading to the assumption
that the best wind resource area will be exploited ﬁrst. This allowed the application of
very high capacity factor, and consequently to a high estimation of power production.
A diﬀerent scenario supposes to apply 10% of the total suitable area per each country
for wind energy development.
Only few countries have already a larger installed
capacity, Denmark, Germany, Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg. The other
countries have still a large share of areas available. This will lead to an installed
capacity of 841 GW, almost 5 times the current installed capacity, and an estimation
of the power production larger than 2500 TWh, this measure represents the total
potential of these 841 GW, no losses are considered with the exception of wake’s
eﬀect. It provides an index of the extremely high potential of wind still available to
be exploited to faster the transition of a Europe running on green energy as earliest
as possible. The area is available and the wind resource is favourable.
Hence, it is proved that high-resolution lead to higher wind estimation. However, the
comparison realized in this thesis has proved that diﬀerent high-resolution wind atlas
diﬀers between them-self. The comparison between the New European Wind Atlas,
Global Wind Atlas 3 and Global Wind Atlas 2 through the three phases (geophysical,
topographical and for suitable areas) has proved that they show discrepancies, in
particular, the mean power density can lead to large diﬀerences. In general, higher
results are provided by GWA3, whereas GWA2 lead to lower statistics. NEWA shows
close results to GWA3. They are aﬀected diﬀerently through the diﬀerent masking
process. A clear overestimation seems to occur in the countries characterized by more
complex terrain. NEWA and GWA2 seem the ones more aﬀected by this phenomena.
In the mean power density, this overestimation is measured in an increase of 10-50
%. Therefore, when estimating wind resource, applying high-resolution wind atlas,
particular attention has to be paid over the areas characterized by complex terrain.
Finally, to estimate the accuracy of the database, the comparison between the power
production predicted for the diﬀerent scenarios of WindEurope are compared along
the wind atlas. It results in a lower estimation of 5% for NEWA and lower of 15%
for GWA2 compared to GWA3. NEWA and GWA3 are the most recently released
dataset, 2019, GWA3 replace GWA2 on account of its improvements in the modelling
phase, in particular in the generalization process and in the microscale modelling.
Therefore, the larger diﬀerence can be linked to the technical improvement applied in
both NEWA and GWA3. Nevertheless, the diﬀerence described by NEWA and GWA3
results low. A further comparison for the scenario where all the area with a capacity
factor larger than 20% were applied in the computation, it results in an average of
97
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSIONS
a capacity factor extracted from the total power produced and the capacity installed
almost identical fro GWA3 and NEWA, and slighter lower for GWA2, leading again
to the conclusion that larger the amount of data considered, smaller the diﬀerence
between the database is.
7.1
Future works
This thesis has proved that applying high-resolution wind atlas in the estimation
of the wind potential on a country level, leads to higher results. The predictions
available for future scenarios underestimate the resources, reducing the potential of
wind energy that could be actually exploited. This thesis has covered the countries
over Europe, it would be interesting to measure the improvement in the estimations
on a global scale.
Furthermore, a sensitivity analysis over complex area would reduce the uncertainty
of these high-resolution wind atlas, providing a measure of the overestimation eﬀect,
that has been observed, in countries with complex orography.
Finally, these high-resolution wind atlas can be applied in the extraction of the most
favourable windy sites from the suitable areas and produce more realistic prediction
of wind energy production. The development of wind farms required time, this source
can help to highlight the most windiest location around the globe and produce real
estimation of the actual future prediction. Furthermore, this thesis has applied a
ﬁx wake’s loss assumption to the capacity factor and a ﬁx capacity density, this
wind atlas allow to investigate the wind ﬂow at high resolution and analyzed the
eﬀect between diﬀerent obstacles, therefore, the eﬀect of wind turbines’ interaction.
This would allow to produce more accurate prediction of the capacity density for
speciﬁc sites, helping to lead faster predictions of wind power estimation close to real
values. Finally, diﬀerent technologies related to the diﬀerent wind resource could
be implemented in the prediction, to observe how this would lead to an additional
improvement of the wind potential estimation.
98
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1] NASA.
Nasa earth observatory:
World of change:
Global tempera-
tures, 2020. URL https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/world-of-change/
global-temperatures. Last accessed 8 February 2020.
[2] C. B. Field, V. Barros, T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, K.J. Mach
M.D. Mastrandrea, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley
(Eds.). Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaptation. 2012.
[3] V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H. O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla,
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R.
Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor,
and T. Waterﬁeld (eds.). IPCC, Global warming of 1.5 ◦C. An IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 ◦C above pre-industrial levels and
related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening
the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and
eﬀorts to eradicate poverty. 2018.
[4] A.
Whiteman,
J.
Esparrago,
S.
Elsayed,
S.
Rueda,
I.
Arkhipova,
and
G.
Escamilla.
Renewable
energy
statistics
2019.
Technical
report,
2019.
URL
https://www.irena.org/publications/2019/Mar/
Renewable-Capacity-Statistics-2019.
[5] DTU. Global wind atlas, 2019. URL https://globalwindatlas.info. Last
accessed 8 February 2020.
[6] DTU.
The
new
european
wind
atlas,
2019.
URL
https://map.
neweuropeanwindatlas.eu/. last accessed 8 Feb 2020.
[7] Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser.
Energy.
Our World in Data, 2020.
https://ourworldindata.org/energy.
[8] W. C. Skamarock, J. B. Klemp, J. Dudhia, D. O. Gill, D. M. Barker, M. G. Duda,
X.-Y. Huang, W. Wang, and J. G. Powers. A Description of the Advanced Re-
search WRF Version 3. Technical Report NCAR/TN-475+STR, National Center
99
==PAGE:108==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
for Atmospheric Research, 2008. URL https://opensky.ucar.edu/islandora/
object/technotes%3A500/datastream/PDF/view. last accessed: 19.10.2019.
[9] ECMWF.
European centre for medium-range weather forecasts, 2019.
URL
https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/datasets/reanalysis-datasets/
era5.
[10] Björn Witha, Andrea Hahmann, Tija Sile, Martin Dörenkämper, Yasemin Ezber,
Elena Garcıa-Bustamante, J. Fidel González-Rouco, and Jorge Navarro. Wrf
model sensitivity studies and speciﬁcations for the newa mesoscale wind atlas
production runs. Technical report, Oldenburg University, 2019. URL https:
//zenodo.org/record/2682604#.Xj06jhNKgWo.
[11] Martin Dörenkämper, Bjarke T. Olsen, Björn Witha, Andrea N. Hahmann,
Neil N. Davis, Jordi Barcons, Yasemin Ezber, Elena García-Bustamante, J. Fi-
del González-Rouco, Jorge Navarro, Mariano Sastre-Marugán, Tija S¯ile, Wilke
Trei, Mark Žagar, Jake Badger, Julia Gottschall, Javier Sanz Rodrigo, and Jakob
Mann. The making of the New European Wind Atlas, part 2: Production and
evaluation. Geophys. Model Development, submitted, 2020.
[12] D. P. Dee, S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi,
U. Andrae, M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, P. Bechtold, A. C. M. Bel-
jaars, L. van de Berg, J. Bidlot, N. Bormann, C. Delsol, R. Dragani, M. Fuentes,
A. J. Geer, L. Haimberger, S. B. Healy, H. Hersbach, E. V. Hólm, L. Isaksen,
P. Kå llberg, M. Köhler, M. Matricardi, a. P. McNally, B. M. Monge-Sanz, J.-J.
Morcrette, B.-K. Park, C. Peubey, P. de Rosnay, C. Tavolato, J.-N. Thépaut,
and F. Vitart. The ERA-Interim reanalysis: conﬁguration and performance of
the data assimilation system. 137(656):553–597, April 2011. ISSN 00359009. doi:
10.1002/qj.828. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/qj.828.
[13] Copernicus.
Slope,
2020.
URL
https://land.copernicus.eu/
imagery-in-situ/eu-dem/eu-dem-v1-0-and-derived-products/slope.
[14] Copernicus.
Corine land cover, 2020.
URL https://land.copernicus.eu/
pan-european/corine-land-cover.
[15] Erik Gløersen, Martin Price, Hallgeir Aalbu, Erwin Stucki, Olivier Roque, Martin
Schuler, and Manfred Perlik. Mountain Areas in Europe: Analysis of mountain
areas in EU member states, acceding and other European countries. 2004.
[16] NREL.
20% Wind Energy by 2030: Increasing Wind Energy’s Contribution
to U.S. Electricity Supply. U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory , U.S
Department of Energy, 2008. DOE/GO-102008-2567.
100
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[17] Ozbay Ahmet. Experimental investigations on the wake interference of multiple
wind turbines. Master’s thesis, Iowa State University, 2012. URL https://lib.
dr.iastate.edu/etd/12427.
[18] S.P.S. Arya, M.E. Capuano, and L.C. Fagen.
Some ﬂuid modeling studies
of ﬂow and dispersion over two-dimensional low hills.
Atmospheric Environ-
ment (1967), 21(4):753 – 764, 1987. ISSN 0004-6981. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0004-6981(87)90071-0. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0004698187900710.
[19] A.J. Bowen and Niels Gylling Mortensen. WAsP prediction errors due to site
orography. Number 995(EN) in Denmark. Forsknings center Risø. Risø-R. 2004.
ISBN 87-550-2320-7.
[20] A. J. Bowen and N. G. Mortensen. Exploring the limits of wasp the wind atlas
analysis and application program.
In A. Zervos, H. Ehmann, and P. Helm,
editors, 1996 European Union wind energy conference. Proceedings, pages 584–
587. H.S. Stephens and Associates, 1996.
[21] F. Dalla Longa, T. Kober, J. Badger, P. Volker, C. Hoyer-Klick, I. Hidalgo,
H. Medarac, W. Nijs, S. Politis, D. Tarvydas, and A. Zucker. Wind potentials
for eu and neighbouring countries: Input datasets for the jrc-eu-times model.
Technical report, EUR 29083 EN, Publications Oﬃce of the European Union,
Luxembourg, 2018.
[22] Beata Sliz-Szkliniarz. Energy Planning in Selected European Regions - Meth-
ods for Evaluating the Potential of Renewable Energy Sources. KIT Scientiﬁc
Publishing, 2013.
[23] Y. Ditkovich and A. Kuperman. Comparison of three methods for wind turbine
capacity factor estimation. The Scientiﬁc World Journal, page 7 pp, 2014. URL
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/805238.
[24] Paul Denholm, Maureen Hand, Maddalena Jackson, and Sean Ong. Land-use
requirements of modern wind power plants in the united states. Technical report,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, August 2009. NREL/TP-6A2-45834.
[25] Xi Lu, Michael B. McElroy, and Juha Kiviluoma. Global potential for wind-
generated electricity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106
(27):10933–10938, 2009. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0904101106. URL
https://www.pnas.org/content/106/27/10933.
[26] C. L. Archer and M. Z. Jacobson. Evaluation of global wind power. J. Geophys.
Res., D12110(110), 2005. doi: 0.1029/2004JD005462. URL https://doi.org/
10.1029/2004JD005462.
101
==PAGE:110==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] Monique Hoogwijk, Bert de Vries, and Wim Turkenburg.
Assessment of
the global and regional geographical, technical and economic potential of on-
shore wind energy.
Energy Economics, 26(5):889–919, 2004.
ISSN 0140-
9883.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2004.04.016.
URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140988304000246.
[28] Baldur Eliasson. Renewable energy sources; Power resources. Baden-Dättwil,
ABB Environmental Aﬀairs, Switzerland, 1998.
[29] Gilbert M. Masters.
Renewable and Eﬃcient Electric Power Systems.
John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2004.
[30] Daniela Thrän Marcus Eichhorn, Philip Tafarte.
Towards energy landscapes
– “pathﬁnder for sustainable wind power locations”. Elsevier, 134(27):611–621,
2017. ISSN ISSN 0360-5442. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0904101106. URL https://
www.pnas.org/content/106/27/10933.
[31] Julien Armijo and Cédric Philibert. Flexible production of green hydrogen and
ammonia from variable solar and wind energy: Case study of chile and argentina.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 45(3):1541–1558, 2020. ISSN 0360-
3199. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.11.028. URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319919342089.
[32] M. J. Grubb and N. I. Meyer. Renewable Energy: Sources for Fuels and Elec-
tricity. Island Press, Washington DC, 1993.
[33] European
Commission,
Joint
Research
Centre.
Enspreso
-
wind
-
onshore
and
oﬀshore.,
2019.
URL
http://data.europa.eu/89h/
6d0774ec-4fe5-4ca3-8564-626f4927744e.
[34] Aloys Nghiem and Iván Pineda. Wind energy in europe: Scenarios for 2030.
Technical report, WindEurope (EWEA), September 2017.
[35] Giorgio Corbetta, Andrew Ho, and Iván Pineda. Wind energy scenarios for 2030.
Technical report, European Wind Energy Association, August 2015.
[36] Olexandr Balyk, Jake Badger, and Karlsson Kenneth Bernard. The eﬀect of
microscale spatial variability of wind on estimation of technical and economic
wind potential. 2015. URL http://www.internationalenergyworkshop.org/
meetings-8.html. 34th edition of the International Energy Workshop ; Confer-
ence date: 03-06-2015 Through 05-06-2015.
102
==PAGE:111==
Appendix A
Table and Figure appendix
Figure A.0.1: Slope conversion table
103
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX A. TABLE AND FIGURE APPENDIX
Figure A.0.2: Table with the comparison of the mean wind speed values [ms−1], at
the 50% windiest areas for each data set. The color bar is the same used to illustrate
the results of the GWA 3 database in Figure 4.2.2
104
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX A. TABLE AND FIGURE APPENDIX
Figure A.0.3: Table with the comparison of the mean power density [ W m−2 ], at
the 10% windiest areas for each data set. The color bar is the same used to illustrate
the results of the GWA3 database in Figure 4.2.6
105
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX A. TABLE AND FIGURE APPENDIX
Figure A.0.4:
Capacity Factor class I comparison between NEWA, GWA3 and
GWA2 results. 10% windiest area, left ﬁgure, 50% windiest areas, right ﬁgure
106
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX A. TABLE AND FIGURE APPENDIX
Figure A.0.5: Capacity Factor class III comparison between NEWA, GWA3 and
GWA2 results. 10% windiest area, left ﬁgure, 50% windiest areas, right ﬁgure
107
