==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Impact of Residents’ Access to Indoor Cli-
mate and Consumption Data on Compre-
hensive Retrofit
Lasse Ring Kildemoes (s143945)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 402
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.iciee.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the effect the installation of a building energy management
systems with in-home displays, providing information and feedback about energy con-
sumption, have on the actual energy consumption. The study is made for a social
housing complex in Ballerup, Denmark, consisting of four apartment blocks with a
total of 244 apartments with various sizes. The study draws on the analyses of heat-
ing, hot and cold water and electricity consumption data during eight months from
November 2018 up to and including June 2019. The data was implemented in R and
analyzed using piecewise and multiple linear regression as well as stepwise regression
as the main tools.
The majority of the analyses made in this thesis found that there is no significant
correlation between the level of interaction with the in-home displays, providing oc-
cupants with real-time feedback on their heating, water and electricity consumption,
and the actual consumption. Only when using stepwise regression, a statistically sig-
nificant effect was found between interacting with the in-home displays and heating
consumption during the heating season. The results also show that the estimated
effect for interacting with the in-home displays varied depending on the floor area.
The effect is negative for small apartments but decrease when the floor area increases
and eventually become positive.
Furthermore, the relation between the heating consumption from both heat cost al-
location and floor heating per square meter and the average indoor temperature in
Korngården was investigated. The results show a great variation in heating consump-
tion necessary to maintain the same indoor temperature. Furthermore, a decrease
in heating consumption is observed when comparing December 2016, January and
February 2017 with December 2018, January and February 2019. The decrease can
to some extent be explained by the outside weather conditions, which were colder in
2016/2017, but might also indicate that energy savings are present when looking at
a longer time perspective than the eight months used for this thesis.
Although the results of this study do not show a clear correlation between usage of
the in-home displays and energy reduction, increased energy information and feedback
through in-home displays can potentially have an essential role when it comes to
reducing energy consumption in domestic buildings. To fulfill this role, uncomplicated
commissioning without technical challenges combined with customized data in terms
of frequency, content, aggregation, and presentation is decisive. However, this is a
very challenging task as consumers respond to energy information and feedback highly
individually.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Dette speciale undersøger hvilken effekt det har på energiforbruget at installere et
bygnings energistyrings system med interne skærme som giver information og feed-
back vedrørende energiforbruget. Undersøgelsen er lavet til et socialt boligkompleks i
Ballerup, Danmark, der består af fire boligblokke med i alt 244 lejligheder i forskellige
størrelser. Undersøgelsen bygger på analyser af data om varme-, koldt og varmt vand-
samt elforbrug i otte måneder fra november 2018 til og med juni 2019. Datasættet
blev implementeret i R og analyseret ved hjælp af stykkevis lineær regression og mul-
tipel regression og variabelselektion som de mest markante analyse værktøjer.
Størstedelen af analyserne foretaget i dette speciale viser, at der ikke er nogen
signifikant sammenhæng mellem interaktionsniveauet med skærmene i hjemmet, som
giver beboerne feedback om deres opvarmning, vand- og elforbrug i realtid, og det
faktiske forbrug. Kun ved anvendelse af variabelselektion blev der fundet en statis-
tisk signifikant effekt mellem interaktion med skærmene og varmeforbrug i opvarmn-
ingssæsonen. Resultaterne viser også, at den estimerede effekt for interaktion med
skærmene varierer afhængigt af gulvarealet. Den estimerede effekt er negativ for små
lejligheder, men faldt når gulvarealet steg for til sidst at blive positivt.
Derudover blev forholdet mellem varmeforbruget fra både radiatorer, opvarming af
vand og gulvvarme per kvadratmeter og den gennemsnitlige indetemperatur i Ko-
rngården undersøgt. Resultaterne viser en stor variation i det varmeforbrug der er
nødvendigt for at opretholde den samme indetemperatur. Derudover er der et fald i
varmeforbruget, når man sammenligner december 2016, januar og februar 2017 med
december 2018, januar og februar, 2019. Faldet kan til en vis grad forklares med de
udendørs vejrforhold der var koldere i 2016/2017, men kan også indikere, at Korngår-
den har sparet energi, hvis man ser på et længere tidsperspektiv end de otte måneder,
der er brugt til denne afhandling.
På trods af, at resultaterne ikke viser en klar sammenhæng mellem brug af
skærmene og energireduktion, kan øget energiinformation og feedback via skærme i
hjemmet potentielt have en vigtig rolle, når det kommer til at reducere energiforbruget
i beboelsesejendomme. Men for at kunne opfylde dette potentiale er en ukompliceret
idriftsættelse uden tekniske udfordringer kombineret med tilpasset data med hensyn
til frekvens, indhold, aggregering og præsentation afgørende. Dette er dog en meget
udfordrende opgave, da forbrugere reagerer meget individuelt på energiinformation
og feedback.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This study was carried out as my master thesis.
The workload of the project is
32.5 ECTS points and was conducted at the Department of Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. This thesis is the final project in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Architectural Engineering.
The thesis was conducted from August 26, 2019, to February 10, 2020.
I would like to thank Senior Researcher Rune K. Andersen, who was my supervisor
throughout this study, for taking time out of your schedule every week to discuss
and drive the project forward by being an excellent sounding board.
Thank you,
your assistance was invaluable in making this thesis become a reality. Furthermore,
I would like to thank Ph.D. Laura Canale for an instructive collaboration and for
accelerating the thesis in the early stages.
Kongens Lyngby, February 6, 2020
Lasse Ring Kildemoes (s143945)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
In-home Displays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Data Processing and Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Results
15
4.1
Relationship Between Indoor and Outdoor Temperature . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Multiple Linear Regression of Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Interactions Effect on Consumption Based on Clicks . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Stepwise Regression by AIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Relation Between Consumptions and HCA and Indoor Temperature
.
38
5
Discussion
43
5.1
Data condition and in-home displays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Uncertainty of measurements and statistical analyses . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Sample size and influencing factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Electric heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.5
Normalization in relation to floor area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.6
Assumptions related to clicks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.7
Heating and indoor temperature comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.8
Implementation and usage of In-home displays
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
51
7
Appendix A
53
7.1
Estimated Effect for percentage weeks clicked as the independent variable 53
7.2
Multiple linear regression output average clicks per week . . . . . . . .
55
7.3
Multiple linear regression plots average clicks per week . . . . . . . . .
59
7.4
Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicks . . . . . . .
61
7.5
Multiple linear regression plots percentage weeks clicks . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Appendix B
69
8.1
Estimated Effect for percentage weeks clicked as the independent variable 69
8.2
Multiple linear regression outputs average clicks per week including
interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
8.3
Multiple linear regression plots average clicks per week including inter-
actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8.4
Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicked including
interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.5
Multiple linear regression plots percentage weeks clicked including in-
teractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9
Appendix C
83
9.1
Stepwise Selection for the Entire Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
9.2
Stepwise Selection for the Heating Season . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Denmark has the ambition of being independent of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas) by
2050. This means that by 2050, Denmark must be able to produce renewable energy
enough to cover the total Danish energy consumption. To reach this goal, the pro-
duction of renewable energy (wind, biogas, wood) need to increase, but at the same
time, the energy consumption needs to be reduced [1]. In 2018 residential buildings
were responsible for 30% of the total energy consumption in Denmark [2]. Most of
the residential buildings in Denmark were built before the first energy regulations
regarding households were introduced in 1980, and residential buildings are therefore
attracting considerable interest due to the great potential for energy savings [3]. Thus,
energy renovations of residential buildings are important if Denmark is to reach its
goal of becoming independent of fossil fuels by 2050. Another important initiative is
to provide the end-users with information and knowledge about consumption data.
This knowledge can accelerate energy efficiency in everyday life and increase aware-
ness about energy consumption levels and patterns, and encourage informed decisions
by the end-users to reduce energy consumption. In recent years the development of
energy technology and the integration of sensors and smart meters within buildings
have increased rapidly. This makes it possible to provide the end-users with real-time
feedback about energy consumption through sophisticated building energy manage-
ment systems (BEMS) and in-home displays (IHDs). Building energy management
systems and real-time energy feedback are widely considered some of the most impor-
tant actions to increase energy efficiency and energy savings [4].
Previous studies published on real-time feedback about energy consumption, show
that the impact on energy and consumption varies widely across individual house-
holds, suggesting that households respond to energy feedback is highly individual.
Studies show that energy and consumption feedback may lead to energy savings be-
tween 5-15 %, but that it depends on the content, frequency, and presentation of the
information [5][6]. A comprehensive literature review of over 70 studies made in 2019,
which provide an overview of energy savings in residential buildings associated with
energy feedback, show that a more realistic energy consumption reduction is between
5-10 %. This review also emphasizes that the reductions depend on the presentation
and how the feedback fit the household and occupants [4].
At the same time, other studies question the accuracy of these estimated reductions,
arguing that the realistic reduction that can be associated with energy feedback
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
through in-home displays are only within the range of 3-5% [7].
This thesis investigates the social housing Korngården in Ballerup, located north-
west of Copenhagen. Between 2015 and 2019 Korngården went through and extensive
energy renovation. As a part of the energy efficiency plan made for the renovation, a
sophisticated BEMS was installed and each apartment was equipped with an in-home
display providing real-time energy consumption feedback wired to temperature and
humidity sensors and smart meters [8]. The displays were placed in the hallway and
provide occupants with real-time indoor and outdoor climate feedback. Furthermore,
the displays provided real-time feedback on electricity and heat cost allocation along-
side hot and cold water consumption for both kitchen and bath, relative humidity
and indoor temperature in each apartment. The system also provides the opportu-
nity to compare real-time data with previous consumption data and data from other
apartments with similar occupant composition.
The purpose of the thesis was to investigate the effect the installation of building
energy management systems and in-home displays had on the energy consumption,
and compare it to previous studies made. This was done by analyzing whether the
level of interactions between the residents and the in-home display could be signifi-
cantly linked to the energy consumption, obtained from Korngården after the reno-
vation. By comparing the number of interactions between the end-user and the IHD
for each apartment in Korngården with the associated energy consumption from each
apartment, a general correlation was sought. The energy consumption data obtained
includes both electricity, heat cost allocators, cold and warm water and floor heating.
This thesis is not going to look at the specific technology used to generate the data.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This project investigates the social housing Korngården in Ballerup, located north-
west of Copenhagen, after a comprehensive renovation. Korngården consists of four
multi-story apartment blocks and was originally built in 1958. The four apartment
blocks had a total of 248 identical apartments facing east-west, but as a part of the
renovation, Korngården now consists of 244 apartments with various sizes between
69-114 m2. One of the visions for the extensive renovation of Korngården was to
lower the energy consumption significantly. Therefore, a new balanced mechanical
ventilation with heat recovery was installed in all four apartment blocks. Further-
more, the building facade was given a complete makeover, which included increasing
the insulation and moving the facade out to the original roof overhang which also
increased the total floor area. All apartments also got new kitchens, bathrooms, and
piping for heating and domestic water. A green switch was also installed at the en-
trance in each apartment making it possible to turn off specific power sockets in the
apartment, as an initiative to lower unintentional electricity consumption. Further-
more, a building energy management systems with in-home displays were installed,
making the occupants able to get real-time energy consumption feedback [8][9]. The
project was started in February 2015 and finished in May 2019 [10]. The renovation
was made one building block at the time, starting with Block 3, then Block 2, Block
1 and ending with Block 4. The first occupants moved out of Block 3 in August 2015
and the last occupants moving back into Block 4 in January 2019. The project took
919 days total but was initially planned to take 741 days [11]. One issue that can be
seen in the data obtained from Korngården, was the commissioning of the in-home
displays. The data shows large fallout periods where data have not been logged.
2.1
In-home Displays
As mentioned in the introduction each in-home displays was wired to temperature
and humidity sensors and smart meters in the individual apartments, capable of pro-
viding hourly data. The IHDs were placed in the hallway and specifically designed to
provide the occupants with data regarding individual water, heating and electricity
consumption, making it possible to monitor and gain insight into their energy con-
sumption data. The hourly data generated was presented on the IHDs providing the
occupants with the ability to track their consumption and indoor climate throughout
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Background
Figure 2.1: Kornården after the renovation (picture taken 22/10/2019).
the day in real-time.
The information was made accessible through different cards which when clicked on
the display gave access to further information. Cards are the term the manufacturer
used to describe the rectangles shown in figure 2.2. To navigate between the cards
on the IHDs were designed with arrows that are circled in figure 2.3.
The IHDs have a variety of cards with different functions. One card gives access
to a collection of tips to lower the consumption and/or improve the indoor environ-
ment, such as remembering to turn off all the lights in the apartment by using the
green switch or remembering to air out. Another card notifies the occupants if the
water is leaking somewhere in the apartment by displaying an alarm, and yet another
card show the present-day weather forecasts, to help the occupants dress according
to the weather. The IHDs also have cards that make it possible for occupants to
visualize their daily, weekly and monthly consumption data, for cold and warm wa-
ter, electricity and heating. The data is presented as cumulative bar plots presented
Figure 2.2: Card clicks.
Figure 2.3: Navigation clicks.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 In-home Displays
5
in the respective unit and updated hourly. Within these cards, the occupants also
have the opportunity to compare their consumption with other users in the building
with similar occupant composition. They can also compare data with their historical
consumption data, making it possible to see whether more or less energy has been
consumed the present week compared to the previous weeks. Furthermore, the cards
made it possible to see an estimation of the expenses associated with their consump-
tion in DKK.
The IHD also made it possible for the occupants to visualize indoor climate data e.g.
indoor temperature and relative humidity, these were not shown as cumulative plots
but given as instantaneous values on the IHD. An example of an alarm card and a
consumption card for water consumption can be seen on figure 2.4 and 2.5.
Figure 2.4: Alarm card for water leaking.
Figure 2.5: Card for water consumption.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
Data Processing and Filtering
The data from the building energy management system in the 244 apartments in
Korngården acquired and examined in this thesis did not include hourly values but
average daily values. The data consisted of values for indoor temperature (°C) and
relative humidity data (%), as well as daily consumption values for hot and cold wa-
ter in bath and kitchen (L), floor heating in the bathroom (kWh), electricity (kWh)
and heat cost allocation or HCA (unit) for each apartment. The data obtained also
included weekly values of how many times the occupant(s) in each apartment had
clicked/interacted with the IHDs.
The interactions were divided between two ac-
tion types, navigation clicks and card clicks in the data. Navigation clicks were only
related to navigating around between the different information on the display, and
card clicks were registered whenever a user clicked on a specific ’card’ presented on
the display to access further information. It was decided not to distinguish between
navigation and card clicks, as it was assumed that both clicks were made with the
intention of seeking knowledge from the display and thereby gain insight into their
energy consumption. All apartments were equipped with a specific installation ID
which made it possible to match consumption data and interaction data.
The original period of data obtained, span from the 1st of August 2017 to the 30th
of June 2019. However, the data was very deficient with long fall out periods and
inconsistent data. After considerable processing which included filtering away invalid
data, a period of 238 days lasting from the 5th of November 2018 to the 30th of June
2019 was selected based on having reliable data collected from 237 of the apartments.
The processing and filtering of the data included deleting specific days of data from
an apartment, if the indoor temperature and/or relative humidity was equal to zero,
as this was seen as a shutdown of the building energy management systems. Outliers
in the data set were found using the interquartile range calculations for all data
variables. The specific outliers within the variables were deleted and replaced with
the symbol NA (not available) within the data set. A list showing all the variables can
be seen in table 3.1. The HCA consumption data is represented four times in table 3.1,
accompanied with a number from one to four. These numbers are an indicator of the
size of the apartment. Small apartments in Korngården will have HCA1 and HCA2,
larger apartments have HCA1, HCA2, and HCA3, and only the biggest apartments
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Methodology
will have from HCA1 and up to HCA4.
Table 3.1: Variables and unit overview.
Variable
Unit
Temperature
°C
Relative Humidity
%
Electricity
kWh
Cold Water Bath
L
Cold Water Kitchen
L
Warm Water Bath
L
Warm Water Kitchen
L
HCA1
unit
HCA2
unit
HCA3
unit
HCA4
unit
Floor Heating Bath
kWh
After the filtering, 237 of the 244 apartments were used to investigate the cor-
relation between the indoor and outdoor temperature. Daily average outdoor tem-
perature and relative humidity data from a sensor located in Herlev, roughly 3.5 km
from Korngården were obtained and daily and weekly averages were calculated. The
measurements were made with a Netatmo sensor placed on a north-facing building
facade, beneath the roof overhang.
The data obtained was crosschecked with average values from the Danish Meteoro-
logical Institute (DMI) for Ballerup to make sure that the data was reliable. The
comparison showed deviations below 0.75 degrees Celsius from November 2018 up
until April 2019 where deviations increased but stayed between 1.45 and 3 degrees
Celsius for the rest of the data period. These deviations were seen as acceptable and
the data from Herlev was used.
To perform some of the statistical analyses, some additional data processing was
needed. The data was altered to represent weekly averages, instead of daily averages.
Subsequently, all rows containing a weekly value of NA were deleted, except for HCA3
and HCA4, since not all apartments have HCA3 and HCA4. This elimination of NA
values was made to ensure that apartments used for the multiple linear regression
contained data for all variables. After the additional processing 156 apartments, with
a varying number of weeks, were left to analyze. In the multiple linear regression,
level of interaction with the IHDs in each apartment was used as a variable. First,
the average number of clicks per week and then the percentage of weeks clicked were
used as variables. The two different calculations were made to see if the number of
clicks and the percentage of weeks clicked made a difference in the significance and
effect on the consumption data.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Statistical Analysis
9
3.2
Statistical Analysis
3.2.1
Piecewise Linear Regression
Piecewise linear regression is used to investigate different linear relationships between
a response, y, and an explanatory variable, x when different linear relationships oc-
cur for different ranges of x. In this case, the response is the daily average indoor
temperature, and the explanatory variable is the daily average outdoor temperature.
Piecewise regression allows multiple linear models to describe the data, this is useful
when a single linear model does not provide an adequate description. In this model
piecewise regression was used to identify a breaking point demarcating two different
linear relationships [12].
The regression function can be discontinuous at the breaking point, but for this in-
vestigation, a continuous model was specified to get a more clear breaking point. The
breaking point is the value of x or daily average outdoor temperature where the slope
of the function changes. For this specific model, only one breaking point was wanted,
and the linear regression model can, therefore, be written as follows:
y = a1 + b1 · x
for x ≤breaking point
y = a2 + b2 · x
for x > breaking point
To make the regression continuous at the breaking point, the values for y needs
to be equal when x is equal to the breaking point. To make the piecewise linear
regression in R the package called ’Segmented’ was used. The R package estimates
linear models with one or more segmented relationships. The package uses an iterative
procedure, where an approximate value for the breaking point is needed as a starting
point for the iterative process [13].
3.2.2
Pearson Correlation
The Pearson correlation coefficient is a measure of the strength of a linear association
between two variables and is denoted by r [14]. The Pearson correlation attempt
to make the best fit line through the data and the coefficient indicates the distance
between the best fit line and the data points. The Pearson correlation coefficient
can be somewhere from +1 to -1. If the coefficient is 0, it indicates no association
between the variables. A positive value indicates a positive association or correlation,
this means that if one value increases, so do the other value. A negative value indicates
a negative association, meaning that as one value increases the other value decreases.
The strength of the correlation is determined by how close the values are to extremities
+1 or -1.
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Methodology
3.2.3
Multiple Linear Regression
Multiple linear regressions are useful when examining the relationship between a nu-
meric outcome or dependent value and multiple explanatory or independent variables.
Multiple linear regression is an extension of simple linear regression. In multiple lin-
ear regression, two or more independent variables are utilized to explain the variation
or predict the value of the dependent variable [15].
However, having more than one independent variable complicates things, and there
are therefore some new considerations. First, adding independent variables to a mul-
tiple linear regression does not necessarily result in a better prediction or variation of
the dependent variable. In some cases, it can end up making the model worse. This
is referred to as overfitting. Another consideration is that adding more independent
variables also creates more relationships between the variables. This can potentially
result in multicollinearity, meaning that the value added as an independent variable
might be related to the dependent variable but also to another independent variable.
The ideal situation is that all the independent variables are correlated with the de-
pendent variable but not to each other [16][17]. Multicollinearity is a problem that
can arise when analyzing real data instead of designed data where the independent
variables can be created to be completely independent. If there is multicollinearity
between two variables, the p-values of the two variables are going to be high compared
to what it would have been if the variables had been independent. A tool to mea-
sure the degree of multicollinearity is to find the variance inflation factor (VIF). The
variance inflation factor gives a measure of how much the variance of the estimated
coefficients, found in the multiple linear regression, increases because of collinear re-
lationships between variables that should be independent [18]. The way the VIF is
interpreted is that if the VIF is 1 there is no correlation among variables, and then
it increases depending on the level of multicollinearity. And while there is no deter-
mined VIF value where it causes issues, it was chosen to use a conservative value of 2.5.
In this project, multiple linear regression was used to find the estimated multiple
linear regression equation, which is as follows:
y = b0 + b1x1 + b2x2 + ....bpxp
y is the predicted value of the dependent variable.
b0 is the intercept and b1,
b2 ... bp are the estimates of the regression coefficients. Each regression coefficient
represents the change in dependent variable relative to a one unit change in the
respective independent variable, and indicates the individual effect of a variable on
the dependent variable, which in this case is the consumption.
3.2.4
Multiple Linear Regression Including Interactions
An interaction effect exists when the estimated effect of an independent variable
on the dependent variable changes, depending on the value of another independent
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Statistical Analysis
11
variable [19]. To describe the interaction effects in addition to the individual effects
for each of the independent variables, an interaction term is added to the regression
equation:
y = b0 + b1x1 + b2x2 + b3x1x2
b3 is the estimate of the regression coefficient of the interaction term, x1 and x2.
Adding interactions to a regression model can greatly increase the understanding of
the variables and their relationship to each other. Adding one or more interaction
changes the interpretation of the regression coefficients. Without interactions b1 is
the unique effect of the variable x1 on y. The interaction means that the effect of
x1 on y is different for different values of x2. This means the unique effect of x1 on
y is no longer limited to b1 but also depends on the values of both b3 and x2. Only
when x2 is zero is b1 interpreted as the unique effect of x1. Otherwise the effect of
x1 is represented by all the sections multiplied by x1, which is b1 and b1x2 [19]. This
makes it more difficult to interpret the importance of main effects, because the effect
of the independent variables are dependent on each other.
3.2.5
Stepwise Regression Including Akaike Information Criterion
Stepwise regression is a way of determining or selecting the independent variable(s)
in a multiple linear regression that produces the best possible regression model. The
goal is to achieve a balance between simplicity and fit [20]. To assess which regression,
found with stepwise regression, have the best fit, the Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC) is used. The AIC was introduced in 1971 by Hirotugu Akaike and is a criterion
used for model selection defined for each model by
AIC = −2 (maximim log −likelyhood of the model)
AIC = + 2 (number of variables in the model plus the intercept).
Log-likelihood is a measure of how well the model fits the data. The lower the
number, the better the fit. The log-likelihood is usually obtained from statistical
output [21]. The difference between AIC and for instance R2 is that AIC also deals
with the issue of overfitting. AIC increases with the number of variables applied to the
model, this way the balance between the amount of information loss and the simplicity
of the model is found. AIC does not say anything about absolute quality. If all of
the models are bad, the AIC will return the best of all the bad ones. Furthermore,
the AIC contains arbitrary constants and can range from 100 to 100,000 the AIC
is therefore not interpretative. Instead, the difference can be considered by using the
following equation:
∆i = AICi −AICmin
Where AICmin is the minimum AIC obtained and AICi is the AIC found for the
i-th model. The best model will, therefore, have ∆= 0, and the rest of the models will
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Methodology
have positive values. The consideration of ∆i is an easy way to interpret the model i.
The larger the ∆i the less plausible the fitted model i is. Some simple guidelines for
assessing the ∆i values are that models having ∆i ≤2 have a substantial probability
of being a representative description of the model. Models with 2 ≤∆i ≤4 have
strong support, and so on, models with a ∆i > 10 essentially have no support of
being a representative description [22]. It was decided that all models within 2 AIC
were seen as equally representative.
When using stepwise regression there are three different variable selection proce-
dures, forward selection, backward selection and both which means that variables can
be selected both ways.
Forward selection begins with no independent variables in the model. Then the inde-
pendent variable which generates the biggest decrease in the AIC is selected. Then
the model is run again, each time adding the independent variable that decreases the
AIC the most. This process is stopped when none of the remaining variables causes a
decrease in the AIC. Note that once a variable has been added to the model it cannot
be deleted.
Backward selection is the opposite of forward selection. In Backward selection, all
the independent variables and interactions are included in the model, and then the
variable that is least significant is removed, which will cause a decrease in the AIC.
This process is continued until removing any remaining variable will cause an increase
in the AIC. When a variable has been removed it cannot be added.
And then a combination of both forward and backward selection.
Stepwise selec-
tion in both ways is a modified version of the forward selection, meaning that the
model starts with no variables and then the variable with the largest contribution
to the model is added. After adding a new variable, all independent variables and
interactions in the model are checked, and any variables that no longer provide an
improvement in the model and can lower the AIC are removed, just like in backward
selection. This stepwise selection, therefore, do both forward and backward selection
[20]. It should be noted that outliers can have a large impact on the three selection
procedures. Another thing worth mentioning is that stepwise regression generate the
best possible fit, and therefore does not take into account if there is a hypothesis
connected to variables that the user want to test.
It was determined that models would be made for two scenarios.
In the first
scenario, all variables and all interactions could be added or deleted, and the regression
with the most suitable variables was chosen based on AIC. In the second scenario,
the most suitable model including the variable regarding clicks in the regression was
chosen, once again based on the AIC. The models were made for all five types of
consumption for the entire data period and the heating season. In cases where the
first scenario included the variable regarding clicks, the second scenario was seen as
unnecessary and therefore was not carried out.
The regressions were chosen by looking at all regressions within 2 AIC of the lowest
AIC. Since it was assessed that a difference in 2 AIC would not make the model
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Statistical Analysis
13
noticeably worse, and there would still be a high probability that it was a proper
description of the data [22]. If the second best regression was not within 2 AIC the
model with the lowest AIC was used, as it was determined that the reliability of
the models was too weak after that point. As an additional precaution a function
generating all possible regressions and their respective AIC values was used in R. This
was done to ensure that the regressions with the overall lowest AIC values were found.
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Relationship Between Indoor and Outdoor
Temperature
Indoor and outdoor temperature both follow a seasonal pattern. High temperatures
can be experienced during the summer months and low temperatures during winter
months. In this section, the relationship between the indoor and outdoor daily av-
erage temperatures are examined using piecewise linear regression. When modeling
the outdoor and indoor temperature using only a single linear regression there is a
significant deviation from linearity, and it is therefore not very descriptive. By using
piecewise linear regression, multiple linear models are used to provide a more accu-
rate description of the data. The piecewise linear regression also identify a breaking
point, demarcating the two different linear relationships between the indoor and the
outdoor temperature. The breaking point is individual for each apartment.
In figure 4.1 there is a weak linear correlation between the average indoor tempera-
ture and average outdoor temperature when the outdoor temperature is below the
breaking point temperature on 7.63 degrees Celsius. The weak linear correlation sug-
gests an insignificant relationship between the two temperatures, insinuating that
the internal temperature was unaffected by the outdoor temperature in this period.
Furthermore, the low correlation indicates that the occupants in this apartment use
heating sources, such as radiators or floor heating to heat their apartments in this
period. When the outdoor temperature rises above the breaking point a strong linear
correlation can be detected between the daily average indoor and outdoor tempera-
ture. The linear correlation indicates that the occupants in this specific apartment to
a greater extent rely on the outdoor climate conditions, and less on internal heating
sources, to maintain a comfortable indoor environment.
This hypothesis is further strengthened by the Pearson correlation coefficient cal-
culated before and after the breaking point. The Pearson correlation coefficient is a
measure of the strength of a linear association between two variables and is denoted
by r. In figure 4.1 the Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.93 after the breaking point at
7.63 degrees Celsius, and only 0.28 before the breaking point. The Pearson correlation
coefficient indicates a clear correlation between the outdoor and indoor temperature
after the breaking point. The p-values both before and after the breaking point are
statistically significant, with the p-value after the breaking point being very close to
zero, showing a very high level of significance.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Results
Figure 4.1: Scatter plot and piecewise linear regression results between indoor and
outdoor temperatures for an apartment.
Similar positive associations between indoor and outdoor temperature after the
breaking point were seen for 216 out of 237 which corresponds to 91% of the apart-
ments. The remaining twenty-one apartments or 9% showed different Pearson corre-
lations such as a negative correlation after the breaking point. In most cases, the cor-
relation difference was caused by insufficient data in the spring and summer months,
for those apartments a subjective assessment of the data was made. The subjective
assessment for the majority of these cases was to include the remaining data in the
heating season. This was done by appointing a breaking point on 20 °C, thereby
forcing all data points into the heating season. For some apartments, the subjective
assessment was to set the breaking point on 15 °C, as these apartments had data
points at the end of May and in June. The two figures 4.2 and 4.3 show examples
where subjective assessments were made. For four out of the twenty apartments, the
differences in correlation were not due to fallout periods and the subjective assess-
ment was to keep those four apartments unchanged as their calculated breaking points
were all reasonable. Figures showing the relationship between the indoor and outdoor
daily average temperatures for all apartments can be found in the electronic appendix.
The breaking point temperatures determined by using piecewise linear regression
are used to decide the heating season for each apartment.
The heating season is
seen as the period where the average outdoor temperature is below the individual
breaking point.
In this project, the breaking points determine which data points
from the individual apartments are included in examinations made for the heating
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Relationship Between Indoor and Outdoor Temperature
17
Figure 4.2: Pearson correlation negative
after breaking point.
Figure 4.3: Pearson correlation stronger
before breaking point.
season.
So instead of guessing or estimating a heating season and applying that
to all apartments, the heating season for each apartment is determined based on
the breaking point.
The heating season determined for each apartment and the
corresponding indoor temperatures are used in section 4.2 to investigate correlations
between interactions levels with the IHDs and consumption.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of breaking point temperatures for apartments.
The distribution of the breaking point temperatures calculated for the apartments
which did not require a subjective assessment can be seen in figure 4.4. The values
have been rounded off for the sake of simplicity. It is observed that a large part of
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Results
the apartments has breaking point temperatures of around eight to eleven degrees
Celsius. This indicates that the majority of the apartments in Korngården starts to
rely on the outdoor climate to maintain a comfortable indoor environment when the
outdoor temperature is approximately eight to eleven degrees Celsius.
To investigate the Pearson coefficient correlations calculated for each apartment
a visualization was made. Figure 4.5 shows the Pearson correlation coefficient be-
fore the breaking point and the corresponding Pearson correlation coefficient after
the breaking point. The majority of the Pearson coefficients calculated before the
breaking points, shown as blue, are located between -0.2 to 0.4, indicating little to no
correlation. The Pearson correlation coefficients calculated for data after the breaking
points, shown as red, are positioned within a close interval around 0.8 indicating high
positive correlations. Highlighted values are the cases where the Pearson correlation
coefficients are both positive and stronger after the breaking point than before. The
values shown as vague which are only represented with one Pearson correlation coef-
ficient are the apartments where the subjective assessments were to set the breaking
point was set to 20 °C. For these apartments all data was included in the heating sea-
son and it was therefore not possible to make a Pearson correlation coefficient after the
breaking point. The vague values which have a Pearson correlation coefficient before
and after the breaking point, are the cases where different correlations were identified,
but the subjective assessment was to keep those four apartments unchanged.
Figure 4.5: Pearson correlation coefficients before and after the breaking points
presented for each apartment.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Multiple Linear Regression of Consumption
19
4.2
Multiple Linear Regression of Consumption
4.2.1
Estimated Effects of the Independent Variables on
Consumption
Multiple linear regressions are useful when examining the relationship between a
numeric outcome or dependent value and independent variables. In this thesis, the
different consumptions are the dependent variables, and the independent variables are
the average number of clicks per week, floor area, and the breaking point temperature,
found for each apartment. During the heating season, the indoor temperature was
included as an independent variable. By using multiple linear regression, apartments
are compared to other apartments, and an overall understanding of the effects and
correlations between the different consumptions and independent variables is gained.
This part of the multiple linear regression analysis examines the estimated increase or
decrease in consumption following an increase of one unit in the respective indepen-
dent values and also looks at the Pearson correlation coefficients. The examination
was carried out for the entire period from the 5th of November 2018 to the 30th of
June 2019 and the heating season determined by the individual breaking point for
each apartment. The estimated effects presented in the table 4.1 and 4.2 are found
by using multiple linear regression in R, an output from R is shown in figure 4.6.
Outputs for all other consumptions both for the entire data period and the heating
season can be found in Appendix A. The Pearson correlation coefficients are also
calculated in R.
Figure 4.6: Multiple linear regression of HCA during the heating season.
Table 4.1 and 4.2 contain values with average number of clicks as the independent
variable. The percentage of weeks occupants clicked the in-home displays was also
calculated for each apartment and inserted as the independent variable instead of
average clicks. The percentage was calculated to investigate if the number of weeks
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Results
occupants had interacted with the displays had a greater influence on the consump-
tion than the actual amount of clicks. Tables made with percentage weeks clicked as
the independent variable are table 7.1 and 7.2 and can be seen in Appendix A along
with the corresponding outputs from R.
The examination presented in table 4.1 shows the estimated effect found by using
R. Rewriting the multiple linear regression equation with the estimated effects pre-
sented in figure 4.6, the equation for HCA consumption during the heating season
would be as follows:
HCA consumption = −39.76 −0.005 · x1 −0.0039 · x2 + 0.16 · x3 + 1.98 · x4
where x1 is the average weekly clicks in the specific apartment, x2 is the floor area
in the apartment, x3 is the breaking point temperature and x4 is the average indoor
temperature for the specific apartment.
Table 4.1: Multiple linear analyses for the entire data period.
p-value: *** > 0.000, ** > 0.01, * > 0.05
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.1705
0.0719
0.03717
0.04328
0.02173
Average Clicks per Week
Estimated
Effect
0.01093
-0.02911
-0.7197
-0.49662
0.012371
Pearson
Coefficient
0.02886
-0.04979
-0.10322
-0.02445
0.06545
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.42044***
-0.03475
0.1317
0.02588
0.05539
Pearson
Coefficient
0.40685
-0.07102
-0.00198
-0.01592
0.12613
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
0.02093
0.05778**
0.6318*
1.27824*
0.00526
Pearson
Coefficient
0.03207
0.24873
0.14568
0.20082
0.03609
Focusing on HCA and the effect of the independent variables on HCA. The mul-
tiple R2 value is 0.171 for HCA which is very low. This means that approximately
17.1% of the variation in consumption can be explained by the average number of
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Multiple Linear Regression of Consumption
21
clicks, floor area, and breaking point temperature during the entire data period. The
table shows a positive correlation between the average number of clicks and HCA
consumption. This suggests that an increase of one average click per week can be as-
sociated with an increase of 0.01093 in consumption, adjusting or controlling for floor
area and breaking point temperature. The positive correlation is contradictory to
what other articles have presented, as this indicates that clicking the IHDs increases
the HCA consumption. However, the estimated effect is not statistically significant
which indicates a high probability that the correlation for the average number of
clicks could be different. This is further strengthened by the fact that the Pearson
correlation coefficient between the average number of clicks and the HCA consump-
tion is 0.02886, which indicates a low correlation between the two. Furthermore, an
increase of 0.42044 units on the HCA consumption can be associated with an increase
of one degree Celsius in breaking point temperature. The three stars indicate a strong
statistical significance, which means that there is a significant correlation between the
HCA and the breaking point temperature. An increase of one square meter floor area
can be associated with an increase in HCA consumption on 0.02093 units, adjusting
or controlling for clicks and breaking point temperature.
However, the estimated
effect of floor area on HCA is not statistically significant.
For the electricity consumption, the multiple R2 is 0.072 which similar to the HCA
consumption is very low. Contrary to HCA consumption, a small negative correlation
between electricity consumption and average weekly clicks can be observed. However,
the correlation is not statistically significant. The only statistically significant effect
is a positive correlation between electricity and floor area where an increase of one
square meter can be associated with an increase of 0.05778 kWh in electricity con-
sumption.
Turning to warm and cold water consumption. The estimated effects of average
weekly clicks are negative and noteworthy larger than the one observed for electricity
consumption, nevertheless, the effects remain insignificant. For water consumption,
an increase in floor area of one square meter can be associated with an increase on
0.6318 and 1.27824 liters for warm and cold water respectively. Similar to electricity
consumption the estimated effect of the floor area is statistically significant. This
indicates that the floor area has a significant influence on the amount of water and
electricity being used. One explanation could be that larger apartments are likely to
have more occupants than small apartments, and therefore have higher consumptions.
For floor heating, none of the independent variables have a significant effect on
the floor heating consumption during the entire data period. The R2 is very low and
similar to HCA consumption a small statistically insignificant positive correlation can
be seen between average clicks and floor heating.
Table 4.1 shows that none of the estimated effects for average weekly clicks are
statistically significant. Furthermore, the estimated effects of floor area are positive
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Results
for all consumptions, indicating that as the floor area increase so does the consump-
tions.
In the multiple linear analyses made for the heating season, the indoor temperature
is added as an additional independent variable. As a result the multiple R2 values
are higher compared to the values presented in 4.1.
Table 4.2: Multiple linear analyses for the heating season.
p-value: *** > 0.000, ** > 0.01, * > 0.05
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.3895
0.1385
0.0428
0.06473
0.05377
Average Weekly Clicks
Estimated
Effect
-0.00468
-0.02180
-0.7308
-0.3432
0.01947
Pearson
Coefficient
-0.04369
-0.04476
-0.11418
-0.01671
0.08096
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.15946*
-0.09902
-0.3034
-1.1090
-0.00801
Pearson
Coefficient
0.2952227
-0.08521
-0.01530
-0.03219
0.04204
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
-0.00391
0.04816**
0.6054
1.1282*
0.00045
Pearson
Coefficient
0.06084
0.25519
0.14192
0.20661
0.05111
Indoor Temperature
Estimated
Effect
1.98262***
0.52232**
2.1506
7.9233
0.31431**
Pearson
Coefficient
0.61045
0.25772
0.08294
0.15971
0.21249
In table 4.2 the estimated effect on HCA associated with an increase of one aver-
age click per week is a negative effect of 0.00468. The effect suggests that a decrease
in HCA consumption can be associated with an increase in clicks. This is the opposite
of what could be seen in 4.1. The same is true for the estimated effect of an increase
in the floor area which is negative in table 4.2. The negative effect means that an in-
crease in floor area results in a decrease in HCA during the heating season. However,
looking at the estimated effect of average clicks and floor area on the HCA consump-
tion, they are both statistically insignificant. Focusing on the significant effects, a
significant effect can be observed between breaking point temperature and HCA. An
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Multiple Linear Regression of Consumption
23
increase of one degree Celsius in breaking point temperature causes an increase of
0.15946 units in HCA. Furthermore, a high estimated effect with a strong level of
statistical significance can be observed from the indoor temperature on HCA. The
estimated effect is an increase of 1.98262 HCA units when the indoor temperature is
increased one degree Celsius.
Turning to the electricity consumption two statistically significant effects can be
observed in 4.2. An increase of one square meter can be associated with an increase
of 0.04816 kWh. And then an increase of one degree Celsius indoors can be associated
with an increase of 0.52232 kWh.
For warm water consumption, no statistically significant effects are observed dur-
ing the heating season. For cold water consumption, the estimated effect of the floor
area is statistically significant. During the heating season, an increase in the floor
area of one square meter can be associated with an increase in cold water consump-
tion of 1.1282 liters.
Regarding floor heating, a statistically significant increase of 0.31431 kWh can be
expected with an increase of one degree Celsius indoors.
The most surprising correlation to emerge from table 4.2 is that electricity con-
sumption and indoor temperature have a significant positive correlation. The corre-
lation is noteworthy because it indicates that electricity is used for heating purposes
by the occupants. This is interesting because new radiators in the apartments, floor
heating in the bathrooms and a new district heating station were installed as part
of the renovation [9]. This suggests that heating should be provided through district
heating and not by electricity consumption. Moreover, no significant correlation was
found between the estimated effects for average weekly clicks and any of the consump-
tions.
To investigate the multicollinearity between the independent variables, the vari-
ation inflation factors (VIF) were found for the independent values used for both
the entire data period, from November 2018 to June 2019 and the heating season.
During the entire data period, all three variables had VIF values below 1.035 indi-
cating no multicollinearity. And during the heating season, the four variables had
VIF values below 1.15 once again showing no multicollinearity. For further diagnosis,
the pair-wise correlation among the independent variables was examined for both the
entire period and the heating season. In figure 4.7 and 4.8 the correlation matrices
show that the pair-wise correlation among the independent variables are all below
0.2, which further indicates that the variables are not correlated.
Furthermore, the majority of the Pearson correlation coefficients show little to no
linear association in both table 4.1 and 4.2. Only the effects with strong statistically
significant effects have noteworthy Pearson correlations coefficients. As mentioned,
similar tables for the entire data period and the heating season have been made with
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Results
Figure 4.7: Correlation
matrix
entire
date period.
Figure 4.8: Correlation matrix heating
season.
percentage of weeks clicked as the independent variable, instead of average clicks
per week. The tables 7.1 and 7.2 which are presented in Appendix A show similar
associations, with minor differences in estimated effect but no changes in statistical
significance.
4.2.2
Visualizations of models based on clicks
To get a better understanding of how temperature and floor area affect the con-
sumption, average values and some chosen values were inserted in the multiple linear
regression models. The values are shown in table 4.3. Average weekly clicks per week
and percentage weeks clicked remained as the independent variable. This was done
to plot the models and thereby get a visualization of the effects.
The results generated for both average clicks and percentage weeks clicked show
the difference in consumption with no interactions between clicks on the IHDs, break-
ing point temperature, floor area, and indoor temperature. The results are made for
the entire data period and the heating season determined by the calculated breaking
point and by subjective assessment. In the figures, each point represents an apart-
Table 4.3: Values used for multiple linear regression.
Average
Minimum
Max
Floor area
91.54
69.03
114.21
Indoor temperature
22.23
20
25
Breaking point temperature
10.77
5
15
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Multiple Linear Regression of Consumption
25
ment, showing the independent variable related to clicks (average weekly clicks or
percentage weeks clicked) and the corresponding consumption. The floor area is de-
noted A, breaking point is denoted bp and indoor temperature is denoted as ti.
Figure 4.9 and 4.10 both show that the breaking point temperature has a larger
effect on the HCA consumption, compared to floor area during both the entire data
period and the heating season. This is evident because the lines representing varia-
tion in floor area lies closer to the average line. In figure 4.10 the indoor temperature
has a considerable effect on the HCA during the heating season, which could also be
seen in table 4.2. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the green line representing the
minimum floor area is above the yellow line representing the maximum floor area in
figure 4.10. This indicates that during the heating season having less square meters
can be associated with higher consumption, which is contradictory to what is seen in
figure 4.9. Looking at the two tables 4.1 and 4.2, the estimated effect of floor area on
the HCA consumption is positive for the entire data period, and negative during the
heating season. The estimated effects are both statistically insignificant, suggesting
that there is a high probability that this is not the true effect. The statistical insignif-
icance means that the null-hypothesis cannot be rejected and conclusions should not
be made based on these effects.
Figure 4.9: HCA entire period.
Average clicks per week
Figure 4.10: HCA heating season.
Average clicks per week
Focusing on figure 4.11 and 4.12, which have the percentage of weeks clicked as
the variable instead of average clicks per weeks. The effects related to changes in
indoor temperature and floor area are very similar to the ones presented in figure 4.9
and 4.10. However, the slope of the lines is closer to zero, which indicates that there
is a less significant association between the percentage of weeks where occupants have
clicked on the display and the HCA consumption. Reminiscent patterns regarding
effects and the slope of the lines can be seen for all figures with the percentage of
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Results
weeks clicked as the variable and average clicks per week. The figures can be found
in Appendix A.
Figure 4.11: HCA entire period.
Percentage of weeks clicked
Figure 4.12: HCA heating season.
Percentage of weeks clicked
Focusing on electricity consumption, a larger estimated effect is associated with
an increase in floor area than in breaking point temperature. This is the opposite
of what could be seen for HCA consumption, in figure 4.9. Furthermore, the indoor
temperature does not have the same predominant effect but lies closer to the effects
of floor area and breaking point temperature. For electricity consumption, there is a
negative correlation between consumption and breaking point temperature for both
periods. This means that a higher breaking point temperature can be associated with
lower electricity consumption. The correlation is presented in figure 4.13 and 4.14 by
the blue line representing a breaking point of 5 degrees Celsius being above the red
line representing a breaking point of 15 degrees Celsius. Figure 4.14 is interesting be-
cause the estimated effects of both floor area and indoor temperature are statistically
significant, as were presented in table 4.2. The significant effects imply that there is a
significant correlation between electricity consumption and the indoor temperature as
well as the floor area in the apartments. For average clicks per week, the correlation
is also negative, but statistically insignificant.
The overall intention of this section was to investigate the temperature and floor
area and keep the variable related to clicks as the only independent variable, i.e.
average clicks per week and percentage weeks clicked. Looking at the figures that
have average clicks per week as the independent variable the majority of the points
representing apartments are placed left of center. In these apartments, occupants
interact with their IHD less than twenty-five times per week on average. This means
that the remaining apartments that have average weekly clicks above twenty-five
times, to a great extent determine the slope of linear regression. The figures also
need to be interpreted with caution, because the visualizations are based on the
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Interactions Effect on Consumption Based on Clicks
27
estimated effects presented in table 4.1, 4.2, 7.1 and 7.2 including the statistically
insignificant estimated effects.
Figure 4.13: Electricity entire period.
Average clicks per week
Figure 4.14: Electricity heating season.
Average clicks per week
4.3
Interactions Effect on Consumption Based on
Clicks
Figures and tables presented in the previous section assumed that the effect of tem-
perature and floor area was the same no matter the percentage of weeks clicked or
average clicks per week.
Figure 4.15: Multiple linear regression of HCA with interactions for the entire data
period.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Results
It also assumed that the effect of clicks was the same regardless of temperature
and floor area. These assumptions resulted in parallel lines with a uniform slope. In
this section, interaction terms are introduced to the multiple linear regression model.
Adding interactions provide a more comprehensive understanding of the relationships
between the variables in the model and to what extent they affect each other. Inter-
actions will tell if an increase in one independent variable can be associated with an
increase or decrease in another.
The estimated effects for the independent variables and the interactions have been
determined using the multiple linear regression function in R, an output generated
by R is presented in figure 4.15. Only interactions between the independent variable
related to clicks and the other independent variables have been made. This decision
was made to prevent the model from becoming too vast. Furthermore, the Pearson
correlation coefficient was excluded because it only measures the linear correlation
between two variables and cannot include interactions.
Table 4.4: Multiple linear analyses for the entire period including interactions.
p-value: *** > 0.000, ** > 0.01, * > 0.05
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.1723
0.07697
0.03739
0.04608
0.02679
Average Clicks per Week
Estimated
Effect
-0.07184
-0.07880
-1.38525
-2.90262
0.14148
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.38507***
-0.07657
0.18474
-0.73510
0.06063
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
0.01780
0.05703*
0.58827
1.17267
0.01286
Average Clicks and breaking point temperature interaction
Estimated
Effect
0.00510
0.00623
-0.01068
0.10741
-0.00031
Average Clicks and Floor Area Interaction
Estimated
Effect
0.00030
-0.00018
0.00826
0.01331
-0.00133
The examination of the entire data period is presented in table 4.4. The table
shows low multiple R2 values and only two statistically significant estimated effects.
Once again no significant correlation is found between the average number of clicks
and consumption of any kind during the entire data period. For HCA consumption,
table 4.4 shows that breaking point temperature has a strong statistically significant
positive correlation with HCA consumption. An increase of one degree Celsius in
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Interactions Effect on Consumption Based on Clicks
29
breaking point temperature can be associated with an increase of 0.38507 units in
HCA consumption. Table 4.4 also shows that electricity consumption and floor area
have a statistically significant positive correlation during the entire data period. An
increase of one square meter can be associated with an increase of 0.05703 kWh in
electricity consumption. These effects are also affected by the interaction terms and
therefore need to be interpreted with caution.
None of the variables or interactions have statistically significant correlations with
warm water, cold water or floor heating consumption. Compared to table 4.1, adding
the interaction terms did not improve the multiple linear regression, in terms of the
number of significant effects.
Table 4.5: Multiple linear analyses for the heating season including interactions.
p-value: *** > 0.000, ** > 0.01, * > 0.05
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.4045
0.1456
0.04605
0.07698
0.063
Average Clicks per Week
Estimated
Effect
0.04728
-0.34985
-5.00388
-20.21006
-0.29259
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.11586
-0.12632
0.41502
-0.88209
0.02591
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
-0.04084
0.03790
0.45490
0.88687
0.00473
Indoor Temperature
Estimated
Effect
2.19467***
0.49061*
1.69909
3.72509
0.20161
Average Clicks per Week and Breaking Point Temperature Interaction
Estimated
Effect
0.00424
0.00299
-0.16490
-0.06610
-0.00492
Average Clicks per Week and Floor Area Interaction
Estimated
Effect
0.00536
0.0014
0.03239
0.04217
-0.00038
Average Clicks per Week and Indoor Temperature Interaction
Estimated
Effect
-0.02766
0.00729
0.17567
0.76035
0.01832
Tuning to the estimated effects during the heating season presented in table 4.5.
The R2 values are low and once again no significant correlations between average
weekly clicks and consumptions are found. A strong correlation between HCA con-
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Results
sumption and average indoor temperature is present. For electricity consumption,
a statistically significant correlation between electricity and average indoor tempera-
ture can be seen. No significant effects are present for warm and cold water or floor
heating consumption. Most noticeable is the estimated effect of minus 20.21 which
can be seen for average clicks per week on cold water consumption. However, the
effects are evened out considerably by the interactions with the floor area and the
indoor temperature which are both positive.
Tables with the percentage of weeks clicked for both the entire data period and the
heating season can be found in Appendix B. The same is true for the outputs made
with R of the multiple linear regressions including interactions. Similar tendencies
can be observed for regressions made for percentage weeks clicked as for average clicks
per week, which is no significant effect between clicks and any of the consumptions.
The VIF values for this section are very high because the interaction terms per
definition are collinear with the original values and vice versa. Because the p-values
are not affected by the interaction terms, the multicollinearity has no consequence
and the high VIF values are therefore ignored. If the interaction terms are excluded
the VIF values are the same as in section 4.2, indicating no multicollinearity. By
looking at table 4.4 the R2 values are fairly low which is another indication that no
multicollinearity is present.
4.3.1
Visualizations of models including interactions based on
clicks
For the visualization of interactions between the independent variables, the values
presented in table 4.3 are reused.
The figures show the estimated effects of the
independent variables including interactions between the variable related to clicks and
the remaining variables. By including interaction terms in the model it is possible to
account for the dependency between variables.
For changes in the floor area, figure 4.16 show nonparallel lines with positive slopes.
The figure indicates that the effect of clicking the IHD decreases when the floor area
increases. Figure 4.17 shows that for apartments with a large floor area above the
average (91.5 m2) an increase in weekly average clicks can be associated with an
increase in the expected HCA consumption. And for apartments with a floor area
below average, an increase in weekly average clicks produce a decrease in HCA con-
sumption. The result indicates that in large apartments average weekly clicks have a
positive correlation with HCA consumption and in small apartments the correlation
is negative.
Looking at the interaction effect based on breaking point temperature during the
entire data period in figure 4.16 nonparallel lines can be seen. In apartments with
high breaking point temperatures, the HCA consumption increases as the number of
average clicks per week increases, indicating a positive correlation. For apartments
with low breaking point temperatures, a negative correlation is seen, meaning that
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Interactions Effect on Consumption Based on Clicks
31
an increase in clicks cause a decrease in HCA consumption.
During the heating season, presented in figure 4.17, the correlation is negative at
both high and low breaking point temperatures. However, the effect of an increase
in average clicks per week on HCA consumption is higher in apartments with low
breaking point temperatures. Focusing on the average indoor temperature effect, an
increase in clicks lowers the HCA consumption noticeably for apartments with high
indoor temperatures, indicating a negative correlation. For apartments with low in-
door temperatures, a positive correlation is present.
Figure 4.16: HCA entire period.
Average clicks per week
Figure 4.17: HCA heating season.
Average clicks per week
The results presented in figure 4.18 and 4.19 have percentage weeks clicked as the
independent variable. The figures show that the interactions have similar effects but
are not as profound. Only during the heating season does the interaction between
floor area and percentage weeks clicked have noteworthy influence. In figure 4.18 the
slopes of the lines are close to being horizontal. This indicates that on average the
effects on HCA consumption do not change notably as the percentage weeks clicked
increases.
Multiple linear regression visualizations for electricity, floor heating and hot and
cold water consumption including interaction are placed in Appendix B.
The section was made to investigate the interaction between the independent
variable related to clicks and the other independent variables. And to see how the
independent variable’s estimated effect on the dependent variable changed, depend-
ing on the value of another independent variable. The figures in this section need to
be interpreted with caution because the estimated multiple linear regressions include
statistically insignificant estimated effects. The insignificance does not mean that
there is no correlation between the independent variables, but that it cannot be said
with certainty that there is no correlation between the independent variables and the
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Results
Figure 4.18: HCA entire period.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 4.19: HCA heating season.
Percentage weeks clicked
consumption.
Additionally, the linear correlation between weekly average clicks and percentage
weeks clicked was investigated, and the Pearson correlation coefficient between the
two was found to be 0.72.
The Pearson correlation coefficient indicates that the
two variables are correlated.
The high correlation explains the similarities in the
estimated effect and the statistically significant values experienced between the two
calculations. Because the Pearson correlation coefficient is so high, it was determined
only to carry on with average clicks per week. The following section will therefore
only feature average clicks per week as the variable related to interaction with the
in-home displays.
4.4
Stepwise Regression by AIC
The stepwise regression function is used to try and reduce the models presented in sec-
tion 4.2 and 4.3. In the two sections, statistically insignificant variables with relatively
small estimated effects were included in the models. By using stepwise regression the
aim is to find the most complete model which is a balance between simplicity and
fit. The stepwise regressions were made with both forward and backward selection
and the value chosen to assess which regressions have the best fit was the AIC. As
an additional precaution, an all possible regression function in R was used to ensure
that the regression with the lowest AIC was found.
Contrary to previous sections, interaction terms between all independent variables
are included to ensure the best possible fit. Furthermore, the AIC is specific and vary
for each scenario and it is therefore not possible to compared scenarios, i.e. different
consumptions or sample sizes.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Stepwise Regression by AIC
33
Figure 4.20: Stepwise regression both ways for electricity consumption during the
heating season.
In figure 4.20 an output from the stepwise regression made in R is shown for
electricity consumption during the heating season. The picture shows the AIC and
how the AIC varies depending on the addition or subtraction of variables, at the
bottom the final regression and the corresponding coefficients are presented. The
regressions for the rest of the consumptions were made using the same procedure
which is both forward and backward selection, including the assessment of regressions
within 2 AIC.
4.4.1
Stepwise Regressions for the Entire Sampling Period
Figure 4.21 shows the coefficients and the corresponding p-values for the stepwise
regression made for HCA, during the entire data period without average clicks per
week. The result shows that none of the variables have statistically significant corre-
lations with HCA consumption. In table 4.1 the estimated effect of breaking point
temperature was statistically significant. Furthermore, the interaction between break-
ing point temperature and floor area is included in the regression. This interaction
was not tested in the previous sections as it does not include the variable related to
clicks. The estimated effect of the interaction is negative which means that the effect
of the breaking point temperature on the HCA consumption decreases when the floor
area increases.
Figure 4.22 include average clicks per week. The addition of average clicks slightly
improve the R2 and the p-values statistical significance but all effects remain insignif-
icant.
Applying stepwise regression did not improve the model for HCA consumption in
terms of the number of statistically significant correlations with HCA consumption.
However, the R2 increased from 17.1% to 17.8% compared table 4.1. The correlation
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Results
Figure 4.21: Coefficients for HCA during the entire data period.
between consumption and average clicks per week remains statistically insignificant,
and the null-hypothesis that clicks do not affect consumption cannot be rejected.
For electricity consumption, average clicks per week were included in the first sce-
nario. The stepwise regression is presented in figure 4.23. The figure shows that only
floor area has statistically significant effect which is not an improvement compared to
table 4.1 and 4.4. In figure 4.23 the estimated effect of the floor area is approximately
the same as the estimated effects presented in table 4.1. This shows that reducing the
model by taking out variables with little to no effect did not change or improve the
precision of the estimated coefficients and predicted values noticeably for electricity
consumption.
For warm water, cold water and floor heating consumption, average clicks per
week were included in the first scenario and therefore only one scenario was made.
For both warm and cold water consumption, the floor area is the only variable with
Figure 4.22: Coefficients for HCA during the entire data period including clicks.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Stepwise Regression by AIC
35
a statistically significant effect.
The stepwise regression for floor heating did not
generate any statistically significant estimated effects. This is not an improvement
of the model compared to table 4.1 where none of the independent variables had a
statistically significant correlation with floor heating. The stepwise regressions for
warm water, cold water and floor heating consumption can be found in Appendix C.
During the entire data period, no significant correlation was found between con-
sumptions and average clicks per week. Looking at the results generated for the entire
data period the effect of clicks made per week cannot be concluded.
Figure 4.23: Coefficients for electricity during the entire data period including
clicks.
4.4.2
Stepwise Regressions for the Heating Season
The results for stepwise regression during the heating season was prepared using the
same procedure as for the entire data period, presented in the previous section.
For HCA consumption average clicks per week were included in the first scenario.
In figure 4.24 the breaking point temperature and the interaction between indoor
temperature and breaking point temperature have statistically significant estimated
effects. The breaking point has a negative correlation of 4.12 and the interaction
has a positive correlation of 0.19. This means that the higher the average indoor
temperature is, the lower the effect of the breaking point is going to be. Eventually,
the effect will become positive when the indoor temperature is high enough.
The correlation between breaking point temperature and HCA consumption is note-
worthy because the correlation is negative at low indoor temperatures in the heating
season. During the entire data period in figure 4.21 and 4.22 the correlation between
breaking point temperature and HCA consumption is positive. One explanation could
be that during the heating season an increase in the breaking point temperature means
including periods with warmer outdoor temperatures. In these periods less heating
is needed to maintain the indoor temperature. The addition of these periods affects
the average HCA consumption during the heating season. Additionally, in table 4.2
indoor temperature was statistically significant and when using stepwise selection
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Results
both ways, the indoor temperature has a statistically insignificant estimated effect
on HCA consumption.
However, the most striking observation in figure 4.24 is that average clicks per
week have a statistically significant negative correlation and that the interaction be-
tween average clicks per week and floor area have a statistically significant positive
correlation with HCA consumption. This means that when the floor area increases
the effect of clicks per week decreases, and for apartments above 100m2 the correla-
tion will become positive. This result provides evidence that average clicks per week
have an effect on the HCA consumption during the heating season, and that the effect
is higher in small apartments when it comes to reducing HCA consumption.
Figure 4.24: Coefficients for HCA during the heating season including clicks.
Figure 4.25 and 4.26 present the stepwise regression made for electricity consump-
tion during the heating season.
Compared to table 4.2 where floor area and the
average indoor temperature had statistically significant effects, stepwise regression
show the same with no noteworthy difference in effect size. However, if the stepwise
regression is compared to table 4.5 where interactions with average clicks per week
were included, only the effect of indoor temperature was significant, then the stepwise
regression improves the model.
To summarize the section, the application of stepwise regression has significantly
improved the model for HCA consumption during the heating season compared to ta-
ble 4.2. The stepwise regressions made for electricity consumption during the heating
season show a similar number of statistically significant estimated effects if compared
to table 4.2. For warm water consumption during the heating season, the effect of
the floor area is significant, which is also an improvement compared to the results in
table 4.2. For cold water consumption, the floor area is also the only variable with
a statistically significant effect which is similar to the results presented in table 4.2.
Floor heating consumption has indoor average temperature as the only significant
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Stepwise Regression by AIC
37
Figure 4.25: Coefficients for electricity during the heating season.
Figure 4.26: Coefficients for electricity during the heating season including clicks.
estimated effect which is not a significant improvement of the model compared to
the results in table 4.2. Figures showing the stepwise regressions made for hot water,
cold water, and floor heating consumption can be seen in Appendix C.
The most striking result to emerge from the stepwise regression is the statistically
significant correlation between average clicks per week and HCA consumption during
the heating season. The model indicates that a small apartment on 69 m2 can expect
a decrease of 0.2 units in HCA consumption per average weekly click increase. And
for an apartment on 114 m2, the decrease is reversed into an increase of 0.1 units in
HCA consumption per average weekly click increase. This is a contradictory corre-
lation compared to similar projects. The model shows that average clicks per week
have a stronger effect in small apartments and little to no effect for bigger apartments
in Korngården. For all other consumptions, no statistically significant correlation be-
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Results
tween average clicks was present, which means that the null-hypothesis that there is
no correlation cannot be rejected. Generally, the statistically significant effects were
similar to the ones found with multiple linear regression in section 4.2. Furthermore,
the floor area has a statistically significant correlation with HCA consumption dur-
ing the entire data period, and with electricity during the entire data period and the
heating season.
Comparing the stepwise regressions made for the entire data period and heating sea-
son, noteworthy differences can only be seen for HCA consumption. These differences
might be because the majority of the HCA consumption is located in the heating sea-
son whereas the other consumptions are more evenly distributed throughout the year.
4.5
Relation Between Consumptions and HCA and
Indoor Temperature
An additional investigation on the correlation between the consumptions was made to
see if those apartments which consumed a lot of water also consumed a lot of electricity
etc.. Therefore a pair-wise correlation among the consumptions was examined for
the heating season. The correlation matrix in figure 4.27 shows a strong correlation
between cold and warm water consumption which was expected. The figure also shows
a noteworthy correlation between electricity consumption and both hot and cold
water consumption, suggesting that the apartments that use a lot of electricity also
consume a lot of water. This correlation is not surprising since all three consumptions
are affected by internal behaviors in the specific apartments which could very well be
related to the number of occupants. Looking at HCA consumption it only has a small
correlation with floor heating. Contradictory to water and electricity consumption
HCA consumption is also affected by external factors such as heat exchange from the
surrounding apartments, weather conditions and placement in the building.
Because of these known external factors, an investigation was made to see whether
a relation between the heating consumption from both HCA and floor heating per
square meter and the average indoor temperature in Korngården could be found or
not. The conversion factor used from HCA units to kWh was one to 1.15, this conver-
sion was made to compare the results with a similar investigation made in a Bachelor
thesis from 2017 [23]. The Bachelor thesis was conducted with similar data from Ko-
rngården. However, the Bachelor thesis only had data from 63 apartments, whereas
the results presented in figure 4.28 have data from 237 apartments.
Figure 4.28 shows the indoor temperature for the apartments as a function of the
heating consumption for each apartment. The investigation was made for December
2018, and January 2019, and February 2019. These three months were chosen because
they are part of the danish heating season. The general tendency is that higher indoor
temperatures result in higher heat consumption. Furthermore, figure 4.28 also shows
that some apartments had an average indoor temperature during January around 23
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Relation Between Consumptions and HCA and Indoor Temperature
39
Figure 4.27: Correlation matrix of all consumptions.
°C while only having an average heating consumption of 2 kwh/m2, whereas other
apartments had to use around 7.5 kwh/m2 in the same period to obtain an aver-
age indoor temperature of 23 °C. Generally the figure shows that during these three
months in the heating season apartments have very different heating consumptions
even though they are trying to obtain the same temperatures.
Figure 4.28 also shows one apartment in February using 13.5 kwh/m2. The apartment
was further investigated and it turns out the apartment has the highest heating con-
sumption in all three months. The apartment has a consumption above 10 kwh/m2
in December and above 16 kwh/m2 in January. However, the specific apartment do
not have indoor temperature measurements during both December and January and
therefore these values are not represented in the figure.
Comparing the results seen in figure 4.28 with the results from the Bachelor thesis
made in 2016/2017 presented in figure 4.29, a noticeable decrease in heating consump-
tion without a decrease in indoor temperature can be seen. In 2016/2017 a large
number of apartments had a heating consumption above 8 kwh/m2 during Decem-
ber, January and February compared to figure 4.28 where very few apartments had
a monthly heating consumption above 8 kwh/m2. This is striking when consider-
ing that data from almost four times as many apartments were used in figure 4.28.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Results
Figure 4.28: Heating consumption as a function of indoor temperature for 238 apart-
ments measured for three months during the danish heating season in
2018/2019.
Figure 4.29: Heating consumption as a function of indoor temperature for 63 apart-
ments measured for three months during the danish heating season in
2016/2017.
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Relation Between Consumptions and HCA and Indoor Temperature
41
The decrease was also present in the average monthly consumptions calculated for all
apartments which are presented in table 4.6 where a decrease of around 2 kwh/m2
can be seen for all three months.
This is interesting because it indicates that heating consumption has decreased
noteworthy in Korngården from 2017 to 2019. However, based on these results, it
cannot be concluded if the interaction level with the IHDs had any influence on
the decrease or not. Furthermore, the comparison made in table 4.6 does not take
the outside weather conditions in 2016/2017 and 2018/2019 into account which is
known to affect the heating consumption. Data from DMI show that December in
2016 on average was 0.5 warmer than December 2018 in Ballerup, but that January
and February were 0.6 and 2.4 degrees colder respectively in 2017 compared to 2019.
The difference in heating consumption can therefore to some extent be explained by
the fact that the winter was colder in January and February in 2017 than in 2019.
However, it cannot be concluded whether or not the outside weather conditions are
the only explanation. Energy savings may be present when looking at a longer time
perspective than the eight months used for this thesis.
Table 4.6: Average consumption for all apartments for each month from December
2016 up to and including February 2017 and from December 2018 up to
and including February 2019.
2016/2017 (kwh/m2)
2018/2019 (kwh/m2)
December
4.65
2.54
January
5.66
3.06
February
4.57
2.39
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
This thesis investigated the effect the installation of a building energy management
systems with in-home displays had on energy consumption. Unlike previous stud-
ies carried out concerning energy feedback [5][7], the majority of the results show
no statistically significant correlation. Only when using stepwise regression, did the
average amount of clicks per week have a statistically significant correlation to the
HCA consumption during the heating season. The estimated effect for average clicks
per week was dependent on the interaction with the floor area, and was negative for
small apartments but decreased when the floor area increased and eventually became
positive. The fact that the majority of the results have insignificant effects does not
mean that no correlation is present. It means that the null-hypothesis that there is
no correlation between average clicks per week and consumption cannot be rejected.
There can be several possible explanations for this lack of correlation which are dis-
cussed in the following sections.
5.1
Data condition and in-home displays
To begin with, a possible explanation is that the data obtained was simply too incom-
plete. As part of the data processing, 15 months out of 23 months was deleted from
the data set leaving only 8 months to analyze due to flaws and deficiencies, i.e. long
fallout periods where no data was collected and outliers. Even after that, additional
filtering was made which further reduced the data set. The inconsistency of the data
also caused the breaking point temperature calculated through iterations to change
from time to time in a small number of apartments, this affects the validity of the
calculated breaking points for those apartments. The data obtained from Korngår-
den also reveal long fallout periods situated just after the renovation had finished
and occupants started to move into the apartments. In this period the in-home dis-
plays were not operating and no data could be accessed due to technical challenges.
This was also one of the issues the occupants underlined when interviewed about the
commissioning [24]. Therefore, it is plausible that the occupants lost their patience
and their motivation to use the in-home displays before they started working consis-
tently. The interview also mentions that some of the occupants forgot to check if
the IHDs were working after a shutdown period and just assumed they did not work.
This means that a lot of potential clicks have been lost in the period after the IHDs
started to work again [24].
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Discussion
Furthermore, it would have been interesting to have data on an hourly basis. The
data obtained are daily and weekly averages, which means that it is not possible
to determine when the consumptions are happening during the day. As mentioned
Korngården is social housing, and it is therefore not unlikely that some consumers
might be in between jobs or senior citizens that are home during the typical working
hours. In these apartments water, electricity and heating are consumed during hours
where apartments with residents in jobs have little to no consumption. This poten-
tial difference in consumption hours affects the comparability of the apartments, but
cannot be taken into account due to the interval in which the data was obtained.
Another plausible issue that might have influenced the results obtained was the hard-
ware used for the IHDs. As a part of this study, a trip to Korngården was made to
see the buildings and to try the IHDs firsthand. The IHDs seemed slow and at times
unresponsive, this was also a source of irritation for one the occupants interviewed
and is something that could reduce the level of interaction with the monitors [24].
5.2
Uncertainty of measurements and statistical
analyses
Another uncertainty in the thesis is the data measurements for outdoor temperature.
Measurements from a weather station located in Herlev, roughly 3.5 km from Korngår-
den, was used to investigate the relationship between indoor and outdoor temperature
and calculate the breaking point temperatures. Even though the outdoor temperature
data was crosschecked with data from Ballerup taken from the Danish Meteorological
Institute (DMI) there is still some level of uncertainty in terms of whether or not the
measurements are representative for Korngården. Focusing on the statistical analysis
tools used in this thesis several limitations might have influenced the results obtained.
To begin with, the breaking point temperature, which determines the individual heat-
ing season for each apartment, is found by using piecewise linear regression. For some
apartments the data is very incomplete, this greatly reduces the model’s ability to
estimate the ’actual’ breaking point temperature. Subjective assessments were made
for these apartments and for the majority of these cases all data points were put into
the heating season, but some were also kept unchanged because the breaking points
were reasonable. The uncertainty resides in the fact that with a complete data set
the breaking point temperatures might have been different. Focusing on multiple
linear regression, overfitting is a common source of error and in both section 4.2 and
4.3 variables with very small effects were included in the analysis. In the stepwise
regression, the overfitting issue was addressed by finding the best fit. However, step-
wise regression also has limitations that need to be addressed. First of all, outliers
have a large impact on the selection procedure. Furthermore, AIC does not say any-
thing about the absolute quality it only returns the best model even if they are all bad.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Sample size and influencing factors
45
5.3
Sample size and influencing factors
As a post-rationalization, the number of apartments used especially after the addi-
tional data filtering was thought to be a limitation. Therefore, a sample size calcula-
tion was made to find out if the results were representative. The confidence level was
set to 95%, the margin of error as 5%, standard deviation as 50% and the popula-
tion was seen as the total number of apartments in Korngården after the renovation
which is 244. The calculation came out with a recommended sample size of 150, this
confirms that even after the additional filtering, the 156 apartments used are repre-
sentative of the whole building complex. The findings in the study, therefore, appear
to be supported in terms of sample size.
Additionally, a previous study state that energy conservation effect has been shown
to decrease as sample size increases, and as more representative sampling are used
[7]. One way to interpret this information is to say that maybe the 156 apartments
which make up the sample size for the majority of the analyses is too large since a
clear energy conservation effect is absent. Another way to look at the information is
to acknowledge how challenging it is to design interfaces which motivate and engage
all people equally, because as the sample size increase so does the representativity.
Energy feedback is a valuable tool and potentially an essential tool when it comes
to increasing the knowledge about energy conservation and energy savings. However,
energy feedback fails to account for the wide range of influencing factors on household
energy behavior i.e. visual indoor environment, personal and social factors, including;
sense of control; personal values; personal and subjective norms; age and gender.
5.4
Electric heating
In section 4.2 a statistically significant correlation was observed between electricity
consumption and indoor temperature during the heating season. As mentioned in
4.2, this could indicate that the occupants in Korngården use electricity for heat-
ing instead of district heating, if this is the case different reasons could be causing
this. One reason could be that occupants, in an attempt to lower HCA consumption
based on the feedback from the IHDs, use electrical radiators or even their ovens
to heat their apartments. This would be an unintended consequence of having the
IHDs, indicating that the IHDs may not induce the desired response in users. It may
also be a consequence of a general lack of knowledge about consumption and prizes
since electricity is a more expensive heating source than district heating in Denmark.
Another reason for the correlation could be that electrical devices generate heat as
a by-product when in use.
Apartments with many devices generating heat could
potentially affect the indoor temperature enough to create a statistically significant
correlation between electricity consumption and indoor temperature. It could also be
an example of a correlation without causation, meaning that it is simply a coincidence
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Discussion
that the correlation between the two is statistically significant.
5.5
Normalization in relation to floor area
In this thesis, it was determined not to normalize the consumptions in relation to floor
area. The decision was made due to the assumption that large apartments would have
a larger consumption, but also a larger number of occupants capable of interacting
with the IHD in the specific apartment. Therefore, there is a possibility that dissimi-
lar evaluations would have arisen if the consumptions had been normalized. On the
other hand, a normalization would have resulted in more comparable consumption
values, as the values would all be adjusted according to the sizes of the apartments.
Normalizing in relation to floor area would also have provided a more simple model
since the floor area would no longer be considered as an independent variable. How-
ever, because the floor area is kept as an independent variable in the model, the effect
of the floor area is included in the model. Furthermore, the consumptions are not
only compared with consumption from other apartments but also to the average clicks
per week and average indoor temperature. These two variables are more comparable
with the energy consumptions when the consumptions are kept as weekly averages,
this gave further support to the decision not to normalize in relation floor area.
5.6
Assumptions related to clicks
As mentioned in the beginning, the majority of this study show no statistically sig-
nificant correlation between the level of interaction with the IHDs or any noteworthy
reduction in any type of consumption during the eight months data period. This lack
of correlation is in contrast to earlier findings [4][7]. The results are problematic for
the residents at Korngården as they indicate that interacting with the IHDs, to gain
insight and knowledge about the consumption, do not have a significant effect on the
actual consumption. Especially because the installation of the in-home displays was
part of a large number of energy saving measures that caused a rent increase. The
increase in rent was supposed to be reimbursed by the consumption decrease caused
by these energy-saving measures including the IHDs.
One of the assumptions made in this thesis is that clicking the IHDs is equal to infor-
mation and knowledge gained about consumption. However, the IHDs also present
time and weather information which is not information directly about consumption.
Furthermore, this thesis does not distinguish between navigation and card clicks, as
it was assumed that both clicks were made with the intention of seeking knowledge
from the display and thereby gain insight into their energy consumption. However,
navigation clicks are only related to navigation and not directly linked to information
about consumption. Card clicks directly give access to in-depth information about a
==PAGE:57==
5.7 Heating and indoor temperature comparison
47
specific consumption which could be tips to lower consumption or historical consump-
tion data. The decision not to distinguish between card and navigation clicks needs
to be considered as a possible source of error.
5.7
Heating and indoor temperature comparison
When comparing the heating consumption data obtained with similar data from 2016
and 2017 the data indicate that there has been a decrease in heating consumption.
Part of the explanation of this decrease in consumption is that it was colder in January
and February in 2017 than in 2019, but there might be other explanations that
could have affected the heating consumption. First of all, the IHDs began to work
more consistently between 2016/2017 and up to 2018/2019, making it possible for
the occupants to monitor their consumption on a more regular basis. It cannot be
concluded whether or not the interaction with IHDs had anything to do with the
decrease, but it is a possibility. Another explanation could be that the mechanical
ventilation had been calibrated to have a better heat recovery or to fit the occupants
better in terms of supply and exhaust air volumes.
Furthermore, the data used for the comparison also have some limitations. First of
all, only 63 apartments were used for the investigation made in 2017 which is below
the recommended sample size of 150 apartments. A small sample size affects the
representativity of the overall population, which in this case is the 244 apartments in
Korngården. This small sample size is especially an issue for the average consumption
values presented in table 4.6. Lastly, a conversion factor was used to convert HCA
units into kWh to make the comparison, the specific kWh/m2 values thus need to be
interpreted with caution, as this conversion factor is unreliable.
5.8
Implementation and usage of In-home displays
Building energy management systems and real-time energy feedback are considered
some of the most important actions to increase energy efficiency and energy savings
[4], but in reality, consumption remains hidden for the majority of consumers. Gen-
erally, consumers have very limited knowledge about their energy consumption, and
this lack of knowledge and interest hampers the ability for consumers to utilize and
save energy. One of the potential issues in Korngården lies in the implementation of
the IHDs. A study shows that a good introduction to the BEMS and uncomplicated
commissioning without technical challenges is decisive for the future use of the system
[25]. In Korngården the commissioning had a lot of technical challenges, which was
also mentioned as a source of irritation by the occupants in the interview [24].
Furthermore, visualization systems such as the IHDs, can not be expected to be based
on the interest from the consumers alone. Private consumers need to be guided and
activated by the system, which is heavily dependent on its frequency, content, aggrega-
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Discussion
tion, presentation, visualization, and combination with other intervention strategies.
As presented by Darby (2006): Any attempts to change the patterns of supply and
consumption, therefore, have to take into account the interfaces between supplier,
technology and consumer and how these can be improved. This is where feedback
issues enter the debate [5].
Other studies show that goal-setting and knowledge about IHDs and its opportu-
nities increase the chance of generating positive results [26][27]. In Korngården no
goal-setting was made with the occupants or integrated into the IHDs. Educational
meetings about the IHDs, with the company responsible for designing and producing
the IHDs, have been held for the residents in Korngården. However, the educational
meetings were held when the occupants moved in, which was when the majority of
the IHDs were not working. This means that a lot of the knowledge gained was prob-
ably forgotten before it could be put into use by the occupants. Furthermore, the
educational meetings were voluntary which means there is a good chance that not all
the occupants were present, and therefore did not obtain the knowledge necessary to
utilize the full potential of the IHDs.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The majority of the results of this study indicate that there is no significant corre-
lation between the level of interaction with the in-home displays, giving occupants
real-time feedback, and the actual energy consumption. This means that it cannot
be concluded that there is an effect but neither is it possible to say for sure that there
is no effect.
Only when using stepwise selection did average clicks per week and HCA consumption
during the heating season have a statistically significant correlation. The correlation
was negative for small apartments but decreased and eventually became positive
when the floor area increased. The study investigated both water, electricity and
heat consumption and no correlation with the level of interaction with the in-home
displays was found. This lack of correlation is in contrast to earlier findings where
similar building energy management systems giving real-time energy feedback have
been linked with reductions in energy reduction between 5-15% [4][7].
The study has some limitations, especially in terms of the quality of the data. Nev-
ertheless, it is believed that this study can be used to increase the knowledge on
this topic. And make it possible to obtain more accurate predictions of the expected
energy consumption in future buildings, where smart building energy management
systems and in-home displays are utilized to provide real-time energy feedback.
The results of the additional study show a great variation in heating consumption
necessary to maintain the same indoor temperature. Furthermore, a large decrease
in heating consumption when comparing December 2016, January and February 2017
with December 2018, January and February 2019 was found. The decrease can to
some extent be explained by the outside weather conditions, which were colder in
2016/2017. However, the consumption decrease might also indicate that energy sav-
ings are present when looking at a longer time perspective than the eight months
used for this thesis.
Finally, it is important to recognize and acknowledge that the interface between
supplier, technology, and consumer is essential and that the most effective energy
information is that which captures the attention of the users, creates involvement
and is both credible and useful in the users’ situation.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Energistyrelsen. Dansk energipolitik (Danish) - Danish Energy Policy. url:
https : / / ens . dk / ansvarsomraader / energi - klimapolitik / fakta - om -
dansk-energi-klimapolitik/dansk-energipolitik. (accessed: 04.10.2019).
[2]
Energistyrelsen. “Energistatistik 2017 (Danish) - Energy Statistics 2017”. In:
(2018).
[3]
Dansk Byggeri. “Byggeriets Energianalyse 2019 (Danish) - Building Energy
Analysis 2019”. In: (2019).
[4]
Paolo Zangheri, Tiago Serrenho, and Paolo Bertoldi. “Energy Savings from
Feedback Systems: A Meta- Studies’ Review”. In: Energies (2019).
[5]
Sarah Darby. “The Effectivness of Feedback on Energy Consumption”. In: (2006).
[6]
Anders Nilsson et al. “Smart homes, home energy management systems and
real-time feedback: Lessons for influencing household energy consumption from
a Swedish field study”. In: Energy Buildings (2018).
[7]
Colin McKerracher and Jacopo Torriti. “Energy Consumption Feedback in per-
spective: Integrating Australian data to meta-analyses on In Home Displays”.
In: Energy Efficiency (2012).
[8]
Renover. Korng ården Lyse boliger - For Hele Livet. url: https://renover.
dk/projekt/korngaarden/. (accessed: 05.10.2019).
[9]
DAB. “Besluttende beboermøde Korngården (Danish) - Residing Residents
Meeting Korngården”. In: (2013).
[10]
JKH. Hovedtidsplan. Dominia. 2014.
[11]
RW. Udførelsestidsplan. Dominia. 2013.
[12]
Sandra E. Ryan and Laurie S. Porth. “A Tutorial on the Piecewise Regression
Approach Applied to Bedload Transport Data”. In: (2007).
[13]
Vito M. R. Muggeo. “Regression Models with Break-Points / Change-Points
Estimation - Package ’segmented’”. In: (2019).
[14]
Lærd statistics. Pearson Product-Moment Correlation. url: https://statistics.
laerd . com / statistical - guides / pearson - correlation - coefficient -
statistical-guide.php. (accessed: 23.10.2019).
==PAGE:62==
52
Bibliography
[15]
Yale University. Multiple Linear Regression. url: http://www.stat.yale.
edu/Courses/1997-98/101/linmult.htm. (accessed: 25.10.2019).
[16]
Statistics Solutions. Multicollinearity. url: https://www.statisticssolutions.
com/multicollinearity/. (accessed: 25.10.2019).
[17]
Keith A. Marill. “Advanced Statistics: Linear Regression, Part II: Multiple Lin-
ear Regression”. In: (2004).
[18]
Trevor A. Craney and James G. Surles. Model-Dependent Variance Inflation
Factor Cutoff Values. url: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.
1081/QEN-120001878?scroll=top&needAccess=true. (accessed: 14.11.2019).
[19]
Karen Grace-Martin. Interpreting Interactions in Regression. url: https://
www.theanalysisfactor.com/interpreting-interactions-in-regression/.
(accessed: 14.11.2019).
[20]
NCSS Statistical Software. Stepwise Regression. url: https://ncss-wpengine.
netdna - ssl . com / wp - content / themes / ncss / pdf / Procedures / NCSS /
Stepwise_Regression.pdf. (accessed: 26.11.2019).
[21]
Statistics How To. Akaike’s Information Criterion: Definition, Formulas. url:
https://www.statisticshowto.datasciencecentral.com/akaikes-information-
criterion/. (accessed: 04.12.2019).
[22]
David R. Anderson Kenneth P. Burnham. Understanding AIC and BIC in
Model Selection. url: faculty.washington.edu/skalski/classes/QERM597/
papers_xtra/Burnham%5C%20and%5C%20Anderson.pdf. (accessed: 10.12.2019).
[23]
Jens Kristian Kruse Petersen and Ane Midtstraum. “Energy Consumption, In-
door Climate and Occupant Behaviour in a Renovated Apartment Building”.
Bachelor thesis in Civil Engineering. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[24]
Teknologisk Institut. “Analyse af 1. interviewrunde hos beboerne (Danish) -
Analysis of 1. interviewround at the occupants”. In: (2016).
[25]
Sarah Gramstrup et al. “eButler – effektivisering af energiforbrug: Slutrapport
(Danish) - eButler - streamlining energy consumption: Final report”. In: (2015).
[26]
G. Wood and M. Newborough. “Energy-use information transfer for intelligent
homes: Enabling energy conservation with central and local displays”. In: Sci-
ence Direct (2006).
[27]
Lawrence J. Becker. “Joint Effect of Feedback and Goal Setting on Performance:
A Field Study of Residential Energy Consumption”. In: Journal of Applied Psy-
chology - Princeton University (1978).
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Appendix A
7.1
Estimated Effect for percentage weeks clicked as
the independent variable
Table 7.1: Multiple linear analyses for the entire period.
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.1717
0.07477
0.02927
0.04559
0.02088
Percentage Weeks Clicked
Estimated
Effect
0.00512
-0.00857
-0.1276
-0.16608
0.00271
Pearson
Coefficient
0.05658
-0.07891
-0.07429
-0.05274
0.05967
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.41930***
-0.03296
0.1550
0.06118
0.05486
Pearson
Coefficient
0.40685
-0.07102
-0.00198
-0.01592
0.12613
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
0.02065
0 0.05718**
0.5946
1.27324*
0.00576
Pearson
Coefficient
0.03207
0.248727
0.14568
0.20082
0.03609
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Appendix A
Table 7.2: Multiple linear analyses for the heating season.
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.3903
0.1387
0.03283
0.06512
0.04659
Percentage Weeks Clicked
Estimated
Effect
-0.00412
-0.00612
-0.1344
-0.1041
0.00167
Pearson
Coefficient
0.0002
-0.03083
-0.06994
-0.01470
0.04210
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.15877
-0.09991
-0.3207
-1.1244
-0.00789
Pearson
Coefficient
0.29522
-0.08521
-0.01530
-0.03219
0.04204
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
-0.00328
0.04720**
0.5521
1.1154*
0.00244
Pearson
Coefficient
0.06083
0. 0.25520
0.14192
0.20661
0.05111
Indoor Temperature
Estimated
Effect
1.98936***
0.53950***
2.6490
8.2021
0.30313*
Pearson
Coefficient
0.61045
0.25539
0.08294
0.15971
0.21250
==PAGE:65==
7.2 Multiple linear regression output average clicks per week
55
7.2
Multiple linear regression output average clicks per
week
Figure 7.1: HCA entire period.
Figure 7.2: Electricity entire period.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Appendix A
Figure 7.3: Electricity heating season.
Figure 7.4: Warm water entire period.
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Multiple linear regression output average clicks per week
57
Figure 7.5: Warm water heating season.
Figure 7.6: Cold water entire period.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Appendix A
Figure 7.7: Cold water heating season.
Figure 7.8: Floor heating entire period.
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Multiple linear regression plots average clicks per week
59
Figure 7.9: Floor heating heating season.
7.3
Multiple linear regression plots average clicks per
week
Figure 7.10: Warm water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 7.11: Warm water.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Appendix A
Figure 7.12: Cold water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 7.13: Cold water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 7.14: Floor heating.
Average clicks per week
Figure 7.15: Floor heating.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:71==
7.4 Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicks
61
7.4
Multiple linear regression outputs percentage
weeks clicks
Figure 7.16: HCA entire period.
Figure 7.17: HCA heating season.
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Appendix A
Figure 7.18: Electricity entire period.
Figure 7.19: Electricity heating season.
==PAGE:73==
7.4 Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicks
63
Figure 7.20: Warm water entire period.
Figure 7.21: Warm water heating season.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Appendix A
Figure 7.22: Cold water entire period.
Figure 7.23: Cold water heating season.
==PAGE:75==
7.4 Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicks
65
Figure 7.24: Floor heating entire period.
Figure 7.25: Floor heating heating season.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Appendix A
7.5
Multiple linear regression plots percentage weeks
clicks
Figure 7.26: HCA.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.27: HCA.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.28: Electricity.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.29: Electricity.
Percentage weeks clicked
==PAGE:77==
7.5 Multiple linear regression plots percentage weeks clicks
67
Figure 7.30: Warm water.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.31: Warm water.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.32: Cold water.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.33: Cold water.
Percentage weeks clicked
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Appendix A
Figure 7.34: Floor heating.
Percentage weeks clicked
Figure 7.35: Floor heating.
Percentage weeks clicked
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 8
Appendix B
8.1
Estimated Effect for percentage weeks clicked as
the independent variable
Table 8.1: Multiple linear analyses for the entire period including interactions.
p-value: *** > 0.000, ** > 0.01, * > 0.05
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.1751
0.0795
0.03017
0.04732
0.0322
Percentage Weeks Clicked
Estimated
Effect
-0.01267
-0.02700
0.25400
-1.03877
0.05156
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.3284*
-0.1071
0.52361
-0.65944
0.10104
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
0.02191
0.05619
0.74802
0.90838
0.02552
Percentage Weeks Clicked and Breaking Point Temperature Interaction
Estimated
Effect
-0.001887
0.00154
-0.00740
0.01436
-0.00093
Percentage Weeks Clicked and Floor Area Interaction
Estimated
Effect
-3.897e-05
1.179e-05
-0.00327
0.00779
-0.00042
==PAGE:80==
70
8 Appendix B
Table 8.2: Multiple linear analyses for the heating season including interactions.
p-value: *** > 0.000, ** > 0.01, * > 0.05
HCA
Electricity
Warm
water
Cold
water
Floor
heating
Multiple
R-squared
0.41
0.1497
0.03765
0.07588
0.05648
Percentage Weeks Clicked
Estimated
Effect
-0.14931
-0.1405176
1.00403
-1.71120
0.06320
Breaking Point Temperature
Estimated
Effect
0.09463
-0.11507
0.08677
-1.08017
0.05741
Floor Area
Estimated
Effect
-0.09950
0.01664
0.29215
-0.04175
0.00738
Indoor Temperature
Estimated
Effect
2.517***
0.38392
6.04158
10.06052
0.38015
Percentage Weeks Clicked and Breaking Point Temperature Interaction
Estimated
Effect
0.00105
0.00021
-0.00860
-0.00390
-0.00128
Percentage Weeks Clicked and Floor Area Interaction
Estimated
Effect
0.00179
0.00063
0.00451
0.02238
-0.00011
Average Clicks and Indoor Temperature Interaction
Estimated
Effect
-0.00917
0.00377
-0.06544
-0.01747
-0.00168
==PAGE:81==
8.2 Multiple linear regression outputs average clicks per week including interactions
71
8.2
Multiple linear regression outputs average clicks
per week including interactions
Figure 8.1: HCA heating season.
Figure 8.2: Electricity entire period.
==PAGE:82==
72
8 Appendix B
Figure 8.3: Electricity heating season.
Figure 8.4: Warm water entire period.
Figure 8.5: Warm water heating season.
==PAGE:83==
8.2 Multiple linear regression outputs average clicks per week including interactions
73
Figure 8.6: Cold water entire period.
Figure 8.7: Cold water heating season.
Figure 8.8: Floor heating entire period.
==PAGE:84==
74
8 Appendix B
Figure 8.9: Floor heating heating season.
8.3
Multiple linear regression plots average clicks per
week including interactions
Figure 8.10: Electricity.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.11: Electricity.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:85==
8.3 Multiple linear regression plots average clicks per week including interactions
75
Figure 8.12: Warm water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.13: Warm water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.14: Cold water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.15: Cold water.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:86==
76
8 Appendix B
Figure 8.16: Floor heating.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.17: Floor heating.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:87==
8.4 Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicked including interactions
77
8.4
Multiple linear regression outputs percentage
weeks clicked including interactions
Figure 8.18: HCA entire period.
Figure 8.19: HCA heating season.
==PAGE:88==
78
8 Appendix B
Figure 8.20: Electricity entire period.
Figure 8.21: Electricity heating season.
Figure 8.22: Warm water entire period.
==PAGE:89==
8.4 Multiple linear regression outputs percentage weeks clicked including interactions
79
Figure 8.23: Warm water heating season.
Figure 8.24: Cold water entire period.
Figure 8.25: Cold water heating season.
==PAGE:90==
80
8 Appendix B
Figure 8.26: Floor heating entire period.
Figure 8.27: Floor heating heating season.
==PAGE:91==
8.5 Multiple linear regression plots percentage weeks clicked including interactions
81
8.5
Multiple linear regression plots percentage weeks
clicked including interactions
Figure 8.28: Electricity.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.29: Electricity.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.30: Warm water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.31: Warm water.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:92==
82
8 Appendix B
Figure 8.32: Cold water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.33: Cold water.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.34: Floor heating.
Average clicks per week
Figure 8.35: Floor heating.
Average clicks per week
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 9
Appendix C
9.1
Stepwise Selection for the Entire Period
Figure 9.1: Coefficients for warm water during the entire data period.
Figure 9.2: Coefficients for cold water during the entire data period.
==PAGE:94==
84
9 Appendix C
Figure 9.3: Coefficients for floor heating during the entire data period.
9.2
Stepwise Selection for the Heating Season
Figure 9.4: Coefficients for warm water during the heating season.
Figure 9.5: Coefficients for cold water during the heating season including clicks.
==PAGE:95==
9.2 Stepwise Selection for the Heating Season
85
Figure 9.6: Coefficients for floor heating during the heating season.
==PAGE:96==
86
==PAGE:97==
==PAGE:98==
