==PAGE:1==
Investigating state-of-the-art
approaches to knowledge
enhancing deep learning based
language models
Victor Elkjær Birk
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The aim of the thesis is to investigate state-of-the-art methods for enhancing
Language Models (LMs) with external knowledge from structured knowledge
representations like relational graphs following a triplet structure. Speciﬁcally,
the thesis studies the mechanisms proposed for knowledge augmentation of both
task-speciﬁc LMs and general-purpose LMs capable of being ﬁne-tune on a vari-
ety of downstream tasks. We immerse ourselves into the details of the Knowledge
Graph Language Model (KGLM) presented at ACL 2019 by [Logan et al., 2019]
in addition to KnowBERT presented at EMNLP 2019 by [Peters et al., 2019].
The novel contributions made throughout the thesis are summarised below,
• We present a motivated overview of the history from the N-gram to present
state-of-the-art LMs.
• We manage, to a satisfactory extent, to reproduce the results of both the
KGLM [Logan et al., 2019] and three variants of KnowBERT [Peters et al., 2019].
• We manage to successfully dissect the Knowledge, Attention, and Re-
contextualisation mechanism employed by KnowBERT, through a qual-
itative analysis, revealing under which conditions KnowBERT seems to
exploit external knowledge most eﬀectively.
• We manage to successfully construct meaningful deep contextualised word
representations based on KnowBERT.
• We manage to successfully assess the extent to which importance sampling
have on next-token prediction for the KGLM.
• We evaluated the two models on a Fact-completion task in close resem-
blance to the original Cloze task [Taylor, 1953], yieldings results enhancing
our knowledge of how the vital mechanism work.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Målet for denne afhandling er at afsøge nutidens førende metoder med henblik
på at tilføre viden til sprogmodeller ved brug af eksterne vidensressourcer, ek-
sempelvis vidensgrafer, der følger en klassisk triplet struktur. Mere speciﬁkt, går
projektet i dybden med de bagvedliggende mekanismer fra de mest lovende mo-
deller. Det indebærer både træning af sprogmodeller, der speciﬁkt henvender sig
mod sprogmodellering, samt prætrænede sprogmodeller, der tilsteder kommer
en bred vifte af applikationer gennem ﬁnjustering af sine vægte til den speciﬁkke
opgave. Vi laver en grundig analyse af KGLM modellen præsenteret på sidste års
ACL conference [Logan et al., 2019], samt KnowBERT præsenteret på EMNLP
2019 [Peters et al., 2019]. Afhandlingens bidrag til feltet er listet nedenfor,
• Vi giver et overblik og sprogmodellers historiske udvikling, tilbage fra tæl-
lebaserede N-gram og frem til nutidens førende modeller.
• Vi formår at reproducere resultaterne præsenteret i [Logan et al., 2019]
samt alle varianter af KnowBERT [Peters et al., 2019] til tilfredsstillende
nøjagtighed.
• Vi formår med success at dissekere KAR mekanismen brugt at Know-
BERT.
• Vi formår med success at producere kontekstualiserede repræsentationer
af ord baseret på KnowBERT.
• Vi formår med succuess at vurdere hvilken eﬀekt vigtighedsprøveudtag-
ning har på næste-ords prædiktionen for KGLM modellen.
• Vi evaluerer henholdsvis KGLM modellen og KnowBERT på en Cloze-test
[Taylor, 1953] hvorved vi opnår ydereligere indsigt ift. vurdering af graden
hvorved sprogmodellerne mekanismer yder som forventet.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis, corresponding to 30 ECTS points, is submitted in fulﬁlment of
the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering degree (Mathematical
Modelling and Computation) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The work presented herein was supervised by Lars Kai Hansen and Michael Riis
Andersen.
The thesis deals with a subﬁeld of Natural Language Processing known as Lan-
guage Modelling. Speciﬁcally, analysing and employing state-of-the-art meth-
ods for infusing structured external knowledge into Language Models (LMs) is
of primary focus.
Lyngby, February, 2020-2020
Insert Signature
Victor Elkjær Birk
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First of, I am humbled and grateful for the impeccable guidance received from
both my supervisors, Lars Kai Hansen and Michael Riis Andersen. Thank you!
Based on your savoir-faire presence alone, you have had my utmost respect from
the get-go, and I treasure the discussions we have had over the course of the
project. Lars, I am especially grateful for you allowing to me steer the thesis in
the direction of my desire, and letting me familiarise myself with the ﬁelds of
Deep Learning (DL) and natural Language Processing (NLP). Fields that I had
little and no prior experience with before engaging in this thesis, respectively.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resume
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
v
1.1
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
2
Background
3
2.1
Embarking on a journey towards current state of the art language
models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theory
13
3.1
Inescapable concepts of NLP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Life before deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
The N -gram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Then came Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
Artiﬁcial neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.2
Fully diﬀerentiable neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.3
Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.4
Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.5
Recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.6
Back propagation through time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.7
Bi-directionality and many layer RNNs
. . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.8
Encoder-Decoder Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.3.9
Please attend to this section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.10 The Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.11 BERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Structured Knowledge representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.4.1
Deﬁnitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.5
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4
Methods
55
4.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.1
Embedded Structured Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.2
Structured Knowledge Relevant to Language Models . . .
56
4.1.3
Knowledge Augmented Language Models
. . . . . . . . .
58
4.2
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2.1
The Knowledge Graph Language Model . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2.2
KnowBERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.3.1
Preparing for take-oﬀ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3.2
Allennlp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.4
Training details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.4.1
General Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.4.2
KGLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.5
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5
Experiments, Results & Discussion
89
5.1
Reproducibility of KnowBERT pretraining results
. . . . . . . .
89
5.2
Into the guts of KAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.2.1
Remarkable observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.2.2
Contextual Word Representations
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.3
Evaluation the KGLM against KnowBERT
. . . . . . . . . . . . 102
5.4
Fact Completion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
5.4.1
Experimental Setup for Fact-Completion . . . . . . . . . . 103
5.4.2
KGLM Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
5.4.3
KnowBERT Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
5.4.4
General Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
5.5
Downstream Training and KnowBERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.6
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
6
Conclusion and Outlook
107
6.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
A Perplexity Intuition
111
B Additional Activation Functions
115
C KnowBERT Architecture
117
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
D Basic Allennlp concepts
119
D.1 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
D.2 Vocabulary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
D.3 Instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
D.4 Predictors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
D.5 Conﬁguration ﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
E Evaluation metrics of relevance to training
125
E.1
The F1-score
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
E.2
Unknown Penalised Perplexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
F Supplementary KGLM Training Details
127
G Supplementary Analysis
129
G.1 KAR analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
H Contextual Embeddings
135
H.1 KnowBERT-Wiki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
H.2 KnowBERT-Wordnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
H.3 KnowBERT-W+W . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Bibliography
139
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Contents
==PAGE:16==
ii
CONTENTS
Abbreviations
ADAM A Method for Stochastic Optimization
ASGD Averaged Stochastic Gradient Descent
ASR Automatic Speech Recognition
BERT Bi-directional Encoder Representations from Transformers
BiLM Bi-directional Language Model
BiLSTM Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory
BiRNN Bi-directional Recurrent Neural Network
BPTT Back Propagation through Time
CBOW Continuous Bag-of-words
CoLA Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability
DL Deep Learning
DS Dialogue System
EL Entity Linker
ELMo Embeddings from Language Model
EM Expectation-Maximisation
ERNIE Enhanced Representation through kNowledge intEgration
FFNN Feed Forward Neural Network
GELU Gaussian Error Linear Unit
GLoVe Global Vectors for Word Representations
GLUE General Language Understanding Evaluation
GPT General Pre-trained Transformer
KAR Knowledge Attention and Re-contextualisation
KB Knowledge Base
KG Knowledge Graph
KGLM Knowledge Graph Language Model
==PAGE:17==
CONTENTS
iii
LKG Local Knowledge Graph
LM Language Model
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
MHA Multi-Headed Attention
MLE Maximum Likelihood Estimation
MLM Masked Language Modelling
NER Neural Entity Recognition
NLI Natural Language Inference
NLP Natural Language Processing
NLU Natural Language Understanding
NMT Neural Machine Translation
NSP Next Sentence Prediction
NT-ASGD Non-monotonically Triggered variant of ASGD
POS Part-of-Speech
QA Question Answering
RNN Recurrent Neural Network
RNNLM Recurrent Neural Network based Language Model
seq2seq sequence-to-sequence
SA Sentiment Analysis
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent
SOTA State-of-the-Art
SQuAD Stanford Question Answering Dataset
TACRED TAC Relation Extraction Dataset
UPP Unknown Penalised Perplexity
WiC Word-in-Context
Nomenclature
==PAGE:18==
iv
CONTENTS
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the following chapter, we provide brief outlines of the subsequent chapters,
so that the reader has a clear idea of the concepts that will be covered. This
chapter concludes with a reading guide to ensure that the reader knows the
prerequisites for each chapter as we move along.
1.1
Outline
Chapter 2: Background
Chapter 2 presents the ideas that have paved the way for today’s NLP systems
and language models in particular. We start by motivating the scope of the
project and the notion of language models while contemplating their vitality
on many NLP tasks. Hereafter, we delve into the current trends in the ﬁeld
after which we examine the breakthroughs that paved the way for the current
systems. We follow up by addressing the importance of contextual awareness
and how knowledge graphs can help alleviate some of the common problems
that State-of-the-Art (SOTA) models experience today such as limited long-
term memory leading to inconsistencies in text generation and limited factual
recall. By the end of this chapter, the reader should have a conceptual idea
about the most prominent breakthrough and their attributes.
Chapter 3: Theory
Chapter 3 aims at covering the vital theory for having to achieve a holistic view
of the models as well as their use-cases. To begin with, we shall formalise the
notion of language models and the task of language modelling. In addition to
doing so, it is necessary to comment on some inescapable concepts in natural
==PAGE:20==
1.1 Outline
1
language processing, e.g., tokenisation and vocabularies. The task of language
modelling and it’s intrinsic diﬃculties can be well understood as we motivate
the N-gram which has been one of the primary workhorses of the ﬁeld prior
to the establishment of deep learning based approaches. The reader should,
at this point have an idea about some of the issues we want to address as we
begin to introduce more complex models. We then turn our attention towards
artiﬁcial neural networks starting from the very beginning and articulating the
ideas that have led to today’s modern network architectures. When writing this
chapter in particular, there has been a focus on writing each topic in a mod-
ular fashion in the sense that the respective models should be readable on its
own. It might, however, be necessary to familiarise oneself with the notation
used in preceding sections. Say, for instance, that you are familiar with the
theory of the transformer. It should suﬃce for proceeding to the introduction
of the bi-directional encoder representation from transformers (or BERT for
short). Having gone through the deep learning theory, we conclude the chapter
by formally introducing the notion of external structured knowledge represen-
tations such as knowledge graphs and knowledge bases along with deﬁnition in
Section 3.4
Chapter 4: Methods
Chapter 4 covers the consolidation of the theory covered in Chapter 3 to anal-
yse the diﬀerent methods proposed for incorporating external knowledge into
language models (LMs). Hence before we elucidate the main models considered
throughout this thesis, namely the knowledge graph language model (KGLM)
[Logan et al., 2019] and KnowBert [Peters et al., 2019], we shed line on a subset
of the related work. The selected subset includes diﬀerent approaches to infusing
external knowledge into language models as well as methods for how external
knowledge is embedded. Proceedingly, we introduce KGLM and KnowBert after
which we turn to s
Chapter 5: Experiments & Results & Discussion
In Chapter 5, we embark on the quests of assessing the extent to which the mod-
els display signs of knowledge. We start with a preliminary analysis of the diﬀer-
ent mechanisms responsible for knowledge augmentation of KnowBert, respec-
tively in Section 5.2. Having studied how the models are knowledge enhanced,
we test how the contextualised word representations produced by KnowBERT
looks after having soldered Knowledge Base (KB)s between pretrained layers.
We visualise the contextualised word representations in two-dimensions through
==PAGE:21==
2
Introduction
means of principal component analysis (PCA) and t-distributed Stochastic Neigh-
bour Embeddings (t-SNE) which wraps up the preliminary analysis.
Subse-
quently, we present the setup later used for evaluation of the models. The task
we speciﬁcally consider is that of Fact-Completion as it allows for comparison
between the KGLM and KnowBert.
Moving on we discuss the most promi-
nent recurring observations and use those as the starting point for a discussion
putting the diﬀerent results in relation to each
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter seeks to augment the reader with an understanding of the ﬁeld of
language modelling. We achieve this by ﬁrst motivating the need for Language
Models (LMs) by exemplifying some of the many applications in which their
role is imperative. Having qualitatively and quantitatively alluded to the reasons
why it is paramount to have good LMs at our disposal, we embark on the journey
towards today’s state-of-the-art (SOTA) models. In this regard, we cover the big
ideas that have paved the way for going from count-based methods such as the
N-gram to the sophisticated Deep Learning (DL) based general-purpose LMs
of today that "understand" text well enough to be amenable to downstream
learning.
The current SOTA is impressive as evident from the scores obtained on the
General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) [Wang et al., 2018] and
SuperGLUE benchmarks [Wang et al., 2019]. Nonetheless, there are still many
scientiﬁc- and engineering-related challenges we need to address. Included in this
set of problems is the poor treatment of rare tokens and the tendency to create
better-performing models solely by increasing the number of model parameters
and data, and utilise transfer learning to downstream tasks [Raﬀel et al., 2019].
We wrap up the chapter by arguing for why infusing external knowledge into
LMs can help us overcome these challenges as the characteristics of structured
knowledge representations such as the Knowledge Graph (KG) in part represent
exactly what LMs are lacking.
LMs are genuinely ubiquitous in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP).
Look, for instance, at the task of language modelling in the classical sense con-
cerning predicting the next word conditioned on previous words.
These are
used for decoding in speech recognition systems as well as to help us search
for the content we need as we visit our beloved friend google daily. Addition-
ally, general-purpose language models can produce numerical representations
of words capable of being trained on a myriad of downstream tasks, including
Question Answering (QA), Dialogue System (DS) and Sentiment Analysis (SA).
==PAGE:23==
4
Background
2.1
Embarking on a journey towards current state
of the art language models
The language models proposed until the time of writing can generally be classi-
ﬁed into two categories: i) count-based models including traditional statistical
models such as the N-gram [Cavnar and Trenkle, 1994] that we cover theoret-
ically in section 3.2.1, and ii) continuous-space LMs that seek to ﬁnd vector
representations of the words (word embeddings) to be used as input to a neural
network, which then may optimise language modelling performance.
Regarding the former, classical count-based methods are typically made tractable
by relying on an N-order Markov approximation1. The simple idea behind the
N-gram is hence to create a probability distribution over the set of possible
words, coined the vocabulary, conditioned on the N −1 preceding words. Al-
beit being simple, using heuristically-guided modiﬁcations of the original N-
gram such as modiﬁed Kneser-Ney smoothing, we can arrive at a somewhat
robust count-based LM which still features in some NLP systems to this date
[Kneser and Steinbiss, 1993, Kneser and Ney, ]. However, it still possesses sig-
niﬁcant ﬂaws as it does not hold any knowledge. Here we refer to knowledge
as being linguistically informed. For instance, the N-gram does not have any
means for knowing that a word sequence like "the mother is holding her child" is
semantically and syntactically similar to "the father carries his daughter".
Another complication with count-based methods is that they innately have dif-
ﬁculties regarding rare words and, in particular, the N-grams not seen as part of
the training, which causes a sparsity issue [Bengio et al., 2001]. Considering the
creative nature of language, we do not need to use a large N before being po-
sitioned with many zero counts. Unfortunately, using only low-order N-grams,
we cannot exploit longer context dependencies since we are modelling a relaxed
conditional under the Markov assumption.
These deliberations let Yoshua Bengio et al. devise a LM grounded in the the-
ory of neural networks in their paper "A Neural Probabilistic Language Model"
[Bengio et al., 2001]. The model aimed at subduing the curse of dimensionality
present of the dominant statistical models at the time of its proposal. They
intended to do so by learning a distributed representation of words to promote
a semantic understanding. The idea is here that even rare sequences should be
able to get a high probability given that the words entailed therein are simi-
lar to terms already seen by the model. While the architecture they presented
was simple, they managed for some conﬁgurations to obtain results on par with
well-performing N-grams, which sparked an interest in using continuous-space
1Which supposedly also aided the authors of the N-gram in coining it.
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Embarking on a journey towards current state of the art language
models
5
LMs that are also commonly referred to as Neural Language Models (NLMs).
The model used by Bengio et al. estimates the same conditional probability as
the N-gram conditioning on the N −1, but used a Feed Forward Neural Network
(FFNN) (introduced formally in 3.3.2) instead of the count-based approach. The
majority of the network conﬁguration considered used two hidden layers: one
to create the shared word features which did not utilise any non-linearity and a
second ordinary hidden layer using the hyperbolic tangent. At the output layer,
the authors employ a softmax function to create a probability distribution over
the words in the vocabulary.
Since the use of neural networks for modelling language had not had time to
ripen, it is natural that the approach presented by Bengio et al. had oversights.
One of the downsides was not exploiting the sequential nature of a sentence.
The community hence hypothesised that recurrent network structures would be
better suited for the task at hand [Mikolov et al., 2010]. Mikolov et al. hence
presented the notion of a Recurrent Neural Network based Language Model
(RNNLM) in 2010. The vital diﬀerence the RNN and the FNN here is that
RNNs use parameter-sharing across the temporal dimension of the network, so
the hidden-layer connects to itself using time-delayed connections. The RNNLM
presented used a vanilla RNN as the language model, showing that they could
lower the relative word error rate (WER) of Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) systems on the Wall Street Journal benchmark by around 18% and ap-
proximately 5% on the way more complex NIST RT05 task using less data than
the count-based baseline.
The success of Mikolov et al. using a vanilla RNN proselytised many of the
ﬁeld’s researchers to devote their resources into studying ways of exploiting the
sequential nature of language and the context information entailed in sentences.
However, not only in regards to the model architectures such as using Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cells instead of vanilla RNNs, but also regarding
the word embeddings used as input to the recurrent model.
Tomas Mikolov himself, in a team of other scientists, devised a new method for
creating word embeddings under the name of word2vec [Mikolov et al., 2013].
Word2vec has proven to have a paramount impact on NLP2 and is still utilised
at the time of writing. The model aims at generating word embeddings capable
of capturing dependence between words. The most commonly used example
that we seek to construct a vector space in which king - man + woman ⇡queen
and Mikolov et al.
proposes two ways of doing so: i) the Continuous Bag-
of-words (CBOW) and ii) the Continuous Skip-Gram.
The CBOW predicts
the current word based on the context around, whereas the Continuous Skip-
2Cited more than 17,000 times according to google scholar.
==PAGE:25==
6
Background
Gram predicts the surrounding words based on the current. In practice, they
construct a neural network consisting of a single hidden-layer without any form
of activation function.
The input to the model is hence either the current
word or the surrounding context, with the aim of predicting the surrounding
context or current word, respectively. The authors employ a softmax to create a
probability distribution over the vocabulary. This method leads to the capturing
of valuable information in the hidden state of the model, and hence the learned
vector representations herein are used as word embeddings. Using Word2Vec
in combination with other methods has since its introduction obtained SOTA
performance, e.g., leading to a 50% increase in Spearman’s rank correlation over
the best result at that time [Zhila et al., 2013].
Nonetheless, word2vec performs similarly to the other precedently described
models, and hence suﬀer from the fact that it only takes into account the
nearby context. Pennington et al. conjectured that NLP systems could ben-
eﬁt from incorporating global context information through the use of a co-
occurrence matrix to form Global Vectors for Word Representations (GLoVe)
[Pennington et al., 2014]. The incorporation of global context information led to
an improvement on many benchmarks [Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003].
After the realisation that RNNs and sophisticated word representations alone,
and in conjunction, could improve the performance of NLP systems, the pri-
mary workhorse for a signiﬁcant period ended up being LSTM cells using ad-
vanced word representations and inputs hereto. The community kept taking
strides towards better representations of words (also on a sub-word level) such
as [Bojanowski et al., 2017]. Still, it is arguably considered the regularisation
and optimisation of existing base-architectures such as the LSTM that inspired
the most vital improvements. In my view, Stephen Merity et al. consolidated
the overarching trends seen in the literature exquisitely when he and colleagues
of Salesforce Research introduced the AWD-LSTM [Merity et al., 2017a].
Results of preceding years found that the over-parameterisation of neural net-
works (not only in the ﬁeld of NLP) implied that the performance of DL
based methods became ever-more dependent on eﬀective regularisation tech-
niques. Especially the likes of Dropout [Srivastava et al., 2014], as well as batch-
normalisation [Ioﬀe and Szegedy, 2015], had proven extremely useful working
with FFNNs and convolutional neural networks as they became a ubiquitously-
recurring ingredient for success. These techniques were not directly applicable to
RNNs, however, and so modiﬁcations had to be made as ﬁelds relying on RNNs
wanted to inspire similar progress. As an example, naively applying dropout
disrupted the RNN’s ability to remember long-term dependencies eﬀectively
[Zaremba et al., 2014]. Thankfully, it turned out that dropout is grounded in
approximate Bayesian inference which led Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani
to propose a variational inference-based dropout technique.
Their technique
==PAGE:26==
2.1 Embarking on a journey towards current state of the art language
models
7
deviated from the original since instead of sampling a new binary dropout mask
at each timestep, it uses parameter-sharing for the dropout mask over multi-
ple steps. The modiﬁcation of dropout hence proved suitable for RNN based
models, showing great promise as for the task of language modelling achieving
SOTA on the Penn Treebank corpus [Marcus et al., 1993].
Having addressed the potential of dropout within the RNNs, we turn to the
methods for harvesting the fruit of the idea behind batch normalisation through
use of, e.g., layer normalisation. As Ba et al. put in the original paper propos-
ing layer normalisation, it is, in essence, transpose batch normalisation. That
is, where batch normalisation normalises the input according to the mini-batch
mean and the mini-batch variance and scales and shifts the output, layer nor-
malisation takes place by adding additional parameters to normalise over the
layers per training example.
The contributions of Merity et al. are many. They introduced i) a new variant of
the averaged stochastic gradient descent, the Non-monotonically Triggered vari-
ant of ASGD (NT-ASGD), ii) a new dataset, WikiText-2 3 and iii) performed an
ablation study over the eﬀect of a wide range the regularisation. The ablation
study included examining the impact of the regularisation techniques we have
discussed thus far, as well as weight tying [Inan et al., 2016] and activation reg-
ularisation (and temporal activation regularisation) [Merity et al., 2017b]. The
most performant conﬁgurations achieved SOTA on both the Penn Treebank and
WikiText-2.
A quick detour to the realm of Neural Machine Translation
To progress
with our history of language models, we need to take a quick intermezzo and
elaborate on vital progress made in nearby ﬁelds, and especially, in the ﬁeld of
Neural Machine Translation (NMT).
The contributions that truly made strides towards better-performing systems
within NMT are the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model [Sutskever et al., 2014]
and the notion of attention [Bahdanau et al., 2014]. The seq2seq model proved
that large and deep LSTMs could perform on par with the best statistical ma-
chine translation systems achieving a test BLEU score on the WMT’14 English
to French dataset. The notion of attention, in turn, implemented the idea that
when humans solve seq2seq tasks such as translation, we do not utilise the entire
input sequence at all times, but instead only focus on the most relevant context
available. As we shall see, attention and models following the notion of a seq2seq
model are now omnipresent and exist in many forms. The most well-known of
the bunch, however, is undoubtedly the Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017]. The
3Which we later in Chapter 4.
==PAGE:27==
8
Background
Transformer sought when introduced in the paper "Attention is all you need",
for one, to alleviate one of the drawbacks of RNNs. Namely, that even though
the individual computations of an RNN are highly parallelisable, the reliance
on the previous hidden-states limit the degree to which the parallel computa-
tions can blossom. Utilising an encoder-decoder based architecture similar to
the likes of [Bahdanau et al., 2014], Vaswani et al. achieve an unprecedented
parallelisation of seq2seq models and have since its proposal in June 2017, been
cited more than a staggering 5200 times according to semantic scholar.
We hence cannot emphasise the vitality of the Transformer architecture enough
as LMs based on its components (the encoder and decoder) top the GLUE
leaderboard at the time of writing [Zhang et al., 2019, Raﬀel et al., 2019].
These LMs are general-purpose in the sense that they are typically pretrained
on objectives that promote Natural Language Understanding (NLU) after which
we steer their capabilities toward downstream tasks, such as language modelling.
To progress, recall the properties of the word2vec and GloVE methods for pro-
ducing word representations. A weak point of these approaches is that they
are context-agnostic. This fact means that use the same word representation
for "bank" in the sequence "river bank" as do they in the sequence "bank de-
posit".
Utilising context-agnostic word representations on tasks such as the
Word-in-Context (WiC) benchmark [Pilehvar and Camacho-Collados, 2018] is
hence suboptimal. Hence it deemed desirable to seek ways of producing con-
textualised word representations so that "bank" in the case of "river bank" need
not map to the same word as "bank" in "bank deposit".
The consequence of the observation made in regards to context-agnostic vs.
context-dependent word representations led to the invention of representations
based on bi-directional language models (BiLMs). Researchers such as Dai et
al. have studied the idea for a few years [Dai and Le, 2015], but it was not until
2018 that we saw the real breakthroughs of pretraining BiLMs.
In Chapter 3 and Chapter 4, we cover the details of how to pretrain such repre-
sentations. Still, for now, their presence engenders two questions: i) "in which
ways can we use the context-awareness to improve NLP systems?", and ii) "what
does the bi-directionality imply for the tasks we can use them to address?".
The answer to question i) is not a single uniﬁed approach, but instead splits into
two overarching strategies: The feature-extraction strategy is to augment task-
speciﬁc architectures with information from the contextualised representations.
Note that using this approach, we do not let the pretrained weights change as
we try to optimise for the task-speciﬁc objective.
==PAGE:28==
2.1 Embarking on a journey towards current state of the art language
models
9
The ﬁrst breakthrough that moved SOTA using this approach was Embeddings
from Language Model (ELMo) [Peters et al., 2018]. ELMo is a Bi-directional
Language Model (BiLM) using a Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory (BiL-
STM) to construct deep contextualised word representations aware of both the
left-to-right and right-to-left using shallow concatenation. The results they ob-
tained by their baseline model with ELMo were overwhelming as they claimed
new SOTA on six NLP tasks including QA on SQuAD [Rajpurkar et al., 2016]
where they obtained a 4.7% absolute improvement (24.9% relative) and Neural
Entity Recognition (NER) on the CoNLL 2003 task [Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003].
The second strategy is that of ﬁne-tuning. The idea behind ﬁne-tuning is to pre-
train contextual representations (typically using multi-task learning [Liu et al., 2019])
after which we add another downstream objective to train against, letting the
network update its parameters to improve upon the downstream task. Note here
that conversely to the feature-extraction approach, we do not use anything ex-
cept for the pretrained weights as starting point. An unavoidable ﬁgure included
in the set of pretrained models using the ﬁne-tuning strategy is Bi-directional
Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [Devlin et al., 2018]. We
will cover BERT theoretically in Chapter 3, but, in essence, the model is a
stack of transformer encoders of the type presented by [Vaswani et al., 2017].
The inﬂuence of BERT, similar to the Transformer, cannot be emphasised
enough as it moved SOTA on 11 NLP tasks including pushing the GLUE score
to 80.5% which at the time corresponded to an 7.7% absolute improvement
[Devlin et al., 2018].
We have now arrived at what can be considered SOTA language models. Yet, we
have not to be held engendered by the properties of BiLMs. That is the unfortu-
nate intrinsic property of bi-directional model that we cannot after pretraining
make models applicable for the task of causal language modelling. A way to
get around this feature and still utilise the Transformer is by solely relying on
the decoder. Modiﬁcations hereof have for instance led to sophisticated text-
generating systems of General Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) [Radford et al., 2018]
and GPT-2 [Radford et al., 2019].
We have now rushed through a signiﬁcant portion of prominent breakthroughs
that have led to the current state-of-aﬀairs. From hereon, we seek to argue for
the choice of research direction pursued in this thesis, that is, to investigate
how infusing external structured knowledge representations into the LMs can
aid them in:
• The treatment of rare words as knowledge graphs such as Wikipedia en-
tails exactly those entities and relations that would typically map to the
unknown token.
==PAGE:29==
10
Background
• Potentially becoming more interpretable by being able to tell from which
entities the LMs decide to draw information.
• Increasing the factual consistency.
The performance of Transformer based models similar to BERT and GPT-2 de-
serves recognition. However, the performance gains obtained are also a conse-
quence of ramping up the number of model parameters to unprecedented values
such as CTRL (1.6B) [Keskar et al., 2019], Megatron (8.3B) [Shoeybi et al., 2019]
and T5 (11B) [Raﬀel et al., 2019]. Actually, way smaller models such as BERT-
large containing (340M) parameter poses issues regarding the devices that can
run them. For instance, BERT-large requires more than 20GBs of RAM, and
therefore we need to ﬁnd ways of learning more eﬀectively.
The substantial
amount of model parameters and the humongous amount of data that we train
the SOTA pretrained Language Model (LM)s upon opens up for the possibil-
ity that LM might be able for them to act as knowledge on their own. Fabio
Petroni et al. work with this idea as part of the work they presented at EMNLP
2019 [Petroni et al., 2019]. More speciﬁcally, they compared LMs with knowl-
edge graphs on QA and NLG tasks. In this setting, we model the NLG instance
using a masked language modelling objective (see section 3.3.11.1) where the au-
thors mask words that are answers to the posed questions. For instance, "The
technical university of Denmark resides in [MASK]" where we in this case expect
the language model to return "Lyngby". They ﬁnd that the LMs pretrained an
ever-growing amount of data might in the future be able to extract relations to
knowledge bases. A caveat here is, though, they also only consider relatively
simple examples.
It is not to strip away the glory of the impressive results obtained with these
models, but merely a consequence of mature methods for representation struc-
tured knowledge mathematically. The maturity means that instead of trying to
increase the model complexity by adding more parameters, we decided to work
on how to use these methods of representing structured knowledge to enhance
modern LMs.
To persuade the reader into following this argument, we conclude this chapter by
articulating some of the current trends concerning the use of structured knowl-
edge in NLP while saving the most relevant related work for later discussion in
section 4.1.
Knowledge graphs (see section 3.4) continue to attract an increasing amount of
attention at the relevant conferences such as Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL) and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
As previously alluded to, this comes as no surprise as it is of great interest to
ﬁnd ways of cleverly infusing external knowledge sources into NLP systems to
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Chapter Summary
11
serve as a kind of long-term memory providing factual consistency. Consider the
keywords used within the accepted papers of EMNLP 2019. The word knowl-
edge comes in at fourth-place right after 1) generation, 2) multi 3) machine4.
The keywords alone do not say anything about the extent to which the papers
do revolve around using structured knowledge to enhance NLP systems, take
it from the president of the (ACL), Ming Zhou, who in his opening speech for
ACL 2019 noted that:
“
Linguistics, knowledge, commonsense and symbolic reasoning should
still play important roles to these challenges.
Ming Zhou - President of the ACL ”
Here "these" refer to common issues regarding using deep learning for natural
language processing such as reasoning, interpretability and learning eﬀectiveness
in terms of improvement obtained through the addition of more data.
It is reassuring to know that Ming Zhou is on-board with our plan as we are now
ready to proceed to the next chapter of our story. The next chapter revolves
around many of the same subjects as we have covered in this section, but in far
greater technical detail and hence before proceeding, we allot a few comments
to the subjects we have covered thus far.
2.2
Chapter Summary
First, we start by colloquially inferring the motivation for the project, including
the reasons to study language models. Included in the discussion, we covered
the strengths and drawbacks of the SOTA models, that at the time of writing,
reside on the top of the GLUE leaderboard [Wang et al., 2018].
Second, we immersed in the history of language models from count-based sta-
tistical models in the form of the N-gram to the Transformer based beasts of
today, such as BERT [Devlin et al., 2018] and Megatron [Shoeybi et al., 2019].
Lastly, we motivated the idea of enhancing language models using external
knowledge to promote desired properties such as factual consistency, better in-
terpretability and high coverage of rare words.
4https://github.com/roomylee/EMNLP-2019-Papers
==PAGE:31==
12
Background
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3
Theory
In the following, we provide the reader with the fundamental theory needed to
grasp the concepts covered in Chapter 4 and the thesis in general. We start by
conveying an introduction about inescapable concepts of NLP such as tokeni-
sation and perplexity, after which we delve into the theory about the primary
workhorses of the ﬁeld before the arrival of deep learning. Hereafter, we in-
troduce the notion of artiﬁcial neural networks motivated by the Rosenblatt’s
perceptron, which elegantly lets us introduce the family of neural network ar-
chitectures. The family members we devote the majority of our attention to are
the FFNN and variants of the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Subsequently,
we formally introduce the concept of a KB and a KG to be able to dig deeper
into the win-win relationship they potentially can help us foster with language
models in terms of alleviating each other’s weak points.
Lastly, we give an introduction to language models in the form of embeddings to
direct our attention to the details of the SOTA models considered throughout
the thesis, e.g. Knowledge Graph Language Model (KGLM), KnowBert and
more.
3.1
Inescapable concepts of NLP
This section covers some of the fundamental concepts required to get the grasp
of the ﬁeld of language models. We cover tokenisation and the formal deﬁnition
of a vocabulary.
Tokenisation
Tokenisation is, in essence, the process splitting a text into a
list of tokens and converting them into an input of use for modelling. It is broad
in its deﬁnition since tokenisation happens on many diﬀerent levels.
Given
some text, one ﬁrst has to tokenise it into sentences, then these sentences can
==PAGE:33==
14
Theory
be tokenised into words, and if sought-after, these words into word-pieces or
characters. During these steps, it might also be that it is desirable to throw
away certain characters such as punctuation, parenthesis, and special charac-
ters. The tokenised text will serve as input to the given model. In general, the
goal of tokenisation is to ensure that the text is processed in the manner/way
that information should be presented further down the NLP pipeline. Typically,
we see two overall categories of tokenisers. The ﬁrst category is text-dependent
tokenisers such as white-space tokenisers and punctuation tokenisers, whereas
the second is model speciﬁc tokenisers. The model speciﬁc part of the tokenisa-
tion process can include going from word to word-pieces (WP) level, but many
other methods exist. Nonetheless, before a tokeniser can tokenise anything, it
is required that we equip it with a vocabulary.
Vocabulary
The vocabulary is the set of tokens that our NLP system knows.
We let V denote the vocabulary of an NLP system with cardinality |V |. Included
herein can be a set of special tokens such as a token to denote padding [PAD]
used to ﬁx sequences that or not of the same length.
3.2
Life before deep learning
To begin, we start by deﬁning the task of language modelling in a formal settings
as to have an easy way of referring to speciﬁc tasks as we progress throughout
the thesis
Problem Definition 3.1 (Language Modelling) Language modelling is
the task of deﬁning a conditional probability distribution over each token in
a sequence conditioned on the previous observations. Consider a sequence of
arbitrary length T, {x1, x2, . . . , xt−1, xt, xt+1, . . . , T} and let xt denote the tth
token and xt−1
1
express the sequence of tokens from 1, . . . , t −1. Then then goal
of language modelling is to predict the probability distribution of xt conditioned
on xt−1
1
, i.e., p(xt|xt−1
1
).
Having a deﬁnition of the task of hand, we can now submerge into the N-gram.
Note here that it is not to confuse the reader that the model introduced below
uses wi instead of xi for the elements in the sequence. The variation is simply
due to the fact that the N-gram uses word-level tokenisation, whereas the formal
task of language modelling can work many levels of tokenisation.
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Life before deep learning
15
3.2.1
The N -gram
Consider a sequence of T word tokens, w1, . . . , wT according to the notation in
Problem Deﬁnition 3.1. Calculating the joint probability of the sequence can be
done by applying the chain rule of probability, i.e.,
p(wT
1 ) = p(w1)p(w2|w1)p(w3|w2
1) . . . p(wT |wT −1
1
)
=
T
Y
n=1
p(wn|wn−1
1
),
(3.1)
which shows the link between the joint probability of the sequence and the
conditional probability of a word given previous T −1 words.
Nonetheless, due to the creative nature of language, one cannot just simply
estimate this distribution by counting the number of occurrences of each word
following every long string.
Hence we need to approximate this probability
somehow. One way of doing so is using Markov’s assumption that the next
word depends only on a ﬁxed number of previous words. Say we approximate the
probability as though the next word only depends on the previous word. Then
we would approximate p(wT |wT −1
1
) using solely the conditional probability of
the preceding word, that is, p(wT |wT −1
1
) ⇡p(wT |wT −1). This speciﬁc example
of an N-gram is called the bigram model. As an example, using bigrams we
would approximate the probability of "myth" given "The Ballmer peak is a"
simply as the probability of myth given "a". Or formally,
p(myth|the Ballmer peak is a) ⇡p(myth|a).
Note that we can readily extend the bigram so we obtain the N-gram by con-
sidering the N −1 preceding words. Now having a way of calculating the con-
ditional probabilities that constitute the product in Eq. (3.1), we can for an
N-gram approximate the joint probability for a sequence of T words by
p(wT
1 ) ⇡
T
Y
n=1
p(wn|wn−1
n−N+1).
(3.2)
Note that the special cases in which N + 1 ≥n is handled by neglecting to
condition on words with non-positive indices.
However, we still need to ﬁnd a way of estimating these probabilities. One such
way is by Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), i.e., getting counts from the
corpus after which one can normalise such that the probabilities lie within the
closed interval between [0, 1]. For example, if we want to calculate the bigram
probability for word wT given wT −1, we take the count of the bigram c(wT −1wT )
and normalise by the sum of events that share the same ﬁrst word.
==PAGE:35==
16
Theory
Naïvely using this approach, we often arrive in a situation in which the probabil-
ity mass is biased towards frequent events. Biasing the probability mass towards
recurring events is, however, unwanted as we instead seek to create NLP sys-
tems generalising well to rare and unforeseen events. Luckily, in the search for
ways of obtaining models that generalise better to such circumstances, the idea
of smoothing arose.
3.2.1.1
Smoothing
It is possible to convey an intuition for smoothing referring to Robin Hood, as
the idea is to take probability mass from frequent events and give it to the less
fortunate, rare - or even unforeseen - events.
The simplest form of smoothing is Laplace smoothing in which one adds one to
every count before normalisation. Let us consider the unigram as an example.
Recall that we can write the MLE of the unigram for word wi as
p(wi) = c(wi)
T
,
where c(wi) is the count of wi. In general we will use c(·) to denote the count
of · which generalises to not only the unigram. Now, using the deﬁnition of
Laplace smoothing, one can rewrite the unigram MLE as
pLaplace(wi) =
ci + 1
T + |V |,
where |V | denotes the cardinality of vocabulary V as introduced in section 3.1
and is included in the denominator to normalise the distribution. This idea
can be generalised to additive smoothing in which one can add a number k to
each count, known as add-k smoothing, but where we then have to add k · |V |
instead of |V |. The optimal value of k can be optimised on the development set
employing, for instance, cross-validation with random search. However, studies
have shown that additive smoothing does not work well for language modelling
as it often produces counts with poor variances and inappropriate discounts
[Jurafsky and Martin, 2000].
Luckily, way more sophisticated ways of smoothing exist, one of the most suc-
cessful ones being Kneser-Ney Smoothing [Kneser and Ney, , Chen and Goodman, 1996].
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Life before deep learning
17
3.2.1.2
Kneser-Ney Smoothing
In order to elucidate the details of Kneser-Ney smoothing, we have to introduce
a concept that we have not yet embraced, namely, interpolation, which we brieﬂy
cover as an intermezzo.
Interpolation
The idea of interpolation is to mix the probability estimates
from all the N-grams estimators from 1 to N in a convex combination. For a
word sequence of length T using an N-gram, this implies:
p(wT |wT −1
1
) =λ1p(wT |wT −1
T −N+1)
+λ2p(wT |wT −1
T −N+2)
...
+λNp(wT ).
(3.3)
The lambdas in Eq. (3.3) follow the constraint that 1T λ = 1 for 1, λ 2 RN
where λ consists of the diﬀerent λ values each of which are non-negative and
a way of optimising λ is through Expectation-Maximisation (EM) using MLE
[Dempster et al., 1977, Kneser and Steinbiss, 1993, Jelinek and Mercer, 1980].
In other words, interpolation is a technique allowing lower-order sequences
(shorter conditionals) to aﬀect the probability distributions of higher-order se-
quences (longer conditionals) which make great sense whenever many higher-
order sequences are not present in the training data. As an example, consider
a bigram and the c("Balderdash divulging") = c("Balderdash is") = 0. In this
case, the unigram "is" is much more frequent than "divulging" and hence the
model would assign more probability mass to "Balderdash is" than "Balderdash
divulging".
Having motivated the idea behind interpolation and shown why it can beneﬁt
language modelling systems, it is considered useful to reformulate Eq. (3.3) in
a recursive fashion so we can arrive at another equally good interpretation of
smoothing.
It is straightforward to realise, that Eq. (3.3) generalises to the
following recursive formulation as we estimate the probability of word i in a
sequence using an N-gram,
pip(wi|wi−1
i−N+1) =λwi−1
i−N+1 pML(wi|wi−1
i−N+1)
+(1 −λwi−1
i−N+1)pip(wi|wi−1
i−N+2),
(3.4)
where 0 λwi−1
i−N+1 1 and pML(·) denotes the maximum-likelihood esti-
mate of the Nth-order distribution [Chen and Goodman, 1996]. The Nth-order
==PAGE:37==
18
Theory
smoothed model can hence be viewed recursively, as a weighted sum between the
maximum likelihood estimate of the Nth-order distribution and the smoothed
version of the (N −1)th-order model, and thus the recursion simply end with the
unigram. Now, instead of multiplying with the MLE of the Nth-order model
distribution, another option is to subtract a ﬁxed discount 0 D 1 from
all non-zero counts, resulting in a technique known as absolute discounting. To
see the analogy to discounting notice that all what we are essentially doing is
discounting higher-order sequences in order to grant probability mass to lower-
order sequences.
Now, using absolute discounting we can hence rewrite Eq. (3.4) in an equivalent
recursive fashion as
pabs(wi|wi−N+1i−1) =max{c(wi
i−N+1) −D, 0}
P
i c(wi
i−N+1)
+(1 −λwi−1
i−N+1)
+pabs(wi|wi
i−N+2).
(3.5)
Note that Eq. (3.5) does not necessarily sum to one and hence we need to use
(1 −λwi−1
i−N+1) as a normalisation factor by
1 −λwi−1
i−N+1 =
D
P
i c(wi
i−N+1)|{wi : c(wi−1
i−N+1wi) > 0}|.
(3.6)
Here |{wi : c(wi−1
i−N+1wi) > 0}| is simply the count of all unique words that
have an occurrence subsequent to wi−1
i−N+1.
Recall now, that we are essentially discounting of the counts for frequent N-
gram to be able to allocate probability mass to rarer events. To actually see
this, we will articulate an experiment performed by [Church and Gale, 1991].
Considering how to discount bigrams, they found empirically that if a given
bigram, say "an example" occurred x times in the training set, then the bigram
count for the same bigram in the heldout set could be approximated well by
subtracting 0.75 from the training count (thus discounting by a ﬁxed value).1
The result of Church and Gale implies that absolute discounting aﬀects the well-
estimated frequent events relatively less than the smaller counts that typically
were underestimated.
Another issue that Kneser-Ney smoothing addresses is that of unigrams with
very spiked bigram distributions. In the general case, we would like to assign
1They found the approximation to work well in all cases apart from the case in which the
bigram count in the training set was 0. The zero case is also invalid anyway since a count per
deﬁnition is a non-negative integer.
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Life before deep learning
19
more probability mass to words that have a higher probability of being utilised
in new contexts. This means that instead of assigning probability mass based
on the question "How likely is word w?" we are interested in answering the
question of "How likely is word w to be a continuation in a given context?". To
model this mathematically, Kneser-Ney smoothing modiﬁes the unigram model
as follows: for word w the intuition is to count the number of times w appears as
a novel continuation, that is, how many contexts it is present in. Mathematically
speaking, we can formulate this as the cardinality of the set of bigrams in which
w is the continuation. That is:
pcont(w) = |{c(vw) > 0}|, 8v 2 V
(3.7)
Notice that Eq. (3.7) can easily be turned into a distribution through normalising
by the number of words preceding all words, i.e.,
pcont(w) =
|{c(vw) > 0}|
P
w |{v : c(vw) > 0}, 8v 2 V
(3.8)
from which it is possible to arrive at the generalised recursive formulation of
Kneser-Ney smoothing:
pKN(wi|wi−1
i−N+1) = max{cKN(wi
i−N+1) −D, 0}
P
v cKN(wi−1
i−N+1v)
+ (1 −λwi−1
i−N+1)pKN(wi|wi−1
i−N−2),
(3.9)
where cKN(·) is equal to the standard count function for the highest-order N-
grams and else the continuation count for the lower-order sequences.
An ever better performing smoothing technique is the modiﬁed Kneser-Ney
which deviates from Eq. (3.9), by utilising a cleverer way of selecting D depend-
ing on cKN. Nonetheless, for that discussion we refer the reader to [Chen and Goodman, 1996]
and instead continue by commenting on another simple technique for treating
rare events. Hereafter we immerse into the details of perplexity as a metric for
evaluating language modelling systems.
3.2.1.3
Back-oﬀ
Another technique commonly used to address rare or unforeseen events is back-
oﬀ. Assume one is trying to compute p(wT |wT −1, wT −2), but we do not have
any example of the particular trigram wT −2wT −1wT . Then one can instead use
the bigram probability estimate and if that does not exist, the unigram. The
idea, in essence, is to back-oﬀuntil we ﬁnd an N-gram with non-zero probability.
==PAGE:39==
20
Theory
We have now seen a few techniques addressing certain challenges that arise
when trying to model language. Another interesting subject is the matter of
evaluating language models so that we have an objective to validate and test
our models against. We now seek to describe one of the most commonly used
measures, i.e., perplexity.
3.2.1.4
Perplexity
When addressing the performance of a LM, it is natural to ponder about the
extent to which the LM is uncertain about the next token to predict. In other
words, "if we randomly picked words from the probability distribution calculated
by the language model at each time step, on average how many words would
it have to pick to get the correct one?". Hence it can be seen as some sort of
eﬀective branching factor when predicting the next token (See Appendix A in
which we convey an intuition for why this is the case).
Let W = w1w2 . . . wT be a word sequence of length T. Then the perplexity can
be calculated as
PPL(W) = p(w1w2 . . . wT )−1
T
=
T
s
1
p(w1w2 . . . wT ).
(3.10)
Note that we can instead, using the chain-rule of probability, formulate Eq. (3.10)
as a product of conditional probabilities using the N-gram model, such that
Eq. (3.10) can be rewritten through the approximation as
PPL(W) =
T
v
u
u
t
T
Y
n=1
1
p(wn|wn−1
i−N+1).
(3.11)
Now before continuing, it is worthwhile to stop and consider the implication of
Eq. (3.11), since it provides us with an equally good motivation of smoothing
compared to Eq. (3.10). As the observant reader might already have noticed, it
only takes a single N-gram evaluating to zero to make the perplexity inﬁnite.
Moreover, say that the language model performs random guessing imposing
a uniform distribution over the words in a vocabulary V .
In that case, the
perplexity is simply equal to the vocabulary size. Hence we need to be cognisant
about an immediate caveat of perplexity arising from the previous fact. Videlicet
that models trained using diﬀerent vocabularies cannot be compared directly due
to the innate diﬀerences in the information entailed by diﬀerent vocabularies.
==PAGE:40==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
21
Fortunately, this does not imply that using perplexity as a guide for training
LMs to perform well on the task of language modelling is a bad idea. As language
modelling is the task of creating a probability distribution over the set of tokens
entailed by the vocabulary, we are interested in using perplexity as a metric to
guide training since it is the inverse probability of the test set normalised by the
number of words. When evaluating LMs, it is hence a good measure to compare
the diﬀerence between the perplexities of the trained models with the actual
perplexity of the language.
Having motivated the task of language modelling as well as presented some of
the intrinsic diﬃculties concerning engineering models that generalise when to
rare data, we shall now look into the ﬁeld of DL and how it can provide us with
tools for addressing some of the issues.
3.3
Then came Deep Learning
We now turn our attention to how NLP tasks has changed due to an ever-
increasing maturity in DL based approaches. We shall therefore start by laying
the foundation for the ﬁeld of deep learning through a guided tour towards neural
networks. On tour, we explore the ingredients that, when properly mixed, allow
for a robust learning recipe.
3.3.1
Artiﬁcial neurons
3.3.1.1
The McCulloch-Pitts neuron
The ﬁrst artiﬁcial neuron dates back to 1943, where Warren McCulloch (neu-
roscientist) and Walter Pitts (logician) introduced the McCulloch-Pitts (M-P)
neuron. A rather simple neuron, able to ﬁre if certain conditions are satisﬁed
and can hence function as a simple decision-maker. It takes as inputs a number
of binary categorical features xi 2 {0, 1}. Suppose we have p of such binary
inputs, then we collect these into a vector x 2 Zp
2. We now deﬁne g(x) to be
Pp
j=1 xj and say that the neuron if the L1 norm of x is above some threshold ✓.
In other words, we can deﬁne a decision function y as the piece-wise function
y =
(
1
if
P
j xj ≥✓
0
if
P
j xj < ✓
(3.12)
==PAGE:41==
22
Theory
This construction can model simple decisions and a few Boolean functions such
as AND and OR. However, we have not yet come to describe the two subcate-
gories of features that the M-P neuron can model. These are inhibitory and
excitatory features. Inhibitory features are features that have maximum eﬀect
on the decision, say, the decision is Shall I eat?. Then an inhibitory feature
would be access to food as one cannot eat without having food available.
Conversely, we have excitatory features that do not make the neuron ﬁre on
their own but collectively can make the neuron ﬁre if the activation is strong
enough. To advance the food example, an excitatory could be Am I hungry?
as it is a possibility to eat without feeling hungry. Now even though the M-P
neuron can model certain aspects of logic, the functionality of the neuron re-
mains inadequate. Fortunately, the design of McCulloch and Pitts did inspire
several other researchers to look into artiﬁcial neurons. One special mention
hereof include F. Rosenblatt who introduced the notion of the perceptron in
1958 [Rosenblatt, 1958]
3.3.1.2
Rosenblatt’s perceptron
The perceptron deviates from the M-P neuron by weighting each binary input
so that the decision function changes to
y =
(
1
if
P
j xjwj ≥b
0
if
P
j xjwj < b ,
(3.13)
where we collect the wjs into a weight vector, w 2 Rp consisting real numbers,
one for each binary feature, and b is a threshold equivalent to ✓in the M-P
neuron setting. The threshold parameter b is referred to ubiquitously as the
neuron’s bias and it tells us somethings about how much it takes to make the
neuron ﬁre.
Taking the bias term as b ⌘−t, we can rewrite the threshold
condition in Eq. (3.13) through use of the dot product so that the output can
be modelled as y = sign(x · w + b). Naturally, this adds a level of sophistication
through the weight vector, but a single perceptron cannot make truly complex
decisions on its own. However, by stacking these networks cleverly, we can create
a system capable of performing increasingly intricate decision-making tasks.
Robustness is still an issue though since the decision boundary essentially is
a Heaviside step function implying that small changes around a sign change
can decide whether or not the neuron ﬁres. In contrast, it is often desirable
to have a smooth, diﬀerentiable function to compute the output activations of
the neurons, causing a slight change in the input to impose a favourably small
change on the output. Thus we seek a way of altering the weights of the model
so that the updated weights lower the objective of the decision-making task at
==PAGE:42==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
23
...
...
...
x1
x2
x3
xp
h1
hK
t1
tV
Input
layer
Hidden
layer
Ouput
layer
Figure 3.1: Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN). Inputs x 2 Rp are projected into
the K dimensional hidden layer, through a learned weight matrix Wh 2 RK⇥p
from which another learned weight matrix Wt 2 RV ⇥K transfers the information
to the output layer. At each neuron, a non-linear activation function is utilised
to project the neurons’ activations onto a desired spectrum of outputs.
hand. If only we had a neuron architecture with those properties, we should be
able to iteratively alter the weights and minimise a given objective leading to a
general learning algorithm.
3.3.2
Fully diﬀerentiable neurons
Several potential neuron architectures can alleviate the non-diﬀerentiability is-
sue with M-P neurons and perceptrons and come up with a formal learning
procedure. One such example is the sigmoid neuron in which we compute the
output of the neuron according to a sigmoid function. A commonly used sig-
moid function is the logistic function depicted alongside its derivative in Fig. 3.2.
Using the logistic function, means that we describe the output neurons as
y =
1
1 + exp (−(x · w + b))
(3.14)
which is fully diﬀerentiable and y 2 R(0,1).
==PAGE:43==
24
Theory
Since the function is diﬀerentiable, we can now examine in greater detail how
small parameter changes to the weights (δw) and biases (δb) aﬀect the output
of the neuron through use of a Taylor approximation to ﬁrst order:
δy ⇡
X
j
✓@y
@wi
δwi
◆
+ @y
@b δb.
(3.15)
Through means of linear algebra and calculus, we have hence found a method of
altering the model parameters in an idoneous way so that we minimise the overall
task speciﬁc objective at hand. Having used the logistic function as an example,
we can now generalise to a broader set of functions as the only requirement is
that the function should be non-linear and diﬀerentiable, and we denote such a
function an activation function. It shall turn out that these functions are vital
to neural networks as we can use them to elegantly manipulate neuron output,
providing these models with great ﬂexibility.
An example of the networks one can assemble using the described types of
artiﬁcial networks is visualised in Fig. 3.1. To recap, Inputs x 2 Rp are projected
into the K dimensional hidden layer, through a learned weight matrix Wh 2
RK⇥p from which another learned weight matrix Wt 2 RV ⇥K transfers the
information to the output layer. Each neuron utilises a non-linear activation
function to project its activations onto a desired spectrum of outputs. Such a
network is, in general, denoted a FFNN, and one can construct complex decision-
makers by adding many hidden layers allowing for complex connections.
The FFNN is arguably one of the simplest neural network architectures, and
we will proceed to some more advanced variants shortly. Nonetheless, before
doing so, we shall ﬁrst elaborate, in greater detail, on the standard procedure
for training neural networks to ﬁnish the foundation.
Supervised Learning
In supervised learning, we seek to optimise a model
that accurately can model a regression or classiﬁcation task. Formally, we con-
sider some task T which has an associated objective L(ˆy, y) that we seek to
minimise where ˆy is the true labels and y the labels predicted by the model.
Say we have a training set consisting of N observations, Dtrain = {X, y}, with
inputs X 2 RN⇥p and corresponding outputs y 2 RN⇥C, where p is the number
of input parameters per observation and C is the number of classes for the task
of hand2. Note that the ith input then corresponds to a feature vector xi 2 Rp
with corresponding output yi 2 RC. The task of the training procedure is now
2That is, 1 for a regression problem and arbitrarily many for a classiﬁcation task. In the
setting of language modelling, we could have C be equal to the size of the vocabulary, |V |.
==PAGE:44==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
25
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
σ(x)
@xσ(x)
✓(x)
Figure 3.2: The need for fully diﬀerentiable neurons. Depicted here is the sigmoid
function σ(x) alongside its derivative @xσ(x) and the Heaviside step function
✓(x). Evidently, the Heaviside step function (seen in blue) is not continuous and
diﬀerentiable and we notice that a small change in the input x can result in an
extreme change in the output ✓(x). Note that the Heaviside function resembles
the changes that can be obtained using the Perceptron whereas the sigmoid
function (seen in orange) is fully diﬀerentiable. It is hence deemed the natural
choice to use fully diﬀerentiable neurons.
to tune a set of trainable parameters that allow the network to approximate the
observations in Dtrain accurately and generalise well to new (unforeseen) data.
We now seek to argue that the objective functions used for optimising neural net-
works are closely related to MLE. One of the most commonly utilised objective
function for classiﬁcation tasks is that of cross-entropy. Let H(p, q) be notation
used for the cross-entropy, where p(x) is the true underlying distribution and
q(x) is the distribution approximated by our model. Then the cross-entropy
H(p, q) can be decomposed into two terms: i) the entropy of the true under-
lying distribution H(p) and ii) the Kullback-Leibler divergence D(p||q). The
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence is commonly referred to as the relative en-
tropy since it measures the diﬀerence between the two distributions and hence
the ﬂaw of using q(x) to model p(x).
It is straightforward to show that the cross-entropy can be written as
H(p, q) = EX⇠p(x)

log
1
q(x)
,
,
(3.16)
that is, as the expectation of a random variable log
-
(q(x))−1.
using examples
X drawn from p(x). Spend two seconds to think about this result as we now
==PAGE:45==
26
Theory
seek to link it to MLE. As we embark on that quest, we show the link from the
opposite direction, i.e., by using MLE as the starting point leading us back to
Eq. (3.16).
Assume that Dtrain is comprised of examples that are independently drawn
samples from the true, but unknown, underlying data generating distribution
p(x).
In MLE we assume that we can use a parametric model pM(x|✓) to
resemble the underlying distribution. Hence, in essence, we want to ﬁnd the set
of model parameters ✓ML maximising the probability of p(Dtrain) conditioned
on those parameters using the maximum likelihood estimator. That is, we want
to compute
✓ML = argmax
✓
pM(Dtrain|✓),
(3.17a)
= argmax
✓
N
Y
i=1
pM(xi|✓).
(3.17b)
Here, we can go from Eq. (3.17a) to Eq. (3.17b) recalling that the examples xi in
Dtrain are assumed to be independent samples drawn from the true underlying
distribution.
Instead of working in the setting of maximum likelihood, it is
often preferable to maximise the sum of the log-probabilities (maximum log-
likelihood) to address the potential issue of underﬂow. The issue in particular
presents itself when working with many examples as is often the case in deep
learning, since we multiply a lot of numbers less than or equal to one. We can
now turn the sum over the log probabilities into an expectation by dividing by
the number of examples N. This division is naturally allowed since dividing by
a constant yields the same set of model parameters. Hence we can write the
maximum likelihood estimator as
✓ML = argmax
✓
EX⇠p(x)[log pM(x|✓)],
(3.18)
from which we, by letting q(x)  pM(x|✓), can arrive at the cross-entropy
✓ML = argmax
✓
EX⇠p(x)[log q(x)],
= argmin
✓
EX⇠p(x)

log
1
q(x)
,
.
(3.19)
The interpretation of Eq. (3.19) is remarkable! It indicates that cross-entropy
optimisation leaves us with a maximum-likelihood estimator, beautifully yield-
ing the best model to describe the training set Dtrain.
Having articulated the relationship between cross-entropy and MLE, we now
turn to a well-established way of doing optimising a network of neurons to esti-
mate the empirical distribution of the data, namely, through gradient descent.
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
27
w[0]
w[1]
w[2]
Figure 3.3: Simpliﬁed illustration of Stochastic Gradient Descent. Using gradient
descent methods, we walk towards the direction that we expect to minimise the
objective the most at any given time. Since we work in mini-batches, our point of
view concerning the best directional is not complete. Hence, it can be described
colloquially like descending a mountain in foggy weather conditions. Moreover,
this is convex, whereas the parameter space of neural networks is highly non-
convex. In practice, this means that the steepest descent direction might not be
the one that points towards the global minimum and hence may lead us to local
minima.
3.3.3
Gradient Descent
For any minimisation problem, the goal is to ﬁnd the global minimum. The
landscape of the objective function when working with neural networks is com-
plex and highly non-convex. The non-convexity implies that we cannot utilise
the lovely toolbox of eﬃcient algorithms we have for solving convex optimisation
problems and hence we do not possess methods for quickly ﬁnding the global
minimum. Say we are standing at a point in the space of our objective function
and we want to ﬁnd a minimum. One of the simplest ways of doing so is to
just roll downhill in the steepest descent direction until we reach a valley. This
speciﬁc idea is the motivation behind gradient descent. To illustrate the idea
mathematically, let us introduce the concept of a gradient which generalises the
notion of derivatives to the vector case. Consider a function J : Rp ! R with
parameters ✓2 Rp, then the gradient of J, denoted r✓J, is a p-dimensional
vector containing all the partial derivatives of J. That is,
r✓J =
✓@J
@✓1
, @J
@✓2
, . . . , @J
@✓p
◆T
.
(3.20)
In order to arrive at the update procedure of gradient descent, we also need to
introduce the notion of a directional derivative. The directional derivative of J
==PAGE:47==
28
Theory
in direction of unit vector u is deﬁned as the slope of J in direction of u. In
other words, the directional derivative is the derivative of function J(✓+ ✏u)
wrt. ✏at ✏= 0 which we, using the chain rule of calculus, can see evaluates to
uT r✓. Aiming now for the direction in which J is steepest downhill, we can
through directional derivatives construct the optimisation problem:
argmin
u s.t.uT u=1
uT r✓J(✓)
(3.21)
=
argmin
u s.t.uT u=1
kuk2kr✓J(✓)k2 cos '
(3.22)
=
argmin
u s.t.uT u=1
kr✓J(✓)k2 cos '
(3.23)
where ' is the angle between the unit vector u and r✓J. Note that the last step
is due to the constraint that u is a unit vector. Since the gradient of J does not
depend on the choice of unit vector, we can instead look only at minimising cos '
over all unit vectors and the answer hereto is naturally when the two vectors
are anti-parallel. This means that the negative gradient points in the direction
of steepest descent allowing for an update scheme on the form
✓(i+1) = ✓(i) −⌘r✓J(✓(i)),
(3.24)
where ✓(i) are the parameters after update i, ✓(i+1) are the parameters after
update i + 1 and ⌘is positive scalar called the learning rate3.
Having arrived at a simple update procedure, we shall ﬁx an immediate issue.
The loss functions used for neural networks often decompose into an additive
per-example loss function, which means that the time complexity of calculating
the true gradient over a data set of N observations is O(N), which is intractable
for enormous data sets. This realisation, together with an important insight
led to the discovery of the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which is one
of the most widely used optimisers in deep learning.
The important insight
is that we can, in expectation, approximate the gradient through a relatively
small number of examples. This insight means that instead of using all data
points to calculate the gradient, we introduce a minibatch (mb) of examples B
consisting of Nmb observations drawn at random from the training set. Working
in mini-batches permits us to train on a data set consisting of arbitrarily many
examples by updating based on a ﬁxed small number of examples. In order
to promote visual comprehension, Fig. 3.3 illustrates a simpliﬁcation of SGD
using a convex and easily comprehensible objective. For each iteration in the
algorithm, we walk a step in the steepest descending direction that depends
on the learning rate ⌘from Eq. (3.24) until we reach a minimum.
For the
3Determining a good learning rate is not a trivial task and hence we elaborate on the
learning rate schedules used as we present the training details of BERT in 3.3.11.1 and the
KGLM and KnowBERT in Chapter 4.
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
29
full gradient descent algorithm, we consider all samples when calculating the
gradient, implying that we would have the ability to walk perpendicularly to the
contours on Fig. 3.3. However, as we typically use SGD, we are limited regarding
the ﬁeld of view obtainable at each step leading to a somewhat stochastic path.
The analogy hence deviates slightly for SGD compared to the one we presented
earlier.
As Yann LeCun puts it in a presentation about graph embeddings,
content understanding and self-supervised learning at the Institut des Hautes
Etudes Scientiﬁques (IHES) in October 2018:
“
It’s like walking in the mountains in a fog and following the direction
of steepest descent to reach the village in the valley.
Yann LeCun ”
An informative analogy, where the fog elegantly resembles the limited ﬁeld of
view at any given step.
SGD is nonetheless, one of the simplest forms of gradient based optimisation,
and in fact there exists a myriad of descendants and reformulations of the SGD.
We address a selected few relevant ones as we progress, but for the interested
reader [Ruder, 2016] provides an excellent overview of some of the most well-
established optimisation schemas for neural networks.
Having already established a way of updating the parameters based on the
gradient of the objective, we now seek a way of calculating the partial derivatives
of the nodes in the computational graph that constitues the neural network. An
immensely elegant way of doing so came to life in 1986. [Ahn et al., 2016]
3.3.4
Backpropagation
D.E Rumelhardt, G.E. Hinton and R.J Williams presented the ﬁrst version of
backpropagation in 1986 [Rumelhart et al., 1986]:
They did that in their paper, "Learning internal representations by error prop-
agation" - in which they present a way of updating the weights eﬃciently by
propagating the error back through the network using the chain-rule. Now, it is
of utmost interest to establish a notation that allows us to elegantly refer to the
individual parameters (weights and biases) of the network in an unambiguous
fashion.
Consider a network consisting of L layers, with parameters, W 2 Rp(`−1)⇥p(`)
and b 2 Rp(`) 8` 2 {2, 3, . . . , L} where p(`) denotes the number of neurons in the
==PAGE:49==
30
Theory
`th layer. Furthermore, let w`
k,j be the connection from the jth neuron in the
(` −1)th layer to the kth neuron in the `th layer. We use similar notation to refer
to the biases and activations by having b`
j and a`
j be the bias and activation of
the jth neuron in the `th layer. Using this notation, we compute the activation
of neuron k in the `th layer exploiting its relation to the activations of the
previous layer
a`
k = σ
0
@X
j
w(`)
kj a(`−1)
j
+ b(`)
1
A.
(3.25)
Nonetheless, writing all the elements out is such a way is cumbersome. Hence
we shall instead work in the more compact vectorised form,
a(`) = σ
⇣
w(`−1)a(`−1) + b(`)⌘
.
(3.26)
Note here, that the activation function σ(·) works element-wise on the vectorised
form. In the following, we refer to z(`) ⌘w(`) a(`−1)+b(`) as the weighted input
for layer `. The motivation for introducing the weighted input z(`) as a quantity
is two-fold as it i) has a meaning for the task while ii) also allowing us to reduce
the tediousness of the expressions4
Backpropagation is all about understanding how the parameters of the model
(weights and biases) can change the loss function, which ultimately boils down
to computing the partial derivatives on the form:
@L
@w(`)
kj
,
(3.27a)
@L
@b(`)
k
.
(3.27b)
We do however not use Eq. (3.27a) nor Eq. (3.27b) as starting points. Instead
we introduce one additional quantity δ(`)
k
as motivated in the graceful derivation
of back propagation by Michael Nielsen5. He elegantly relates δ(`)
k
to the two
equations in Eq. (3.27). The quantity δ(`)
k
has a profound interpretation as it
resembles the error in the kth neuron of the `th layer. We still need to introduce
δ(`)
k
so here it is:
δ(`)
k
⌘
@L
@z(`)
k
(3.28)
As brieﬂy alluded to previously, the primary work-horse of backpropagation is
automatic diﬀerentiation and the chain-rule of calculus. To grasp the vitality of
4For instance, it allow us to write a(`) = σ(z(`)).
5In
Chapter
2
of
his
book
"Neural
Networks
and
Deep
Learning"
http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap2.html
==PAGE:50==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
31
the chain-rule we simply just have to appreciate the fact that we can compute
the derivatives in layer ` using the derivatives of layer ` + 1. The implications
of this result mean that we can propagate the error back through the network,
given that we can calculate the loss of the last layer. The derivation is tedious
including a lot of index acrobatics, so here we just present the resulting update
rules,
Loss of last layer
δ(L) = raL ◦σ0⇣
z(L)⌘
,
(3.29a)
Loss of layer `
δ(`) =
✓⇣
w(`+1)⌘T
δ(`+1)
◆
◦σ0⇣
z(`)⌘
, (3.29b)
Derivative wrt. bias
@L
@b(`)
k
= δ(`)
k ,
(3.29c)
Derivative wrt. weight
@L
@w(`)
kj
= a(`−1)
j
δ(`)
k .
(3.29d)
These four update rules grant us with the ability to propagate errors back
through a neural network while computing the gradients. Employing the update
rules in conjunction with a gradient based optimiser provide us with a learn-
ing mechanism. A high-level description of the back propagation algorithm is
outlined in Algorithm 1. Evidently, these update rules are based on a single
sample, but the algorithm can readily be extended to use batches as is done in
practice.
3.3.5
Recurrent neural networks
Backpropagating gradients through time opens up for a new type of neural
network architecture, namely, the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). It was
similar to backpropagation ﬁrst introduced by [Rumelhart et al., 1986] and has
been designed so that neural networks can process sequential data. The main
motivation for RNNs was to overcome a vital ﬂaw with FFNNs when working
with sequences. Consider the sentences "In 1989 the Berlin wall fell" and "The
Berlin wall fell in 1989" and say we wanted a machine to learn to tell the year in
which the Berlin wall fell. Then it should be able to learn the relevant features
no matter if the year occurred in the second or sixth position of the sentence. A
FFNN would then have to learn the relevant features for every position of the
sequence, whereas we want to share the information across the temporal dimen-
sion of the network. An RNN accomplishes that through parameter sharing,
i.e., between the hidden states of the network by using the hidden states of the
previous time step as input to the current. In order words, the hidden states at
time t, h(t), depends on the input x(t) and the hidden states over the previous
==PAGE:51==
32
Theory
Algorithm 1: The high-level Back Propagation for a single sample
Input
: Input sample x of arbitrary dimension and a network of L layers
Output: The result of
@L
@b(`)
k
= δ(`)
k
and
@L
@w(`)
kj
= a(`−1)
j
δ(`)
k
1 Set the activation a1 for the input layer based on x;
2 for `  2 to L by 1 do
3
z`  w(`) a(`−1) + b(`);
4
a`  σ
-
z`.
;
5 end
6 Compute the output error δ(L)  raL ◦σ0-
zL.
;
7 for `  L −1 to 2 by −1 do
8
Back Propagate the error through the network;
9
Compute the error of layer ` by δ(`)  ((w(`+1))T δ`+1) ◦σ0(z`);
10 end
11 Compute the gradient of the loss function;
12
@L
@b(`)
k
 δ(`)
k
and
@L
@w(`)
kj
 a(`−1)
j
δ(`)
k ;
time step h(t−1) so that
h(t) = f
⇣
h(t−1), x(t); ✓
⌘
= f
⇣
W (hh)h(t−1) + W (hx)⌘
x(t).
(3.30)
Here W (hh) and W (hx) are the weights between the previous and current hidden
states and the weights between the input and the hidden state, respectively.
3.3.6
Back propagation through time
Backpropagation, as described previously, can be readily extended to a sequen-
tial setting. This modiﬁcation is commonly called Back Propagation through
Time (BPTT). We only cover the modiﬁcation in a high-level and do not get
into all the details. For a thorough introduction to BPTT the reader is referred
to [Mozer, 1995].
It is straight-forward to extend the total loss to the setting of sequences as
we can write the total loss as the sum of the individual losses per step in the
sequence.
To calculate the gradients of the model parameters, we write the
gradient of the loss function with respect to some parameter as the sum of the
gradient of the loss function at all timesteps for that parameter.
==PAGE:52==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
33
Algorithm 2: Back Propagation through Time (BPTT)
Input
: A recurrent neural network and an input-output pair for each
timestep
Output: An optimised recurrent neural network based model
1 while Loss has not converged do
2
Propagate a sequence of timesteps of input-ouput pairs through the
network;
3
Unroll the network;
4
Accumulate the errors across each timestep;
5
Roll-up the network;
6
Update the weights through update procedure;
7 end
Recall that an RNN is provided with a single input and returns a single output
for each timestep. BPTT exploits that innate property of RNNs by unrolling
the computational graph across all the input timesteps6. Unfolding the compu-
tational graph for each timestep is done by keeping a copy of the network and
a single input-output pair. This way, we can unroll the graph, roll it back up
and update the parameters. The procedure is explained brieﬂy in pseudo-code
in Algorithm 2.
This, in principle, leaves us with a fairly simple procedure for computing the
gradients. Unfortunately, this does not mean that we can easily train RNNs.
It turns out that RNNs are indeed notoriously diﬃcult to train. Their intrin-
sic non-linear iterative nature leads to problems in terms of capturing long-
range temporal dependencies due to "the butterﬂy eﬀect"7 [Bengio et al., 1994,
Martens and Sutskever, 2011]. RNNs inherent properties hence aﬀect the loss
function in such a way that its derivative has a way of becoming exponentially
large early on, making the loss function extremely sensitive to small changes.
3.3.6.1
Long-short term memory networks
The workhorse for a long period in terms of modelling sequences has been the
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cell, which gracefully allows the gradients to
ﬂow for longer durations of time without vanishing [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997].
Au fond, they function as complex activation units which ensure a more stable
6For an excellent introduction to the notion of computational graphs, we refer the reader
to chapter 6 of [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
7The Butterﬂy eﬀect refers to the sensitive dependence on initial conditions where small
changes in given states of non-linear systems can result in large diﬀerences in later states.
==PAGE:53==
34
Theory
σ
f (t)
σ
i(t)
tanh
˜c(t)
σ
o(t)
⇥
f (t) ◦c(t−1)
+
c(t)
⇥
i(t)◦˜c(t)
⇥
tanh
c(t−1)
Cell State
h(t−1)
Hidden State
x(t)
Input
c(t)
h(t)
h(t)
Figure 3.4: Long Short-Term Memory Cell. Information from the input x(t) at time
t and the previous hidden state h(t−1) are used as input to four diﬀerent com-
putations: (i) the forget gate f (t) used to determine the amount of information
ﬂow allowed from the previous cell state c(t−1) using the sigmoid function, (ii)
the input gate i(t) to determine the amount of information to let through the
new cell state ˜c(t), (iii) the new cell state ˜c(t) which is added to the contribu-
tion of the previous cell state to form c(t) and (iv) the output gate c(t) that is
used in conjunction with the new cell state compute the hidden state h(t). The
illustration is a modiﬁed version of the elegant LSTM cell created in TikZ by J.
Leon8
information ﬂow as we propagate along the temporal dimension of the RNN. For
illustrative purposes, a single LSTM cell has been outlined in Fig. 3.4. At ﬁrst
glance, the cell might look daunting; however, the following aims to describe
the ideas behind the individual components colloquially to convey an intuition
about the construction.
We start by noting that similarly to the vanilla RNN, the ﬂow of information
starts by utilising the output of the preceding hidden state h(t−1) and the input
x(t) to use both as input to compute the next. In the LSTM, the current input
and previous hidden state are used as input to four gates: the input gate i(t),
the forget gate f (t) and the output gate o(t) as well as a new memory cell ˜c(t).
==PAGE:54==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
35
Mathematically, we compute each of these as
i(t) = σ
⇣
Wix(t) + Uih(t−1)⌘
,
(3.31a)
f (t) = σ
⇣
Wfx(t) + Ufh(t−1)⌘
,
(3.31b)
o(t) = σ
⇣
Wox(t) + Uoh(t−1)⌘
,
(3.31c)
˜c(t) = tanh
⇣
Wcx(t) + Uch(t−1)⌘
.
(3.31d)
Here W(·) and U(·) for (·) 2 {i, f, o, c} respectively denote learned input weights
and recurrent weights (shared across the temporal dimension of the network).
The purpose of the forget gate is to determine which parts of the previous
cell state to remember9 (see upper-leftmost multiplication in Fig. 3.4). Looking
instead at the input gate i(t), its purpose is to determine the information entering
the cell-state (long-term memory) as we multiply the input gate with the new
cell state ˜c(t). Before continuing, we perform a quick intermezzo allotting a
few comments to the activation operators applied. The sigmoid function settles
whether to let information ﬂow or not (recall from Fig. 3.2 that the output of
the sigmoid function σ : R ! R(0,1) maps any input to be in the open interval
from 0 to 1). However, this implies that if we solely rely on sigmoids, then we
cannot delete memory from the network. This brings us to the purpose of the
hyperbolic tangent. For the unfamiliar reader, the hyperbolic tangent tanh is
deﬁned as
tanh (x) = e2x + 1
e2x −1.
For clarity, we plot the hyperbolic tangent alongside its derivative in Fig. 3.5.
Turning our attention back on the LSTM cell, we see an immediate consequence
of a property of the hyperbolic tangent.
Namely, that tanh : R ! R(−1,1)
which makes it attractive for parts of the LSTM cell as it opens up for the
possibility of forgetting memory in the cell state ˜c(t). Allowing for memory loss
is however not required for the output gate o(t) as its purpose revolves solely
around determining which information we should propagate to the next hidden
state h(t) along the temporal dimension. Mathematically speaking, the steps
we have just covered are given by
c(t) = f (t) ◦c(t−1) + i(t) ◦˜c(t)
(3.31e)
h(t) = o(t) ◦tanh c(t),
(3.31f)
9As larger output leads to more information ﬂow from the previous cell state, I would have
suggested to coin it the remember gate.
==PAGE:55==
36
Theory
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
1
2
3
4
5
6
−1
−0.5
0.5
1
tanh(x)
@x tanh(x)
Figure 3.5: The hyperbolic tangent and its derivative. Depicted here is the sigmoid
function σ(x) alongside its derivative @x tanh(x). The innate property of the
hyperbolic tangent that tanh : R ! R(−1,1) makes it attractive for parts of the
LSTM cell as it opens up for the possibility of forgetting memory in the cell
state ˜c(t).
where f ◦g denotes the element-wise multiplication between f and g. In Chap-
ter 4, we consider several language models that are based on LSTMs, such as
the AWD-LSTM [Merity et al., 2017a] and the KGLM [Logan et al., 2019].
Getting to the discussion of these prominent language models, we now spend
some time introducing the concepts of bi-directionality, attention, and the trans-
former which will lead us to bi-directional encoder representation from trans-
formers (or BERT for short).
3.3.7
Bi-directionality and many layer RNNs
The RNNs discussed so far process sequences from left-to-right, which is required
for solving auto-regressive tasks, e.g., language modelling, but is not required
for tasks such as sentence classiﬁcation. For tasks that innately do not require
the auto-regressive property, it was hypothesised that RNNs could beneﬁt from
processing the input sequence in both a left-to-right and right-to-left fashion
making the RNN bidirectional knowing both about the past, present and future
context of the sequence [Schuster and Paliwal, 1997]. In practice, to utilise this
structure, we concatenate the hidden states of both directions to form a new
output. Utilising the idea of bi-directionality in conjunction with adding more
layers leaves us with what is known as the Deep Bi-directional Recurrent Neural
==PAGE:56==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
37
. . .
LSTM!
LSTM!
LSTM!
LSTM!
. . .
LSTM 
LSTM 
LSTM 
LSTM 
. . .
. . .
x2
x3
x4
x5
h5
h4
h3
h2
h!
2
h!
3
h!
4
. . .
. . .
h 
3
h 
4
h 
5
Figure 3.6: Illustration of a bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network. The inputs
xi are given to a left-to-right and right-to-left based RNN (in this case using
LSTMs). The hidden states hi are then concatenated so that and these lay-
ers can be stacked on top of each other to form Deep Bidirectional Recurrent
Neural Networks. Courtesy of https://github.com/PetarV-/TikZ with minor
modiﬁcations.
Network (BiRNN) and is seen visualised in Fig. 3.6.
We would now like to elucidate the concept of attention in NLP, but to motivate
it from where it originates, we make a few comments on seq2seq models and
encoder-decoder architectures before we proceed.
The notion of seq2seq revolves around solving tasks where the input (ﬁxed-
length) is a sequence, and the output (ﬁxed-length) is a sequence, but where
the length of the input need not be the same as the length of the output.
Examples of problems that innately have this property are video-captioning,
speech recognition, text summarisation and NMT.
3.3.8
Encoder-Decoder Models
There are three main constituent components of the seq2seq model, that is, the
encoder, context vector and the decoder. Each of these play their own part in
the process from sequence to sequence and we shall explain their interplay using
the example depicted in Fig. 3.7. That is, the task of translating the English
sentence "to be or not to be" into the French equivalent "être ou ne pas être".
==PAGE:57==
38
Theory
to be or
not to be
Input
Sequence to Sequence
Encoder
Context
Decoder
être ou ne
pas être
Output
Figure 3.7: General seq2seq model based on encoder-decoder architecture. The
ﬂow of information passes through a seq2seq model goes as follows: The input
sequence is processed by the encoder element by element. The goal of the en-
coder is then in turn to capture the relevant information and compile it into the
context vector. The context vector is then used as input for the decoder whose
responsibility it is to produce the output sequence element by element.
Encoder The encoder is essentially a stack of multiple recurrent units (e.g.
LSTMs) and the goal of these is to process the input sequence x =
(x1, . . . , xTx) element-by-element, capture the relevant information and
propagate the information forward. In the example, this means starting
from the ﬁrst "to" until having processed the second "be". The hidden
states of the encoder are calculated according to Eq. (3.30) for an RNN
based encoder.
Context Vector After the input has been encoded, the ﬁnal hidden state is
denoted the context vector c.
The purpose of the context vector (see
Fig. 3.7) is to encapsulate and utilise all the information that has gone
through the encoder so that it helps the decoder when making predictions.
It that sense it acts like a hidden state.
Decoder The last piece of the puzzle is the decoder. The decoder is, simi-
larly to the encoder, a stack of recurrent units, but where it deviates is
that the decoder is typically trained to predict the next element yt given
the context c and all the previously predicted elements {y1, . . . , yt−1}.10
By decomposing the joint probability into ordered conditionals, it hence
deﬁnes a probability distribution over the set of possible outputs y:
p(y) =
Ty
Y
t=1
p
-
yt|yt−1
1
, c
.
.
(3.32)
Each conditional probability is modelled using a recurrent unit so that for
an RNN:
p
-
yt|yt−1
1
, c
.
= g(yt−1, st, c),
(3.33)
10Recall that in NLP, the elements are tokens, e.g., words or word-pieces.
==PAGE:58==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
39
where we are utilising the sequence notation used in Sec. 3.2.1, st is the
hidden state of the RNN and g is a nonlinear function that outputs the
probability of yt.
A high level abstraction of an encoder-decoder architecture is shown in Fig. 3.7.
Note here that, the lengths of the input and the output are not the same.
We now motivate diﬀerent attention mechanisms in models that follow the pure
abstraction of an encoder-decoder architecture shown here, but with minor de-
viations.
3.3.9
Please attend to this section
The notion of attention in NLP was ﬁrst introduced within the ﬁeld of NMT
[Bahdanau et al., 2014].
At the time of publishing, most NMT models and
seq2seq models in general were based on the Encoder-Decoder RNNs, but now
attention is utilised ubiquitously in both RNN and Transformer based models
(see Sec. 3.3.10).
The idea arose as a consequence of the fact that at the time models had to take
into account the entire input when trying to translate from source to target
language. Bahdanau et al. conjectured that the typical way of doing things
would eventually lead to a performance bottleneck as it is also quite far from
how humans translate. When translating a paragraph, humans do not utilise all
the information contained in the entire input sequence when predicting the next
token. It would hence be desirable to construct a mechanism that allows models
to attend to the parts of the source sentence that are relevant when translating
the next word.
Luckily, such a mechanism is achievable with a minor change to the architecture
of Fig. 3.7. Instead of using the ﬁnal hidden state as the context vector, we
now introduce a distinct context vector c(i) for each target word in the output
sequence. We compute these context vectors as a weighted sum over the hidden
states of the encoder (one for each element in the input sequence). Hence instead
of receiving only the ﬁnal hidden state of the encoder, the decoder receives all
the encoder hidden states
-
h(1), . . . , h(Tx).
. Each of these hidden encoder states
in principle contains information about the entire input sequence, but the closest
elements to element i entail the vast majority of information for context vector
ci.
The goal is now to be able to produce useful context vectors c(i) that make
==PAGE:59==
40
Theory
the decoder utilise the essential information from the input sequence at each
step in the decoding process. The main ingredient in relation hereto is a well-
performing alignment model. The goal of the alignment model is precisely to
match segments of the input sequence with their corresponding segments of
the output sequence so that the decoder can focus on the most relevant parts.
There exist many diﬀerent alignment-models, but essentially, they all utilise the
previous decoder hidden state and the encoder states to compute the scores for
every encoder state.
Having obtained the scores for each encoder state, the rest of the process goes
as follows for a single decoding timestep:
1. An attention distribution is created by softmaxing the scores of the en-
coder hidden states so that they sum to one for each decoding timestep.
2. An alignment vector for each encoder hidden state is created by multiply-
ing the softmaxed scores with the encoder hidden states.
3. The alignment vectors are summed up to construct the context vector for
the ith decoding timestep c(i).
4. The context vector is fed into the decoder, but there does not exist a
uniﬁed method for doing so, and hence we shall elaborate as it becomes
relevant.
Having presented the process informally, we now brieﬂy cover the underlying
mathematics: Let Tx be the length of the input sequence x and i the current
decoder timestep. Moreover, let ↵i⌧be the amount of attention that the ith
output in the decoding process should pay to the ⌧th encoder hidden state h(⌧)
and s(i−1) be the previous decoder hidden state. Then the context vector for
the ith decoding timestep is,
ci =
Tx
X
⌧=1
↵i⌧h(⌧),
(3.34)
where each of the attention scores ↵i⌧is computed using the alignment model
f which takes as input s(i−1) and h(⌧):
↵i⌧= softmax
⇣
f(s(i−1), h(⌧))
⌘
=
exp
-
f(s(i−1), h(⌧))
.
PTx
t0=1 exp
-
f(s(i−1), h(t0))
..
(3.35)
The above attention formulation was the format that Bahdanau et al. presented
in 2014, but since then the notion of attention has been generalised through three
==PAGE:60==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
41
matrices (i) the query Q, (ii) the key K and (iii) the value V . In this setting,
the alignment model f takes as input the query and the key vectors and creates
a matrix of
c = softmax(f(Q, K)) · V ,
(3.36)
where Q 2 Rn⇥dk, K 2 Rm⇥dk and V 2 Rm⇥dv and dk. Relating back to
Bahdanau et al., the attention they proposed used the previous decoder hidden
state as query and the encoder hidden states at the key and value.
For our cause, we use the scaled dot-product as the alignment model. The scaled
dot-product is, however, ﬁrst relevant to our quest when discussing multi-headed
attention in Sec. 3.3.10.2 relation to the Transformer, and so we present here
the standard dot-product attention
c = Attention(Q, K, V ) = Softmax
-
QKT .
V .
(3.37)
The dot-product alignment model is one of the most widely used ones, but in
fact there exist a plethora of other options11.
At this point, I feel the urge to comment on an apparent issue that has thus
far been overlooked. Recall that optimisation of neural networks in practice
happens in batches as discussed in sec 3.3.3. A quick caveat is therefore that
the input sequences need not have the same length, which naturally imbalances
the input, but we can entirely ﬁx this issue through padding the shorter input
sequences and work with the size of the largest input sequence per batch. Math-
ematically, this works by replacing the values with a substantial negative value
so that they eﬀectively do not account for anything as we softmax the attention
scores.
3.3.10
The Transformer
A rather unfortunate issue with RNNs is that they by deﬁnition require a lot of
sequential computations since each timestep utilises the hidden state of the pre-
vious. This recurrence means that we cannot parallelise the computations to the
extent the individual operations potentially allow. The transformer presented
in [Vaswani et al., 2017] follow an encoder-decoder based architecture similar to
some RNN-based models, but is constructed in such a way that it is highly par-
allelisable. The parallelisable nature of the transformer has, in turn, recently
led to the creation of enormous models with more than a billion parameters.
11Many of which are covered in a well-informing blog post by Raimi Karim https:
//towardsdatascience.com/attn-illustrated-attention-5ec4ad276ee3#ba24
==PAGE:61==
42
Theory
Encoder #1
to
x1
be
x2
. . .
self-attention
add & normalise
add & normalise
FF
FF
Positional
Encoding
Decoder #1
self-attention
add & normalise
encoder-decoder attention
add & normalise
FF
FF
add & normalise
Figure 3.8: Single
Encoder
and
Decoder
in
the
Transformer
model
[Vaswani et al., 2017].
A single encoder layer consists of two sub-layers.
First, we propagate the input through a self-attention mechanism that allows
the input sequence to attend to itself using h = 8 attention heads (do not
overthink the meaning of eight attention heads at this point as we cover it in
one of the subsequent paragraphs). The output of the self-attention mechanism
is then used as input to the next sub-layer (a FFNN) after employing residual
connections and layer normalisation. The entire transformer is composed of six
encoder and six decoder layers and the output of each layer (and sub-layer) has
dimension dmodel = 512.
Such examples include the GPT-2 (1.5B) [Radford et al., 2019], CTRL (1.6B)
[Keskar et al., 2019], Megatron (8.3B) [Shoeybi et al., 2019]. These models are
only trainable due to the parallelisable nature of the Transformer, and this
section describes the main contributions of the original transformer paper by
Vaswani et al. that paved the way for the era of transformers in NLP.
The Transformer consists of an encoder and a decoder following the high-level
abstraction of Fig. 3.7 even though a lot more is going on under the hood.
Many other models build on the architecture we now describe by using either
the transformer encoder or the transformer decoder as the main architectural
component.
For instance, BERT uses the bidirectional encoder part of the
transformer, and GPT-2 uses a modiﬁcation of the decoder part for text gener-
ation [Devlin et al., 2018, Radford et al., 2019]. Before we get to BERT, let us
ﬁrst examine in greater detail the intricacies of the transformer introduced by
Vaswani et al.
==PAGE:62==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
43
Both the encoder and the decoder are composed of six identical layers, and the
following is a description of a single encoder layer and a single decoder layer
using Fig. 3.8 for reference.12
A single Encoder layer consists of two sub-layers:
1. A Multi-Headed Self-Attention Mechanism
2. A Position-Wise Fully Connected Feed Forward Neural Network
A single Decoder layer consists of three sub-layers:
1. A Multi-Headed Self-Attention Mechanism, but where the decoder only
can attend to the previous decoding steps. It is commonly referred to
as masked self-attention since the model masks subsequent decoding time
steps out before taking the softmax in Eq. (3.37)
2. An Encoder-Decoder attention mechanism which is similar to the attention
mechanism of [Bahdanau et al., 2014] since it uses the previous decoder
state as query and the output of the encoder stack as key and value.
3. A Position-Wise Fully Connected Feed Forward Neural Network
Additionally, note that for each sub-layer in both the encoder and decoder, the
authors employ residual connections [He et al., 2015] as depicted by the dashed
lines in Fig. 3.8 and layer normalisation [Ba et al., 2016] as depicted by the
purple sub-layers. The goals of these are to stabilise the gradient ﬂow, hidden
state dynamics and speed-up training. To facilitate the residual connections, all
layers as well as sub-layers produce outputs of dimension dmodel = 512.
3.3.10.1
Multi-headed attention
Vaswani et al.
found it beneﬁcial to linearly project the queries, keys and
values multiple times using diﬀerent learned linear projections to subspaces of
the model space. This is an expansion to using a single attention head with
dmodel dimensional queries, keys and values. Let h be the number of attention
heads. The multi-headedness implies that Q, K, V are associated with h learned
matrices each on the form W Q
i
2 Rdmodel⇥dk, W K
i
2 Rdmodel⇥dk and W V
i
2
12Many of the ﬁgures in this section are inspired by Jay Alammar’s exquisite blog
post,
"The
Illustrated
Transformer",
accessible
through
http://jalammar.github.io/
illustrated-transformer/
==PAGE:63==
44
Theory
Rdmodel⇥dv respectively. Here dk is the dimension of the keys (and hence queries),
dv is the dimension of the values and i 2 {1, . . . , h} denotes the index of the
attention heads. The Multi-Headed Attention (MHA) is then computed by
MHA(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, . . . , headh)W O
where headi = Attention
⇣
QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i
⌘
,
(3.38)
where W O 2 Rh·dv⇥dmodel has the dimension of the concatenated Zi matrices
(the computation for a single attention head is depicted in Fig. 3.10).
3.3.10.2
Self-attention
Query
Key
Value
X
⇥
X
⇥
X
⇥
W Q
=
W K
=
W V
=
Q
K
V
Figure 3.9: Self-attention mechanism for a single head.
For each attention head,
we learn three matrices as part of the training of the transformer, i.e.,
W Q, W K, W V based on X.
The eﬀect hereof is that each attention head
hopefully learns to attend to diﬀerent parts of the syntactic and semantic struc-
ture of the task at hand. For instance, it is common to ﬁnd that an attention
head performs internal co-reference resolution.
Self-attention refers to the idea of letting the input attend to itself, that is, by
having both the query, key and value be equal to the input X as depicted in
==PAGE:64==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
45
Q
⇥
KT
Softmax (
)
pdk
V
=
Z
Figure 3.10: Self-attention calculation for a single attention head. The illustration
depicts how for self-attentions, where all matrices are learned based on the same
input matrix X can attend to itself, meaning that it can ﬁnd relevant attention
patterns across the entire input. The scaling factor within the softmax since
the creators of the transformer hypothesised that the dot-product would else
be able to push the softmax to regions in which it has very small gradients and
hence functions as gradient stabiliser. Note that for multiple attention heads,
we concatenate the output matrices Z and learn a projection back into the
model parameter space of the proceeding sub-layer.
Fig. 3.9 so that Q = K = V = X in Eq. (3.38). Using self-attention in conjunc-
tion with the concept of multiple attention heads, in turn, permit the diﬀerent
attention heads to attend to diﬀerent, and hopefully relevant, subspaces. For
instance, when working with text, distinct attention heads can capture diﬀerent
semantic and syntactic structures, e.g. co-references.
Scaled Dot-Product Attention
Recall that Eq. (3.37) shows the computa-
tion for a single attention head using the dot-product attention as the alignment
model. Now, the type of alignment model that the transformer uses is almost
identical to Eq. (3.37) apart from the fact that the authors included a scaling
factor to the softmax computation so that it becomes,
Attention(Q, K, V ) = Softmax
✓QKT
pdk
◆
V .
(3.39)
Scaling by pdk is far from arbitrary, and one can arrive at the logic behind
the decision based on the following observation. Consider the individual dot
products between query and key vectors on form the q · k = Pdk
i qi · ki that
constitute the matrix multiplication Q KT . Assume now that both qi and ki
follow a normal distribution N(µ = 0, σ = 1), then the dot product q · k will
have mean 0 and variance dk. The consequence hereof is that for large dk, we
push the softmax into undesirable regions where the outputs are pushed towards
the boundaries.
==PAGE:65==
46
Theory
3.3.10.3
Positional-Wise Encodings
The positional-wise FFNNs, present in both the encoder and decoder, actually
consist of two linear transformation using the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) (vi-
sualised in Fig. B.1) so that the output of the two linear transformations is
FF(x) = max(0, xW1 + b1)W2 + b2,
(3.40)
where W1 2 Rdmodel⇥dFF, b1 2 RdFF, W2 2 RdFF⇥dmodel and b2 2 Rdmodel with
dFF = 2048.
As neat realisation is provided in the original paper, namely,
that this in essence is the same as having two convolutions with kernel size 1
[Vaswani et al., 2017].
Notice that until this point, we have not articulated how the transformer utilises
the structure of the sequence.
In fact, none of the constituent components
addressed thus far contain any recurrence nor any true convolutions. This lack
of recurrence implies that the transformer in itself does not know about the
order - and hence structure - of the input sequence. Hence, information about
the relative and absolute ordering of tokens in the sequence must be somehow
infused. Vaswani et al. manage to do so by adding what they coin "positional
encodings" to the input embeddings at both the encoder and decoder stack. To
make the positional encodings compatible with the rest of the model, we have
a positional encoding of dimension dmodel for each word to allow for summing
the two.
In the original paper, they compute the positional encodings using sinusoidal
functions with frequencies depending on the position of the word in the input
and the dimension of the embeddings so that
PE(pos, i) = sin
⇣
pos · 10000−2i/dmodel
⌘
(3.41a)
= cos
⇣
pos · 10000−2i/dmodel
⌘
,
(3.41b)
where pos is the word position and i is the index of the input where Eq. (3.41a)
is used for i 2 Z(0,255) and Eq. (3.41b) is used for i 2 Z(256,511).
We do not delve into the training details of the transformer as we instead focus
on those when we address BERT. The reason for doing so, is that we augment
BERT in Chapter 4 with external knowledge rather than the original trans-
former. To conclude the section, we note that the original authors equip the
model with two types of regularisation techniques. First, residual dropout is ap-
plied in both the encoder and decoder for each sub-layer as well as to the sum of
the positional encodings and the embeddings [Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2016].
==PAGE:66==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
47
0
32
64
96 128 160 192 224 256 288 320 352 384 416 448 480 512
20
15
10
5
0
-1
0
1
Word index
Dimension
Figure 3.11: The positional encoding used by the transformer. The left part of the
ﬁgure shows the sine part of the encoding wheres the right shows the cosine
part.
Second, they manage to reduce the BLEU score13 even further by adding label
smoothing ✏ls = 0.1 to confuse the model.
As a result hereof, the model is
prevented from becoming overly conﬁdent [Müller et al., 2019].
3.3.11
BERT
In October 2018, Devlin et al. of Google proposed a new method for pretraining
a general-purpose model capable of being trained (ﬁne-tuned) towards a wide
range of downstream tasks using a uniﬁed model architecture by constructing
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT). The idea is
to pretrain a bidirectional language model over diﬀerent self-supervised learning
objectives after which it can be ﬁne-tuned to make predictions on a broad se-
lection of downstream tasks such as NER and QA. The self-supervised learning
objectives employed in pretraining are Masked Language Modelling (MLM) and
Next Sentence Prediction (NSP). We articulate the details and implications of
these as we progress throughout this section.
The details of BERT are many, and hence we proceed carefully to promote an
understanding of the diﬀerent features that allowed BERT to move SOTA on
eleven diﬀerent NLP tasks at the time of its inauguration. We start by artic-
ulating BERT’s relation to the Transformer presented in the previous section.
Hereafter we discuss the input/output representations that permit BERT to
solve such a broad selection of downstream tasks after which we discuss the
13A metric commonly employed in NMT
==PAGE:67==
48
Theory
pretraining and ﬁne-tuning procedures.
Relation to the Transformer
BERT’s model architecture is essentially a
stack of transformer encoder layers. To describe the architecture unambiguously,
we from hereon let L be the number of encoder layers, dmodel be the hidden state
size and h be the number of self-attention heads. Even though we do not utilise
it, for now, we note that the original papers brought with it, two pretrained
models:
1. BERTbase(L = 12,dmodel = 768, h = 12) leading to approx. 110 million
tunable parameters,
2. BERTlarge(L = 24, dmodel = 1024, h = 16) leading to approx. 340 million
tunable parameters.
We present results based on both models later in Chapter 5.
Input/Output representations
We will explain the input/output repre-
sentations of BERT using Fig. 3.12. The model can take as input both single
sentences or sentence pairs, and for generality, we consider sentence A and sen-
tence B14. The separation token [SEP] seen in the example of Fig. 3.12 is used
to indicate whether a given token belongs to sentence A or sentence B. More-
over, the ﬁrst token of every BERT input sequence is the special classiﬁcation
token [CLS] and BERT uses the ﬁnal hidden state corresponding to the classi-
ﬁcation token as the aggregate sequence representation for classiﬁcation tasks.
We denote the ﬁnal hidden state vector corresponding to the classiﬁcation to-
ken as C 2 Rdmodel and the ﬁnal hidden state vector for the i’th input token as
Ti 2 Rdmodel.
The input to the ﬁrst BERT encoder is, for each token, the sum of three contri-
butions: i) the word-piece token embedding, ii) a learned segment embedding
to indicate which sentence a given token belongs to, and iii) learned positional
embeddings (converse to the ﬁxed sinusoidal positional encodings used in the
original transformer). As an example of BERT tokenisation, see Fig. 3.12 where
sentence A="barack likes michelle" and sentence B="they are charming". Notice
in the case of "charming", that a perk of using word-piece tokenisation is, that
it allows us to reduce the vocabulary size by splitting verb at the stem.
14Here, a sentence is simply just a contiguous span of text and need not be the text between
punctuation tokens alone.
==PAGE:68==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
49
Input
Token
Embeddings
[CLS]
E[CLS]
barack
Ebarack
likes
Elikes
michelle
Emichelle
[SEP]
E[SEP]
they
Ethey
are
Eare
charm
Echarm
##ing
E##ing
[SEP]
E[SEP]
Segment
Embeddings
EA
EA
EA
EA
EA
EB
EB
EB
EB
EB
Positional
Embeddings
E0
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
E7
E8
E9
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 3.12: Input Representation for BERT. Illustration of how the BERT input is
comprised of three contributions: the word-piece level token embedding (green),
the segment embeddings (orange) indicating which part the token membership
of either sentence A of sentence B and the positional embeddings (grey) fol-
lowing the formula depicted in Fig. 3.11. The three contributions are summed
to form the actual input for BERT.
Pretraining
Devlin et al. wanted to create a deep BiLM since they conjec-
tured that it could prove more proﬁcient than using left-to-right language mod-
els like GPT [Radford et al., 2018] or, similar to that of ELMo, by using shal-
low concatenation [Peters et al., 2018]. Sadly, training BERT against a causal
left-to-right and right-to-left language modelling objective does not provide the
model with any promising learning capabilities. To see this, think about how
bidirectional conditioning allows each word in the sentence to see itself. To sur-
pass this challenge of triviality, the authors propose the MLM objective inspired
by the cloze task [Taylor, 1953]. The MLM objective works as follows: For each
token in an input sequence there is 15% chance that the token is masked for
prediction during pretraining. The prediction simply takes place by feeding the
ﬁnal hidden state vectors into a softmax over the size of the vocabulary. Now,
as we do not provide the model with any masked tokens during ﬁne-tuning, it
is desirable to ensure that BERT does not depend too heavily on the presence
of masked tokens. BERT achieves this by not always replacing the chosen 15%
of the tokens to be replaced with the [MASK] tokens, but occasionally instead
of being replaced with either a random word from the word-piece vocabulary or
leaving the token unchanged. Essentially, it is a two-step preparation process.
First, 15% of the inputs are masked. For each of the masked tokens, there is then
80% chance they end up being replaced by the [MASK] tokens, 10% chance that
we replace it with a random token from the vocabulary and 10% chance that
we leave it unchanged. The masking procedure is summarised in Algorithm 3.
Fig. 3.8
The speciﬁc masking strategy was chosen based on an ablation study
over diﬀerent masking techniques performed (see Table 8 of the original paper)
[Devlin et al., 2018]. Having elucidated the details of MLM, we turn to describe
==PAGE:69==
50
Theory
Algorithm 3: BERT Masking Procedure
Input
: An input sequence for BERT
Output: The input sequence prepared for Masked Language Modelling
1 Select 15% of the tokens in the input sequence to be masked at random
and let Mt be the set of selected tokens for masking;
2 for token t 2 Mt do
3
Draw random sample rs 2 R[0,1];
4
if rs 0.8 then
5
t  [MASK];
6
else
7
Draw another random sample rs 2 R[0,1];
8
if rs 0.5 then
9
Choose random token t⇤from the vocabulary;
10
t  t⇤;
11
else
12
t  t;
13
end
14
end
15 end
the binary classiﬁcation problem of NSP. NSP works as follows: given sentence
pair A and B, predict whether B is a valid proceeding sentence of A. Hence the
authors add NSP as an objective to promote a relational understanding between
sentences; something that is not directly captured by the MLM objective. De-
vlin et al. showed that the inclusion of NSP to BERT’s overall objective has
a profound impact on BERT’s performance, especially related to downstream
tasks such as QA and Natural Language Inference (NLI) where it is of utmost
importance that the model knows about the relationship between diﬀerent sen-
tences. Recall that we utilise the ﬁnal hidden state of the classiﬁcation token
[CLS], C as the aggregate sentence representation to actually carry out the NSP
prediction. In total, the pretraining objective of BERT hence becomes,
LBERT = LMLM + LNSP.
(3.42)
3.3.11.1
BERT Pretraining details
Training Data
BERT is pretrained on the BooksCorpus (see Table 5.2 for
summary statistics) and the English Wikipedia consisting of 2,500M words
(without lists, tables and headers).
To generate input sequences from the corpus for training, two spans of text
==PAGE:70==
3.3 Then came Deep Learning
51
are sampled under the condition that their combined length is at most 512
tokens. The embeddings inputted to the model follow the already described
input representation of Fig. 3.12.
Additionally, we sample sentence B given
sentence A so that 50% of the time sentence B is the actual subsequent sentence
to sentence A and 50% of the time using a random sentence from the corpora.
Hyperparameters
BERT is pretrained with a batch size of 256 sequences
which corresponds to 128,000 tokens per batch (256 sequences * 512 tokens)
for a million gradient updates (steps) corresponding to approx. 40 epochs15.
As a last comment concerning the input sequence preparation, we note that
it is desirable to use short sequences to the largest degree possible without
compromising performance. The reason being that self-attention has a quadratic
computational complexity to the sequence length. Hence the authors utilised
input sequences of size 128 for 90% of pretraining while the last 10% were used to
properly learn the positional embeddings utilising the maximal sequence length
of 512 tokens.
Devlin et al. use adaptive learning rates for each parameter using A Method
for Stochastic Optimization (ADAM). We do not immerse into the details of
ADAM. Still, in essence, it uses estimates of the ﬁrst moment (mean) and sec-
ond moment (uncentered variance) of the gradients in conjunction with two
decay factors to construct an optimiser shown empirically to work very well
[Kingma and Ba, 2014].
Kingma et al.
recommended using decay rates of
β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 which is also what BERT uses together with an
L2-weight decay of 1e-2.
Besides the aforementioned facts, BERT uses a dropout probability of 0.1 across
all layers, and to avoid the primacy eﬀect of early training examples, BERT uses
a linearly increasing learning rate to warm-up over the ﬁrst 10,000 steps. More-
over, following likes of [Radford et al., 2018], BERT employs a Gaussian Error
Linear Unit (GELU) activation function which also performs a sense of dropout
in its own, by randomly applying the identity or zero map to the neurons’ inputs.
We have, for illustrative purposes, visualised the GELU activation function in
Appendix B where it is shown next to ReLU to visualise their similarities and
distinctive features.
15Note that we use a [PAD] to assure that the combined length of sentence A and B is of
length 512.
==PAGE:71==
52
Theory
3.3.11.2
Fine-tuning BERT
Due to the versatile and uniﬁed architecture of BERT, it is easily trainable
towards downstream tasks.
The self-attention mechanism presented does in
conjunction with the input representation of sentence pairs, eﬀectively ensure
that BERT has a method for performing bi-directional attention across sentence
pairs.
Training Data
Training data for ﬁne-tuning naturally depends on the down-
stream tasks to which one wants to train BERT. As an example, Stanford Ques-
tion Answering Dataset (SQuAD) is commonly used for QA, whereas the Corpus
of Linguistic Acceptability (CoLA) can be used to train a binary classiﬁcation
problem on whether a sentence is linguistically acceptable or not.
Hyperparameters
Most of the hyperparameters are left unchanged as we
switch from pre-training to ﬁne-tuning apart from the batch size, learning rate
and the number of training epochs. Since the vast majority of resources goes to
pretraining when getting BERT up to full speed, we are situated in a position
where we can perform parameter sweeping to ﬁnd the best ﬁned-tuned model.
BERT (and KnowBERT later on) hence for ﬁne-tuning performs cross-validation
over batch sizes B 2 {16, 32}, ADAM learning rates lr 2 {5e-5, 3e-5, 2e-5} and
number of epochs Nepochs 2 {2, 3, 4}.
At this point, we have covered most of the theory needed to understand and
utilise both the KGLM and KnowBERT that we present in the subsequent
chapter, but before we immerse hereto, we need to put in place the ﬁnal piece
of the puzzle. That is, understand how we represent the external knowledge
sources to be used to improve upon the eﬀectiveness and factual recall of LMs.
3.4
Structured Knowledge representations
In general, there exists a myriad of ways to represent structured knowledge,
and it is hence vital to be speciﬁc about the type of knowledge representations
used. The models considered throughout this thesis use remarkably diﬀerent
abstractions when they articulate the structured knowledge representations. To
ensure a common understanding when we describe the models formally, we
present the following deﬁnitions of a Knowledge Graph (KG), a Local Knowledge
Graph (LKG) and a Knowledge Base (KB).
==PAGE:72==
3.4 Structured Knowledge representations
53
3.4.1
Deﬁnitions
Definition 3.2 (Knowledge Graph) A knowledge graph (KG) is a di-
rected, labelled graph comprised of a set of entities E and a set of relations
R where E and R are the nodes and the edges of the KG, respectively. Each
element in the KG is a triplet (p, r, e), where p 2 E is the parent entity with
relation r 2 R to the object entity e 2 E. Hence we can formally introduce
any KG following this structure as a set of the prescribed manner so that they
formally constitute a KG on the form
KG = {(p, r, e) | p 2 E, r 2 R, e 2 E}
(3.43)
To elucidate the main ideas behind the KGLM [Logan et al., 2019], we need to
one additional deﬁnition in the form of a local knowledge graph which is a subset
of deﬁnition above.
Definition 3.3 (Local Knowledge Graph) A local knowledge graph (LKG)
is a directed, labelled graph comprised of a set of entities E and a set of rela-
tions where E and R are the nodes and the edges of the LKG, respectively. The
subscript t denotes that the LKG can contain entities and relations referred at
time t. Each element in the KG is a triplet (p, r, e), where p 2 E is the parent
entity with relation r 2 R to the object entity e 2 E. Hence we can formally
introduce any KG following this structure as a set of the prescribed manner so
that they formally constitute a KG on the form
KGt−1
1
= {(p, r, e) | p 2 E, r 2 R, e 2 E}.
(3.44)
The main diﬀerence between the KG and the LKG is the fact the LKG only
contains the parent entities and all the facts they entail while the KG store all
triplets.
The last deﬁnition we present encapsulates, the knowledge base, both the KG
and the LKG. It is an inclusive deﬁnition as we do not need the standard triplet
structure since it suﬃces to be able to embed the entities only.
Definition 3.4 (Knowledge Base) A Knowledge Base (KB) is a struc-
tured knowledge representation which can be represented through a set of entity
embeddings, each of which can be represented in an entity embedding space of
dimension RE where E is some natural number16.
16For all structured knowledge representations considered throughout this thesis, E 2
[200, 300]
==PAGE:73==
54
Theory
As evident, Deﬁnition 3.4 allows for an excess of ways in which we can encode
structured knowledge as long as we can embed the entities into a meaningful
mathematical representation of which the KG and the LKG are special cases.
Having bestowed three essential deﬁnitions we shall work with for the remainder
of this thesis; the reader should by now be able to grasp the details of the models
we consider from hereon.
3.5
Chapter Summary
We started by covering some inescapable concepts of NLP, including the process
of tokenisation and the notion of vocabularies. Subsequently, we immersed into
the realm of language modelling but dealt at ﬁrst with the ﬁeld before sophis-
ticated deep learning techniques had emerged. More speciﬁcally, we covered
the N-gram which is an intuitive and simple language model that allows one to
understand many of the common challenges in relation to language modelling
and which which actions we can take to surpass these, e.g., inherent challenges
such as the treatment of rare tokens as well as the establishment of appropriate
metrics for evaluating language modelling systems.
We then motivated deep learning as a ﬁeld in the general setting, pointing to
the ideas that have inspired the learning algorithms of today. In this section,
we covered material ranging from the McCulloch-Pitts neuron to sophisticated
Recurrent Neural Networks and the transformer, which in the end paved the
way for BERT.
We concluded the chapter by providing some necessary deﬁnitions in order to
unambiguously distinguish between the types of external knowledge sources we
consider for the remainder of the thesis.
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 4
Methods
The reader should by now be acquainted with the history of language models
and have seen the essential theory we now aim to utilise as we consolidate the
knowledge obtained so far with related work regarding structured knowledge
representations into methods for enhancing LMs.
We start by looking into related after which we look at some of the speciﬁc mod-
els proposed and use those as a springboard to present the KGLM [Logan et al., 2019]
and KnowBERT [Peters et al., 2019] formally in section
4.2.1
and 4.2.2, re-
spectively.
After having dealt formally with the intricate details of KGLM and KnowBERT,
we comment on the baseline models for which we provide results in Chapter 5.
Included in the discussion of these are an elaboration on the model architectures
and training details and model conﬁgurations presented in 4.4
Next, we immerse into the implementation details. Here, we discuss the ap-
proaches that one can take when designing the software to running such models
as there are many design choices to be made conditioned on the third-party soft-
ware available. Here we discuss the software, hardware and overall environment
needed to train and run the models as well as how to reconstruct the obtained
results1. In regards hereto, we start by elucidating the motivation for using
the Allennlp python library [Gardner et al., 2018] to facilitate NLP research.
We provide a discussion on the design principles of the module and refer two a
selected few code snippets that we have placed in Appendix D.
To conclude the chapter, we recap the content dealt with thus far and assign a
few comments to preliminary experiments made to examine whether or not the
KGLM and KnowBERT do show signs of augmented knowledge.
1https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/context-dependent-language-models/context-dependent-
language-models
==PAGE:75==
56
Methods
4.1
Related work
In this section we cover relevant related work to the models we later assess.
The primary subjects we will focus on revolve around method for embedding
external knowledge source into meaningful mathematical abstractions,
4.1.1
Embedded Structured Knowledge
The goal of entity embedding is to produce real valued vector representations
from structured knowledge sources.
Today, there exists several methods by
which one can achieve this depending on the structure of the external knowledge
source. Methods established for KGs and LKGs, by Deﬁnitions 3.2 and 3.3 in
Section 3.4, try to optimise the score of the triplets, of form (p, r, e), entailed by
the KG, where p, e 2 RE. There exists an abundance of ways in which we can
optimise the score, but they typically fall under two categories. The ﬁrst is linear
models which uses a similarity-based scoring function [Dettmers et al., 2017]
and the second is translational distance models which uses a dissimilarity based
scoring function [Bordes et al., 2013]. That being said, at EMNLP this year,
another scheme which generalises the aforementioned was introduced in the
form a TuckER decomposition we will elaborate on in detail in Section 4.2.2.4.
If instead we are trying to infuse knowledge from an external source that does
not possess the renowned triple structure of KGs, as according to Deﬁnition 3.4,
there exist other methods for producing entity embeddings through use entity
meta data and/or entity contexts. [Ganea and Hofmann, 2017, Lee et al., 2017,
Kolitsas et al., 2018]
4.1.2
Structured Knowledge Relevant to Language Mod-
els
4.1.2.1
Linked WikiText-2
Incorporating factual knowledge into language models is diﬃcult since annotated
training data is hard to obtain. The main reason for this is that up until this
point in time, we have not established corpora for language models with the
new goal in mind to augment them with external knowledge. There exist many
evaluation data sets intended for the task of Relation Extraction, e.g., TAC
Relation Extraction Dataset (TACRED) [Zhang et al., 2017] and SemEval-2010
Task 8 [Hendrickx et al., 2009], but these are not designed to ﬁt the task of
==PAGE:76==
4.1 Related work
57
Train
Development
Test
Documents
600
60
60
Tokens
2, 019, 195
207, 982
236, 062
Vocabulary size
33, 558
33, 558
33, 558
Mention Tokens
207, 803
21, 226
24, 441
Mention Spans
122, 983
12, 214
15, 007
Unique Entities
41, 058
5, 415
504
Table 4.1: Linked WikiText-2 Corpus Summary Statistics. The split behind the train,
development and test set respectively.
language modelling as the sentences are disjoint leading to constant context
fragmentation.
One of the main contributions of Logan et al., apart from the KGLM (see sub-
section 4.2.1), is the development of the Linked WikiText-2 dataset2. Summary
statistics for the splits are depicted in Table 4.1. The articles contained within
Linked WikiText-2 is close to the same as of the WikiText-2 language modelling
corpus but linked to the WikiData knowledge graph [Vrandečić and Krötzsch, 2014].
This similarity between the corpora allows for a fair comparison to models
trained on WikiText-2, e.g., the AWD-LSTM [Merity et al., 2017a]. A direct
comparison is however not applicable, due to the diﬀerence in download dates
as well as the fact that Merity et al.
collected WikiText-2 by querying the
Wikipedia Text API whereas Logan et al. utilised the HTML source directly to
maintain the links between articles.
Note additionally in Table 4.1, that for each split, more than 10% of the tokens
are mention tokens implying that they are factual references to the KG making it
a diﬃcult benchmark for models who does not display signs of factual knowledge.
It is also the case that each entity is mentioned only a few times (less than ﬁve on
average, with a long tail) with more than a thousand diﬀerent relations. These
dataset statistics seem to indicate that regular LMs would have a diﬃcult time
generating factual text. Hence there exists a need for language models to be
able to refer to external sources of information [Ahn et al., 2016].
Assembling Linked WikiText-2
The initial entity annotations were based
on the human-provided links in between Wikipedia articles. More speciﬁcally,
for every span of text linked to another Wikipedia article, the authors to as-
sociated its corresponding Wikidata entity with the given span. This method
did provide Logan et al. with a reasonably good baseline. Still, in order to
2Explore
and
download
the
dataset
here:
https://rloganiv.github.io/
linked-wikitext-2
==PAGE:77==
58
Methods
additional identity links to Wikidata, they utilised the Neural-EL Entity Linker
(EL) [Gupta et al., 2017] as well as the Stanford CoreNLP software to ﬁnd co-
references covering pronouns, nominals and other tokens missed by the EL.
The authors employ string matching in order to expand the annotations of non-
entity tokens such as dates and quantities to cope with the many ways in which
we can format such tokens. For instance, think about the "February 14" which
alone can be formulated as "The 14th of February", "02-14", "14/2", "Valentines
Day" and so on. It is hence desirable to create exhaustive lists of such non-entity
tokens to ensure that we capture the majority of such formulation.
4.1.3
Knowledge Augmented Language Models
We split the following discussion into two.
A section about knowledge aug-
mented language models solving the task of language modelling and one on
knowledge augmented general-purpose models
4.1.3.1
Knowledge enriched language modelling
Arguably one of the ﬁrst works to present a knowledge model capable of suc-
cessfully utilising entity knowledge to enhance performance on the task of lan-
guage modelling (Problem Def. 3.1) was the Neural Knowledge Language Model
(NKLM) [Ahn et al., 2016]. The external knowledge used herein is the Wiki-
Facts Datset which essentially align a subset of wikipedia articles with wikidata.
Their model is uni-directional RNNLM based on LSTMs but equipped with a
topic model. The gist of the model they present is the usage of the topic model,
and words related to the topic entail herein. They hence distinguish between
the words entailed by a global vocabulary and a set of topics each equipped with
a set of words describing the topic. At any time in the generative process, they
provide the RNNLM with three concatenated input embedding vectors. Specif-
ically, they provide the model with 1) an embedding vector for the topic for the
preceding time-step, 2) an embedding vector corresponding to the word from
the global vocabulary of the preceding time-step, and 3) an embedding vector
coined a knowledge word. The notion of a knowledge word as they present it is
just a word from the vocabulary of the topic of the previous time-step. They
utilise the knowledge words by copying them directly from the topic related
vocabularies by employing the copy-mechanism of [Gu et al., 2016]. However,
at any timestep, the NKLM uses either the previous word from the global vo-
cabulary or that of the topic of the preceding work. The one that it was not
used for generation at the previous time-step is substituted with a zero vector
==PAGE:78==
4.1 Related work
59
of the same length as the embedding vector. The generative process takes place
by ﬁrst predicting fact for the current timestep based on the hidden-state of
the RNN using the input described above. Conditioned on the fact prediction,
the model make a binary classiﬁcation using a sigmoid activation function to
determine whether or not to generate the next token based on the global vocab-
ulary or to copy-from the topic vocabulary. The prediction takes place using a
an MLP with a single ReLU layer and a single linear output unit based on the
hidden-state and the topic embeddings of the current time-step. If the output of
the sigmoid classiﬁcation is less than a half, then the NKLM predicts using the
global vocabulary which, a bit simpliﬁed, takes place by using a softmax over
the vocabulary. Instead, if outcome of the sigmoid classiﬁcation problem was
to generate the next-token based on the copy-mechanism, then the model starts
by predicting which of the knowledge words to copy. Similar to the prediction
using the global vocabulary, the model uses a softmax over the vocabulary, but
in this case over the set of knowledge words entailed by the topic vocabulary.
Using the described method, the authors interestingly found that conditioning
on the topic model alone, using the global vocabulary for next-token prediction
does not yield results superior to that of the RNNLM they use for benchmark-
ing. However, using the copy-mechanism, they succeeded in creating a model
that improved upon the baseline in three out of three considered perplexity mea-
sures. Using the copy-mechanism, the NKLM produced signiﬁcantly less out-
of-vocabulary predictions (approx. 50% compared to their baseline) changed
facts about entities in the topic models reﬂected themselves directly in the LMs
predictions. A drawback of the model, unfortunately, is that it needs additional
conditioning on entity information ahead of time, which means that only capa-
ble of functioning as an oracle. Note that oracle in this case and from hereon
refer to a model that is provided the information that it is conditioned on.
Another related study is that of Ji et al., who presented the EntityNLM
[Ji et al., 2017]. The EntityNLM is able to dynamically model entities explic-
itly and update their representations from which it can generate its predictions.
It is trained to maximise the joint probability over a knowledge graph (following
Deﬁnition 3.2) and a global vocabulary. As their intention is to perform lan-
guage modelling they choose to marginalise over the dynamic knowledge graph
through mean of importance sampling in order to make next token predictions.
They evaluated their model on the task of predicting the next entity given a
preceding sequence of text on the test set of the InScript corpus.
In doing
so, they managed to obtain results yielding 74.3% accuracy which is just 3%
short of human performance on the InScript test set. It hence proved that their
approach of dynamically updating a relation knowledge graph could prove vital
in creating fact-aware language modelling systems as it brings with a major
beneﬁt. Namely, that dynamically updating the knowledge graph potentially
==PAGE:79==
60
Methods
allows LMs that only keeps a relatively small amount of entities compared to
the entire graph - hence entailing at any given time only the most essential
knowledge to the given context.
4.1.3.2
Knowledge enriched general-purpose language models
After the introduction of the Transformer and BERT in particular many have
aimed at augmenting pre-trained language models with additional knowledge.
One of these approaches tries to enrich the contextual representations by chang-
ing the Masking strategy of BERT as they introduced Enhanced Representation
through kNowledge intEgration (ERNIE) [Sun et al., 2019]. The likes of Sun et
al.
follow this approach by inventing a new multi-stage masking procedure
consisting of a three masking levels. ERNIE’s ﬁrst masking level deals with
basic level masking, which is closely related to the masking procedure of BERT.
Speciﬁcally, the basic-level masking takes place by masking 15% of the basic-
level language units (words) for English. Sun et al. claim that this level of
masking alone is not suﬃcient to model high level semantic knowledge since the
masking strategy typically does not mask entire entity spans commonly consist-
ing of more than a single basic semantic unit. The two other levels of masking
they propose seek to address this issue. The second masking stage, Phrase-level
masking, involves masking a group of tokens that together acts as a concep-
tual unit even though the predictions takes place at the basic token-level. The
groups are similarly to the basic-level masking selected at random, however,
to chunk the data properly into the notion of conceptual units, Sun et al. ex-
ploits lexical analysis and language dependent segmentation tools. To tell Ernie
about the phrase information, Sun et al. employ add a contribution to the token
input-representations similar to the segment encoding of BERT (see Fig. 3.12 in
section 3.3.11). The last masking stage is the entity-level masking and the in-
tention of this stage is to mask named entities such persons, e.g., "Kobe Bryant"
or locations, e.g., the city of "Kobe" in Japan. To achieve without having to
annotate all the named entities, they use named entity recognition techniques
to analyse the sentences, mask the chosen entity tokens to predict them all on
a token level.
To validate their approach, Sun et al. showed that including all three masking-
level stages resulted in an absolute improvement in test accuracy of 0.8% (from
76.8% to 77.6%) on the XLNI test set [Lample and Conneau, 2019]. More im-
portantly, to address ERNIE’s knowledge learning capabilities, Sun et al. the
showed that ERNIE has superior knowledge reasoning capabilities to BERT-
base by testing it on a number of test examples from the Cloze task [Taylor, 1953].
==PAGE:80==
4.2 Models
61
4.2
Models
The following section will formally introduce the models that we present results
for in Chapter 5. We start by elucidating the details relevant to the KGLM and
hereafter proceed
4.2.1
The Knowledge Graph Language Model
The KGLM is a RNNLM similar to that of AWD-LSTM [Merity et al., 2017a],
based on LSTMs [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] (see section 3.3.6.1). Ad-
ditionally, it maintains a dynamically growing Local Knowledge Graph (LKG)
which the model uses to elegantly select and copy relevant information using the
traditional copy mechanism [Gulcehre et al., 2016, Gu et al., 2016]. The LKG
is essentially a subset of KG consisting of the already mentioned entities and
their and their related entities. A distinctive feature of the KGLM is that it
predicts whether or not to grow the LKG or render a fact from the LKG online.
When growing or rendering a fact, the KGLM combines the standard vocabu-
lary with the tokens available in the KG (including rare tokens) which provides
an elegant way of rendering factually consistent external knowledge. This fea-
ture, however, makes the KGLM deviates from Problem Deﬁnition 3.1 as the
model tries to predict both the t’th token in conjunction with the relevant set of
entities of Et of the LKG. What this means in practice is that the trained model
estimates the joint probability distribution p(xt, Et|xt−1
1
, Et−1
1
) where Et−1
1
de-
notes the observed entities in xt−1
1
with a corresponding LKG, KGt−1
1
. We shall
now submerge into the details of how the model works.
4.2.1.1
The generative process
The model starts by determining the type of xt, i.e., tt 2 (N, R, ;) where N
denotes a reference to a new entity not entailed by the KGt−1
1
, R denotes a
reference to an entity already entailed by the KGt−1
1
and ; implies that the type
of the observed token is not an entity mention. The subsequent part of the
process naturally depends on tt, and we explore the three possible cases:
tt = N:
The upcoming entity, et is chosen from the set of all entities E allowing
us to condition on the chosen entity.
==PAGE:81==
62
Methods
tt = R:
The upcoming entity, et is chosen through a few steps. First, we need
to choose a parent entity pt from KGt−1
1
. Next, we need to decide on a
factual relation rt to render and can hence only be conditioned on the
chosen parent entity, i.e., rt 2 {(p, r, e) 2 KGt−1
1
| p = pt} which then in
turn let’s us choose et as one of the child entities of pt under relation rt
so that et 2 {e | (pt, rt, e) 2 KGt−1
1
}.
tt = ;:
The upcoming entity,et, is the empty set which implies that we cannot
condition the prediction of token xt on any external knowledge.
Note additionally, that the model can refer to an entity it has already mentioned
implying that p = e. In this speciﬁc instance, the author’s behind the KGLM
introduce a self-relating relation, Reﬂexive so that we can describe the triplet in
this case by (p, Reﬂexive, e. After the type prediction we let Et
1  Et−1
1
[ {et}.
Note that if et = ;, then Et  Et−1
1
and the model can now generate xt
conditioned on et, potentially copying one of et’s aliases. An example of the
generative process is outlined in Fig. 4.2.
As previously alluded to, the model tries to compute p(xt, Et|xt−1
1
, Et−1
1
) whereas
the initial goal is to get the distribution on the form outlined Problem Deﬁni-
tion 3.1. We achieve this by marginalising out the LKG through
p(x) =
X
E
p(x, E).
(4.1)
Note that we are marginalising over the entire KG which is intractable due to
combinatorial space of possible annotations. The issue of handling this marginal-
isation is however parked for now as we save the details of overcoming this
intractability for subsections 4.2.1.2 & 4.2.1.3.
Parameterising the Distributions
We are now interested in describing the
generative process more formally. The hidden states of the RNN is split into
three component,
ht = [ht,x; ht,p; ht,r],
(4.2)
which are used to predict words, parents and relations, respectively. The type
description described above happens through a single-layer softmax over ht,x.
After having predicted the type of the token, tt, we now turn our attention
to the task of picking a relevant entity.
As part of the work presented by
the author’s of the original paper, they provided pretrained embeddings for all
==PAGE:82==
4.2 Models
63
entities and relations in the knowledge graph, denoted by "e and "r respectively.
The process of picking relevant entities inherently also depends on tt, and hence
we shall return to the two cases for which we have to predict entities and/or
relations, that is, if tt 2 {N, R}:
tt = N:
We have to select an entity et over all entities in E. This is done through
a softmax over the dot-product between the entity embeddings and the
sum of the hidden parent and relation representations (ht,p +ht,r) so that
p(et) = softmax("e · (ht,p + ht,r)).
(4.3)
Now, the reason for adding the hidden representations of the parent and re-
lation is to mimic the structure of TransE which is also the method the au-
thors used to construct the knowledge graph embeddings [Bordes et al., 2013].
The way in which the KG embeddings are learned is presented in subsec-
tion 4.2.1.2.
tt = R:
In this case, we shall both have to pick a parent entity pt and a relation
rt in a similar fashion to the previous case. First, the parent entity pt
p(pt) = softmax("p · ht,p),
(4.4)
over all parent entities entailed by the LKG, Et−1
1
after which we pick a
relation rt through
p(rt) = softmax("r · ht,r).
(4.5)
over all r 2 {r|(pt, r, e) 2 KGt−1
1
}. The chosen tuple (pt, rt) now heavily
constraints the possible entities since the entity, et, must satisfy (pt, rt, et) 2
KGt−1
1
. In many cases, it is the case that the cardinality of the set of en-
tities satisfying this constraint is one leading to an easy pick. Consider as
an example the relation Married_To. As most people live in monogamous
relationships, we can be certain that there will at most be a single entity
to choose from. Nonetheless, it happens given some speciﬁc choices of pt
and rt, that the cardinality of the set of entities that satisfy the constraint
is greater than one. In this case the KGLM picks an entity at random.
Having picket a triplet, if et 6= ;, we now present the method used for rendering
the chosen entity. In the simple case that et = ; we are simply left with the
standard RNN LM prediction over the standard vocabulary using ht,x as there
is no entity to render.
==PAGE:83==
64
Methods
Table 4.2: Generative Example taken directly from the original paper.
It is if there exists an entity to render that we augment the standard vocabulary
with the tokens of the aliases of the entities in the LKG. In picking an entity
to render, we also condition the distribution over the augmented vocabulary
on both the observed token xt and the picked entity et. Hence computing the
scores over the original vocabulary is replaced by h
0
t,x = W proj[ht,x; "et] where
W proj is a learned weight matrix that learns to project the concatenated vector
ht,x; "et into the same vector space as ht,x. Note, however, that the projection
matrix does not let us obtain probabilities over the alias vocabulary over the
entities which is a major issue since a lot of the aliases are unknown words
to the standard vocabulary. To trounce this issue, the authors utilise a copy-
mechanism [Gu et al., 2016]. In essence, the mechanism works by embedding
the token sequences comprising each alias {aj} from which we compute the copy
scores according to the formula:
p(xt = aj) / exp
h
σ
⇣
(h
0
t,x)T W copy⌘
aj
i
.
(4.6)
The details of how the mechanism works will not be presented in this thesis,
but we kindly refer the interested reader to the original paper for the details
[Gu et al., 2016].
4.2.1.2
Training Details and Inference
Training KGLM can be split into two parts:
1. Pretrained KG Entity Embeddings
2. Training on the annotated Linked WikiText-2
==PAGE:84==
4.2 Models
65
1. Pretrained Entity Embeddings
Evidently, situations can arise where
the model is required to make predictions on entities and relations not seen
throughout the training. To surpass this issue, the authors utilise ﬁxed pre-
trained entity and relation embeddings using TransE on Wikidata [Bordes et al., 2013].
For a given KG triplet, the aim is to minimise the distance
δ("p, "r, "e) = k"p + "r −"ek2.
(4.7)
This is done in practice through a max-margin objective in order to learn the
embeddings
LTransE = max
h
0, γ + δ("p, "r, "e) −δ
⇣
"
0
p, "r, "
0
e
⌘i
,
(4.8)
where γ is the margin and either p0 or e0 is the entity embedding selected at
random.
2.
Training on the annotated Linked WikiText-2
When training on
Linked WikiText-2, the KGLM exploits the fact that we observe all random
variables implying that training can take place using oﬀ-the-shelf gradient-based
optimisation techniques using a negative log-likelihood objective
LKGLM(✓) =
X
t
log p(xt, Et|xt−1
1
, Et−1
1
; ✓),
(4.9)
where ✓is the set of model parameters. Note, that if an annotation has multi-
ple viable parents, then the model marginalises over all viable candidates. Note
additionally, that the marginalisation is straight-forward since the training ex-
amples are annotated meaning that we only have to marginalise over selected
subsets of the KG. In contrast, at inference, we need to ﬁnd a way of overcoming
the marginalisation over the entire KG. Hence we now look at the method used
by the KGLM to make the marginalisation feasible.
4.2.1.3
Inference and the discriminative model
At inference, we are positioned in an infeasible situation since we might not have
annotated data which leave us with a marginalisation over all entities e 2 E in
order to compute p(x) = P
E p(x, E). The issue is resolved through importance
sampling in order to approximate the marginal distribution [Dyer et al., 2016,
==PAGE:85==
66
Methods
Ji et al., 2017]
p(x) =
X
E
p(x, E) =
X
E
p(x, E)
q(E, x) q(E, x)
⇡1
N
X
E⇠q
p(x, E)
q(E, x).
(4.10)
Here N denotes the number of samples from q. Following [Ji et al., 2017], the
KGLM utilises a discriminative version of the model to compute q(E, x) thereby
predicting annotations for the current token instead of the next token. The dis-
criminative model is trained upon an objective trying to minimise 1) a sequential
cross-entropy loss of the mention type prediction, 2) a loss related to the new
entity prediction and 3) a loss relevant to the related entity predictions.
Using the generative model in conjunction with the discriminative model hence
open up the possibility for competing on a problem such as fact completion.
In Chapter 5, we test how the KGLM’s performance depends on the number of
samples drawn from q as well as its ability to make good predictions conditioned
on good annotations.
4.2.2
KnowBERT
We are now ready to introduce the contributions of [Peters et al., 2019] paving
the way for KnowBERT. We start motivating the model by informally cover-
ing their main contribution, i.e. the introduction of a new, in principle model-
agnostic mechanism for infusing external knowledge from knowledge bases dubbed
into pretrained models such as BERT under the name of Knowledge Attention
and Re-contextualisation (KAR). We do this in order to convey an intuition
for some of the concepts included as we progress such as candidate spans and
candidate entities. After informally introducing the KAR mechanism, we com-
ment on how BERT is used as a host model as well as mention the requirements
put on external knowledge bases to be compatible with the KAR mechanism.
The KAR mechanism is then formally introduced after which we introduce the
models created by Peters et al.
based on the KnowBERT architecture, i.e.,
KnowBERT-wiki, KnowBERT-wordnet, and KnowBERT-w+w utilising both
wikipedia and wordnet. Introducing these model in turn require that examine
how the knowledge bases after which we conclude the section by addressing how
to KnowBERT to train the entire architecture.
==PAGE:86==
4.2 Models
67
The KAR mechanism involves a lot of intricate details, and it is hence worth
conveying an intuition for the steps involved before submerging into the nitty-
gritty details. Personally, when I ﬁrst encountered the model, it took me a few
iterations before actually understanding the diﬀerent concepts at play here and
so we have created an overview illustration depicting the model architecture in
Appendix C (Fig. C.1).
At heart, KAR tries to solder external knowledge in between two pre-trained
layers. To facilitate this, we need to project the contextual word representations
from the previous layer into a space compatible with the entity embeddings of
the respective KBs. Hereafter we need to generate relevant candidate spans from
the KB based on the text itself so that we can link the text to entities entailed
by the KB. A candidate span here refers to a piece of the input sequence that we
can link to relevant entities in an external KB with hopes aggregating relevant
external knowledge through these candidate spans. As an example, contemplate
about using wikipedia as a knowledge base and consider the sentence "Kobe
Bryant is ...". Here, a wikipedia candidate selector extracts the following set of
candidate spans:
Cexample = {"kobe", "bryant", "kobe bryant"}
and a set of entities related to each of these.
To keep a small computational overhead as we try to infuse knowledge into
BERT, Peters et al. set the number of candidate spans generated from the in-
put text to a threshold much smaller than the number of entities in the external
knowledge sources. Let C be the number of allowed candidate spans in a given
BERT sequence, then C for each knowledge source is set to 30 for all experi-
ments presented throughout this work3. Moreover, for each of these at most 30
candidate spans, the candidate selector also provides a set of at most K = 30
hopefully relevant entities from the KB.
The key idea from here uses integrated ELs to create knowledge enhanced en-
tity span representations by disambiguating the entities of relevance to the in-
dividual candidate spans. Consider the ﬁrst candidate span of Cexampleas an
example, that is, "kobe". In this case, the set of entities provided by the candi-
date selector might look something like {kobe_(beef), kobe_bryant_(sports),
wagyu_(beef), LA_lakers_(sports), ... }, and here we would naturally prefer
that the entity disambiguator accredits Kobe Bryant and the LA Lakers as the
most relevant.
It is now a matter of ﬁnding an elegant way to re-contextualise the knowledge
enriched entity span representations to infuse the added knowledge into the
3We went with C = 30 to promote direct comparison with the results presented in the
original publication [Peters et al., 2019]
==PAGE:87==
68
Methods
next pre-trained layer. The authors achieve this through multi-headed word-to-
entity attention as they seek to encapsulate long-term dependencies between the
contextual word representations of the previous layer, and the relevant entities
to the given context after which we learn a mapping to the next pretrained layer.
Entailed in the description above are many of the aspects that make this archi-
tecture of interest. Since we solder external knowledge into BERT between pre-
trained layers, we do not change the output layer of the pre-trained model. This
neat feature implies that we can still train the augmented architecture utilising
self-supervised learning objectives to optimise the KAR mechanism and produce
knowledge enhanced contextual word representations. Moreover, since we con-
sider a very limited number of candidates combined, and add an insigniﬁcant
amount of model parameters per KB compared to going from BERT-base to
BERT-large. Moreover, it is a light-weight addition in terms of computational
complexity compared to ramping up the number of parameters (see Table 4.3).
After the motivation of the overall idea, let us get formal concerning the intricate
model details. To exploit the potential beneﬁts of the KAR mechanism, we
assume that a pretrained LM is within reach4. KAR is, in principle, agnostic
to any pre-trained model, and I tried to make it work with GPT-2, but to this
point without any luck, as it quickly became a software engineering exercise in
bridging code compatibility between many libraries (see section 4.3).
4.2.2.1
BERT as a host model
As alluded to in the Chap. 3, BERT works on a word-piece (WP) tokenisa-
tion level.
This mean that formally, BERT takes as input a sequence or a
sentence pair of N word-piece tokens (x1, . . . , xN) and computes L layers of
dmodel-dimensional representations Hi 2 RN⇥dmodel for all i 2 (1, . . . , L). We
kindly refer to the theory chapter for an introduction to BERT.
Assuming now we have a pre-trained model of this form, can now delve into the
details about the KAR mechanism. More speciﬁcally, we shall proceed formally
through the motivating steps outlined above and depicted in the Fig. 4.1. Note
that it is possible to solder KAR mechanisms between multiple layers of a pre-
trained BERT model. Still, we shall for illustrative purposes look at the case of
soldering an external knowledge source between two arbitrary layers i and i+1.
4For instance, one can use a pre-trained model from within the exquisite Transformers
Library by HuggingFace (https://github.com/huggingface/transformers).
==PAGE:88==
4.2 Models
69
4.2.2.2
Knowledge Bases
The KBs utilised by KnowBERT follow Deﬁnition 3.4, but with extra constraint
that candidate selectors must accompany the KBs. The goal of the candidate
selector is to take some text and generate a list with a maximum of C candidate
spans. For each of the C candidate (subscript m) a list of K candidate entities
are extracted from the KB so that
C = {[startm, endm] ,[em,1, em,2, ..., em,K]
, [pm,1, pm,2, ..., pm,K]}
(4.11)
where the startm and endm refers to the indices of the text piece m, and em,k
is the k’th entity in the KB related to candidate span number m. The ﬁnal
vector contains the prior probabilities, pm,k, which has been proven eﬀective in
the entity linking [Ganea and Hofmann, 2017].
Two primary advantages of this approach are the ability to restrict the number
of candidates, and the agile deﬁnition of KBs, which encompass a large amount
of external knowledge. The broad deﬁnition of KBs also include KBs that do
not necessarily follow Deﬁnition 3.2. This deﬁnition implies that using the KAR
mechanism can work with KBs containing only metadata about the entities. The
knowledge bases we equip KnowBERT are Wikipedia [Ganea and Hofmann, 2017]
and Wordnet [Miller, 1995] as described in subsection 4.1.2.
4.2.2.3
Knowledge, Attention, and Re-contextualisation
As previously alluded to, the KAR mechanism links KBs with the host model (in
this case, BERT). Conceptually, we split the process into eight steps as depicted
by the grey boxes in Fig. 4.1 and root our description of the mechanism in these:5
1
BERT ! KB (Entity Projection):
From the ith BERT encoder layer,
a linear projection from the space of contextual word representations (R768 for
BERTbase) into the space of entity embeddings of KB speciﬁc dimensional which
we can generally denote E. Naturally remembering that E is necessarily not
the same for diﬀerent KBs. The linear projection is mathematically given as
Hproj
i
= HiW proj
1
+ bproj
1
(4.12)
5Throughout the following description, it might also be beneﬁcial to consult the complete
KnowBERT architecture depicted in Fig. C.1
==PAGE:89==
70
Methods
Hi
R768⇥M ! RE⇥M
Hproj
i
Original input
Mention Spans
Entity Linking
RE⇥C
Se0 2 RE⇥C
Recontextualization
H
0proj
i
RE⇥M ! R768⇥M
H
0
i
1
2
3
4 −6
7
8
Figure 4.1: Graphical overview of the KAR mechanism. The contextual word repre-
sentations from BERT encoder layer i, Hi, are projected into the KAR vector
space of dimension in which each element is in RE, where E denotes the KB
dependent dimension of the entity embeddings. Asynchronously, the candidate
selector associated with the given KB prepares a list of C mention spans with
K associated entities and their entity embeddings. The tokens corresponding
to the candidate spans are then processed through a self-attentive-span-pooling
mechanism producing S. Se and the entity embeddings provided by the candi-
date selector are then used to produce entity-span representation by scoring the
relevance of the entities to the mention-span. The scores (see Eq. (4.14)) are
then parsed to the entity linker, where steps 4-6 unfold. Lastly, the KAR mech-
anism re-contextualises the KB inputs into H
0proj
i
using multi-headed word 2
entity attention before projecting it back into back into BERT space and onto
the next encoder layer. The grey numbers x
correspond to the eight numbered
steps described in the main text.
2 Self-attentive span pooling:
Next, the KAR mechanism computes C
mention-span representation sm 2 RE (one for each candidate span). We com-
pute these by performing self-attentive span pooling over the word pieces cor-
responding to the candidate/mention spans [Lee et al., 2017] (calculated from
the input of BERT rather than Hi). In essence, this works by generating an
unnormalised attention score for each word-piece in the entire BERT sequence
after which we form span-representations through normalisation of the attention
scores within each span. Having done so, we collect the mention-span represen-
tations to form a mention span matrix S 2 RE⇥C.
3
Mention-Span Self-Attention:
We now let the mention-span represen-
tation contained in S parse through a transformer encoder block to incorporate
global information as we let the mention-spans attend to each other through
self-attention to form
Se = TransformerBlock(S),
(4.13)
whose rows se
m we refer to as entity-span representations.
4
Entity Linking:
The KAR mechanism then seeks to score the candidate
entities for each mention-span and uses three ingredients: 1) the entity-span
==PAGE:90==
4.2 Models
71
representation on form se
m computed via Eq. (4.13), 2) the K candidate en-
tities (that is, their embeddings em,k ) produced by the candidate selector as
described in section 4.2.2.2, and 3) their corresponding priors pm,k. Based on
these ingredients, we compute K entity-scores per mention-span m using the
priors pm,k as
 m,k = MLP(pm,k, se
m · em,k)
(4.14)
utilising a two-layer MLP with 100 hidden neurons. This scoring determines
the relevance of the individual entity embedding for the given mention-span for
all candidates.
If we have EL supervision available, then we can compute loss given a gold
entity em,g with corresponding score  m,g.
The authors employ diﬀerent EL loss functions for the Wordnet and Wikipedia
knowledge bases, respectively. The WordNet EL uses log-likelihood
LEL = −
X
m
log
✓
exp ( m,g)
P
k exp ( m,k)
◆
,
(4.15)
whereas the Wikipedia EL uses max-margin
LEL = max (0, γ − m,g) +
X
em,k6=em,g
max (0, γ +  m,k).
(4.16)
5
Relevance Thresholding:
To discard all redundant candidate entities, a
threshold, δ, is introduced, after which we normalise the scores using a threshold-
softmax. Mathematically,
˜ m,k =
8
>
<
>
:
exp ( m,k)
P
 m,k≥δ exp ( m,k),
 m,k ≥δ
0
 m,k < δ
,
(4.17)
6
Knowledge Enhanced Entity Span Representations:
The remaining
entity embeddings (if any) weighted using the thresholded relevance scores:
˜em =
X
k
˜ m,k em,k.
(4.18)
to form C weighted entity embeddings. Note that, in the case where ˜ m,k < δ
for all k 2 {1, . . . , K}, we substitute a special NULL embedding for the weighted
entity embedding ˜em.
==PAGE:91==
72
Methods
Using the weighted entity embeddings, we ﬁnish this by updating the C entity-
span representations by
s
0e
m = se
m + ˜em,
(4.19)
which in turn are are packed into a matrix S
0e 2 RC⇥E to be used for the
re-contextualisation.
7
Re-contextualisation:
Perhaps the most exciting step is the recombina-
tion of the knowledge enhanced entity-span representations with the contextual
word representations of the previous BERT encoder layer. Peters et al. achieve
this using a MHA mechanism using Hi as the query, and S
0e for both key and
value, i.e.,
H
0proj
i
= MLP
⇣
MHA
⇣
Hproj
i
, S
0e, S
0e⌘⌘
.
(4.20)
Note that this type of attention is per attention head similar to the original
attention mechanism by Bahdanau et al. (see section 3.3.9). Recall that the
attention proposed by Bahdaunau wanted to let the decoder (query) attend
to the context vectors (key and value). In close analogy, the purpose of this
attention mechanism is hence to let each of the projected contextualised word
representations attend to the entity-span information of the entire context. Em-
pirically, Peters et al. found it suﬃcient to use a small transformer layer with
1024 hidden units in the MLP and 4 attention heads. Note that, similarly to
the Transformer by Vaswani et al. (see section 3.3.10), the MLP/FFNN works
position-wise as depicted in Fig. 3.8 as we addressed the Transformer.
8
KB ! BERT projection:
We have now arrived at the last step of
the KAR mechanism where we ﬁnally project the knowledge enhanced contex-
tual word representations back into the dimensionality of BERT using a linear
transformation with an added residual connection from the previous layer
H
0
i = H
0proj
i
W proj
2
+ bproj
2
+ Hi.
(4.21)
These are in turn fed into the next pretrained BERT layer i+1 using transformer
encoder in casual BERT fashion after which the remainder of BERT works as
described in section 3.3.11.
Before we proceed to discuss the training details of this beast, it is worth com-
menting upon the way Peters et al. manages to align BERT with the entity
embeddings happening through three contributions. First, in Eq. (4.21), they
choose to initialise W proj
2
so as to promote alignment between the contextual
word representations of BERT and the entity vectors. More speciﬁcally, they
initialise W proj
2
as (W proj
1
)−1. Second, the residual connection from the Hi
==PAGE:92==
4.2 Models
73
directly to H
0
i further aligns the entity-span representations with the entity
vectors as does thirdly, the dot product similarity in Eq. (4.14) in step 4 .
The reader should, by now, be acquainted with the concept of knowledge,
attention, and re-contextualisation and so we proceed by allotting a few re-
marks to model-speciﬁc elements of KnowBERT-wiki, KnowBERT-wordnet and
KnowBERT-w+w respectively
4.2.2.4
KnowBERT Variants
In this section, we attend to the diﬀerent KnowBERT variants presented by
Peters et al.
KnowBERT-wiki
The external knowledge base utilised by KnowBERT-wiki
follows Deﬁnition 3.4. It consists of 470K, 300-dimensional, entities embeddings
of Wikipedia page titles produced by a skip-gram like objective [Mikolov et al., 2013]
using the article descriptions solely without any graph-like structure between
them. Hence nodes in the KB are Wikipedia page titles such as Kobe_(city).
For Peters et al., it naturally eased the process of creating KnowBERT that
[Ganea and Hofmann, 2017] provided the 470K pretrained entity embeddings
and an entity linker. Moreover, they also provided a candidate generator equipped
with prior probabilities of entities given a mention p(e|m) based on a combina-
tion of the YAGO dictionary [Hoﬀart et al., 2011] and CrossWikis (a substan-
tial precomputed dictionary combining statistics from both Wikipedia and a
web corpus [Spitkovsky and Chang, 2012]). The priors are computed using the
probabilistic expectation of two indexes built from counting the mention entity
hyperlink statistics CrossWikis [Spitkovsky and Chang, 2012]. For YAGO, the
priors for each candidate follow a uniform distribution.
Ganea et al.
trained their EL using a max-margin objective function which
also explains the reason for using performing training KnowBERT-wiki using
Eq. (4.16) as the objective.
For EL supervision, KnowBERT-wiki adopted the standard splits of the AIDA-
CoNLL dataset [Hoﬀart et al., 2011], i.e., 18,448 linked mentions in 946 for
training, a validation set of 4,791 mentions in 216 documents, and a test set
of 4,485 mentions in 231 documents. Each of these linked documents consists
of exhaustively annotated entity links for common entity types such as organi-
sations, locations, persons and miscellaneous.
KnowBERT-wiki does at both train and test time consider all the selected can-
==PAGE:93==
74
Methods
didate spans as well as the at most top-30 entities using the NULL embeddings
discussion as part of the KAR mechanism to distinguish between true and false
links from the selector (eﬀectively functioning as a padding mechanism).
KnowBERT-wordnet
The external knowledge base used by KnowBERT-
wordnet is WordNet(3.0) using nltk as an interface. In essence, WordNet (3.0)
is a relational graph composed of the combination of synset and lemma meta-
data.
To those unfamiliar with the notion of a synset, it is simply a set of
synonyms, and a lemma is just an element of a synset. As part of constructing
the graph to be used for KnowBERT-wordnet, Peters et al. discarded certain
symmetric relationships in the graph such as (e.g., kept meronyms, but dis-
carded the inverse relationship posed by holonyms). Hence after preprocessing
WordNet being aware of symmetries, they kept 28 synset-synset relationships
and the same for lemmas, constructing a graph with synsets and lemmas and
nodes and relations between them as edges. Note, however, that by the descrip-
tion of the graph so far, we are left with two large independent sets. To connect
the two, Peters et al. created a ﬁnal relation called lemma_in_synset. For the
WordNet case, we hence have a KB that follows Deﬁnition 3.2.
The candidate selector of KnowBERT-wordnet was built using a role-based lem-
matiser without part-of-speech information based on SpaCy.
The entity embeddings learned for KnowBERT-wordnet are determined based
both on the graph, but as well on the deﬁnitions of the respective synset as early
experiments empirically showed that using both improved the MLM perplexity
the most.
For the graph part, the authors employed a recent well-performing model [Balažević et al., 2019]
based on the original Tucker decomposition [Tucker, 1964]. We will not delve
into the details of the performant TuckER model. Still, it is a robust linear
model based on the Tucker decomposition of a binary tensor representation of
knowledge graph triplets and Balazevic et al. shows that multiple other previ-
ously introduced models are special cases of TuckER.
For the synset deﬁnition embedding, Peters et al. produce 2048-dimensional
sentence embeddings by employing an oﬀ-the-shelf SOTA sentence embedding
method [Subramanian et al., 2018].
To construct the ﬁnal embeddings to be utilised by KnowBERT, for a single
node in the graph, the sentence and graph embeddings are concatenated for a
learned linear projection to project into R200.
==PAGE:94==
4.2 Models
75
For EL supervision, KnowBERT-wordnet uses the word sense disambiguation
(WSD) dataset [Miller et al., 1994], but removing the examples also present in
the WiC for a fair evaluation.
The objective of the TuckER model is the Bernoulli negative log-likelihood which
explains KnowBERT’s usage of the likelihood objective (Eq. (4.15)) presented
in the section.
A note to be made in this regard is that at train time, we do not provide
KnowBERT-wordnet with any Part-of-Speech (POS) tags nor gold lemmas,
which forces the KnowBERT to model coarse-grained POS tags implicitly to
disambiguate each word properly.
KnowBERT w+w
As a ﬁnal model, Peters et al.
proposed KnowBERT
w+w. This version solders two distinct KAR mechanisms between pretrained
BERT layers, i.e., one for Wikipedia and one for WordNet.
4.2.2.5
Training Procedure
The training procedure for KnowBERT is outlined in Algorithm 4. Given a pre-
trained BERT model (in our case BERT-base-uncased from the pytorch-pretrained-bert
library, and J KBs, each equipped with a candidate generator, we pretrain
KnowBERT incrementally. By training KnowBERT incrementally, we refer to
opening up for more substantial portions of the network before training all the
trainable parameters. The training approach in that sense similar to "chain-
thaw" approach of [Felbo et al., 2017] by sequentially letting KnowBERT un-
freeze and ﬁne-tune a single layer a time. The result of this approach in regards
to the risk of overﬁtting and general, performance, is that better results at the
expense of a more complex ﬁne-tuning procedure [Felbo et al., 2017].
More speciﬁcally, for each KBj, KnowBERT starts by computing the entity
embeddings for the speciﬁc KBj, training these if we do not have them at our
disposal pretrained from another source. Recall from section 4.2.2.4 that we use
pretrained embeddings for the Wikipedia entities and compute 200-dimensional
entity embeddings for WordNet using the TuckER [Balažević et al., 2019]. Here-
after, in the case that entity linker supervision is available, we proceed by train-
ing the newly added KAR related parameters from Eq. (4.12) - Eq. (4.14) to
convergence while freezing all other parameters.
Connecting the dots to the KnowBERT variants, KnowBERT-wiki and KnowBERT-
wordnet solder their respective KBs between layer 10 and 11 of BERT-base
==PAGE:95==
76
Methods
Algorithm 4: KnowBERT Training Procedure
Input
: A pretrained BERT model and J KBs
Output: KnowBert
1 for j  1 to J do
2
Compute entity embeddings for KBj ;
3
if Entity Linking Supervision is available then
4
Freeze all network parameters apart from those in
Eq. (4.12) - Eq. (4.14) ;
5
Train to convergence using Eq. (4.15) (WordNet) or Eq. (4.16)
(Wiki) ;
6
end
7
Initialise W proj
2
as
⇣
W proj
1
⌘−1
;
8
Unfreeze all model parameter apart froom the entity embeddings ;
9
Minimise the KnowBERT objective ;
10
LKnowBERT = LBERT + Pj
i LELi;
11 end
which has 12 layers in total. For KnowBERT-w+w, however, we need to sol-
der two KBs between BERT layers and hence KnowBERT-w+w solders the
Wikipedia KB between the 10th and 11th layers and WordNet between the
11th and 12th layers. Note that such late layers of the base model was chosen
as to interfere the least with the already pre-trained host model.
4.3
Implementation
Let us immerse into the implementation of the models considered throughout
this thesis.
The entire code-base is implemented in PyTorch, but using the
Allennlp library as a wrapper. The code-base for KGLM was published as the
work by Robert Logan et al. became accepted for ACL 2019. The motivation
behind the model as well as the fact that there existed data and a readily-
available code-base was imperative for the decision to devote part of the project
to study the methods of [Logan et al., 2019]. Especially since the ﬁrst one and
a half months spent primarily revolved around dissecting the ﬁeld of automatic
speech recognition.
Before stumbling across the paper and code base of Logan et al., I did not have
any prior knowledge of allennlp. The learning curve concerning getting familiar
with the library was extremely steep, trying to familiarise oneself with the code
==PAGE:96==
4.3 Implementation
77
base of Robert Logan et al. who had written an extensive package to be used
with allennlp for the KGLM.
Now since KnowBERT was ﬁrst proposed in September 2019, it naturally did
not exist at the start of the project. Instead, we stumbled across it as part of the
literature study of language models. KnowBERT, in particular, intrigued me for
several reasons. One of the most prominent being that instead of creating better
models by scaling up the number of model parameters, the work by Peters et
al. actually tries to make pre-trained models learn more eﬀectively by granting
them with a mechanism for understanding real-world entities.
To ensure that my results are reproducible, I have spent a substantial amount
of time trying to create intuitive README.md, making it easy to set up the en-
vironments required for running both the KGLM and KnowBERT. Moreover,
I have created Jupyter notebooks reproducing everything related to the pre-
liminary/internal studies of the mechanisms that constitute both the KGLM
and KnowBERT, respectively. The models I have trained can through these
notebooks be downloaded via API calls to a GoogleDrive folder I have created
for the purpose, so the reader does not have to train them from scratch. More
information about how to reproduce the results are described in the repository.
4.3.1
Preparing for take-oﬀ
4.3.1.1
Data preparation for the KGLM
As discussed previously, one of the major contributions of Logan et al. were the
creation the Linked-WikiText-2. We are hence so fortunate to be able to use this
dataset as-is, concerning the training, tuning and benchmarking of the KGLM
model as well as baseline in the form of the AWD-LSTM [Merity et al., 2017a].
In regards to evaluating whether, or not, the KGLM is fact-aware Logan et al.
tested it on a Fact Completion benchmark they created for the purpose (seen
in Table 4 of [Logan et al., 2019]). In order to validate the results presented in
the original paper as well as having something concrete to benchmark against,
we thank Robert Logan for providing us with the 600 sentences they used to
produce table.
In Chapter 5, we compare the results we obtained on this exercise to those
presented in the original paper.
==PAGE:97==
78
Methods
4.3.1.2
Data preparation for KnowBERT
It feels required to split this section into two since, we process to before and
after the release of the KnowBERT code-base.
Prior to EMNLP 2019
We started by preparing the entity linkers for wikipedia
and wordnet, respectively. The wikipedia process was tedious as we had to go
through the steps presented in [Ganea and Hofmann, 2017] to create the entity
linker as well as the prior probabilities for the entities given mentions6. In total,
the data in the process of training the wikipedia EL resulted in ⇡150GB of
data and the priors across CrossWikis alone amount to 775MB of data.
To prepare the wordnet linker, and wordnet entity embeddings using TuckER,
we made use of the GitHub repo Ivana Balazevic et al. published as part of
their ICML acceptance7 train using the WN18 dataset, while acknowledging
that it did not include as many relations as the data preprocessing Peters et al.
proposed [Peters et al., 2019]. In this way we were able to construct a graph
consisting of 41K entities.
Regarding the pre-training data for KnowBERT, we utilised the commonly used
WikiExtractor to extract wiki-articles following the procedure of BERT. That
is, by extracting only the text passages and ignoring, list, tables and headers
[Devlin et al., 2018].
Moreover, as the Toronto BooksCorpus is not publicly
available anymore, we utilised a GitHub repo by the user soskek in an attempt
to replicate it8
Note that at this point, we had not tried to prepare the sentence for NSP as we
did not have a successful implementation of KnowBERT. In all honesty, nowhere
near it since it proved tedious to port the Lua-code constituting the Wikipedia
entity linker to anything PyTorch friendly.
The overall goal was to base the implementation on the prominent transformers
library9. The approach taken hereto was, to fork the transformer library and
work within the script relevant to BERT. However, I managed only to create a
setup where model instantiated the BERT model with the KAR mechanism as
an identify operator before the release of the KnowBERT repo. The release of
the KnowBERT repo hence functioning as an extreme case of a residual con-
nection allowing us to skip many layers that might not have been feasible to
6https://github.com/dalab/deep-ed
7https://github.com/ibalazevic/TuckER
8https://github.com/soskek/bookcorpus
9https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
==PAGE:98==
4.3 Implementation
79
implemented fully within the time-frame of the thesis10.
Subsequent to EMNLP 2019
After the release of the code-base for Know-
BERT, the view of the task at hand change drastically. Many of the data sets
needed for running KnowBERT were provided by Allennlp through Amazon
Web Services S3 buckets even though we had prepared our own before the code-
base of KnowBERT was released. The code-base hence provide an opportunity
to validate the eﬃcacy of the KAR mechanism. To properly comment on the
implementation, we proceed from here by articulating some essential concepts
and design-principle of the allennlp library.
4.3.2
Allennlp
Allennlp is an NLP library created by the AllenAI institute in Seattle, Wash-
ington [Gardner et al., 2018]. Before digging into the details of the library most
relevant to this thesis, we ﬁnd it worthwhile to denote a paragraph describing
the motivation behind the library and its current functionalities since it has
been one of most frustrating, yet fruitful encounters made throughout the span
of the thesis.
Allennlp is an open-source research library built on top of PyTorch to quickly be
able to design, and evaluate NLP experiments and run them anywhere. Accord-
ing to their web-page11 institutions such as Facebook AI Research (FAIR), Har-
vard, University of Pennsylvania, Carnegie Mellon, and the like, use the library
in their everyday work. They market themselves primarily by being inspired
by the question "what higher-level components would help NLP researchers do
their research better + more easily?" and claim that they have created a library
that allows for quick prototyping, easy model conﬁguration and test-driven de-
velopment. They elegantly manage to wrap PyTorch modules so that they be
conﬁgured easily from the outside model. Additionally, they provide a google
cloud-based, collaborative platform called Beaker 12 for rapid and reproducible
research utilising the power of containers through Docker to facilitate the Beaker
experiments. Something which is of interest to the entire NLP community to
allow for quickly validating research results and ideas. For convenience, we pro-
vide in Appendix. D a few code snippets of some essential abstraction included
in the library.
10and most certainly not in same quality.
11https://www.allennlp.org
12https://www.beaker.org
==PAGE:99==
80
Methods
4.3.2.1
The building blocks of Allennlp
The initial with this section to provide an extensive overview regarding how to get
up to full-speed using allennlp. Unfortunately, due to the innate time-constraints
posed on the this project, it will not be feasible in times. Hence before the end
of next week I will create a medium blog post in which I cover some essential
details.
4.4
Training details
In this sections we cover the training details of the KGLM and KnowBERT and
their respective baselines. We focus on the training data, the hyperparameters
used and how we monitored the trained to verify that everything went according
to plan.
4.4.1
General Remarks
When training, we evaluate the models using metrics thus far not introduced.
These include the F1 which we use to assess the performance of the KGLM
in regards to the type prediction described in section 4.2.1.1). Moreover, we
use another perplexity measure, the Unknown Penalised Perplexity (UPP), in
addition to the one initially introduced in section 3.2.1.4. The reason for doing
so lies in the fact that models correctly predicting unknown can achieve a good
perplexity score even though the predictions does not add any value.
UPP
alleviates the issue by penalising the unknown predictions. Given that the reader
is unfamiliar with any of these metrics, we advice you to consult Appendix E
where we gave motivated the terms more precisely.
The computational part of the project initially resided on the DTU Compute’s
GPU cluster where we took the ﬁrst groundbreaking steps in terms of settings up
environments. However, as we began to work with both Wikipedia, the Toronto
BooksCorpus and the massive preprocessing steps involved with creating priors
for the wikipedia entity linker, then we were forced to move everything to DTU’s
main HPC in which I have scratch-folder with the necessary storage capacity.
Hardware speciﬁcation
Due to periods in which many had a desire to utilise
the GPUs on the HPC, we runs had unfortunately not been run on the same
==PAGE:100==
4.4 Training details
81
Name
Year
Architecture
CUDA
CUDA
Clock
Mem
SP Peak
DP Peak
Peak
cap.
cores
MHz
GiB
GFlops
GFlops
GB/s
Titan X
2016
GP102 (Pascal)
6.1
3584
1417
11.90
10157
317.4
480
Tesla V100
2017
GV100 (Volta)
7.0
5120
1380
15.75
14131
7065
898
Tesla V100-SXM2
2018
GV100 (Volta)
7.0
5120
1530
15.75
15667
7833
898
Table 4.3: Hardware
speciﬁcation:
GPUs
utilised
as
part
of
the
project
work.
More
information
can
be
accessed
through
https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=2129
Hardware. Throughout the projected we exploited the architectures shown in
Table 4.3
4.4.1.1
Monitoring Training Activities with TensorBoard
As explained in the section 4.3.2, the library possess a tremendous tensorboard-
writer functionality, that when told to, logs all training events to the chosen
serialisation directory. Using VS Code, to remotely connect to DTU’s HPC in
conjunction with agent forwarding, this allowed us to track the allennlp deﬁned
metric using an instance of their Trainer class which for every x mini-batches
(user-speciﬁed) writes to the tensorboard event ﬁles. As an example of how such
an overview looked we have include Fig. 4.2. In general, one can just choose the
lowest common ancestor of the serialisation directories as the log-directory to be
able to fetch events from all experiments conducted as part of project, making
it one of the most powerful visualisation tools for deep learning in my opinion.
We now turn to the actual training part where we start by providing arguments
for the chosen baselines where-after we analyse the training of the KGLM and
the AWD-LSTM as an example.
4.4.2
KGLM
Pretrained KG embeddings
The KGLM uses pretrained entity and rela-
tion embeddings to represent the knowledge base utilised as part of the work
presented [Logan et al., 2019] are all in RE with E = 256. They are trained
using TransE [Bordes et al., 2013] using a max-margin objective with margin
γ = 1.
Training the KGLM
==PAGE:101==
82
Methods
Figure 4.2: TensorBoard showing the training progress of the KGLM. Seen here
is the only the epoch metrics for training The green and grey coloured lines
correspond to discriminative runs, whereas the blue and red are examples of
generative runs. Note that you should lot put into meaning into the fact that
the new entity prediction of the generative models are 0, since it is not measured.
Knowledge Source
# of ents.
# of rels.
KB def
Wikipedia (KnowBERT)
470K
N/A
KB Def 3.4
WordNet (KnowBERT)
117K
28 ⇥2 + 1
KG Def 3.2
Linked Wikitext-2
46K
1,291
LKG Def 3.3
Table 4.4: Summary Statistics for the external knowledge source associated with
KnowBERT and KGLM.
Architecture
As the KGLM was constructed in a way to allow for direct com-
parison with another impressive RNNLM, namely the AWD-LSTM [Merity et al., 2017a]
we utilise 400 dimensional word embeddings and a 3-layer LSTM with 1150 hid-
den units to encode tokens.
Optimisation and Regularisation
The KGLM optimises Eq. (4.9) using an
ADAM optimiser [Kingma and Ba, 2014] with learning rate 3 ⇥10−4 instead of
the NT-ASGD. The NT-ASGD is essentially a variant of the Averaged Stochastic
Gradient Descent (ASGD) method in which the optimisation switches from SGD
to ASGD at the end of a non-monotonic interval n. The reason that the KGLM
utilises ADAM over NT-ASGD is that early experiments showed the NT-ASGD
led to unstable results when training the KGLM [Logan et al., 2019]. Addition-
==PAGE:102==
4.4 Training details
83
AWD-LSTM
KGLM [ p(x, E) and q(E|x) ]
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Num trainable params.
31 M
Num trainable params.
[48M/43M]
Num Epochs
750
Num Epochs
500
Batch Size Patience
10
Patience
10
Embedding Size
400
Embedding Size
400
Hidden Size
1,150
Hidden Size
1,150
# Layers
3
# Layers
3
Optimiser
NT-ASGD
Optimiser
ADAM
Learning Rate lr
30
Learning Rate lr
3 ⇥10−4
Weight Decay
1.2 ⇥10−6
Weight Decay
1.2 ⇥10−6
Weight Tying
X
Weight Tying
X
Dropout
0.4
Dropout
0.4
Dropout (h,i,e)
(0.2,0.65,0.1)
Dropout (h,i,e)
(0.3,0.65,0.1)
Weight drop
0.5
Weight drop
0.5
lr scheduler
NT-ASGD
Relation Embedding dim
256
Non Monotonic Interval, n
5
Alias Encoder (AE) Type†
LSTM
Grad Clipping
0.25
AE Input & Hidden Size†
400
Results
Actual # of Epochs
389
Actual # of Epochs
115
Avg. Epoch Duration
⇡1 min
Avg. Epoch Duration
⇡19 min
Table 4.5: The conﬁguration used for the experiments with the AWD-LSTM and
the KGLM. The layout of this table is intented to highlight the similarities that
make the AWD-LSTM and KGLM applicable for direct comparison. Note that
the parameters where the AWD deviates from the KGLM are side highlighted in
bold font. The † indicates that the setting is only relevant for the generative
KGLM model estimating the join probability distribution p(x, E).
ally with respect to regularisation, the KGLM employs the same strategy as
[Merity et al., 2017a] by utilising DropConnect [Wan et al., 2013], dropout and
weight tying. Table 4.5 is supposed to highlight the similarities, but also devi-
ations between the conﬁgurations of the AWD-LSTM and the KGLM. Notice
that apart from the inherent diﬀerences, that the models conﬁguration are very
similar.
Eﬀectiveness of training
In Fig. F.2, we have visualised the UPP and PPL
of the AWD-LSTM and the generative KGLM on the training and validation/de-
velopment set of the Linked-Wikitext-2 corpus. Evidently, subﬁgure (a) and (b)
show similar trends. We ﬁnd generally, that the KGLM converges quicker in
terms of the number of epochs and to a lower perplexity, however, the epoch
duration for the AWD-LSTM is substantially shorter than the epoch duration
of the KGLM. Let us contemplate about this is greater detail.
For the speciﬁc runs, the generative KGLM was trained for 115 epoch for a
duration of approximately 36 hours of training before early stopping triggered.
==PAGE:103==
84
Methods
0
0.5
1
·105
100
200
300
Step
UPP
AWD-LSTMtrain
AWD-LSTMval
KGLMtrain
KGLMval
(a)
0
0.5
1
·105
40
60
80
100
120
Step
PPL
(b)
Figure 4.3: Unknown Penalised Perplexity (UPP) and the Perplexity (PPL) as a
function of training steps. (a) shows the evolution of the UPP throughout
training the both the AWD-LSTM and the generative KGLM whereas (b) shows
the evolution of the PPL throughout training. Note that the KGLM manages to
achieve both a lower UPP and PPL compared to the AWD-LSTM in accordance
with the result presented in [Logan et al., 2019].
Comparing that to the just most than the 6 hours it took to train the AWD-
LSTM for 389 epochs means that the training time per epoch for the KGLM is
approx. 19 minutes whereas the epoch duration of the AWD-LSTM is approx.
1 minute.
The reason for the immense diﬀerence in epoch durations is not
trivial and took some pondering it took some time pondering before I arrive at
a reasonable explanation. Note ﬁrst in Fig. 4.5, the diﬀerences in the number
of parameters which naturally has an eﬀect on the forward/backward time of
the network.
However, these diﬀerences alone should not provide suﬃce to
yield such a deviation. To investigate the reason for this deviation, I started
analysing the log-ﬁle in which I found that the two runs had been submitted on
two diﬀerent GPU architectures. Speciﬁcally, we submitted the AWD-LSTM
training to a NVIDIA Tesla V100-SXM2 (see the third row of Table 4.3) and
the generative KGLM to a Tesla V100 (see the second row of Table 4.3). Still,
by glancing at the hardware speciﬁcations, we cannot truly argue for diﬀerence
in GPU architecture to be responsible for the deviation. The epiphany instead
came based on the logger provided by allennlp illuminating the fact that the
AWD-LSTM utilised the power of the GPU far more eﬀectively due to the
KGLM frequently having to communicate more frequently with the CPU.
Turning back to the overall training progress of the KGLM, we depict in Fig. 4.4,
the new entity prediction accuracy of the discriminative model in sub-ﬁgure (a).
A
==PAGE:104==
4.5 Chapter Summary
85
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.2
0.4
Step
Accuracy (tt = N)
train - top1
val - top1
train - top20
val - top20
(a)
0
2
4
6
·104
101
102
Step
PPL
KGtrain
KGval
BGtrain
BGval
(b)
Figure 4.4: New Entity Prediction Accuracy of the discriminative model and Per-
plexity of the KG- and BG (RNNLM) based predictions. (a) shows
the top1 and top20 accuracy of new entity prediction (tt = N) on the training
and test set respectively, i.e., if the gold entity is entailed within the top1 and
top20 predictions respectively. We see that the validation accuracy stagnates
early whereas the training accuracy continuously increases. (b) in turn shows
for the generative model, the perplexity of the LM when tt = ; (BG) and when
tt 2 {N, R}. We see a large deviation between the BG perplexity and that of the
knowledge graph related predictions which alludes to the fact that the model is
less confused when able to make predictions based on the LKG.
4.5
Chapter Summary
In this Chapter, we started by presented related work to the journey we have
embarked on. We focused in section 4.1. As part hereof, we primarily covered
three subjects:
• Methods for embeddings structured knowledge mathematically,
• The data-availability in regards to supervised knowledge enhancement,
• A selected subset of models within the ﬁeld using similar techniques to
those of the KGLM and KnowBERT. Speciﬁcally, we looked at the NKLM
[Ahn et al., 2016] and EntityNLM [Ji et al., 2017] since their character-
istics consolidated is similar to those of the KGLM. With respect to BERT,
we examined two potent LMs, that is, ERNIE [Zhang et al., 2019] and
ERNIE†[Sun et al., 2019]13 since they propose propose methods for en-
riching knowledge into general-purpose approach is closely related to that
of KnowBERT.
13Fun Fact: Note that these are not erroneous citations as two diﬀerent models called
ERNIE were proposed around the same time for submission to ACL 2019.
==PAGE:105==
86
Methods
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.5
1
Step
F1 (tt = N)
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.5
1
Step
F1 (tt = R)
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
·104
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Step
Sequence Cross-Entropy wrt. (tt) prediction
Discriminativetrain
Discriminativeval
Generativetrain
Generativeval
(c)
Figure 4.5: Measures related to the type prediction in the generative process. (a)
shows the F1-score wrt. the type prediction when the correct answer is tt = N,
(b) shows the F1-score wrt.
the type prediction when the correct answer is
tt = R and (c) shows the sequence cross-entropy on a token level. The legend
is shared across all three sub-ﬁgures.
We then turned to the two main models of this thesis:
==PAGE:106==
4.5 Chapter Summary
87
• KGLM,
• KnowBERT,
the likes of which we analyse in Chapter 5.
After formally addressing both the KGLM and KnowBERT, we went into the
implementation details including a discussion about how the approach changed
after the release of the KnowBERT repo [Peters et al., 2019]. As part of this
discussion, we introduce some of the concepts of allennlp as I told the story of
how I got acquainted with the library. A natural inclusion to the section about
the implementation was also the data-preparation1415.
At last, we concluded the chapter by elucidating the training details of the both
models including how we kept track of the desired metric in TensorBoard helping
us produce the visualisation depicted in section 4.4.
14Using https://github.com/soskek/bookcorpus to replicate Toronto Books Corpus.
15And https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor to process a Wikipedia database dump.
==PAGE:107==
88
Methods
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 5
Experiments, Results &
Discussion
In the following chapter, we seek to do a thorough analysis of the models dis-
cussed in Chapter 4. As mentioned at the closing of Chapter 4, before evaluating
the performances of the models quantitatively, we wish to test to what extent
they utilise the external knowledge provided. Hence we begin by investigating
the involved mechanisms in an exploratory fashion.
The exploratory analysis of both models diﬀers due to the inherent diﬀerence
between their ways of utilising external knowledge (see subsections 4.2.1 and
4.2.2).
Concerning KnowBERT, we look into the guts of the KAR mechanism to assess
whether or not the model display signs of enhanced knowledge or if the perfor-
mance boost compared to BERT [Devlin et al., 2018] accredits KnowBERT’s
"gut feeling". The details of the assess, together with a motivation for assessing
the knowledge enrichment in the chosen way, can be found in section 5.2.
After having immersed into the detail of the KAR mechanism, we ime
Concerning KGLM, we seek to assess: i) the systems dependence on the number
of samples for importance sampling when performing next-token prediction, and
ii) that it actually utilises the information given the right context.
5.1
Reproducibility of KnowBERT pretraining re-
sults
To assess the validity of the results presented in [Peters et al., 2019], we started
by reproducing the results obtained in the original paper. We have summarised
==PAGE:109==
90
Experiments, Results & Discussion
Language Model
MLM
Wikidata
# params
# params
PPL
MRR
KAR
Ent. Embed.
BERT-base†
5.5
0.09
0
0
BERT-large†
4.5
0.11
0
0
KnowBERT-Wiki
(4.3,6.7)
(0.26,0.25)
2.4
141
KnowBERT-WordNet
(4.1,4.2)
(0.22,0.23)
4.9
265
KnowBERT-W+W
(3.5, 3.7)
(0.31,0.31)
7.3
406
Table 5.1: Replicating the Pre-training Results of [Peters et al., 2019].
For the
three KnowBERT models, we have present the results we obtained through the
reproducibility exercise in bold font next to the results presented in the original
paper [Peters et al., 2019].
For KnowBERT-WordNet and KnowBERT-W+W,
we manage to obtain similar results to those presented by Peters et al. whereas
our KnowBERT-Wiki model performs worse than BERT-(base+large) in terms
of masked language modelling perplexity.
# of books
# of sent.
# of words
# of unique words
mean # of WPS
median # WPS
11,038
74,004,228
984,846,357
1,316,420
13
11
Table 5.2: Summary Statistics of the BooksCorpus dataset.
The BooksCorpus
[Zhu et al., 2015] consists of books in 16 diﬀerent genres, e.g., Romance (2,865
books)
the results pretraining in Table 5.1 and as well as the number of model param-
eters (in millions) the KAR mechanism consist of. The results are obtained
based on the pretraining data-preparation we discussed in Chapter 4 (see sec-
tion ??). More speciﬁcally, we followed the section ‘How to pretrain KnowBert‘
in the code-base1 to the point apart from preparing the knowledge bases since
that had been handled prior to EMNLP 2019. The beauty of allennlp truly
shines through in this case as the conﬁguration ﬁles constructed by Peters et
al. dictated the experiments to follow their recipe one-to-one. Recall from sec-
tion 4.2.2.5 that pre-training KnowBERT takes places using the ’chain-thaw’
approach of [Felbo et al., 2017]. This means, that ﬁrst we conducted the EL
supervision after which KnowBERT was pre-trained layer by layer.
Downstream tasks won’t be of primary concern until we reach section ?? where
we discuss the training of KnowBERT for Word-in-Context task, which will
also be formally deﬁned therein. Hence we essentially park, the training aspect
of KnowBERT for now and instead turn our focus to the task of familiarising
ourselves with the intricacies of the KAR mechanism.
1The
entire
KnowBERT-repo
is
contained
within
the
thesis
repo:
https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/context-dependent-language-models/context-dependent-language-
models
==PAGE:110==
5.2 Into the guts of KAR
91
Category
Description
nation-capital
The capital of <country x> is <y>
person-birthloc
<person x> was born in <y>
person-birthdate
<person x> was born on <y>
person-spouse
<person x> is married to <y>
city-state
<city x> is a city in the state of <y>
book-author
<book x> is a that was written by <y>
Table 5.3: Descriptions of the Fact Completion dataset for each category. Many
of the following experiments are based 600 sentences from these categories (100
sentences each).
5.2
Into the guts of KAR
The goal of our quest with respect to evaluating KnowBERT is in general to
assess the extend to which the enhancement can be attributed to the exter-
nal knowledge base. Speciﬁcally, enhanced in the sense that it becomes more
aware of real world entities through the soldered knowledge bases. As it is the
KAR mechanism that accounts for soldering the pre-trained layers with external
knowledge, we seek in this section to dissect the miscellaneous steps involved in
KAR process described in section 4.2.2.3.
To do so, we use a single-set consisting of 600 sentences throughout the chap-
ter.
The 600 sentences can be decomposed into 6 categories: nation-capital,
person-birthloc, person-birthdate, person-spouse, city-state, and book-author, each
consisting of 100 examples. The structure of the respective categories are ex-
empliﬁed in Table 5.3.2 The dataset consists of sentences that will eventually
be used for its intended purpose of fact-completion in section 5.4, but for now
we proceed by providing an example sentence in the person-birthdate category:
"Kobe Bryant was born on 23/08/1978."
In the following we examine the KAR mechanism through examples. We start by
providing an intuition for the word-to-entity attention through a series of exam-
ples depicted in conjunction with the linking scores of the respective EL per KB
as well as the priors probabilities for the entities given a mention p(e|m) (evoke
the discussion about entity-span representations in section 4.2.2.3 and more
speciﬁcally Eq. (4.14)). We do this to examine how the priors come into play in
under to understand their inﬂuence on the entity disambiguation. Hereafter, we
immerse into similar details for a selected subset of examples. The examples are
chosen to promote an understanding of the conditions under which the KAR
mechanisms do provide KnowBERT with relevant knowledge and when they
2And we thank R.L Logan IV (the ﬁrst-author behind the KGLM) for providing the dataset.
==PAGE:111==
92
Experiments, Results & Discussion
seem to function more like an intelligent form of regularisation or "gut-feeling".
The illustrations we present in the following are fairly details, and might look
daunting at ﬁrst sight. For the convenience of the reader, we provide a Plot
explanation.
Plot Explanation 5.1 (Internals of KAR) In the internals of the
KAR examples (Figs. 5.1 & 5.2), we visualise selected steps in the KAR process
for each KB (wiki: top row, wordnet: bottom row) . The left panel shows heat-
maps of the multi-headed word 2 entity attention mechanism, see Eq. (4.20),
with four attention heads depicted through diﬀerent colours. The opacity, as
well as size of the squares, represents the value of the attention-score.
The
ﬁrst axis of the heat-maps shows the word-piece tokenization of the sentence
while second axis contains the generated candidate spans (note that they diﬀer
signiﬁcantly according to KB due to the diﬀerent candidate selectors). The right
pane include visualisations of the prior candidate probabilities and normalised
entity linking scores on top and bottom, respectively. The right pane shows, for
each KB, the priors probabilities of the top-3 most likely entities as well as the
normalised and thresholded entity linking scores of the top-5 most likely entities
after entity disambiguation.
In Fig. 5.1 we see a visualisation following plot explanation 5.1 using the exam-
ple "barack obama is married to michelle obama". Looking ﬁrst at the word 2
entity attention heatmap related to the wiki KB, we see clearly that the token
"barack" attends a great detail to all the proceeding candidate spans, which
in this speciﬁc example all have relevance to him as an entity. Moreover, the
token "obama" pays a lot of attention to "barack" which also makes great sense
in the current context. As a last comment regarding the wiki-heatmap, we see
that Michelle pays attention to the candidate spans related to her as an entity.
Apart from these speciﬁc observations in relation to the speciﬁc example, we
acknowledge that it also to some extent looks similar to typical self-attention
where the token attends the most to the most recent context. We come to this
conclusion as it is generally the case, that both attention word 2 entity attention
mechanism of the respective KBs tend to focus along the "diagonal" of the po-
tentially asymmetric matrices. In the WordNet case, we immediate notice that
the diﬀerence between the two KBs. Where the wikipedia candidate selector
chose to create spans based on real world entities, the WordNet candidate selec-
tor focuses on the linguistic aspects of the sentences. It is seen that every token
in the input sequence attend to the mention span "is" which in the sentence
construction also have relevance to the entire context. It is moreover encour-
aging to see that especially is "barack" and the tokens surrounding "michelle"
that choose to attend to married. Turning now to the priors and link-scores, we
utilise in conjunction with Fig. 5.1, the associated table (Table G.1). Immedi-
==PAGE:112==
5.2 Into the guts of KAR
93
barack
obama
is
married
to
michelle
obama
.
barack
barack obama
obama
married
michelle
michelle obama
michelle obama .
obama
.
Wiki
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
barack
obama
is
married
to
michelle
obama
.
is
married
Wordnet
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
barack
barack obama
obama
married
michelle
michelle obama
michelle obama .
obama
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
barack
barack obama
obama
married
michelle
michelle obama
michelle obama .
obama
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
is
married
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
is
married
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Figure 5.1: Internals of KAR Example (Barack Obama).
Refer to Plot Explana-
tion 5.1 for an introduction to the visualisations depicted here if needed.
ately evident from Table G.1 is that the priors generated through CrossWikis
[Ganea and Hofmann, 2017], seem to be descriptive of the candidate entities se-
lected by the candidate selector in the wiki case seen both in the table as well as
the upper right panel of Fig. 5.1. However, the wikipedia EL has a tendency to
produced very similar scores across all selected candidates and hence distributes
the importance relative to the priors as seen both in the table and ﬁgure. The
WordNet EL however, seems to be get more certain after entity linking.
Another example following plot explanation 5.1 is depicted in Fig. 5.2 for the
sentence "bert from sesame street is married to ernie". The trends present in the
Bert and Bernie example resembles those of Barack and Michelle to a very large
==PAGE:113==
94
Experiments, Results & Discussion
bert
from
sesame
street
is
married
to
ernie
.
bert
bert from sesame street
sesame
sesame street
street
married
ernie
.
Wiki
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
bert
from
sesame
street
is
married
to
ernie
.
sesame
street
is
married
Wordnet
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
bert
bert from sesame street
sesame
sesame street
street
married
ernie
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
bert
bert from sesame street
sesame
sesame street
street
married
ernie
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
sesame
street
is
married
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
sesame
street
is
married
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Figure 5.2: Internals of KAR Example (Bert) Refer to Plot Explanation 5.1 for an
introduction to the visualisations depicted here if needed
degree for both KBs. In general, rooted in the examination on many examples
the following general observations were found
5.2.1
Remarkable observations
The analysis used to extract these recurring observations was conducted as fol-
lows. Five examples from each category of the fact-completion dataset were
sampled at random. Using these, the trends were consolidated based on con-
siderations similar to those discussed as part of presenting Fig. 5.1. We won’t
==PAGE:114==
5.2 Into the guts of KAR
95
include all 30 visualisation in an appendix, but we provide a few more for anal-
ysis in Appendix G.1.
1
Nearest Neighbour Attention (NNA) The MHA tends to focus, for
every token, on the previous candidate span leading to a pattern up along the di-
agonal of the heatmap matrix. As we often see these types of attention patterns
in regular self-attention of seq2seq models [Bahdanau et al., 2014], we choose
not to interpret this as showing signs of being augmented by external knowl-
edge, but conversely as a mere consequence of the structure of the English
language, as we commonly only utilise the words in closest proximity. A visual
example of NNA is seen in Appedix Fig. G.1 with associated candidate-entity
table G.3 for the WordNet KB.
2
Dominant Span Attention (DSA) Just contemplating about the exam-
ples thus far, we commonly ﬁnd for the wiki candidate selector that it produces
candidate spans corresponding to similar entities. In this case, we commonly
ﬁnd that words attend to the longest of these relevant to the context. For in-
stance, consider again Fig. G.1, where almost every token attends to "city in
japan". It is however, not only the case when we have plural similar candidate
spans as DSA is also evident from Fig. G.2 in the WordNet case where the vast
majority of words attend a lot to the candidate span "in". The dominant span
attention can in many cases be contributed to an external entity introduced and
hence this type of accounts counted positively in our analysis.
3
Long-Distance Attention (L-DA)3 The last type of attention observa-
tion made through the analysis is one we have already discussed, the L-DA. Thus
far, we have seen examples of this observation in both ﬁgures in the main matter
as both Barack and Bert attend to candidate spans, many indices away from
their location. For the examples considered using the fact-completion dataset,
we are working with linguistically simple sentence and hence we do not see this
trend often for the WordNet knowledge base. We hypothesise though, that it
might be present for longer and more complex sentences. In total the L-DA
is assessed to show signs of knowledge enhancement by enabling it to capture
long-term dependencies between entities.
Knowledge Characterisation based on KnowBERT Attention Pat-
terns
Based on the NNA, DSA and L-DA patterns, we took 5 sentences per
category and scored them using the Knowledge, Gut-feel, Noise (KGN) score.
The aim of the score is to assess the degree to which KAR mechanisms show
signs of being enriched by valuable knowledge from the respective knowledge
3Not to confuse with Latent Direchlet Allocation nor Linear Discriminant Analysis.
==PAGE:115==
96
Experiments, Results & Discussion
Category
Knowledge
Gut-feel
Noise
nation-capital
4
0
1
person-birthloc
1
2
2
person-birthdate
1
1
2
person-spouse
1
1
3
city-state
4
1
0
book-author
2
2
1
Table 5.4: Summary of the Wikipedia-probing analysis using the Knowledge,
Gut-feel, Noise (KGN) score. Five samples from each category were sam-
pled at random to retrieve 30 sentences in total from the fact-completion dataset
(see Table 5.3). These were then thoroughly analysed through use of the KAR
plots (see Fig. 5.2 for an example) in conjunction with corresponding Table (see
Table G.1 for an example) using the KGN Score which, in essence, seeks to eval-
uate whether or not the KAR mechanisms do in fact provide KnowBERT with
additional knowledge or functions as a form of regularisation through provision
of structured noise. Due to time-constraint, we managed only to conduct this
experiment for KnowBERT-W+W.
bases by analysing the word2entity attention patterns for NNA, DSA and L-
DA. As the KAR mechanism in principle the score should be applicable given
that KAR is incorporated into other pre-trained models. The results of the 30
analyses are shown in Table 5.4.
We
5.2.2
Contextual Word Representations
So far, the investigation of the intricacies of KnowBert have seemed to indi-
cated that the KAR mechanism does aﬀect the model to a signiﬁcant extent.
To better see this, we now seek to visualise the contextual word representation
produced by the diﬀerent KnowBERT variants using principal component anal-
ysis in the form of Singular Value Decomposisition (SVD) and t-Distributed
Stochatic Neighbour Embeddings (t-SNE). We assume the reader is familiar
with these methods4, but for clarity we brieﬂy summarise the main ideas.
• SVD is a linear method for ﬁnding a set of orthogonal principal compo-
nents (PCs) with maximum variance describing some dataset. The PCs
each explain a portion of the overall variance in descending order so that
4If not, then we guide the reader to [Klema and Laub, 1980] for an introduction to SVD
and [Arora et al., 2018] for t-SNE.
==PAGE:116==
5.2 Into the guts of KAR
97
the ﬁrst PC account for the most variance, the second for second most
and so forth.
• t-SNE is a non-linear visualisation tool for visualising high-dimensional
data in low-dimensional manifolds. t-SNE achieves this by aiming to re-
duce the dimensionality of the data-source while minimising the Kullback-
Leibler Divergence using gradient based optimisation (see section 3.3.3).
A note to be made with respect to our descriptions below is that we refer
to the 1st and 2nd axis of the t-SNE plots as PCs for simplicity, despite
them technically not being PCs.
We use the contextual word representations of the tokens contained in the Fact-
completion dataset as input to these methods. However, before applying any of
the methods we normalise the data. The normalisation takes place by dividing
by the standard deviation and subtracting the respective mean value of each
dimension from each dimension. In regards to PCA, it is of utmost importance
that we normalise before using the method, to ensure that no single direction
is substantially biased in terms of the variance, hence producing undesirable
results. It is conversely not generally agreed upon that we need to normalise
before applying t-SNE, it proves good practice as unnormalised data in conjunc-
tion with less fortunate initialisation can result in strange representations of the
results.
In the following we take the reader through a series of visualisation aiming
at illuminating the structure of the embeddings that the KnowBERT variants
produce. For the assessment and since we do not whiten the data, we do not
worry much about the rotations of the clusters produced. Instead we look to
assess the elements contained in the diﬀerent clusters.
In total, including padding per batch using a mini-batch size of 32, KnowBERT
produces 9512 tokens for the entire fact-completion dataset. In Appendix H, we
have visualised all 9512 tokens projected onto the ﬁrst and second PCs using
PCA and t-SNE, respectively. In each visualisation, we colour the individual
tokens based on the part-of-speech (POS) tag of the token. The strategy for
assigning POS-tags to the tokens was simple. For each token, we look up its
synsets in WordNet, count the POS-tags for each synset and assign to the POS-
tag with the highest count. In the case of two count being equal, we assign an
N/A tag. The N/A tag is also assigned to tokens that do not have entries in
WordNet which means that most entities considered are places in this category.
The marker shapes in the visualisation articulate which sentence category the
token is a part of (see Table 5.3).
KnowBERT-Wiki Embeddings In Figs. 5.3 & 5.4 we see the contextual
embeddings produced by KnowBERT-Wiki with PCA and t-SNE, respectively.
==PAGE:117==
98
Experiments, Results & Discussion
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
1st Principal Component
−5
0
5
10
15
20
2nd Principal Component
[CLS]
the
[CLS]
was
[PAD]
[PAD]
[SEP]
[PAD]
richard
[PAD]
[CLS]
[PAD]levin
[CLS]
[SEP]
/
was
/
’Principal Component Analysis’
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
Figure 5.3: KnowBERT-Wiki Contextual Embeddings using PCA.
Both of these are tokens sampled at random from the the 9512 visualised in
Appendix G.1 and shown with a few annotation to convey an intuition about
the formation of clusters. Looking ﬁrst at the PCA visualisation, we see a clear
structure as the three special tokens (marked in red) have created distinct clus-
ters. Additionally, the verbs have formed a cigar-shaped cluster at the bottom
of the visualisation while the N/A and nouns forms a dilute cluster together as
we might have anticipated. The reason being, that a signiﬁcant portion of the
N/A tokens are entity names.
Investigating the t-SNE plot for KnowBERT-wiki we encouragingly see the same
trends, but in a subspace containing more variance. It is however interesting to
see that having a large negative projection onto the ﬁrst axis (for both methods)
seems to indicate that the token is likely of the special kind. In addition hereto,
we see that a large positively valued projection onto the second PC indicates
whether or not the speciﬁc special token is of type [PAD], [SEP] or [CLS].
KnowBERT-WordNet Embeddings A similar validation of the contextual
embeddings is here presented for KnowBERT-WordNet. In this case, however,
we plot for the PCA visualisation shown in Fig. 5.5, the projection of the contex-
tual embeddings onto the 2nd and 3rd PCs. When projecting onto the 2nd and
3rd PCs, the classiﬁcation tokens have drifted in towards the center. This trend
might indicate that a signiﬁcant portion of the variance on the ﬁrst PC goes to
distinguishing the special token and classiﬁcation token in particular. Another
interesting observation revealed by looking at the category markers instead of
the POS-tags. We see that, to a great extent, the tokens cluster according to
==PAGE:118==
5.2 Into the guts of KAR
99
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
1st Principal Component
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
2nd Principal Component
shakespeare
book
[PAD]
[CLS]
born
[PAD]
a
the
in
claude
john
[CLS]
born
[SEP]
02
the
[SEP]
mo
’t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embeddings’
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
Figure 5.4: KnowBERT-Wiki Contextual Embeddings using t-SNE.
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
2nd Principal Component
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
3rd Principal Component
[PAD]
in
in
hara
the
[SEP]
[CLS]
paris
sebastian
per
[PAD]
[PAD]
city
in
is
king
[SEP]
[CLS]
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
PCA
KnowBERT-wn
Figure 5.5: KnowBERT-WordNet Contextual Embeddings using PCA.
the sentence category. The reader can easily convince oneself of this fact by
looking at the scatter points in the bottom-most part of Fig. 5.5 where the vast
majority of points belong to the book-author category.
If we instead turn our attention to the t-SNE case of Fig. 5.6, we see a lot of
structure with few overlapping POS-tag segments even though they co-exist in
==PAGE:119==
100
Experiments, Results & Discussion
−40
−20
0
20
40
1st Principal Component
−40
−20
0
20
40
2nd Principal Component
doha
of
capital
[PAD]
ko
ka
[PAD]
[PAD]
bowie
[CLS]
[CLS]
brothers
[PAD]
[PAD]
the
[CLS]
[PAD]
burton
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
tSNE
KnowBERT-wn
Figure 5.6: KnowBERT-WordNet Contextual Embeddings using t-SNE.
close proximity around the center. A new observation compared to the previous
is the fact that the objectives of the KnowBERT-Wordnet embeddings seems
to cluster gracefully into clusters that might corresponding to the same word in
diﬀerent sentences from within the same sentence category. To see this, notice
for instance the adverbs of person-birthdate category corresponding to the word
"on"5. By paying heed to the details, we ﬁnd that clusters appear in many
places. As it was far from the case with KnowBERT-Wiki, one may speculate
as to whether or not KnowBERT-Wordnet manages to improve the context-
awareness, by aligning tokens contextually based on the sentence constructions
more than the individual words.
It is worth to take a step back and recall the recurring observations we discussed
as we analysed the word 2 entity attention plots. Speciﬁcally, there is a potential
explanation for the trends seen in Fig. 5.6 residing herein. Look for instance
at the lower-panel of Fig. 5.1 where we see the heatmap, priors and EL linking
scores for the KAR mechanism associated with WordNet. We found that almost
every token attends to both candidate spans and that the EL ascertains the
scores of particular sense numbers of "is" and "married". As the EL becomes
100% certain as part of entity linking this means that for each mention span in
the example, eﬀectively only a single entity embedding is used in the weighted
sum of Eq. (4.18), leading to two entity-span representations that has changed
solely based on a single entities. In turn, these are used as input to the multi-
5Even though it is not annotated directly here, we can be certain that these points are all
"on"s as by recalling the structure of the person-birthdate sentences (see Table 5.3)
==PAGE:120==
5.2 Into the guts of KAR
101
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1st Principal Component
−10
−5
0
5
10
2nd Principal Component
[PAD]
[CLS]
[PAD]
[CLS]
was
written
the
[PAD]
[SEP]
state
[PAD]
[SEP]
[PAD]
[PAD]
born
/
27
on
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
PCA
Figure 5.7: KnowBERT-W+W Contextual Embeddings using PCA.
headed word 2 entity attention mechanism leading to the attention heatmap
shown in Fig. 5.1. It is worth speculating that this tendency is co-responsible
for the clustering seen in Fig. 5.6.
KnowBERT-W+W Embeddings At the last stop of on the trail of contex-
tualised embeddings experiments we examine the contextual embeddings based
on KnowBERT-W+W. We remind the reader that when training KnowBERT-
W+W, the KAR mechanism for the Wiki KB in a lower layer than that of
Wordnet. In Fig. 5.7, we see KnowBERT-W+W’s embeddings projected onto
the 1st and 2nd PCs. Similar to the contextual embeddings of KnowBERT-Wiki,
we see that the special tokens typically have large projections onto the 1st PC,
and in particular the classiﬁcation token. In addition to this observation, we see
that tokens from the same sentence category are frequently projected to points
in close proximity.
Looking instead at the t-SNE case depicted Fig. 5.8, we mostly acknowledge
observations already alluded to in the discussions concerning KnowBERT-Wiki
and KnowBERT-Wordnet. The classiﬁcation tokens reside with a signiﬁcant
distance to the center, and the rest of the location of the remaining tokens are
based both on the sentence category as well as the POS-tag as one would only
hope for with contextual word representations.
Generalisation to the broader picture As mentioned in the beginning of
this section, we have also plotted the full version for all three model variants
for both visualisation types in Appendix H. This is primarily done to facilitate
==PAGE:121==
102
Experiments, Results & Discussion
−40
−20
0
20
40
1st Principal Component
−40
−20
0
20
40
2nd Principal Component
of
the
[SEP]
is
[CLS]
william
in
in
scranton
on
[PAD]
[SEP]
is
capital
[PAD]
[PAD]
nixon
is
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
tSNE
Figure 5.8: KnowBERT-W+W Contextual Embeddings using t-SNE.
generalising our ﬁndings to all 9512 tokens.
5.3
Evaluation the KGLM against KnowBERT
As the two main models, the KGLM and KnowBert, inherently solves diﬀerent
tasks due to their intrinsic properties, it is not trivial how to evaluate them
against each other.
Nonetheless, by using BERT’s MLM objective, we can
compare them directly on the task of fact-completion. In doing so, we hope to
make observations regarding the types of knowledge the models possess.
5.4
Fact Completion
In this experiment, we will look at a task closely related to the typical language
modelling task following Problem Deﬁnition 3.1, but where task solely revolves
around predicting a single token to complete a factual statement.
==PAGE:122==
5.4 Fact Completion
103
Category
KGLM (N drawn importance samples)
10
50
100
500
nation-capital
(0,1,1,1)
(0,4,6,6)
(0,5,9,9)
(0,3,10,20)
person-birthloc
(8,22,23,23)
(10,28,31,32)
(9,31,32,32)
(10,31,32,32)
person-spouse
(0,5,5,5)
(0,4,7,7)
(0,2,6,7)
(0,2,9,12)
city-state
(9,26,29,30)
(6,37,42,42)
(5,39,50,52)
(4,39,51,53)
book-author
(21,42,43,43)
(30,47,49,50)
(28,48,48,51)
(28,49, 49,50)
Average
(7.6,19.2,20.2,20.4)
(9.2,24.0,27.0,27.4)
(8.4,25.0,29.0,32.3)
(8.4,24.8,30.0,33.2)
Category
KnowBERT
Wiki
WordNet
W+W
nation-capital
(63,68,72,73)
(0,4,6,15)
(60,69,69,71)
person-birthloc
(2,12,19,23)
(0,1,3,4)
(3,10,14,19)
person-spouse
(0,5,5,5)
(1,2,2,4)
(2,9,9,15)
city-state
(90,94,95,98)
(18,49,56,70)
(91,91,96,98)
book-author
(5,14,17,23)
(0,1,5,6)
(8,13,17,24)
Average
(32.0,38.6,41.6,44.4)
(3.8,11.4,14.4,19.8)
(32.8,36.3,41.0,45.4)
Table 5.5: KGLM
and
KnowBERT
Fact-completion.
Top-k
accuracy
(@1/@5/@10,@20) [%] for next token prediction (and MLM prediction for
KnowBERT) provided incomplete factual sentences.
Selected examples are
depicted in presented in Table 5.6.
We have neglected the category "person-
birthdate" since both models commonly predicted weekdays, which is cheating as
there a 1/7 chance that a weekday is correct.
LM
Category
Antecedent <x>
Consequent <y>
KGLM
Both
book-author
Mein Kampf
Adolph Hitler
Adolph
Adolph
city-state
Anchorage
Alaska
Alaska
Alaska
KGLM
person-birthloc
Kobe Bryant
Philly
Philly
Chicago
book-author
Twelfth night
Shakespeare
Shakespeare
Prof.
Know-
nation-capital
The capital of Denmark is
CPH
a
CPH
BERT
city-state
Berkeley
Cali
the
Cali
None
person-spouse
Jay-Z
Beyonce
the
Sarah
person-birthdate
Andy Warhol
06/08/1928
the
broadway
Table 5.6: Fact Completion Examples. Qualitative Evaluation using KGLM with N =
100 and KnowBert-Wiki for a selected subset of sentences.
5.4.1
Experimental Setup for Fact-Completion
For the Cloze task experiment [Taylor, 1953], we naturally want to evaluate
all three KnowBERT variants. Regarding the KGLM, however, we seek to ex-
amine the eﬀect of the number samples drawn for importance sampling when
making predictions. More speciﬁcally from Eq. (4.10) (see section 4.2.1.1 for
reference), we examine four values of N, i.e., N = {10, 50, 100, 500}.
These
values of N were chosen to the cover the eﬀect of the KGLM sampler and pro-
vide means for discussion of how to improve the KGLM’s dynamically updated
LKG. Note that our experimental approach does not match the one presented
in [Logan et al., 2019] as they also equipped the KGLM with a named entity
linker to create even better annotations for use in the generative process.
==PAGE:123==
104
Experiments, Results & Discussion
Table 5.5 shows the results per sentence category for the diﬀerent models using a
Top-k evaluation metrics with k 2 {1, 5, 10, 20}. As we have hundred examples
per category, all elements in the table corresponding to percentage accuracy
for the diﬀerent values of k.
The colouring works as follows: for each row,
in the table we examine for k the diﬀerent accuracy obtained by the diﬀerent
models and assign the number a red formatting to the best model for each k per
row. In the case that two or more models perform equally well, we assign both
numbers a green formatting. The last comment concerning the table formatting
is that for each category, we let the best KGLM model compete against the base
KnowBERT variant. The winning model scores a grey row shading.
5.4.2
KGLM Observations
As evident from the KGLM upper part of Table 5.5, increasing the number
of samples, N, drawn for importance sampling does not necessarily improve
the performance of the LM as next token prediction revolves around picking the
most likely word, i.e., for k = 1. Hence by looking at the average accuracy across
sentence categories for the KGLM, we ﬁnd N = 50 to be the conﬁguration that
leads to the highest top-1 prediction accuracy. However, as we increase N we ﬁnd
that the actual consequent is moved further up the list of most likely tokens,
albeit, not all the way to the top of the list making it the actual prediction.
Therefore, it is likely that we can seek a good trade-oﬀbetween speed and
accuracy with N 100. Yet due to the limited time available, we have not been
able to carry out an experiment in which we ﬁnd a good trade-oﬀbetween model
accuracy and the time per predictions for the KGLM. Moreover, we would have
like to equip the KGLM with an external entity linker as done for the Fact-
completion task in original paper [Logan et al., 2019] as well as allowing it to
predict as an oracle in which we provide it with the correct annotations before
starting the generative process.
We expect that doing so, we would obtain
results closer to those presented in Table 4 of the KGLM paper.
5.4.3
KnowBERT Observations
Looking at the lower half of Table 5.5, we see the results obtained on the Fact-
completion task for the three KnowBERT variants. As one would anticipate,
the inclusion of a Wordnet based KAR mechanism does not provide superior
results as the KB does not entail knowledge about real-world entities.
Considering instead the likes of KnowBERT-Wiki and KnowBERT-W+W, we
see that the two variants produce similar, and indeed impressive results on the
==PAGE:124==
5.4 Fact Completion
105
same categories leading to good average scores across all categories. Nonetheless,
it is only within the geography related sentence categories of nation-capital and
city-state that KnowBERT-Wiki and KnowBERT-W+W produce tremendous
results. This means that in some sense, the average accuracy can be considered
a bit misleading.
It is not surprising, however, that KnowBERT-Wiki and KnowBERT-W+W
are particularly good at geography. In the original experiment by Logan et al.,
they benchmarked the KGLM against GPT-2 and found the sentence category
in which the GPT-2 performed the best to be city-state achieving a @1 accuracy
62% and 15.3% across all categories. It is hence possible that it is a general trait
of large pre-trained model that they possess knowledge of geography due to the
extensive amounts of data they are trained upon. In order to validate this we
seek before the thesis presentation to produce baselines using BERT-base and
BERT-large and hopefully also perform the Cloze task of the LAMA benchmark
proposed by [Petroni et al., 2019]
5.4.4
General Remarks
Having looked at both the results of the KGLM sampling approaches and Know-
BERT variants in isolation, we now look to comment on the general observations
made throughout the Fact-completion experiment. An immediate realisation of
the study is that, the KGLM and KnowBERT perform well on diﬀerent cat-
egories. Where KnowBERT excels in geography related subjects, the KGLM
excel in the person-birthloc and book-author categories.
We now turn to investigate the models’ predictions on a selected subset of exam-
ples outlined in Table 5.6. Both models manage to identify that "Mein Kampf"
was written by "Adolph Hitler" and that "Anchorage" is a city in "Alaska". In
this case, both antecedents being "Mein Kampf" and "Anchorage" are rather
unique which allowed both models to bias heavily towards the correct answer.
Regarding the examples that only the KGLM predicts correctly, these are ex-
actly examples of the categories for which KnowBERT struggles. Nonetheless,
a nice feature of KnowBERT’s predictions in vast majority of instances is that
they actually make sense in the context, both grammatically and intuitively.
Notice for instance how KnowBERT realises that for predicting who "Jay-Z" is
married he needs to come up with a female name although he does not realise
the desired entity. Conversely, given that the KGLM has to rely on the standard
vocabulary alone instead of predicting through the copy mechanism, it most of-
ten ends up predicting either "the" or "a". Looking at the table again, this is
in essence also what we see for every example that the KGLM does not predict
correctly.
==PAGE:125==
106
Experiments, Results & Discussion
5.5
Downstream Training and KnowBERT
As the main goal of the thesis has been to investigate the mechanisms responsible
for knowledge augmentation of the considered models, we do no in this report
provide any results for the downstream related tasks for which we validated
KnowBERT’s performance. An elaborate description of how to reproduce the
results are included in the gitlab repository instead.
5.6
Chapter Summary
We began the chapter by explaining how we reproduced the KnowBERT pre-
training results and presented the ﬁgures obtained as part of that exercise.
We then looked into the guts of the KAR mechanism introduced theoretically
back in section 4.2.2.3. In this experiment we tried to deduce recurring trends
in the word 2 entity attention patterns from which we found three recurring
trends
• The Nearest Neighbour Attention where the tokens tend to focus pri-
marily on the previous candidate span.
As focusing on the most re-
cent context alone resembles classical encoder-decoder attention scores
[Bahdanau et al., 2014]
• Dominant Span Attention where most tokens in the sentence attend to a
single (and sometimes a few) candidate span(s). This pattern is typically
present whenever there is one or more important entities involved and
hence yields some sign of knowledge augmentation.
• Long-Distance Attention for which we see a single or plural entity attend
to candidate span many indices from their own placement. Commonly
this attention pattern also seems to link relevant entities.
Moreover, the study revealed major diﬀerences in behaviour between the Wordnet-
and the Wiki EL. The Wordnet EL typically resulting in a single entity embed-
dings contributing to the re-weighting of the entity-span representations. Con-
versely the Wikipedia EL showed a tendency to distributed the probability mass
evenly implying that all entities selected for each mention span by the candidate
selector are weighted equally before utilised for the word-to-entity.
==PAGE:126==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Outlook
In this work we have, to best of our knowledge, presented a ﬁrst of its kind
analysis of the state-of-the-art knowledge enhanced language models to asses
the degree to which the reported performance boost reﬂects contextual knowl-
edge. The primary focus has been to elucidate the underlying mechanics in the
KAR mechanism, that constitutes the foundation of KnowBERT, and the novel
KGLM model.
The analysis of KnowBERT studies patterns in word 2 entity attention mecha-
nism at the heart of the KAR mechanism. Here we ﬁnd that the structure of the
knowledge base has a profound inﬂuence on the attention patterns. Visualising
the attention in a heatmap for unstructured knowledge graphs as Wikipedia,
revealed three tendencies which we have labelled: Nearest Neighbour Attention
(NNA), Dominant Span Attention (DSA), and Long-Distance Attention (L-DA).
NNA is similar to regular self-attention in which the entities pays most atten-
tion to the neighbouring entities. Contrary, we also witness cases of DSA, where
a single (or a select few) entity is the primary attention object of all entities.
The ﬁnal recurrent pattern is the L-DA where connected entities pay special
attention to each other across long distances. We interpret DSA and L-DA as
indicators of factual, or at least contextual, knowledge opposed to NNA. Based
on this analysis we evaluated KnowBERT on a few subset of randomly chosen
Wikipedia probing data through a qualitative measure "Knowledge, Gut-feel,
or Noise" (KGN) from which we conclude that KnowBERT in many cases im-
proves in a non-trivial fashion which does not reﬂect contextual knowledge in
an interpretable fashion.
Also the entity linker diﬀers substantially between the two knowledge bases. The
WordNet EL commonly produces a single entity, opposed to the Wiki EL which
often results in scoring reminiscent of a mean. For this reason, KnowBERT
WordNet proved quite reliable in cases where the correct entity was entailed in
the KG. Furthermore, it is speculated that the performance boost, to some de-
gree, can be attributed the KAR mechanism as a novel regularisation technique,
in the cases where KnowBERT Wiki experience better performance while not
==PAGE:127==
108
Conclusion and Outlook
reﬂecting knowledge in an obvious way.
PCA and t-SNE analysis revealed that the contextual word representations tend
to score similar values within a number of categories. Speciﬁcally, we witnessed
clustering into groups based on part of speech (POS) and the Fact-completion
data categories it was evaluated on. The POS often saw the special characters
[PAD], [CLS], and [PAD] value the largest, showing that it pays extra attention
to these. Furthermore, we see a a consistent evaluation of the same word in the
same context across multiple evaluations, e.g. "on" as the adverb in the person-
birthdate task. We interpret this cluster formation as knowledgeable bearing in
mind that is it produced by t-SNE.
We follow up on these qualitative observations by comparing KGLM and Know-
BERT on the Fact-completion task. Here KnowBERT W+W and KnowBERT
Wiki has similar performance, whereas KnowBERT WordNet hardly sees any
increase. At ﬁrst sight, KnowBERT Wiki scores a good average performance.
However, this is because KnowBERT scores subliminally in some categories.
We conclude, that the average scores should be used with caution, or not at all.
Speciﬁcally, KnowBERT performs well on geography related facts, albeit this is
a trait observed in language models in general. Both KnowBERT and KGLM
are good at completing facts that entails rare words, as illustrated through e.g.
"Mein Kampf". But, unlike KGLM which often fails blatantly when it fails,
KnowBERT reﬂects some general knowledge even when the KG fails. In this
work it was exempliﬁed by suggesting that the spouse of Jay-Z was Sarah, rather
than predicting "the" as KGLM often does.
KGLM was found to perform quite well on relations such as Person-Birthloc and
Book-Author in contrast to KnowBERT. The KGLM functions quite diﬀerently
from KnowBERT, e.g. by having the number of samples parameter, N. We
found no direct correlation between increasing N and the performance on the
Top-1 evaluation criteria. However, for Top-k scores for larger k’s, there seems to
be an optimum between computational eﬀort and eﬀect for moderate number of
samples. We have not quantiﬁed this number, but suspect it will be for N < 100.
We conclude this thesis by acknowledging that the augmented knowledge graphs
often reﬂect knowledge. However, KGs with a triplet structure produce more
consistently knowledgeable results for entities that are represented in the KG.
As such, constructing KGs with a strict relation structure seems likely to have
a better chance of making informed choices. This is particularly relevant in
examples where the augmented KG consist of non-trivial relations that cannot
be decoded from the grammatical context, and the entities are unlikely to have
been part of the pre-trained training corpus.
==PAGE:128==
6.1 Outlook
109
6.1
Outlook
As follow-up work to this project we wish to: validate the analysis model used to
assess the knowledge enrichment of KAR mechanisms by implementing a KAR
mechanism compatible with the transformers library.
==PAGE:129==
110
Conclusion and Outlook
==PAGE:130==
Appendix A
Perplexity Intuition
This appendix aims at providing the reader with a better understanding of
the notion of perplexity. We start by recalling the deﬁnition typically used in
NLP after which we bridge it with the notion of entropy, Recall that we deﬁne
perplexity in NLP as PPL(W), where W = w1w2 . . . wN is a word sequence of
length N, as
PPL(W) = p(w1w2 . . . wN)−1
N
=
N
s
1
p(w1w2 . . . wN),
(A.1)
and recall additionally, that the probability of a discrete probability distribution
is given two to the power of the entropy of probability distribution p. Mathe-
matically speaking, we have that
PPL(p) = 2H(p) = 2−P
x p(x) log2 p(x),
(A.2)
where x is the possible events of p and H(p) is the entropy in bits. Note here
that the base does not have to be equal to two as long as it uses the same base
as the entropy.
Now, in order to motivate the viewing of perplexity as the eﬀective branching
factor, we shall utilise Shannon’s entropy
H(x) = Ex⇠p[I(x)] = −Ex⇠p[log p(x)],
(A.3)
where I(x) = −log p(x) is the self-information [Goodfellow et al., 2016]. Now
since we are dealing with a discrete probability distribution, it is straight-forward
to write out the expectation and derive the common form of Shannon’s entropy,
==PAGE:131==
112
Perplexity Intuition
H(p) =Ex⇠p[I(x)] = −Ex⇠p[log p(x)]
(A.4a)
= −
X
x
p(x) · log p(x)
(A.4b)
=
X
x
p(x)
|{z}
prior
·
log
1
p(x)
,
|
{z
}
information of x in bits
.
(A.4c)
A remarkable result and evidently Eq. (A.4c) shows that the entropy is in essence
the average number of bits required to encode the information associated with
a random variable. Hence measured in a given base (not necessarily base 2)
the exponentiation is the weighted average number of choices a random variable
possesses.
To get back to natural language processing, this means that the
model perplexity is 242 per sentence if the average sentence across a test set can
be encoded in 42 bits.
Now, having elucidated the beautiful interpretation of Shannon’s entropy, we
turn our attention to the quest of showing how to arrive at the perplexity def-
inition given in Eq. (3.10) for a given model M. In the following p and pM
denote the probability distribution we want to model and each observation in
the training set is a sample drawn from p, and it’s unknown distribution, and
our learned probability model (predictions) respectively.
PPL(p) =2H(p) = 2avg. # of bits
(A.5a)
=2−PN
i=1 p(wi)·log pM(wi)
(A.5b)
where N is the number of words, wi is the i’th word and pM(wi) is models M’s
prediction. Now as previously alluded to, we do not need to use base two for
the entropy and exponentiation. Hence we shall proceed using e and ln so that,
PPL(p) = e−PN
i=1 p(wi)·ln pM(wi)
(A.5c)
As we not want to make any assumptions on the frequencies of each word favour
models predicting frequent words, we assume that p(wi) = N −1 for all i implying
==PAGE:132==
113
that
PPL(p) = e−PN
i=1
1
N ·ln pM(wi)
(A.5d)
= pM(w1)−1
N · pM(w2)−1
N . . . pM(wN)−1
N
(A.5e)
=
N
Y
i=1
pM(wi)−1
N
(A.5f)
N
s
1
QN
i=1 pM(wi)
(A.5g)
Notice here, that Eq. (A.5g) it equivalent to Eq. (3.10).
Note here, that evaluating our predictions pM against samples drawn from p
leaves us with the cross-entropy.
==PAGE:133==
114
Perplexity Intuition
==PAGE:134==
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
−0.5
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
ReLU(x)
GeLU(x)
Figure B.1: The Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) and the Gaussian Estimated Lin-
ear Unit (GELU) .
Appendix B
Additional Activation
Functions
==PAGE:135==
116
Additional Activation Functions
==PAGE:136==
Appendix C
KnowBERT Architecture
==PAGE:137==
118
KnowBERT Architecture
Kobe
Bryant
is
...
Input
BertEncoder #0
BertEncoder #1
· · ·
BertEncoder #i
KAR
BertEncoder #11
KnowBERT (Peters et al., 2019)
Downstream task
e.g. Question Answering
Task
Hi
R768⇥M ! RE⇥M
Hproj
i
Original input
Mention Spans
Entity Linking
RE⇥C
Se0 2 RE⇥C
Recontextualization
H
0proj
i
RE⇥M ! R768⇥M
H
0
i
1
2
3
4 −6
7
8
Knowledge, Attention, and Re-contextualization (KAR)
Hproj
i,1
Hproj
i,2
Hproj
i,3
Hproj
i,j
Kobe
Bryant
is
...
Original Input
Current
representation
E
C
s1
s2
s3
...
Knowledge Base
Candidate Selector
Span Pooling
S
Mention-Span
Self-Attention
Se
sm
E
C
se
1
se
2
se
3
... se
m
Mention Span Generation (Lee et al., 2017)
em =
Kobe (m = 1):
from Wiki
E
K
...
(em,1) kobe (beef)
(em,2) Kobe Bryant (sports)
(em,3) wagyu (beef)
(em,4) LA Lakers (sports)
...
(em,k)
Knowledge Base
Hproj
i
= HiW proj
1
+ bproj
1
Project to entity space: Linear projection from
R768⇥M ! RE⇥M, where E is 200 for Wordnet and 300
for Wiki.
H
0
i = H
0proj
i
W proj
2
+ bproj
2
+ Hi
Projection to BERT space: Linear projection from
RE⇥M ! R768⇥M, i.e. back to the original dimensionality
Projections
H
0proj
i
= MLP
⇣
MHA(Hproj
i
, Se0, Se0)
⌘
MLP: MLP with 1024 hidden neurons found to be suﬃ-
cient.
MHA: Multi-Headed-Attention with 4 heads, Hproj
i
as
query, and Se0 as both key and value.
Re-contextualisation
 m
1
· · ·
k
 m,k
MLP(pm,k, se
m · em,k)
e
 m
1
· · ·
k
 m,k
8
>
<
>
:
exp  m,k
P
 m,k≥δ exp  m,k
,  m,k ≥δ
0
,  m,k < δ
˜em
=
em
⇥
e
 m
s
0e
m
=
+
se
m
em
Entity Linking
Figure C.1: KnowBERT Overview
==PAGE:138==
Appendix D
Basic Allennlp concepts
In the following, we present some of the basic higher-level components and
concepts entailed by the allennlp library. For each section, these are presented
through code snippets and comments to go in greater detail where it is felt
needed.
D.1
Model
1 class
Model(torch.nn.Module , Registrable ):
2
def
__init__(self ,
3
vocab: Vocabulary ,
4
regularizer : RegularizerApplicator = None) -> None
: ...
5
6
def
forward(self , *inputs) -> Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]: ...
7
8
def
get_metrics (self , reset: bool = False) -> Dict[str , float ]:
...
9
10
@classmethod
11
def
load(cls ,
12
config: Params ,
13
serialization_dir : str ,
14
weights_file : str = None ,
15
cuda_device : int =
-1) -> ’Model ’: ... # cuda_device
=-1 implies
compute
on CPU
In contrast to implementations using torch.nn.Module a forward pass for an
Allennlp model always returns a dictionary of torch.Tensors and it is by con-
vention the "loss" key that is utilised to optimise the network, even though it
is not a necessary key to make predictions since else it would not be possible to
make inference. It is fairly straight-forward to wrap an existing PyTorch into
==PAGE:139==
120
Basic Allennlp concepts
the wrapper so that it functions with the framework.
D.2
Vocabulary
Every NLP project inevitably needs a Vocabulary in order to work with lan-
guage.
The high-level Vocabulary class designed by Allennlp let’s one build
a vocabulary from instances (data), add tokens to the vocabulary namespace,
map tokens to indices.
1 class
Vocabulary ( Registrable ):
2
def
__init__(self ,
3
counter: Dict[str , Dict[str , int ]] = None ,
4
min_count: Dict[str , int] = None ,
5
max_vocab_size : Union[int , Dict[str , int ]] = None ,
6
non_padded_namespaces : Iterable[str] =
DEFAULT_NON_PADDED_NAMESPACES ,
7
pretrained_files : Optional[Dict[str , str ]] = None ,
8
only_include_pretrained_words : bool = False ,
9
tokens_to_add : Dict[str , List[str ]] = None ,
10
min_pretrained_embeddings : Dict[str , int] = None)
-> None: ...
11
12
@classmethod
13
def
from_instances (cls , instances: Iterable[’Instance ’], ...)
-> ’Vocabulary ’: ...
14
15
def
add_token_to_namespace (self , token: str , namespace: str = ’
tokens ’) -> int: ...
16
17
def
get_token_index (self , token: str , namespace: str = ’tokens ’
) -> int: ...
18
19
def
get_token_from_index (self , index: int , namespace: str = ’
tokens ’) -> str:
20
return
self. _index_to_token [namespace ][ index]
21
22
def
get_vocab_size (self , namespace: str = ’tokens ’) -> int:
23
return
len(self. _token_to_index [namesp
D.3
Instances
1 class
Instance(Mapping[str , Field ]):
2
3
def
__init__(self , fields: MutableMapping [str , Field ]) -> None:
...
4
5
def
add_field(self , field_name : str , field: Field , vocab:
Vocabulary = None) -> None: ...
==PAGE:140==
D.4 Predictors
121
6
7
def
count_vocab_items (self , counter: Dict[str , Dict[str , int ]])
: ...
8
9
def
index_fields (self , vocab: Vocabulary ) -> None: ...
10
11
def
get_padding_lengths (self) -> Dict[str , Dict[str , int ]]: ...
12
13
def
as_tensor_dict (self ,
14
padding_lengths : Dict[str , Dict[str , int ]] =
None
15
) -> Dict[str , DataArray ]:
D.4
Predictors
D.5
Conﬁguration ﬁles
1
{
2
" dataset_reader ": {
3
"type": "tacred",
4
" entity_masking ": " entity_markers /type",
5
" tokenizer_and_candidate_generator ": {
6
"type": " bert_tokenizer_and_candidate_generator ",
7
" bert_model_type ": "https:// allennlp.s3-us -west -2.
amazonaws.com/knowbert/models/bert -base -uncased -tacred -entity -
markers -vocab.txt",
8
" do_lower_case ": true,
9
" entity_candidate_generators ": {
10
"wiki": {
11
"type": "wiki"
12
},
13
"wordnet": {
14
"type": " wordnet_mention_generator ",
15
" entity_file ": "https:// allennlp.s3-us -west -2.
amazonaws.com/knowbert/wordnet/entities.jsonl"
16
}
17
},
18
" entity_indexers ": {
19
"wiki": {
20
"type": " characters_tokenizer ",
21
"namespace": " entity_wiki ",
22
"tokenizer": {
23
"type": "word",
24
" word_splitter ": {
25
"type": " just_spaces "
26
}
27
}
28
},
29
"wordnet": {
30
"type": " characters_tokenizer ",
==PAGE:141==
122
Basic Allennlp concepts
31
"namespace": " entity_wordnet ",
32
"tokenizer": {
33
"type": "word",
34
" word_splitter ": {
35
"type": " just_spaces "
36
}
37
}
38
}
39
}
40
}
41
},
42
"iterator": {
43
"iterator": {
44
"type": "basic",
45
" batch_size ": 32
46
},
47
"type": " self_attn_bucket ",
48
" batch_size_schedule ": "base -12gb -fp32"
49
},
50
"model": {
51
"model": {
52
"type": " from_archive ",
53
" archive_file ": "/ work1/s144086/kata/ pretrained /
knowbert_wiki_wordnet_model .tar.gz",
54
},
55
"type": "simple - classifier ",
56
"bert_dim": 768,
57
" concat_word_a_b ": true,
58
" include_cls ": false,
59
"metric_a": {
60
"type": "microf1",
61
" negative_label ": 0
62
},
63
" num_labels ": 42,
64
"task": " classification "
65
},
66
" train_data_path ": "/ work1/s144086/kata/data/tacred/train.json"
,
67
" validation_data_path ": "/ work1/s144086/kata/data/tacred/dev.
json",
68
"trainer": {
69
" cuda_device ": 0,
70
" gradient_accumulation_batch_size ": 32,
71
" learning_rate_scheduler ": {
72
"type": " slanted_triangular ",
73
" num_epochs ": 3,
74
" num_steps_per_epoch ": 2128.875
75
},
76
" num_epochs ": 3,
77
" num_serialized_models_to_keep ": 1,
78
"optimizer": {
79
"type": "bert_adam",
80
"b2": 0.98,
81
"lr": 3e-05,
82
" max_grad_norm ": 1,
==PAGE:142==
D.5 Conﬁguration ﬁles
123
83
" parameter_groups ": [
84
[
85
[
86
"bias",
87
"LayerNorm.bias",
88
"LayerNorm.weight",
89
" layer_norm .weight"
90
],
91
{
92
" weight_decay ": 0
93
}
94
]
95
],
96
"t_total": -1,
97
" weight_decay ": 0.01
98
},
99
" should_log_learning_rate ": true,
100
" validation_metric ": "+ micro_f1"
101
},
102
" vocabulary ": {
103
" directory_path ": "/ work1/s144086/kata/
vocabulary_wordnet_wiki .tar.gz"
104
}
105
}
==PAGE:143==
124
Basic Allennlp concepts
==PAGE:144==
Appendix E
Evaluation metrics of
relevance to training
E.1
The F1-score
Two essential measures of classiﬁcation systems are those of precision and recall.
Precision is deﬁned the number of positive labels the systems guessed correctly
divided by the total number of times the systems predicted a positive label
whereas recall is the number of positive labels that the models guessed correctly
divided by the total number of positive labels in the dataset. Mathematically
speaking, the deﬁne the precision P and recall R as
P =
TP
TP + FP,
(E.1a)
R =
TP
TP + FN,
(E.1b)
where TP is the true positives, FP is the false positives and FN is the false
negatives. These are typically used in conjunction to deﬁne the F1-score we
utilise as the evaluation metrics on many occasions for the remainder of the
thesis. The F1-score is deﬁned as the harmonic mean of the precision and recall
F1 =
2
P + R = 2 · P · R
P + R.
(E.2)
Now the unfamiliar reader might ponder: "Where does the 1 in F1 score come
from?" to which the answer is that it is a special instance of the Fβ-measure
which is deﬁned as
Fβ = (β2 + 1)P · R
β2P + R
,
(E.3)
where β = 1 and in general have to comply with the condition that (0 β 1).
A quick remark here is that notice how values of β > 1 makes the Fβ-score
become recall oriented whereas β < 1 makes the score precision oriented with
the special that β = 0 leading to F0 = P.
==PAGE:145==
126
Evaluation metrics of relevance to training
E.2
Unknown Penalised Perplexity
A major drawback of the perplexity measure presented 3.2.1.4 is that one can
obtain a low perplexity by accurately predicting the unknown token. Unfortu-
nately, in the most extreme of cases, this implies that if all words in a sequence
are unknown, then the language modelling system can achieve a perplexity of
0 by predicting everything as unknown which does really provide any useful
information.
Hence another evaluation metric utilised by the likes of [Logan et al., 2019] is the
Unknown Penalised Perplexity (UPP) [Ahn et al., 2016] in which the likelihood
of unknown words are penalised by
pUPP(wunk) =
p(wunk)
|Vtotal\Vvoca|
(E.4)
==PAGE:146==
Appendix F
Supplementary KGLM
Training Details
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.5
1
Step
P (tt = N)
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.5
1
Step
R (tt = N)
disctrain
discval
gentrain
genval
(b)
Figure F.1: KGLM Generative Process:
Type Prediction Details (a) Shows the
precision of the new type-prediction for tt = N (b) Shows the recall of the new
type-prediction for tt = N [Logan et al., 2019].
==PAGE:147==
128
Supplementary KGLM Training Details
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.5
1
Step
P (tt = R)
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
·104
0
0.5
1
Step
R (tt = R)
disctrain
discval
gentrain
genval
(b)
Figure F.2: KGLM Generative Process:
Type Prediction Details (a) Shows the
precision of the new type-prediction for tt = N (b) Shows the recall of the new
type-prediction for tt = N [Logan et al., 2019].
==PAGE:148==
Appendix G
Supplementary Analysis
G.1
KAR analysis
==PAGE:149==
130
Supplementary Analysis
kobe
is
a
city
in
japan
.
kobe
city
city in japan
japan
.
Wiki
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
kobe
is
a
city
in
japan
.
kobe
is
a
city
in
japan
Wordnet
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
kobe
city
city in japan
japan
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
kobe
city
city in japan
japan
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
kobe
is
a
city
in
japan
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
kobe
is
a
city
in
japan
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Figure G.1: Internals of KAR Example (Kobe (city in Japan). Left panel) Visu-
alisation of the Word2Entity attention mechanism for the example "Kobe is a
city in Japan" for the two knowledge bases respectively. With respect to the
wiki-heat notice how all tokens attends to the candidate span "city in japan". It
is a recurring observation that important candidate spans extends over several
tokens draw a signiﬁcant portion of attention to them. In the WordNet case, a
pattern is that of nearest neighbour attention in which the given token focuses
on the neighbourting candidate span to the left.
==PAGE:150==
G.1 KAR analysis
131
Candidate Spans
Sentence
Barack Obama is married to Michelle Obama
Associated with Fig. 5.1
Priors (top-3)
Norm. EL Scores (top-3)
ent
p(e|m)
ent
 m,k
Wiki
barack
Barack Obama
0.53
2000
Camp
David
Summit
0.07
Barack (brandy)
0.15
Barack
Obama
cit-
izenship
conspiracy
theories
0.07
Barack Obama, Sr.
0.14
Barack Obama
0.07
barack obama
Barack Obama
0.54
Presidency of Barack
Obama
0.04
Barack Obama, Sr.
0.09
George W. Bush
0.04
Barack
Obama
in
comics
0.09
2009
Nobel
Peace
Prize
0.04
obama
Barack Obama
0.47
Space policy of the
Barack
Obama
ad-
ministration
0.03
Obama, Fukui
0.05
Presidency of Barack
Obama
0.03
Obama, Nagasaki
0.04
Community
organiz-
ing
0.03
married
Marriage
0.32
Jacob Zuma
0.03
Same-sex marriage in
California
0.13
Taran Noah Smith
0.03
Las Vegas weddings
0.13
Joe DiMaggio
0.03
michelle
Michelle Obama
0.40
Michelle McManus
0.03
Michelle (song)
0.24
Michelle Rhee
0.03
Hurricane Michelle
0.07
Michelle Lang
0.03
michelle obama
Michelle Obama
1.00
Michelle Obama
0.60
Celebrity (game)
0.00
Celebrity (game)
0.40
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
obama
Barack Obama
0.47
Barack
Obama
cit-
izenship
conspiracy
theories
0.03
Obama, Fukui
0.05
Obama Domain
0.03
Obama, Nagasaki
0.04
Barack Obama, Sr.
0.03
Wordnet
is
be.v.01
0.64
be.v.01
1.00
be.v.02
0.18
be.v.03
0.00
be.v.03
0.05
be.v.05
0.00
married
marry.v.01
0.94
marry.v.01
0.53
marry.v.02
0.06
marry.v.02
0.47
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
Table G.1: Knowledge,
Attention
and
Re-contextualisation
example:
Barack
Obama is married to Michelle Obama. The table shows how the diﬀerent can-
didate spans draw upon information from entities entailed by the two knowledge
bases. Evidently, the entity disambiguator for Wiki seems confused as it is pro-
vided good priors, but tends to disambiguate entities so that the distribution
over the importance is uniform.
==PAGE:151==
132
Supplementary Analysis
Candidate Spans
Sentence
kobe bryant was born in philadelphia .
Associated with Fig. G.1
Priors (top-3)
Norm. EL Scores (top-3)
ent
p(e|m)
ent
 m,k
Wiki
kobe
Great Hanshin earth-
quake
0.26
Kobe Tai
0.09
Kobe Bryant
0.22
Kobe Bryant
0.09
Kobe Airport
0.16
Derek Fisher
0.09
kobe bryant
Kobe Bryant
0.56
Los Angeles Lakers
0.25
Kobe Bryant sexual
assault case
0.15
Kobe Bryant
0.25
Lil Wayne
0.14
Lil Wayne
0.25
bryant
William
Cullen
Bryant
0.10
Kobe Bryant
0.03
Bryant,
Humboldt
County, California
0.10
Bryant, Minneapolis
0.03
Bryant, Alabama
0.08
Matt Bryant
0.03
born
Nativity of Jesus
0.70
Frank Zamboni
0.03
Michael Savage
0.02
Ingvar Kamprad
0.03
Richard Nixon
0.01
Michael Savage
0.03
philadelphia
Philadelphia
0.70
Philadelphia
0.05
Philadelphia (ﬁlm)
0.03
Comcast
SportsNet
Philadelphia
0.03
Philadelphia 76ers
0.02
Philadelphia Flyers
0.03
.
Full stop
0.47
Shwe Mann
0.03
Names of Burma
0.12
Doctor of Philosophy
0.03
University of Yangon
0.08
U Thant
0.03
Wordnet
kobe
kobe.n.01
1.00
kobe.n.01
1.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
was
be.v.01
0.64
be.v.01
1.00
be.v.02
0.18
equal.v.01
0.00
be.v.03
0.05
be.v.05
0.00
born
bear.v.01
0.24
give birth.v.01
1.00
give birth.v.01
0.18
bear.n.01
0.00
digest.v.03
0.14
have
a
bun
in
the
oven.v.01
0.00
in
in.r.01
0.69
in.s.03
1.00
inch.n.01
0.14
in.s.01
0.00
in.s.03
0.03
in.r.01
0.00
philadelphia
philadelphia.n.01
1.00
philadelphia.n.01
1.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
Table G.2: Knowledge, Attention and Re-contextualisation example: Kobe Bryant
was born in Philadelphia. The table shows how the diﬀerent candidate spans draw
upon information from entities entailed by the two knowledge bases.
==PAGE:152==
G.1 KAR analysis
133
kobe
bryant
was
born
in
philadelphia
.
kobe
kobe bryant
bryant
born
philadelphia
.
Wiki
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
kobe
bryant
was
born
in
philadelphia
.
kobe
was
born
in
philadelphia
Wordnet
Attn-head 1
Attn-head 2
Attn-head 3
Attn-head 4
kobe
kobe bryant
bryant
born
philadelphia
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
kobe
kobe bryant
bryant
born
philadelphia
.
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wiki −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
kobe
was
born
in
philadelphia
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −priors
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
kobe
was
born
in
philadelphia
25%
50%
75%
100%
Wordnet −links
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Top 4
Top 5
Figure G.2: Internals of KAR Example (Kobe Bryant). Left panel) Visualisation of
the Word2Entity attention mechanism for the example "kobe bryant was born
in philadephia" for the two knowledge bases respectively. For the wiki heatmap,
it is encouraging to the that "kobe" attends to to both "kobe", "bryant" and in
a small extend to "philadelphia".
==PAGE:153==
134
Supplementary Analysis
Candidate Spans
Sentence
kobe is a city in japan .
Associated with Fig. G.2
Priors (top-3)
Norm. EL Scores (top-3)
ent
p(e|m)
ent
 m,k
Wiki
kobe
Great Hanshin earth-
quake
0.26
Great Hanshin earth-
quake
0.11
Kobe Bryant
0.22
Kobe Bryant
0.09
Kobe Airport
0.16
Derek Fisher
0.09
city
City
0.45
Chicago
0.03
City
status
in
the
United Kingdom
0.08
Houston
0.03
Cities of Japan
0.08
New York City
0.03
city in japan
Cities of Japan
1.00
Cities of Japan
1.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
japan
Japan
0.79
Japan
0.05
Japan national foot-
ball team
0.02
Japan men’s national
ice hockey team
0.03
Empire of Japan
0.02
Japan national bas-
ketball team
0.03
.
Full stop
0.47
Ba Win
0.03
Names of Burma
0.12
Doctor of Philosophy
0.03
University of Yangon
0.08
Union Solidarity and
Development Associ-
ation
0.03
Wordnet
kobe
kobe.n.01
1.00
kobe.n.01
1.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
N/A
0.00
is
be.v.01
0.64
be.v.02
1.00
be.v.02
0.18
be.v.01
0.00
be.v.03
0.05
constitute.v.01
0.00
a
angstrom.n.01
0.50
angstrom.n.01
0.85
a.n.07
0.07
a.n.07
0.15
a.n.06
0.07
vitamin a.n.01
0.00
city
city.n.01
0.87
city.n.01
1.00
city.n.02
0.12
city.n.02
0.00
city.n.03
0.02
city.n.03
0.00
in
in.r.01
0.69
in.r.01
0.62
inch.n.01
0.14
in.s.01
0.16
in.s.03
0.03
in.s.02
0.12
japan
japan.n.01
0.46
japan.n.01
1.00
japan.n.02
0.31
japan.n.02
0.00
japan.n.04
0.08
japan.n.03
0.00
Table G.3: Knowledge, Attention and Re-contextualisation example: Kobe is a city
in Japan. The table shows how the diﬀerent candidate spans draw upon infor-
mation from entities entailed by the two knowledge bases.
==PAGE:154==
Appendix H
Contextual Embeddings
H.1
KnowBERT-Wiki
H.2
KnowBERT-Wordnet
H.3
KnowBERT-W+W
==PAGE:155==
136
Contextual Embeddings
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
1st Principal Component
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2nd Principal Component
Principal Component Analysis
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
Figure H.1: Principal Component Analysys of the the contextual word represen-
tation produced by KnowBERT-Wiki on the fact completion dataset.
−40
−20
0
20
40
1st Principal Component
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
2nd Principal Component
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
Figure H.2: t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding of the the contex-
tual word representation produced by KnowBERT-Wiki on the fact
completion dataset.
==PAGE:156==
H.3 KnowBERT-W+W
137
−10
0
10
20
30
1st Principal Component
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
2nd Principal Component
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
PCA
KnowBERT-wn
Figure H.3: Principal Component Analysys of the the contextual word repre-
sentation produced by KnowBERT-Wordnet on the fact completion
dataset.
−40
−20
0
20
40
1st Principal Component
−40
−20
0
20
40
2nd Principal Component
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
tSNE
KnowBERT-wn
Figure H.4: t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding of the the contextual
word representation produced by KnowBERT-Wordnet on the fact
completion dataset.
==PAGE:157==
138
Contextual Embeddings
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1st Principal Component
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
2nd Principal Component
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
PCA
Figure H.5: Principal Component Analysys of the the contextual word repre-
sentation produced by KnowBERT-W+W on the fact completion
dataset.
−40
−20
0
20
40
1st Principal Component
−40
−20
0
20
40
2nd Principal Component
SPECIAL
N/A
NOUN
ADJ
VERB
ADV
nation-capital
person-birthloc
person-birthdate
person-spouse
city-state
book-author
tSNE
Figure H.6: t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding of the the contex-
tual word representation produced by KnowBERT-W+W on the fact
completion dataset.
==PAGE:158==
Bibliography
[Ahn et al., 2016] Ahn, S., Choi, H., Pärnamaa, T., and Bengio, Y. (2016). A
Neural Knowledge Language Model.
[Arora et al., 2018] Arora, S., Hu, W., and Kothari, P. K. (2018). An Analysis
of the t-SNE Algorithm for Data Visualization.
[Ba et al., 2016] Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. (2016). Layer Nor-
malization.
[Bahdanau et al., 2014] Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural
Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate.
[Balažević et al., 2019] Balažević, I., Allen, C., and Hospedales, T. M. (2019).
TuckER: Tensor Factorization for Knowledge Graph Completion.
[Bengio et al., 2001] Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., and Vincent, P. (2001). A neu-
ral probabilistic language model. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 3:1137–1155.
[Bengio et al., 1994] Bengio, Y., Simard, P., and Frasconi, P. (1994). Learning
long-term dependencies with gradient descent is diﬃcult. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks, 5(2):157–166.
[Bojanowski et al., 2017] Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., and Mikolov,
T. (2017). Enriching Word Vectors with Subword Information. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146.
[Bordes et al., 2013] Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcia-Duran, A., Weston, J.,
and Yakhnenko, O. (2013).
Translating Embeddings for Modeling Multi-
relational Data. In Burges, C. J. C., Bottou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani, Z.,
==PAGE:159==
140
BIBLIOGRAPHY
and Weinberger, K. Q., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 26, pages 2787–2795. Curran Associates, Inc.
[Cavnar and Trenkle, 1994] Cavnar, W. B. and Trenkle, J. M. (1994). N-Gram-
Based Text Categorization. In In Proceedings of SDAIR-94, 3rd Annual Sym-
posium on Document Analysis and Information Retrieval, pages 161–175.
[Chen and Goodman, 1996] Chen, S. F. and Goodman, J. (1996). An empirical
study of smoothing techniques for language modeling. In Proceedings of the
34th annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics -, pages
310–318, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Church and Gale, 1991] Church, K. W. and Gale, W. A. (1991). A comparison
of the enhanced Good-Turing and deleted estimation methods for estimating
probabilities of English Bigrams. Computer Speech & Language, 5.
[Dai and Le, 2015] Dai, A. M. and Le, Q. V. (2015).
Semi-supervised se-
quence learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015-
Janua:3079–3087.
[Dempster et al., 1977] Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. (1977).
Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data via the EM Algorithm. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 39(1):1–38.
[Dettmers et al., 2017] Dettmers, T., Minervini, P., Stenetorp, P., and Riedel,
S. (2017). Convolutional 2D Knowledge Graph Embeddings.
[Devlin et al., 2018] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K.
(2018). BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding.
[Dyer et al., 2016] Dyer, C., Kuncoro, A., Ballesteros, M., and Smith, N. A.
(2016). Recurrent Neural Network Grammars.
[Felbo et al., 2017] Felbo, B., Mislove, A., Søgaard, A., Rahwan, I., and
Lehmann, S. (2017). Using millions of emoji occurrences to learn any-domain
representations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sarcasm. In Proceedings
of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 1615–1625, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Ganea and Hofmann, 2017] Ganea, O.-E. and Hofmann, T. (2017). Deep Joint
Entity Disambiguation with Local Neural Attention.
[Gardner et al., 2018] Gardner, M., Grus, J., Neumann, M., Tafjord, O., Dasigi,
P., Liu, N., Peters, M., Schmitz, M., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2018). AllenNLP:
A Deep Semantic Natural Language Processing Platform.
==PAGE:160==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
141
[Goodfellow et al., 2016] Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016).
Deep Learning. The MIT Press.
[Gu et al., 2016] Gu, J., Lu, Z., Li, H., and Li, V. O. K. (2016). Incorporating
Copying Mechanism in Sequence-to-Sequence Learning.
[Gulcehre et al., 2016] Gulcehre, C., Ahn, S., Nallapati, R., Zhou, B., and Ben-
gio, Y. (2016). Pointing the Unknown Words.
[Gupta et al., 2017] Gupta, N., Singh, S., and Roth, D. (2017). Entity Link-
ing via Joint Encoding of Types, Descriptions, and Context. In Proceedings
of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 2681–2690, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[He et al., 2015] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2015). Deep Residual
Learning for Image Recognition.
[Hendrickx et al., 2009] Hendrickx, I., Kim, S. N., Kozareva, Z., Nakov, P.,
Ó Séaghdha, D., Padó, S., Pennacchiotti, M., Romano, L., and Szpakowicz, S.
(2009). SemEval-2010 Task 8: Multi-way Classiﬁcation of Semantic Relations
Between Pairs of Nominals.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic
Evaluations: Recent Achievements and Future Directions, SEW ’09, pages
94–99, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997).
Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780.
[Hoﬀart et al., 2011] Hoﬀart, J., Yosef, M. A., Bordino, I., Fürstenau, H.,
Pinkal, M., Spaniol, M., Taneva, B., Thater, S., and Weikum, G. (2011).
Robust Disambiguation of Named Entities in Text.
In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’11, pages 782–792, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Inan et al., 2016] Inan, H., Khosravi, K., and Socher, R. (2016). Tying word
vectors and word classiﬁers: A loss framework for language modeling. 5th
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017 - Confer-
ence Track Proceedings.
[Ioﬀe and Szegedy, 2015] Ioﬀe, S. and Szegedy, C. (2015). Batch Normalization:
Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift.
[Jelinek and Mercer, 1980] Jelinek, F. and Mercer, R. L. (1980). Interpolated
estimation of {M}arkov source parameters from sparse data. In Gelsema, E. S.
and Kanal, L. N., editors, Proceedings, Workshop on Pattern Recognition in
Practice, pages 381–397. North Holland, Amsterdam.
==PAGE:161==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ji et al., 2017] Ji, Y., Tan, C., Martschat, S., Choi, Y., and Smith, N. A.
(2017). Dynamic Entity Representations in Neural Language Models.
[Jurafsky and Martin, 2000] Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J. H. (2000). Speech and
Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language Processing, Com-
putational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition. Prentice Hall PTR, USA, 1st
edition.
[Keskar et al., 2019] Keskar, N. S., McCann, B., Varshney, L. R., Xiong, C.,
and Socher, R. (2019). CTRL: A Conditional Transformer Language Model
for Controllable Generation.
[Kingma and Ba, 2014] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A Method for
Stochastic Optimization.
[Klema and Laub, 1980] Klema, V. and Laub, A. (1980). The singular value
decomposition: Its computation and some applications. IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, 25(2):164–176.
[Kneser and Ney, ] Kneser, R. and Ney, H. Improved backing-oﬀfor M-gram
language modeling. In 1995 International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing, volume 1, pages 181–184. IEEE.
[Kneser and Steinbiss, 1993] Kneser, R. and Steinbiss, V. (1993). On the dy-
namic adaptation of stochastic language models. In 1993 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, volume 2, pages 586–
589.
[Kolitsas et al., 2018] Kolitsas, N., Ganea, O.-E., and Hofmann, T. (2018). End-
to-End Neural Entity Linking.
[Lample and Conneau, 2019] Lample, G. and Conneau, A. (2019). Cross-lingual
Language Model Pretraining.
[Lee et al., 2017] Lee, K., He, L., Lewis, M., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2017). End-
to-end Neural Coreference Resolution.
[Liu et al., 2019] Liu, X., He, P., Chen, W., and Gao, J. (2019). Multi-Task
Deep Neural Networks for Natural Language Understanding.
[Logan et al., 2019] Logan, R. L., Liu, N. F., Peters, M. E., Gardner, M., and
Singh, S. (2019). Barack’s Wife Hillary: Using Knowledge-Graphs for Fact-
Aware Language Modeling.
[Marcus et al., 1993] Marcus, M., Santorini, B., and Marcinkiewikz, M. (1993).
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Com-
putational linguistics, 19(2):313.
==PAGE:162==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
143
[Martens and Sutskever, 2011] Martens, J. and Sutskever, I. (2011). Learning
Recurrent Neural Networks with Hessian-Free Optimization. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML’11, page 1033–1040, Madison, WI, USA. Omnipress.
[Merity et al., 2017a] Merity, S., Keskar, N. S., and Socher, R. (2017a). Regu-
larizing and Optimizing LSTM Language Models.
[Merity et al., 2017b] Merity, S., McCann, B., and Socher, R. (2017b). Revisit-
ing Activation Regularization for Language RNNs.
[Mikolov et al., 2013] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013).
Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space. 1st International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2013 - Workshop Track Pro-
ceedings.
[Mikolov et al., 2010] Mikolov, T., Karaﬁát, M., Burget, L., Jan, C., and Khu-
danpur, S. (2010). Recurrent neural network based language model. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the International Speech Commu-
nication Association, INTERSPEECH 2010, volume 2, pages 1045–1048.
[Miller, 1995] Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: a lexical database for English.
Communications of the ACM, 38(11):39–41.
[Miller et al., 1994] Miller, G. A., Chodorow, M., Landes, S., Leacock, C., and
Thomas, R. G. (1994). Using a Semantic Concordance for Sense Identiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Human Language Technology, HLT ’94,
page 240–243, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Mozer, 1995] Mozer, M. (1995).
A Focused Backpropagation Algorithm for
Temporal Pattern Recognition. Complex Systems, 3.
[Müller et al., 2019] Müller, R., Kornblith, S., and Hinton, G. (2019). When
Does Label Smoothing Help?
[Pennington et al., 2014] Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D.
(2014).
GloVe: Global vectors for word representation.
In EMNLP 2014
- 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Proceedings of the Conference, pages 1532–1543, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
[Peters et al., 2018] Peters, M. E., Neumann, M., Iyyer, M., Gardner, M., Clark,
C., Lee, K., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2018). Deep contextualized word represen-
tations.
[Peters et al., 2019] Peters, M. E., Neumann, M., Logan, R. L., Schwartz, R.,
Joshi, V., Singh, S., and Smith, N. A. (2019). Knowledge Enhanced Contex-
tual Word Representations.
==PAGE:163==
144
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Petroni et al., 2019] Petroni, F., Rocktäschel, T., Lewis, P., Bakhtin, A., Wu,
Y., Miller, A. H., and Riedel, S. (2019).
Language Models as Knowledge
Bases?
[Pilehvar and Camacho-Collados, 2018] Pilehvar,
M.
T.
and
Camacho-
Collados, J. (2018).
WiC: the Word-in-Context Dataset for Evaluating
Context-Sensitive Meaning Representations.
[Radford et al., 2018] Radford,
A.,
Narasimhan,
K.,
Salimans,
T.,
and
Sutskever, I. (2018). Improving language understanding with unsupervised
learning. Technical Report, OpenAI, page 16.
[Radford et al., 2019] Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D.,
and Sutskever, I. (2019). Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learn-
ers.
[Raﬀel et al., 2019] Raﬀel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S.,
Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W., and Liu, P. J. (2019). Exploring the Limits of
Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed Text-to-Text Transformer.
[Rajpurkar et al., 2016] Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K., and Liang, P.
(2016). SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine Comprehension of Text.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 2383–2392, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[Rosenblatt, 1958] Rosenblatt, F. (1958).
The Perceptron:
A Probabilistic
Model for Information Storage and Organization in The Brain. Psychological
Review, pages 65–386.
[Ruder, 2016] Ruder, S. (2016). An overview of gradient descent optimization
algorithms.
[Rumelhart et al., 1986] Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J.
(1986).
Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
Nature,
323(6088):533–536.
[Schuster and Paliwal, 1997] Schuster, M. and Paliwal, K. K. (1997). Bidirec-
tional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
45(11):2673–2681.
[Shoeybi et al., 2019] Shoeybi, M., Patwary, M., Puri, R., LeGresley, P.,
Casper, J., and Catanzaro, B. (2019). Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion
Parameter Language Models Using Model Parallelism.
==PAGE:164==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
145
[Spitkovsky and Chang, 2012] Spitkovsky, V. I. and Chang, A. X. (2012). A
Cross-Lingual Dictionary for {E}nglish {W}ikipedia Concepts. In Proceed-
ings of the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation ({LREC}’12), pages 3168–3175, Istanbul, Turkey. European Language
Resources Association (ELRA).
[Srivastava et al., 2014] Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever,
I., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural
Networks from Overﬁtting. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15:1929–
1958.
[Subramanian et al., 2018] Subramanian, S., Trischler, A., Bengio, Y., and Pal,
C. J. (2018). Learning General Purpose Distributed Sentence Representations
via Large Scale Multi-task Learning.
[Sun et al., 2019] Sun, Y., Wang, S., Li, Y., Feng, S., Chen, X., Zhang, H., Tian,
X., Zhu, D., Tian, H., and Wu, H. (2019). ERNIE: Enhanced Representation
through Knowledge Integration.
[Sutskever et al., 2014] Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. (2014). Se-
quence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks.
[Taylor, 1953] Taylor, W. L. (1953). “Cloze Procedure”: A New Tool for Mea-
suring Readability. Journalism Quarterly, 30(4):415–433.
[Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder, 2003] Tjong Kim Sang, E. F. and De Meul-
der, F. (2003). Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task. In Proceedings of
the Seventh Conference on Natural Language Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003
- Volume 4, CONLL ’03, pages 142–147, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Tucker, 1964] Tucker, L. R. (1964).
{T}he extension of factor analysis to
three-dimensional matrices. In Gulliksen, H. and Frederiksen, N., editors,
{C}ontributions to mathematical psychology., pages 110–127. Holt, Rinehart
and Winston, New York.
[Vaswani et al., 2017] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J.,
Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention
Is All You Need.
[Vrandečić and Krötzsch, 2014] Vrandečić, D. and Krötzsch, M. (2014). Wiki-
data: A Free Collaborative Knowledge Base. Communications of the ACM,
57:78–85.
[Wan et al., 2013] Wan, L., Zeiler, M., Zhang, S., Cun, Y. L., and Fergus, R.
(2013). Regularization of Neural Networks using DropConnect. In Dasgupta,
==PAGE:165==
146
BIBLIOGRAPHY
S. and McAllester, D., editors, Proceedings of the 30th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, volume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pages 1058–1066, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. PMLR.
[Wang et al., 2019] Wang, A., Pruksachatkun, Y., Nangia, N., Singh, A.,
Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and Bowman, S. R. (2019). SuperGLUE: A
Stickier Benchmark for General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems.
[Wang et al., 2018] Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., and
Bowman, S. R. (2018). GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark and Analysis Plat-
form for Natural Language Understanding.
[Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2016] Zagoruyko, S. and Komodakis, N. (2016).
Wide Residual Networks.
[Zaremba et al., 2014] Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., and Vinyals, O. (2014). Re-
current Neural Network Regularization.
[Zhang et al., 2017] Zhang, Y., Zhong, V., Chen, D., Angeli, G., and Manning,
C. D. (2017). Position-aware Attention and Supervised Data Improve Slot
Filling. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP 2017), pages 35–45.
[Zhang et al., 2019] Zhang, Z., Han, X., Liu, Z., Jiang, X., Sun, M., and Liu,
Q. (2019).
ERNIE: Enhanced Language Representation with Informative
Entities.
[Zhila et al., 2013] Zhila, A., Yih, W.-t., Meek, C., Zweig, G., and Mikolov, T.
(2013). Combining Heterogeneous Models for Measuring Relational Similar-
ity. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North {A}merican Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 1000–1009, Atlanta, Georgia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[Zhu et al., 2015] Zhu, Y., Kiros, R., Zemel, R., Salakhutdinov, R., Urtasun,
R., Torralba, A., and Fidler, S. (2015). Aligning Books and Movies: Towards
Story-like Visual Explanations by Watching Movies and Reading Books. In
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06724.
