==PAGE:1==
Helge Stefan Esch
Autonomous Bidding Agent in P2P
Electricity Market
Master Thesis, February 2020
==PAGE:2==
Helge Stefan Esch
Autonomous Bidding Agent in P2P
Electricity Market
Master Thesis, February 2020
==PAGE:3==
Autonomous Bidding Agent in P2P Electricity Market
Author(s):
Helge Stefan Esch
Supervisor(s):
Pierre Pinson, Fabio Moret
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
11.02.2020
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve a Master of
Science in Sustainable Energy at Technical University of Denmark.
The report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Helge Stefan Esch, 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ABSTRACT
The increasing deployment of distributed energy resources, combined with smart and
ﬂexible technologies is giving rise to a prosumer era.
Prosumers are grid or microgrid connected individuals that can produce as well as consume
electricity. They can actively control part of their load and thus participate in novel forms
of markets, business models or social structures.
One of such market structures envisages peer-to-peer exchanges of electricity among market
participants. Conceptually inspired by existing platforms of the sharing economy such
as AirBnB or Uber, peer-to-peer electricity markets allow individuals, households or
communities to directly trade electricity with each other. Not only does this enable direct
market access, but it also allows participants to diﬀerentiate who their trading partners
are. Thus, prosumers are enabled to express preferences and willingness to pay (e.g. prefer
to buy green electricity, willing to sell for less to local businesses etc.).
In [1], we proposed an online matching market mechanism for the prosumer era that allows
for product diﬀerentiation by means of product type. The aim of this work is to investigate
the possibilities of automizing the necessary trading activity.
We ﬁrst formulate the problem of trading and automatically handling the necessary control
activity from the perspective of an individual household participating in such a peer-to-
peer market. After the problem has been identiﬁed and formulated, we utilize popular
algorithms from the Reinforcement Learning community and investigate their applicability
in this context.
The reader will be introduced to the fundamental concepts of Reinforcement Learning and
get familiar with the following three algorithms: Q-Learning, Deep Q-Networks and Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient. All of these algorithms will be applied and analyzed to
illustrative trading problems. At the end of this study we will discuss the challenges and
possibilities of the utilized tools in this context.
i
==PAGE:6==
PREFACE
This thesis was developed at the Department of Electrical Engineering, more precicely at
the Centre for Electric Power and Energy. It was prepared in fulﬁlment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science in Sustainable energy at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU).
The work was developed from 11/09/2019 to 11/02/2020 under the supervision of Pierre
Pinson (DTU Elektro) and the co-supervision of Fabio Moret (DTU Elektro).
Kongens Lyngby, February 11, 2020
Helge Stefan Esch (s171667)
ii
==PAGE:7==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First and foremost, my utmost gratitude goes to my supervisor Pierre Pinson. It would
be a missed opportunity not to use this occasion to thank Pierre for holding one of the
best lecture series I have attended throughout my university years. It is what inspired my
curiosity to explore the topic of electricity markets and brought me to the very fortunate
position to be able to work with Pierre on multiple projects. This thesis in particular
being the most challenging yet, I want to thank him for being an incredible mentor and
academic genius. His constructive way of thinking has always proved to bring invaluable
advice and pushed me forward.
Furthermore, my strongest appreciation and thankfulness goes to Fabio Moret. It has been
a delight to work with this talented and bright mind and he has been a fantastic teacher
to me. Fabio was more than generous with his time, never lost the bigger picture, and was
a reliable source of inspiration, leaving me with fresh positivity after every single thesis
meeting.
An additional shout out and big thank you goes out to the people on the Energy Collective
project, namely Tiago and Pierre-Elouan, whom I have had the luck to work with and to
whom I am looking very much forward to work with more throughout the coming months.
-
With this thesis, my years of university studies are ﬁnally a closing chapter. I feel lucky to
have been able to come to this wonderful city of Copenhagen as a part of this journey. I
want to take this opportunity to address some of the very important people that I have
been fortunate enough to be surrounded by throughout this thesis and my entire university
experience.
I want to express my deepest gratefulness and love to all my friends, especially the Ayervais
family, Christoph Billinger, Eric Moss, Julian Schwierzy, Kajeesan Jeevendra, Kilian Lerch,
Lisa Pardini and Simon Both. Your approach to life has been a true inspiration to me.
The unconditional friendship I received throughout this thesis and my study years has
brought me trust, fulﬁllment and pure joy, allowing me to dance through the good days
and stand up straight through the tough ones. Big hug!
Last and most importantly of all, none of this journey would have been possible without
the love, care and relentless support that I continuously receive from my parents and my
sister. There is nothing more to say than thank you for everything!
iii
==PAGE:8==
NOMENCLATURE
Abbreviations
ANN
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
CDA
Continuous Double Auction
DDPG Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
DP
Dynamic Programming
DQN
Deep Q-Networks
FA
Function Approximation
FA
function approximation
LTA
liquidity taker assumption
MDP Markov Decision Process
MSE
mean squared error
OU
Ornstein Uhlenbeck (process)
P2P
peer-to-peer
POMDP Partially observable Markov Deci-
sion Process
RL
Reinforcement Learning
TD
Temporal Diﬀerence
Symbols
–
learning rate
◊
parameter set for function approxi-
mation
‰
risk aversion factor
”
TD-error
‘
exploration rate
“
discount factor
Ÿ
index for an agent
⁄
mean reversion factor for OU process
A
set of all actions
As
set of actions available in state s
B
experience replay buﬀer
E
evolution of MDP episode
M
set of all matchings
N
noisy process
P
probabilistic transition function from
t to t + 1
S
set of all states
Ω
set of all orders in order book
Ê
order
X
maximum capacity for market partic-
ipant
Φ
overall surplus (revenues + virtual
utility)
ﬁ
policy
ﬁú
optimal policy
‡
standard deviation for OU process
· end
i
ending time of physical exchange for
product i
· start
i
starting time of physical exchange for
product i
◊a
parameter set for policy function ap-
proximation (actor)
◊c
parameter set for action-value func-
tion approximation (critic)
◊aÕ
parameter set for target policy func-
tion approximation
◊cÕ
parameter set for target action-value
function approximation
X
minimum capacity for market partic-
ipant
Υ
balancing settlement revenue
›
order submittance fee
iv
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
a
action variable
C
holdings of cash
C
set of scenarios
c
scenario of realization
F
set of all forecasts
f·
forecast for any variable ·
G
cumulative reward
I
set of all energy products
i
index for a speciﬁc energy product
L
expected revenue due to balancing
L
loss function
m
matching
p
price
p+
maximum market price
p≠
minimum market price
Q(·)
action-value function
R
reward
s
state variable
sÕ
successor state to s
SM(·) transfer function from t to t + 1
T
terminal time stamp for a considered
time interval
t
time index
U(·)
external utility function
V (·)
state-value function
W
exogenous information
w
weight factor for balancing risk rein-
forcement
X
holdings of bought / sold energy
x
quantity of energy to be traded
XÕ
produced / consumed energy
XT
holdings at market closure time
X·i
holdings of product i after trading is
over
Y
balancing risk reinforcement
y
target
v
==PAGE:10==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Table of Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Framework and Problem Formulation
5
2.1
Online matching market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mathematical problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Problem overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Optimization Strategies
15
3.1
Markov Decision Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Policy design strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Choice of tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
24
4.1
Value functions for Markov Decision Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Dynamic programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Key concepts and terminologies in reinforcement learning
. . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Monte Carlo control methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Temporal diﬀerence learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Q-function approximation for continuous state spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.8
Reinforcement learning overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
40
5.1
Modeling assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Optimal control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Tabular Q-Learning agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Q-function approximation agent with continuous state space . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
54
6.1
Balancing in Markov Decision Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.2
Balancing risk assesment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
vi
==PAGE:11==
Table of Contents
6.3
DDPG agent with continuous action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
64
7.1
Challenges and learnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2
Key take aways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
References
67
vii
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Context
Electricity is one of the most crucial needs for modern societies. A large global sector with
an involvement of trillions of dollars is constantly trying to ensure stable access. However,
our increasing consumption of electricity is having major unintended side eﬀects, which
citizens, industries and governments are determined to get under control. This interest, and
the technological development are causing the entire industry to undergo major changes.
Part of these changes are a rise of renewable energy generators such as photovoltaic or
wind power plants and the integration of smart and distributed energy technologies such as
smart heating or cooling systems, electric vehicles or battery storage technologies in private
households. Such developments push infrastructural setups in the sector to be completely
rethought. The infrastructure that is of most interest for this work is the electricity market.
Traditionally, this sector often indicated several natural monopolies from generation to
transmission and hence was under public control in most countries. With the aim of
bringing down costs, a liberalization and privatization of the industry started throughout
the 80’s and 90’s. The liberalization process is still ongoing and regulatory mechanisms
are constantly being updated. As part of this process, a set of market mechanisms were
introduced with the objective of bringing buyers and sellers of electricity together, while
ensuring safe and stable grid conditions. While regulations and mechanisms often diﬀer
for diﬀerent regions, many of those places are now facing similar challenges coming from
technological, regulatory and political developments.
Some of the main structural challenges in the industry are a change
• from a physical generation setup that is composed by large scale and central units,
to an increasing share of small scale, decentralized units.
• from controllable and forecastable producers to stochastic ones.
At the same time, modern technologies open up new opportunities for the sector, including
a change
• from largely uncontrollable demand towards an increasing integration of smart and
ﬂexible devices.
• from electricity as a homogenous good towards the ability to diﬀerentiate between
diﬀerent types of production or consumption (product diﬀerentiation) [2].
• from few possibilities to store electricity to more and more grid-connected battery
technologies of diﬀerent types.
1
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
Traditionally, electricity end-consumers had ﬁxed price contracts with retailers, but new
opportunities are arising. The European Union’s target is to have smart meters (smart
electricity measuring devices) installed in 80% of all households by the year this thesis
is written (2020). Combined with smart devices, the new data accuracy and ﬂexible
loads enable the development of new business models and the introduction of new market
mechanisms. The simplest example for a utilization of such technologies in a consumer
product is dynamic pricing for diﬀerent times (Ørsted [3]). Here, consumers are economically
incentivized to contribute to grid stability and eﬃciency.
Next to simple economic incentives, an emerging opportunity is the increasing awareness,
transparency and empowerment of consumers through community based markets [4] .
Next Kraftwerke [5], for example, aggregates generation and storage capacities from small
scale prosumers into virtual power plants and hereby empowers consumers to join there
capacities together and participate in a diﬀerent market.
Deﬁnition 1 (prosumer) A prosumer is a market participant that can feed electrical
energy into the grid as well as consume it from the grid. The combined production /
consumption is here referred to as prosumption.
The german company sonnen GmbH introduced the sonnenCommunity [6]. All members
of this community are sharing their self produced excess electricity and are at all times
exclusively consuming electricity from the virtual pool of producers inside the community.
In both examples, the company is directly involved in the management and scheduling of
some of the assets and distributes the virtual energy ﬂows for the community. This is a
service of the company which the participants of the community are subscribed to.
A third approach is the full bottom up peer-to-peer (P2P) concept, which is a distributed
environment where participants (peers) contribute to a sharing or trading platform with
what they can oﬀer and enter bilateral contracts between peers.
A comprehensive review of P2P and community based electricity markets is found in [7].
The authors show how the distribution of energy and scheduling can be formulated as
an optimization problem in mathematical terms. Diﬀerent optimization decomposition
techniques such as Lagrangian relaxation and Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
(also known as ADMM) are discussed, aimed at solving the problem and ﬁnding a consensus
among peers while ensuring individual privacy at the same time. Two main challenges
are identiﬁed: First, with the problem implemented in a bigger context, the problem size
increases and quickly becomes intractable. Second, in a network of peers trying to agree on
a consensus, it appears to be challenging when the state of available information diverges
amongst peers. Thus, scalability and asynchronicity are remaining issues to be researched.
Driven to overcome these challenges, we studied online matching market mechanisms that
allow for continuous trading of future contracts [1]. We proposed a continuous double
auction based market similar to those of stock exchanges. Here, a central electronic unit
makes up a virtual trading ﬂoor where buyers and sellers are automatically matched with
each other. We also included a mechanism that allows market participants to diﬀerentiate
2
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
between diﬀerent types of products (e.g. green electricity, local, etc.). Hereby we enable
prosumers to express preferences or collaborate towards a common goal amongst a group
of peers.
1.2
Challenges
Throughout our study in [1], we researched hypothetical market evolutions under the
assumption of non-strategic agents. This assumption must be relaxed, in order to further
understand the opportunities and challenges of the proposed mechanism and to study what
kind of changes are necessary in its design and on a regulatory level. Hence, it is necessary
to study strategic agents in the environment.
Deﬁnition 2 (agent) In this work, agent refers to a computer application which acts in
favor of its human owner and autonomously interacts with the electricity market.
A second challenge in this context is the fact that the amount of trading options and
necessary market activity quickly goes beyond a task to be executed manually by a human.
Thus, what is needed is a machinery, here also referred to as an agent, which autonomously
acts in the favor of the human. In fact, the human should be able to make general settings
such as choose an objective or parameterize preferences and the agent will execute the
actions in accordance.
There are two main reasons for why the task should be executed by an autonomous agent.
First, the proposed market allows for continuous trading of multiple product types at the
same time. Consequently, each market participant potentially has an inﬁnite number of
trading possibilities to decide when to buy or sell which product at which price level.
Second, when a market participant or also a collaborating group of participants act strategic,
they are following a certain objective (e.g. maximizing proﬁt or maximizing the use of
renewably generated electricity etc.). In order to optimize towards that objective, large
amounts of data such as forecasts, historic data, etc. need to be processed. This could be
done much more eﬃciently and eﬀectively by a machine rather than a human.
1.3
Contribution
The aim of this work is to study and formulate such autonomous agents. As a ﬁrst
contribution, we will deﬁne the problem from the perspective of an individual household,
elaborate its decision making process and discuss necessary considerations to be made
for the market interaction. To be more precise, we will see how the agent should take an
observation of the currently available information as an input, and map this to the optimal
actions to be taken.
Afterwards, we will investigate how the decision making can be automized and optimized.
We therefor formulate the problem in mathematical manner and discuss how "optimal
trading strategies" can be found. We will compare diﬀerent mathematical methods towards
3
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
optimizing the decision making process and evaluate all of them in context of the particular
problem.
We will elaborate why we see speciﬁcally great potential in the application of algorithms
from the reinforcement learning community and move on to review a number of existing
algorithms. Finally, three algorithms will be put to test in a simpliﬁed market environment
and the strategies which the algorithms ﬁnd will be discussed.
At the end of this thesis, we will discuss learnings and challenges encountered throughout
the process. We then reconsider our choice and re-evaluate the approach of reinforcement
learning in respect to this problem. We will understand if it is a reasonable approach for
real life applications and what needs to be investigated further.
1.4
Thesis structure
The coming chapter starts by reviewing the market mechanisms of the P2P electricity
market. We then move on to deﬁne the market bidding problem as a sequential decision
problem from the perspective of an individual market participant.
After the objective and problem structure is understood for a market participant, the
next step is to discuss diﬀerent strategies to mathematically solve the sequential decision
problems (chapter 3). Diﬀerent tools are contextualized and we elaborate on why we chose
to work with approaches from the reinforcement learning community.
The following chapter (4) holds an introduction to fundamental concepts of the
reinforcement learning approach and introduces diﬀerent algorithms that have broadly
been applied in other contexts. The reader is familiarized with algorithms for continuous
control methods as well as for discrete action control methods.
Chapter 5 starts by deﬁning a simpliﬁed model of the P2P market bidding problem and
moves on to apply discrete action control methods. After the results and learnings are
discussed, chapter 6 moves on to complexify the problem and utilize a continuous action
control method.
The ﬁnal chapter (7) reviews the challenges and learnings from this work and closes with a
conclusion and an outlook to potential future works.
4
==PAGE:17==
2
FRAMEWORK AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
Throughout this chapter we will ﬁrst present the underlying mechanisms of the electricity
market to get to know the environment that we want to formulate an agent for. We then
have a better understanding of how the agent can interact with the market, how it will
have an impact on the market and what considerations need to be made for the trading
activities.
In the second section of this chapter, we will formulate the decision making problem from
the perspective of an individual agent. We will deﬁne the problem in mathematical terms
in form of an objective function and move on to discuss variables that should be included
in the decision making process.
2.1
Online matching market
For the sake of this work, we slightly adjust the market rules compared to the original
proposal in [1] and will now discuss all mechanisms in detail so the reader gets a profound
understanding of the mechanism.
Generally, the proposed market is an online matching electricity market, based on a
continuous double auction including a mechanism for attribute based product diﬀerentiation
of a homogeneous good. In this market, packages of electrical energy for certain time-periods
can be traded in a continuous manner up to the timestamp of physical exchange.
Deﬁnition 3 (electrical energy product) An electrical energy product i
œ
I is
characterized by a time interval throughout which the physical exchange is to be realized
[· start
i
, · end
i
) and (optionally) a set of attributes to deﬁne further characteristics of the
product, such as green producer etc. It can be sold or bought in ﬂoating quantities x, where
x > 0 indicates a sale (production) and x < 0 a buy (consumption) of electricity.
Deﬁnition 4 (to trade) In the context of this work, trading always refers to the economic
transaction including a buyer and a seller with the legal commitment to consume or produce
(combined prosume) a certain quantity of a product in the future.
Deﬁnition 5 (to exchange) In the context of this work, exchanging always refers to the
physical and measureable prosumption of an energy product.
For each energy product, the market has three phases: At ﬁrst a trading session, then the
physical exchange happens and last the mismatch is balanced with a balancing settlement
5
==PAGE:18==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
mechanism.
Figure 2.1 graphically shows the structure of the market with the time
dimension on the x axis. The subsequent paragraphs and sections will elaborate on each of
the phases and their underlying mechanisms.
Trading Session for ! = 1
BS
Physical
Exchange
$%
&'()'
$%
*+,
-
Trading Session for ! = 2
BS
Physical
Exchange
Trading Session for ! = 3
BS
Physical
Exchange
Trading Session for  ! = 4
BS
Physical
Exchange
Trading Session for ! = 5
BS
Physical
Exchange
...
Trading Session for ! = 2
BS
Physical
Exchange
BS: Balancing Settlement
Price Evolution
Figure 2.1. Visualization of market trading sessions and exchange intervals.
Trading sessions
For each energy product i, a trading session is open before the product
is physically exchanged. As multiple product types can exist for the same exchange interval
and each trading session is open for an arbitrary time before gate closure (e.g. 24hrs),
market participants can trade diﬀerent products in separate trading sessions at the same
time.
Physical exchange
After gate closure of the market t = · start
i
, market participants
prosume their electricity of products i until · end
i
. A smart meter records the prosumption
throughout the interval, also referred to as the realization of the exchange. Here we assume
that a smart meter is able to automatically allocate quantities to diﬀerent product types
through a bookkeeping mechanism.
Let Itrade
t
be the set of products that are currently being traded, Icurex
t
the subset of
products that are currently being exchanged physically and Iover
t
the set of products that
are neither traded nor exchanged physically anymore.
6
==PAGE:19==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
Itrade
t
= It<· start
i
(2.1)
Icurex
t
= ItØ· start
i
ﬂIt<· end
i
(2.2)
Iover
t
= ItØ· end
i
(2.3)
I = Itrade
t
ﬁIcurex
t
ﬁIover
t
(2.4)
Furthermore, let Ii be a subset for all i that share the same exchange interval. For example,
in the example from ﬁgure 2.1, I1 = I2 = I3 = {1, 2, 3} and I4 = I5 = {4, 5}.
2.1.1
Market matching mechanism
Figure 2.1 indicates that multiple products are traded in separate auctions and the orange
graphs suggest continuously changing and separate prices for each product.
The price equilibrium is directly determined by a supply - demand based continuous double
auction (CDA). A central unit, referred to as the matching engine acts as the market
place where buyers and sellers get together. Market participation is enabled through the
submission of orders deﬁned through a limit price and quantity. Orders meant to buy
electricity are referred to as bids and orders meant to sell electricity as asks.
Deﬁnition 6 (order) An order Ê(x, p, i) is deﬁned by a (standing) quantity x œ R, a
limit price p œ R and a product ID i for which it is determined.
The following two sections elaborate on the market’s matching mechanism.
Order book
The order book is a list of available bids and asks, publicly visible to other market
participants. An order book is fully deﬁned through the available quantity (depth) to be
bought or sold at each price level as shown in an example in ﬁgure 2.2. In the graphic,
available depth in blue on the left are all buying, in orange on the right selling orders. The
unit price is plotted on the x-axis while the y-axis indicates the cumulative volume. The
diﬀerence between the best bid and the best ask is referred to as the market spread and
the mean between the two prices is considered the price equilibrium.
7
==PAGE:20==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
Figure 2.2. Example order book chart.
We will denote the set of all standing orders in the orderbook as Ω, where Ωi is the subset
with only orders for product i.
Pro Rata matching algorithm
The Pro Rata matching algorithm is a mechanism to determine which orders are matched
with each other. The matching engine processes each order immediately upon arrival and
executes potential matches (also referred to as trades) instantaneously if possible. Since
orders are processed immediately upon arrival, the order that arrives ﬁrst, is matched ﬁrst,
if possible.
A match is possible whenever an arriving order crosses the spread, so when a bid price is
higher than the best selling price in the order book or when an ask price is lower than the
best buying price in the order book respectively. Once the spread is crossed, a trade is
executed at the best available price with the maximum tradable quantity possible.
Deﬁnition 7 (matching / trade) A matching m(pm, xŸm) or trade is a contract
between multiple agents Ÿ œ Ÿm to exchange a certain quantity of a product i throughout
its exchange interval. Each matching occurs at a speciﬁc price level pm and the sum of all
involved quantities must always equal to 0 (q
ŸœŸm xŸm = 0).
Matchings enter the set of all matchings M, with Mi being the subset of all matchings for
product i and MŸi the subset of all matchings for i that include involvement from agent Ÿ.
8
==PAGE:21==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
The incoming order that crosses the spread and is matched to a standing order is considered
the price taker and accepts the limit price of the previously standing order. The order that
determines the price is considered the price maker. In case of multiple orders standing at
the best price level in the order book, the matched quantities are distributed proportionally
to the quantity of the original order, thus the name pro rata algorithm.
In case the incoming order has taken up all available quantity at the best price level, a
second match is executed at the next best price level using the same procedure until either
the incoming order is entirely matched or until the spread is not crossed anymore.
As trading always occurs before the physical exchange, the contracts are always associated
with an immediate ﬁnancial transaction and a future exchange of the physical product.
Orders that are not entirely ﬁlled or orders that did not cross the spread at all, enter the
order book with their standing quantity until either ﬁlled or removed.
Generally, orders that cross the spread are considered as liquidity takers and orders that
do not cross the spread liquidity makers.
Deﬁnition 8 (liquidity taker) A liquidity taker is one who accepts the limit price of
one or more standing orders from the order book.
Deﬁnition 9 (liquidity maker) A liquidity maker is one whose limit price does not
cross the spread and hence provides additional liquidity to the market.
2.1.2
Balancing settlement mechanism
At gate closure time · start
i
, each participant will have a certain market holding for the
products to be exchanged.
Deﬁnition 10 (market holding) The market holding Xit describes the cumulative
quantity of electrical energy one has sold (>0) or bought (<0) of product i up to time t.
Throughout the physical exchange interval, a player is committed to deliver or consume the
amount of electricity according to their market holdings. After the interval has passed, the
smart meter will have measured the realization XÕ
i. The diﬀerence between the realization
and commitment is then cleared in a balancing settlement (c.f. ﬁg. 2.1). Hypothetically,
this could be a diﬀerent market. Here however, a ﬁxed feed-in tariﬀp≠is payed out for any
unit the user has in excess and a ﬁxed price p+ is charged per unit the user is in deﬁcit.
We denote the ﬁnal market holdings of product i at the closing time of the according
trading session as X·i. For example, when (XÕ
i ≠X·i) < 0 it means the user has sold more
electricity to the market than actually produced or it has consumed more than it bought
upfront. Thus, for every of such units, a price of p+ is charged from the grid. Again,
production or selling energy is noted >0, consumption or buying <0. In regards to revenue,
9
==PAGE:22==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
a revenue >0 denotes an income for the agent and a revenue <0 is money going away from
the agent. The balancing revenue Υi for product i for an agent is then calculated as
Υi = p≠[XÕ
i ≠X·i]+ + p+[XÕ
i ≠X·i]≠.
(2.5)
Again, we assume that a smart bookkeeping mechanism ensures that prosumption is
allocated to each product i accordingly. The same mechanism can also ensure that the
agent is not for example buying CO2 intensive energy, storing it in a battery and then
reselling it as green electricity.
2.1.3
Market framework
Min/max market holdings
To discourage players from large speculation in the market,
at any point in time, a market participant cannot have market holdings that would exceed
its maximum capacity for the exchange interval.
X Æ
ÿ
jœIi
Xj Æ X
’i œ Itrade
t
(2.6)
(2.7)
In order to fully enforce the intention, the market also requires that the market holdings
for products i with the same exchange-interval must either all be positive or all be negative.
Otherwise equation 2.6 could be out-ruled by holding large positive quantities of one and
the same large negative quantity of the other.
’j œ Ii :
sign(Xj) = sign(Xi),
’i œ Itrade
t
(2.8)
Order submittance fee
The last rule is that each time an order is submitted, the
market charges a ﬁxed order submittance fee ›.
2.2
Mathematical problem formulation
We will now formulate the problem from the perspective of the individual P2P market
participant (agent). The intention here is to get a perspective of what kind of variables
should be considered in the decision making process and what the decision steps and
considerations need to be in order to automize and optimize the process.
Let Ÿ denote our agent in the market, trying to maximize an objective function measured
for a certain time horizon t œ [0, T].
Objective function
As mentioned before, the objective of a market participant could be
deﬁned in diﬀerent ways. For example, it could be to maximize the use of green electricity,
or to maximize the use of self-produced electricity, or simply to minimize overall cost. In
order to properly compare the production / consumption of diﬀerent product types with
10
==PAGE:23==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
each other and weigh it against ﬁnancial costs or gains, we consider a measure of virtual
utility for each product. Let Ui(XÕ
i) be an arbitrary function that deﬁnes the utility for a
certain prosumption of product i.
The utility (or cost-utility) can be of both, external monetary measures or of virtual nature.
It could incorporate opportunity costs or (dis-)comfort measures for example due to certain
heating schedules etc. However, it is important to note that the cost-utility does not
incorporate the price payed in the market.
Note here that it is not the aim of this work to ﬁnd proper external utility function
representations for households. We simply want to emphasize the necessity to incorporate
such a measure if the market allows for product diﬀerentiation of the naturally homogeneous
good.
For each individual trading session for product i, the ﬁnancial ﬂows are described by
the sum of all matches that the agent is involved in and the revenue due to balancing
settlements it is subject to. Hence, the overall surplus ΦT that has been realized at the
end of the considered time horizon T can be written as the sum of the all revenues (trades
and balancing) plus the gained utility of each product i:
ΦT =
ÿ
iœI
ΦiT
(2.9)
ΦiT =
ÿ
mœMŸi
xmŸpm + Υi + Ui(XÕ
i)
(2.10)
Autonomous bidding
In equation 2.9 we have deﬁned the surplus function which the
agent is supposed to maximize. What we need to ﬁnd out now is how to formulate an
algorithm that automatically places optimal orders in the market throughout time, trying
to maximize the objective function.
As mentioned in section 1.3, whenever the agent is activated at time t, it is supposed to
take an observation of the currently available information as an input (called the state st),
and map this to one or multiple optimal actions to be taken (called at).
The mapping from observation to action can be rule based (e.g. if price > threshold,
then sell; if price < threshold, then buy) or any arbitrary function. The mapping
is called a policy ﬁ. The intention is to ﬁnd the optimal policy ﬁú, where the interpretation
of optimal is in respect to the objective function to be deﬁned beforehand.
Note here that unless stated otherwise, ﬁthroughout this work never refers to the
mathematical constant 3.14, but rather to a policy function.
Deﬁnition 11 (policy) A policy (ﬁ) is a mapping from an observation of the available
information to a feasible action. [8]
11
==PAGE:24==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
Diﬀerent strategies exist towards ﬁnding the optimal policy for a problem, which will be
dealt with later on. Before, the problem will be formulated in mathematical terms. As
the agent is an algorithmic implementation that will be executed or triggered by discrete
events or intervals, we can write the problem as a sequence of optimal decisions.
2.2.1
Market agent sequential decision problem formulation
Throughout this section, the decision problem for an agent participating in the market is
formulated as a discrete timestamp sequential decision problem. This formulation includes
a deﬁnition of the state variables, the action variables, a model of the environment and an
objective function.
Note here that we will try to keep the formulation general at ﬁrst to understand the
problem in its entity and to get a sense of the problem’s magnitude for an agent in a
real market environment. Later, we will simplify the model for the ﬁrst simulations and
elaborate on the arguments for this step.
State variables
The state variable st describes an observation of the environment with information available
at time t. It can be separated into the physical state, an information state and exogenous
information.
Physical state
Mt = set of all matches in the market
MŸit = subset of matches for product i, that
include activity from agent Ÿ respectively
MŸt = (MŸit)iœI
Ct = holdings of cash
Ut = holdings of virtual or external utility
Xit = market holdings of energy units of product i
(quantity already bought / sold in market)
=
ÿ
mœMŸit
xmŸ
Xt = (Xit)iœI
˙Xit = current prosumption of i, ’i œ Icurex
˙Xt = ( ˙Xit)iœIcurex
Ξs
t = status of (smart) devices in household
Ëit = time left until trading session for i closes
Ët = (Ëit)iœIcurex
12
==PAGE:25==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
Information state
Ωit = order book for i
relevant information include market depth
for diﬀerent prices and spread
Ωt = (Ωit)iœItrade
pit = price equilibrium for a unit of electricity
for product i at time t
(can also be seen as sub-information of Ωit)
pt = (pit)iœItrade
fpitÕ
t
= forecast generated at time t
for the price of a unit of i at time tÕ,
over a horizon tÕ = t + 1, ..., · start
i
f
XÕ
i
t
= forecast for the realization of i
fXÕ
t
= (f
XÕ
i
t
)iœI
fui
t
= forecast for the cost-utility function of i
fu
t = (fui
t )iœI
f
Ξs
tÕ
t
= forecast for status of (smart) devices at time tÕ
f
Ξa
tÕ
t
= forecast for available actions of (smart) devices at time tÕ
Ft = (fptÕ
t
, fXÕ
t
, fU
t , f
Ξs
tÕ
t
, f
Ξa
tÕ
t
)
The relevant state variable for an agent at time t then is:
st = (Ωt, pt, Ct, Ut, Xt, Ξs
t, Ft)
(2.11)
Action variables
Whenever an agent is activated at time t, it can submit new orders for each tradable
product to the market. As trading sessions for i are only open up to the starting point of
physical exchange · start
i
, The following action variables can be set for ’i œ It<· start
i
.
xit =
quantity for new order of product i
pit =
price for new order of product i
Êit = (xit, pit)
Êt = (Êit)iœItrade
In addition to the market activity, the agent may also have control options for certain
smart devices in the household.
Ξa
t =
actions for (smart) devices in household
13
==PAGE:26==
2. Framework and Problem Formulation
Even though the control of smart devices will not be considered further in this work, it is
included in the problem formulation for the sake of completeness. The action to be taken
by the agent then is:
at = (Êt, Ξa
t )
(2.12)
Exogenous information
Let Wt denote a set of information that is only available once we have already arived in t.
The exogenous information process then is (s0, W1, W2, ..., WT ) and we note
W = (Wt)tœ{1,...,T}
.
(2.13)
Transition from t to t + 1
Let SM be a transition function that represents the environment and describes the transition
from st to st+1. Its inﬂuencing parameters are the current state, the actions taken by the
agent and a set of external factors Wt+1 that may only be realized after the agent has
already taken its action. SM may be deterministic or stochastic. [9]
st+1 = SM(st, at, Wt+1)
(2.14)
Optimization problem
The objective function was to maximize the overall surplus at the end of a considered time
horizon T (c.f. eq. 2.9) by adjusting the policy that determines the agent’s actions. We
can write
max
ﬁ
E
Ó
ΦT (SM, ﬁ, W)|s0
Ô
.
(2.15)
2.3
Problem overview
Throughout this chapter, we have ﬁrst gotten to know the P2P electricity market
environment which we want to participate in: an online matching market that allows for
continuous trading of diﬀerent products, where products diﬀerentiate in timeperiod of
energy exchange and in product types such as green production, local production, or any
other type of attribute based product diﬀerentiation.
The second part of this chapter presented a formulation of the sequential decision problem
which we face from the perspective of an agent. We deﬁned an objective function to be
maximized and mentioned that in order to achieve our goal, we need to ﬁnd the optimal
policy to guide us from an observation of state variables to the ideal actions to be taken.
14
==PAGE:27==
3
OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES
Throughout this chapter, we will discuss diﬀerent techniques towards ﬁnding policies to
the decision making problem with the aim to maximizing the objective function. At the
end of this chapter, we will understand diﬀerent techniques that could be utilized in the
context of the autonomous trading agent in the P2P electricity market and we will be able
to choose a set of tools that we can then move on to apply to ﬁnd policies.
We have deﬁned the general problem in mathematical terms. We take the perspective of an
individual agent that is subject to a market environment, in which it can take a sequence
of actions in order to pursue its objective. The agent can measure or estimate a set of
parameters from the environment, but it may not be able to fully determine or predict it.
We realize that this type of problem can be modeled as a Markov Decision Process. For
the reader that is not familiar with the concept of such, we will review it in the following
section.
3.1
Markov Decision Processes
A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a stochastic decision processes in a discrete time
dimension (indexed t), where an agent can observe information from the environment and
take certain actions. After the agent has taken its action, the environment transitions to
its next state and the agent receives a reward (positive or negative).
Deﬁnition 12 (environment) The environment in a Markov Decision Process is the
surrounding that an agent interacts with. It is what determines a transition to the next
state and it is what gives a feedback to the agent after transitioning to the next state.
A MDP can be written as a tuple of MDP =< S, A, P, R >, where
• S is a set of states that the environment can be in, where s œ S fully describes a
speciﬁc state of the environment.
• A is a set of actions, where a œ As is an action that the agent can take in state s.
• P is a probabilistic transition function that state st+1 = sÕ, given that state st = s
and action at = a. Pa(s, sÕ) = Pr(st+1 = sÕ|st = s, at = a). This is the equivalent to
the transition function SM from our market environment (cf. eq. 2.14).
• R is a reward which the agent receives after taking action a in state s and transitioning
to sÕ.
15
==PAGE:28==
3. Optimization Strategies
Here, the reward is deﬁned as an immediate reward after transitioning to the following step.
In the context of the electricity trading problem, it may be reasonable that immediate
losses are acceptable if they lead to a future beneﬁt, because what is actually of importance
is the overall surplus. However, the Reward Hypothesis says: "All goals can be described
by the maximisation of expected cumulative reward." [10]
Figure 3.1 shows how an agent interacts with the environment in a MDP. At each discrete
time-step t, the agent ﬁrst takes an observation of the available information, the state st.
It then takes an action at, receives a reward Rt+1 and experiences a transition to the next
state st+1.
Figure 3.1. Agent in a MDP.
A general condition for each state in a MDP is the Markov property, which holds when
the future of the process only depends on its current state, not on its history.
Time horizon
Let t œ [0, T], so that T denotes the terminal time of an MDP. In the
case of an inﬁnite horizon, T = Œ. MDPs with a ﬁnite horizon are referred to as episodic
problems.
Deﬁnition 13 (episode) A full episode is a run from t = 0 to a ﬁnite horizon’s terminal
time T. It gives the evolution of a MDP as the tuple E =< s0, a0, R1, s1, ...., sT≠1, aT≠1, RT >.
Partially observable Markov Decision Processes
In the MDP, it is assumed that all state variables can be measured and known. While it
may be a reasonable assumption in theory, reality hardly ever allows this. Many MDPs
are actually partially observable MDPs (POMDPs).
A POMDP is a process
• whose dynamics may include randomness,
• of which an agents observation may include noise,
• of which an agent can not necessarily measure all state variables to fully describe the
process.
Hence, the agent’s observation of the true state is only a belief about it.
All processes dealt with throughout this work are POMDPs, as we always expect randomness
or exogenous information that we can not observe at all or at least not accurately.
16
==PAGE:29==
3. Optimization Strategies
Thus, from now on the state st always represents a possibly imperfect observation of
the environment’s true state.
17
==PAGE:30==
3. Optimization Strategies
3.2
Policy design strategies
Throughout the previous section, the concept of Markov Decision Processes was discussed.
We realized that the electricity trading problem from the perspective of an agent can be
formulated in the <state, action, reward, new state,...> manner. The task is now to ﬁnd
the best mapping from an observation of the state to a feasible action, also called the
policy (ﬁ). Given an objective function, the best of all policies is called the optimal policy
(ﬁú).
Deﬁnition 14 (optimal policy) "The optimal policy for the Markov Decision Process is
one that provides the optimal solution to all sub-problems of the decision process (Bellman,
1957)" [11]
Two main types of policies exist: they can be either deterministic (c.f. eq. 3.1), in which
case the policy is a direct mapping from state to action, or stochastic (c.f. eq. 3.2), in
which case the policy is a probability distribution, assigning each possible action a certain
probability to be chosen.
ﬁ(s) = a
(3.1)
ﬁ(a|s) = P[a|s]
(3.2)
Throughout this work, we will mainly deal with deterministic policies.
3.2.1
Classes of strategies
The diﬀerent strategies that exist towards ﬁnding the optimal policy for a problem can
all be comprised in the mathematical ﬁeld of stochastic optimization. Note that many
communities in this ﬁeld exist, with sometimes overlapping terminology for diﬀerent
methodologies or vice versa.
For this work, we chose to follow the conventions and
terminology of [9], in which the authors lay out an overview of the diﬀerent communities.
Generally, policy design strategies to ﬁnd an optimal policy ﬁú for a stochastic optimization
problem can be clustered in the two classes of policy search and direct lookahead methods.
Each of these classes can further be separated in two sub-classes:
• Lookahead approximations: a policy is derived by estimating the future and thus
deriving a policy from that or by evaluating the impact of a policy in respect to the
future.
– Direct lookahead (DLAs): the future of the environment is approximated
in a deterministic or stochastic manner. The policy is then derived from an
optimization problem respecting the lookahead.
– Value function approximations (VFAs): the value of being in a certain
state is approximated and the policy can be chosen so that it maximizes the
expected value of the future.
18
==PAGE:31==
3. Optimization Strategies
• Policy search methods: a policy is derived by evaluating it against a cost or
performance measure
– Policy function approximations (PFAs): analytic functions, lookup tables
or rules that typically do not involve solving an optimization problem.
– Cost function approximations (CFAs): a cost is parametrically approxi-
mated as a function of the action. The policy is then chosen in respect to a
maximization or minimization of the cost function subject to a set of constraints.
[8, 9]
Note here that all of the four classes can be applied out of MDP context. However, since
we identiﬁed the P2P electricity trading problem as a MDP, we will discuss them in the
context of MDPs. In the following sections, the core ideas of all four strategies will be
elaborated and put into context of the P2P agent. At the end, we will have a better
understanding of which techniques could be applied for our type of problem. We will
summarize with a brief comparison and argue why we choose the tools that we want to
continue to work with
Function approximations (FA)
Throughout the coming sections, we will note ◊as a
parameter set to deﬁne any function approximation in the form of f(·|◊). In most cases, ◊
would deﬁne parametric linear functions of the form f(x|◊) = ◊· xT or the weights for
neurons in an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN).
3.2.2
Direct lookahead policies
Whenever the agent has to make a decision, it takes the current state as a starting point
to model the evolution of the environment over a ﬁxed time horizon and maximizes an
objective function by selecting the best policy. In order to compute the evolution, direct
lookahead policies always require knowledge of a model for the environment, such as a
transfer function (cf. eq. 2.14) to model the environment transition from t to t + 1.
This model can either be a direct representation of the environments underlying laws, or it
could also be an approximation generated through system identiﬁcation techniques. It can
also be both, a deterministic or a stochastic model. In the latter case, the best policy is
often found through scenario-based computation [12].
A popular technique for direct lookahead policies is Model Predictive Control (MPC),
which is an on-line optimization technique. Whenever the MPC agent is activated to
make a decision at time t, it optimizes an action for the current, and all future time steps.
However, while the immediate action at is taken, all computed future actions are discarded
and a new optimization problem is solved at the next time step. This procedure is then
repeated at every decision timestamp. [13]
19
==PAGE:32==
3. Optimization Strategies
Application to the P2P market agent
In the context of the P2P market agent, we
would directly solve the optimization problem as equation 2.15
max
ﬁ
E
Ó
ΦT (SM, ﬁ, W)|s0
Ô
.
(3.3)
The optimization would be maximized for every decision timestamp, which would require
knowledge of a transfer function SM as in equation 2.14. As the trading problem from
the agent’s perspective clearly involves randomness and exogenous information (e.g. price
dynamics, other participants strategies and behavior, etc.), there would be two options.
Either, an environment model is established manually and plugged with forecasts to predict
the future evolution or a system identiﬁcation is applied and potentially combined with
forecasts. This may be a feasible solution, however the problem then becomes: how to
generate the perfect forecast and how to build the most accurate model of the environment.
System identiﬁcation would require historic data to generate a model approximation, which
does not exist yet for this particular market setup with product diﬀerentiation. Forecasting
is a big ﬁeld in research and many advances have been made in the context of energy
and/or trading. However, especially price forecasting has been proven to be particularly
challenging. [14, 15, 16]
3.2.3
Cost function approximation
The cost function approach comprises the deﬁnition of a function that evaluates the cost of
taking a certain action in a state. Whenever the agent is activated, it solves an optimization
problem to choose the set of actions with the lowest immediate cost. The approach is
broadly applied for large scheduling or supply chain problems. [9]
In the case of the MDP convention, the reward R could be modeled as a negative cost.
The aim is then to parametrically deﬁne a reward function R(s, a|◊) of state and action
and a set of constraints. At each decision time step t, the policy for the agent then is
ﬁ(st) = argmax
aœAst
R(st, a|◊) .
(3.4)
Application to the P2P market agent
The main task here is to parameterize
R(s, a|◊).
Generally it seems straight forward to parameterize an immediate reward
function. The simplest deﬁnition would be the immediate monetary revenue plus the
revenue of external utility measures coming from an action. However, we see two diﬃculties.
The reward cannot be modeled deterministically. As the observation is only a believe of
the full state, not all parameters can be known. Even the parameters that are known,
such as equilibrium price and state of order book, may change between the time of the
observation and the time that the new order of our agent arrives at the market. Thus, the
best reward function approximation one could ﬁnd is an expectation function. This could
be done, for example again with system identiﬁcation techniques.
20
==PAGE:33==
3. Optimization Strategies
The second reason is more signiﬁcant. Taking an action may impact the options of our
future actions. For example: if the agent buys electricity now, it may miss the opportunity
to buy it later for a better price. Or vice versa: if the agent does not buy electricity now,
it will be subject to a balancing penalty in the future. The main point being that the
action that maximizes the immediate short term reward is not necessarily the one that is
the best in respect to the future. Thus, we need an agent that takes actions in context of
the future. It may be an option to consider the future in terms of opportunity costs etc.,
but as we will see in the following section, there are more intuitive methods.
3.2.4
Value function approximations
The concept was ﬁrst introduced by Hamilton and Jacobi and then further developed
by R.E. Bellman in the 1950s for problems represented in continuous time space. It is
commonly known as the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation and can also be applied to
discrete time decision processes in the context of MDPs. [9]
Generally, the idea of a value function is to evaluate how good it is to be in a certain
state considering an objective function. Knowing the value of a state, a policy can then be
derived by evaluating an actions impact on the evolution of the future.
The value function V (s) for a deterministic MDP is deﬁned as the immediate reward one
receives when transitioning from t to t + 1 plus the value of the next state:
V (st) = R(st, at) + V (st+1)
(3.5)
The policy can then be found by choosing the action that maximizes the value function:
ﬁ(st) = argmax
aœAst
(R(st, a) + V (st+1))
(3.6)
Here, note the diﬀerence between the policy derived from the the cost function approach in
equation 3.4. In the cost function approximation, the action was chosen by maximizing the
immediate reward. With the value function approach, the policy is found by maximizing
the sum of immediate reward plus value of next state. Thus, the downstream impact on
the future is now evaluated in the decision making process.
In case the agent has full knowledge of R(s, a), V (st+1) and a transition function SM to
model the step from t to t+1, the policy is easily solved. If the information is not available,
popular approximation and learning techniques exist for both, model based and model
free approaches. Namely dynamic programming (model based) and reinforcement learning
(model free). The precise methods will be explained in detail in the coming chapter.
For now it is important to be aware that value function approximation methods consider
the impact of the here and now action on the downstream evolution of the environment.
Thus, actions are always taken in respect to the future. Furthermore, it is important to
emphasize that this approach can be utilized with knowledge of a transition function SM
or without it. What is a requirement however, is to have access to data to derive value
21
==PAGE:34==
3. Optimization Strategies
function approximations, or alternatively to have access to a simulation environment to
generate data.
Methods from this approach have recently gained a lot of popularity as researchers have
been able to achieve "super-human" capabilities in many game environments such as popular
Atari games [17] and the board game Go [18], which was long considered unbeatable for
computer algorithms. More signiﬁcant for the P2P trading context, reinforcement learning
methods have been broadly broadly studied in the context of portfolio management and
trading diﬀerent types of assets [19, 20, 21].
Application to the P2P market agent
First, the approach evaluates actions in
respect to future, this is a major diﬀerence compared to the cost function approximation
approach and seems more appropriate considering the problem formulation. The agent
shall always be able to put the here and now action into perspective of the future and what
the overall goal is to maximize the ﬁnal surplus, the steps in between are not signiﬁcant.
For example, it may be beneﬁcial for an agent to choose an action that gives a low or
negative immediate reward, but enables it to generate a proﬁt in a future. Value function
evaluations comprise this property.
Moreover, policy design strategies based on value function approximations can be applied
with or without the existence of a transfer function. Again, particular methods will be
explained in the following chapter. For now, it is simply the possibility to be pointed out.
3.2.5
Policy function approximations
As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, policy function approximation are
generally direct mappings from state to actions which do not require solving an optimization
problem.The major approach of policy function approximations is that policy function
approximations generally have interpretability for a human. In the deterministic case, the
policy function approximation ﬁ(s|◊) is a direct mapping from state to action. In the
stochastic case ﬁ(s|a, ◊) gives the probability of each action to be taken under a state.
Both cases allow interpretability and visualization of the policy.
In the simplest case, a policy function could be a manually or analytically deﬁned
function such as "if price < threshold, then buy;" or "if new weather forecast
arrived, then sell estimated production;". However, as it is our aim to develop
autonomous trading agents, we aim to leave the policy deﬁnition and improvement up to
an algorithm.
In order to deﬁne a policy automatically, the ﬁrst thing that must be deﬁned is a measure
to evaluate the performance on. In the coming chapter, we will see how the value function
from the previous section can be utilized as a performance measure and the two strategies
value function approximation and policy function approximation can be combined in an
intuitive way.
22
==PAGE:35==
3. Optimization Strategies
3.3
Choice of tools
Throughout this chapter, we have gotten to know the underlying ideas of diﬀerent strategies
in order to ﬁnd the optimal policy for an agent’s sequential decision process. We followed the
framework from [9], in which the authors identify four diﬀerent approaches towards solving
stochastic optimization problems: direct lookahead policies, value function approximation,
policy function approximations and cost function approximation.
We disregarded the direct lookahead methods for the reason that they purely rely on the
ability to identify a transfer function from t to t + 1 and forecast environment parameters.
Thus, the bottleneck to solving the problem then becomes to generate the best forecasts
and apply the best system identiﬁcation techniques. Although these may be interesting
applications for future work, no relevant data for this market environment exists yet and
we choose to follow a diﬀerent path for this work.
Cost function approximations naturally do not regard the downstream impact of a here
and now action. The action is not evaluated in respect to the future, which seems to be an
obvious aspect to be included for the P2P trading agent.
We identiﬁed that for this work, value function based methods seem to be a good choice as
• they evaluate an action in consideration of the future,
• they can be implemented with and without knowledge of the transition function SM,
• in the best case they seem to be very scalable to multi-dimensional problems sets,
• they can be combined with policy function approximations and thus compute
interpretable policies,
Throughout the coming chapter, an introduction to relevant concepts and algorithms of
reinforcement learning techniques will be given.
23
==PAGE:36==
4
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHMS
Throughout this chapter we will ﬁrst revisit the concept of value functions and go
through them in detail.
We then discuss how the value function can be utilized to
ﬁnd a policy with the dynamic programming approach and what the diﬀerences are
to the reinforcement learning approach. The next step will be to clarify concepts and
terminologies in reinforcement learning. Finally, learning and approximation algorithms
from the reinforcement learning community will be introduced.
4.1
Value functions for Markov Decision Processes
The value function denotes how good it is for the agent to be in a certain state, given an
objective function. It is an accumulation of the expected future rewards, given a state s, a
policy ﬁand a terminal state T. Let the discounted cumulative return Gt of a MDP be
Gt = Rt+1 + “Rt+2 + ... + “T≠t≠1RT
(4.1)
=
T
ÿ
k=t+1
“k≠t≠1Rk
(4.2)
= Rt+1 + “Gt+1,
(4.3)
where “ is a discount factor and determines how much future rewards are discounted in
respect to immediate rewards. [22]
State-value
The state-value function is the expected, accumulated and discounted future
reward, given a state s and a policy ﬁwhich the agent is following:
Vﬁ(s) = Eﬁ[Gt|s = st]
(4.4)
= Eﬁ
S
U
T
ÿ
k=t+1
“k≠t≠1Rk|s = st
T
V
(4.5)
= Eﬁ[Rt+1 + “V (st+1)|s = st]
(4.6)
Action-value
The value function can also be formulated as an action-value function,
which is the value of a state s, given that the immediate action is at and action at+1 is
24
==PAGE:37==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
chosen according to the policy ﬁ, hence:
Q(s, a) = Eﬁ[Gt|s = st, a = at]
(4.7)
= Eﬁ
S
U
T
ÿ
k=t+1
“k≠t≠1Rk|s = st, a = at
T
V
(4.8)
= Eﬁ[Rt+1 + “QaÕ≥ﬁ(st+1, aÕ)|s = st, a = at]
(4.9)
In the case of a stochastic policy ﬁ(a|s), the relation between Q(s, a) and V (s) is that the
sum of all action-values multiplied with their probability is equal to the state value:
Vﬁ(s) =
ÿ
aœA
ﬁ(a|s)Qﬁ(a, s)
(4.10)
Expected value function
Let sÕ œ S denote a potential successor state to s, and
P(sÕ|s, a) the probability of transitioning from state s to sÕ, given that the agent takes
action a. The expectation of state- and action-value functions then are:
Vﬁ(s) =
ÿ
aœA
ﬁ(a|s)
Q
aR(s, a) + “
ÿ
sÕœS
P(sÕ|s, a)Vﬁ(sÕ)
R
b
(4.11)
Qﬁ(s, a) = R(s, a) + “
ÿ
sÕœS
P(sÕ|s, a)Vﬁ(sÕ))
(4.12)
= R(s, a) + “
ÿ
sÕœS
P(sÕ|s, a)
ÿ
aÕœA
ﬁ(aÕ|sÕ)Qﬁ(aÕ, sÕ)
(4.13)
Optimality equation
The aim is to ﬁnd the policy which maximizes the expected
future reward. So according to the previous equations, the optimal policy ﬁú is the one
that gives the optimal value function:
Vú(s) = max
ﬁ
Vﬁ(s)
(4.14)
Qú(s, a) = max
ﬁ
Qﬁ(s, a)
(4.15)
ﬁú = argmax
ﬁ
Vﬁ(s) = argmax
ﬁ
Qﬁ(s, a) = max
aœA Q(s, a)
(4.16)
Combining equations 4.14 with 4.11 and 4.15 with 4.13 respectively, gives the Bellman
optimality equations:
Vú = max
aœA
Q
aR(s, a) + “
ÿ
sÕœS
P(sÕ|s, a)Vú(sÕ)
R
b
(4.17)
Qú(s, a) = R(s, a) + “
ÿ
sÕœS
P(sÕ|s, a) max
aÕœA Qú(sÕ, aÕ)
(4.18)
25
==PAGE:38==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
On a side note, if “ = 0, then Q(s, a) = R(s, a) and thus the action value approximation is
analog to the cost function approximation as explained in 3.2.3.
4.2
Dynamic programming
If it is possible to model the environment, so if the state transition probabilities P(sÕ|s, a)
are known, an optimal policy can be found by directly solving Bellman’s optimality equation
(cf. eq. 4.17). This is called dynamic programming (DP). Next to the probabilities, also
the reward realizations R(s, a) and values of the possible successor states sÕ must be known.
If Vú(sÕ) in equation 4.17 is unknown, of course it can be solved by inserting the same
equation for the successor states and so on until the end of an episode. Basically, this
means to unfold a decision tree with all its transition probabilities and rewards up to the
episodes terminal state sT . The optimality equation is then solved by looping backward
from the terminal time step up to the current time step [T, T ≠1, ..., 1, 0]. This approach
is called backward dynamic programming. [23, 24]
Algorithm 1: Vanilla implementation of backward dynamic programming
algorithm. [24]
1 Initialize VT (sT ) = 0,
’s œ S;
2 for t in [T-1, ... , 1,0] do
3
for s in S do
4
Vt(st) = maxaœAst
!R(st, a) + “ q
stœS P(st+1|st, a)Vt+1(st+1)
";
5
end
6 end
Backward DP is the most trivial method of solving Bellman’s optimality equation but as
it is necessary to compute all possible evolutions in respect to discrete states and actions,
its application is highly limited by the curse of dimensionality.
4.2.1
Curse of dimensionality
In [23], a total of three curses are identiﬁed. First, if the state variable st is a vector
with more than 1 dimension, the total number of discrete states that can be observed
grows exponentially. If one or more of the state dimensions are not discrete scalars, but
continuous, the total number of states is inﬁnite and the DP approach cannot be used at
all unless it is discretized. For example, a state vector with three continuous dimensions,
each discretized in 100 increments, already results in a total of one million states [9].
The same curse of dimensionality occurs for a multi dimensional action and continuous
action spaces respectively.
The third curse is encountered when multiple decisions to be taken at time t correlate with
multiple state variables and hence the state space must expand for that.
26
==PAGE:39==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
4.2.2
Approximate dynamic programming
Approximate dynamic programming is a developed method to overcome the curses of
dimensionality. Instead of unfolding a decision tree up to the terminal state in order to
compute the value of being in a speciﬁc state, the value function is approximated. This
also allows the application of DP for POMDPs.
Note here that the use of approximate dynamic programming and RL terminologies often
overlap in diﬀerent literature. Some authors argue that RL is a subset of ADP or vice
versa. In this work, the diﬀerentiation we make is that dynamic programming methods
are always model based. A model free method could of course also be interpreted as a
model based method with transfer function 1 and all changes happening as exogenous
information. [25, 26]
Dynamic programming in context of P2P market trading agent
It quickly
appears that the dynamic programming approach comes with two major diﬃculties in
respect to the electricity trading problem which is to be solved in this work.
First, it may appear diﬃcult to develop an accurate model of the environment for the
same reasons as explained for MPC in section 3.2.2.
The second diﬃculty of the DP approach is an exponential increase in problem size in
respect to its variable dimensions (curse of dimensionality). As written in the problem
formulation, the MDP concludes multiple state and action dimensions. DP appears to be
a challenging and computationally expensive method to be scaled to such large spaces.
As soon as an agent is managing market positions for diﬀerent product types i and modelling
the supply and demand for i at the same time, the problem becomes computationally
intractable as soon as one realizes that the supply and demand for diﬀerent product types
correlate with each other and with ones own actions.
The identiﬁed issues in regards to dynamic programming methods can be solved with
reinforcement learning techniques, which will now be introduced.
4.3
Key concepts and terminologies in reinforcement
learning
Two main concerns have been identiﬁed regarding the application of dynamic programming
in this context. The necessary modeling and forecasting of the environment and the three
curses of dimensionality. In this section, it will be elaborated why and which techniques in
reinforcement learning can solve both of these challenges.
Next to supervised and unsupervised machine learning, reinforcement learning is the third
big branch in the ML communities. RL is a method that can be utilised to learn policies
for MDPs (or POMDPs) model free. Through interaction with an environment, the
agent can either directly learn an approximation for a policy, an approximation for a
27
==PAGE:40==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
value function or a combination of both. Here, the term learning refers to an algorithm
that updates the approximations iteratively through a reinforcement mechanism based on
experienced rewards.
The crucial term here is experience. Since it is a model free approach, the agent gets all of
its knowledge from experience. This means it must visit states, take actions and somehow
memorize and relate these with the successor state and the received reward.
Generally, the agent has the aim to learn an optimal policy, so to maximize the cumulative
reward. However, in order to get new knowledge and discover so far unknown knowledge, an
agent needs to explore the environment. This exploration could, of course, be sub-optimal
and not allow the agent to achieve the maximum reward when exploring. These two goals
can contradict each other, and the agent needs to strategize on when to focus on gaining
new knowledge and when to make use of its developed knowledge, which will be explained
in the following section.
Policy exploration and exploitation
Exploration and exploitation are the two modes that an agent utilizes to choose an action.
Deﬁnition 15 (exploitation) The agent exploits the knowledge it currently has. It sticks
with the best policy according to its current knowledge.
Deﬁnition 16 (exploration) The agent chooses an action that is not necessarily
suggested by the current value-maximizing policy in order to try something new and
potentially make new discoveries.
Exploration is of special importance, when an agent moves around an unknown environment
or when the current policy is stuck in a local maximum. Exploitation is, of course, of
signiﬁcance to optimize the cumulative reward.
Diﬀerent types of exploration exist. The most common being random choice of actions or
adding a noisy process on top of the current policy. Undoubtedly, it is a dilemma to trade
oﬀbetween the two modes. A common implementation to balance between both is the
‘-greedy strategy.
Deﬁnition 17 (greedy policy) To choose the optimal action according to the currently
available knowledge, so the action that gives the highest action-value:
ﬁgreedy(s) = argmax
aœAs
Q(s, a)
(4.19)
28
==PAGE:41==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Deﬁnition 18 (‘-greedy) The ‘-greedy strategy chooses the best action known to this
point with a (1 ≠‘) probability and a random action with an ‘ probability.
aú = argmax
aœAs
Q(s, a)
(4.20)
ﬁ‘≠greedy(a|s) =
I (1 ≠‘) +
‘
|As|
if
a = aú
‘
|As|,
if
a ”= aú
(4.21)
If no knowledge of policies or value functions is available upfront, it is expected that the
initial policy is not a good one. Combined with a small exploration rate (e.g. 0.1), it
would be expected that performance in the beginning is only improving very slowly. It is
therefore common practice to start the agent oﬀwith an exploration phase.
Deﬁnition 19 (exploration phase) Throughout exploration phase, the agent chooses
each action randomly: ﬁexplore(a|s) =
1
|As|.
On-policy vs oﬀ-policy learning
This raises the question of which policy the agent is attempting to improve. The precise
policy it is using to generate the data (e.g. epsilon greedy) or a diﬀerent one (e.g. ﬁnd
optimal policy assuming that exploration will not be followed after a learning period).
In RL, the terminology for the two strategies are on-policy and oﬀ-policy methods. An
agent learning on-policy is improving its policy based on the assumption to keep applying
the same strategy. The agent could, for example, end up ﬁnding the optimal policy that
continues to explore. This may diﬀer from the ideal greedy policy.
Deﬁnition 20 (oﬀ-policy method) An agent utilizing an oﬀ-policy learning method
attempts to improve for a subsequent optimal policy. It aims to ﬁnd the best greedy policy.
Deﬁnition 21 (on-policy method) An agent utilizing an on-policy learning method
attempts to improve for a policy that respects the fact that it continues to explore. Thus, it
aims to ﬁnd the best policy that is committed to exploring.
The advantage of using an oﬀ-policy method is of course that it learns the global optimal
policy. The trade oﬀ, however, is that oﬀ-policy algorithms generally indicate a slower
convergence and greater reward variance. [22, 27, 28]
State and action spaces
Both, state and action variables can be represented in either discrete or continuous spaces.
Some algorithms are meant for continuous and others for discrete or hybrid representations.
In the coming sections, ﬁrst only discrete representations are dealt with, but later also
continuous methods are applied.
29
==PAGE:42==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
The advantage of continuous representations is obvious in the case of continuous variables.
In the electricity market problem, for example, both prices and quantities are naturally
continuous spaces, so a continuous representation will allow us to evaluate every possible
state action combination across the space.
Discrete representations give one value per state-action combination. Hence, in order to
evaluate or improve a value, each state-action combination must be visited and handled
with individually. This obviously leads to the curses of dimensionality.
Continuous representations on the other hand, naturally allow generalizations for
neighboring state-action combinations in the evaluation / improvement process.
Both representation forms and a hybrid version will be dealt with in the coming sections.
It will be shown that algorithms for discrete representations can be implemented in a fairly
simple and computationally inexpensive manner. Continuous methods on the other hand
require slightly more complex algorithms and are computationally more expensive due to
necessary diﬀerentiations of possibly complex function representations.
4.4
Monte Carlo control methods
The most simple case to improve a policy without modelling the environment is to estimate
action values for each discrete state-action combination, so that a greedy policy can simply
be executed by ﬁnding the maximum argument from all action values in a state (c.f. eq.
4.16).
The straightforward way to estimate the action values for all combinations is to directly
compute them from already experienced episodes.
With the evolution of an MDP
E =< s0, a0, R1, s1, ..., RT >, for each state-action combination that is visited throughout
the episode, the action-value function Q(s, a) is estimated as the cumulative discounted
reward Gt experienced after (c.f. equation 4.1). For state-action combinations that are
visited repeatedly, the value is approximated as the average of all discounted cumulative
returns.
To compute Gt from equation 4.1, all rewards up to a terminal state are necessary. Hence,
Monte Carlo Methods cannot be applied to inﬁnite horizon MDPs, but only to episodic
ones. For an inﬁnite number of episodes in a stationary environment, it has been proven
30
==PAGE:43==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
that the value estimation converges to Qﬁ, the real action value function for a given policy.
Algorithm 2: On-policy Monte Carlo control through action-value estimation
following a policy ﬁ. [22]
1 Initialize a policy ﬁ(s) œ As arbitrarily ’s œ S;
2 Initialize Q(s, a) œ R arbitrarily ’s œ S, a œ As;
3 Initialize Returns(s, a) : empty list ’s œ S, a œ As;
4 for episode in [1, ... , M] do
5
Generate episode following a policy (e.g. ﬁ‘≠greedy):
E =< s0, a0, R1, s1, ..., RT > ;
6
G Ω 0;
7
for t
in
[T ≠1, T ≠2, ..., 0] do
8
G Ω “G + Rt+1;
9
Append G to Returns(st, at);
10
Q(st, at) Ω mean(Returns(st, at));
11
ﬁ(st) Ω argmaxa Q(st, a)
12
end
13 end
Algorithm 2 learns on-policy, so the action values are learned not necessarily for the optimal
policy, but for the one that is committed to exploring. Hence, after inﬁnite samples, the
best policy found is the best policy committed to further exploration.
The way the algorithm is presented, it can only be applied for discrete state and discrete
state representations.
The same methodology from algorithm 2 can also be utilized to approximate state-values
instead of action-values in which case it could be used as a value function approximation
for approximate dynamic programming. However, it would still require a model or the
state transition probabilities P(sÕ|s, a) to utilize approximate dynamic programming. [22]
4.5
Temporal diﬀerence learning
The disadvantage of Monte Carlo methods is that the policy can only be updated after
an entire episode is completed, as the evolution up to the terminal state is necessary.
Therefore, it is not possible to update a policy / value function in an on-line manner. This
problem is solved with temporal diﬀerence (TD) learning.
Revisiting the Bellman equations (c.f. equations 4.6 & 4.9), an accurate value function
approximation is achieved when for all state action combinations the following holds:
V (st) = Rt+1 + “V (st+1)
(4.22)
This is called the TD-target. Whenever the agent visits a state and takes an action, it
memorizes the tuple < st, at, Rt+1, st+1, at+1 > and can calculate the diﬀerence between
31
==PAGE:44==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
the target and the realization according to the current approximation. This diﬀerence is
called the TD-error ”. In TD-learning, the value function approximation is then updated
with a learning rate –:
” = Rt+1 + “V (st+1) ≠V (st)
(4.23)
V (st) Ω V (st) + – ú ”
(4.24)
TD Q-Learning
Equations 4.22 to 4.24 for the state-value can be applied for action value representations
in the same manner. The result is one of the most basic TD-learning algorithms called
Q-Learning. For a discrete state space s œ S and action space a œ A, the agent learns an
action-value approximation for each state-action combination through a mix of exploration
and exploitation.
It starts out with an initialized (e.g. zeros) lookup table with a row for each possible
state tuple and a column for each action tuple. The agent then updates the elements of
its lookup table with the TD-learning method and chooses an exploration-exploitation
strategy such as ‘-greedy. The following algorithm shows each step to train a Q-learning
agent in an environment with discrete states and actions. In this example algorithm, the
agent utilizes an ‘-greedy strategy as a trade oﬀbetween exploration and exploitation.
This could be changed to a diﬀerent exploration strategy if preferred.
Algorithm 3: Basic TD Q-learning algorithm with ‘-greedy strategy.
1 Initialize Q(s, a) table ’s œ S,
a œ As;
2 for episode in [1, ... , M] do
3
observe st;
4
with ‘ probability choose at = random_choice(Ast)
5
else choose at = argmaxaœAst Q(st, a);
6
for t in [0, ... , T] do
7
execute action;
8
receive Rt+1, observe st+1;
9
with ‘ probability choose at+1 = random_choice(Ast+1)
10
else choose at+1 = argmaxaœAst Q(st, a);
11
set target: y Ω Rt+1 + “ maxaœAst+1 Q(st+1, a);
12
set TD-error: ” Ω y ≠Q(st, at);
13
update value: Q(st, at) Ω Q(st, at) + – · ”;
14
end
15 end
Take notice that in line 12 of algorithm 3, despite the fact that at+1 has already been
chosen, the TD-error is calculated with maxaœAs Q(st+1, a) and not with Q(st, at+1). This
is because Q-Learning is an oﬀ-policy algorithm. Line 12 can be changed to
y Ω Rt+1 + “Q(st+1, at+1),
(4.25)
32
==PAGE:45==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
in which case the agent’s learning happens on-policy. The algorithm is then referred to as
the SARSA algorithm.
A signiﬁcant drawback of both, Q-Learning and SARSA may be that the discrete tabular
approach requires visits for each individual state-action pair in order to update the value
estimate. An update to a state-action value does not impact its neighbors. Thus, in
high dimensional or continuous spaces that must be discretized, the application of tabular
Q-Learning is highly limited by the same curse of dimensionality.
Techniques to overcome this challenge such as parameterized function approximations for
Q(s, a) as a continuous function do exist and will be discussed in the following sections.
4.6
Q-function approximation for continuous state spaces
The tabular Q-learning algorithm as utilized in the previous section approximated one
action-value Q(s, a) for each individual state-action pair which required visits for each
state-action combination for updates. In this section, the Q-function is approximated
through an arbitrary function approximation. For each discrete action, a separate and
independent function approximation estimates the action values by taking the state
as continuous variables as an input. Thus, the value update from a speciﬁc state-action
visit will impact neighboring states as well and at least one of the curses of dimensionality
is overcome.
Let ◊c œ RdQ be a set of parameters to describe the action-value function, so that Q(s, a; ◊c).
It is important to emphasize that the function approximations discussed in this section
are explicit for discrete actions and continuous state variables. Thus, an individual set of
parameters could be extracted from ◊c for each discrete action. However, we generalize ◊c
to include the parameter sets for function approximations for all actions.
◊c can be a parameter set for any arbitrary function approximation, e.g. linear or ANNs.
In the case of an ANN approximation, the method is often referred to as Deep Q-learning
(DQL) or Deep Q-Network (DQN) in literature [17]. Note here, that ◊c may just as well
be a parameterization for a tabular approximation, which is why tabular Q-learning as
utilized in the previous section can be seen as a subset of DQN.
The general aim of minimizing the temporal diﬀerence error remains. Yet the Q-value
cannot directly be updated, but instead a gradient descent step with a learning rate –c is
performed on a loss function L in respect to the parameter set ◊c.
◊c Ω ◊c ≠–c ˆL
ˆ◊c
(4.26)
In the simplest case, L is the TD-error (cf. line 12-14 in algorithm 3), so that the gradient
descent of the parameter update is minimizing the TD-error. In the following section we
will explain that L could also be the mean squared TD-error of a batch of samples to make
learning more eﬃcient. [17]
33
==PAGE:46==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Experience replay
Experience replay is a method where experienced step quintuples < st, at, Rt+1, st+1 >
is not just used once to update the Q-function approximation, but they are stored in a
buﬀer and the agent rehearses the experience multiple times. Thus, experiences are reused
in an eﬀective way and convergence can happen more quickly. However, a condition for
experience replay to work properly is that the underlying laws of the environment are
stationary. Experience replay adds more inertia to the training process and consequently
the algorithm may not adjust to sudden changes as quickly. [29]
The advantage of using an experience buﬀer is that it eliminates correlations between
consecutive steps, smoothes out parameter oscillations and makes learning more eﬃcient
as it regularly refreshes its knowledge on previously learned experiences. [30]
Let B be a buﬀer with memory size for |B| transitions. Updates of ◊c then always occur
based on a random batch from B.
The following shows the DQN algorithm with an implemented experience buﬀer replay
mechanism and a mean squared error (MSE) loss function over a sampled batch. The
parameter update is a gradient descent with learning rate –.
Algorithm 4: DQN algorithm with ‘-greedy strategy, an experience buﬀer and
MSE loss function. [17]
1 Initialize parameter set ◊c for action-value function approximation;
2 Initialize replay buﬀer B;
3 for episode in [1, ... , M] do
4
observe st;
5
for t in [0, ... , T] do
6
with ‘ probability choose at+1 Ω random_choice(Ast+1)
7
else choose at+1 = argmaxaœAst+1 Q(st+1, a; ◊c);
8
execute action;
9
receive Rt+1, observe st+1;
10
store tuple < st, at, Rt+1, st+1 > in B;
11
sample random batch Bú with |Bú| tuples < sj, aj, Rj+1, sj+1 > from B;
12
for j in Bú do
13
set target: yj Ω Rj+1 + “ maxaœAsj+1 Q(sj+1, a; ◊c);
14
set TD-error: ”j Ω yj ≠Q(sj, aj; ◊c);
15
end
16
Update critic with learning rate –c by gradient descent step on loss L with
respect to ◊c (cf. eq. 4.26):
17
L(◊c) =
1
|Bú|
q
jœBú ”2
j ;
18
end
19 end
DQN is again an oﬀ-policy learning method as the target value is calculated with the greedy
action value instead of the one actually taken used (line 13). Even though the function
34
==PAGE:47==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
approximation itself would also work as an on-policy algorithm, the use of an experience
buﬀer does not. This is because the experience replay presents transition tuples to the
update that were generated by a diﬀerent policy from the one currently being updated.
[22]
4.7
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
DQN could potentially be extended to continuous action space as well. However, since the
policy relies on choosing the action that gives the maximum estimated value, in continuous
action space this would require a global maximisation of the continuous function at every
step and would be computationally expensive.
Instead, the policy can be an explicit function approximation ﬁ(s, ◊a) = a, where ◊a œ Rda
is a set of parameters from a da-dimensional space to deﬁne an arbitrary function as long as
it is diﬀerentiable in respect to its parameters. The parameter set ◊a can then be improved
through a gradient ascent of the action-value function approximation Q(s, a|◊c). In this
case, the two explicit function approximators are referred to as actor (policy function
approximation) and critic (action-value function approximation)
The following ﬁgure shows a ﬂow chart of the deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm
(DDPG). The critic is updated in the same way as it was updated in the DQN algorithm:
through a simple gradient descent step on the calculated mean sqaured error of the TD-error
”.
!" = $(&") + )"
*+,-. /*: $(&|23)
4.5,+ /*: 6(&, !|28)
6(&", !")
ENVIRONMENT
1. update: minimize td-error
&"9:
;"9:
2. update: by policy gradient
&"
Figure 4.1. Graphic of DDPG algorithm.
35
==PAGE:48==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Policy update
The general goal of the policy ﬁ(s|◊a) is to maximize the expected value
for a given state. Thus, a performance measure J for the policy in a certain state can be
written as
J = E[Q(s, a)|s=st,a=ﬁ(st|◊a)].
(4.27)
The aim is to maximize the performance, thus the policy parameters are updated with a
gradient ascent step on the performance measure. Applying the chain rule, the gradient is
approximately
Ò◊aJ ¥ E[Ò◊aQ(s, a)|s=st,a=ﬁ(st|◊a)]
(4.28)
= E[(ÒaQ(s, a)|s=st,a=ﬁ(st)) (Ò◊aﬁ(s|◊a)|s=st)]
(4.29)
The policy parameter set ◊a can then be updated by performing a gradient ascent step
on Ò◊aJ with a learning rate –a. Informally: the actor is updating by climbing up the
action-value function. The existence of the gradient for the deterministic policy and the
fact that it can be modeled is proven in the deterministic policy gradient theorem in [31].
[32]
Exploration
In order to include exploratory behaviour to the deterministic policy agent,
a random process N is added to the action that is determined by the actor. Common
practice is to include simply Gaussian noise or a mean-reverting process. [33]
Alternatively to a random process, it is also an option to utilize a similar exploration
strategy as ‘-greedy. For example, with an ‘ probability, the action could be chosen
from a an even distribution throughout the entire action space. The main advantage of
utilizing noise or a mean-reverting process is that the algorithm preferably explores the
neighborhood of the current policy.
Replay buﬀer
The DDPG algorithm utilizes the same replay buﬀer combined with
batch normalization as in the DQN algorithm (cf. algo. 4). Again, this is only possible
because it is an oﬀ-policy algorithm.
Soft target updates
A novel technique that has not been covered in this work yet but
is a common feature in deep deterministic policy gradient implementations are soft target
updates.
Reviewing the critic update function as in the DQN algorithm (algorithm 4), it becomes
apparent that the function approximation used to calculate the target value is the very
36
==PAGE:49==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
same one that is supposed to be improved:
1 for j in Bú do
2
set target: yj Ω Rj+1 + “ maxaœAsj+1 Q(sj+1, a; ◊c);
3
set TD-error: ”j Ω yj ≠Q(sj, aj; ◊c);
4 end
5 Update critic with learning rate –c by gradient descent step on loss L with respect
to ◊c (cf. eq. 4.26):
6
L(◊c) =
1
|Bú|
q
jœBú ”2
j
Basically, the function approximation is in a way following itself. Many researches have
experienced issues of unstable learning and a solution to this are target functions. [17, 32]
Let ﬁÕ(s|◊aÕ) and QÕ(s, a|◊cÕ) be the target functions for actor and critic respectively.
Initially, both are identical copies of ﬁ(s|◊a) and Q(s, a|◊c). Throughout the learning
process, however, the target functions do not receive the same update as the original ones.
Instead, each iteration the target values are slowly updated with an update factor ‹ π 1:
◊aÕ Ω ‹◊a + (1 ≠‹)◊aÕ
(4.30)
◊cÕ Ω ‹◊a + (1 ≠‹)◊cÕ
(4.31)
This adds inertia to the learning and thus can potentially slow the learning process.
However, according to [32], the gained stability is signiﬁcantly worth it.
37
==PAGE:50==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
The entire algorithm is shown in algorithm 6.
Algorithm 5: DDPG algorithm with experience buﬀer, MSE loss function and
target functions. [32]
1 Initialize parameter set ◊a and ◊c for policy ﬁ(s|◊a) and action-value FA Q(s, a|◊c);
2 Initialize target FAs for ﬁÕ and QÕ: ◊aÕ Ω ◊a, ◊cÕ Ω ◊c;
3 Set learning rates –c and –a and target update rate ‹;
4 Initialize replay buﬀer B;
5 for episode in [1,..., M] do
6
Initialize random process N for action exploration;
7
observe st;
8
for t in [0,...,T] do
9
at = ﬁ(st|◊a) + Nt;
10
execute action;
11
receive Rt+1, observe st+1;
12
store tuple < st, at, Rt+1, st+1 > in B;
13
sample random batch Bú with |Bú| tuples < sj, aj, Rj+1, sj+1 > from B;
14
for j in Bú do
15
set target yj Ω Rj+1 + “QÕ(sj+1, ﬁÕ(sj+1|◊aÕ)|◊cÕ);
16
set TD-error: ”j Ω yj ≠Q(sj, aj|◊c);
17
end
18
Update critic with learning rate –c by minimizing the loss L:
19
L(◊c) =
1
|Bú|
q
jœBú(”j)2;
20
Update actor policy with learning rate –a by gradient ascent from samples:
21
Update target parameter sets:
22
◊aÕ Ω ‹◊a + (1 ≠‹)◊aÕ;
23
◊cÕ Ω ‹◊c + (1 ≠‹)◊cÕ;
24
end
25 end
38
==PAGE:51==
4. Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
4.8
Reinforcement learning overview
Throughout this chapter, we have reviewed how value functions can be utilized to create
policies.
The introduced algorithms derived value functions for explicit state-action
combinations so that, given a state, it is always possible to evaluate which action gives the
highest expected value.
Model free, temporal diﬀerence learning methods were discussed in order to approximate
the value functions based on experience data. Three main algorithms were discussed:
• tabular Q-Learning: approximation of explicit Q values for discrete state-action
combinations.
• Deep Q-Networks: continuous Q-function approximations for state as a continuous
and explicit actions as discrete function variables.
• Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient: combination of value-function approximation
and policy function approximation (actor-critic method), that enables continuous
state and continuous action spaces.
Furthermore, concepts such as experience replay buﬀers for more eﬃcient learning and
target updates for more stable learning were explained.
Now that a set of algorithms has been introduced, the coming chapters will document the
application of the three algorithms in simpliﬁed models of the P2P market environment.
39
==PAGE:52==
5
DISCRETE ACTION POLICIES IN SIMPLIFIED
MARKET ENVIRONMENT
Throughout this and the coming chapters, we will utilize diﬀerent reinforcement learning
algorithms in order to optimally solve the P2P market trading problem under diﬀerent
conditions and understand its applicability in the context.
The complete problem formulation from section 2.2.1 included a set of multiple state and
action variables. It was formulated for a market with multiple products being traded and
the option to submit new orders deﬁned by price and quantity for all tradable products
at any given time. In addition to the trading activity, we even included variables for the
control of smart devices, as they are expected to inﬂuence our options of prosumption.
To include all of the state and action variables in a simulation would require large amounts
of data as an input (forecasts, utility curves, smart device control options, etc.). In addition,
it would require a complex model of the market environment, for which real data does not
exist (yet).
Even more important, including all of the state and action variables and utilizing model
free reinforcement learning algorithms, we would quickly loose interpretability. It easily
becomes intractable for the human to visualize and understand
• rules that the agent ﬁnds,
• errors that occur along the way or
• performance diﬀerences between diﬀerent settings and conditions.
Despite the fact that interpretability may not be the goal for a policy in a real application,
we are convinced that it is important to initially reduce the complexity of the environment
so that we can ﬁrst get to know the algorithms and understand the application better.
Later, some of the assumptions will be incrementally relaxed.
In the following section we will discuss the model assumptions made for our ﬁrst simulations.
We will then move on to apply Q-learning algorithms to learn a policy for the environment
and compare it to a proven optimal control policy.
Throughout the chapters after, we will complexify the model and utilize diﬀerent
reinforcement learning algorithms.
40
==PAGE:53==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
5.1
Modeling assumptions
First and foremost, a true and competitive continuous double auction (CDA) market
environment would entail a scenario in which each market participant could have direct
inﬂuence on the market equilibrium, spread and the entire evolution of the order book
dynamics. One could approach to model such an environment with game theoretical
techniques or multi-agent simulations. This is not the focus of our work and to simplify
the model for our simulations, we start with the liquidity taker assumption.
Liquidity taker assumption
Under the liquidity taker assumption (LTA), inﬁnite
market depth is assumed at a given market equilibrium price on both, bid and ask side.
Thus, the participant can always buy or sell any desired quantity at the current market
price equilibrium.
Under the LTA, any order is guaranteed to be accepted at the market equilibrium price.
Therefore it is not necessary to choose a speciﬁc limit price for an order and the agent only
needs to choose a quantity xt to buy or sell. Thus the transfer function for the market
holdings is simply the sum of the current holdings and the quantity bought/sold:
Xt+1 = Xt + xt
(5.1)
Price dynamics
Under the LTA, our agent does not inﬂuence the order-book’s state or
dynamics and the market equilibrium is just made up by a price evolution. To model pt,
either real data or a stochastic process can be utilized. As real data for the market setup
in this context does not exist yet, a stochastic process is modeled.
The market mechanism and framework indicates similarities with CDA intraday electricity
markets such as the EPEX SPOT Intraday Continuous [34]. Both utilize a CDA auction
mechanism and allow trading up to a short time period before the physical exchange is to
be realized.
In existing literature such as [35, 36], the price dynamics of such a market are modeled as a
continuous and stochastic process with mean reversion. The authors of both studies choose
an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process to model the dynamics as a stochastic diﬀerential
equation of three parameters. pµ denotes the long-run average, ⁄ œ R the mean reversion
speed and ‡ œ R the intensity of a Wiener process dWt respectively. The Wiener process
in this work is deﬁned as Gaussian noise. The dynamics are deﬁned as:
dpt = ⁄(pµ ≠pt)dt + ‡dWt,
t œ (0, T]
(5.2)
dWt = N(0, 1)
(5.3)
pt = p0
(5.4)
Min / max price assumption
Considering the enforced balancing mechanism (c.f. eq.
2.5), it only makes sense to clip the price dynamics within the balancing price. We assume
that agents do not buy electricity at higher prices than what they could buy it for in the
41
==PAGE:54==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
balancing market. The same holds for selling at lower prices. Accordingly, the price is
bounded to
pt œ [p≠, p+]
(5.5)
Financial resources are not scarce
First, the P2P market environment is not meant
to be a place to place large ﬁnancial investments. This intention is also reﬂected through
the rule that prohibits a participant to hold quantities that would exceed their electrical
capacities. We assume that the maximum load capacity is still within a range so that the
availability of ﬁnancial resources is not a limiting factor to purchase electrical energy. As a
matter of fact, what is scarce is the overall quantity a market player can buy or sell.
Trading sessions / product type assumption
The P2P market environment allows
for multiple products to be traded in individual trading sessions. One of the questions
to be solved here is if the action space of one RL agent should include decisions for all
product types, or if actions can be taken independent from each other.
In a real life application, the following considerations would have to be made:
• The agent’s physical prosumption can be considered a scarce resource that must
be allocated in between diﬀerent product types with the objective to maximize our
overall surplus. In addition, the market environment has a limit requirement for
the sum of all holdings of products with the same exchange interval and all market
positions have to be on the same side (produce or consume). Thus, it is necessary
to include all actions for products of the same exchange interval in the same MDP
model.
• The information space could of course still utilize information about products of
other exchange intervals such as price development etc.
• In case ﬁnancial resources are scarce, our agent would have to allocate them in the
best way towards the diﬀerent tradable products. As a result it would be worthwile to
let the RL agent automatically take care of it and include the action for all tradable
products in one MDP.
• In case that our agent’s control space incorporates smart devices that can be scheduled
over multiple exchange intervals, it would also be necessary to include all actions for
all exchange intervals in the same MDP.
In a real environment, it would be expected that there are price correlations for example
between product types for the same or adjacent (/neighboring) exchange intervals. Under
the LTA and simulated price dynamics, this would require to deﬁne correlated price
processes. To simplify the model, we start by only trading one speciﬁc product with an
independent price process
Time horizon
As we are modelling the trading of only one product, the environment
has a speciﬁcally deﬁned end. The agent can take actions up to the point of market closure
42
==PAGE:55==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
and it gets its last feedback from the environment in terms of the balancing cost. Thus,
the trading problem is naturally an episodic model with a ﬁnite time horizon t œ [0, T].
In a real world application, the problem could be formulated as both, an episodic or an
inﬁnite horizon problem, depending on the deﬁnition of the MDP. In case only products
for the same exchange interval are modelled in one MDP, it is always an episodic process,
terminated by the balancing transaction. If actions for products of all tradable exchange
intervals are modelled in the same MDP, the MDP could be deﬁned as an inﬁnite horizon
problem. It is important to take this into account, as the reward function has to be deﬁned
diﬀerently for the two scenarios.
Utility
In the objective function for the agent from equation 2.9, we included a utility
measure. This would particularly be necessary to express diﬀerences between diﬀerent
product types (e.g. renewable vs local vs regular electricity).
As for now we do not model diﬀerent product types and it is not the scope of this work to
deﬁne measures of external utility, we disregard it for our simulations.
Balancing
In case our market holdings at the end of the trading session are diﬀerent
from the actual prosumption, we would be subject to balancing.
For our ﬁrst simulation, we assume to have a ﬂexible load (e.g. battery) with an arbitrary
setpoint, so that we are not subject to balancing. As a consequence, we are trading for
proﬁt only in contrast to trading to minimize balancing or other. This assumption will be
relaxed in a later chapter.
Friction Costs
In this context, friction costs refer to any fees that may be induced by
submitting/reclaiming orders, or by being on the liquidity taker/maker side. For the ﬁrst
simulation, all types of friction cost are disregarded. Again, this assumption will be relaxed
in a later chapter.
5.1.1
Markov Decision Process for ﬁrst simulation
With all the simpliﬁcations from above implemented, the ﬁrst model breaks down to a
simple "trading one product for proﬁt" problem. We want the agent to learn a policy for
when to buy and when to sell which quantities in order to accumulate proﬁt.
The state variable made up by the current market price and the market holdings of the
agent st = (pt, Xt) and an action that is only a matter of the quantity the agent intends to
be bought/sold at = (xt). Again, positive quantities indicate to sell to the market, negative
quantities to buy from the market.
The transition function for the price is determined by the OU process, and for the holdings
it is simply the sum of the previous holdings and the quantity bought or sold. As we are
43
==PAGE:56==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
under the LTA with inﬁnite depth at market price equilibrium, every order is accepted
and the quantity traded is equal to the quantity ordered by the agent, so that:
Xt+1 = Xt + xt
(5.6)
Reward
As in this simulation we are simply trading for accumulative proﬁt. As for now we care
about the ﬁnal proﬁt, theoretically it would be possible to to only reward the agent in
its ﬁnal transition. This is common for many RL agents for example to learn games
where it just about winning vs loosing. For the electricity trading problem, however, it
would be highly ineﬃcient not to reinforce the agent along the way. It could be nearly
impossible, or at least require immense amounts of training data, to backpropagate a
terminal reward through the value function to explicit actions during the trading session
of possibly thousands of timesteps.
However, the ﬁnal proﬁt can intuitively be expressed as the accumulated revenues. Thus,
the reward Rt+1 is deﬁned by the revenue generated by the trading activity at time t:
Rt+1 = pt ú xt
(5.7)
5.1.2
Model overview
The model that is developed for the ﬁrst simulations reduces to one trading session, a
stochastic process for the equilibrium price and an order quantity as the action. This is
arguably a strong simpliﬁcation compared to the general problem formulation from section
2.2.1. Again, the main motivation for that is to get to know the reinforcement learning
algorithms in this context and not loose interpretability of performance, policies and value
functions.
In addition to the outlined reasons, a proven optimal solution exists to a similar problem.
That way, we will be able to compare the result of the reinforcement learning agent to the
optimal solution.
5.2
Optimal control
Before we start utilizing a RL algorithm to learn a policy to the MDP, we now review a
proven optimal control method for a similar problem which will help as a reference later.
The authors in [35] analytically solve an inﬁnite horizon trading problem of an OU-process
driven market as a stochastic optimal control problem.
The simpliﬁed problem is comprised of a stochastic diﬀerential equation price process and
portfolio dynamics that can easily be modeled as a feedback loop mechanism. The problem
can be modeled in a continuous and low-dimensional space and thus be solved analytically.
The authors in [35] apply a technique called analytic dynamic programming. Eventually,
the method is the equivalent to solving Bellmans optimality equation (cf. eq. 4.17) in a
44
==PAGE:57==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
continuous time representation. In fact, the continuous approach was the predecessor of
the discrete one.
5.2.1
Result and analysis
With an objective function to maximize the logarithm of the cumulative proﬁt, the
deterministic optimal control policy is stated in equation 5.8. Here, Crisk
t
is the total
capital that the agent is willing to risk in the market and Xt is of course the current market
holdings.
ﬁú(Crisk
t
, Xt, pt) =
⁄
2‡2 (pt ≠pµ)Crisk
t
≠Xt
(5.8)
With a static Crisk
t
, the policy attempts to control the overall market holdings proportionally
to the market price. The slope is determined by the OU-process’ parameters and the risk
capital. The distance between the current market price pt and it’s long run average pµ
determine the boldness of the desired market holdings: The further pt diverges from its
long run average, the more aggressive the market holdings shall be.
However, the policy is the solution for an inﬁnite horizon trading problem, meaning that
there is no market closure time or balancing mechanism assumed. Furthermore, the control
policy does not account for the market rule of a minimum/maximum market holdings
(c.f. sec. 2.1.3). To account for min/max rule, we have clipped the control policy and
plotted it in ﬁgure 5.1 for diﬀerent risk capitals. The graphic shows the control policy
for a normalized price and holdings space. Here, the price bounds (e.g. eq. 5.5) and the
maximum market holdings are both set to [-1,1]. As the policy is in the same units as the
market holdings, its bounds are [-2, 2], so that it is possible for the agent to switch from
maximum to minimum holdings or vice versa with one action.
45
==PAGE:58==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
Figure 5.1. Clipped optimal control policy for OU price dynamics.
As seen in the graphic, a higher risk capital just increases the slope and an inﬁnitely high
risk capital would lead to a binary "all-in" strategy. Eventually, the strategies attempt
to control the overall market position. The binary strategy in green always aims for a
market position equal to the sign of the current market price (target: Xt+1 = sign(pt); so
xt = sign(pt) ≠Xt). For the pink strategy, we have chosen a risk capital so that the agent
commits its full capacity to the market when the the price is at its bounds of -1 or 1 and
a directly proportional market holdings for any price in between. So the risk capital is
Crisk = 2‡2
⁄
and the targeted market holdings Xt+1 = pt; so xt = pt ≠Xt. Remember here
that we are still in normalized space [-1, 1] for both, price and maximum allowed market
holdings, which is why we do not need to transform the units.
In the following sections we will refer to the two explained strategies as "the binary strategy"
or "all-in strategy" and "the linear strategy".
In ﬁgure 5.2, we compare both strategies for a sampled price evolution (OU(⁄ = 3·10≠3, ‡ =
3 · 10≠2, pµ = 0)) for 10 000 timesteps. The ﬁrst graph shows the price, the second the
market tholdings and in the third, the dynamics of the according portfolio value for both
strategies are plotted. Portfolio value is measured as the sum of cash holdings and current
market holdings valued at pt.
46
==PAGE:59==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
Figure 5.2. Price, holdings and portfolio value (PV) dynamics for linear and binary control policy.
The ﬁrst thing to stick out is that the linear strategy agent is obviously changing its market
position at every timestep while the binary strategy agent only changes it’s market position
whenever the price crosses the mean, which happens much less frequently for the sampled
price process.
On average, the gains of the portfolio value are increasing at a similar rate for both
strategies. However, the portfolio value for the binary strategy is much more volatile
compared to the linear strategy. Although this is expected as the binary strategy is by
deﬁnition the riskier strategy (high Crisk in eq. 5.8).
5.3
Tabular Q-Learning agent
The optimal control solution can only be calculated when the OU-process parameters are
known. In a real life scenario, the best we could do is to use techniques such as maximum
likelihood estimation to estimate the parameters of a hidden OU process. Besides, if the
real price dynamics do not follow an OU process or if there are additional patterns in the
price process next to the pure OU dynamics, the application of the optimal control policy
is limited. Furthermore, the analytic solution is not scalable for problems with more state
and / or action dimensions.
A reinforcement learning agent on the other hand is model free and does not require
parameter estimations. On top of that it can ﬁnd optimal policies for larger state and
action space problems.
In our ﬁrst analysis, we apply a tabular Q-learning algorithm to approximate state
47
==PAGE:60==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
and action-values and derive a greedy policy from it. We will then interpret the value
approximations and compare the policy with the optimal control solution.
Simulation setup and hyperparameter settings
Both state dimensions (pt, Xt) are discretized to 11 values in [≠1, 1], which gives a total
of 121 possible states. In order to be able to succeed in each of the holding values with
one order, the action space (xt œ [≠2, 2]) is discretized in 21 values. However only 11
actions are available in each state due to the maximum holdings rule. For example: if
ones holdings are 0.8, the available actions in this particular state are xt œ [≠1.8, 0.2].
Discretizing the three variables leads to a total of 1331 state-action pairs for which the
Q-learning algorithm should learn values.
For the learning rate –, as a rule of thumb we can estimate that at least 1
– visits for each
state-action combination should be considered for a decent approximation. For example,
for – = 10≠3 this leads to approximately 106 timesteps of pure exploration to learn an
approximation for each action-value. We quickly realize that we are subject to the curse of
dimensionality and we have not even considered that the number of visits per state is not
evenly distributed. Due to the mean reverting price process, prices that are close to the
mean are visited more frequently than prices more distant.
This is not to say that this number of steps is necessary to ﬁnd a good policy. It is only
necessary to generate reasonable value approximations. The ﬁnal policy is already found
once the argument for the maximum action-value in a speciﬁc state doesn’t change.
In the following table we show the setpoints for the algorithm hyperparameters and the
price process used for the ﬁrst simulation.
Algorithm
tabular Q-Learning Number of episodes
6000
Timesteps per episode
5000
Learning rate –
2 · 10≠3
Discount factor “
0.99
Exploration rate ‘
linearly decreasing from
1 for the ﬁrst episode to
0.1 for episode 3000 and all episodes after
Price process
as in ﬁgure 5.2
(OU(⁄ = 3 · 10≠3, ‡ = 3 · 10≠2, pµ = 0))
Table 5.1. Parameter settings for Q-Learning agent.
Results
The following ﬁgures show the learned policy, state values and the maximum action value
for each state (maxaœAs(Q(s, a))).
48
==PAGE:61==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
Figure 5.3. Learned policy function.
Figure 5.4. Learned action values for best
action in each state respectively.
Figure 5.5. Learned state values.
First, we note that the agent ﬁnds the all-in policy as explained in the previous section.
Despite the fact that it is a bit noisy, which we would expect to go away for smaller learning
rates and longer training periods.
Both, action- and state-value approximations indicates maximum values for (pt, Xt) =
(≠1, 1) and (1, ≠1), whereas the minimum values are indicated for (≠1, ≠1) and (1, 1)
respectively. In (1, -1), for example, the agent can sell 2 units for a price of 1 per unit and
thus receive an immediate reward of 2. At (1, 1) on the other hand, it can buy at the
highest price and generate negative revenue or do nothing. Not buying or selling anything
in this state is of course the best thing to do, which is why the maximum action-value in
this state is close to 0. It is not exactly zero because of expected future rewards valued
through the discount factor.
Note that despite the fact that both state- and action-value approximations indicate very
similar shapes, the scale is shifted. The state-value in the worst case state is actually below
zero. This is due to the fact that the algorithm is still exploring and thus there is a certain
49
==PAGE:62==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
probability greater zero of the agent taking a sub-optimal action and receiving a negative
reward.
The edges indicate that these state-action combinations have not been visited often enough.
Since the values were initialized at zero, the approximation is still below its real value.
The fact that these combinations have not been visited as often is of course ﬁrst due to
the price process and second due to the fact that our agent is following its policy which
does not allow us to end up in these cases so often.
5.3.1
Tabular Q-Learning Recap
First and foremost, we quickly realized that we are subject to the curse of dimensionality,
when having to discretize the naturally continuous state and action spaces. For now, the
state space included two dimensions while the action space only one. Increasing either one
of the spaces, we would quickly need extremely long training times. The simulation from
above required 64 minutes on a 2017 3.1 GHz Core i5 processor.
The second constraining factor would be data. With the artiﬁcially created price process,
it is straight forward to generate sample data. However if we would rely on real data
points, it may be challenging to accumulate the necessary amounts of data.
Furthermore throughout the training process, we realized that the settings of the
hyperparameters had a high impact on convergence speed and quality of the learned
policy.
When changing the learning rate –, we found out that higher learning rates often lead to
the policy getting stuck in local maxima rather than ﬁnding an overall global policy. Lower
learning rates signiﬁcantly increased the convergance time. Furthermore, threshold for –
at which the agent is more likely to get stuck in a local policy was strongly inﬂuenced by
the standard deviation of the Wiener process in the OU price dynamics. We should note,
that a noisy process required lower learning rates in order to not get stuck in local policies.
The discount factor “ did not inﬂuence the speed of ﬁnding the approximately binary
policy. However,a high discount factor signiﬁcantly increased the convergence speed of
the value functions. Obviously this seems intuitive as for a high discount factor, future
rewards must slowly be passed backwards through a long sequence.
Overall, the Q-learning agent was able to learn a policy that buys energy units whenever
the price is below its long time mean and it sells units whenever the price is above its long
time mean. The policy learned is approximately the same as the optimal control method
for a risk neutral. Although it generates proﬁt for the OU process over the long run, the
all-in strategy may not be desirable as our portfolio value is subject to high variance and
much balancing would be necessary in the balancing market. So far neither of these two
aspects have been included in the MDP model, so it is expected and will be addressed
later.
Before, we will address learning eﬃciency and slightly complexify the model in the coming
section.
50
==PAGE:63==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
5.4
Q-function approximation agent with continuous state
space
Throughout this section, we will relax the assumption of no friction cost and introduce a
ﬁxed transaction fee. More importantly, we will focus on the use of the Deep Q-Network
algorithm to increase learning eﬃciency and utilize a continuous state space.
Simulation setup and hyperparameter settings
Again, the action space is discretized in 21 values, while the state space is taken as
continuous variables. For the function approximations, we use ANNs with 2 layers, 16
neurons each and rectiﬁed linear activation functions from the tensorﬂow project for python
[37]. As a loss function for the gradient descent, we use the mean squared error.
The hyperparameter setpoints are set as followed:
RL algorithm
Deep Q-Network
Function Approximation
ANN 2 layers x 16 neurons with
rectiﬁed linear activation functions
Number of episodes
200
Timesteps per episode
5000
Capacity of experience buﬀer |B|
30000
Batch size for experience replay
5000
Learning rate –
2 · 10≠3
Discount factor “
0.99
Exploration rate ‘
linearly decreasing from
1 in the ﬁrst episode to
0.1 in episode 100 and all episodes after
Price process
as in ﬁgure 5.2
(OU(⁄ = 3 · 10≠3, ‡ = 3 · 10≠2, pµ = 0))
Table 5.2. Parameter settings for DQN learning agent.
For the coming simulation, we will include a ﬁxed fee of 0.2 that is charged every time the
agent submits an order with a quantity xt ”= 0 to the market. Therefore, the revenue and
reward functions are updated compared to the previous MDP from section 5.1.1, all other
equations stay the same.
Rt+1 = pt ú xt ≠0.2 · abs(sign(xt))
(5.9)
5.4.1
Results
The following ﬁgure (5.6) shows the learned policy. Generally we also see a similar all-in
strategy as in the previous simulation. The diﬀerence being that there is a ﬂat area without
any purchase or sale in the middle of the policy.
51
==PAGE:64==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
Figure 5.6. Policy of DQN agent for market with transaction costs.
Obviously, the ﬂat area in the middle is due to the transaction cost. The agent is only
willing to make a transaction if the expected proﬁt exceeds the transaction cost.
We notice that despite the signiﬁcantly fewer training episodes, the policy is much less
noisy than the tabular Q-learning one. After all, in the previous simulation for Q-learning
the algorithm had to learn 1331 explicit state-action values. In the DQN approach the
agent is approximating the weights for 21 function approximations (one for each possible
action). Thus, the agent is generalizing its knowledge from experience in a much more
eﬃcient way.
5.4.2
Learnings from Q-function approximation application
When experimenting with diﬀerent hyperparameter setups, we realized that the success of
the DQN was very hyperparameter sensitive. For example, greater buﬀer capacity and
batch size allowed higher learning rates. Our interpretation is that greater buﬀer sizes
comprised transitions from a broader range. Updates of the function approximations were
than less local and more global, over a broader range of the state space.
The DQN algorithm combined with experience replay was able to drastically reduce the
amount of experience that was needed until a policy converged (6000 episodes in tabular Q-
Learning vs. 200 episodes with DQN). We attribute that to both, the more general function
approximation and the use of the experience replay method. The overall simulation time
cut to 10% compared to the tabular Q-learning approach (approx. 6 minutes), despite the
fact that the update time per timestep increased. We expect the increase in computation
time per timestep to more complex calculations that are necessary. First, each update
considers a whole batch with 5000 transitions and in addition the gradient descent with
multi-layer ANN requires more computation.
52
==PAGE:65==
5. Discrete Action Policies in Simpliﬁed Market Environment
The utilized function approximations allowed us to utilize continuous state variables.
However, the action space still had to be discretized. As the current setup only includes
one dimension in the action space, we were not cursed by the curse of dimensionality. If
the algorithm would be scaled up to deal with actions in multiple dimensions (e.g. bidding
quantitiies for multiple products or include control variables for smart devices), due to
the curse of dimensionality, the number of necessary discrete actions would exponentially
increase. As a consequent it is expected to require much more data to converge to a good
policy.
In chapter 4.7, we were already introduced to the DDPG algorithm which is supposed to
overcome the challenges. The following chapter will discuss this application.
53
==PAGE:66==
6
CONTINUOUS ACTION POLICIES WITH
BALANCING RISK
As a reminder, the balancing mechanism steps in whenever an agent traded a diﬀerent
quantity in the market compared to its measured prosumption. In the previous chapter,
the balancing mechanism was not included in any way. For this reason, the agent simply
learned to execute proﬁtable trades in the sense that it would buy electricity whenever
the price is below its long time average and it would sell whenever the price is above its
long time average. The agent was not penalized for holding a position at the end of the
exchange interval.
This will be the focus of this chapter. The agent shall learn that it is subject to balancing
in case there is a mismatch between market holdings and the realization of prosumption at
the end of the trading session. We will ﬁrst describe how we ﬁrst included the balancing
cost in the MDP in the most simple way and analyze why the results were not promising.
We then introduce a diﬀerent way to asses the risk of balancing throughout trading.
Next to the inclusion of the balancing mechanism, we will utilize the DDPG algorithm
throughout this chapter to learn continuous action policies.
6.1
Balancing in Markov Decision Process
The balancing revenue was originally deﬁned in equation 2.5 for multiple product types.
For just one product, with the realization as XÕ and market holdings XT at market closure
time, we review the balancing revenue as
Υ = p≠[XÕ ≠XT ]+ + p+[XÕ ≠XT ]≠.
(6.1)
Throughout the trading session, the realization is of course not known yet and the best
estimate we can include is the forecast fXÕ
t
. Furthermore, the terminal holdings XT is not
known before market closure, so at time t, the agent has only knowledge of its current
market holdings Xt.
The observation of the state from the previous simulations comprised only price and
holdings (st = (pt, Xt)). In order to trade towards speciﬁc market holdings at the end of
the session, it is necessary to include at least two additional dimensions in the state space:
time and a prosumption forecast. We include time because the agent needs to be able to
asses how much time is left for trading until the market closes and a forecast so that the
agent has a target for its holdings. We consider time as normalized time left. Thus, the
54
==PAGE:67==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
new state is
Ët = 1 ≠(t/T)
(6.2)
st = (pt, Xt, fXÕ
t
, Ët)
(6.3)
6.1.1
Balancing as terminal revenue
The simplest approach to include the balancing mechanism is to include the it as a ﬁnal
(terminal) revenue. In this case, we include Υ in the reward of the ﬁnal transition RT .
With a high discount factor “ (future rewards given high or equal signiﬁcance compared
to short term rewards), ideally the agent would back-propagate the terminal revenue to
previous states and learn that towards the end of the trading session it becomes valuable
to have holdings close or equal to the forecast.
After all, the concept of value functions is to evaluate a state or a state-action combination
in consideration of the expected future. If balancing settlements are part of the future, the
reinforcement agent should be able to learn a representation of that in its value function
and derive an according policy from it.
We ﬁrst tested a DQN agent for the simplest scenario: a deterministic and perfect forecast
of the realization (’t œ [0, T] : fXÕ
t
= XÕ). For both, “ = 0.99 and “ = 1, the agents
learned the same binary policy as in the previous chapter and did not diﬀerentiate the
policy over time. We would expect that at least towards the end of the trading session,
the policy would change towards a policy that aims for the forecast as holdings.
The following paragraphs summarize our observations, interpretation and thought process
regarding the result:
OU process parameters
With a binary policy and OU process driven price dynamics,
the agent changes its position and can generate proﬁt each time the price crosses the mean.
The number of such "mean-crossings" depends on the OU process parameters (OU(⁄, ‡, pµ))
and the length of the episode. More crossings are experienced in case the OU parameters
either have a strong standard deviation for the Wiener process part of equation 5.2, or if
the mean reversion factor is strong. For processes with many mean-crossings, overall larger
proﬁts can be accumulated with the binary policy. In such cases, the balancing revenue
at the end is of less signiﬁcance as it makes up a relatively low revenue compared to the
revenue from all transactions throughout trading.
At this point we refer to ﬁgure 5.2 for a review and visualization of the price process
parameters that we have chosen for all simulations that are documented in this work.
Few transitions including balancing costs
The total length of the trading session for
all simulations shown in this work is 5000 steps. Including balancing costs in the simulation
means that every 5000th step, a diﬀerent reward / value pattern appears compared to all
other steps. This is such a low fraction from the perspective of an agent that the terminal
55
==PAGE:68==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
balancing cost quickly seems like an outlier. Furthermore, the environment is already noisy
so that the terminal cost is easily dismissed as noise. Of course the agent does not do any
formal outlier or noise analysis (yet), but we use it as an analogy.
Back-propagation of balancing revenue
With every 5000th transition including a
diﬀerent pattern that needs to be reﬂected in the value function, a lot of episodes of training
would be needed so that the agent can learn a good policy that reﬂects the expected
balancing revenue. The algorithm shall learn that the closer it gets towards market closure
time, the higher the value is for states with holdings close to the forecast. However, the
algorithm is moving forward in time from t = 0 to t = T, but it has to back-propagate the
expected revenue from t = T to earlier states. Again, intuitively that would require many
episodic iterations.
Overcoming balancing issues
We see two options in order to overcome the outlined
issues. The ﬁrst option would be to adjust the algorithm in a way that a higher learning
rate is used for terminal states or that the terminal transition is explicitly reinforced more
often. With experience replay learning, it could be implemented in a straightforward way.
Alternatively, we can redeﬁne the Markov Decision Process. With a forecast, the balancing
revenue can at least be estimated. In the following section, we will deﬁne a balancing risk
assessment mechanism that will be included in the reward term of the Markov Decision
Process.
6.2
Balancing risk assesment
We have seen that if no risk measure is given, the agent ﬁnds an all-in strategy, trying to
trade for proﬁt only. The risk relates to a situation where our holdings at market closure
time are diﬀerent from our actual prosumption and we have to settle the diﬀerence with
the balancing mechanism. If we want to minimize the risk of incurring such balancing
costs, we can include an expected balancing cost in the reward and thus reward the agent
for trading towards holdings close to our forecasted realization.
The expected balancing revenue in respect to the current market holdings and the forecasted
prosumption can be expressed as
E
Ë
p≠[fXÕ
t
≠Xt]+ + p+[fXÕ
t
≠Xt]≠È
(6.4)
Let fXÕ
t
= N(fXÕµ
t
, fXÕ‡
t
) be a probabilistic forecast with a mean and a standard deviation
from which we can sample a set of scenarios c œ Ct (|Ct| = number of scenarios).
To evaluate the risk, we utilize a risk measure called the conditional value at risk. Therefor,
let ‰ œ [0, 1] be a risk aversion factor, so that we evaluate the risk with (1 ≠‰)|Ct| of
the worst case scenarios. The sub-set of the worst case scenarios is those for which the
expected Υ entails the greatest loss for the agent. We note Cú
t as the sub-set with the
56
==PAGE:69==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
worst case scenarios and calculate the expected revenue due to balancing as Lt
Lt =
ÿ
cœCú
t
1
(1 ≠‰)|Ct|
Ë
p≠[c ≠Xt]+ + p+[c ≠Xt]≠È
.
(6.5)
Again, a negative revenue means a penalty payment going away from the agent and a
positive revenue is a monetary income. With this simple calculation, we evaluate how
distant the current market holdings are from the sub-set and what balancing revenue that
would result in. The risk aversion factor determines throughout which spectrum of all
scenarios the samples are taken. The following ﬁgure shows the cumulative histogram of
an example set of 10000 scenarios for
• Xt = 0.1 (sold 0.1 units to the market),
• fXÕµ
t
= ≠0.2 (0.2 consumption),
• fXÕ‡
t
= 0.1,
• [p≠, p+] = [1, 2] .
Figure 6.1. Sample of scenarios for risk evaluation.
We note that for the chosen risk aversion factor ‰ = 0.8, the expected balancing revenue is
calculated as -0.85 monetary units in revenue. It is important to be aware that for a risk
neutral agent ‰ = 0, the expected revenue Lt ”= 0. ‰ = 0 simply means that all samples
are taken into consideration (cf. ﬁgure 6.1).
So if the expected balancing revenue Lt would directly be reinforced in the reward function
of the agent, the agent would in almost any scenario experience a penalty. However, we may
want the agent to be allowed to trade "for the sake of proﬁt" in the beginning of a trading
session and then gradually trade towards minimizing the expected loss due to balancing.
Therefore, we include a weight factor wt in the expected balancing reinforcement for the
agent. We note the weighted expected balancing Yt
Yt = wtLt .
(6.6)
57
==PAGE:70==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
6.2.1
Expected balancing penalty example
To visualize the mechanism, the following graphic shows an example evolution for an
imaginary scenario under the following conditions:
• constant market holdings Xt = 0.1 (sold 0.1 units of production to the market),
• constant forecast mean fXÕµ
t
= ≠0.2 (0.2 units of consumption),
• gradually declining standard deviation from fXÕ‡
0
= 0.15 to fXÕ‡
T
= 0.05 (to simulate
improving accuracy of incoming forecasts),
• gradually increasing risk aversion factor from ‰2000 = 0 to ‰T = 0.8,
• gradually increasing weight factor from w1000 = 0 to wT = 1,
• [p≠, p+] = [1, 2],
• scenarios generated from 1000 samples.
Figure 6.2. Expected revenue for risk modelling example.
So in the beginning up to t = 1000, no matter what the market holdings are, the weighted
expected balancing, because wt = 0 thus Yt = 0. Afterwards, we start including the risk
assessment and gradually weigh it more. At t = 2000, the risk aversion factor ‰ starts to
increase.
In the bottom plot of the ﬁgure, Lt and Yt are shown. Here we can see why we choose to
include the weight factor w. Despite the fact that the risk aversion factor ‰ is 0 in the
beginning, an expected revenue Lt < 0 is computed.
The reason why Lt is increasing for the ﬁrst 2000 steps despite a constant ‰t is of course
the increasing accuracy of the forecast (decreasing standard deviation).
58
==PAGE:71==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
6.2.2
Reinforcement in reward
Now the agent shall be penalized for not being risk averse in accordance to ‰ and w. Yt
will be included in the reward function. Previously, the reward function Rt+1 was deﬁned
as the relative change in cash holdings compared to the previous timestamp (revenue from
trades at t). We will follow the same principle here and deﬁne the reward of the MDP as
Rt+1 = pt ú xt + (Yt+1 ≠Yt).
(6.7)
6.3
DDPG agent with continuous action
In the previous section, we have deﬁned a risk measure for expected balancing costs that
we will include in the simulation. In addition to the change of the MDP deﬁnition, we
will utilize the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient algorithm in order to learn a policy
function approximation that maps a continuous state variable to a continuous action
deterministically. This is done by simultaneously approximating one general value function
Q(s, a|◊c) which guides a policy function approximation towards improvement through
gradient ascent as explained in chapter 4.7.
Simulation setup and hyperparameter settings
In the DDPG algorithm, actor and critic are separate function approximations and can
thus be updated with diﬀerent learning rates. As the critic is in a way guiding the actor,
it is important to set a higher learning rate for the critic than the actor [38].
For exploration, we simply implement an ‘-greedy strategy in the sense that with an ‘
probability, a random action is chosen from a uniform distribution over the available action
space Ast.
Overall, due to the target updates and the additional function approximation, the number
of hyperparameter increases. We have been successfull in converging to a policy with the
following settings:
59
==PAGE:72==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
Algorithm
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Function approximation actor and critic
each 2 layers x 32 neurons ANN with
rectiﬁed linear activation functions
Number of episodes
100
Timesteps per episode
5000
Capacity of experience buﬀer |B|
100000
Batch size for experience replay
5000
Learning rate actor –a
5 · 10≠5
Learning rate critic –c
5 · 10≠4
Target update rate ‹
0.001
Discount factor “
0.99
Exploration process
with ‘ = 0.1 probability
choose random action from
uniform distribution over action space
Price process
as in ﬁgure 5.2
(OU(⁄ = 3 · 10≠3, ‡ = 3 · 10≠2, pµ = 0))
Table 6.1. Parameter settings for DDPG learning agent
First and foremost, the following simulation does not include a transaction cost
like those from the previously shown simulation in chapter 5.4. Due to the continuous
action space, test simulations have shown that the policy function approximation is having
diﬃculties to "ﬁnd" the sweet spot of xt = 0 in order to avoid the transaction fee. This
seems intuitive as the continuous policy is very unlikely to explore precisely xt = 0. In
future work, this could of course be overcome either by manually including a binary
parameter in the policy, or by manually enforcing exploration of the action xt = 0 so that
it will be recognized.
The mean for the prosumption forecast is randomly chosen for each episode, but does
not change throughout an episode.
The state variable is deﬁned as in equation 6.3
(st = (pt, Xt, fXÕ
t
, Ët)). Risk aversion factor, weight and standard deviation of the forecast
are deﬁned exactly as shown in the penalty example from ﬁgure 6.2, so they linearly change
throughout the trading session.
6.3.1
Result
As the state variable now has more dimensions than we can visualize in one ﬁgure, the
following three ﬁgures show the policy for a ﬁxed forecast fXÕ
t
= ≠0.2 and three diﬀerent
timesteps (t = [0, 2500, 5000]). This way we can see the evolution of the policy from the
beginning to the end of a trading session.
60
==PAGE:73==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
Figure 6.3. Learned policy function for DDPG
algorithm for f XÕ
t
= ≠0.2 at t = 0.
Figure 6.4. Learned policy function for DDPG
algorithm for f XÕ
t
= ≠0.2 at t =
T = 5000.
Figure 6.5. Learned policy function for DDPG algorithm for f XÕ
t
= ≠0.2 at t = 2500.
First, it appears obvious that the found policy for the beginning of a trading session (ﬁg.
6.3) is the same binary "all-in" policy as described in the optimal control and tabular
Q-Learning section (cf. chapter 5.2 and 5.3). As in the beginning, the weight for the
expected balancing reinforcement is set to w0 = 0, this is expected.
Next, looking at the policy for the ﬁnal time step of the trading session (ﬁg. 6.4), we can
see that the policy is attempting to achieve market holdings equal to those of the forecast.
The most obvious place to see this are the edges of holdings. For holdings of -1, the policy
is approximately 0.8 for any price, which means that Xt + ﬁ(s|◊a) ¥ fXÕ
t
. The price edges
(price -1 and 1) appear to be a bit of compared to the rest of the policy. Just like in
chapter the results from the tabular Q-learning approach (chapter 5.3, we attribute this to
the fact that the extreme price states are not visited as often and are thus updated less
often. The direction of the drift makes even more sense when considering where the policy
is coming from from earlier time steps.
61
==PAGE:74==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
We have seen that the policy in the beginning is trading in an "all-in" for proﬁt manner
and the ﬁnal policy trades precisely towards the forecast. The policy for time steps in
between indicates a gradual change from one to the other. Figure 6.5 shows the policy
for the middle of the trading session and we can see how the binary policy from the start
opens up towards the ﬁnal policy. We interpret, that in case the guaranteed proﬁt exceeds
the penalty calculated from the expected balancing, the agent is willing to trade for the
sake of a proﬁtable opportunity. Otherwise, it approaches holdings equal to the forecast.
6.3.2
Learnings from balancing risk and continuous action policy
In the beginning of this chapter we identiﬁed the reasons why we thought it to be intuitive
to reinforce a risk measure to the agent through the reward. The main motivation being
that a terminal penalty from balancing would make the learning ineﬃcient due to the
necessary back-propagation of the value and it could potentially be marginilized by the
environment’s noise and thus hardly be identiﬁed.
The approach we chose was to compute a conditional value at risk and reinforce it as part of
the reward function for the agent. Interestingly, this approach is in a sense comparable
to the cost function approximation approach: the calculated balancing revenue that
is reinforced could be described as an expectated cost to go. Thus, this approach in a way
combines three of the four policy design strategies identiﬁed in chapter 3: value function
approximations, policy function approximation and cost function approximations
The result was that the agent did indeed adjust its policy and aimed to trade towards
holdings equal to the forecast. We were able to identify and visualize how the policy
adjusted over time with an increasing weight and risk aversion factor.
Next to the inclusion of a risk measure, we applied the DDPG algorithm, which
approximated an explicit policy function ﬁ(s|◊a) and an action value function Q(s, a|◊c) for
a continuous state and action space. Compared to the DQN algorithm, this allowed us
to directly parameterize a policy function and parametrically deﬁne a Q-function without
the discretization of the actions. The DDPG simulation increased in 2 additional state
dimensions compared to the DQN simulation ((pt, Xt, fXÕ
t
, Ët) vs. (pt, Xt)) and was trained
with half the number of episodes of training (100 vs. 200). We attribute this to the broader
generalization for continuous action spaces and the potentially more stable target updating
method. This seems promising and we expect that with this approach, the algorithm could
be scaled to high dimensional problems.
Despite the fact that only half the number episodes were trained, we experienced a signiﬁcant
increase in computation time from 6 minutes for the DQN simulation to 132 minutes for the
DDPG simulation with the same batch size (2017 3.1 GHz Core i5 processor). We would
attribute the increase in simulation time to the larger size of the ANNs which increases
the computation of the gradient. Additionally, in the DQN the gradient update was done
once for the Q-function, while with the DDPG algorithm two gradient updates are done
each iteration. One of which is even the gradient across the two function approximations.
Overall, it appears that by applying the DDPG algorithm, the curses of dimensionality
62
==PAGE:75==
6. Continuous Action Policies with Balancing Risk
can be overcome and the approach could in the best case be extended to large dimensional
state and action spaces. A disadvantage however was that for a simulation with transaction
cost, the continuous action approach was not naturally able to ﬁnd the "sweet spot" of not
bidding anything to avoid transaction costs. This is an important learning as a method
shall be developed in case such binary or discretized costs exist.
63
==PAGE:76==
7
CONCLUSION
In the beginning of this work, we reviewed the market structure as proposed in [1]. We
then moved on to deﬁne an objective for a participating agent and formulated a sequential
decision making problem. With the problem structure and objective function deﬁned, it was
then necessary to discuss diﬀerent policy design strategies. We followed the conventions of [9]
and deﬁned four main classes of strategies: direct lookahead approximations, cost function
approximations, value function approximations and policy function approximations.
We decided that the approach of value function approximations seemed to be most suited
to our problem as it evaluates actions in the context of the future and it could naturally be
implemented without knowledge of a transfer function. When studying diﬀerent algorithms
from the reinforcement learning community, we realized that value function approximations
can actually be combined with policy function approximations in an intuitive way and
the resulting actor-critic method is scalable to continuous and large dimensional spaces.
Simulations with the DDPG algorithm showed that it could signiﬁcantly reduce the amount
of necessary experience to converge to a policy compared to the discretized methods.
Without any measure of expected balancing, the algorithms would learn a simple "buy
maximum when price below mean" and "sell maximum when price above mean" pol-
icy. In order to minimize the risk of being penalized due to a mismatch in the balancing
market, we introduced a risk measure that was reinforced as an expected value risk. In-
terestingly, this approach was in a sense comparable to the cost function approach: the
penalty that we reinforced could be described as an expected cost to go and is indeed a
function of state and action, like in cost function approximations (cf. chapter 3.2.3).
Thus, we ended up utilizing a combination of strategies from three diﬀerent
policy design strategy classes: value function, policy function and cost function
approximations.
7.1
Challenges and learnings
The two major challenges during this work regarded the deﬁnition of the Markov Decision
Process and hyperparameter settings for the diﬀerent algorithms.
Regarding hyperparameters, it had not been our aim to extensively study the impact
of diﬀerent hyperparameter settings, but we were often faced with diﬃculties and
inconsistencies regarding the set points. The DDPG algorithm, for example, has more
than 10 hyperparameters that can be set independently. We were often confronted with
non-converging simulations and it required many iterations of trying diﬀerent parameter
combinations. In addition, the fact that we had the freedom to make diﬀerent settings to
64
==PAGE:77==
7. Conclusion
the price process did not simplify the case as it added additional parameters to set. We
realized that for diﬀerent OU-parameter settings, diﬀerent hyperparameter set points for
the algorithms were necessary to achieve similar results.
Overall, we cannot emphasize enough how valuable it was to fully investigate the learning
behavior of the simplest algorithm (tabular Q-learning) and move from there step by
step. A crucial part to the learning process was to reduce the problem to a number of
dimensions that could be visualized graphically and interpreted easily. We then went
on to visualize each iteration of function approximation updates to get to the core of
the inﬂuence of diﬀerent hyperparameters. Only afterwards were we able to utilize more
complex algorithms.
7.2
Key take aways
In retrospect, all policies that were found by the RL agents throughout this work could
easily have been identiﬁed and set manually. Especially considering the fact that the
environment was simpliﬁed to a minimum representation. All policies could have been
represented by simple buy, sell, hold thresholds with the addition of a target of the forecast
for the last scenario. From that perspective, the algorithms did not achieve anything that
could not have been deﬁned by hand. The two strategies cost function approximation and
/ or policy function approximation could quickly have led to the same result.
However, the promising aspect is that the RL agents were able to ﬁnd the policies completely
model free, simply relying on exploration of the environment. Furthermore, the approach
is at least in theory scalable to higher dimensions and feature extraction methods can
easily be applied.
Overall there seems to be potential in the approach but signiﬁcant scepticism remains.
One of the major diﬃculties we see is that once the method is applied to more state and
action dimensions, the policies and value functions quickly lose interpretability and thus
turn into a black box. Considering the facts that
• we encountered major diﬃculties with hyperparameters and
• the main tool that enabled us to overcome those issues was visualizing policy and
value functions,
we are critically minded towards scaling this approach to a real environment. Furthermore,
we were not able to ﬁnd "stable" set points in the sense that similar results could be
achieved for diﬀerent settings of the OU price process. Thus it seems diﬃcult to formulate
a general agent that will be able to adjust to changing environment dynamics. Although
promising methods such as automatic learning rate adjustments are being studied. [39]
If anything, we estimate that only algorithms that allow continuous representations of
both, state and action space, are scalable and reasonable methods for the P2P electricity
trading problem. First, they overcome the curse of dimensionality and second, signiﬁcantly
less amounts of data are necessary to approximate policy and value functions.
65
==PAGE:78==
7. Conclusion
7.3
Future work
The most obvious next step to be explored is to extend the environment to include more
dimensions with multiple product types for diﬀerent exchange intervals. Proper simulations
would require
• deﬁnitions of utility functions in order to compare the value of the prosumption of
diﬀerent product types,
• price processes that are somehow correlated to simulate a real market environment.
Another interesting way to extend this work is to investigate closed market environment
with a number of agents, all using diﬀerent (or the same) kind of strategies and algorithms.
Lastly, throughout this work, all policy design strategies were model free, so without
any knowledge or approximation of a transfer function. Depending on the environment
deﬁnition, transfer function approximations (e.g. system identiﬁcations) could be a valuable
input to the agent and / or would allow the use of completely diﬀerent policy design
strategies such as model predictive control.
66
==PAGE:79==
REFERENCES
[1]
Helge Stefan Esch, Fabio Moret, Pierre Pinson, and Andrea Marin Radoszynski.
Online matching and preferences in future electricity markets. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth Yale Workshop on Adaptive and Learning Systems, 2019.
[2]
Etienne Sorin, Lucien Bobo, and Pierre Pinson. Consensus-based approach to
peer-to-peer electricity markets with product diﬀerentiation. CoRR, abs/1804.03521,
2018.
[3]
Ørsted Privatsalg El & Gas A/S. Variabel pris, 2020. URL
https://privat.orsted.dk/el/.
[4]
Guillaume Le Ray and Pierre Pinson. The ethical smart grid: Enabling a fruitful and
long-lasting relationship between utilities and customers. Solar Energy, 194:254–271,
2019.
[5]
Next Kraftwerke. Virtual power plant operator & power trader, 2020. URL
https://www.next-kraftwerke.com/company.
[6]
sonnen GmbH. What is the sonnencommunity, 2020. URL
https://sonnengroup.com/sonnencommunity/.
[7]
Tiago Sousa, Tiago Soares, Pierre Pinson, Fabio Moret, Thomas Baroche, and
Etienne Sorin. Peer-to-peer and community-based markets: A comprehensive review.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 104:367 – 378, 2019. ISSN 1364-0321.
doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2019.01.036.
[8]
Warren B. Powell. Clearing the Jungle of Stochastic Optimization, chapter Chapter 4,
pages 109–137. INFORMS, 2014. ISBN 978-0-9843378-5-9. doi:
10.1287/educ.2014.0128.
[9]
Warren B. Powell. A uniﬁed framework for stochastic optimization. European
Journal of Operational Research, 275(3):795 – 821, 2019. ISSN 0377-2217.
[10] David Silver. Lecture 1: Introduction to reinforcement learning, Lecture at University
College London Computer Science; Course COMPM050/COMPGI13, 2015. URL
http:
//www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/d.silver/web/Teaching_files/intro_RL.pdf. last
visited on 3.1.2020.
[11] Martijn R. K. Mes and Arturo Pérez Rivera. Approximate Dynamic Programming by
Practical Examples, pages 63–101. Springer International Publishing, 03 2017. ISBN
978-3-319-47764-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-47766-4_3.
[12] Georg Schildbach and Manfred Morari. Scenario-based model predictive control for
multi-echelon supply chain management. European Journal of Operational Research,
252(2):540 – 549, 2016. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2016.01.051.
67
==PAGE:80==
References
[13] J. H. Lee. Model predictive control and dynamic programming. In 2011 11th
International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems, pages 1807–1809, Oct
2011.
[14] Rafa≥Weron. Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-of-the-art with a
look into the future. International Journal of Forecasting, 30(4):1030 – 1081, 2014.
ISSN 0169-2070. doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2014.08.008.
[15] Jie Ma and Xiandong Ma. A review of forecasting algorithms and energy
management strategies for microgrids. Systems Science & Control Engineering, 6(1):
237–248, 2018. doi: 10.1080/21642583.2018.1480979.
[16] Marin Cerjan, Ana PetričiÊ, and Marko Delimar. Hira model for short-term
electricity price forecasting. Energies, 12:568, 02 2019. doi: 10.3390/en12030568.
[17] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis
Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1312.5602, 2013.
[18] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George
van den Driessche, et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and
tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, January 2016. ISSN 0028-0836. doi:
10.1038/nature16961.
[19] Y. Li, W. Zheng, and Z. Zheng. Deep robust reinforcement learning for practical
algorithmic trading. IEEE Access, 7:108014–108022, 2019. ISSN 2169-3536. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2932789.
[20] Xin Du, Jinjian Zhai, and Koupin Lv. Algorithm trading using q-learning and
recurrent reinforcement learning, 2016. URL
http://cs229.stanford.edu/proj2009/LvDuZhai.pdf.
[21] Zhuoran Xiong, Xiao-Yang Liu, Shan Zhong, Hongyang Yang, and Anwar Walid.
Practical deep reinforcement learning approach for stock trading. CoRR,
abs/1811.07522, 2018.
[22] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
The MIT Press, second edition, 2018.
[23] Warren B. Powell. What you should know about approximate dynamic programming.
Naval Research Logistics - NAV RES LOG, 56:239–249, 04 2009. doi:
10.1002/nav.20347.
[24] Warren B. Powell. Sequential decision analytics and modeling: Modeling exercises
with python. last visited on 3.1.2020, 2019. URL
https://www.overleaf.com/read/nczfwthskmcc.
[25] Warren B. Powell. Approximate Dynamic Programming I: Modeling, chapter
Approximate Dynamic Programming. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. ISBN
9780470400531. doi: 10.1002/9780470400531.eorms0042.
68
==PAGE:81==
References
[26] Paul Werbos. Reinforcement Learning and Approximate Dynamic Programming
(RLADP)-Foundations, Common Misconceptions, and the Challenges Ahead, pages
1–30. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 02 2013. ISBN 9781118104200. doi:
10.1002/9781118453988.ch1.
[27] Christopher Watkins and Peter Dayan. Technical note: Q-learning. Machine
Learning, 8:279–292, 05 1992. doi: 10.1007/BF00992698.
[28] Michael Herrmann. Rl 5: On-policy and oﬀ-policy algorithms, Lecture at University
of Edinburgh, School of Informatics; Postgraduate Course: Reinforcement Learning
INFR11010, January 2015. URL
http://www.inf.ed.ac.uk/teaching/courses/rl/slides15/rl05.pdf. last
visited on 4.1.2020.
[29] Long-Ji Lin. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning
and teaching. Machine Learning, 8(3):293–321, May 1992. ISSN 1573-0565. doi:
10.1007/BF00992699.
[30] Long-Ji Lin. Reinforcement Learning for Robots Using Neural Networks. PhD thesis,
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, 1992.
[31] David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin
Riedmiller. Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Proceedings of the 31st
International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume
32, ICML’14, pages I–387–I–395, 2014.
[32] Timothy Lillicrap, Jonathan Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez,
Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning. CoRR, 09 2015.
[33] Cédric Colas, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. GEP-PG: Decoupling
Exploration and Exploitation in Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithms. In
Journées Francophones sur la Planiﬁcation, la Décision et l’Apprentissage pour la
conduite de systèmes (JFPDA 2018), Nancy, France, July 2017.
[34] EEX Group. Day-ahead and intraday - the backbone of the european spot market,
2020. URL https://www.epexspot.com/en/basicspowermarket#
day-ahead-and-intraday-the-backbone-of-the-european-spot-market.
[35] Enrico Edoli, Stefano Fiorenzani, and Tiziano Vargiolu. Optimal Trading Strategies
in Intraday Power Markets, pages 161–184. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 2016.
ISBN 978-1-137-41297-3. doi: 10.1057/9781137412973_8.
[36] Marco Piccirilli and Tiziano Vargiolu. Optimal portfolio in intraday electricity
markets modelled by lévy-ornstein-uhlenbeck processes, 2018.
[37] Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig
Citro, et al. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,
2015. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/. Software available from tensorﬂow.org.
69
==PAGE:82==
References
[38] Pengqian Yu, Joon Sern Lee, Ilya Kulyatin, Zekun Shi, and Sakyasingha Dasgupta.
Model-based deep reinforcement learning for dynamic portfolio optimization. CoRR,
abs/1901.08740, 2019.
[39] Chang Xu, Tao Qin, Gang Wang, and Tie-Yan Liu. Reinforcement learning for
learning rate control. CoRR, abs/1705.11159, 2017.
70
==PAGE:83==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Write ISBN XX-XXXXX-XX-X (or delete)
