==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Designing marketable indoor growing so-
lutions through a holistic analysis of the food
system
Owen Tycho Willum Elkjær (s134139)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Personal food gardening is on the rise, and advances in LED technology makes this
practice feasible indoors. Indoor food gardening can potentially play an important
role in our current relationship with food and agriculture. From environmental and
health aspects to learning about growing food sustainably and for self-reliance. This
opens up a new market for indoor growing systems partially driven by the gradual
legalization of cannabis. This aim of the thesis is to provide a well reasoned and vi-
able business concept following Lean Startup principles to the startup ”Sativo” who
wish to enter this market.
This thesis performs an analysis of the current agricultural system and its challenges
to understand the larger food system of which indoor gardening is a part of.
In-
door gardening is examined from a technological point of view in terms of best-suited
plants, grow mediums, grow lights and grow environments.
The market for indoor-growing is analyzed to find trends and competing products.
Customer segments are hypothesized through lean personas. Qualitative interviews
are carried out to understand the different customer’s problems and challenges re-
garding the indoor-growing of vegetables and cannabis.
The agricultural problems, market analysis, and customer insights are synthesized
and developed into 3 concept ideas for indoor growing systems:
1. Indoor cannabis growing at home
2. Indoor herbs and greens growing at home
3. Indoor community-driven small scale farming
The indoor cannabis growing concept is chosen for in-depth business model and proto-
type work due to market opportunity, customer feedback, and technological feasibility.
This results in the design, prototyping, and validation of a personal indoor cannabis
growing system developed as a concept for the startup Sativo.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Management Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering. The thesis has been prepared under the guidance of Josef Oemen,
Mads Rømer, Lluís Ròmul Sala Vilar and Roberto Flore in the summer and autumn
of 2019. This project accounts for a total of 35 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, February 14, 2020
==PAGE:6==
iv
Preface
Owen Tycho Willum Elkjær (s134139)
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the supervisors for all their inputs. Even though we only had
few meetings, the supervision was enough guidance to let me continue the thesis work
with motivation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis in own startup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Research and Problem Solving Methods Used
5
2.1
System-oriented problem solving-framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Running Lean startup framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
The Mom Test for customer conversations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Analysis of Agriculture
11
3.1
Why start with agriculture? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Brief history of agriculture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Agriculture Today
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Industrial agriculture and its challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Sustainable Agriculture Solutions
27
4.1
Agroecology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Personal household gardening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Indoor Growing Technology
33
5.1
Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Soil and growing mediums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.3
Grow Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Indoor Growing Market
47
6.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Cannabis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Products on the market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Customer Conversations
55
7.1
Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
Surveys
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3
Customer conversations - Problem interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8
Concept Goals
73
8.1
Structuring design goals and requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.2
Company requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.3
Technological requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9
Concept Development
77
9.1
Ideation Phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
9.2
Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
9.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
9.4
Østergro Case-study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
9.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
10 Discussion
111
10.1 Summarized findings from the report:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
10.2 Regenerative and sustainable agriculture through technology - a new
way forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
10.3 Sativo concept possibilities and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
10.4 Reflections on working with the Running Lean method . . . . . . . . . 117
10.5 Limitations of the thesis report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
10.6 Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
11 Conclusion
121
A An Appendix
123
A.1 Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
A.2 Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Bibliography
136
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Thesis in own startup
An important fact of this thesis is the relationship and co-operation between me as
the author of this thesis and founder of Sativo. The two different roles will be tightly
intertwined as I will make business decisions directly based on thesis work and also
the opposite way around.
Sativo is a company founded by me and my business partner Malte Nielsen just
months before the thesis work started. The goal of the company has been to design
aesthetic indoor growing systems for personal use. My role in Sativo is business de-
velopment, design, and mechanical engineering, where Malte is focused on electronics
and IT-development. The thesis work has been shaped in ways such that academic
and business tasks will be within the framework of the thesis but also have tremendous
value for the company. The startup’s goal is to create products for consumers (B2C)
and not B2B (business to business). This creates a framework that is vastly different
from other indoor growing technology companies focusing on B2B and creates the
need for various design processes such as aesthetics, manufacturing, and UX.
1.2
Purpose
The motivation for doing this thesis stems from a personal interest in how to use
technology to aid with growing plants. Growing plants in a simple but beautiful and
thought-full way which could have some ripple effects towards the larger societal prob-
lems we are facing in the food and agricultural system. Many people including myself
find a large joy in growing plants at home and this joy is something I want to help
more people get a chance to experience. This is the main motivation behind found-
ing the company Sativo which has been shaped and developed during the thesis work.
The purpose of the thesis work is to use my engineering skills and experiences from
DTU to analyze, evaluate, calculate and construct matters that are highly valuable
for the startup Sativo. This is done through a holistic analysis of the current agricul-
tural system and understanding of how it works and what is currently problematic.
These problems and possible alternative solutions feed into a creative process of con-
cept development through design thinking and startup frameworks. The purpose of
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
this thesis is to work and act like a startup company with the main goal of delivering
valuable concepts, analyses, and prototypes that can be acted upon. This also why
this thesis work will be focused on merging scientific and academic methods and pro-
cesses with pragmatism and real-life use cases.
The thesis also aims to give an honest look at the inner workings of a newly founded
hardware startup with the challenges that this entails. Working with Running Lean
methodology has been a great part of the process and will be shared with reflections
on what went well and what did not. Hopefully, this transparent development pro-
cess and decision making can serve as valuable information of inspiration for other
founders or soon to be founders.
Another purpose of the thesis is to be a part of the solution space within sustain-
able agriculture. This complex system benefits from solutions with many different
angles, though all aiming at creating a better more sustainable future for food and
agriculture.
1.3
Thesis Structure
Initially, I have been working with 3 main questions. 1. Why aren’t people growing
food for themselves? and why not indoors? 2. Can I design a solution to address the
problem? 3. What impacts would these solutions have on different systems? How-
ever, as the thesis evolved and got more concrete the following structure was obtained.
The thesis is structured in 4 main phases as illustrated in figure 1.1. Phase 1 will
analyze agriculture and its challenges. Phase 2 will dive into alternative solutions,
growing technology, and plants suitable for indoor growing. In Phase 3, the market
will be investigated through interviews and competitor analysis. Phase 4 is where it
all comes together in unique concepts, prototypes, and business development. .
1.4
Scope
The nature of a startup is to work with limited time, money and resources in general.
This carries over into the scope of this thesis. The focus of many sections of this
report is not thoroughly extensive on subjects but aims to find the most essential
learning’s which are sufficient for continuing the overall development.
When looking at the agricultural system in chapter 3 the aim is to get an overview
of the general working mechanisms and problems of which there is a consensus. The
aim is not to go into detail with mechanisms or specific studies. However, digging
down to the root causes of the problems is a part of the analysis. This part of the
thesis serves as a background and foundation for the rest of the thesis. While also
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Scope
3
Figure 1.1: Illustration of thesis structure.
giving an overview of the large scale industry that is of interest to Sativo.
When discussing alternative solutions in chapter 4 and technology in chapter 5, there
will not be an exhaustive list and comparison of all specific detailed types of tech-
nologies such as aeroponic, aquaponic and hydroponic. These technologies will be
examined on a contextual level in terms of their relevance to the task at hand with
the startup in mind. The chosen depth of analysis is highly dependent on its per-
ceived value to the company. Nor will there be an extensive environmental and life
cycle comparison between the chosen concepts and other possible growing methods.
This is simply out of the scope of this report. These subjects will be discussed from
a and immediate point of view and if they are relevant for the discussion.
The few interviews and surveys were conducted through the framework of The Mom
Test and Lean Startup methodology. This means that they are very subjective and
will not be of significant scientific value to anything else than contextual decision
making within the company Sativo.
Prototyping will only go into detail in areas that have relevance to the business
model and general concept decisions. Details regarding electronic processing or man-
ufacturing specifics are omitted unless they are significantly important or unique to
this project.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.5
Project Plan
The Project was planned out in a Gantt chart at the beginning. This showed to be
a plan of content for the report rather than a follow-able time plan. The planning
then shifted to a more agile development style. SCRUM was inspiring weekly and
monthly sprints, and more often smaller development meetings took place than longer
planning sessions. The initial plan set out to have a focus on building a quick proto-
type from rather limited knowledge to serve as a platform from further analysis and
development. This went well and the first prototype was built within the first month.
The next stage of the project worked in an iterative manner where the Lean Canvas
from Running Lean [1] served as a framework for gauging improvement and planning
the next steps. This went on for a good 2-3 months until the writing of the report
was carried out.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Research and Problem
Solving Methods Used
What’s in this chapter?
• Using a system-oriented problem-solving framework
• Running Lean startup methodology
• How to talk to customers - The Mom test
2.1
System-oriented problem solving-framework
Figure 2.1: System-oriented problem-solving framework in this thesis.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Research and Problem Solving Methods Used
The system-oriented problem-solving framework is a great case for this thesis. It
is used as a tool to get an overview and manage large complex projects involving
multiple stakeholders or multiple subsystems. In this project is can be seen how the
framework fits very well on the subject matter in figure 2.1.
The large scale, socio-technical system in this project is agriculture and food, which is
a very good example due to its vast complexity and many stakeholders. The complex
systems are the subsystems of the larger food systems such as specific markets or
methods of farming. Different agricultural movements are also important to look at
as they also tie into the larger system. Technology makes new methods of farming
possible and comes with pros and cons for the overall food system. On the artifact
level, a single product or concept can be evaluated and in this thesis, we have a few
tangible concepts. These are small artifacts which impact the complex systems and
large scale systems.
The system-oriented problem-solving framework uses many different framing meth-
ods to investigate, demarcate and evaluate systems. This is very useful in a startup
context where the overall goals and requirements might change very quickly due to
new information from talking to customers or getting feedback on prototypes. Many
good systems thinking heuristics are used in this report even though it might not
always be very explicit.
Considering time-related changes is a heuristic that proved very useful when doing
market research. Acknowledging that new markets can emerge due to new technology
or social situations, even though it does not look like it in the current moment.
Working from a general to a detailed perspective is also a great way to strategi-
cally black box certain elements which might not be necessary to investigate more
for the task at hand. This is key when trying to build a startup as the resources are
scarce and detours might be very detrimental.
System demarcation has also been a part of the thesis at the start of the situation
analysis. To get an overview over which parts of the food system would be interesting
and reasonable to investigate. Looking for root causes is a very important task. Ev-
ery business solves a problem, and the process of finding the root cause of a problem
made sure that a critical reflection was carried out. Especially to makes sure that the
problem is valid and worth even trying to solve.
The overall problem-solving process has been closely following the process described
in ”No More Muddling Through” [2] seen in figure 2.2. This has been used in a very
iterative manner during the thesis and has served well to manage the smaller and
large problem to solution cycles.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Running Lean startup framework
7
Figure 2.2: Problem solving cycle [2].
2.2
Running Lean startup framework
Early on in the project, there was a need for a good management tool that allowed
for rapid but measurable and controlled development. One criterion was that it could
not take too much time and energy to work with as these resources were very scarce
and really needed on other ends of the project. ”Running Lean” by Ash Maurya [1]
was suggested as a good framework, especially the modified business model canvas
referred to as the lean canvas seen in figure 2.3.
The running lean methodology is a reinterpretation and developed version of Eric
Ries ”The Lean Startup” which has been quite popular in the startup community.
Running lean differentiates itself by focusing on very limited resource startups with-
out investments (bootstrapping) compared to The lean startup which is more focused
on venture-backed startups. The lean canvas is very intuitive and focused on helping
with creating novel ideas and products from nothing, in a zero to one context. The
Lean Canvas highlights the 9 most important aspects of a startup and forces the one
working with it to constantly think and iterate on these.
Working with the Lean Canvas: To work with the canvas a new mindset and
a new way of doing development need to be acquired. The essence of this mindset
is to find out what products need to be made and not so much how to make them.
As seen in figure 2.4 the Lean startup methodology works as a continuous innova-
tion compared to the more traditional waterfall and the newer agile methods. This
is the reason why the canvas is simple. It has to be worked with many times and
might change a whole lot. The reason this makes sense to do is that access to cus-
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Research and Problem Solving Methods Used
Figure 2.3: Lean Canvas [3].
tomers is relatively quick today with rapid prototyping technologies and the internet.
Customer opinions and feedback is essential to building products that solve a real
problem. Solving a real problem is heavily emphasized in this framework and the
phrase ”love the problem, not the solution” is often stated.
These small iteration circles can be done in a more traditional agile manner, where
these sprints usually last 1-3 weeks. It could be a design task or customer evaluation.
Another important point when developing a business model through the lean canvas
is to continuously identify the riskiest part. Focusing on the riskiest parts first is
a necessary way of working with limited resources. Prioritizing problems and work
efforts (Sprints) continuously is key, and revisiting current beliefs when new informa-
tion arises is a common and critical practice.
Problem/solution fit describes a problem that has been thoroughly understood and
then a solution has been developed through an offer to real customers. The feedback
determines if the solution was a real fit for the problem or if the solution only worked
on paper. This is the fundamental framework that ties into the prototyping done
in this project. Product/market fit is a term that describes how the product (solu-
==PAGE:19==
2.3 The Mom Test for customer conversations
9
Figure 2.4: Lean Canvas [3].
tion to the problem) fits with the larger market demand. This is done qualitatively
through minimum viable products and direct customer feedback. When a consistent
product-market fit is attained, the company can start scaling up.
Work with the Lean Canvas begins in Chapter 9 where it is the foundation for the
concept developed.
2.3
The Mom Test for customer conversations
Another method that has played a central role in this thesis is the practice of cus-
tomer conversations. The Running Lean methodology is based on fast work cycles
and reiterations of the business plan through customer feedback. But what is good
and bad customer feedback? This is where the Mom Test came in handy with a struc-
tured approach to talking to people about business plans and product ideas. I have
used this mindset of interviewing customers in chapter 6 where surveys and interview
were conducted.
The Mom Test essentials: The Mom Test is a founder-centered book that aims
to learn aspiring founders to talk to customers. Specifically to learn to separate the
signal from the noise in the feedback one usually gets through these interviews. The
premise is that people’s opinions can be clouded by being too polite and usually don’t
surface unless you strategically dig for it. For a startup, the aim is not to find as
many people who tell you that you have a good idea but instead asking the right
questions to find uncomfortable truths that challenge one’s hypothesis. Questions
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Research and Problem Solving Methods Used
serve as tools to find this truth and it is not easy, it is a skill like many others that
will need to be honed and trained over time. However certain mindsets and strategies
will help get closer to what is sought after, which is the truth.
Asking good questions is key and questions should continually dig down to under-
stand more about the customer. Yes and no questions like ” Do you think this is a
good idea” is not helpful as they do not help further the understanding of the un-
knowns of the customer. Questions should be asked to help find the root cause of the
problem and not only discover the symptoms. Trying to understand the customer
from their point of view should be the main objective and listening more and talking
less is advised.
Finding problems and uncovering things that ruin the hypothesis is also a key practice
in customer conversations. This falls in line with the Lean Canvas and one should ask
questions about the elephant in the room instead of jumping around the scary sub-
jects. Hitting a dead-end should motivate new questions where new solution spaces
can be uncovered.
It is equally important to be critical of the incoming data one gets when asking
the right questions. People are social beings and give bad data such as compliments
to be polite. Bad data can also be generic or hypothetical answers or answers that
relate to future scenarios. It is important to keep the questions very near the present
moment and ask about current problems. Another common mistake is to take ideas
from customers too seriously, customers know all about their problems, but it is the
founder’s job to develop the idea on how to solve it.
When the Mom Test mindset is practiced it is a powerful tool that helps to guide
conversations with customers into giving valuable data that feeds directly into the
business model development done with the Lean Canvas.
Keypoints
• The system-oriented problem-solving framework is used to work with the large
agriculture and food system and its constituting subsystem and artifacts.
• The Running Lean framework and the Lean Canvas is used to manage the
entrepreneurial part of the thesis work because it is tailor-made for resource-
scarce startup innovation of new ideas.
• The Mom Test ties into the Running Lean methodology as a great tool for
learning how to talk to customers
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis of Agriculture
What’s in this chapter?
• How agriculture started and how it is interconnected with society as we know
it today
• How agriculture is currently practiced in the world
• Industrial agriculture’s challenges
3.1
Why start with agriculture?
The purpose of this chapter is to get a bird’s eye view on the large food system with
a focus on agriculture and plant cultivation. Creating an overview of the intricate
stakeholder landscape, co-existing complex systems that makeup agriculture and food.
The goal is to create a solid foundation to underlie the rest of the thesis work. The
aim is to get a high-level view and get a sound idea of how current agriculture works
and which challenges are present. The goal is then to uncover and list the important
problems present to serve as a basis for later concept development. These problems
or challenges will serve a purpose much like the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). A set of objectives and challenges that later concepts, solutions, artifacts,
systems or other processes can then be hold up against to gauge if the needle is
moving in the right direction. Agriculture is a large and important system that has
the magnitude to change the world and how we live, however as with most complex
systems, they consist of many smaller systems and parts which will need to align for
this to happen.
Following the systems-oriented problem-solving framework, agriculture is a prime
example of a large scale socio-technical engineering system. From the highly tech-
nical and situational skill of cultivating the soil and land to the intricacies of social
systems involving politics, distribution of foods and cultural differences, the food sys-
tem is ever-complex and changing. This is also one of the motivations behind doing
this thesis. This system has plenty of room for analysis and improvement and, and
the more solutions we are bringing to the table the better.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Analysis of Agriculture
The scientific progress on studying and understanding agriculture is far from be-
ing set and stone, and much like the related subjects of nutrition and biology there
has been tremendous development in understanding underlying mechanisms and their
relationships to the larger systems while there is still a world to uncover. An example
is the rapid progress of understanding genetics, which has been fairly recent as the
human genome was first sequenced in 2003 and still today we are baffled by discover-
ies on how these biological technologies of nature work.
This is one reason why agricultural science can be very polarizing. Due to the com-
plexity of the system and much like in nutrition science and biology, the paradigms
might change often, this being said there are some larger aspects and aspirations in
agriculture of which there is great scientific consensus on. All aspects of agriculture
are very contextual and there are no one-size-fits-all solutions. This is a very impor-
tant point to make from the beginning, as this whole thesis and its concepts will be
highly situational to the context presented in this chapter.
3.2
Brief history of agriculture
The domestication of plants and animals began at different times in different places
all over the world. Before domestication, humans were hunter-gatherers who often
lived like nomads and searched for food. The first agricultural revolution was the ne-
olithic revolution [4]. This happened around 12.500 years ago and this is what forms
the basis of much of the domesticated food crops we know today such as wheat and
barley, peas and lentils. This new source of food also gave way to the domestication
of animals.
This new way of living gave the people the option of permanent settlement and
started freeing up time for people to do other things than hunting and gathering,
resulting in an increase in population. This development of living in villages and do-
mesticating the land also called the Neolithic package, founded some of the things we
take for granted today such as political structures, hierarchical ideologies, division of
labor, trade, and architecture. This showcases the complexity and interdependency
of society and agriculture and how it essentially was born at the same time and is
the backbone of the world that we live in today. The technological development of
agriculture also started in the Neolithic Revolution with irrigation, crop rotations,
and fertilizers.
From around the bronze age (3300 B.C) and forward civilizations all over the world
started to rely heavily on farming. Ancient cultures were built upon agriculture and
societies revolved around farming such as ancient Greece, ancient Egypt and in me-
dieval times with the manorial system. The aforementioned technologies including
selective breeding were developed during the next 1000’s of years. Foreign crop species
were being introduced from other continents, an example is Columbus explorations
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Agriculture Today
13
in 1492 which introduced the potatoes and corn to Europe.
200 years ago this development took off starting with the British Agricultural Revo-
lution where the intensification of crop rotations led to better utilization of the soil
resulting in higher yields and more livestock farming. As a result, populations in-
creased from 5.5 million in 1700 to over 9 million in 1800. This more efficient food
production system freed up even more people and this, in turn, impacted the Indus-
trial Revolution that heavily shaped our world as well.
The last 100 years is really important as for the first time in human history there
was a shift from natural or organic farming methods such as manure fertilizer, crop
rotations to artificial methods such as chemical fertilizers and pesticides. The Haber
process invented in the early 1900s made it possible to produce artificial nitrogen
which is one of the key elements used by plants and led to increased yields previ-
ously thought impossible. Around the same time in direct response to this new way
of farming, the Organic movement was founded by Albert Howard and Biodynamic
farming by Rudolf Steiner. These farming systems showed a solution in response to
some of the obvious detrimental effects on soil health noticed by farmers using syn-
thetic fertilizers. These methods focused on preserving soil health above anything else.
GMO’s (Genetically Modified Organisms) used to breed selective traits across differ-
ent organisms was introduced in the 1950s around the same time as the development
of chemical-based hydroponic systems. This artificial, efficient and mechanized way of
farming with tractors, high yielding plant species, synthetic fertilizers, and pesticides
took off from the 1940s to the 1970s under what was called the Green Revolution.
This goal was to create a surplus of food especially to combat starvation around the
world, resulting from the massive population increase of the 20th century. This leads
us to where we are today, heavily dependent on industrial agriculture as it was the
combination of all the above-mentioned technologies that made it possible for our
civilization to sustain the enormous population we have today.
3.3
Agriculture Today
Brief Scoping: The analysis will briefly look at the global agricultural situation, but
then transition into focusing more on the developed world and industrial agriculture.
One reason is the entrepreneurial aspect of the thesis, more precisely working with a
company with objectives of selling products mainly to the developed world. But also
due to the large extent of industrial agriculture and the many challenges involved
in it. Also, some aspects, complexities, and context of problems regarding farming
in the 3rd world are so vastly different from the problems associated with industrial
agriculture. Not to say that understanding how global agriculture works is not of
great importance, but merely to state that there is a focus on the most relevant areas
given the scope of the report.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Analysis of Agriculture
Global Agriculture: Agriculture is the world’s largest business as one-third of
the economically active population is making a living farming. Agricultural practices
are very different from continent to continent and from country to country. When
looking at the land farming methods a country uses it depends on many parameters
including their economic situation, local climate, soil quality, arable land, politics,
cultural norms and market forces.
The majority of the world have agricultural activities consisting of a mix between
industrial agriculture and small scale farming practices. It is estimated in [5] that
there is more than 500 million farms in the world with more than 500 million of these
being family farms. The definition of a family farm can vary from country to country
but the essence is that most of the worlds farms are very small. Around 475 million
farms are less than 2 hectares in size. When looking at the estimation of farmland
distribution between large scale agriculture and small scale farming the numbers show
higher use of farmland for larger-scale agriculture.
Estimations from [5] shows that: 84 percent of farms are smaller than 2 hectare
but operate 12 percent of the farmland while conversely 16 percent of the world’s
farms are larger than 2 hectares and represent 88 percent of the world’s farmland.
This is from a global perspective and it shows that there are many small scale farms
left globally.
However we can categorize these farms into 3 categories as done in the EU agriculture
report [6], 1. small scale family farms who produce mainly to support themselves and
their families, 2. small-medium scale family farms, 3. large scale farming operations
which commonly have a legal form or is a corporation. The term ‘family farm’ refers
to any farm under family management where 50 percent or more of the regular agri-
cultural labor force is provided by family members”. The majority of the small farms
in the world are category one farms in developing countries especially Asia.
Many countries in the developing world were a part of the Green Revolution project
which introduced chemical fertilization, pesticides, and GMO crops to significantly in-
crease crop yields. This mainly took place in Mexico, Pakistan, India, the Philippines,
Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, China, Indonesia, Iran, Kenya, Malaya, Morocco, Thailand,
Tunisia, and Turkey. To illustrate the current presence of industrial agriculture in
the world we look at the statistics for countries’ use of pesticides. From figure 3.1,
it is clear that the majority of Asia, Europe, and the Americas are using some form
of modern industrial agriculture techniques. Africa is the largest area with countries
where industrial agriculture has not been notably introduced yet. Here and in other
3rd world countries agriculture is often done at a small scale and the problems asso-
ciated with agriculture are vastly different than in the developed world due to social,
political and economic problems. How this relates to agriculture in developing coun-
tries is too broad of a scope to fully encompass in this report. Because the trends are
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Agriculture Today
15
Figure 3.1: Global pesticide use of major pesticide groups (Insecticides, Herbicides,
Fungicides, Plant growth regulators and Rodenticides [6]).
going in the direction of more industrial farming in developing countries, the focus
of the analysis will look more into the currently developed world’s industrial farming
practices and challenges as these might be future problems that developing countries
could face some years down the line.
Agriculture in The US and Europe:
We start by looking at the size and types of farms.
To get an overview of farm-
ing in Europe and The US reports from The EU [6] and USDA [7] shows a great
array of data to analyze. There are 10.5 million farms in Europe and 2 million in the
US and they all differ in management structure, local climate, and soil type. When
looking closer at the number of farms distributed in the EU, 32.7 percent of the
farms are located in Romania, even though Romania only produces 3.3 percent of the
EU’s economic agricultural output. This exemplifies the current dichotomy of agri-
culture in the world where small farms are plenty and produce little of the total food,
and large industrial farms are constituting a small percentage but produce enormous
amounts of food.
Family farms are very prevalent in the EU with 9 out of 10 people and in the US
with 98 percent working at farms either being the sole farmer or in his/her family.
The reports further categorize the farms in terms of their economic size. The data
shows that 4 million farms had an economic standard output below EUR 2000 per
year and over 2/3’s of these consumed more than 50 percent of their own production.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Analysis of Agriculture
3 million farms had an output within the range of EUR 2000 - EUR 8000 per year.
The striking fact is that 304000 farms (2.9 percent of the EU total) each produced a
standard output of EUR 250000 or more per year. These 2.9 percent of farms, largely
consisting of large industrial corporations were producing a whole 55.6 percent of
the EU’s total agricultural output. This is strikingly similar to the US agriculture
of which large scale farms of USD 1 million or more in gross cash income (GCFI),
accounted for only about 3 percent of the US farms, but produced 46 percent of
the total value in terms of production. In figure 3.2 the total overview of US farms
categorized by their economy and share of production can be seen. Similar data can
Figure 3.2: US farms production and economy [7]).
be seen in figure 3.3 for the EU, also categorized by countries. It is clear to see in
figure 3.3 that some countries such as Germany, Netherlands, United Kingdom, and
France have a relatively high output compared to their number of farms. Conversely,
countries such as Romania, Poland, Italy, and Spain, have a larger number of farms
with lower total outputs.
The percentage of employment adds more to the overview of the European farm
landscape. This shows that countries with many small scale family farms such as the
examples given earlier in Romania, also employ a large percentage of their population,
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Agriculture Today
17
Figure 3.3: Percentage of EU total Farms and standard output, 2016 [6]).
in Romania’s case 23 percent. While other countries such as Denmark only employs
around 2 percent. This is also a good example of how industrial agriculture can free
up the population to be able to work in other sectors.
Type of farming: Another important distinction between farms is the type of farm-
ing operation that they are carrying out. Why is this important to know? Because
understanding how many farms are present and how these farms operate will be key
when we are looking at problems caused by specific types of farming. Staying with
the European rapport [6] it can be seen in figure 3.5 how around 50 percent of farming
is crop specialist focused, 25 percent is pure livestock and the rest is mixed farming.
The situation in the US is remarkable as about one-half of the 2 million farms are
involved in some type of livestock operation with about 913000 of them having and
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Analysis of Agriculture
Figure 3.4: Percentage of employment in EU agriculture, 2016[6]).
raising cattle and calves. However traditional livestock farming often requires grain
for feedstock and there is a considerable part of the grain produced that will be used
as fodder. This situation is present in the US, where data from[7] shows that corn
and soy account for 43.5 percent of total cash receipt earnings for all crops in 2018.
In contrast vegetables, fruits and nut cash receipts only account for about 25 percent
of the total.
Majority of farmers are men and older than 55: The report [6] also states
that the average farmer who makes financial and farm planning decisions are typi-
cally elderly men. 71.5 percent of the total farms in Europe are run by men and 57.9
percent are over 55 years of age. Only ten percent of the farm managers where under
40 years old. There is a large imbalance in terms of gender. Especially in countries
with many larger farms and few small farms such as Denmark where only 7.7 percent
are female , Netherlands (5.2 percent) and Germany (9.6 percent). However Lithua-
nia and Latvia both has an exceptionally large share of female farmers at 44.9 percent.
Number of farms are decreasing and getting bigger in size: The number
of farms in Europe and The US are decreasing and figure 3.6 shows that around
the time of utilizing more modern agriculture, the number of farms in the US fell
drastically from 1935 to 1970 and and has been averaging a decline since. The same
is true for Europe and just in resent years a large decrease in especially the smaller
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Agriculture Today
19
Figure 3.5: Farm types in EU agriculture, [6]).
farms has been seen. From 2005 to 2016 a broad estimation is that there has been
a decrease of 1/4 of all EU’s farms. About 4.2 million farms has been closed with
about 85 percent being small farms with a size under 5 ha. The figure 3.7 shows how
the only increasing farm segment is the large farms bigger than 100 ha. All smaller
farms are decreasing in numbers.
Trade and logistics: In this overview, we will touch upon what happens with
all the produce from agriculture. This is very important as the complexity of the
system needs to take into account if the foods are being consumed mostly at and
around the local small family farm or being shipped across the globe as exports. The
US exports on average about 20 percent of its agricultural products to the rest of the
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Analysis of Agriculture
Figure 3.6: Number of Farms over time in the US [7]).
world, with the majority going to Canada, Mexico China and Europe. The amount of
produce exported is very crop specific but the main exports are cotton and tree nuts.
The report [6] states that the EU primarily exports foodstuff consisting of processed
products such as alcohol, tobacco, and processed foods, while mainly importing raw
unprocessed agricultural goods. The interesting thing to look at here is if countries
are importing foods they could be growing themselves or not. The data suggest that
the US main imports are food groups that they cannot grow due to climate and envi-
ronmental conditions. However, Europe in particular imports many raw agricultural
products from Brazil and this tell us that there is either some economic forces or
practical limitation to the EU’s self-sufficiency in this category.
Understanding industrial agriculture: Industrial agriculture can be broken down
into a juxtaposition of 3 main areas seen in figure 3.8. Science and technology, eco-
nomics and politics. And as we have already touched on earlier, these 3 constituents
are heavily interconnected and have been essential to agriculture from its birth. It is,
however, critical to understanding how these different domains have shifted through
time and constructed the agriculture we have today. This is key because these are
the levers we have to move if we want to push agriculture in a new direction.
It is very important to point out that the evolution of industrial agriculture did not
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Industrial agriculture and its challenges
21
Figure 3.7: Change in number of farms and utilized area in the EU [6]).
happen because it was the more efficient way of farming and therefore out-competed
smaller farms. It has been a direct result of rules, regulations, and subsidies which
favored this type of intensive farming. [9]. It is very easy to forget this fact and
come to the logical conclusion that it must have been the market that largely shaped
agriculture in this more efficient direction. However subsidies have a large effect on
this transition which continues to happen today, and we must realize this if we want
to change agriculture for the better.
3.4
Industrial agriculture and its challenges
A good starting point is to look at what challenges will be examined. The FAO (Food
and Agriculture Organization) usually looks at 3 different aspects of agriculture in
their reports, hunger, food supply, and environment. I will focus on the environmen-
tal and some food supply aspects, but not dive deeper into the hunger dimension
as stated earlier this report will focus on the developed world where hunger isn’t a
problem in stark contrast to some countries in the developing world. The developed
world’s problems revolve more around food logistics and environmental sustainability,
which will be the main focus in this section.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Analysis of Agriculture
Figure 3.8: Industrial Agriculture visualized [8].
A large portion of the problems and challenges with agriculture in the developed
world are related to industrial agriculture. This will be examined closer and the chal-
lenges will be assessed. Now that a broad overview of current farming practices has
been established and the focus has been dialed in on developed nations, especially
the US and Europe the challenges relating to these can be looked at.
Consensus on challenges: The truth of the matter is that agriculture in its various
forms has certain advantages and certain disadvantages and it is up to us set goals
and metrics which will tell us if we are going in the direction we want to as a society.
A good place to look for some consensus about the future direction of agriculture is
the UN’s FAO and the UN’s SDG’s.
Over population: The first large driving factor for the widespread use of indus-
trial agriculture and therefore the challenges associated with it, is population growth.
We are currently around 7.5 billion people each requiring enough food to survive each
day. It is estimated that the world’s population will be almost 10 billion by 2050.
This sets the bar high for the amount of food we need to produce to not only have
the same level of food supply as today but even more as we also have the goal of erad-
icating hunger. This puts pressure on our environments as the practice of industrial
agriculture is not sustainable the way it is done today.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Industrial agriculture and its challenges
23
The environment: As the biological systems of the planet are very interconnected
in ways we still do not fully understand. This section will examine some of the ob-
served problems which we know are present today from scientific observations.
Soil erosion and degradation: Industrial agriculture does not respect the nat-
ural soil biology. Soil is one of the most important factors for life on this planet and
needs to be treated with caution. Chemical fertilizer while giving a great boost in
yields, circumvents the natural process of soil biology and the soil food web. This
results in a loss of organic matter in the soil and this further leads to soil compaction
[10]. Industrial farming fertilizes in a way were nutrients in the soil aren’t replenished
but depleted gradually. To make things even worse is the use of pesticides which
destroys pests alongside the natural life in and around the soil. This combined with
synthetic fertilizer decreases the diversity of bacteria, fungi, nematodes and other
critically important inhabitants of the soil.
Monocropping or simply having one or two varieties of a crop on the same land
year after year is another contributor to the destruction of the soil health. The soil
quickly becomes depleted from nutrients and therefore ”requires” chemical fertilizer.
Tilling with mechanical farm equipment can be done in harmful ways which increases
soil compaction and thereby decreases the aeration of the soil making plants and es-
pecially their roots stunted resulting in smaller yields.
Loss of biodiversity: We are amid a steep decline in biodiversity. Many factors play
a role, but one of the major causes is industrial agriculture and especially pesticides
[11]. The pesticides lead to poisoning of certain species which disrupts the normal
distribution of wild plants and weeds which is the feed of many wild animals. The
toxic effects also cascade into both insects and other wildlife. Clearing of forests is
also leading to severe environmental degradation which also affects biodiversity.
Climate Change: The decrease in soil health is not only bad for yields and agricul-
ture but hurts the global climate as well. Soil stores large amounts of carbon which
can be released when the soil life is destroyed by deforestation and unsustainable
agriculture. Chemical fertilizers and pesticides are manufactured from natural gas
and petroleum which release large amounts of C02. The US food system is consum-
ing around 19 percent of the fossil energy used by the nation. 7 percent is directly
attributed to agricultural production. Concentrated feedlot operations are intercon-
nected with all the problems which have to do with industrial agriculture due to the
feed being produced in unsustainable manners. Animals are very heavy feeders and
conversion of grains to meat is not very efficient. On top of this problem, cows are
releasing more methane(CH3) as a result of not feeding them their natural diet which
is grass.
Water: Apart from the greenhouse gas pollution already discussed, there are more
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Analysis of Agriculture
problems with industrial agriculture, and the article [12] gives a great overview. The
intensive irrigation uses large reserves of water which can be problematic in areas
with scarce water supply. Airborne pesticides can drift into water sources and affect
wildlife. Runoff from agriculture is identified to be the source of 48 percent of the
polluted rivers and streams in the US. It can be very problematic for rivers running
into the ocean with an example of the upper Mississippi River which runs from the
Corn Belt. This flow of runoff is considered to be a major cause of the algae growth
in its outlet in the Gulf Of Mexico. The algae feed on the fertilizer runoff and its
growth depletes oxygen in the water leaving fish and other wildlife unable to survive
there.
Profit as the main metric: Agriculture has become very focused on one met-
ric. Profits. The main goal that agriculture has worked towards since the Green
Revolution has been to increase yields and quantity of production at the lowest cost
possible. This ”cheap food” policy has shown to be a great idea for efficiently feeding
the world enough basic nutrition. However, this focus and subsidiaries of industrial
farms lead to a host of problems, like making the prices on crops so low that it makes
competition very hard for smaller farms. This is a problem as it also makes it hard
for people with limited funds (often young people) to get into agriculture. Another
problem apart from the lack of sustainability of this farming practice is the lower
quality of nutrition in the foods that are created from the produce.
Nutrition The industrial agricultural systems produce food that is more likely to
become processed food. Corn, wheat, and soy are frequently used in processed foods
that are associated with poor health. Especially in the US, it can be seen how these
low-quality foods due to being more affordable than the healthier whole unprocessed
foods such as vegetables, fruits, and properly raised meats. This triggers a socio-
economical situation where the poor people in developed nations like the US have a
hard time getting adequate nutrition. While caloric needs are being more than met in
the Standard American Diet, the lack of micro-nutrient rich foods and the abundance
of sugar and processed foods give rise to a large increase in lifestyle diseases directly
related to diets such as diabetes and obesity.
Food Waste: The goal of more efficient highly yielding food production is one side
of the coin. How many people consume the produce is also important. We currently
have a huge problem with food waste as about 670 million tonnes of food is wasted
in high-income countries and about 630 million tonnes in low and middle-income
countries. This happens at 3 levels according to the FAO report [13]: 1. Micro-level
waste at the farms due to poor harvest practices and bad storage. 2. Meso-level
waste in terms of supply chain failures such as poor coordination or contamination. 3.
Macro-level, socioeconomic factors such as a lack of infrastructure, lacking legislation,
price incentives and subsidies.
Disconnection from food: Lastly, another real problem that is often overlooked
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Summary
25
is food connection and education.
Many children do not grow up learning about
where foods come from and do not have a real relationship to how much resources
food production takes. A survey of 27,500 children from the UK [14] showed that
29 percent of five to seven-year old’s and 25 percent of older primary school pupils
thought cheese came from a plant. And that in general, many children lack a basic
understanding of the origins of food. Another point is the general lack of connection
to the animal raised from factory farming. The difference in perspective when buying
meat products at the supermarket versus buying from a farm is tremendous. This
also ties in to the general lack of understanding of how a farm actually works, which
crops are available in what seasons and again how different crops and products are
made.
This information is hidden in the current food system and the knowledge
products we buy in the supermarket are usually limited to the sparse text of a label.
3.5
Summary
This concludes a small overview of how agriculture began, how it was shaped through
history, how current farming is done and what challenges and problems currently face.
From its birth, agriculture has always been tightly intertwined with policy and econ-
omy. Throughout history, farming has developed in tandem with the world’s popula-
tion increase. As a positive loop of more production capacity and efficiency freed up
the increasing population to work on technology which then in return has increased
production capacity even more. This loop has culminated in what we know as indus-
trial agriculture. Industrial agriculture has worked as a short term solution heavily
pushed by government subsidies to increasing yields and feeding people but has ne-
glected many aspects of the complex food system which we now realize might crucial
for our future.
Industrial agriculture is heavily practiced in the developed world where the trends
are such that the number of smaller farms is declining with haste and larger farms are
getting bigger. This is not a good development if we look at the current consensus
from the UN with FOA highlighting the importance of reducing the use and expan-
sion of unsustainable farming methods.
There is a clear consensus that industrial agriculture and its practices such as chem-
ical use, mechanization, and clearing of land is very harmful to the environment in
many different ways from soil degradation, decreasing biodiversity, greenhouse gas
emissions, and water contamination. There is a host of auxiliary problems from agri-
culture such as poor nutrition, lack of knowledge and a decreasing number of local
farms due to tough competition on food prices.
Keypoints
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Analysis of Agriculture
• Agriculture has always been tightly intertwined with policy and economy
• Industrial agriculture is heavily practiced in the developed world
• Industrial agriculture as it is practiced now is unsustainable and harms many
local and global ecosystems
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Sustainable
Agriculture Solutions
What’s in this chapter?
• Agroecology as a proposed solution to problems from industrial agriculture
• Organic farming and other sustainable methods
• Personal gardening’s role in sustainable agriculture
The previous chapter did an overview of some of the major problems regarding indus-
trial agriculture, but it didn’t propose any solutions. This chapter gives an overview
of how different alternative solutions can address the problems and how we need a
new path and new principles if we want to have a sustainable agricultural system. We
will examine how these solutions act as a context-specific piece of the puzzle that con-
tributes to holistic sustainable development in agriculture. It can be seen how there
are a plethora of ways to farm sustainably, how different systems work in different
areas, and how these methods all work by following a set of overarching principles
that makes them sustainable.
We look at personal gardening and its place in agriculture and we investigate some
types of small scale farming in more detail and analyze common plants grown at
home. We examine indoor farming and how it ties into current and future agricul-
ture. This chapter is an acknowledgment of how we already know many ways to solve
the problems we currently have in agriculture. However, it goes to show how the
implementation of these solutions is the key to reach a sustainable, diverse, culturally
holistic and human-centered food system.
4.1
Agroecology
A set of principles for doing sustainable agriculture is commonly termed Agroecology.
Agroecology is a very broad term that describes the holistic multidisciplinary study
and practice of agriculture and ecology combined. It is quite similar to sustainable
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Sustainable Agriculture Solutions
agriculture. The main idea is to work with natural systems instead of against them.
Instead of trying to fix the unsustainable practice of industrial agriculture, it goes
back and tries to address the root cause of the problems. It is an interplay of ecology,
culture, economic, science, and society. With the goal of generating nutritious food
in a way that takes care of the environment and is sensitive to the people involved in
farming. Figure 4.1 illustrates how the economy, environment, and social values tie
together in the agroecological way of producing food.
Some of the key pricinciples of agroecology [16]:
• Working with concepts of ecology
• Working with the natural cycles of life
• Partnerships and exchange of knowledge and resources
• Diversity of plants and methods to create resilience to uncertainty
• Designing and managing acro-ecosystems
• Utilize synergy of different systems
• Increasing efficiency of the systems
• Recycling and sustainability
• Human-centered and social values
Figure 4.1: Agroecology constituents [15] .
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Agroecology
29
• Respecting and working with cultures and traditions
• Circular and solidarity economy
Organic and Bio dynamic: Within this spectrum of boundaries we find many
different methods of farming. As mentioned earlier there is organic and biodynamic
farming which focuses heavily on soil biology and organic inputs only. These methods
of farming are very good at respecting the environments and due to this, it can be
expected that yields will be lower than conventional agriculture. Of course, yields are
important but as we have seen, having a larger goal of sustainability and robustness
is more important in the long term. Studies [17] show Organic farming yields about
20 percent lower than conventional farms in the developed world and 43 percent lower
in the developing world. However, as we are not measuring by the metric of yields
alone this is not as alarming as it would be through the lens of industrial agriculture.
Many sustainable methods: There are also No-till gardening practices where
the soil is left undisturbed and the permaculture movement where natural systems
designed specifically to be very much left as natural as possible while still yielding
harvests of fruits, nut, and other perennial crops. All these practices work within
the framework of agroecology and with the main goal of providing solutions for the
collective food system. Regenerative agriculture is the practice of grazing animals
as sustainably as possible by doing planned grazing that leaves the best growth con-
ditions for the grass. This way of farming animals might propose solutions to the
problems associated with greenhouse emissions and soil depletion. A study done [18]
on White Oak Pastures who is practicing this type of farming showed a total decrease
in carbon emissions due to large amounts of carbon sequestered by the soil. They
also saw an increase in organic matter in the soil which is crucial for soil life.
Market gardening is also becoming more popular, where front lawns and other ur-
ban plots of land are being cultivated with high-value crops which then are sold
directly to the restaurant, supermarkets or at farmers’ markets. Homesteading and
traditional farms can also be great examples of sustainable agriculture. Where many
different systems such as mushrooms, animals, and plants can work synergistic and
provide diversified food options for the local community.
Lastly, we are seeing a boom in high tech farming systems like hydroponics, aeropon-
ics, and aquaponics. These systems might tackle some problems relating to urban
agriculture and water use. However, there is still room for development in a more
sustainable direction as hydroponics are mainly practiced with synthetic fertilizer.
Aquaponics, however, can be a great small system where fish live in the water and
makes great fertilizer for the plants. All these methods work towards a more sustain-
able future for agriculture, each solving a specific set of problems.
The urban farming movement: Urban farming is a way of bringing farms closer
to its consumers who live in the city. A large and growing number of people live in
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Sustainable Agriculture Solutions
cities. By growing certain crops in the city it is possible to bring down the distance
from farm to consumer. It is also a way to connect with people as there is a more
dense population around the farms versus traditional rural agriculture. This creates a
great opportunity for building a community around the farm and transparency about
the food production methods [19]. Many urban farmers end up being educators due
to the high influx of people. It is also a less expensive option for young people or
people with low starting capital, as it can be practiced on leased land, even in people’s
front yards. Another plus is the easy access to water.
But is it even possible to produce enough food that it matters?
This is a good
question, and to answer this it makes sense to look at Cuba. The article [20] de-
scribes how Cuba entered small scale organic urban farming through a food crisis due
to political instability which limited the option for chemical agriculture. The idea
behind the Cuban urban agriculture is that production is in the communities, by the
communities, and for the community. To be able to supply healthy, fresh produce
directly to consumers. in 2002 they produced 90 percent of the cities fresh produce
in the organic city gardens. [21]. This is a stunning example of how policymaking
and choice to go in a new direction can be feasible on a larger scale. Cuba has shown
how knowledge and practice of Organic gardening methods in the city, can be a sus-
tainable way to increase food security for its inhabitants.
Knowledge sharing and community: Another feature of many of these types
of agriculture is the community building and knowledge sharing focus they have.
There is a focus on sharing innovations or methods which can increase production or
sustainability. The farms are often open to visitors and very transparent about their
practices. Knowledge sharing among farmers is so important as they are essentially
the main holders of information needed to innovate. This is both important as a way
of educating consumers to buy and support sustainable agriculture, but also a way for
fellow farmers to be inspired to do even better and learn new about new techniques
or methods.
4.2
Personal household gardening
What role does personal gardening have in this large and complex food system? There
might be a debate about if household gardening can be a significant contributor or
solution to overall food security and food production.
However, anyone who has
grown their own food knows how rewarding and fulfilling this practice can be. And
on top of that if done correctly and efficiently it can push a household toward par-
tial to full self-reliance on vegetables. It might be the most direct access to food
for people as it is grown directly in or around their own homes. In the greater food
system, it serves a role to provide even more diverse crops and animals [22]. This
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Summary
31
makes the whole system more resilient to food shortages and uncertainty. Personal
gardens serve as a great conversation starter and a way to educate people who are
interested in understanding the food system better. And such personal gardening can
be a great sustainable addition to the food system, while not being a panacea for all
the problems of agriculture.
Another aspect of household gardening is medicinal plants. A large portion of plants
grown in household gardens is grown explicitly for medicinal purposes. The study of
gardens in Sri Lanka [22] revealed that 30 percent was grown exclusively for medicinal
use. It can be seen that in the western world as well as many of the plants grown at
homes such as garlic and turmeric has some medicinal benefits and especially cannabis
is now being recognized more as having multiple medicinal uses.
However the success of a garden is very much reliant on the skill, knowledge, and
experience of the gardener. Therefore knowledge must be shared on how to garden
sustainably and effectively. Luckily it has never been easier to find information than
today, And many new gardeners seek information in books and on the internet where
an abundance of methods and techniques are shared.
Indoor gardening Today, 55 percent of the world’s population lives in urban areas.
In the future, it is projected by the UN [23] that 68 percent of the world’s population
is projected to live in urban areas by 2050. This makes household gardening harder
as it requires some space preferably outdoors or inside in a sunny place.
Still, many people are growing plants indoors. Primarily houseplants for some green
in the home, but herbs are also a being grown by many people do the ease of mainte-
nance. One of the most cultivated plants indoors is Cannabis. This is mainly due to
the legal status of the plant and it has pushed growers to use stealthy methods such
as grow tents to hide the plants.
The role of indoor gardening in regards to agroecology is to be an extension of the
outdoor garden in the months of the year where outdoor growing is not possible.
Indoor growing serves the same purpose as household growing in producing food in
the home, and serving as an introduction to food gardening in general. As we will
examine later in the report, LED lights can make indoor growing feasible and with
sustainable energy, this can serve as a sub solution that can find its place in the larger
complex food system.
4.3
Summary
in this chapter, we looked at agroecology as a great framework for working with na-
ture instead of against it. It could also be seen how many intelligent and very specific
but different farming methods, movements and techniques could each be a part of
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Sustainable Agriculture Solutions
the larger solution. The role of urban farming could be a valuable practice as more
people are going to be living in cities in the future. Household food production and
gardening also showed to be a very valuable part of the food systems and creates
better nutrition, more biodiversity while encouraging community and education re-
volving around food. Indoor gardening as an addition to home gardening is already
practiced widely but still has the potential for development. It can be a positive
practice if done sustainably.
Keypoints
• Agroecology can be a great framework for working with nature and potentially
reverse damage from industrial agriculture
• Urban farming and small scale farming can play a part in the transition to a
more local and sustainable agriculture
• Personal gardening practice can prove valuable for the larger food system on
many levels
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Indoor Growing
Technology
What’s in this chapter?
• What plants are well suited for indoor growing
• How different grow mediums work
• What parameters makes a good indoor grow environment
• Basic introduction on how grow lights work and how to use them when growing
indoors
In the previous chapter, we saw how indoor growing could potentially be a great
addition to the larger sustainable food system. But how can this be done and what
parameters are important?
In this chapter, the technology necessary to facilitate
indoor growing will be described. It is crucial to understand how different indoor
growing methods work, as they dictate the type of plants that can be grown. Different
plants are categorized and evaluated concerning their suitability for indoor growing.
The type of plant is essential to have in mind when designing grow systems, as there
is no one size fits all solution if an effective system is the goal. We look at soil vs soil-
less mediums and synthetic fertilizer methods vs organic methods. We also look at
how to set up an environment optimized for plant health. Details regarding lighting
physics and general setups are discussed to serve as a background for calculations
later in the concept development phase.
5.1
Plants
We start of this chapter by investigating which plants are most suited to indoor grow-
ing. A spreadsheet was created where different parameters were set up.
The analysis focuses on edible or usable plants/food and does not go into details
with mushroom cultivation, algae cultivation. Plants used for decorative purposes or
general houseplants/flowers will not be discussed in detail.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Indoor Growing Technology
Categories of plants: Cannabis, Mushrooms, Hops, Herbs, Spices, Root, vegeta-
bles, Greens, Microgreens, Sprouts, Legumes, Nightshades, Onions, Berries, Fruit
plants, Trees, Succulents, Grains, Seaweed/Algae, Squash family, Tobacco, Tea, and
Coffee.
The spreadsheet can be seen in appendix figure A1 and A2. The spreadsheet sum-
marizes if a plant is a good candidate for indoor growing. The first parameters of
interest in this report are to find plants that are popular in demand and therefore
have a high sales price, but at the same time being easy and fast to grow in an indoor
environment. From the book [19] a quantifying metric for plant characterization is
used called CVR (crop value rating). This rating summarizes how fast a plant grows
to full maturity, its yield per area, the price per weight, growing season and popu-
larity. Furthermore, the size of the plants, how difficult it is to grow and its light
requirements were also noted.
The conclusion of the analysis showed three plant categories with high ratings in
terms of being optimal for indoor growing. These were cannabis, greens, and herbs.
Greens and herbs are good in terms of quick crop cycles, easy growing, low light, and
fertilizer requirements while still outputting high yields due to the whole plant being
harvested. Cannabis, on the other hand, is good regarding its popularity and high
crop value even though it is a longer growing cycle.
5.2
Soil and growing mediums
The basis for growing plants is to have something they can develop their root system
in. Soil works as a plant medium because it gives the roots what they need, a solid
foundation, a supply of oxygen, retains water and contains accessible nutrients. Soils
are different and different plants thrive in different soils. To understand how differ-
ent methods of growing with soil or even without it works, we investigate how plants
uptake nutrients.
A plant requires, like humans, both macro and micronutrients. In can be said in
a simple comparison that humans require the macronutrients of fats, carbs, and pro-
teins where plants require nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K) which is found
in most synthetic fertilizers, but also calcium, magnesium, and sulfur. Micronutrients
are boron, chlorine cobber, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, and zinc. These
are required in smaller amounts. A plant only requires 17 elements to grow [24], (this
includes, co2, oxygen, and water)
The plant uptakes these basic elements via small root hairs and transports the
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Soil and growing mediums
35
molecules through the root and distributes them through water inside the plants
where it is needed. This is a complex biochemical process, so only the crux of the
processes will be discussed. There is a need for these molecules to be present in the
root zone and this can be done in several ways. The root hairs can absorb the ele-
ments in their basic forms, hence this is why inorganic fertilizers work.
Organic fertilizers work by feeding complex versions of the required elements to the
microbes living in the soil.
Plants do not just soak up nutrients, but sends outs
juices called exudates to attract and feed bacteria which can convert these complex
elements the plant needs to easier digestible versions [25]. This means that the plant
is in charge and allocates the nutrients it needs from the soil. This makes soil biol-
ogy a crucial factor for the plant’s health. As the conversion of nutrients and other
biological processes are carried out by beneficial bacteria and fungi. On top of this
many small living creatures such as worms, nematodes, arthropods, and protozoa are
contributing to the system called ”the soil food web” [25]. This system requires soil
as a foundation for the soil food web. However organic non-soil mediums such as
coco-coir fibers can be initiated with organic fertilizers and bacteria to form a small
and simplified organic nutrient delivery system. Hydroponic solutions are not easy
to do with an organic fertilizer in this way as they rely on water for the transport of
nutrients, and this can be quite complicated compared to just using synthetic soluble
salt forms of fertilizer.
Inorganic fertilizers can supply nutrients to the soil either in liquid or solid form,
however, water is needed for the plant to uptake these. Inorganic fertilizer feeds the
roots of the plants directly and thus gives the plant the required elements for life.
This is what makes practices such as hydroponics feasible where water is loaded with
soluble synthetic fertilizer which the plants can take up directly.
This method is
easy and works pretty well however it requires more constant feeding as the soluble
nutrients are being used rapidly by the plants compared to the organic more complex
methods where the plant uses what it needs when it needs it.
Hydro vs Soil for indoor growing: There is pros an cons to both methods in
regards to indoor growing and different ways of doing both.
Here is some of the
important features of each listed.
• Use less overall space due to the constant feed of nutrients. Systems can also
be very flexible as only water flows in the system and no soil medium needs to
be present.
• Use less water due to the recycling of nutrients in a water reservoir.
• require precise control of nutrient solution and pH of the water
• Not very forgiving when nutrient levels are off or if water levels drop. This often
results in crop loss and a restart can be needed.
• Grows faster but develops inferior taste and aromas.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Indoor Growing Technology
Figure 5.1: Hydroponic grown lettuce in plastic tubes and soil.
• Harder to do organically
Soil has these features:
• Takes up a decent amount of space as nutrients are distributed in the soil.
• Needs scheduled watering as the soil cannot dry out as this will kill microbial
activity.
• fewer inputs needed through the growing cycle as nutrients are taken up grad-
ually as the plant grows.
• Very forgiving when something goes wrong, there is usually plenty of time to
correct.
• Grows a bit slower but develops better taste and aromas.
• Organic by nature
Summarizing soil mediums: Even though arguments can be made that hydroponic
systems with synthetic fertilizer can save large amounts of water due to its water
recycling nature, there is a conscious choice in this thesis to go back to the basics and
look more closely at organic techniques. This is also in response to what was discussed
earlier in the report, that feeding plants synthetically can load the soil with excessive
fertilizer and particular excess nitrogen can cause large disruptions in both soil life
and the larger ecosystem. We also saw how synthetic fertilizers in particular nitrogen
are based on natural gas and are very energy-intensive to manufacture. Sustainable
organic growing methods will also serve as an educational tool to teach how soil works,
something which is very important for future generations to know about. Therefore
the focus on organic growing methods.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Grow Environment
37
5.3
Grow Environment
When the roots of the plants have their needs covered by the soil, the plant can
begin its growth cycle. The environment above the soil is also very important as
above-ground plant parts such as leaves stems and fruits have certain requirements
for optimal growth.
A plant sucks up water from the soil through the roots and
then transpires it into the air through tiny holes in the leaves called stomata. This
creates a pressure difference from the root zone to leaves. This is one reason why air
circulation is needed.
Ambient humidity levels and temperature also dictate how different plants grow as
they have evolved in different climates, thus having different needs. Plants absorb
co2 from the air around it and exhale oxygen. An ample supply of CO2 is needed,
however, the amount in normal air is usually enough if a room is ventilated to a cer-
tain degree. Higher levels of C02 can be introduced by adding C02 from gas bottles.
This is only necessary if the rate of photosynthesis is very high. This will be covered
in the light section.
Indoor vegetable, herbs, and cannabis growing: To be more relevant we look
at the types of plants usually grown in indoor environments and look at certain guide-
lines:
Air exchange and circulation: Air exchange is important to secure optimal co2
levels, control humidity and reduce the risk of pests, however, it is quite easily ob-
tained by having an extraction fan setup to extract air from the growing environment
to the outside. For circulation, a smaller fan is needed to leave no air stagnant in the
grow room, as this can invite conditions favored by mold and fungus.
A general guideline is to have a grow rooms total volume of air changed every 1-
5 minutes [26].
Temperature levels are different for various vegetables but in general, temperatures
from 18-23 degrees Celcius are suitable for most vegetables, with many being able to
grow at even lower temperatures. Luckily this is the range we humans like as well so
usually there is no need for excessive thermal control if a grow room is in a normal
building where humans are present. Cannabis plants thrive in 20-30 degrees Celcius.
As long as humidity levels aren’t extremely high or low, most plants can adapt and
grow well in these conditions. 50-80 percent is a good range for healthy plant growth.
This range is also correlating well to humans’ preferred conditions. If humidity levels
are too low the leaves might dry out and start curling while stunting growth, and if
too high, the plants have a hard time transpiring and at the same time being more
susceptible to funguses and mildew.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Indoor Growing Technology
5.4
Lighting
Lights are the most crucial factor for indoor growing. In its essence, a fully indoor
grow setup needs to substitute the sun. This requires the right amount of energy and
the right spectrum of light and comes with a few challenges such as heat and light
intensity. Let’s start by looking at different grow light options.
We look at 3 basic types of grow lights. 1. Fluorescent grow light, 2. High-pressure
sodium/metal halides and 3. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs).
Fluorescent tubes and bulbs are commonly used as grow lights especially for veg-
etables and herbs due to them being cheap, emitting low heat and being able to be
placed close to the plants. The negatives are their low efficiency and limited light
output.
High-pressure sodium and metal halides are old but solid light bulb technologies
which work by lighting up and arch inside a glass bulb containing different types of
gas depending on the color hue wanted. These lights produce high light intensity,
but also high heat. This means they need to have some distance to the top of the
plant canopy and heavy ventilation to avoid the plants getting heat stress and stop
overheating of the growing environment.
LEDs have been around for long, but it is just in the last 10 years that they have
become very efficient and feasible for the indoor growing industry. LEDs are great
because they emit high light levels while keeping heat outputs low. This results in
very high efficiency. LEDs, therefore, trump the other two on efficient performance.
LED lights used to be very expensive, but prices on LED grow light has gone down
considerably in recent years as large scale LED manufacturers such as Samsung are
making very efficient chips specifically targeted at horticulture.
Closer look at LEDs: Due to the benefits mentioned before and because LED
technology is evolving at a high rate, LEDs will be examined further.
The sun’s light includes all the colors visible to the human eye, plus ultraviolet and
infrared. Plants use light for 2 things, photosynthesis and photomorphogenesis (con-
trol of shape and development). The spectrum used for photosynthesis is called PAR
(photosynthetic active radiation) and was analyzed and found by Mcree in [27] and
can be seen in figure 5.2. Different plants use light spectrum and light timing as
signals for specific development such as when to start flowering.
At the start of the 2000s, a common thought among LED light manufacturers was
that the main part of the light spectrum plants would use for photosynthesis was red
and blue. This led to many LED grow lights combining only pure red and pure blue
LEDs. Although this was thought to be an efficient way seen from an engineering
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Lighting
39
Figure 5.2: [27] Showing plants absorption spectrum and photosynthesis with re-
spect to certain wavelengths.
perspective, research and newer knowledge show that plants use a larger part of the
spectrum in different ways and that full-spectrum lighting to the like of the sun is
more ideal for overall plant development.
The development of LED technology has steadily been going on since the early 1990s
where the blue LED was developed. The blue led would then serve as a basis for the
white LEDs that we know today. This happened through phosphor coating and as
late as 2014 a team of Japanese scientists received the Nobel prize of physics “for
the invention of efficient blue light-emitting diodes which has enabled bright and
energy-saving white light sources”.
This was the beginning of efficient LED grow
lights. Samsung released a white full spectrum LED chip called LM301b in 2017 and
this is where things took off for the led grow light industry. This chip is used in
most of the full spectrum white LED grow lights on the market today. Phosphorous
coating of the led surface creates a much wider white spectrum as seen in figure 5.3.
This type of LED chip is relatively affordable and most of all incredibly efficient.
These types of LEDs can be manufactured to specific color temperatures measured by
Kelvin. Different Kelvin dictates the overall hue of the light and goes from a colder
light more heavy in blue wavelengths at lower Kelvin to a warmer light more heavy
in red wavelengths at higher K.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Indoor Growing Technology
Figure 5.3: [28] Spectrum of a 6500K, 4000K and 3000K LMb301 phosphor-coated
full spectrum LED chip.
Plants grow well withing 3000-6500K with higher Kelvin stimulating more compact
growth with a focus on its vegetative stage. Lower Kelvin stimulates flowering and
fruit production in plants and makes the plants focus on its reproduction. However,
when growing with full-spectrum lights the color ranges are not as important due to
the full spectrum serving the plants all the different wavelengths it needs, much like
sunlight. In certain conditions like cannabis cultivation where even a small percent-
age increase in yield can be very important, additional IR, UV and red lights can be
used to further drive flower production.
How much light do plant need?
Now that we have an idea of what type of
light plants need we can start looking at how much light they need. Daily Light
Integral (DLI) is the go-to standard for knowing how many hours of light different
plants need in relation to light intensity. To understand how much light they need
we must first quantify light intensity.
Light is photons. Light intensity is a measure of how densely packed light is with pho-
tons. How much light comes out of the light source is measured in Photosynthetic
Photon Flux (PPF) and is a measure of how many photons of Photosynthetically
active radiation (PAR) light, or plant usable light is emitted. The unit of PPF is
Micromoles per second, µmol/s. PPF’s only depicts the light coming out of the light
source and not the photons hitting the plant itself. Photosynthetic Photon Flux Den-
sity (PPFD) takes this into account as it is the number of photons per second within
a given area.
An example of how this works can be given by looking at HLG-550 v2 light fixture
comprised of 4 pcs of Qb288 (288 Samsung diodes soldered to an aluminum plate) see
figure 5.5. This light is a Samsung LM301b powered LED light with supplemental
red diodes specifically made for cannabis production. The light intensity per area or
its PPFD can be measured by a sensor and mapped as seen in figure 5.5.
This PPFD
chart is representative of the light being hung at 18” (45cm) and 24” (60cm). Here
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Lighting
41
Figure 5.4: HLG-QB288 including light spectrum graph.
Figure 5.5: HLG-550R PPFD chart.
it is clear that hanging height is very important with respect to how many photons
are hitting the plant.
LED lights have the advantage of having a low heat output and in comparison with
HPS lamps, they can quite close to the plants. However, caution is still needed as
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Indoor Growing Technology
phosphor-coated LEDs such as the Samsung LM301b have a very high light energy
output. This means that the PPFD level as seen in the graph easily can go above
1000 and this can damage the plant due to energy and heat stress. When setting
up grow environments it is, therefore, necessary to measure the light intensity of the
light at a different heights to find the optimal spot for growth.
In the PPFD chart it can also be seen how there is a definitive hot spot in the
center of the growing area and how the light intensity tapers off gradually, the closer
it gets to the edges. This is because this mapping was done with the light hung with
no reflective surfaces or walls to guide photons down towards the grow area resulting
in great inefficiency. This shows how the quantity of light plants receive is highly
dependent on a good light environment, more specifically, hanging height of the light
source and guidance of photons toward the plant canopy.
To achieve higher light levels at the bottom of the grow area it is common to use
Mylar ( a highly reflective material), white paint, or lenses on the led itself. The
amount of light hitting the plants compared to how much power is used can be cal-
culated by looking at the efficiency of the light source, its power supply, and room
reflections. This can be seen in figure 5.6. It shows especially that there is a large
loss of light if no reflector/lens is used and the light source is hanging in a place with
no walls to reflect the light down.
Figure 5.6: [29]Efficiency of different light sources, power supplies, and reflection
methods.
Looking at plant requirements for photons it can be seen in figure 5.7 that growth
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Lighting
43
will increase as light intensity increases. However, there is a natural bottleneck limit
at 1000 µmol/s as seen in figure 5.7. This limit is where the photosynthesis process
is utilizing all the Co2 present in the ambient air. The light levels can be increased
for higher growth rates, however, this requires supplemental Co2. .
Figure 5.7: Graph showing the relationship between light intensity and plant
growth.
Some plants have high light needs due to being used to warm climates with lots
of direct sun, others prefer colder and even shaded environments. As we just dis-
cussed the upper light limit is around 1000 µmol/s, but time also plays an important
role we are talking about the number of photons. Hence they are accumulating. Low
levels of PPFD over a long duration will net the same total photon count as higher
PPFD levels for a shorter time. General guidelines for light intensity can be seen in
figure 5.8.
DLI is the daily light integral and is a metric for how much light per area per day.
The unit is mol/m2/d. In figure 5.9 the relationship between time and light intensity
can be seen.
Different studies on plants have categorized levels of optimal DLIs [31].
A broad
categorization can summarize DLI levels for different plants and stages of growth as
such:
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Indoor Growing Technology
Figure 5.8: [30] PPFD levels required for optimal plant growth for different plants.
• Seedlings, Microgreens - 6-12 DLI
• Vegetative Growth( e.g herbs and leafy greens) - 12-17 DLI
• Flowering crops (e.g Tomatoes, Cannabis, s - 15-40 DLI
This is important as indoor growing generally has the option for total control over
the light schedule, in comparison to outdoors where the day length and weather is
the determining factor.
5.5
Summary
This chapter revealed how herbs, greens, and cannabis might good candidates for
indoor growing. Soil and other grow mediums were evaluated and the living com-
ponent of soil was described in detail. Temperatures, humidity, and environmental
factors were described for optimal plant growth indoors. Different grow lights were
evaluated and LED lights were highlighted due to its superiority on efficiency, plant
growth and heat. A description of how plants use light and factors determining this
was done through examples with white full spectrum LED’S. Important factors to
consider when setting up lights in an indoor growing area was covered.
Keypoints
• Herbs Greens and cannabis are great candidates for indoor growing
• Certain levels of humidity, temperature, and air circulation are required to grow
plants indoors
• LED grow lights are a great option for indoor growing due to their efficiency,
the spectrum of light they output and their low heat output
.
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Summary
45
Figure 5.9: Graph showing relationship between light intensity and duration result-
ing in DLI.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Indoor Growing
Market
What’s in this chapter?
• Total Food gardening is increasing with millennials getting involved
• Urban gardening, indoor gardening, and organic gardening is on the rise pushed
by millennials
• Overview of the cannabis market
• Canadian cannabis market and US legal markets show new user demographics
• How many and who will grow at home?
• Which personal indoor grow systems are available now?
This chapter looks at general food gardening trends which can be related to indoor
growing. As the personal indoor growing of vegetables is still a very small market
and due to indoor growing of cannabis currently being illegal in the majority of
countries, data is sparse. The approach is, therefore, to look at large food gardening
statistics and important data to the context of indoor gardening. For cannabis, the
legal markets of Canada and US legal states will be examined and the relevant data
will be extrapolated to give a perspective on new emerging cannabis markets.
6.1
Overview
There is a distinction between 2 markets in this chapter, one is the indoor veg-
etable/herb gardening market and the second is the cannabis market with a focus
on indoor grow systems. There will be an overlap as both activities types of systems
can be used to grow many types of plants, however, there is a clear difference between
the two different target audiences.
The personal food gardening market is used as an indicator of gardening interests
and to get an overview as it is closely related to the niche market of indoor growing.
The National Gardening Association in collaboration with Garden Research is a U.S.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Indoor Growing Market
based market research agency that specializes in doing national surveys called “What
gardeners think”. These surveys are very thorough and benchmark different segments
of gardeners on their attitudes, opinions, values, demographics, gardening practice,
annual spending, and purchases.
Food gardening on the rise: The 5-year study done from 2008-2013 [32] is a
very comprehensive look at the market conditions as they were at that time and also
the trends that prevailed. It is very relevant due to the detailed information, even
though is not the newest information. The study provides some interesting statistics.
Overall, there has been an increase in food gardening from 2008-2013. From 36 mil-
lion households to 42 million households participating, that’s a 17 percent increase.
The total amount spent on food gardening has also been rising, 40 percent more was
spent in 2013 ($3.5bn) compared to 2008 ($2.5bn). The data also showed a 20 per-
cent increase in first-time growers in 2009 and a steady increase in the years following.
Millennials, urban and indoor gardening: Another interesting point from the
study [32] is the involvement of millennials (age 18-34). This demographic increased
by 63 percent from 2008-2013. And later studies confirm the trend. A recent study
from 2018 by the same agency reveals that 38 percent of 18-34 year-olds plan to spend
more on lawn and garden activities in 2019, compared to the overall average of 29
percent. It also shows that 18-34 year-olds accounted for a quarter of estimated lawn
and garden spending in 2018, despite having lower household incomes than others
and being more likely to live in an apartment or condo. Males in the 18-34-year-old
age category reported increased participation in lawn and garden activities (from 23
percent in 2016 to 27 percent in 2017. An increase in urban gardening of 29 percent
was also noticed in the 2008-13 study. Indoor gardening is also making a big come-
back with 30 percent of all households buying at least one houseplant.
How much and where is it spent? Overall, American gardeners reported spend-
ing a record $47.8 billion on lawn and garden retail sales, the highest ever, with a
record average household spend of $503 – up nearly $100 over the previous year. From
the 2008-13 study, we saw that spending has grown from $2.5bn to $3.5bn and 50
percent of the spending was going towards vegetable gardening followed by 22 percent
fruit, 15 percent herbs, and berries at last. In 2008, millennials spent a total of $632
million on food gardening, and in 2013 they spent a total of $1.192 billion, an increase
of 89 percent.
What is this demographic buying?
Some of the spendings go towards knowledge.
Many of these gardeners acquired gardening information from books, courses or gar-
dening websites to help them be better and more effective gardeners.
Eco conscious and grow it yourself: There is also a growing trend of being
an environmentally conscious gardener who aims to grow and eat organic. More and
more people are interested in organic growing methods where the health of the soil
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Cannabis
49
is in focus and working with organic fertilizer and other inputs is essential. There is
also an increase in plant-based diets and organic food from consumers, with multiple
reasons for this such as climate change, protecting local environments and healthier
dietary choices. The numbers show this trend, and the UK soil associations have re-
ported [33] a steady increase in organic produce over the last 5 years and an all-time
high in 2018.
6.2
Cannabis
The National Gardening Survey also includes information on cannabis for the first
time in their 2018-19 surveys, and younger households show a very high level of inter-
est in cultivating legal cannabis: nearly half, an estimated 35.9 million U.S. residents,
say they would definitely or probably grow a type of cannabis if it were legal to do
so. Seven and a half million of these young adults interested in growing cannabis
say that no one in their household currently participates in any lawn and garden
activity. So cannabis growing could potentially be the first step into food gardening.
Males in the 18-34-year-old age category reported increased participation in lawn and
garden activities (from 23 percent in 2016 to 27 percent in 2017.) The National Gar-
dening Survey also includes information on cannabis for the first time - 33 million
households (27 percent) said it should be legal to grow for personal use, and 15 per-
cent of households (19 million) said they would grow cannabis if it were legal to do so.
The current legal cannabis market consists of explicitly legal states in the U.S. seen in
figure 6.1, Canada as a whole, South Africa and Uruguay. Then an array of countries
where it is decriminalized and 44 countries where medicinal use is legal. Then there
are gray zones and special laws in countries like the Netherlands and Spain. The legal
Cannabis market constitutes about 8 percent of the global Cannabis market or $12.2
billion. The US represents about 90 percent of the legal market, followed by Canada
and the Rest of the world.
The Canadian market is interesting as it is the first wealthy country to fully legalized
cannabis. There is some data to be gathered and the data is relevant the market has
similarities to the US and Europe. Deloitte reported on the Cannabis market [35]
which can help give an overview of the different consumers, channels, and estimation
of market size.
Results from [35] shows that 22 percent of the Canadian adult population consumes
recreational marijuana on at least an occasional basis (this does not include medical
marijuana), with a full 7 percent of the adult population consuming daily. A further
17 percent show some willingness to try it if it were legal, suggesting the total po-
tential marketplace (current plus potential consumers) is close to 40 percent of the
adult population. For context, Statistics Canada reports that close to 80 percent of
the adult population has consumed alcohol in the last year.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Indoor Growing Market
Figure 6.1: [34] Blue represents totally legal, dark green is medicinally legal and
light green is medicinally legal but limited THC, gray is total prohibition
and D’s mark decriminalized states.
In figure 6.2 the market estimation can be seen.
The market is split up into dif-
ferent segments with the base market being calculated on cannabis consumption av-
erages. The auxiliary markets such as growing facilities and testing labs account for
the market where indoor growing equipment would be represented and is estimated
to between $12.7bn - $22.6bn.
New cannabis users entering the market post legalisation: With the legal-
ization of recreational cannabis new user segments are seen. From the report [36] it
can be seen how the traditional young male risk-taker consumer might not be at the
center of a legalized market. There might be an influx of older more conservative
experimenters following legalization. These users have very different values, incomes,
consumption habits and reasons for consuming than the risk-takers. This will shape
the legal cannabis market to something very different than the current illegal market.
In a report on consumer behavior done by an American legal cannabis delivery
company Eaze [37] it can be seen how this change is already taking effect. Female
consumers are increasing. Consumers at 50 years and older are increasing. The mo-
tivation for consumption has also changed towards a health focus with new products
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Cannabis
51
Figure 6.2: Canadian cannabis market estimations on base market, auxiliary market
and other externalities. [35].
entering the market such as topical and orally ingested oils which tout health bene-
fits. CBD, a non-psychoactive compound in cannabis associated with health benefits
has been a great purchase decision factor in 2018 as it goes along with health aware-
ness. Several consumers also report using cannabis to cut down on alcohol and pain
medication. These examples of new consumers and a new market would have some
carryover to the European market as it shares similarities in wealth and culture with
the US and Canada.
Growing at home: The most important question relating to this thesis, is how
many would grow themselves. In one survey [36] an average of 27 percent of cannabis
consumers would like to grow their own. With a breakdown even further stating that
53 percent of daily users and 31 percent of less frequent users would grow themselves.
A Bloomberg article [38] refers to an online poll where 1380 Canadian homeown-
ers where interviewed about their view on indoor cannabis growing. In the study, it
was found that more than half of homeowners (57 percent) felt growing even the legal
amount of cannabis would hurt a home’s value. Twenty-six percent disagreed and 18
percent were neutral. Millennial respondents were most open to growing cannabis
at home (19 percent) compared with 15 percent of GenXers and 11 percent of baby
boomers.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Indoor Growing Market
6.3
Products on the market
The goal here is to have a brief look at the market for personal indoor growing sys-
tems and the different products already being offered. This is not a detailed analysis,
more of an overview.
Grow tents: The most common form of indoor growing equipment is grow tents.
They have been around for many years and are the standard option for growing more
light requiring plants such as cannabis, chilies or tomatoes. To get a tent set up and
growing one usually has to buy all the parts separately as they are manufactured by
different companies. This makes grow tents very customizable and less plug and play.
They are shaped by the illegal nature of their history and made to be discreet and
hidden away. The price ranges as tents are available in many different sizes. However,
prices range from $80-$300 for a tent without equipment. These tents are optimized
for high yield and optimal plant growth.
Figure 6.3: Common grow tent setup.
Vegetable and herbs systems: The first segment of products are the smaller
designer systems made for growing herbs and small vegetables such as Aerogarden
seen in figure 6.4. These systems are usually hydroponic and come with nutrients
and seeds. They are plug and play solutions where the price reflects the convenience
they offer. These systems are around $100-$200 and cater to a modern user who
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Products on the market
53
wants to pay more for something that looks good and is easy to use. ClickGrow is
another similar company that started as a crowdfunding campaign as it served as the
right platform for their target market. It is now sold through Apple retail stores as a
designer grow system.
Aerogarden is one of the biggest players on the indoor grow system market being
acquired by the large company Miracle-gro. They have various grow systems ranging
from around $50 to $500. This company was one of the first to showcase and serve
the needs of small consumer systems for the indoor growing market. There are many
other players on the market but they don’t differentiate a lot from the Aerogarden
type of product.
Figure 6.4: Aerogarden in kitchen.
Cannabis: Indoor cannabis growing has been equated with grow tents for many
years. These grow tents are usually purchased online or through a local grow shop.
It is until recently that a few companies have showcased a special designed all in one
solution. A very good sales channel for these systems has been crowdfunding.
In figure 6.5 Grobo and Seedo can be seen, they are some of the most popular prod-
ucts in this category. Specially made for 1 plant which is grown hydroponically with
sensors and ”smart” capabilities such as wifi connection and smartphone APP. The
idea of these systems is to provide a plug and play and automatized solution for in-
door growers. However, these systems come with a hefty price tag of around $2000
which is quite high compared to what you could get a traditional grow tent for. There
are other systems like the two showcased in figure 6.5, but they look very similar. An-
other system which has been competing with grow tents for some time is more closet
systems. They are essentially just metal closets with grow lights and equipment fitted
inside. They are another plug and play solution competing with the ”smart” systems.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Indoor Growing Market
Figure 6.5: Indoor cannabis grow systems. Grobo to the left and Seedo to the right.
6.4
Summary
Food gardening as a practice is increasing and millennials are very involved.
Or-
ganic, urban and indoor growing is becoming more and more popular especially for
millennials. Cannabis cultivation at home is becoming more popular and especially
incentivized by legalization. Cannabis markets are opening up around the world with
large economies like Canada fully legalizing for recreational use. This creates a new
market with new customers for businesses to serve. Although there are already prod-
ucts such as grow tents on the market, these are not made for growing vegetables and
herbs. They aren’t made to be modern and fit the needs of the new cannabis growers.
That’s why products such as Aerogarden are popular for people growing herbs at
home and smart designer systems like Seedo and Grobo are becoming popular.
Keypoints
• Food gardening is on the rise
• Organic, Urban and Indoor growing are increasing in popularity
• Legal cannabis markets are being shaped and are evolving rapidly
• Companies are capitalizing on this with technology-driven designer indoor grow
systems
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7
Customer
Conversations
What’s in this chapter?
• How to use lean personas
• Creation of personas for gardening and cannabis growing
• Small surveys for added qualitative insights
7.1
Personas
Personas are used because it is a valuable tool to concretize the target users and split
them up into different segments in the market. These user segments can then be
analyzed specifically and reveal unique values, problems or angles which then can be
used to develop a business model concept around.
Personas are traditionally formed from
• Interviews
• Intuition
• Online research
• Already acquired Data ( From a website, analytics, etc)
The method used here is an adaptation of what the Lean UX method calls a “proto-
persona”, which is typically done as a first step towards finding personas. This method
is usually started by brainstorming and leaves the interviews to be done later. It is a
fast tool to get started from assumptions and sparse data. The idea is then to prove or
falsify the hypothesis when doing the interviews. In this project, this method serves
as a good starting point for creating an outline of the different imagined customers,
and when formulating questions for the interview this serves as a pre-framing. This
makes the questions able to go down certain predetermined paths which gives more
relevant answers as the questions are tailored towards the individual being interviewed
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Customer Conversations
Goal of the personas: Setting up goals for the personas is a very important part
of the process, as the decisions when formulating the personas has to be evaluated to
its importance towards the goal of the analysis
The main goal of the personas in this project is to try to segment user types and find
different niches in a very broad diverse group of people, ie. gardeners and cannabis
users. In relation to the Lean Canvas, the personas give rise to different canvases
to be explored for each user type. Lastly, the personas will be used when concepts
are developed to gauge if the concept would be interesting for the targeted persona.
Also if in doubt the personas can be used as a tool to find out who would be the
best potential customers for the product. The goal here is not to go into too much
detail on each persona, but try to go as diverse as possible, to begin with, and then
later hone in on interesting segments and dig deeper. This part would then consist
of interviews which then would be retrofitted onto the lean personas if possible. The
personas and the real interviews then show similarities and differences which can lead
to an iteration of the business model or scope of the concept.
Compiling relevant data: The first step is getting some data on the different
types of people in the target audience. Facebook Audience Insights is a great place to
start if one does not already have a website or data beforehand on the audience. As
this project is about a new product for a brand new company, we are starting from
scratch with the data gathering.
Audience insights let you browse large amounts
of data present about Facebook users and have statistics for the demographic one
inputs information about. This step is where intuition is helpful to get started and
Facebook Audience Insights then helps out to come up with suggestions based on the
vast amount of data on Facebook. Mixing data from Facebook with intuition and
personal knowledge about the target demographics was used to develop the personas.
Categories: When creating the personas I evaluate which categories, and topics
I want to know about the imagined persona. This could range from demographics,
hobbies
interests, values
needs, attitudes, etc. The important thing is to strictly
ask during the process, “Does this make sense to know concerning the goal of the
persona? ”
The created Lean Personas are split into two sets.
One set for people interested
in general gardening and one set for cannabis specifically. This makes sense to do
because there are substantial differences in motives, challenges, and markets between
the two. This will also make it easier to develop and evaluate the concept later.
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Personas
57
Figure 7.1: Persona 1: The Homesteader.
Figure 7.2: Persona 2: The Community Gardener.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Customer Conversations
Figure 7.3: Persona 3: The Millennial Urban Gardener.
Figure 7.4: Persona 4: The Busy Mom.
==PAGE:69==
7.1 Personas
59
Figure 7.5: Persona 5: The Diy Gardener.
Figure 7.6: Cannabis Persona 1: The Old School Cannabis Grower.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Customer Conversations
Figure 7.7: Cannabis Persona 2: The Modern Healthy Mom.
Figure 7.8: Cannabis Persona 3: The Social Millennial.
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Personas
61
Figure 7.9: Cannabis Persona 4: The Medical User.
Key assumptions from gardening personas:
• Different motives for growing food depending on the context of the individual
situation all want to grow more food than they currently do
• Different levels of gardening knowledge and experience, but they want to learn
• They are limited on time and want to optimize their grow space
• They all value homegrown vegetables and herbs over store-bought
• They want to grow more food during the cold and dark half of the year.
Key assumptions from cannabis personas:
• Different motives for growing cannabis depending on their current situation
• They all would like to know more about indoor cannabis growing
• They all think indoor growing is complicated and expensive
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Customer Conversations
7.2
Surveys
To get more knowledge about people’s views on gardening and their current practices
and challenges 2 surveys were created. The goal of these surveys was to get some
background knowledge from different people to either confirm or deny some of the
assumptions made in the beginning when formulating the personas. The surveys were
short 3-minute surveys optimized for ease of completion. The 2 surveys gathered a
little bit of data, while not enough to be close to statistically significant, they served
their purpose. The surveys were distributed from my personal Facebook account and
also spread on Reddit subreddits related to gardening in general.
The first survey was targeting broad general gardening questions and got 23 responses.
The second survey was focused on indoor gardening and got 17 responses. The exact
questions and answers can be seen in the appendix. The questions for the surveys
were formulated in line with the interview questions used throughout the project and
followed the Mom Test and Lean Canvas methodology.
7.3
Customer conversations - Problem interviews
The problem interviews or customer conversations are one of the most important
parts of this project. In the end, it is the customers who will validate if the product
concept will solve their problems and if the business model is economically feasible.
The interview sessions have been conducted by the same framework used by startups
talking to potential customers. This was done to be in alignment with the Running
Lean methodology and because of the entrepreneurial scope of this project.
I have based the customer conversations on the teachings on the teachings from
the book “The Mom Test: how to talk to customers and learn if your business is a
good idea when everyone is lying to you ”. The Mom Test describes a framework for
interviews where the point is to have casual conversations steered smoothly into areas
that show people’s real emotions and thoughts about an idea, product or situation.
The idea behind this style of interviewing is that you don’t prime the person with
your ideas when you starting the interview. This is to try to maintain an honest con-
versation that revolves around the person’s habits, values, and daily life. The reality
is that people will lie to you or be nice to you when you ask them about your specific
personal ideas. Therefore, the interviewer has to be strategic to get useful results
which he then can use with some confidence to validate if the ideas have potential or
not.
Solution-based interviews and more extensive interviews on features, details and more
can be conducted after concepts are developed based upon the problem interviews.
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Customer conversations - Problem interviews
63
Figure 7.10: Key takeaways from gardening surveys.
Notes from the interviews can be seen in the appendix. The notes reflect the na-
ture of the interviews where emotion, expressions, and body language were a large
part of the observation.
The Interviews had to be structured in a way that helped me get back on track
if the conversation got off track. The conversations follow these key objectives:
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Customer Conversations
Learn:
• Is this a real problem?
• Does anybody care?
• Do the market exist?
Confirm:
• Can i get someone to pay for it?
Analyze customer behavior:
• What do people do right now?
• Do people really value the product? Find customers using competitors products
and ask them about it
The interview structure is also heavily inspired by the script provided by Ash Maurya
seen in figure 7.11.
Figure 7.11: Problem interview structure [39].
==PAGE:75==
7.3 Customer conversations - Problem interviews
65
The main structure used in the interviews was as follows:
1. Introduction without mentioning anything about the problems or solutions.
Just briefly mentioning the topic of the interview which is gardening and in-
door gardening.
2. Basic demographic information such as age and living situation.
3. Then proceed to ask a question to initiate the conversation like:
• “Do you do any food gardening today? If not, why?”
4. Ask questions that look for the root motivation for doing what they are doing.
• “Why are you food gardening?, Why not?”
• “What is your favorite plants to grow?”
5. Ask about their current practice:
• How are you currently doing food gardening?
6. Search for problems or challenges associated with gardening:
• “What is the most challenging thing about gardening for you?”
7. At the end of a conversation, bring up the idea or concept hypothesis. Followed
by a question which seeks commitment such as:
• “Would you like to buy a prototype?” or something that involves a com-
mitment of time, reputation or money on their end.
Prioritization: Due to the nature of a startup, there are time constraints.
Ev-
ery hour has to be spent on the most important tasks. Certainly interviewing is a
time-consuming process and if done unstructured can waste tremendous amounts of
valuable time which could have been spent on development, design or other tasks that
move the project forward. Therefore an evaluation of the most important customer
segments was done. These segments were chosen for interviews because they were
most relevant to the scope of the project and the easiest to find. As with the Personas,
the differences are great enough to split the customer segments into two, even though
there can be an overlap between them.
• General gardeners outdoor
• General gardeners indoors
• Medicinal cannabis growers
• Recreational cannabis growers
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Customer Conversations
This segmentation combined with the personas served as an initial reference when
selecting people to interview. I started by reaching out to friends and family who fit
this description and then slowly progressed to interviewing people, who I got recom-
mended to speak with from the first batch of interviews.
How many interviews are needed?: The number of interviews conducted be-
fore achieving confidence in the hypothesis or business plan varies. One indicator
that enough interviews have been made is when there is no new information gathered.
When you hear the same answers to the same questions over and over, this is also
an indicator that some truth has been found. On the other hand, if you keep getting
fuzzy answers all over the place, it shows that the customer segment might be too
broad. This is why personas as a prerequisite to the interview process are very im-
portant. Rob Fitzpatrick recommends 3-5 interviews per business idea if the industry
and topic are fairly simple and around 10 if it is a more complex situation. Ash
Maurya [40] recommends a minimum of 10 interviews and sometimes up to 30 before
finding valuable patterns in the answers. In this thesis, I have conducted around 25
interviews varying from quick 5 min talks to more detailed 30+ minute conversations,
both in person, on the phone and via text.
7.3.1
Key findings from customer conversations
The key finding from the initial interviews will be summarized here into two different
summaries fitting the respectable customer segment.
General gardening: The key findings in the gardening segment were that a few
problems such as watering were universal across all conversations. It was also noted
that the living situation of each person varies on many parameters and that has a
great impact on what motivations and problems people have. To reflect on the process
so far with interviews it is clear that there is a need for more customer segmentation.
For example, splitting up the segments in groups of indoor gardeners and gardeners
with access to a real garden would probably make the answers more coherent and
easier to analyze. I have summarized the most general finding here:
Motivations for gardening:
• Achieve more self-sufficiency
• Watch the progress and do it for the activity itself
• Growing something which yields and can be used for cooking
• Want to get a feeling of getting closer to nature
• More green colors in the living room
==PAGE:77==
7.3 Customer conversations - Problem interviews
67
• For a better indoor environment
• Want to grow herbs for the family to put on food as spices
• Want to grow for fun
• Better tasting than store-bought vegetables
• Grow Heirloom varieties that can’t be bought in the store
Current practices:
• Grows easy plants such as Kale outdoors.
• Grows hot peppers indoors in the summer because they are fun and can be used
and preserved
• Grows a variety of vegetables outdoors in pots and soil when the season allows
it
• Grows sprouts on the kitchen counter
• Grows a few vegetables on the balcony in pots
Problems and challenges:
• Not enough space and does not know where to allocate space for growing
• Remembering to water
• Dosing of nutrients and watering
• What to do when something unknown happens and general plant knowledge
• Providing enough light in the winter
• Grow systems are expensive
Key finding from customer conversations about cannabis growing
The problem interviews with a focus on cannabis growing got more consistent an-
swers and the customer’s worldview was more coherent than the general gardening
interviews. This is an indicator that the customer segment is a good size and that
the prevalent problems have some validity to them. This also made it more approach-
able in terms of referencing the personas to the person interviewed. This resulted in
more practical results which gave more motivation to pursue this customer segment
in depth.
Because of this, the interview responses were summarized in terms of what persona
type the interviewed customers were most related to.
Cannabis Persona 1: The Old School Cannabis Grower
Motivations for growing cannabis:
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Customer Conversations
• Building the setup DIY style
• To consume the end product
• To know that its organic and no chemicals were used
• Both for medical and for recreational reasons
• Legalisation
Current practices:
• Grows plants outdoors with minimal inputs
• Grows plants indoors in large grow tents
Problems and challenges:
• Knowledge about plant health and cannabis
• cultivation
• Watering
• Fertilizing
Differences from persona and insights:
• Old school growers are adapting to newer growing methods in particular indoor
growing.
• The difference between medical and recreational use in older individuals can be
blurry.
Cannabis Persona 2: The Modern Healthy Mom
Motivations for growing cannabis:
• Want to grow something less potent and more balanced
• Sharing with friends
• Assurance of origin
• High-quality end product
• For the joy of the process
Current practices:
• Doesn’t grow due to legal status many places
• Doesn’t buy if it is only available at the black market
• If located in a legal country, she will buy cannabis
• Grows outside if legal
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Customer conversations - Problem interviews
69
Problems and challenges:
• Smell
• Legal status - too risky to grow
• Grow tents are not pretty
• Doesn’t know how to get started growing indoors - seems too complicated
Differences from persona and insights:
• Is very likely to grow in places where it is legal to do so
Cannabis Persona 3: The Social Millennial
Motivations for growing cannabis:
• High-quality end product
• Saving money
• Assurance of origin
• Being self-sufficient
• Growing special strains
• Want to stop supporting the black market and illegal activities
• Sharing with friends
• For the joy of growing something, but extra motivated by the psychoactive effect
Current practices:
• Tried growing a few times with no real success, due to lack of knowledge about
growing
• Basic cheap grow tent and setup
• Doesn’t grow but buys from illegal sources
Problems and challenges:
• Knowledge about growing
• Smell
• Noise
• Grow tents are ugly and unhandy
• Want something discreet
Differences from persona and insights:
• Saving money on cannabis is not as important as presumed in the persona
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Customer Conversations
• High upfront cost on indoor growing equipment might be a barrier
Cannabis Persona 4: The Medical User and Grower
Motivations for growing cannabis:
• High-quality end product
• Growing enough cannabis for their medical needs
• Saving money
• Helping to cut down on opioids and other drugs
Current practices:
• Grows larger quantities (4+ plants) in grow tents
• Buys on the black market
• Buys legal cannabis from dispensaries
Problems and challenges:
• Getting high-quality product
• Problems associated with growing - High humidity
• The overall growing process is hard and not easy for beginners
• Price
Differences from persona and insights:
• Might have no experience with or knowledge about cannabis when beginning
to grow
• Doesn’t compromise on equipment for growing
• Might grow more cannabis than expected due to high medical consumption
7.4
Summary
The Lean personas jump started the customer development. The quick iterations
from having a blurry idea of who the customer is to go through many different po-
tential customers helped the interviewing process. Through the structuring of the
interviews real problems, motives and viewpoints were understood. The interviews
were then summarized in terms of the personas created. The personas worked as
intended as all the interviewed customers could fit reasonably inside the created per-
sonas. The surveys gave some background validation of the problems and showed
that it was often more than one person experiencing it. Many key findings have been
found and summarized in bullet points so they are easily referenced for use in the
==PAGE:81==
7.4 Summary
71
concept creation phase.
Keypoints
• Lean Personas is a good tool for customer segmentation and customer interview
preparation
• The Lean Personas were created and showed many different sub-segments within
a large customer group
• Small surveys gave a broad overview of peoples main reasons for gardening, how
they garden and their challenges with it.
• The Problem oriented interviewing methods from The Mom Test and Running
Lean was described in detail
• Two customer segments were interviewed: General gardeners and Cannabis
growers
• Key findings from interviews were summarized in relation to the personas cre-
ated
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 8
Concept Goals
What’s in this chapter?
• What requirements is there from a Startup perspective?
• Summarized technical requirements
8.1
Structuring design goals and requirements
This chapter summarizes the finding from the previous chapters and develops a small
catalog of objectives for the concept design process. This makes the concept devel-
opment more structured as it has some clear requirements to follow. The 2 main
constraints are the startup Sativo’s requirements and harder technological require-
ments. The customer’s design goals will be found in detail in chapter 9 as they are
depending on the specific concept. The requirements listed are ”need to have” hard
requirement.
8.2
Company requirements
As Sativo is a hardware startup focused on bootstrapping and being as lean as possible
the requirements are developed hereafter. The main constraint for Sativo is time and
money. Due to the iteration processing time of hardware development being longer
compared to software development it is important to think twice before developing
concepts.
Prototyping: Fast prototyping of concepts is important as they will probably change
and the faster the mistakes or re-designs are figured out, the faster the next proto-
type can be designed. There is also a need for as cheap as possible prototyping due
to the company’s situation. The focus on cost-effective prototyping also forces the
prototypes to be more creative in terms of design. This adds a layer of constraint
that will have to be factored in. This requires the designer to skip the first step of
doing an expensive prototype build by expensive materials such as Bosch Rexroth
aluminum rails. This relates to the need for hitting as close to the desired target with
the prototypes. Even though this requires more upfront development, calculations
==PAGE:84==
74
8 Concept Goals
and reassessment of CAD drawings, it is a must because hardware prototypes are
large and relatively expensive.
Designing with later-stage manufacturing in mind early on is important as it will
save a lot of time on reiterations. This doesn’t mean designing the concepts for ac-
tual factory production from the start, but rather to keep in mind that the goal of
these concepts is to make real consumer products which will have to be manufactured
at some point. The main requirement here is to avoid building bloated, unrealistic con-
cept prototypes which have no carryover into the real business development of Sativo.
Normally a hardware startups development of prototypes diverges into two paths,
a ”works like” prototype which tests out the essential hardware functionality and a
”looks like” prototype which looks as close to the final product as possible. In this
project, it is an objective to develop prototypes that will be able to do both. This
should be doable due to the previously stated requirements and because of the rela-
tive simplicity wanted of the final concepts.
Brand values: When designing the concepts it is important to factor in some pre-
conceived values from Sativo. These values the founders wish to showcase and adhere
to the brand. Brand values for Sativo are based on a combination of preconceived
personal values from the founders and also some added values that were explored
during this project.
Simplicity, practicality through technology is some of the key values. Simplicity by
doing things in a minimalist way with design, keeping bloat of technology down and
only using it to deliver the most necessary features. Keeping things simple and also
very practical is important as well, this ties into user experience which is also very
important. Some values are greatly inspired by Apple which does a great job of cre-
ating beautiful products that are simple but still highly functional and user-friendly
without compromising on technology. As a B2C business, the aesthetic component
of the product concepts is important, as the first glance at a product should reveal
brand values and visually communicate to the customer which type of customer and
market segment it addresses. The concept has to appeal to people with the feeling
that the product is easy to use and simple to understand from the get-go.
Additional brand values are also a focus on being natural, organic and self-sufficient.
High quality and a degree of craftsmanship in each product are also brand values
that tie into the bootstrapping nature of the startup. As authenticity is crucial in
business it is important to showcase the real story behind the company and it would
be miss-leading to act like a large company from the start.
==PAGE:85==
8.3 Technological requirements
75
Company requirements summarized:
• Fast prototyping and iteration cycles
• Affordable prototyping materials and processes
• Hit as close to home with the prototypes as possible
• Design with manufacturing and real end product in mind
• ”Looks like” and ”works like” combined
8.3
Technological requirements
The technological requirements are the boundaries which make sure that plants can
grow and thrive. These requirements are findings from chapter 5 and will influence
the design decisions as they need to be met.
Medium:
The medium has to be organic with as few inputs as possible. All inputs should also
be organic. The medium should be tailored to grow the highest quality crops pos-
sible. The soil should be suited for the optimal growth of herbs, greens, and cannabis.
Environment
• The air in the growing environment should be changed every 1-5 minutes.
• Temperature should be kept between 18-30 degrees Celcius
• Relative humidity levels should be between 50-80 percent.
• Air circulation is required
• Odor control might be needed if growing cannabis
Light
• The light has to be full-spectrum
• With a dominant color of 3000-6500 Kelvin depending on the phase of growth
• Light intensity per area needed at the plant canopy is minimum 150 and maxi-
mum 1000 PPFD
• Energy use should be kept as low as possible i.e high PPF/W efficiency
• Heat levels must be low at the canopy to avoid heat stress
• Light must be able to be dimmed and time scheduled
• Photons should be reflected towards the bottom of the grow area so light loss
is minimized
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 9
Concept
Development
What’s in this chapter?
• Indoor growing system concept ideation
• Inception of Sativo as a business and brand
• Detailed lean business model work with indoor cannabis growing system called
”Sativo One”
• Design and engineering of 4 Sativo One prototypes
• Sativo Green - A Herb and vegetable growing concept
In this chapter, a full-fledged concept for an indoor grow system business is developed.
Through an ideation phase, sketching and iterations this chapter shows the apex learn-
ing points, breakthroughs that directly influenced decisions leading to in-depth work
with one concept. Due to company interests and an interesting market opportunity
of cannabis growing, the total business concept ”Sativo” with the product being an
indoor grow system specifically for cannabis, will be the main concept which will be
most thoroughly explored. Concepts focusing on vegetables will be explored on a
more conceptual level.
The concept of creation will follow the framework of the Lean Canvas. This is to
have a backbone of a business model, not to get too focused on solution details such
as engineering solutions. Hereby sticking to the most crucial engineering choices and
letting the rest speak for itself.
9.1
Ideation Phase
The first step in the process of concept development is a brainstorming ideation ses-
sion. Ideas should flow unobstructed by logic and no idea is inherently bad.
==PAGE:88==
78
9 Concept Development
The brainstorm was focused on grow-system concepts that can grow organic veg-
etables and or cannabis. The brainstorm was done while sketching out the concepts
loosely resulting in 3 major concepts. Concept ideas can be seen as illustrated in
figure 9.1. Only the most relevant concepts have been included in the report because
of the choice value of concept depth instead of width.
Concept Ideas
• Personal indoor grow system for growing herbs and greens
• Personal indoor grow system for cannabis
• Small scale indoor garden grow systems for herbs and vegetables
Personal indoor grow system for herbs and greens: The idea behind this con-
cept was to create a home growing system that allowed people to be a part of the
food system by growing their own organic greens and herbs. The basis of the system
is a bed made out of wood which contains the soil and a small watering system. A
fixture on top with LED lights on top for year-round growing. This system should
be easy to operate and yield enough so that it could replace a substantial amount of
store-bought herbs and greens. That is why the vertical dimension was added to it
and also the modular design resulting in stackable trays.
The system can help the overall food system by learning people to be more self-
sufficient while growing fresh and healthy produce. The system also shows children
how food is actually grown and gives them a little glimpse of the biology behind. Also,
it serves as a conversation piece that could initiate conversations about agriculture
and growing food for yourself or at least inspire people to be more conscious about
food in general.
Personal indoor grow system for cannabis: This concept revolves around the
need for legal cannabis home growing systems. The market has just recently opened
up and there is a host of new costumers entering the space. The system is a plug and
play grow system which can grow cannabis from seed to harvest. Minimalist wooden
design with a focus on being a part of the modern home. The system would grow
organic high-quality cannabis for medical or recreational users. A ”smart” element is
added with smartphone app access to data on the plant and environment plus control,
guidance and support through the app.
Small scale indoor garden grow systems for herbs and vegetables: This
concept is a more direct take on solving problems related to agriculture. Having the
ability to grow organic vegetables in passive solar greenhouses, basements or contain-
ers through LED grow lights. The purpose would be growing fresh organic vegetables
and have a functioning indoor garden quite similar to an outdoor one. This type of
gardening would function well as something to showcase during winter months, but
also as an indoor educational tool for organic growing and gardening in general.
==PAGE:89==
9.1 Ideation Phase
79
Figure 9.1: Refined brainstorm sketches and ideas.
==PAGE:90==
80
9 Concept Development
9.1.1
Selecting concepts for further development
After exploring the ideas gathered from the brainstorm and sketching and based on
the knowledge gathered about current market conditions and customer behaviors it
is clear that the cannabis growing unit seems the most reasonable concept to dive
further into. From the startup’s perspective, it rules high on realism concerning the
resources available and skills at hand. Both in terms of time for building prototypes,
but also in terms of complexity. The task seems doable with reasonable technicality.
The profile of the potential customers has been revealed from the interviews and
seems more unified and clear than potential customers for the indoor herb garden.
The larger-scale indoor garden concept is also interesting but will require much more
time and effort in terms of talking to specific customers, as the gardens would have
some customization element to them. The other reason was the speed of prototyping
which would be much slower when building a larger system.
Even though the Cannabis grow box is the main concept, the two other systems
are also used as concept case studies and can be seen in the latter part of this chap-
ter. One is product extension for Sativo and the other is a small concept case study
with a small rooftop farm called Østergro. This can be seen after the main concept
development of Sativo.
9.2
Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
What is Sativo?
Sativo is a business concept developed while writing this report but also a real com-
pany. The name Sativo is derived from the Latin ”Sativa” which means ”cultivated”
it is associated with plants that promote good health, ie. oats Latin name ”Avena
sativa”. It is also associated with Cannabis as cannabis Sativa is the Latin name of
the common cannabis variety.
Sativo’s main product is the cannabis grow system called Sativo One seen as a render
in figure 9.2. It is an indoor grow box which makes organic cannabis growing easy
while looking great in the home. Perfect for beginners who want to get started while
good enough to produce high quality organic product for medical users. It is a prod-
uct that caters to a new demographic of cannabis users who are different due to the
legalization of cannabis in countries such as Canada. The company focuses on health,
self-sufficiency and organic growing principles.
==PAGE:91==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
81
Figure 9.2: Sativo indoor cannabis growing system render.
The development of Sativo from the initial idea to a more polished concept is de-
scribed in this section.
The Lean Canvas will be the main tool to structure and
describe the concept. This is to showcase how the concept was conceived through
working with the concept as a real business model and how each box in the canvas
forced critical decision making along the way. The concept will be developed from
knowledge found in all previous sections plus knowledge from prototyping, engineer-
ing design and testing along the way.
Although there is no fixed way to work with the Lean Canvas, the author Ash Maurya
has given some examples of which boxes to prioritize. The order can be seen in chap-
ter 2 figure 2.3 and is carried over into the structure of concept description. The idea
is to start with the most crucial parts of the business model, which is understanding
the customers and the problem. When these are understood the rest of the canvas
can be worked with, and if these aren’t well-considered, they will make the rest of
==PAGE:92==
82
9 Concept Development
the canvas less useful.
To start working with the Lean Canvas it was filled out with initial ideas and worked
with as a hypothesis. This was done early in the project and iterated several times
before reaching its final state presented in this report. The most recent Canvas can
be seen in figure 9.3 and illustrates the idea of the business concept.
Sativo - Indoor cannabis Grower
Lean Canvas is adapted from The Business Model Canvas (BusinessModelGeneration.com) and is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Un-ported License.
PROBLEM
Growing cannabis Smells
Quality is bad and origin
unknown
Requires time to maintain
and knowledge about
what to do
Requires a lot of
components and diﬀerent
parts to start
Growing systems are ugly
EXISTING
ALTERNATIVES
Grow Tents
Expensive High End
Hydrosystems
Buying cannabis instead of
growing
SOLUTION
Complete grow system
App with guidance and
control of light &
automatic watering
Modern aestetics
designed to be standing in
a living room
Organic Soil
UNIQUE VALUE
PROPOSITION
Grow your own organic
top shelf cannabis in 8-10
weeks. Fully Automated.
Designed speciﬁcally for
the ﬁrst time grower and
the modern home. No
Smells, No hassle.
HIGH-LEVEL
CONCEPT
The Iphone of indoor
growing
UNFAIR ADVANTAGE
Fast Follower
Great support from DTU
and network
Great Team
complementation -
Childhood friends
CUSTOMER
SEGMENTS
Indoor cannabis Growers
EARLY ADOPTERS
Millenial modern "hipster"
cannabis consumers and
ﬁrst time grower
KEY METRICS
Revenue of $1million in 2-
3 years
Landing page visits
Email Captures
CHANNELS
Word of Mouth
Social Media
Physical presence in
public places (Cafés etc.)
Advertising
Partnering with growshops
online and oﬄine
COST STRUCTURE
Manufacturing
Shipping
Advertising
1 person salary
REVENUE STREAMS
Margin of proﬁt from direct sales of hardware growbox
Recurring sales of seeds and soil
Proﬁt from split payments
Figure 9.3: Initial Lean Canvas.
9.2.1
Customers
The first thing important aspect of creating a product is to know who the target
customers/users are. In the end, it is the customers who make the product a reality
by purchasing it. The product can fulfill the same overall purpose, but look, feel and
act differently depending on the actual user/customer. This is seen in all product
categories but is visible as an example of different cars. All solve the same main prob-
lem of transportation, but there is endless optionality of features and design when
selling to many different target customer segments. Having a firm grasp of the target
customers is essential when looking further down the line of product development as
==PAGE:93==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
83
it works as a lighthouse for guiding decision making.
Identifying customers: The main customer segment is everyone who wants to
grow cannabis at home or do it already. There are already a lot of people growing
at home and the market research done shows a potential increase in the number of
people entering the space. People have many different motives for growing cannabis
at home and the customer segments within the cannabis market are already very
diverse and have become even more so in recent years. A key objective when working
with this part of the Lean Canvas is to go beyond the major customer group and dive
into details. This is part of the reason for doing the personas in chapter 7. This was
to help identify different customer segments and try to understand their behavior,
values, and problems.
Underneath the main customer group of indoor cannabis growers, we find different
segments. These will be the same as the personas in chapter 7. But let’s highlight
them again.
Customer segments
• The Old School Cannabis Grower
• The Modern Healthy Mom
• The Social Millennial
• The Medical User
From the interviews, it was clear that there was a large overlap between customers
who fit The Modern Healthy Mom persona and The Social Millennial persona. Both
were interested in a healthy lifestyle, the social aspects of cannabis and had a prefer-
ence for organic. The Old School Cannabis Grower and the Medical User had some
overlap as well. Where the age and health of the Old School Grower demographic
might push users more in a direction of easing pain. The medicinal users also has a
greater consumption and grows more plants.
This resulted in two main customer segments:
1. A younger more progressive and modern customer segment with a focus on social
well being and health
2. A medicinal use customer segment with a focus on pain management and being
able to live a better life and be a more active part of society.
The Lean Canvas is easier to work with if the best-case early adopter customer is
imagined. This makes the sequential steps more concrete. In this particular case, we
base the early adopter customer persona on our first actual customer who showed the
intent of purchasing the concept from one of the first customer problem interviews.
She fits in the category of a millennial modern progressive ”hipster” grower. Due
==PAGE:94==
84
9 Concept Development
to her being real and willing to buy our product, her statements are valued highly
compared to others who did not convey how important it was for them to overcome
their problem and get closer to their goals.
9.2.2
Problem
The most emphasized aspect of working with the Lean Canvas is to make sure that
the problem to be solved is real and relevant for the hypothesized customer segment.
This is usually what makes or breaks a startup.
To get this foundational understanding of the customers problems, specific problem
interviews were conducted as described in chapter 7. The problems stated are the
ones most applicable to our imagined early adopter customer. To understand the
problems more in detail a 5 why’s analysis approach is used on the problems as seen
in the appendix. This is done to get to the root cause of the problems and look at
overlapping problems between the segments or if some problems are unique. From
the interviews, there has also been a focus on trying to estimate the severity of the
problems by looking for signals such as customers repeating a problem and also look-
ing at their emotional expressions when explaining the problem.
The customer’s main problems: A big hurdle for people who wants to start
growing is knowledge. Many people get overwhelmed by the many different equip-
ment options just to get started. And also become confused about which methods
they should use for growing. These customers are not overly interested or necessarily
have experience with gardening and plants. The next hurdle is the disturbances which
tie into the aim of being discreet. They are not comfortable with the smell, noise
or light disturbances of growing cannabis. Also, they might want to be very discreet
about their grow setup due to local legal status and social stigma. If they choose to
grow and utilize grow tents, they have some issues with these also. The industrial
look and limited view of the plants is a problem.
• Knowledge
– Lacks knowledge about the general gardening skills and the process of
growing cannabis from seed to harvest
– Lacks knowledge about what equipment to buy to get started growing
– Lacks knowledge about how to process the end product
• Disturbances
– Odor from plants is a problem in terms of not being discreet and being a
general inconvenience in the home
– Noise from extraction fans are disturbing
– Grow light might be annoying for the eyes and not be discreet
==PAGE:95==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
85
• Time
– Lacks time and feels stressed about doing plant upkeep such as watering
and fertilizing
– Doesn’t have time to sit down and learn all aspects of growing cannabis
– Doesn’t have time to troubleshoot problems related to growing cannabis
Existing alternatives: A common fail when analyzing existing alternative solutions
to the problem at hand is to only look at the narrow competition. The alternatives
described in the Lean Canvas are meant to be broad and not necessarily specific to
the category of the startup’s solution space.
In this case, the first problem to be solved is the larger need to grow, purchase
or obtain cannabis for consumption.
Here are multiple alternatives:
• Growing legal or illegal cannabis in regular grow tents
• Growing legal or illegal cannabis in modern grow-systems (direct competition)
• Growing legal or illegal cannabis outdoors
• Buying legal cannabis at dispensaries
• Buying cannabis from the black market
• Buying legal cannabis at dispensaries
• Not buying or growing anything at all
9.2.3
Unique value proposition
The unique value proposition is the promise and offers our company gives to the cus-
tomers. It is usually presented in a condensed form that grabs attention and explains
the whole business concept simply. It has to bring something unique to the table and
let customers know how the company differentiates from other solutions.
A good template for building a unique value proposition is Dane Maxwell’s formula:
Good unique value proposition = End Result Customer Wants + Specific Period
of Time + Address the Objections
Sativo’s unique value proposition:
Grow your own organic top-shelf cannabis in 8-10 weeks. Fully Automated. Designed
specifically for the first time grower and the modern home. No Smells, No hassle.
Another useful way to convey the promise of the company is to describe the high-
level concept. These are a few words that simplify the concept by comparing it to
==PAGE:96==
86
9 Concept Development
already existing concepts. Like Uber for teaching or the BMW of bicycles.
Sativo’s high level concept:
The iPhone of indoor cannabis growing
9.2.4
Solution
The grow system was created following a hardware development path developed by a
hardware development consultant company Bolt.io it can be seen in figure 9.4. This
is a hybridized model between heavier manufacturing-focused management tools and
more lightweight design thinking principles. It will be used mainly as a tool to explain
various iterations and considerations relating to design, engineering, and validation.
Figure 9.4: [41] 4 phase hardware development model.
Ideation: The problem research was clear and ideas on how to solve these began.
The first problem to be solved was how to contain the cannabis plants indoors in a
modern way. It needed to be a different look than grow tents and plants should be
visible. Something new had to be thought out. From a lot of design sketches, a new
design came up as seen in figure 9.5. This would be a proof of concept prototype
drawing just to validate further development.
A 3 part box where the top and bottom was some form of wood was the initial
idea. The design was inspired by a Kickstarter project called 7 sensors which had a
similar look, although it was manufactured in plastic and not wood. Wood was cho-
sen because it is a classic furniture material and would have a natural look. Acrylic
sheets would make the box transparent and work as a terrarium highlighting the
plant inside. Both materials would be reasonably priced and available to purchase
and work with. Acrylic can be laser-cut and wood can be milled out on a wood 3d
==PAGE:97==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
87
Figure 9.5: Initial refined concept sketch.
CNC. This is crucial as prototypes have to be cheap and easy to produce. This is
why plastics weren’t considered to start with as it requires expensive tooling.
The size of the box had to be determined.
It was a general customer need that
it should be able to grow 1-2 plants at a time. A decision was made to create the first
prototype for one plant to keep things simple. Now as cannabis plants range in size
due to different genetics and ways of growing, it was important to have some sort of
average to work with.
Auto-flowering cannabis plants are a certain genetic variation that grows from seed
to harvest in around 60-80 days which is relatively quick. They are not requiring a
certain day/night light schedule such as normal cannabis plants to flower and pro-
duce buds. This and the fact that they average around 1m tall made them a good
candidate for the grow box. The development of these strains of cannabis has started
to get popular in the last 5 years so the timing is good for a product that focuses on
these. This size of the plant made sense to design the box around. The boxes would
be between 40-80cm wide and 120-140cm in height.
The first sketch 3d drawing and finished V1 prototype can be seen in figure 9.6.
This was the first concept prototype created to verify the construction of wood and
==PAGE:98==
88
9 Concept Development
acrylic. Also, it would be our hardware testing prototype to verify electronics, lights,
and fans.
Figure 9.6: First prototype from initial sketching.
Design phase: The design part of the development cycle was pretty straight for-
ward. To aid the customer development and feedback a new 3d model needed to be
drawn. A model representing a more finished ”looks like” prototype.
The design was drawn in detail in fusion360 and evolved further from the first proto-
type to have a larger bottom wooden box with a lid. This was to hide the plastic pot
with soil and watering system. Also, the logo was printed on the case and the wood
was upgraded to represent higher-finish plywood. The last design iteration was cre-
ated with bamboo wood. This design change would try to move the first impression
towards a higher-end product and at the same time symbolizing sustainability. This
design change was well-received when customers where asked about if they preferred
it or not. This concludes the visual design and looks of the concept.
Engineering specifications:
This is where the actual mechanical and electrical engineering takes place. Certain
hard requirements need to be complied with. These challenges and solutions will be
described here.
==PAGE:99==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
89
Figure 9.7: V2 concept CAD drawing.
Electronics: The backbone of the electrical system had to be developed to be able
to control all the electrical components such as lights, fans, and sensors. The choice
fell on an ESP32 which is a microcontroller with integrated Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.
The Wi-Fi integration makes the grow box able to be controlled from the internet
through a phone app for example. Also, it makes it able to store and access data from
boxes in an online database. The microcontroller can run sufficient code to control
the light schedule and intensity while controlling fan speed and reading sensor data.
Light: From the light requirements various LEDs were considered. The option of
creating our own customer LED circuit board was also on the table, but due to time,
price and minimum order amount a decision was made to go with a prefabricated
LED. The chosen LED is a full spectrum 3500-4000 Kelvin fixture based on Sam-
sungs LM301B white LED technology, also called quantum boards. The LED can be
seen in Figure 5.5 in chapter 5. It is very efficient and comes with a small heat sink
which keeps the heat on the diodes low.
A quick calculation shows how the required wattage for the grow area chosen.
Grow area * Desired PPFD level = Total PPFD required / Efficiency of Grow light
(0.4m ∗0.6m)0.24m2 ∗800µmol = 192µmol−> 192µmol/1.5 = 128watt
This is perfect for the chosen LED which runs up to 135 Watt. The LED requires
a power supply that could be controlled by PWM signals and fit the required load.
==PAGE:100==
90
9 Concept Development
Figure 9.8: 3d render of the prototype in bamboo.
After trial and error and tinkering with drivers to try to save money, a dedicated
Mean well ELG-120-54B LED driver was chosen as it is reliable, controllable and safe
for the purpose.
The light is usually passively cooled, however, due to its configuration in the box
where it sits inside a confines space it requires an air exchange to keep temperatures
low. This can be accomplished by combining the air exchange system for the grow
space with cooling the LED panel.
Air exchange: The plant environment needs to be controlled within the stated
requirements from chapter 8. The temperature and humidity levels are largely deter-
mined by the indoor climate of the house where the Sativo grow box will be placed.
This is done as most houses in the chosen markets where the product will be sold
have temperatures and humidities within a reasonable threshold. Air circulation and
exchange need to be controlled by fans.
The top of the box is where air will be extracted.
This is done through the top
of the enclosed acrylic box which contains the plant as seen in figure 9.9. The extrac-
tion system will be based on ultra-silent fans. When looking at fans the metric for
==PAGE:101==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
91
Figure 9.9: Top box assembly CAD and render.
volume flow CFM (cubic feet per minute) is usually specified. To find the required
airflow for the grow box the calculation can be made. The required total volume
exchange had to be a minimum of 1 per minute. Added to this is the requirement for
static pressure to over-win the resistance of a carbon filter. A rule of thumb is that
carbon filters need 25 percent more flow to be accounted for. Also, it has to be able
to move enough air to cool the LED to a reasonable level, this will be measured with
testing of the actual setup.
(0.3m3/minute = 10.59CFM ∗1.25 = 13.2CFM
The initial fan to be tested was an AC infinity s2 multi fan blowing 35CFM at 17dB
with static pressure at 0.84mm-H20. However, due to pricing, sourcing and increased
static pressure, a Noctua NFP12 Redux 1300 fan blowing at 19dB with static pressure
at 1.68mm-H20 was finally chosen. These fans have plenty of overhead on airflow and
are quieter than a regular pc fan so noise levels are kept low. Small fans inside the
grow-system will make sure that no air is stagnant
Carbon filter: A carbon filter had to be designed and implemented as odors ranked
high as a customer problem. The carbon filters used in traditional grow tents are
very large heavy and require powerful fans therefore not suited for the small space
available as in the top of the Sativo grow box. A housing for custom carbon filters
was designed and fitting filters were ordered from a wholesale supplier. The design of
the top can be seen in figure 9.9. The filling is carbon RC412 which is an Australian
carbon specifically made for odor elimination.
==PAGE:102==
92
9 Concept Development
Figure 9.10: Custom carbon filter.
Bottom of the box: The pot, soil, fertilizer and water reservoir is located at the
bottom of the grow system.
Pot size is directly related to how tall and big the
plants because it dictates the root ball size. General guidelines are looked at for auto-
flowering cannabis plants which are the chosen species to be grown in the Sativo box.
General recommendations are followed by looking in the manual [42] for cannabis
growing given by the company Mephisto Genetics who breed auto flower plants. For
a full-size auto flower grow, 12-18 liters of pot size is recommended.
With a focus on minimal inputs, cost, quality, and yield we chose to with organic soil
with nutrients and living microorganisms. Soil is the most natural growing medium
and the easiest to control. Organic nutrient-rich and microbially active soil barely
require any inputs other than a good watering schedule and some organic fertilizer to
help in high nutrient demanding situations such as cannabis flowering or after an end
grow to reset the soil and use it for the next grow. When growing in a microbially
active living organic soil, the plant is working in symbiosis with the microbes to get
the exact micronutrient as discussed in chapter 5.
An obvious benefit is that the need for fertilization is minimized as the soil is pre-
mixed with organic nutrients, microbes and fungi to support a plant’s full life cycle.
This makes it easy for the grower. This also simplifies the watering system as there
is no need for special auto-calibrating systems to control ph levels or liquid fertilizer
mixing. This saves money and reduces complexity. Organically grown plants are
higher in micronutrient and phytonutrient levels than conventionally grown plants
==PAGE:103==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
93
and that is also a reason to go the organic route, as we want the highest quality plant
for the grower.
Watering will be done through a system called Blumat. It is ceramic stakes that
connect to a water source through a small tube. The stakes are permeable and work
by equalizing pressure levels between the soil and the ceramic resulting in a uniform
moisture level and distribution. They work by drawing up the water passively and
doesn’t require any pumps. It works well with the living soil as microbes require
constant moisture levels.
Figure 9.11: Blumat stakes watering system installed.
Validation: The last part of the development cycle is to test and validate the design.
This was done in iterations as 4 prototypes were built in total and different systems
were tested on each one.
The first prototype showed that the construction with acrylic and wood could hold
itself with relative little reinforcement. This design was carried on into the next pro-
totypes.
The light setup had many assumptions that needed to be validated.
First off a
measurement of light output in the final configuration had to be done. Measuring
and mapping out PPFD levels at different heights and light intensity settings were
done. The light levels were perfect as they averaged around the required 700-1000
PPFD at the canopy levels of the plant inside the box at around 30 cm from the light
source. The results can be seen in the appendix.
A finding was that the light intensity was highest closest to the light source and
==PAGE:104==
94
9 Concept Development
exponentially decreased the further away it was measured. It was evident that the
light was not adequately forced downwards.
There was a huge loss in the room
through the acrylic. The test setup can be seen in figure 9.12 This resulted in a need
Figure 9.12: Light reflection test.
for a reflective surface on the inside of the acrylic to enhance the bottom PPFD levels.
This can be done using partially reflective solar films which still allows the customers
to see into the box. This can also dampen the light a bit as the light is very intense
for human eyes.
Heat levels were measured inside the box at various light intensity settings to make
sure that fans expelled heat that otherwise would be trapped in the top lid of the
box. This was a huge success as the fans even running at low speeds could keep the
temperatures at around 36 degrees Celsius compared to around 70 degrees Celsius
when no fan was running. This also led to the installation of a heat safety switch
that turns off the lights if temperatures exceed 60 degrees.
==PAGE:105==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
95
The ventilation system with carbon filters was tested and showed adequate flow. How-
ever further testing on the carbon filter’s ability to reduce smells will be needed.
A test with a real plant was also done. The first prototype was used as a test for
growing a small tomato variety with many similar characteristics to cannabis. The
light schedule had to be dialed in and moisture levels from the Blumat automated
watering stakes had to be tinkered with to find the optimal number and setup of the
water container. The test proved a success in that a plant could be grown from seed
to harvest with the chosen light, soil fertilizer, and watering mechanism.
Figure 9.13: Tomato test grow cycle in V1.
Recap on solution: The concept was developed from idea to finished prototype
and additional process pictures can be seen in figure 9.14 and the accompanying web-
site in figure 9.15. The prototype was finished enough to evaluate the customer’s
reaction to the look. The prototypes also served its purpose of mechanical, electrical
and biological testing. The finished prototypes can be seen in figure 9.16. V1 was a
quick mockup prototype. V2 was a more refined version with real functionality. V3
was a prototype made for public testing and feedback and was meant to be placed
in DTU Skylabs’ entrepreneur hub. V4 was a customer requested larger prototype
with the same mechanical and electrical components as V2 but with space for 2 plants.
The prototypes also learned us about manufacturing methods as they were built
by hand. Although many of the systems and components might be changed in the fu-
ture these prototypes validated the business concept on a level that made us confident
==PAGE:106==
96
9 Concept Development
enough to want to progress further with the company as a whole.
==PAGE:107==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
97
Figure 9.14: Pictures from the development process.
==PAGE:108==
98
9 Concept Development
Figure 9.15: Website development.
==PAGE:109==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
99
Figure 9.16: Prototypes developed.
9.2.5
Channels
The channels are the paths to the customers. The channels for marketing Sativo One
will be many. The first obvious channel is looking at where other similar products
are sold, in existing grow shops. They are present in many cities and sell products
solving some of the same problems as Sativo One. Word of mouth could also be a
great channel, as the product is something relatively rare that people don’t see every
day. They might tell friends about it and get them interested that way.
The product is so self-explanatory that it will work very well on social media. Plants
grown inside the box can be made into time-lapses. Community driven aspects such
as pictures of people’s own grow would also work well for social media. Collaboration
with influencers who produce content around cannabis growing or cannabis, in gen-
eral, would also be good marketing.
The product could also be placed in cafes or libraries to be seen by visitors. More
scalable forms of marketing can be done through advertising or giveaways. Content
marketing in the niche of cannabis growing and consumption with an added focus on
organic and catering to the new demographics of the market could potentially drive
traffic and customers as well.
List of channels
• Growshops both online and offline
==PAGE:110==
100
9 Concept Development
• Social media
• Word of mouth
• Public places like cafe’s, libraries etc.
• Advertising
• Influencer marketing
• Giveaway competitions
• Content marketing
9.2.6
Revenue streams
As Ash Maurya states ” There is no business in your business model without revenue”.
The product sold needs to be able to turn a profit for the company to be financially
sustainable.
The revenue streams for Sativo is pretty simple. The boxes are either sold directly to
consumers through a Sativo owned webshop or sold through retailers. Another stream
of income would be the individual sale of extra seeds, soil, fertilizer, and carbon filters.
Pricing: Pricing is very hard, especially for rational engineers who often calculate a
Bills of Material (BOM) list and then slabs a profit margin of 50 percent on top and
thinks that’s it. Pricing is very complex as it is based on the value that is created
for the customers. Additionally, it also has to take into account the price of cur-
rent competitor’s products and alternatives. In Sativo’s case selling cannabis growing
equipment the value of the grown cannabis has to be taken into consideration as well.
The price point is to be tested by offering the product to real customers and it is
easier to reduce the price if nothing sells than it is to increase the price if it is un-
derpriced. The close competitor’s products range from between $1000-2500 so that
is the price range wherein the final product price will be. The price also depends on
if the product is sold via retail or directly from the website. Retail requires a good
margin before it makes financial sense.
9.2.7
Cost Structure
The cost structure is a way to estimate how much economic runway there is left. A
calculation also called burn rate. This is done within a certain timeframe such as 3
months for example.
Sativo’s cost structure is currently pretty lean. The company has no employees, both
founders have additional income apart from Sativo. Fixed costs would be hosting for
running the website www.sativoone.com. Materials for prototypes and equipment for
==PAGE:111==
9.2 Cannabis grow system Concept - Sativo
101
building these are a monthly cost. However, these are kept low due to the design
of the box and the option for using free workshops and maker spaces for the initial
prototypes.
The cost per prototype has been around 2500 DKK in materials. This goes to say
that the current cost structure should not be a barrier to the business model.
9.2.8
Key metrics
The key metrics are the chosen parameters on which we can track and measure
progress on the business model.
It is advisable to start with a minimum success criteria as a goal. Readjusting the
goals upwards can always be done later on. The minimum success criteria are defined
by Ash Maurya as ” The smallest outcome that will deem your project a success x
years from now where x<=3”. A yearly revenue number is a good metric.
Sativo’s key metrics Yearly revenue of $1million in 3 years. This equates to be-
tween 500-1000 boxes sold.
9.2.9
Unfair advantage
As Jason Cohen, founder of WP-engine has stated: ”The unfair advantage is some-
thing that cannot be easily copied or bought”.
One of Sativo’s unfair advantages is the great team where the founders have a long
history of being friends and working on tech projects.
This is a clear advantage
over newly founded startups where the founders have known each other for a limited
amount of time.
A great combined network of people in the industry of tech startups through DTU
can also be seen as an unfair advantage.
9.2.10
Sativo Green
Sativo Green is another concept within the Sativo brand. This product caters to
customers who want to grow their own herbs and vegetables in a healthy, stylish and
easy way.
Company Requirements: Simple manufacturing, Cheap BOM list, Stylish design
that fits branding strategy, Margin at sale of min. 2.5x Cost of goods sold. Low
minimum order quantity for parts.
==PAGE:112==
102
9 Concept Development
Customer requirements:
• Must Look good, minimalist, fit into the modern home (Wooden or Painted
look)
• Has to fit multiple use situations, kitchen counter, floor, windowsill.
• Light has to be optional and non-intrusive to the environment.
• Specialized for growing herbs, greens, and smaller vegetables.
• Organic Growing preferred Watering not more often than once a week
Figure 9.17: Prototype sketches of Sativo Greens concept.
9.3
Future work
The next steps for Sativo are to continue working with the Lean Canvas and the
overall Lean startup approach. At the time of writing, this thesis orders have already
==PAGE:113==
9.3 Future work
103
Figure 9.18: Prototype render of Sativo Greens concept.
come in for Sativo One grow boxes. These will be made according to the customer’s
preference before closing and finalizing the design too much. There is a need to get
more customer feedback, to understand their problems to the core. These iterations
will include testing out different pricing strategies.
A more finalized design will be developed based upon the learning from the pro-
totypes.
There is still quite some way from the concept prototypes to a sellable
product. The prototypes were too fragile and not sturdy enough for customers to
use. The construction needs to be tightened up and standardized for easy assembly,
production, and use. A step towards this is to create a wood focused design leaning
more towards a furniture closet look. Working with a carpenter or wood designer to
get a more solid solution could be a great next step. Another next step would be
simplifying the design in terms of BOM list items and manufacturers to keep things
as simple and local as possible for the first real products.
Manufacturing anywhere from 10-50 Sativo One’s inhouse in Sativo would make sure
that we know the product and processes well enough to be able to outsource them
later on.
Crowdfunding and scaling up: When the problem of the customer is validated
through various product iterations, a product-market fit is the next goal. And after
==PAGE:114==
104
9 Concept Development
Figure 9.19: Prototype render of Sativo Greens concept.
testing out different pricing options and sales channels a closure of the design can be
made. A version 1.0 will be ready to build and shipped upon orders. This requires a
final list of components and control of the construction and assembly of each Sativo
One.
When trying to scale up, an option could be to create a crowdfunding campaign to
market the product and get investment. This would help with a larger scale produc-
tion in China. Another option is to seek external investment to help with overcoming
the bump of scaling up production.
Additional products: Additional products could be tested out now that a cus-
tomer base has been developed. The Sativo Greens concept could be initiated to
serve the need for indoor herb growing. Other products could be relating to the pro-
==PAGE:115==
9.4 Østergro Case-study
105
cessing of the harvested cannabis from Sativo one into oils or concentrates.
Mushroom growing could be another extension of the grow it at home product family.
9.4
Østergro Case-study
The case study of Østergro is a way to examine how an organic indoor LED-lit com-
munity garden could look like from a technical and business perspective. The value of
indoor gardening might be showcased best in situations like this where the goal of the
garden is not just a high yield, but also culture, community, mission and conveying
a message. The juxtaposition of all these variables including a pure business and
financial perspective all has to align to make concepts like this feasible.
This concept of indoor organic farms using LED lights for community farms was
developed first and then used as a case study in cooperation with Østergro. The
concept calculations, needs, and information are based on a visit to the rooftop farm
and interview with Steffen who is in charge of daily business operations.
Østergro explained: Østergro is a community-supported rooftop farm located in
Østerbro in Copenhagen. The farm has a small rooftop where the goal has been to
create an analog to a real organic seasonal vegetable farm. The roof is covered in
35cm soil and has pathways leading to a small restaurant. The restaurant is a source
of income and a gathering place for the community of CSA members and volunteers.
The farm is very popular and over 300 people are on the waiting list to be a member
of the CSA. However, the main source of income is the restaurant and the farm acts
as a point of interest and marketing tool to have something to center the restaurant
around. Education about food and agriculture is very important to Østergro and
they want to focus on the challenges that we are facing in regards to agriculture. The
40 People who signed up for the CSA did it to be a part of a community with values
in organic farming principles and to feel like they are a part of the solution to some
of the problems with agriculture.
Østergro requirements: Østergro wants to showcase and grow more food on the
property in the winter months and this is currently not possible due to the seasons.
Østergro also wants to focus on organic growing and how nature works, education is
a big part of their DNA. The restaurant uses herbs and greens for dishes and being
self-sufficient in the offseason with these plants would be great. Simulating an out-
door garden with LED lights indoors. Purely Organic no-till Growing Basement plot
of 1x4 meter raised beds
Sativo Requirements: Simple manufacturing, Cheap BOM list. Low MOQ for
parts. Showcasing of LED indoor growing systems. Focus on Technology and Or-
ganic growing methods. Easy installation for the customer. Minimum support to
==PAGE:116==
106
9 Concept Development
customer
Technical Requirements:
Size:
Østergro potentially has a large 5x5m space to devote to indoor farming, but the
case study takes a basis in a 1x4m raised bed which then can serve as a baseline for
calculations on scaling up further. Raised beds can be purchased relatively cheaply
and are commonly used in gardens around the world.
Plant requirements:
As stated by Østergro the main plants they want to cultivate are herbs, spices, small
greens, and vegetables for their restaurant. These plants are fairly easy and quick to
grow. They don’t have high light or fertilization requirements.
Soil, Watering, and Fertilizer:
Soil depth is very important when growing with living soil and organic inputs. The
absolute minimum soil depth is usually around 6” or 15 cm. However the optimal
depth is around 12” or 30cm. This the depth where shallow rooting vegetables can
get sustainable roots to be able to achieve full development. Østergro already uses
35cm soil in their outdoor garden and is well adapted to growing in this soil depth
and the same height will be suggested for the indoor raised bed.
Østergro is fairly experienced in working with organic soil and would therefore prob-
ably have their ways of securing nutrients for the plants. But the basics are the same
here as anywhere. The soil in the bed would need to be prepared at the time of
the setup using compost and amendments of organic fertilizers with NPK and mi-
cronutrients. Which specific type and source of fertilizer are noncrucial as long as
the minimum requirements for the soil health and plant are met. In this case, the
plants chosen are very light feeders and it’s therefore relatively forgiving in terms of
fertilizer. Østergro has access to chicken manure and that could be a good source of
nutrients combined with other organic inputs.
The soil can be reused after the first harvest as long as the healthy practice of com-
posting and amending has been followed.
This allows the raised be to provide a
continual output of vegetables.
Watering can be done either by hand or by setting up a drip irrigation system for a
more hands-off approach. The important thing is that the soil isn’t allowed to dry
out as it damages the microbial life in the soil and reduces the cycling of nutrients to
the plant’s root systems, resulting in smaller yields.
Light requirements calculation: To calculate the needed wattage of LED light
several factors have to be considered. As discussed in the light section the light setup
==PAGE:117==
9.4 Østergro Case-study
107
is very important in terms of how many photons the plants receive. To calculate the
need for the grow light we start by looking at the area where the plants are going to
be cultivated. In this case study, we calculate for at 1m*4m raised bed. The plants
that will be grown here are herbs and greens. The DLI for these types of plants is
around 10-16. When looking at the DLI Graph it can be seen that a coverage PPFD
of 150-250 at 18 hours of light per day would be optimal. This light schedule should
be possible as the location is inside and enclosed so the light doesn’t disturb anything.
As we are calculating the wattage needed when using the efficient Samsung LED
grow lights, the PPFD/W is 2. Taking the inefficiency of the grow setup into account
as discussed in chapter 5 section 5.4, we subtract 25% totaling 1.5 PPFD/W.
18 Hours of 16 DLI = Desired PPFD level at 250 PPFD
Grow Area = 4m2 * Desired PPFD 250 = 1000 Total PPFD/ 1.5 PPFD/W = 770W
Needed.
Looking at different LED options the Quantum Board and Samsung LED strips
are considered. Due to the relatively low light level needs of greens, the canopy light
needs to be spread out as evenly as possible. The strips advantage is the even distri-
bution of light. However, the strips cost 65% more for the same wattage output as
the Quantum Boards. So in this case study to keep the costs down, the Quantum
Board is chosen for the application. 3x 250W Quantum Boards evenly distributed
over the raised be will provide enough light for the plants chosen to grow to see figure
9.18. The lights need to be hung at least 1m over the canopy and optimally have a
Figure 9.20: Grow light layout for Østergro.
frosted acrylic plate to diffuse the sharp light for better light distribution.
The setup will consume 750W 18 hours a day at 2kr/kWh this amounts to 821kr/-
month.
==PAGE:118==
108
9 Concept Development
Output / Yield calculations: Yield calculations are based on Curtis Stone’s [19]
average yield for various vegetables and herbs in his organic 30 inch wide 25ft long
rows equal to 5.8m2. Even though this style of farming and intensive outdoor farming
technique with sunlight, it still serves as a guideline in terms of yield to be expected.
Curtis is only growing with organic inputs, and that makes the comparison even bet-
ter. However, due to the nature of the variables involved in plant growth, yields can
dramatically fluctuate.
Calculated from Curtis is the average yield of Bok Choy, Kale, and Herbs such as
Cilantro. Curtis yield numbers are recalculated to be yield per 1 m2 and multiplied
by the chosen growing area of Østergro at 4m2.
Bok Choy: 15.6kg per bed every 50 days totaling around 300g/day or 2 kg/week
or 1-2 Bok Choy per week.
Kale: 36kg per bed every 70 days totalling around 0.5kg/day or 3.6kg/week
Cilantro: 17kg per bed per 30 days totaling around 0.57kg/day or 4kg/week
At a consumer market price of around 300-1000kr per kg and assuming the setup
lives up to the yield calculations, the setup would produce 5000kr-17000kr worth of
coriander per 30 days, not considering VAT. This is just a quick superficial calculation
and should only be used as such. A more thorough evaluation of the setup would
need to be done with a real growth cycle in the final environment to be able to draw
any real conclusions.
COGS and Pricing Even though this is a unique project for Østergro the financial
perspective is important to get a feel for the current expenses associated with setting
up for indoor growing.
Quantum boards cost 150$ delivered to DK. Including driver, wires and hanging
equipment. Soil would be provided by Østergro as they already know where to get
organic soil. But for the case study to be applicable in other scenarios, we take it
into account at a market price of 150$ per m3 organic quality soil. Wooden raised
beds and a plastic liner inside cost around 100$. The manual setup and installation
of light would take appx. 5 hours and cost around 150$.
In Total
• Lights 150$
• Soil 150$
• Wooden Bed 100$
• Labor Cost 150$
• COGS= 550$
==PAGE:119==
9.5 Summary
109
Final Price example for Østergro = 1000$ per 4m2 setup.
User Experience: The light setup would be installed and raised beds filled with
amended soil. The garden should now act and behave quite similarly to an organic
outdoor raised bed garden with the same size specifications. One major difference is
watering as rain isn’t present in this scenario. So a more consistent watering scheme
can be used. This would be managed by the already experienced master gardener
at Østergro. The same goes for soil and plant health and pest management. Crops
could be harvested by community members, volunteers or employees, and function as
an addition to their other farming activities. The setup could act as a conversation
starter about indoor growing and the differences in plants grown indoors locally vs
imported or other topics that are in congruence with Østergro’s overall values and
key issues.
9.5
Summary
This section attempted to describe a process with a large number of iterations. The
business model is a snapshot of a very liquid process where many options have been
on the table. Due to the scope of the report, this snapshot solidifies the concept in
its most appropriate form.
The ideas developed were shaped through the work done in other chapters such as
understanding the current market movements, current technology and talking to real
potential customers. The grow system focused on cannabis was chosen after very
high interest from potential customers and a realistic look at the current and future
market. This led to the development of Sativo an indoor grow systems business with
a sharp branding on being high end, self-sufficient and user-friendly. The prototypes
developed reflected this in being minimalist, easy to use with high-end technology
and a focus on quality. Many learning’s from tinkering with the prototypes could
not be described in detail but led to the improvement and results shown in the real
prototypes and design solutions presented in the report. The prototype testing was
a success with good plant growth and great performing hardware and software.
The smaller grow system for herbs ”Sativo Green” was developed on a conceptual
level as an upcoming product for Sativo.
A case study was done for the rooftop garden Østergro who might potentially in-
terested in a basement indoor grow setup.
Keypoints
• Cannabis growing was chosen out of 3 major indoor growing concepts due to
market potential and company interest.
==PAGE:120==
110
9 Concept Development
• Sativo as a business and brand concept was developed
• Lean Canvas created a realistic model of the business perspective
• Through successful design, engineering, and testing of 4 Sativo One prototypes,
confidence in the product was obtained
• Sativo Green, a herb and vegetable growing concept was developed as a potential
addition to the product lineup of Sativo
• A case study was done to portrait how a larger basement indoor garden might
look and operate
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 10
Discussion
What’s in this chapter?
• Quick summary of the findings
• Technology use in terms of sustainable regenerative farming
• What role does indoor growing have in the food system
• Opportunities and limitations of the concept Sativo
• Limitations of the thesis report
10.1
Summarized findings from the report:
• Agriculture has always been tightly intertwined with policy and economy
• Industrial agriculture is widely practiced in the developed world and is unsus-
tainable by harming many local and global ecosystems
• Agroecology, urban farming, personal farming, and indoor farming methods can
work with nature and play a positive role in moving food production towards
more sustainability
• The use and promotion of living organic soil growing is a key component of the
transition to a more sustainable future
• Indoor growing can be useful for growing herbs, greens, and cannabis
• LED technology is a promising light source for indoor growing
• Food gardening is on the rise and the segment of millennials living in urban
environments are increasing
• The market of cannabis and indoor growing equipment for cannabis is large and
growing
• There is a need for new and more modern indoor growing solutions due to new
market segments emerging
• Sativo One is a promising business concept for a company entering the indoor
growing market
==PAGE:122==
112
10 Discussion
10.2
Regenerative and sustainable agriculture
through technology - a new way forward
From the analysis of the agricultural system in chapter 3 there is no doubt that
the industrial farming techniques used today are not a sustainable practice in terms
of our local and global environment. The industrialized and highly processes foods
which are connected and a product of industrial agriculture is one of the root causes
of the human nutrition crisis in the developed world where obesity, diabetes, and
other lifestyle diseases are rampant. There are multiple positions to take in terms
of how we get out of the situation we have forced upon our self. The first step is
to acknowledge the current problems and understand the situation. It is much like
climate change, first, we have to accept the present condition and acknowledge the
science that underlies the status quo. How to solve the problem and how the future
will look in different scenarios comes with much higher uncertainty and therefore re-
quires a complex discussion where multiple viewpoints need to be assessed and be a
part of the overall solution.
Agriculture can be seen as a dichotomy. Right now it is easy to be dogmatic and
choose between two common paradigms of agriculture, technological driven or natural
and organic driven.
One way to solve the problems is to continue the paradigm of technological advance-
ment to solve the problems created by technology.
This is what solved the food
capacity crisis of hunger but in turn, created many downstream problems that we see
today. Concerning agriculture, this could be research and development of new GMO
plants with higher yields and reduced need for fertilizer or pesticides. It could also
be creating new advanced mechanized farming technology to increase production ca-
pacity or other tools to better process the harvested crops and achieve more efficiency.
Another approach is to seize the development of technology in agriculture and re-
fer back to ancient methods of farming. These methods such as agroecology, organic,
bio-dynamic and permaculture design are focusing on working with natural systems
with minimal inputs and are often done on smaller-scale farms. These systems focus
heavily on circulating nutrients and having many biological systems working symbiot-
ically. An example could be how grazing cow’s manure fertilizes grass which in turn
feeds the cows. These methods can reverse environmental damage from industrial
farming and provide high-quality nutrient-dense foods. Even though these systems
are less efficient and less yielding in the short term one could argue that they might
be more efficient in the long term.
I would advocate looking critically at solutions in terms of the local and global con-
text. Undoubtedly there are different levels of sustainability from various methods,
but there is no one size fits all solution. I suggest taking a step back and start with
==PAGE:123==
10.2 Regenerative and sustainable agriculture through technology - a new way forward
113
the notion of nature knows best. Acknowledging that nature is an incredibly com-
plex system developed over billions of years. We are only starting to understand these
mechanisms through science and have only scratched the surface. Indigenous cultures
and animals have worked with nature for thousands of years and have had relative
success in terms of health and environmental sustainability so I would advise looking
into these ancient practices as a foundation for change.
There is no doubt that the world we live in today is very far from natural. This
is why I also advise that technology should be utilized consciously with a healthy
amount of skepticism and through a scope of complex systems fragility. The poten-
tial upside of using a new technology should be cautiously evaluated in relation to
its potential downside and causal relationship on many other subsystems. Pesticides
are a great example of a technology with immediate possible benefits. However if a
more complex analysis of potential downstream disruptions were done from the start
and evaluated from a risk perspective, one might re-evaluate the choice of large scale
implementation.
Technology should be developed and used with the main intention of increasing the
efficiency of natural systems. As long as we are still physiologically close to our evo-
lutionary ancestors who lived a great deal more in contact with natural systems, I
would suggest that we keep this feeding and nurturing this biological technology (our
bodies) in a way that is not fundamentally different from our ancestors. This means
a foundation of organic, whole foods that comes from agriculture which respects and
works with nature. This, however, can be done in multifaceted ways.
Technology should improve natural systems capabilities. Increasing the output within
the boundary conditions of the system without disrupting major mechanisms of the
system. Examples of this are the intelligent use of electric fences for grazing animals.
They enable the farmer to control ruminant animals to move in ways that resem-
ble how herds of grazing buffalo moved in their natural environment. This creates
flourishing grass that sequesters carbon in the soil and increases organic soil contents
which also benefits the soil while increasing the amount of feed for the animals.
The same can be said for using tractors or other machines consciously so they aid in
the efficiency of the farming while it still is being done in an organic and net sustain-
able way. Composting technology is another great use of technology where we utilize
the natural bio-mechanic process of compost and helps to create perfect conditions
for it to happen quicker and more efficiently. Greenhouse structures and especially
passive solar greenhouses where solar heat is transferred and trapped in the soil from
where it can stabilize temperatures during winter is another great example of intelli-
gent use of technology where the seasons can be extended. This enhances the natural
processes and works disproportionally by having more upsides than downsides.
Technologies can also be used in certain contexts where there is a primary motive of
==PAGE:124==
114
10 Discussion
education and a secondary motive of being sustainable. This can be seen in smaller
food labs or experimental farms which might not be the biggest contributors in terms
of actual food production, but they have their place as hubs for education, knowledge,
community and general front runners by tinkering with new technology. This is seen
quite a lot currently with indoor farming, hydroponic farming, aquaponics and mush-
room cultivation.
There are arguments that these organic, agroecological and permacultural practices
cannot be scaled up enough to have a substantial impact on the greater food system.
However, I think the premise of the argument is false and that it tries to justify the
current technological agricultural paradigm. From a technological standpoint, this is
not correct as the advancements to achieving regenerative and sustainable agriculture
are within reach and certainly doable. The major barrier is politics. If a new common
goal were set and governments would divert subsidiaries from unsustainable agricul-
ture to farmers who actually take part in regenerative and sustainable agriculture it
would certainly be possible to transition over a longer period.
Indoor growing and its role in the food system: Indoor growing is a rela-
tively new phenomenon.
In chapter 5 we saw how LED technology has been the
main driving force behind the increase of indoor growing capabilities. We now have
LED lights that are highly efficient and relatively accessible to average consumers and
companies. This sets the stage for the technology to be domesticated. We are at the
beginning of the potential disruption of the standard paradigm of plant cultivation.
It is up to the creativity of coming solutions to explore this technology to the fullest.
What could potentially unlock this transition to even more indoor growing would be
more sustainable energy. Having ”cleaner” electricity would put indoor growing with
LED lights into a whole different light in terms of sustainability. The questions would
then be more targeted at the lifecycle, production sustainability, and durability of the
LEDs rather than the operating energy consumption. Much like what we currently
see happening with electric cars.
Indoor growing is contextually a great practice.
This can be seen in the concept
case study with Østergro who showed interest in indoor growing with LEDs. Coun-
tries far away from the equator with short day length in winter are particularly good
candidates. The lack of sunlight simply makes plant cultivation very ineffective on
top of colder temperatures which also makes it hard. Indoor growing technology has
the efficiency to be incorporated into the architectural design of new buildings and be
a local food production unit. Having south-facing glass sections where both natural
sunlight and LED light could provide enough light for reasonable indoor growing hubs.
There are already companies utilizing grow lights in greenhouses in Nordic countries.
Another aspect is the food transportation. Complexity arises when trying to asses
sustainability efforts.
Indoor grown food produced in northern climates from sus-
tainable energy sources could potentially be more sustainable than imported produce
==PAGE:125==
10.3 Sativo concept possibilities and limitations
115
from southern countries. This would be interesting to compare through a detailed
life cycle and emission analysis. The sustainable energy could be from wind turbine
production at night where the energy grid can be in surplus.
Personal food gardening was shown to be on the increase in chapter with a focus
on sustainability and organic growing methods for health reasons. Indoor growing
can fit this narrative well as it provides a real option for being self sufficient in certain
plants such as greens, herbs or even cannabis. This can be done in winter times where
outdoor gardens are dormant. If this trend continues it would be interesting to see
how this practice will be domesticated towards home use. Personal food gardening
and eating healthy is potentially a large future market with many interesting possi-
bilities for innovation.
10.3
Sativo concept possibilities and limitations
What are Sativo’s place in the food system and indoor cannabis growing market? We
have looked at competitors and the global market and trends which give data upon
which way the market might be heading. However, there is still great uncertainty in
actually reaching a product-market fit. This process needs tinkering and continual
iterations of innovation to be more concrete. The concept developed in this report
only obtained a good problem - solution understanding. The prototype could clearly
solve most of the problems for people about indoor growing. The next step is to find
out the exact format of the product that makes it scalable to sell.
If a product-market fit is obtained, Sativo could be a great addition to the over-
all food and agricultural system. Even though the first product is about cannabis
growing, the values and focus on personal organic farming could pave the way for
more products along this line of thought. Cannabis growing is also a great intro-
duction to growing plants in general. If indoor growing of vegetables could become
”cool” in our modern culture and society, the impact on the larger system would be
felt. Much like electric cars was ”uncool” until Tesla, I hope that indoor farming and
growing vegetables or plants at home in an efficient way for self-reliance would be
considered a positive thing. This might help the overall transition by showcasing on
a small scale the benefits of growing yourself. The connectivity of the grow systems
also lends it to be a social practice where gardens can be shared through the IoT,
have live forums, etc.
From the interviews and data gathered in the report, I firmly believe there is a
large market opportunity for other indoor growing equipment than cannabis. The
trends showed how people are gravitating toward growing food for themselves due to
many factors. Health consciousness is a large part of this trend, and many people
==PAGE:126==
116
10 Discussion
start having a focus on eating more vegetables and especially organically grown. An-
other part of this trend is the increased focus on environmental sustainability, which
I would imagine to be growing in the coming years. The sheer fun and rewarding
experience of growing something is also a factor. People living in cities also feel more
distance to nature and seeks to implement plants in both the city’s landscape and
their homes. This is where I see the concept of personal growing-systems to be a
great fit. Systems that fits well in the environment of peoples home and solves the
most annoying problems related to growing plants.
If Sativo as a business was successful it could very well be scaled up to more than
just personal grow-systems. If indoor growing becomes such a feasible thing to do
due to technological advances and it becomes a societal trend, then things can take
off. Apartments complexes could have grow-systems as the like of having swimming
pools, restaurants would have their own grow areas for fresh produce and there would
be a plethora of places where this could be the norm. The market would have many
opportunities for Sativo. This is quite a far fetched perspective however it should be
considered.
Limitations of the Sativo concept: The grow-systems developed did not get
tested by users to the extent that was planned in the beginning. It was the idea that
the prototypes would be set up in public places where they would have been used.
Also, personal user experience workshops could have been done. The prototypes were
currently only user-experience tested internally in Sativo. Although this provided
valuable feedback, much more user testing is needed if we want to provide a product
with a really great user experience.
The interviews were following the principles from The Mom Test outlined in chapter
2. However, this way of interviewing requires practice. Even though several inter-
views were conducted, the quality of the interview process would increase with more
practice. This is a clear limitation of this report and I have based concept creation
quite heavily on the interviews. Finding the right candidates to talk to, structuring
the interview before and during would have gotten even more precise answers.
If we look at the concept prototype Sativo One it certainly did its job of testing
and validating hardware and software. However, a part of the goal with the proto-
type was the ”looks like” feature of it. We wanted to test and validate the design of
the grow box as well. The grow box prototype was only showed to very few people,
and this reduced the amount of feedback on the design. Due to the positive reaction
and even intent of purchase we got from the few people we showed the prototype
to, we subconsciously felt that we had enough validation. This was a clear mistake
as we could have gotten even more critical information by showing more people the
prototype. I think this is a common problem when getting positive feedback as if it
fits the narrative it is easy to justify that what we are doing is the right thing. This
mistake can be avoided in the future for Sativo if a mindset of being more public
==PAGE:127==
10.4 Reflections on working with the Running Lean method
117
about the development would be adopted.
Even though potential customers were found during the project, no sales have been
made yet and the product of Sativo One still needs to be further developed. Until
real customers purchase the product, more conclusive feedback on the business model
cannot be obtained. This is, of course, the next step of Sativo as a business, but
concerning the report, it does show some limitations. However multiple people have
expressed the intention of purchasing a Sativo One in the coming year and that is
better than having no potential customers.
10.4
Reflections on working with the Running Lean
method
The fundamental principles of Running Lean with a focus problem-solving focus, prac-
ticality, and pragmatism worked very well in terms of progressing with the startup.
It helped legitimize moving fast and not always having a solid quantifiable argumen-
tation for the steps taken.
A positive result of Running Lean was that emphasis on iterations from qualitative
interviews and the startup notion of Boyd’s law ”Speed of iterations beats quality
of iteration”. The conflict is however that every iteration takes a certain amount of
scarce resources. Thus making it a trade-off between multiple iterations and hitting
close to home the first time. I this project these principles were felt first hand. The
4 prototypes build were quite similar even though every prototype had some new fea-
tures and manufacturing processes. The similarities from the first prototype to the
4th made the concept iterations more fragile in terms of already going down a fixed
path without testing multiple alternatives first. Going back to the drawing board and
trying a fundamentally different approach is then made harder by the finite resources
available. This is especially evident in hardware startups. The Running Lean frame-
work works very well with software prototypes as iterations are usually lower cost.
For an engineering heavy startup, the paradigm shift from ”the product is the so-
lution” to ”the business model is the solution” was very refreshing. It helped sensible
product development and the reoccurring reflection of ”why are we building this?”.
Features and design solutions were easier to determine as we had done interviews
and chosen a specific demographic. This made the questions ”who are we building
this for” easier to answer. Essentially the Running Lean methods pushed us to go
talk to customers very quickly. This was immensely valuable as the feedback we got
motivated us to continue development knowing that real customers were out there. It
also gave us much needed external feedback on ideas that we took for granted as good.
==PAGE:128==
118
10 Discussion
Re-evaluations were done many times after speaking to new potential customers.
In the pursuit of eliminating waste, both as time, money and energy Running Lean
helped tremendously.
The heuristic of always questioning the riskiest part of the
business model worked well to help focus attention and prioritization. It is very easy
to get caught up in details and miss out on the bigger picture and overall direction.
Reducing waste also forced the design methods to be concise.
Internal management of energy and time was still a hard thing to do. Even with
the overall framework of Running Lean, there was a clear difficulty in resource man-
agement. I think the biggest reason for this is the lack of experience of running a
large project or startup. Lessons were learned about increased communication with
SCRUM like sprints and weekly/daily rundowns on tasks and barriers. Specific re-
source management is something I would have benefited from learning at the same
time as the Running Lean Framework. I was lucky enough to have a course at DTU
about SCRUM and AGILE which proved to be a great strategy for managing the
startup and thesis project.
10.5
Limitations of the thesis report
This thesis shows how working with a very open-ended concept in high detail can be
hard to describe and convey through a report. I think the way I worked with the
thesis as a startup has proven to be unorganized and chaotic. The research parts of
the thesis were more appropriate as report material, but describing the practical work
of starting a company, branding it, designing and iterating on prototypes, calculating
BOM lists and all the small but crucial decisions seem to have been lost somewhat in
the report. This is mainly because it would produce a very long and detailed report
with no real consistency between chapters. The way I tried to structure it, on the
other hand, might have left out substantial evidence and interesting facts that might
confuse readers of the report.
I think other formats such as a presentation encapsulates this process better. This
is to state that the report is limited in many ways on a detailed theoretical level.
The theory used in this report has been overarching and worked as a mindset or
framework to reference. This limits the actual scientific description of what works
and what does not. This combined with the small sample size of the interview and
surveys conducted limits this study in terms of replicability and validity.
I knew these limitations before starting the thesis and prefaced the thesis by say-
ing that all studies and interviews and the conclusions from these were contextual to
the decision making of the startup Sativo. The motivation for doing this thesis was to
do something out of the ordinary and let it be very exploratory. Not only for myself
as I worked with the startup I tried to start, but also as a real case study for others to
==PAGE:129==
10.6 Summary
119
look into and learn from my mistakes. Even though I have not stated them all in this
thesis I am working on an additional document with my learning as a contribution
to other students and entrepreneurs. This document will be used in courses run by
the entrepreneur hub Skylab at DTU to help to navigate the difficulties of starting a
hardware company as an engineer.
10.6
Summary
Keypoints
• Technology should be utilized with caution and to work with natural systems
• Indoor growing is on the verge of being domesticated due to the technology and
could have many use cases
• The concept Sativo was created from low sample size research and worked as a
qualitative prototype
• The bulk of the work and the nature of the work in the thesis was hard to
describe through a written report
• The Running Lean framework worked well for this project and the work in the
startup even though more managing strategies had to be implemented
==PAGE:130==
120
==PAGE:131==
CHAPTER 11
Conclusion
This thesis work aimed at analyzing the agricultural system and consumer market for
indoor growing equipment to seek out opportunities for a startup business entering
the market.
From the quantitative and qualitative research done, it could be seen that the market
of indoor gardening with artificial lighting is beginning to grow and open up, partially
driven by the slow but steady cannabis legalization. Indoor gardening of especially
greens, herbs and cannabis with LED light can be a feasible practice and be a positive
addition among other solutions working with regenerative and sustainable agriculture.
Its success and sustainability is very dependent on the local context, but could prove
especially valuable in climates with low temperatures and short day lengths and if
done with educational intent. The perception of indoor gardening is shifting towards
a more accepting one, as the interest for growing plants at home in a sustainable way
is on the rise and technologies make it easier to do so.
Through structured interviews with potential customers of indoor growing systems,
challenges related to indoor growing were analyzed and understood. Three concepts
were developed on basis of these challenges with a focus on 1. cannabis growing at
home, 2. herbs and greens growing at home and 3. community-driven indoor small
scale farming operations. All concepts worked with organic soil mediums as it is a
way to differentiate the concepts from the majority of other grow systems that are
using chemical fertilizer. It also has the potential of educating people about how
natural systems operate on a small scale and could inspire people to take steps in a
direction that could have a large and meaningful impact on our larger ecosystem and
environment.
The market segment of urban living millennials and medicinal users and growers
of cannabis were found to be of particular interest.
The startup Sativo, and the
main product Sativo One, a personal indoor cannabis grow system was designed and
developed specifically towards these two customer segments in great depth through
working with the Lean Canvas. The business plan was refined and tested to get the
concept as close to a real business case as possible within the time boundaries of
the thesis. Prototypes were designed, manufactured and validated both technically
and qualitatively by customers. Through showcasing of the prototypes and business
==PAGE:132==
122
11 Conclusion
concept to potential customers 2 actual orders were placed.
This is a validation
of the concept and solution developed and would suggest a possible business if the
development would be continued by Sativo.
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Figures
A.2
Interviews
Interview 1: students:
Age 25
Lives in apartment/dorm
Vegetable Growing: Reasons for growing?
• Self Sufficiency
• Watch the progress
• Growing something which yields and can be used
• For the activity itself
• Winter Growing/indoor growing seems interesting but they lack information
about it.
Problems with gardening?
• Space when growing indoors, tomatoes get too big and shadow the apartment
• Watering, Remembering when and especially knowing how much. Unknown
factors
• Fertilising can be a bit difficult if there is no Clear Cut instructions
Grows?
• Easy plants and easy fertilizing
• Heirloom is important for the taste and because of the uniqueness. You can’t
get it in stores
• Kale - Easy
• Hot Peppers beautiful plants and the harvest can be used in a variety of ways.
Versatility
==PAGE:134==
124
A An Appendix
Cannabis Growing:
Issues growing Cannabis?
• Smell - Not discreet and annoys guest or roommates
• Legal status - Taboo associated with cannabis in general
• Cannot be seen by anyone
• Upfront costs
• Forgets to water
• Light Scheduling
• Fertilizing can be hard
Wants to go all in on quality , Get to the 80% of perfection for the cheapest price
Needs to have automatic watering and lightning schedules. Have no problem spend-
ing electricity on growing Wants to grow 1-2 plants
Reasons to grow?
• Quality
• Assurance of origin
• Sharing with friends
• Special Strains
• Want a discreet grow unit
• Possibility to move it out of the way when having guests
• Aesthetics is important as it is situated in the living room
• Grow Tents are unhandy and ugly
• Organic is great if it is easier and if the quality is better than non-organic
• Low noise
• Needs a cover
• Maybe a modular system to lower entry level costs.
Interview 2
Women
Late 20’s
Shared Apartment
==PAGE:135==
A.2 Interviews
125
Vegetable Growing
Grows Kale on the balcony and Herbs indoors in the windowsills. Wants to grow
more, but is confined by space.
Reasons for gardening?
• Closer to nature
• Green colors
• Have something living in the apartment
• Maybe it purifies the air
No real issues with gardening so far. Loves to connect with the plants. Likes toma-
toes, Carrots, potatoes and berries. Considering to invest in a shared garden. Want
her own greenhouse and garden at some point. Organics is very important.
Cannabis Growing
• Wants to grow her own cannabis
• Don’t want to support illegal gangs
• Want to grow something less strong
• For the fun of growing a beautiful plant in the living room
Concerns
• Illegal
• Smell
• Cannot be seen by others
• Too risky
Wants to pay 5-6k for a system which solves these problems. Wants to buy our pro-
totype and be a first mover/early adopter. Interview 3 Cannabis Growing
Student age 24
Lives in apartment
• Would like to grow for fun
• Wants something cheap
• Wants to grow to stop buying illegally Currently buys from illegal sources a few
times a month
• Have grown 1 plant on the balcony which didn’t really work out.
==PAGE:136==
126
A An Appendix
Interview 4 Cannabis growing
Man
Age 20
Lives in apartment in Copenhagen
Wants to start growing for fun and for the joy of doing it himself.
Want to be
self sufficient. Currently buying from an illegal source.
Wants to grow 1-2 plants in his newly acquired small apartment.Wants an 80% reduc-
tion in smells from the plants and wants the setup to be discreet. Wants to check on
the plants some times, but doesnt need to have visuals all the time. Transparency is
nice to have. Does Not have requirements for energy usage.Wants the most optimal
setup for the least amount of money. Wants to Pay around 1500 for a setup.
Interview 5 Women 49 Denmark
Lives in a house with husband and 3 kids.
Want to grow herbs (around 8 different herbs) indoors to garnish dishes and thinks
is would be fun to grow indoors. Kitchen table space is a problem and would not be
suitable position. (Talks about wall hanging). Would pay around 500 for a working
system.Needs to be flexible to fit multiple situations - tabletops kitchen counter and
also with legs. Neat with Herbs inside the kitchen. Enough to continually top salads
and food. Watering once a week. Light should be optional and not disturb the look of
the “furniture”. Need for information about planning and guide to seeds and rotation.
Natural color or bamboo.
Interview 6
Male 25
Lives in an apartment in Copenhagen
Does have a small balcony but wants to grow in his attic.Sometimes keeps the herbs
growing from the supermarket. Likes to grow chilis, tomatoes and strawberries Grow
mostly for fun, but also enjoys the taste.Has no particular reason for not growing in
the winter.Strawberries was annoying to water everyday.Looked at grow systems but
thought they were too expensive.Wants to grow and eat organic.
7th Interview Interview Through Discord in a forum for DIY growers:
Key Takeaways:
• Reasons for growing:
• To consume the end product
• Save money
==PAGE:137==
A.2 Interviews
127
• Love of growing plants, but extra incentive from the psychoactive effect
• Building the setup DIY style
Buying Motivation:
• Value for money
• Yield in a key factor
• Flexibility and modularisation
Don’t like the “Blurple” lights. Wants Simplicity. Upgrades as you go. Heat and
humidity is problematic.
Interviews with various legal medicinal and recreational cannabis grow-
ers from facebook groups.
Interview 8: American legal cannabis grower
Hey read your post..i’m a medical patient and do a home grow..i love my new hobby..
May I ask why you grow your Own?
I know that my meds are organic 100 percent. plus I love to grow now that I live in
a state that has made it legal to do just that.
Sweet, where do you live? did you grow before legalization? or did you buy then?
Bought back then bc the laws where pretty stricken if you got caught...i live in okla-
homa..you can grow 12 plants. 6 in flower and 6 in vegs. I’ve used cannabis for 40
years..Now I don’t have to rely on pharma drugs for relief.i cut my opioid use by 2
thirds of what I use to take.
that makes sense. Yes it’s an amazing plant for pain management. How did you start
growing and how are you doing it now? I bought a tent for my house...2by4 by 6
foot..led lighting..now I have a bigger place my spare bedroom..my wife has a patient
card now too so I grow Indica for her and sativa for myself..also have been making
edible.
That sounds great! What was the biggest challenges when starting to grow? Like
watering, noise, smell or anything else? Learning about ph balance ..nutrition the
cannabis plant needs and an organic feed that covers the needs of the plant all threw
the different stages of growth. I have a ro water system so I’m ph balanced..the other
issue was the sweet smell of flower..i installed a ventilation system to stop the smell
from filling my hole house.
Interesting. Youtube video has helped me gain the smarts to create awesome meds
for us. Yes there is a wealth of knowledge on youtube. How much do you grow?
I can legally have 1 pound of usable flower in possession..i keep 5 plant rotation going
most of the time. okay, so 5 in flower at most times?
about two ounces per plant on indoor grow. Yes ..just got finished with a harvest and
put the other 5 plants in my flower lighting system. So about 10 ounces per cycle 10
weeks of flower time is rule of thumb. Cool! Apprx how much did you spend on your
setup initially? To get started?
==PAGE:138==
128
A An Appendix
We spent around 500 to buy the start up tent and lights..all to get her it’s around
700 total for the soil and seeds. My electric cost is about 25 dollars a month. Great!
What is the most important thing for you about growing your own?
Knowing that it is organic..without pesticides and unhealthy chemicals. I hope my
info helps you in your paper..God bless you have a great day
Interview 9 Fantastic to hear that you are growing for medical reasons, Can i
ask you a few questions on the topic? Okay, first of. Why are you growing cannabis?
To treat my wife’s ailments in a healthy affordable way. She suffers emotion based
seizures linked to her high anxiety, depression, and ptsd. She also has a number of
gastrointestinal issues such as chrons, celiac vomiting disorder, gerd, and stomach
paralysis. Great that it helps her. How are you growing it currently?
Organic living soil, indoors, under Samsung boards. cool! Do you use a grow tent?
Yes. 4x8 That a good size grow! How much are you producing and consuming each
cycle or month?
Each cycle runs approx 3 months. Just harvested my first run in this setup, so not
sure on final weight yet, but it’s looking to be close to 2 lbs. We go through a half
oz a week, roughly. Okay great. How do you mainly consume the product?
Mostly combustion, I will be making feco this run though for my wife’s gi issues.
Allright! What are the biggest challenges/ Problems about growing for you?
Living in a high humidity area. Mold is a constant battle, and drying is near impos-
sible without a dehumidifier. What soil do you use and what strains do you grow?
I use compost, coir, and perlite as a base. Amendments are coots mix. This run was
super cheese, next run is zombie virus.thwestern Pennsylvania, typical humidity is
70okay thanks.
Interview 10 Medical CBD Users, (Danish) tak fordi du svarede på mit in-
dlæg. Må jeg stille dig et par spørgsmål? Ja, Må jeg høre lidt mere om din interesse
for cbd.
Ja det må du,Jeg har fået thc ,som jeg skrev , på recept og senere cbd ,da jeg ikke
tåler thc så godt. Det er muligvis pga ptsd og angst . Så nu er det kun cbd. Jeg har
også fibromyalgi og depression. Jeg har nogen lindring af cbd . Vil dog prøve at tage
cbg et stykke tid , da det vist er bedre til mine dårlig dømme.
Okay. Ville du være interesseret i at gro dit eget cbd hvis det var lovligt i Danmark?
Ja Hvor meget cbd tager du Ca om dagen / ugen?
Jeg tager som regel 2 x 5 dråber , 5% Om dagen Okay. Jeg er nemlig igang med at
undersøge om cbd patienter ville være interesserede i at gro og lave deres egen cbd
hvis det var lovligt. Det er de jo fx i Canada og mange stater i USA.
Ja og Spanien. Men man skal godt nok sætte sig meget ind i det. Cbg er det stadie
der er før det bliver til cbd og thc.Og nogle planter indeholder mere eller mindre af
de forskellige . Der er også mange andre cannabinoider , eller hvad det hedder end vi
lige tænker over. Vist over 100. Jeg skal jo vide hvornår jeg skal høste for ikke at få
thc frem. Og hvilke planter der ikke indeholder thc. Uha det er indviklet.
Ja det skulle helst være nemt som patient Ja og til at stole på de mennesker der sælger
==PAGE:139==
A.2 Interviews
129
til og vejleder en.
Ja netop. Der er heldigvis håb forude og der sker meget for tiden på de fronter. Håber
I den grad der sker noget. Jeg bliver så gal når jeg alle de ressourcer der bliver brugt
på de syge og ældre der dyrker lidt i vindueskarmen. Og naboerne så får trang til
at være bedre mennesker og melder de stakler der har ondt. Ja det er vi 100% enige
om Hvis du skulle dyrke selv ville du så være interesseret i processen med at have en
plante eller ville det være hovedsageligt for udbyttet
Øh ,? altså for at kunne lave olie ,te osv. Og planten er god til flere ting Ja men
mere i forhold til om du ville synes det var interessant and have og passe en plante
eller om du var mest interesseret i at få medicinen billigere. Både og da jeg synes det
er dyrt men også fordi jeg er nysgerrig. Og elsker at se noget gro.
Interview 11: Medical User of CBD: (Danish) Hej Ang din forespørgsel ang
medicinsk cannabis. Jeg får cbd dråber på recept Okay. Må jeg spørge hvorfor du
tager det? Efter en rygskade Det hjælper mig i konstanten med mine ben , men kun
lidt på rygsmerter
Øv det lyder ikke sjovt. Hvor meget tager du Ca om dagen? Jeg har afprøvet flere
medicinske præparater, men får rigtig mange bivirkninger, og er lidt anti på medicin
da bivirkninger er store og er endnu en ting i rygsækken. Hvis du forstår. Jeg har
derfor valgt cbd og mit liv tilpasses derefter.må også gerne få udskrevet thc men der
vil jeg få kørselsforbud og min bil har jeg brug for da jeg har valgt at beholde mit job
dog 8 timer nu i fleksjob. Jeg tager 15 dråber 3 gange daglig 5 %cbd
Jeg forstår din situation. Hvis nu cannabis var lovligt ville du da være interesseret i
at gro din egen cbd? Det er svært at sige. Måske. Lige nu er det på recept, dog uden
tilskud så det koster 2000 kr for 30 ml Jeg tænker at hvis det blev lovligt ville der
komme et medicintilskud. Her vælger jeg at prioritere trods det er dyrt
Ja selfølgelig. I lande som USA og Canada er hjemmedyrkning jo tilladt og derfor
kan der spares en del ved at gøre dette. Jeg søger dog tilskud da det er udskrevet
som magistral medicin. Ja danmark er latterligt bagud Ville gerne have thc som pn
men ønsker ikke en rus. Kan også vælge at købe det illegalt men det ønsker jeg heller
ikke,
God ide. Der ligger rigtig mange undersøgelser på cannabis, ca 60000 hvor andre
lovlige medicinske præparater er blevet godkendt på ca 8000 undersøgelser?undren
kan forekomme. Tænker det evt kan handle om penge og magt desværre. Ja derfor
er jeg meget interesseret i at give folk mulighed for at dyrke selv på en nem og over-
skuelig måde. Det kunne være fint med det frie valg Tror nemlig der kommer til at
være mange der ser det som en god mulighed ved en legalisering af hjemmedyrkning
Er du generelt plante interesseret? Desværre ikke så meget mere med at dyrke i min
have, da mine udfordringer fysisk gør at jeg ikke kan så meget, men interesseret i
planter på mange måder. Laver selv kombuscha og jun jun og fermeterer det efterføl-
gende med forskellige smage, planter der gør noget godt, helt magisk at indtage en
lækker sund læske der er komponeret i bobler som smager godt og er hjemmelavet
Super fedt at du ikke lader det begrænse dig for meget. Kombucha er super cool. Så
du er typen der måske ville kunne se det spændende i at dyrke en plante selv hvis det
==PAGE:140==
130
A An Appendix
var lovligt Jeg fokuserer på muligheder i nuet. Ja det ville jeg måske hvis dette var
lovligt. Det ville jeg nok være typen på at afprøve. Men ikke illegalt
Fornuftigt. Jeg siger tak for din feedback. Håber du får god bedring med ryggen
Helt ok. Min situation er stationær men sådan er det. Held og lykke med dit projekt.
Interview 12: US Legal recreational cannabis grower Saw your post mate
Let me know if I can ask you a few questions about cannabis growing Fire away
why are you growing the plant, what is your motivation to grow?
I have been a
smoker for a long time and have always struggled finding quality it’s either grown by
gangsters with no love or by people who do show love but don’t have a regular supply
great.
And how are you growing right now? How many plants and what type of grow (Indoor
outdoor) Hydro /organic I usually grow between 3 and 4 depending on strain got a
basic tent setup and grow in nutrient boosted soil, at the moment I’m growing cheese
and wedding cake
Wow nice how big of a tent and what type of soil/nutrients? Hi sorry... I have a
5 by 5 tent and use a coco soil in 5 liter pots and add a 3 part feed from general
hydroponics I have basic fan and extractor and use a 800w bulb
==PAGE:141==
A.2 Interviews
131
Sheet1
Plants Categories: Indoor growi Days to Maturity Yield / Area
Price / Weight Growing Season (Popularity/Demand CVR(Crop Value Rating) Size 
Difficulty Light Requirements
Cannabis
Good
Autoflowering
Good
<70
High
High
High+
High+
Small-Medium
Easy
High
Photoperiod
Good
>90
High
High
High+
High+
Small-Large
Medium
High
Greens:
Arugula
Good
30
High
High
Long
High+
High+
Small
Easy
Low
Mustard
Possible
40
Low
Long
Low
Low
Small
Easy
Low
Radish
Good
25-70
High
High
Long
High
High
Small
Easy
Low
Brassicaes
Possible
50-90
Medium-high Low-high
Long
Medium
Medium
Small-Medium
Easy
Low-medium
Lettuce
Good
<60
High
Low-High
Medium
High+
High
Small
Easy
Low
Spinach
Good
60
High
High
Long
High+
High+
Small
Easy
Low
Chard
Good
short
High
Medium
Long
High
High
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Artichoke
Possible
Long
Low
High
Medium
Low
Low
Large
Medium
Medium
Microgreens
Good
Short
High
High
High+
High+
Small
Easy
Low
Celery
Good
Medium
High 
Medium
Medium - High
High
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Sprouts
Good
Short
High
High
High+
High+
Small
Easy
Low
Legumes:
Pea
Possible
55-85
Low
High
Long
High
High
Large
Easy
N/a
Lentils
Possible
80-110
Low
Low
Long
Medium
medium
Large
Medium
N/a
Beans
Possible
45-80
Low
Low
Long
Medium
medium
Large
Easy
N/a
Peanuts
Possible
110-150
Low
Low
Long
Medium
medium
Large
hard
N/a
Chickpea
Possible
100+
Low
Low
Long
Medium
medium
Large
hard
N/a
Soy
Possible
100+
Low
Low
Long
Medium
medium
Large
hard
N/a
Nighshade
Tomato
Good
50-90+
Medium-High High
Short
High+
High
Large
Medium
High
Potato
Possible
90-120
High
Low
Long
High
Medium
Medium
Easy
Peppers
Good
60-90
Medium
High
Short
High+
High
Small-Large
Medium
High
Goji
Possible
high
High+
medium
Eggplant
Possible
75-90
medium
Low
Low
Large
Medium
High
Okra
Possible
50-65
High
Low
High
Small
Medium
Root vegetables
Carrot
Possible
60-80
High 
Low
Long
High
Low
Medium
Easy
N.a
Beetroot
Possible
50-70
High
Low
Long
Medium
Low
Medium
Easy
N.a
Sweet Potato
Possible
90+
High
Low
Long
Medium - High
Low
Medium
Easy
N.a
Turnip
Possible
40
High
Low
Long
Low
Low
Medium
Easy
N.a
Yam
Possible
100
High
Low
Long
Low
Low
Medium
Easy
N.a
Celery root
Possible
100+
High
Low
Long
Low
Medium
Easy
N.a
Herbs
Basil
Good
30-70
High
High
High+
High+
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Oregano
Good
30-70
High
High
High
Medium-high
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Dill
Good
30-70
High
High
High
High
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Mint
Good
30-70
High
High
High
High
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Sage
Good
30-70
Medium
High
High
Medium-high
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Thyme
Good
30-70
Medium
High
High
Medium-high
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Rosemary
Good
30-70
Medium
High
High
Medium-high
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Parsley
Good
30-70
High
High
High+
High
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Cilantro
Good
30-70
High
High
High+
High
Small-Medium
Easy
Low
Spices
High
Turmeric
Possible
Long
High
High+
Medium
Medium
Hard
Ginger
Possible
Long
High
High+
Medium
Medium
Hard
Ginseng
Possible
Long
High
High+
Medium
Medium
Hard
Black Pepper
Not optimal
Long
High
High
Medium
Cumin
Not optimal
Long
High
High
Medium
Medium
Hard
Fennel
Possible
60-90
High
High
Medium
Medium
Hard
Cinnamon
Not optimal
Long
High
High
Medium
Large
Hard
Nutmeg
Not optimal
Long
High
High
Medium
Large
Hard
Cardamom
Not optimal
Long
High
High
Medium
Medium
Hard
Onions
Red/white Onion
Possible
90-120
Low
Medium
Low
Medium
Easy
Chives
Both
60
Low
Medium
Medium-High
Small
Easy
Shallots
Both
60-90
Low
Medium
Medium-High
Medium
Easy
Asparagus
Both
2nd Year
Low
High
Medium
Low
Medium
Easy
Garlic
Both
90+
Low
High
Low
small
Easy
Leeks
Both
120-170
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Medium
Easy
Squashes
Medium
Pumpkin
Possible
85-120
High
Medium
Medium
Low
Large
Medium
High
Cucumber
Good
55-65
High
Medium
High
Medium
Large
Medium
High
Melon
Good
65-100
High
Medium
Medium
Low
Large
Medium
High
Squash /Corgette
Good
50-60
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Large
Medium
High
Figure A.1: Plant categorisation.
==PAGE:142==
132
A An Appendix
Sheet1
Berries
Strawberries
Good
Semi-long
High
High
Medium
Small
Medium
Medium
Raspberries
Not Optimal Long
High
High
Low
Medium
Hard
Medium
Blackberries
Not Optimal Long
High
High
Low
Medium
Hard
Medium
Blueberries
Not Optimal Long
High
High
Low
Medium
Hard
Medium
Fruits
Apple
Not Optimal
Low
High
Low
Large
Hard
High
Pear
Not Optimal
Low
Medium
Low
Large
Hard
High
Plum
Not Optimal
Medium-high
Low
Low
Large
Hard
High
Abricot
Not Optimal
Low
Low
Low
Large
Hard
High
Banana
Not Optimal
Low
High
Low
Large
Hard
High
Kiwi
Not Optimal
Low
Low-medium
Low
Large
Hard
High
Grapes
Not Optimal
Low
Medium
Low
Large
Hard
High
Pineapple
Possible
High 
High
Low
Large
Hard
High
Trees
Avocado
Not Optimal
High
High+
Low
Large
Hard
High
Citrus
Possible
High
High
Low
Large
Hard
High
Olive
Possible
High
medium
Low
Large
Hard
High
Nut trees
Not Optimal
High
High+
Low
Large
Hard
High
Succulents
Cacti
Good
High
Low
Low
Easy
Low
Aloe Vera
Good
High
Medium
Low
Easy
Low
Grains
Sweet Corn
Not Optimal 70-105
Low-Medium Low
Low
Low
Large
Medium
Rice
Not Optimal
Low
Low
Low
Large
Hard
Wheat
Not Optimal
Low
Low
Low
Large
Medium
Quinoa
Not Optimal
Medium
Medium
Low
Large
Medium
Oats
Not Optimal
Low
Low
Low
Large
Medium
Tea & Coffee
Camelia Sinensis
Not Optimal
Medium
Medium
Low
Medium
Hard
Coffea Arabica
Possible 
Medium
Medium
Low
Medium-large
Hard
Chamomille
Not Optimal
low
Low
Seaweed/Algae
Chlorella
Possible
High
High+
Medium
Small
Seaweed
Possible
Medium
High+
Medium
Small
Mushrooms
Good
High
High+
Medium-High
Medium
Hops
Possible
Medium
High
medium
Large
Figure A.2: Plant categorisation.
==PAGE:143==
A.2 Interviews
133
Figure A.3: 5 why’s root problem analysis.
==PAGE:144==
134
A An Appendix
Figure A.4: 5 why’s root problem analysis.
==PAGE:145==
A.2 Interviews
135
Figure A.5: Results from light test.
==PAGE:146==
136
==PAGE:147==
Bibliography
[1]
Ash Maurya. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan That Works. 2010.
[2]
Rainer Züst. No More Muddling Through, Mastering Complex Projects in Engi-
neering and Management. Springer, 2006.
[3]
Ash
Maurya.
What
is
the
right
fill
order
for
a
lean
canvas?
https://blog.leanstack.com/what-is-the-right-fill-order-for-a-lean-canvas-
f8071d0c6c8c, 2019.
[4]
Roudart Mazoyer. A History Of World Agriculture. Agroecosystem Diversity.
Earthscan, 2006.
[5]
Singh Lowder, Skoet. What do we really know about the number and distribution
of farms and family farms in the world. 2014.
[6]
Agriculture, forestry and fishery statistics 2018. 2018.
[7]
USDA. Usda data on ag. https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-food-
statistics-charting-the-essentials/farming-and-farm-income/, 2019.
[8]
Khan Academy. Industrial agriculture. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cajeNeQ5p64t,
2013.
[9]
Baveye Godwy. An evolutionary perspective on industrial and sustainable agri-
culture.
Agroecosystem Diversity, Reconciling Contemporary Agriculture and
Environmental Quality, pages 425–433, 2019.
[10] foodprint.
Foodprint on soil.
https://foodprint.org/issues/how-industrial-
agriculture-affects-our-soil/, 2019. 2019.
[11] PAN-EU.
Biodiversity
and
pesticidesl.
https://www.pan-
europe.info/old/Resources/Briefings/Biodiversityandpesticidesleaflet.pdf, 2010.2010.
[12] Today’s food system: How healthy is it? 2009.
[13] The future of food and agriculture trends and challenges. 2017.
[14] BBC. ”cheese is from plants”. https://www.bbc.com/news/education-22730613, 2013.
==PAGE:148==
138
Bibliography
[15] Groundswell
international.
Agroecological
farming.
https://www.groundswellinternational.org/approach/agroecological-farming/, 2019.
[16] The 10 elements of agroecology guiding the transition to sustainable food and agri-
cultural systems. 2018.
[17] Ramankutty et al. Seufert. Comparing the yields of organic and conventional agri-
culture. 2012.
[18] Thorbecke. Carbon footprint evaluation of regenerative grazing at white oak pastures.
https://www.generalmills.com//̃media/Files/Issues/WOP_farm_system
_3_0_2019_Quantis_FINAL.pdf?la=en, 2019.
[19] Curtis Stone. The urban farmer : growing food for profit on leased and borrowed land.
New Society Publishers, 2016.
[20] Mario Gonzales Novo and Catherine Murphy. Urban agriculture in the city of havana:
A popular response to crisis. 2000.
[21] Cubaagriculture.com.
Agriculture
in
cuba
today.
http://www.cubaagriculture.com/agriculture-today.htm, 2002.
[22] Rajapakse RMN Perera AH. A baseline study of kandyan forest gardens of sri lanka:
structure, composition and utilization. 1991.
[23] UN.
68 percent of the worlds population projected to live in urban areas by
2050. https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-of-
world-urbanization-prospects.html, 2018.
[24] Jeff Lowenfels. Teaming with nutrients: the organic gardener’s guide to optimizing
plant nutrition/Jeff Lowenfels.—1st ed. Timberpress, 2013.
[25] Wayne Lewis Jeff Lowenfels. Teaming with microbes: a gardener’s guide to the soil
food web. Timberpress, 2006.
[26] Ecogrow. Grow room ventilation. https://www.ecogrow.com/learning-center-grow-
room-ventilation-c-283299.html, 2019.
[27] The action spectrum, absorptance and quantum yield of photosynthesis in crop plants.
1971.
[28] Samsung.
Middle power led series 3030 lm301b cri 80 datasheet.
https://e-
neon.ru/catalogfiles/pdf2/lm301bcri80.pdf, 2017.
[29] Shaun
Torpey.
Grow
light
efficiency
calculation
tool.
https://www.migrolight.com/grow-light-efficiency-calculation-tool/, 2017.
==PAGE:149==
Bibliography
139
[30] HLG. Converting lux to ppfd. https://horticulturelightinggroup.com/blogs
/calculators/converting-lux-to-ppfd?f, 2018.
[31] Ledtonic.com. Dli (daily light integral) chart - understand your plants’ ppfd photope-
riod requirements.
https://www.ledtonic.com/blogs/guides/dli-daily-light-integral-
chart-understand-your-plants-ppfd-photoperiod-requirements, 2019.
[32] NGA.
Garden to table.
https://garden.org/special/pdf/2014-NGA-Garden-to-
Table.pdf, 2014.
[33] Soil Association UK.
”organic has reached its highest sales ever at over
£2.2b”.
https://www.soilassociation.org/certification/trade-news/2018/organic-has-
reached-its-highest-sales-ever-at-over-22b/, 2018.
[34] Wikipedia.
Legality
of
cannabis
by
u.s.
jurisdiction.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legality_of_cannabis_by_U.S._jurisdiction, 2019.
[35] Deloitte.
Recreational
marijuana
insights
and
opportunities.
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ca/Documents/Analytics/ca-
en-analytics-DELOITTE%20Recreational%20Marijuana%20POV%20-
%20ENGLISH%20FINAL_AODA.pdf, 2016.
[36] Deloitte.
A society in transition,an industry ready to bloom 2018 cannabis re-
port. https://www.1933industries.com/images/pdf/ca-cannabis-2018-report-en.PDF,
2018.
[37] Eaze.
Eaze
insights
|
state
of
cannabis:
Consumers
diversified
in
2018.
https://www.eaze.com/article/insights-2018-state-of-cannabis-report-marijuana-
consumer-diversify, 2018.
[38] Bloomberg. 85% of canadians won’t grow pot at home as property value concerns
weigh, survey finds. https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/85-of-canadians-won-t-grow-pot-
at-home-as-property-value-concerns-weigh-survey-finds-1.1152641, 2018.
[39] Leanstack.
Find better problems worth solving with the customer forces can-
vas.
https://blog.leanstack.com/the-updated-problem-interview-script-and-a-new-
canvas-1e43ff267a5d, 2017.
[40] Leanstack.
The problem with problems.
https://blog.leanstack.com/the-problem-
with-problems-50dd364ccb2b, 2018.
[41] Bolt.io. The illustrated guide to product development. https://blog.bolt.io/ideation/,
2015.
[42] Mephisto genetics. Mephisto 2017 grow guide. 2016.
==PAGE:150==
