==PAGE:1==
Bicycle demand and biking behavior in Denmark/
Cykel efterspørgsel og cyklistadfærd i Danmark
Vadym Zakryvydoroga
Master’s Thesis of the DTU M.Sc. in Management 
Transport and Logistics
Supervisors (DTU):
Stefan Eriksen Mabit
Anders Fjendbo Jensen 
Division of transport
Candidate:
Vadym Zakryvydoroga
DTU: s180195
Technical University of Denmark 
February 15, 2020
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
The aim of this thesis was to analyze the likelihood of using bicycle trans-
port in Denmark, as well as the visions of bicycle cyclists. It is known that cy-
cling is famous for its advantages in urban environments and provides many ad-
vantages, as well as an inexpensive wellness way to travel. People who use cycling
clearly understand its benefits as speed and flexibility in moving.
Thus, this research uses TU data from the Danish National Travel Survey to as-
sess the significance of the likelihood of cycling on trips and movements. Conse-
quently, data and analysis were prepared to include parameters and model cal-
culations. The Binary Logit (BL) model was developed to evaluate what factors
influence when choosing a bicycle. The likelihood of cycling, as well as the choice
of cycling, depends on many factors. A model for choosing the type of bicycle was
also calculated. Starting from the structure of the city, the place of residence of
a person and ending with socio-economic indicators. Thus, the research provides
important information on the proposed options for cycling as a mode of transport,
among other vehicles.
2
==PAGE:3==
2
Preface
This master’s thesis,” Bicycle demand and biking behavior in Denmark/
Cykel efterspørgsel og cyklistadfærd i Danmark” was carried out from Septem-
ber 15, 2019, to February 15, 2020, at DTU Transport at the Technical University
of Denmark. This thesis constitutes 30 ECTS points. I would like to thank my
DTU supervisors Stefan Eriksen Mabit, Associate Professor and Anders Fjendbo
Jensen, Associate Professor for their help, guidance, discussions, as well as feed-
back throughout the work on the whole project. I really appreciated the support
of my family and friends throughout the process, working on the thesis. While
working on my thesis, I sincerely enjoyed discussions on the project during all
our meetings, and also learned a lot from my DTU supervisors, for which I am
sincerely appreciative. Finally, I would also like to thank for the support from
Ukraine: Kateryna Vakulenko, Associate Professor - Department of Transport and
Logistics for cities, (KNUUE) and Oleksiy Goryayinov, Associate Professor - De-
partment of Transport Technology and Logistics, (KPVNTUA).
Vadym Zakryvydoroga
DTU: s180195
3
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Abstract
2
2
Preface
3
3
List of Abbreviations
6
4
List of Figures
7
5
List of Tables
8
6
Introduction
9
7
Background and history on a bicycle
11
8
Literature review
12
8.1
Physical activity and Social environmental factors . . . . . . . . . . .
12
8.2
Bicycle policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
8.3
Active Transportation: Public and environmental health benefits . . .
15
9
Theory
19
9.1
Experimental design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
9.2
Bicycle Choice Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
10 Description of Data
26
10.1 The Danish National Travel Survey (TU) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
10.2 Data analysis with software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
10.3 Description of the average data for men and women . . . . . . . . . .
33
10.4 Description of annual data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
11 Types of Bicycles
36
11.1 Ordinary bike, city bike
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
11.2 The electric bicycles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
11.3 The cargo bikes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
12 Model Estimation and Results
41
12.1 Binary Logit Model of Bicycle choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
12.2 Model of bicycle-type choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
13 Discussion
52
4
==PAGE:5==
14 Conclusion
55
15 References
57
16 Appendix
62
16.1 Annex A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
16.2 Annex B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
16.3 Annex C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
==PAGE:6==
3
List of Abbreviations
AIC
Akaike information criterion
ASC
Alternative specific constants
DKK
Danish Kroner
CO2
Carbon dioxide
CPH
Copenhagen
CPR
A personal registration number
NO
Nitrogen oxides
PT
Public transport
TU
Transportvaneundersøgelsen
US
United States of America
VOC
Volatile organic compounds
6
==PAGE:7==
4
List of Figures
Figure 1.The environmental and public health benefits of active transportation. 16
Figure 2. Benefits of cycling.
18
Figure 3. Matrix 1
21
Figure 4. Matrix 2
21
Figure 5. Frequency distribution of Bicycle Type (23,30) and Stage Length.
29
Figure 6. Frequency distribution of Bicycle Type (20,22) and Stage Length.
29
Figure 7. Histogram distribution of Resp Age Correct and Mileage.
32
Figure 8. Histogram distribution average Age of Bicycle Type and Mileages.
32
Figure 9. Distribution histogram using types of bicycle transport for Men.
34
Figure 10. Distribution histogram using types of bicycle transport for Women.
34
Figure 11. Yearly data distribution.
35
7
==PAGE:8==
5
List of Tables
Table 1. Descriptive statistics of Bike type in a complete dataset.
28
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of variables describing, mean, standard deviation,
mode and median.
30
Table 3. Group average data distribution.
31
Table 4. Group average data distribution.
31
Table 5. Frequency of distribution between the gender.
33
Table 6. Model 1.
42
Table 7. Summary of model 1.
42
Table 8. Model 3.
43
Table 9. Summary of model 3.
43
Table 10. Final model.
45
Table 11. Summary of final model.
46
Table 12. The result of different models specification.
46
Table 13. Model specification 1
49
Table 14. Model specification 2
50
Table 15. Result of specification of two models.
51
Table 16. Result of model 1 specification.
62
Table 17. Model specification before statistically significant(For model 2.1).
62
Table 18. Model specification before statistically significant(For model 2.2)
63
8
==PAGE:9==
6
Introduction
Transport is part of human life. In terms of using urban space, cycling in an
urban setting brings a number of positive benefits to people. A bicycle does not
have a direct environmental impact. In addition, cycling brings positive effects on
the physical and emotional state of a person (Oliver W, 2012).
Today it is difficult to imagine the modern cities of Denmark without a bicycle.
Moreover, in large cities, we can observe the trend of constant use of cycling. Which,
in turn, becomes a habit in everyday use and is part of the life of citizens. The
bicycle in its characteristics is a simple means of transportation. Which in turn
facilitates the movement of people around the city.
The following bike features can be highlighted, namely as: First of all, its simplic-
ity in control, as well as it is low-cost. Secondly, a bicycle does not depend on oil
prices, as well as on traffic density. Thirdly, cycling solves a number of problems,
such as traffic jams, noise, and CO2 pollution.
On the other hand, the health benefits of physical activity. Cycling on a bicycle
helps build muscle, lose fat, strengthen legs, lower blood pressure and increase
stamina (Blond et al., 2016). Cycling is an extremely effective way to relieve stress,
clear your mind and improve your mood (Millet et al., 2013). Driving a bike af-
fects health better than walking, as its intensity and duration are higher (BBC
News, 2017). Daily use of a bicycle in everyday life makes a person healthier.
In terms of environmental benefits. The bicycle is driven by a person - this
is physical activity. Due to this, he makes it possible to reduce CO2 pollution into
the air. In addition, the benefit of a bicycle is that it does not form traffic conges-
tion. Traffic congestion has a negative effect on Danish residents. The formation
of traffic jams, it is primarily a loss of time. Traffic congestion is the inability to
reach your destination due to slow or unpredictable speeds (Pascal A, 2007). The
fastest and easiest way to reduce your environmental impact is to use your bike
several times a week instead of using a car. Another advantage when choosing a
bicycle is the fact that the bike creates less noise than when driving a car (Wijers
P, 2018). As you know, the noise has a negative effect on society, just like air pol-
lution (UWE, Bristol. Science for Environment Policy, 2016).
Recently, bicycles have become more functional, more exciting, reliable and per-
ceived as fun. A bicycle serves people as a convenient flexible form of everyday
transport. A large number of types of bicycles are used when choosing specific
trips. The types of bicycles differ significantly from each other. That makes it
possible to make a more accurate choice of the appropriate type of bicycle .
9
==PAGE:10==
The Danish National Travel Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen, TU), con-
ducted by DTU Management. This includes an individual survey and is based on
online surveys and telephone surveys, as well as new data collection technologies.
TU covers a wide range of data and applies to all ages and strata of the residents
of all of Denmark (The Danish National Survey, 2019). With this in mind, with
an extensive dataset, various aspects of the Danish transport system can be ana-
lyzed. Based on this, it is possible to determine various transport statistics, e.g.
market shares for mode choice, and in general, evaluate travel behavior within
Denmark.
Thus, the purpose of this thesis is to determine the factors that influence
the use of bicycles in Denmark, which in turn leads to the following first research
question:
1: Characteristics of the different uses of bicycles, as well as factors affecting the
bicycle?
2: What factors influence the overall level of bicycle demand in Denmark and how
do these factors explain regional and city variation in bicycling?
To calculate the research model, (TU) data will be used that will answer the research
question. The thesis will consist of an introduction, sections, conclusions, list of used
sources and applications. Data analysis and calculations will also be made. Which
in turn will make it possible to complete the thesis with a summary of the results
and findings.
10
==PAGE:11==
7
Background and history on a bicycle
The bike is one of the most used vehicles in the world. Every day, people make
movements for different distances while using different types of bicycles. But few
wondered about the origin of this type of transport. It has always been believed
that movement is the essence of life. The bike is considered the simplest vehicle ever
created.
It all started back in the ninth century. In 1817, the German professor Baron Karl
von Drez invented and patented the first run bike, which was the first prototype of
a modern bicycle. He gave him the name ”running machine.” In external character-
istics, it strongly resembled modern bicycles. A distinctive feature was that it had a
wooden frame and did not have pedals (Gupta V, no date). The original idea of the
bicycle was conceived as a toy for wealthy people, but pretty soon turned into an
efficient and convenient vehicle (Gupta V, no date). The familiar look of a modern
bicycle was made only in 1862 by Pierre Lalman in Paris. From the 1870s, various
bicycle models began to gain popularity. Some of them were quite dangerous in
design. In 1885, the first chain-driven model was developed (David V, 2004). Grad-
ually, with the development of technological progress, which greatly contributed to
improving the appearance and structure of the bicycle to the state that we can see
today. To reduce the weight of the bicycle in its design in the 1890s, the use of light
metal (aluminum) in the production of frames began (David V, 2004).
All parts of the bicycle are made in such a way as to facilitate movement. The first
switching mechanisms began to appear only at the dawn of the 20th century. They
were a rather inconvenient method and way of switching. With the further devel-
opment and improvement of the bicycle, the gear shifting mechanism only in 1950
became identical to the modern according to the working scheme. The emergence
and development of the bicycle have left a strong footprint on the overall technical
development of society. This contributed to the fact that in some countries the qual-
ity of roads significantly improved, which led to the speedy development of vehicles.
The bicycle has become a common means of transport for people and the purpose
of its use is not only relaxation but also work. In modern densely populated cities,
this is one of the most efficient and simple modes of transport.
11
==PAGE:12==
8
Literature review
This thesis analyzes the demand for bicycles and the behavior of cyclists in
Denmark, as well as the factors and benefits that influence the use of bicycles. Con-
sequently, this chapter will give a brief overview of research topics in the field of
cyclists as an alternative use case. After that, relevant studies in the transport sec-
tor will be presented.
8.1
Physical activity and Social environmental factors
Cycling behavior as an important form of physical activity and a sustainable
way of moving attracts and motivates people. In addition, cycling affects physical
and social environmental factors. The goal of increasing the level of physical activity
of the population, public health is set by many countries, including Denmark. Nu-
merous studies on the assessment of physical activity, which used the socio-ecological
model. Have been shown the relative effects of factors such as physical, and social
environments (Giles-Corti 2006).
Physical activity factors
In the literature, the concepts of “physical activity”, “exercise” or “training”
are often used in different words, but the meaning remains the same. As the defini-
tion of physical activity is known, it means “any movement of the body produced by
skeletal muscles, which leads to the expenditure of energy”, this definition was defi-
nite (Caspersen et al. 1985). However, activities aimed at improving or maintaining
physical fitness are initiated initially by physical exercises. Physical activity is char-
acterized primarily by human health or physical skills. Examples of this include
cardiorespiratory endurance, reaction time, muscle strength, and more (Handy S et
al., 2014). In addition, physical activity gives a person the opportunity to engage in
everyday physical life without excessive fatigue and with sufficient energy (Handy S
et al., 2014). In this thesis, physical activity focuses on cycling. The classification of
physical activity can be divided into several categories depending on energy expen-
diture and type of activity: easy, moderate or active. For example, activities such
as cooking, walking slowly or billiards can be considered easy activities. Moderate
may include brisk walking or light cycling. As for the active, an example here can
be quick climbs uphill or fast cycling.
In terms of improving public health, regular physical activity based on the use of
12
==PAGE:13==
a bicycle reduces the risk of many diseases. Active transport means cycling, which
can be carried out on a regular basis. This activity is not expensive and is an impor-
tant contribution to health. The intensity of cycling stimulates the human body to
increase the heart rate, which provides greater benefits compared to other vehicles
or walking.
The most important thing that a person has is his health. To maintain and normal
functioning of the body it is necessary to perform physical activity. For a healthy na-
tion, in terms of health, benefits can be achieved by incorporating moderate physical
activity during the day and week. Physical activity affects qualities such as reduc-
ing the risk of death from all causes and also improves health from a psychological
point of view. To benefit from physical movement, adults should engage in moder-
ate physical activity (2 hours 30 minutes) every week. This approach will prevent,
firstly, overweight and obesity (Physical Activity Guide: Chapter 4, 2008).
Overweight and obesity have an adverse effect on human health. These factors are
one of the causes of poor health (Marshall et al., 2009). In terms of considering
private transport, the daily use of road transport contributes to urban air pollu-
tion. This is due to a large number of cars that accumulate on the roadway during
rush hours. During the combustion of fuel from a vehicle, volatile organic com-
pounds (VOCs) release nitrogen oxides (NOx) and carbon dioxide (CO2) into the
air (Marshall et al., 2009). CO2, in turn, causes lung irritation, as well as air quality
problems. Due to the growth factors of environmental pollution, obesity and lack
of activity, all this significantly affects people’s lives (Goldberg et al., 2007). This
is why cycling is an alternative means of transportation. Cycling promotes physi-
cal form maintenance. Bicycle transport is also easily compatible with the public
transport system, which makes it more universal. Cycling, on the other hand, is an
incentive to motivate people to cycle. Since people are interested in the goal of im-
proving health and well-being, which, in turn, leads to an increase in life expectancy.
Social factors
Cycling is part of Danish culture, which begins with the advent and devel-
opment of bicycles and has been around for many years. Originally, the bicycle
industry in Copenhagen has formed thanks to the help of social aspects. In the
early stages of the appearance of a bicycle, riding on it was considered only in nar-
row direction, for example, for sports and recreation. More practical bikes began
to appear in the late 1800s, which allowed the general public to quickly use them
(Denmark.dk, 2014).
Regardless of social classes, people use bicycles, this type of transport united people
13
==PAGE:14==
and gave freedom in movement in the fresh air.
The situation worsened with the advent of cars on the market. In the 1960s, cars
filled the streets of Copenhagen, which led to increased pollution and a change in
travel habits. Soon, this led to the fact that people established the requirement
to reduce the number of cars in the city and renew attention to the conditions for
cyclists. Thus, this movement has led to significant changes and has become a big
part of the development of the bicycle city, which today is Copenhagen, which you
can see.
Social environment and physical activity are interconnected, which is expressed in
society and affects people(Bopp M et al., 2018). The social environment may include
a number of factors, namely as:
∙Availability of a bicycle partner
∙Encouragement from close friends or family
∙Having peers on a bike
∙Support from close friends or family through joint cycling (Escort).
Not everyone owns a car, but regardless of age, gender or income, everyone has the
right to mobility in the fresh air. As for cycling, it is not expensive and affordable
for almost everyone. Consequently, it covers a wide range of areas and provides
mobility to a large number of people. Cycling in combination with public transport
significantly increases the distance of travel, and also creates competition for cars in
the city.
Every day, more than 60% of people living in Copenhagen use a bicycle for pur-
poses such as work and school (Kabell M, 2015). As for the percentage, 49% think
that cycling around the city is faster, 50% think it is easier and healthier (Kabell
M, 2015). Which in turn emphasizes the further development and improvement of
bicycle transport.
8.2
Bicycle policy
Political impact has a big influence on cycling conditions. Funds from the na-
tional budget are allocated for the improvement and development of bicycle trans-
port, as well as for the construction of bicycle roads. In recent years, attention
to green and urban mobility has increased several times, all because of a political
initiative that affects the culture of cycling in Denmark. Denmark has carried out
14
==PAGE:15==
various projects for the development of cycling and is also developing and helping
to attract more and more people to a safe mode of transport, such as bicycles.
As for the local level, here is a completely different picture, and political influ-
ence is even greater. Every year the number of cities aimed at cycling is growing.
Denmark has many traditions, and one of them is cooperation between public and
private organizations, as well as between different sectors. Such cooperation between
municipalities opens up new ideas and new opportunities for creating and improving
various projects, for example, bicycle highways. Cycling in urban areas is gaining
popularity among the use of cycling superhighways. The projects and innovations
are impossible without mutual assistance and mutual coordination between munici-
palities. The Danish approach to cooperation at different levels (public and private)
originates in a distant history, where cooperation was widespread and used by all in
all municipalities of Denmark.
Cycling policy works best through encouragement and interest. First of all, fol-
lowing the idea that cycling should be attractive compared to driving a car. Which
in turn should create the conditions in which driving by car will be more expensive
and time-consuming.
One of the levers to stimulate cycling is to increase the price of fuel (preventing
the use of cars), on the other hand, a cycling safety factor is of great importance
compared to a car (Pucher and Buehler 2006).
In addition to this, other variables (cash costs, travel time, physical needs) and the
costs of different modes of transportation when moving also have an effect on the
use of bicycles (Cycling, the European approach 2008 ). Using policies can change
many ways that affect the use of bicycles. There are ways to encourage people to
use a bike. An example is a reduction in the cost of acquiring a bicycle. In addition,
the fact that parking fees also have a positive effect on the selection and use of a
bicycle is also beneficial. However, with regard to travel time, this factor negatively
affects the use of bicycles.
8.3
Active Transportation: Public and environmental health
benefits
The transport regime includes a number of positive and negative factors. On
the other hand, it can simultaneously contribute to or hinder the achievement of
15
==PAGE:16==
various goals related to environmental protection or public health. The schematic
below shows how active transport can help improve the environment and human
health.
Figure 1: The environmental and public health benefits of active transportation.
Public health benefits
The emphasis is on the long-term health effects from a public health perspec-
tive. Behind good health and longevity is the improvement of physical activity and
physical fitness of people, as well as a better quality of life.
The active life of people is influenced by many factors. The most effective way to
engage people in intense physical activity in everyday life is to use a bicycle.
Cycling is an activity that is largely consistent with the guidelines for physical activ-
ity (Dill J 2009). From the point of view of numerous studies showing that cycling
has a positive effect on human health (Frank et al., 2009).
However, another positive factor from the point of view of a literature review
of cardiovascular events showed that on average there is an active decrease in the
incidence of cardiovascular diseases due to the use of a bicycle (Tin Tin et al., 2009).
The research also showed that those who went to work on a bicycle and led an active
lifestyle, the risk of death was lower than that of inactive people (Madsen T, 2013).
Cycling as a form of active transport is very useful in issues such as the fight against
the obesity epidemic. The fight against passive lifestyles as well as obesity is an issue
on the agenda in many countries. People who actively use the bike in their daily
lives have a lower risk of being overweight and obese. Such advantages can be seen
among the population as a whole, in all age groups, as well as among representatives
of different sexes.
On the other hand, the result of cycling is associated with an improvement in the
16
==PAGE:17==
quality of life due to the mobility and ease of use of the bike. However, increasing
the active lifestyle of people through the use of a bicycle has great potential to re-
duce many environmental pressures.
Environmental health benefits
Every year, public and political interest in the environment and health is
growing. However, with regard to Denmark, it is characterized by certain approaches
in its environmental policy. It is directly based on the participation of initiation,
which allows for consensus on understanding the environment (COWI, 2001).
Active transport has several advantages, such as reducing noise levels in cities, fuel
economy and air pollution, because it depends on the physical strength of a person.
Cars in most cities are the main sources of noise and air pollution. For healthy
living conditions, first of all, you need a clean atmosphere, which helps to preserve
and protect the environment and human health. One part of the atmosphere is air.
Which is also a transport medium that affects the distribution of gases and parti-
cles in nature. Air, in turn, transports and disperses a wide range of technogenic
pollution caused by one of the transport factors (OECD, 2001). Car emissions are
understood as exhaust emissions of all vehicles. But in addition to this, environ-
mental pollution also occurs due to the evaporation of volatile organic compounds
from vehicles and road dust. Danish air is also heavily dependent on neighboring
European countries. Clean air is an important environmental priority. This is the
environment in which we are and spend our lives. The easiest and most effective
way to reduce and prevent damage caused by transportation to the environment is
to use a bicycle. Cycling every kilometer instead of a car reduces carbon dioxide
emissions. Cycling, which is primarily one of the most sustainable and healthy ways
to get around the city.
Using the example of the city of Copenhagen, he, in turn, takes steps to neu-
tralize CO2 emissions, which, on the other hand, allows expand and improve the
existing bicycle infrastructure (COWI, 2001). Along with other countries for a long
period, Denmark advocates the creation of even more developed bicycle infrastruc-
ture and sets an example for other countries.
17
==PAGE:18==
The main advantages of cycling
Figure 2: Benefits of cycling.
A bicycle is universal in structure. Which in turn makes it flexible and inter-
acting with other modes of transport. Regarding a trip on a bicycle is a terrific way
to save on everything beginning from gasoline and ending with car insurance. In
addition, cycling to work increases your productivity, improves your tone and mood,
and also helps you not to sleep during the day. One should take into account the
fact that bicycle drives are carried out exclusively on the roads, which in turn gives
theoretical assumptions that any bicycle can be used (Atlas D, 2019).
From the point of view of bicycle infrastructure, we can conclude that it is safer than
an automobile. In terms of the speed, an average of 15-20 km / h, traffic accidents
with fatalities in which a pedestrian and a cyclist were involved were almost com-
pletely excluded. In cities where people use a bicycle instead of a car, the number
of cars on the road decreases, which in turn reduces the speed of movement, which
becomes safer and more comfortable for life.
18
==PAGE:19==
9
Theory
The aim of this work is to analyze the demand for bicycles and the behavior of
cyclists in Denmark. The document is disclosed in basic at the data level from the
Danish National Organization Travel Survey (TU). For the calculation and analysis
of factors that affect the likelihood of cycling and thereby contribute to cycling,
there may be factors such as age, gender, the purpose of the trip, income, and area.
Logistic regression is this type of statistical analysis (also known as the logit model),
it is primarily a method for modeling a binary variable (for predicting a binary de-
pendent change depending on predictors), which in turn takes values 1 and 0. Thus,
the main goal is to predict the likelihood of an event or choice. In other words,
determine the best fit model that describes the relationship between the dependent
variable and the set of independents. It is also worth considering that the parame-
ters obtained for each of the independent variables can be used to estimate the odds
ratios in the model (Simon P, Matthew G, Fred L, 2003).
Also for further calculation, the logistic or logit function is used to convert and
present the S-shaped data curve in an approximately straight line, for better per-
ception. In this case, the measuring range of proportions from 0–1 to -∞to + ∞
is used due to the logit function. We can define a logit function as the natural
logarithm (ln).
logit(p)=In( p/1-p)
(7.1)
Where: p is the probability.
The relationship between probability can be modeled as follows:
logit (p) = 𝛽0+𝛽1𝑥
(7.2)
On the one hand, this model is similar to a simple linear regression model, but
there is a significant difference, since the main distribution is binomial, and the pa-
rameters (𝛽0) and (𝛽1) cannot be estimated in the same way as for a simple linear
regression since they vary in the range from -∞to + ∞. Use the maximum proba-
bility method instead. In other words, the likelihood assessment is a search for the
value (s) of the parameter (s), which in turn gives the maximum likelihood. Thus,
the model can be used to calculate the predicted probability.
P=e𝛽0+𝛽1𝑥/1+𝑒𝛽0+𝛽1𝑥
(7.3)
19
==PAGE:20==
In this situation, two binary dependent variables were determined for the regres-
sion analysis: using the bike on trips (New Stage Mode code 1) compared to all other
modes (code 0). In terms of the consideration of the transport of the urban struc-
ture in the promotion of cycling. In different situations, such as whether cycling is
the primary mode or an alternate mode used in combination with public transport.
It is also worth noting that the dependent variables were analyzed to determine all
trips that include using the bicycle as a vehicle to travel to the destination.
It is also worth noting that the dependent variables were analyzed to determine all
trips that include using the bicycle as a vehicle to travel to your destination.
The analysis of this thesis is based on binary logistic regression with independent
variables. For this, a logistic regression model was chosen, which in turn is confirmed
by the methodological literature on transport. On the other hand, the model can
also provide a reliable analysis of various facts that can affect the likelihood of cy-
cling on any trip, which can be applied to logistic regression. From the point of view
of the variables under consideration, it can be assumed that when choosing a bicycle
as a driving mode vehicle, this may depend on socio-demographic variables. These
include indicators such as age, gender, income, type of family, etc. Many factors
that could affect the model were not included, because when calculating they gave
indicators that were insignificant. Such factors include a driver’s license, education,
profession, etc. However, other indicators were endogenous in the analysis and could
affect the model.
As for time, cycling changes throughout the year, and sometimes even faster and
changes from year to year. Thus, control time variables exclude the possibility of
significantly affect the results.
Nevertheless, the variables that were chosen for the final models explaining cycling
and the use of the bicycle as a mode of transport are indicators of statistical sig-
nificance, as well as the degree of their correlation with the dependent variables in
the model. In other words, we can say that the final model contains accessibility
variables, which in turn are most suitable for explaining variations in the cycle in
the sample. Thus, it can be seen that some of the changes significantly affect the
likelihood of cycling.
20
==PAGE:21==
9.1
Experimental design
From the point of view of studying experiments in various situations, what
people will do and what their choice will be at the moment. The main goal is to
find out to what extent and what attributes or factors influence their decisions (Du-
bernet I et al.,2019).
From the point of view of decision making, when choosing variables that should
be included for consideration and which should not depend on how they affect the
parameters. Starting with the most specific variables, they can be the same as time
and cost, etc., and end with socio-demographic variables (these include variables
such as age, gender, income, etc).
Which, in turn, allows one to obtain several
observations depending on the experiments of various situations. In addition, when
choosing a solution, people are faced with various alternatives, which, in turn, leads
to the need to choose a compromise solution.
Thus, the experimental plan is a matrix of values that describes when values are
used and at what level, and when not. Categories are arranged in a column, and
the row, in turn, represents a selection situation.
The main condition for describing various regression models is that the predictors
will be numerical since this is of particular importance in the calculation. In ad-
dition, depending on what type of category the first or second matrix is used, the
design matrix will look like this:
Figure 3: Matrix 1
or this
Figure 4: Matrix 2
21
==PAGE:22==
The matrix code that represents at the interaction of the i-th row and the j-th
column of which is 1, then the calculation in the formula takes value and 0 otherwise.
9.2
Bicycle Choice Models
At its core, the discrete choice model is a classical theory of choice between two
or more discrete alternatives, for instance, the choice between modes of transport.
In other words, they were based on mutually exclusive alternatives or solutions,
which, in turn, means that when a person chooses one, he refuses to choose another.
It is also believed that the choice of people is individual and is random and specific
to each situation. On the other hand, it is influenced by a number of factors, first
of all, these are socio-economic characteristics, as well as the circumstances that
characterize the environment of choice. Thus, it allows you to better predict and
assume the behavior of people when choosing.
Every day, people are faced with the choice of transport when traveling (to work,
study, to kindergarten) and at the same time take into account all factors and cir-
cumstances from a favorable point of view for moving. In this case, the discrete
choice model is considered on the model of disordered polynomial logit. It is very
difficult to predict a person’s choice, but, on the other hand, it is possible to assess
the probability of his choice in accordance with the circumstances of the choice and
socio-economic factors. In this case, the logit model gives us the probability that
the choice of a person under certain circumstances will depend on the choice of a
specific alternative j. Thus, it can be expressed both linearly and non-linearly.
This probability function is calculated from the following expression:
P𝑖𝑗=
𝑒𝑉𝑖𝑗
∑︀𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑒𝑉𝑖𝑗
(7.4)
Thus, the probability of all alternatives j is combined with the fact that, in turn,
it is assumed that any Pij takes values from zero to one. Which also explains that
the higher Vij, the higher the values of Pij. In addition, the relationship between
utility and observable variables is not linear but rather resembles an S-shape. This
also explains that the parameters 𝛽
′ cannot be directly interpreted as a regression
line. Therefore, it is worth considering the ratio of coefficients, derivatives, and
elasticity for the interpretation of model parameters.
P𝑖𝑗=
𝑒𝛽
′
𝑥𝑖𝑗
∑︀𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑒𝛽′ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
(7.5)
22
==PAGE:23==
Thus, the determination of the final profile of the probability of choosing a
function (Pij).
P𝑖𝑗=
𝑒𝛽
′
𝑥𝑖𝑗
1+∑︀𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑒𝛽′ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
(7.6)
According to the laws of probability, such as: 0 <Pij <1 and ∑︀𝑖
𝑗=1 𝑃𝑖𝑗= 1.
Interpretation of parameters
From the point of view of model interpretation, the parameters 𝛽
′ do not directly
affect the probability of choice (Train 2003). Thus, in this situation, the estimated
coefficients can be interpreted as elasticity or as the influence of the explanatory
variable on the subject. To better understand this factor, use elasticity instead of
derivatives. Since elasticity is defined as the percentage change (%) in the proba-
bility of choosing an alternative, relative to the percentage change in the observed
variable 𝑋𝑛𝑖(Aloulou F 2018). Thus, elasticity is calculated as independent of the
units of measure of the explanatory variables. Elasticity is pretty much informa-
tional, which makes it possible to learn about the most influential factors. Thus,
the calculation can be made for all arguments of the probability function and this
will be direct elasticity (Aloulou F 2018).
E𝑖,𝑋𝑛𝑖= 𝜕𝑃𝑛𝑖
𝜕𝑋𝑛𝑖
𝑋𝑛𝑖
𝑃𝑛𝑖= 𝜕𝑉𝑛𝑖
𝜕𝑋𝑛𝑖𝑋𝑛𝑖(1−𝑃𝑛𝑖)
(7.7)
where:
𝑖- another alternative.
𝑋𝑛𝑖- observed variable.
Thus, the point is when it is calculated relative to the arguments associated with
the selected alternative j. Cross elasticity can also occur when calculating arguments
related to other 𝑋𝑛𝑗alternatives.
E𝑖,𝑋𝑛𝑗= −𝜕𝑉𝑛𝑖
𝜕𝑋𝑛𝑖𝑋𝑛𝑖𝑃𝑛𝑖
(7.8)
Consequently, the formula demonstrates that cross elasticity does not depend
on alternative i, which means that the influence of the percentage change in one
attribute equally affects all the others. Thus, we can say that cross elasticity is the
same for all alternatives i and can be represented (interpreted) as one alternative
(Train 2003).
23
==PAGE:24==
E𝑖,𝑋𝑛𝑖= %𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑛𝑖
%𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑋𝑛𝑖= Δ𝑃𝑛𝑖/𝑃𝑛𝑖
Δ𝑋𝑛𝑖/𝑋𝑛𝑖= Δ𝑃𝑛𝑖
Δ𝑋𝑛𝑖
𝑋𝑛𝑖
𝑃𝑛𝑖
(7.9)
In addition to the interpretation, it is important to remember that methods pri-
marily represent the assumption that, with unobservable factors, all people have the
same variance.
Likelihood Ratio Test
From the point of view of considering the literary definition, likelihood ratio
tests are generally considered to be superior. Thus, this test checks the likelihood
ratio using parameters to compare the probability of obtaining data, offers the null
hypothesis that all coefficients are zero (L (𝛽0)), with a probability (L (^𝛽)) of re-
ceiving data. The formula is:
- 2 [L (𝛽0)−𝐿(^𝛽)]
(7.10)
After that, a comparison is made with the distribution of 𝑋2 with the K degree
of freedom. Which, in turn, K represents the number of parameters that are added
to the null model in the experiment. Therefore, we can compare models using the
formula. 𝑥2-distributed with K = Ki - Kj degrees of freedom. The null hypothesis
can be rejected when the values of the test statistics exceed the corresponding value
in the table of the 𝑥2 distribution, shows the ratio of probabilities to sample data.
The main goal is to reject the null hypothesis at a significance level of 5%. Since,
if this is not done, then adding parameters to the model with restrictions will not
improve it sufficiently, which will lead to the fact that it can be excluded.
Goodness of fit of the model
In order to determine whether a model is suitable from the point of view of
the data image, it is necessary to make a qualitative fit or calibration of the model.
Which in turn shows how well the model describes the response variable. In other
words, an assessment of the quality of compliance, which in turn studies how close
the values of the predicted model are compared to the observed values. In the case
where there is only one explanatory variable, then you can check the correspondence
of the model by categories. In this case, the explanatory variable, in this case, is first
grouped into categories and then compared with the expected and observed values
24
==PAGE:25==
and by categories. Calculated by the formula:(7.3) where: x is the marker level for
an individual parameter. Which, in turn, gives a forecast of probability from which
you can calculate the arithmetic mean that this will happen. However, the observed
and expected values are compared using the 𝑋2 fitness criterion.
The 𝑋2 test statistic is given by:
x2 = ∑︀(𝑜𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑒𝑑−𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑)2
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑
(7.11)
To make a comparison in the test statistics with the distributions X 2, in this
case, the degree of freedom (K) is equal to the number of categories, minus the
number of parameters in the model. Thus, we find X 2, which ultimately gives p
values that show how the values differ from the values predicted by the model.
Likelihood Ratio Index
There is also another way to compare a model with its null hypothesis us-
ing probability values. To avoid misinterpretation with increasing (L (^𝛽)) with an
increase in the number of parameters of degrees of freedom (K), it is also worth con-
sidering this in the formula when calculating. In other words, we need to calculate
the adjusted likelihood index, which in turn takes into account the parameters of
the number K, so calculating with these values eliminates the increase in the effect
(L (^𝛽)) (Ben-Akiva and Lerman,1985).
The formula is:
𝜌−2 = 1−𝐿(^𝛽)−𝐾
𝐿(𝛽0)
(7.12)
Thus, the 𝜌−2 value presented in formula 7.12 shows how much better the model
compares with all coefficients with zero values. In terms of considering the tradi-
tional approach, it would be more likely to add additional parameters to the model.
After that, the values of the logarithmic likelihood L (^𝛽) were compared using the
likelihood ratio criterion with the distribution statistics 𝑥2. It is also worth consid-
ering that models should be equally based on the same data set and should not be
limited to each other. Because the values are logarithmic depending on the data.
It is also worth remembering that the likelihood ratio criterion and the likelihood
ratio index limit each other when comparing. It is also worth noting that the like-
lihood ratio criterion increases with the addition of parameters, which also affects
the result.
25
==PAGE:26==
10
Description of Data
In this dissertation, a data set was used for the analysis and calculation of the
Danish National Organization Travel Survey(TU). In order to understand the data
and use them in further processing. Description of the data, as well as documen-
tation of the data, will be described both qualitatively and quantitatively. In the
course of the research activity, the structure and descriptive statistics for the initial
results will be presented to disclose and analyze the purpose of the study. However,
the conclusion is the most important goal in the thesis of statistical analysis that
there is some general pattern based on the analysis of a limited number of observa-
tions.
10.1
The Danish National Travel Survey (TU)
The source of cycling data is the data set considered in the project that was
taken from The Danish National Travel Survey (Transportvaneundersøgelsen, TU),
which is implemented through DTU Management. This directly includes primarily
an individual survey and a one-day travel diary of respondents, as well as based on
online surveys and telephone surveys for data collection. The data collected by TU
applies to residents of all Denmark from all ages (from 6 years to 80 years) and all
segments of the population. However, based on extensive data sets, we can analyze
many different aspects and analyze the transport system in Denmark. Based on
this, it is possible to determine various transport statistics, e.g. market shares for
mode choice, and in general, evaluate travel behavior within Denmark (The Danish
National Survey, 2019).
The purpose of the TU Datasheet is to describe a survey that is intended to
cover every aspect of every detail. Also, the goals that TU is to study the transport
behavior and transport habits of the Danes living in the territory of Denmark. Data
that are used in the project are collected in 2019. TU data is an individual survey
that takes into account individual human behavior or general statistics. Sometimes
it is difficult to collect data due to the frequency of peoples responses.
Collecting data is a priority in obtaining good and detailed information, not only
day trips but also night trips. Throughout the year, which means 365 days, data
is collected to get a complete picture of the upcoming analysis. At the same time,
the age category of people is from 6 to 80 years. If we consider the lowest limit of
6 years, firstly is it explained that children up to this age are difficult to interview,
26
==PAGE:27==
on the other hand, they make a few trips. And also, it is worth considering the fact
that children under 6 often travel with adult people or parents.
Improving, saving time and cost of data collection, helps a lot with the use of
new technologies, such as telephone devices. With the permission of the Danish
Ministry of Health, which manages the registry (CPR), you get accurate informa-
tion about the year of birth, gender and permanent address for each Danish resident.
As for trips, they are carried out with goals: from the place of departure and to the
destination, because the goal is, in principle, connected with the stay (The Danish
National Survey, 2019).
10.2
Data analysis with software
First, use the SAS software to load the data (TU data). From the data, select
3 data set for consideration:Data Del tur, Data tur, and Session. These data
sets contain the bike-related data in question. After the data has been loaded, we
combine the two tables together. In this case, we use general observations from the
first Data Del tur table such as Tur id, Del tur, Stage Mode, Mode Group, and
Stage Length, and from another table Data tur :Bic Type, Session Id, Tur Nr .
Combining the two tables, we make sure that the number of observations remains
the same namely (561904).
After that, combine the results obtained from the first two tables with the Session
table. At the same time, combining the table with the data of Diary Year, Resp
Sex, Resp Age Correct . It is also seen that the number of observations remained
the same (561904).
After combining the three tables and obtaining all the necessary parameters,
filter the data. Data is filtered by all variables. The first conditions of the variables
are ”Diary Year” , which should be higher than in 2014, then consider all values
that are higher than in 2014 and up to 2019.
The second value is the ”Bicycle Type” which is sorted into four categories,
namely: 20 ordinary two wheel bike, 22 which in turn means Bike with trailer, 23
is Electric bicycle and 30 is Carrier cycle, Christianiabicycle. As well as the last
two filtering options - this is the “Stage Length” , which should be no more than
50 km since people moving above this level will not use only one bike and “Stage
Mode” which is equal to 2, which in turn means Bicycle (Including electric cycle,
tricycle, etc.). After the data were filtered for all of the above parameters, the to-
27
==PAGE:28==
tal number of observations was 19787. Compared to the initial observations, which
were 561904, and the new observations were 19787, the difference between them was
542117, which also makes up the number of observations losses.
For further consideration, we select variables that are binary files for considera-
tion. Then we compile a table with mean, maximum and minimum as well as the
number of observations for the variables under consideration. Compared to three
types of bicycles. For a clearer perception of data. From Table 1 it is also seen
that Stage Length presents indicators that are responsible for the distance in km
which is 47.30 km. In addition, the table shows various descriptive statistics for
the variables. Average indicates where the average value of the data. The standard
deviation is a measure of data variation, but it does not explain anything in the
distribution. A maximum and minimum are useful in order to get an idea of the
interval in which the variable is located.
Analysis variable: distance
Bicycle type
Number of observation
Mean
Standard deviation
Min
Max
Mode
20 Ordinary two wheel bike
19011
3.06
3.46
0.03
47.30
1.00
22 Bike with trailer
44
2.40
1.97
0.50
10.00
2.00
23 Electric bicycle
579
4.27
4.46
0.10
30.00
1.00
30 Carrier cycle, Christianiabicycle
252
2.37
2.69
0.10
30.00
1.00
Table 1: Descriptive statistics of Bike type in a complete dataset.
For the best presentation of data, a unique type of diagram by its nature is a
histogram, the task of which is to display parameters in a certain range of values
and at the same time is a very useful tool. In terms of a graphical representation of
the scatter of data. For a deeper look, it is a series of columns of the same width,
but at the same time with different heights, depending on the parameters that are
being considered. However, if look at the column in more detail, then it shows the
interval in the observation range, and the height, in turn, directly represents the
number of observations falling into this interval. As shown below the histogram of
Bicycle Type and Stage Length
28
==PAGE:29==
Figure 5: Frequency distribution of Bicycle Type (23,30) and Stage Length.
Figure 6: Frequency distribution of Bicycle Type (20,22) and Stage Length.
Since the indicators on the graph show the frequency of using a type of bicycle
transport, it is significantly noticeable that observations 22 (Bike with trailer, fre-
quency=105.7) and 30 (Carrier cycle, Christiania bicycle, frequency=597.78) have
not significant large indicators. Which in turn is advisable to combine the two indi-
cators in one column of data (BicycleType1).
After combining and creating a new data column, the table has changed signifi-
cantly. Which gives more visualization of the presented values. Then we got new
29
==PAGE:30==
values of
∙20 (a tandem, in other words, an ordinary bicycle with a frequency = 19011
and a percentage of 95.60),
∙23 (an electric bicycle with a frequency = 579 and a percentage of 2.91),
∙1 (Bicycle Type1 with a frequency = 296 and percent of 1.49).
For a better perception of the text, the data will be tabulated as shown below.
Table 2: Descriptive statistics of variables describing, mean, standard deviation,
mode and median.
In terms of consideration of socio-economic factors. The first step is to divide
Resp Age Correct into groups starting from the age of 6 to 80. For data, each group
contains an interval of 4 years (For instance from 6 to 10). Data that is below the
age of 6 years is not used for observation as described above. As for the last two
groups, it is advisable to combine them into one, since the indicators in these two
groups are not large. Which in turn serves as a good option for the best presentation
of data, as well as graph distribution. After that, the data obtained are presented
in the table ”Group data distribution” below (group, the number of people who fell
into this group and mileage).
On the other hand, we make an average calculation for each age group and each
type of bicycle transport. The data are summarized in 3 tables in which is shown
below.
After compiling the tables, we can see how the data was distributed on the graph
(Figure 7). In the largest indicator, what represents a group with an age of 15-19
years and a mileage of 6546.73, and a group with an age of 25-29 years and a mileage
of 5393.865 as well as a group with the smallest indicators of 75-80 years with data
of 1206.5. That in turn, the data was distributed by the groups with the highest
30
==PAGE:31==
indicator in the region of 5-6.2 km, and the smallest group does not exceed 1.5 km.
As for the distribution of people into groups, the groups with the highest indicators
are 10-14, 15-19, the data ranged from 2000 to 2500 people, and the smallest group
75-80 which in turn do not exceed 500 people in the group.
Table 3: Group data distribution.
Table 4: Group average data distribution.
The calculated data are presented in table ” Group data distribution” on the
basis of which the distribution histograms are constructed.
31
==PAGE:32==
Figure 7: Histogram distribution of Resp Age Correct and Mileage.
In addition, a histogram of the distribution of the average use of each type of
bicycle transport was compiled.
Figure 8: Histogram distribution average Age of Bicycle Type and Mileages.
After compiling the histogram, we can see how the data was distributed on the
graph. Starting from the age of 6 years, the activity of using a bicycle begins to
increase sharply. This is undoubtedly due to the fact that interest in cycling at this
age is due primarily to interest in transport.
In other words, if at a short distance from the school it is better to ride a bicycle
32
==PAGE:33==
than to walk. On the other hand, it is also seen that activity begins to decline after
19 years. This is due to the fact that at this age, many people begin to get the
rights to drive a car, although the decrease is not so significant as not everyone can
afford a car. Subsequently, the graph shows that people continue to use the bike
as a type of movement, although the next age group shows that people at this age
already have children and consider it safe and healthy to alternatively and safely
use the bike to spend time outdoors.
As far as the situation of student life is concerned, this is essentially a saving in
terms of travel costs. The completion of the schedule starting from the age group of
60 years is demonstrated by the fact that people are not physically able to use the
mode of transport for a long distance and therefore indicators are reduced. Which
in turn is explained by the fact that young people make more trips and lead a more
mobile life than older people. Nevertheless, factors that contribute to this are study,
work, and sports.
With regard to more detailed information on the average distribution of each type
of bicycle transport, depending on the age group and mileage. Also, after compiling
a histogram (Figure 8), we can see how the data was distributed on the graph. By
the highest indicator, what is a group with an age of 20-24 years with average use of
all three types of bicycle transport, as well as a group with the lowest rates of 10-14
years. Nevertheless, the graph of the average distribution shows that the average
use of the mode of transport of the electric bicycle in many groups has an advantage
for the average trip.
10.3
Description of the average data for men and women
Regarding the frequency of using bicycle transport among women and men,
the distribution frequency chart shows that women use more bicycle mode of trans-
port than men. In turn, men use a bicycle mode of transport with a frequency
of 9469, which is equal to 47.85 percent, what concerns women, the frequency was
10318, which is equal to 52.15 percent. The difference between the data is 849 and
in a percentage ratio of 4.3 percent (Table 5).
Table 5: Frequency of distribution between the gender.
33
==PAGE:34==
Figure 9: Distribution histogram using types of bicycle transport for Men.
Figure 10: Distribution histogram using types of bicycle transport for Women.
Taking into account two histograms of the distribution between the average level
of use between men and women, on the whole, a clear picture is visible of the fact
that women use the electric type of bicycle more than men. Since an electric bicycle
makes it easier for women to move around and given the fact that it is fashionable
to use an electric bicycle, girls and women are the first to start chasing a fashion
trend. From the point of view of men using an electric bike, as the graph shows, a
lot of activity from the age of 20 years, it can be both students and young parents
who use the bike to move not only themselves but also with children. As for the
group of elderly people, with the age of 50 years and above, both groups of men and
women begin to use an electric bicycle. This is due to people’s physical fatigue.
34
==PAGE:35==
10.4
Description of annual data
Similarly, for more visual perception of the use of bicycles throughout the year
per kilometer for types of cycling, a distribution histogram is presented, which is
shown below (Figure 11).
Figure 11: Yearly data distribution.
The graph shows how data is distributed according to the years. It is clearly seen
that every year the demand for using all types of bicycles is increasing. Do not focus
a lot of attention in 2019, since the year has not yet ended, and the analyzed data
contains only the initial data for 2019. The histogram also represents the difference
between the types of bicycles and the activity of people. This is also due to the fact
that people are more active in terms of movement, and also monitor their health,
which also affects the environment.
35
==PAGE:36==
11
Types of Bicycles
The bicycle as a form of transport over the past decade, its use has undergone
significant changes in cities around the world. At its core, a bicycle is primarily
a transportation vehicle for short trips. For long distances, the bicycle serves as a
vehicle for stops and communicates with public transport (Dufour D, 2010).
However, in urban travel, people need a bike with certain characteristics. Against
the background of busy traffic in the city, the bicycle must comply with the high-
speed mode and also be able to carry a small number of your belongings. When
choosing to use a bicycle for travel purposes, it depends primarily on travel plans
or distances (Atlas D, 2019). For example, for trips to work, for training or for
relaxation. Depending on the different styles and functions bicycles, in turn, are
divided into a seemingly infinite number of categories and subcategories (Atlas D,
2019). Only a few types of bikes will be described in this thesis.
11.1
Ordinary bike, city bike
A bicycle is an engineering invention that is a wheeled vehicle. The bicycle
is driven mainly by the muscle power of a person through the pedals. In general,
this is a rigid frame, to which two wheels and a seat are attached, two pedals and a
metal chain connected to the teeth on the pedals and the rear wheel.
Today, the most common are two-wheel bikes, but tricycles are not uncommon.
Even before the widespread use of public transport, the bicycle was used as a means
of transportation. For many areas, bicycles are the main means of transportation.
A popular form of using a bicycle is general physical education, courier services, and
cycling. With the development of new technologies, the bicycle has taken on a new
form, which has become much easier and faster and also uses an electric drive to
increase the area of bike use.
With the advent of the bicycle, he had a huge impact on society. First of all, from
the point of view of culture, this also served as a powerful incentive for the de-
velopment of modern industrial methods. Many ideas and innovations were taken
from the bike base and were subsequently transferred to the automotive industry
(Stampanoni R, no data).
The main demand for city bikes falls on almost all segments of the population of
Denmark. Since it is designed for everyday trips around the city and short walks.
In addition, city bikes have an affordable price compared to cars. The main feature
is that it is designed and adapted for traveling in ordinary clothes and for various
36
==PAGE:37==
weather conditions.
For trips of less than 5 kilometers, cycling in urban areas is usually the fastest and
easiest way to get around. However, from the point of view of the design of such a
bicycle, it aims at convenience and practicality, which are simple and more designed
for the city. Characteristic features are a large padded seat and high steering wheel
adjustment. The movement on such a bicycle creates the feeling that you are sitting
on a chair. Another feature is that the upper tube of the frame is low or absent, this
is due to the fact that in everyday clothes to sit down and get off the bike in this
situation is much easier. Also, an important feature is that the bicycle is equipped
with a trunk, a chain cover, and a bell. As for the brakes, they are often foot drums.
These are, perhaps, all the main distinguishing features of a city bike.
11.2
The electric bicycles
Electric bicycles are a new and modern type of bicycle which was based on
a traditional bike (Mobycon, 2014). An electric motor was added to it, which can
significantly increase and increase the efficiency of the transport system, especially if
it replaces the use of a car in cities (Salmeron-Manzano E and Manzano-Agugliaro
F, 2018). At its core, E-bikes are a relatively simple vehicle of movement. The
E-bike uses electric motors as an additional assistant for the cyclist. The electric
motor is driven by pedals, and its battery is a source of energy. Various forms of a
bicycle, as well as style and design, fit well into the urban environment and have a
wide range of performance characteristics (MacArthur J, et al, 2018).
As for the main advantages of an electric bicycle, they are both economic and en-
vironmental. In terms of economic benefits, E-bike in the cities is a great way to
move around the city. Charging batteries of electric bicycles can be done in several
ways, 1) standard way by connecting them to the plug 2) when you turn on the
pedals in some gears. Another important factor is that, until it is fully charged,
depending on the type of battery, it takes 6-8 hours to charge the battery and its
range of motion is from 35 to 50 km at a speed of about 20 km / h (depending on
the weight of the driver) (Salmeron-Manzano E and Manzano-Agugliaro F, 2018).
Which in turn means that with one battery charge it will be enough to go to work,
visit friends and return home, at a distance of 15 km from his / her home, if you
are in the city. From an environmental point of view, in comparison with cars and
other modes of transport, an E-bike, like an ordinary bike, has such advantages as
reduces environmental pollution, less noise, and less air pollution. First of all, an
electric bike is a new form of private transport, which opens up new opportunities
37
==PAGE:38==
for mobility for a group of people who find it difficult to drive a regular bike, and
traveling by car is expensive. Especially relevant in cities with large populations
that care about the environment and traffic safety.
With the development of new trends and technologies, the use of electric bicycles is
becoming more common since an increasing number of different population groups
are resorting to this type of transport. With the increase in the introduction of elec-
tric bicycles in the system of transport routes, they are becoming an increasingly
integral part of both users and the transport network. In addition, electric bicycles
help people in a wider range, such as (women, the elderly and those with physical
disabilities) to travel to other destinations, drive more and carry more goods with
less effort. Due to these advantages, electric bicycles provide people with more op-
tions, for example, to increase the distance traveled by bicycle and to change the
driving goals for which bicycles are used. Reducing car drives, in terms of distance,
continues to be one of the most important reasons for buying an electric bike. An
e-bike allows more people to ride a bike instead of a ordinary bike.
As for young people and people without physical limitations, for them being the
main factor is the speed and economy of trips to their destination.
The e-bike
handles these requirements well. For women, most are concerned about the trans-
port of goods or children on bicycles, which also affects physical activity. It is also
strongly expressed among various populations using their electric bicycles. In ad-
dition to substantial assistance, an electric bike helps generate more drive and also
significantly affects their duration. Thus, it positively affects the daily movement of
people, and also expands the opportunities and time spent on fresh air. In addition,
e-bikes make longer rides more suitable, as the distance to the destination is a key
deterrent to riding. Which in turn directly affects the movement of people who live
in the suburbs and have longer trips (Mobycon, 2014).
11.3
The cargo bikes
A cargo bike is an excellent combination of an ordinary bike and an e-bike in
one case, as well as a special box for transporting goods or people. A cargo bike
is more spacious and performs more functions than an ordinary bike. Originally a
cargo bike literally, “bakfiets” means a box bike. Today, two-wheeled carriers called
Cargo bikes originally belonged to three-wheeled carriers (cargo bikes). The term
”cargo bike” is quite common in urban logistics and is the most commonly used
term. In other words, this term is used for any vehicle with a pedal, as well as for
electric bicycles for the transport of goods. For young families in urban areas, a
38
==PAGE:39==
cargo bike is such a practical and obvious option for transport. From the point of
view of public life, this means that these families can do without a car.
The cargo bike allows, in turn, to transport children, which accordingly increases
the number of people on one bike. It also reduces travel by car, which is a benefit for
public spaces. Today, a cargo bike is, for the most part, used to transport children.
As for research in Copenhagen, 22% of people use a cargo bike instead of a car, and
24% say they use it as an addition to a car. Therefore, this means that the cargo
bike is popular among families with children compared to other social groups. A
fairly large number of Copenhagen families have a cargo bike (Bondam K, 2009).
The design of the bike is made and designed so that it could withstand the load
of the transported weight. Accordingly, the idea is that the cargo carried by bicycle
is equal to the weight of the children transported. In turn, the purpose of trans-
portation and the design of the bike are closely related.
The main goal of the development of the bicycle was the acute desire of people to
move faster, respectively, the development of the cargo bicycle was due to a much
different goal, namely to move all kinds of goodies and loads. In other words, trans-
fer the goods from point A to point B.
With the development and improvement, freight bikes have become stronger and
bigger. This was primarily due to the fact that people tried to ease their work. For
a long time, the cargo bike changed and was transformed into that habitual state
which can be observed today. Changes in the design and improvements of the cargo
bike give it a new look and make it more advanced (Kirkels M, 2016)
Often can see this picture in the busy streets of Copenhagen full of all kinds of
bicycles, but the first thing that catches your eye is, of course, cargo bikes. How-
ever, these bikes are quite popular among Danes and are often called Christiania
bikes. Often, they are used to transport children to and from kindergarten, as well
as to deliver goods, and even serve as a taxi or just for relaxing. They have gained
popularity among busy housewives and locals driving Christiania tricycles due to
their ease of use (Nair. R et al ,2018).
The first cargo bikes appeared in connection with the industrial revolution. Bicy-
cles, in turn, were used by workers exclusively for the delivery of goods such as
milk, bread, meat and mail, and others, which pretty much facilitated their work.
Throughout the entire period of existence, the bicycle has changed significantly in
appearance (Yao C, 2014). Since the 1920s, a bicycle was developed in Denmark,
innovation was to add a box, cargo bicycles then became fashionable as a way to
transport children.
39
==PAGE:40==
In the world of bicycles, cargo bicycles are semi-trailers and differ significantly from
ordinary bicycles. Cargo bicycles are inherently versatile and can be used to travel
to the store and transport products, and can also be equipped to accommodate one
or more children in the back or front. By design, the bike has an elongated shape
and a heavy frame design, which in turn suggests that electric freight bikes are
significantly heavier than conventional freight bikes. Therefore, they are primarily
intended for use on flat roads, which is ideal for urban traffic (Lo T, 2016).
40
==PAGE:41==
12
Model Estimation and Results
This chapter includes the model specification and estimation. The task is to
make a specification of the model and estimate the variables. At the same time,
using the t-test, Wald’s chi-square test, likelihood ratio, and elasticity.
Thus, the t-test can be performed by analyzing the p-values of the coefficients
to find out whether the coefficients are significantly different from zero. In other
words, the test is used to determine significant variables. Parameters that have val-
ues above 0.05 have a rather high p-value, which is explained by the fact that they
are not important for the model, and vice versa. The lower the p-value, the higher
the significance of the parameter for the models, this means that the parameters
are important for the model. Thus, the idea is to reject the null hypothesis, which
states that the coefficients are zero at a 5% significance level. Same as with the Wald
chi-square test, this is a way to find out if explanatory variables are significant. In
other words, “Significant” means that something has been added to the model; on
the other hand, variables that have nothing to add to the model can be deleted.
Models were evaluated between the original form, which included only a few
variables, and the final form with many variables, which turned out to be statically
significant. Thus, the goal is to determine how the model changes with a specific
set of variables. Each time a new variable was added, which showed that it was
statistically significant, it was saved in the model. Not all steps will be described in
a detailed format. The data are explained taking into account how they are inter-
preted in the model, as well as their impact on the model.
12.1
Binary Logit Model of Bicycle choice
As described earlier in the theory section, a binary logit model consists of two
utility functions. To study models with many variables and statistically significant
levels. The impact of variables on models is also analyzed.
The essence of the logit model is to determine what probability will be made when
choosing a bike. The choice is to choose a bicycle as a vehicle, along with other al-
ternatives offered. The choice was made along with criteria such as walking, driving
a car, driving another vehicle, train, public transport bus, train bus in combination,
and more. All these criteria were used in the specification of models. Variables that
influence the choice of the bike also affect the result. The idea is to determine how
41
==PAGE:42==
certain factors affect the choice of a bicycle. As well as changing people’s choices
when adding new variables, which values have a greater impact and which less. The
end result was a comparison between the original model and the final model.
To make this comparison, it was decided to first make the simplest model the
simplest, using only a few variables, and then add the variables and their interac-
tion. Until we get a model that cannot be improved further and which is statically
significant. For this, we also used the method based on the AIC (Akaike information
criterion) value, which we want to make as low as possible. It should also be noted
that all the results of the specialization model are presented in table form in table 16
Appendix A. Thus, the first model includes only a few variables. Such as the dummy
variable for men, age group 1 (6 to 30 years old), age group 2 (31 to 64 years old),
distance to the nearest station and travel distance. Only significant results with a
significance level of 5%, which contain significant effects and parameter estimates,
are presented in Table 6 below.
Table 6: Model 1
Table 7: Summary of model 1
The results of the first model show that dummy for men and age groups have
a positive effect on the model. The result shows that men use the bike more than
42
==PAGE:43==
women. On the other hand, the distance to the nearest station and the travel dis-
tance had a negative sign. The next step was to add other variables to the first
model and at the same time see how the model changes when adding variables.
Thus, we leave the results that are statically significant in the model. Which also
has a significant effect (p <0.001). Each time, performing the specification of the
model with new variables, the model acquired various forms of change. With some
variables, the model improved, with other variables, on the contrary, the model re-
ceived variables that were statistically insignificant.
The following variables were added to the model, area of residence (municipality
code), distance squared, the interaction of distance and dummy for men. The re-
sults are presented in Table 8 below.
Table 8: Model 3
Table 9: Summary of model 3
After the results obtained, it can be seen from Table 8 that all the variables
are statically significant and have a significant influence of the p-value (p <0.001),
43
==PAGE:44==
while the variable distance of the trip does not (p = 0.3690). Variables, such as
dummy for men and age groups, were largely related to the effect on the model.
As for the distance to the nearest station, this factor plays an important role, since
the likelihood of using a bicycle decreases with increasing distance. The variable
distance nearest station, as in the first model, also has a negative sign. Other vari-
ables such as dummy for men, when new values were added, changed and began to
have a negative sign in the model. This is due to the fact that when more variables
affecting choice are taken into account, the model changes. The same applies to
distance: the greater the distance, the less likely it is to use a bicycle as the main
mode of transport. Although in model 3 the variable has a positive sign. However,
the difference between models 1 and 3 showed that the variable travel distances have
changed and have a positive sign in the model since the residence factor has been
taken into account. The variable place of residence of people has a significant im-
pact on the model. Variables, such as the interaction of the squared distance, are a
negative sign in the model, but provide an opportunity to find out at what distance
the use of the bike begins to decrease. As for the interaction of distance and dummy
for men, which has a positive effect, men use the bike over longer distances than
women.
To compare the obtained models 1 and 3, we use the likelihood ratio criterion. The
likelihood ratio test, which has the formula -2[(L (𝛽0))-(L (^𝛽))].
Depending on the number of variables, we determine the number of degrees of free-
dom. The table shows that the chi-square distribution (𝑥2) with a certain degree of
freedom that we find when comparing the two models, and the difference between
the calculated result between the two models, tells us whether we can reject the null
hypothesis or should we accept. The following is the difference between likelihood
relationship models.
The results show that the likelihood ratio test shows improvements in the mode
-2[(L (𝛽0))-(L (^𝛽))]= −2 [(- 51837.27) - (- 51060.34)] = 1553.87 >12.59, is 𝑥2-
distributed with K = 12 - 6 = 6; 6 degrees of freedom = 12.59. So the null hy-
pothesis can be rejected because values far exceed 12.59. It also means that model
3 has been improved over model 1.
Thus, following the strategy of adding one variable to the model and observing the
result, we evaluate which variables are statically significant. Step by step, adding
variables, we leave those variables that have a significant impact and reject the sec-
ondary. In other words, the model changes every time.
The final model included variables such as the day of the week, the purpose of the
44
==PAGE:45==
trip, income and also the interaction of distances and age groups, and the distance
and place of residence of people. The variable day of the week has a negative ef-
fect, due to the fact that when choosing to use a bicycle on weekends it will be less
than on weekdays. Since on weekends most often people stay at home or travel on
another form of transport. The purpose of the trip is closely related to the day of
the week. Since the main purpose of the trip on weekdays is work or study. With
regard to the interaction of distance and age groups, with increasing distance, this
significantly affects the choice of a bicycle. Since for long distances, even for young
people, cycling becomes difficult. The interaction variable distance and place of
residence have a positive effect, only the second group (Kolding, Randers) has a
negative sign. The results of the final model are presented in Table 10 below.
Table 10: Final model
Now that we have the final model, we can use it to compare it with the first
model and the previous one. Thus, to see the difference between them and find out
which model is better.
45
==PAGE:46==
Table 11: Summary of final model
We see that all variables are very important, p <0.001, with the exception of the
variable distance of the trip (p = 0.1704), place of residence of group 0 (p = 0.0604),
the interaction of the distance and place of residence of group 1 (p = 0.7779 ) and
the interaction of the distance and place of residence of group 2 (p = 0.0747) is not
significant. It was decided to keep these values in the final model. As in model
1, we check the ratio of likelihood and index values, also using the equations as
before. This method allows you to determine how the model has changed, with the
addition of new variables, namely, how much the model has improved or worsened.
The results show that the likelihood ratio test shows improvements in the mode 2[(L
(𝛽0))-(L (^𝛽))]= −2 [(- 51837.27) - (- 50555.94)] = 2562.66 >25 is 𝑥2-distributed with
K = 21 - 6 = 15 degrees of freedom, so the null hypothesis can be rejected because
values far exceed 25.00. It is also seen that the 𝜌−2 value changed about is 0.444, so
the difference between model 1 and final is 0.014.
Using the formula 2[(L (𝛽0))-(L (^𝛽))] for the likelihood ratio test, we calculate for
each specification model. The difference between each model is presented in Table
12 below.
Table 12: The result of different models specification
All this means that the final model with added variables is better than the first
model 1 or model 3 as well as the previous. Other variables worsened the model
when added, so they were not taken into account. All other results of the specifica-
tion models are presented in Table 16 Appendix A. The table included the number
of observations, the likelihood ratio, and the Akaike information criterion (AIC).
46
==PAGE:47==
From the data obtained, one can also see a non-linear relationship between the
distance and use of the bike, which starts from 5.54 km. In other words, when the
distance exceeds 5.54 km or more, the probability that people will choose a bicycle as
a mode of transport begins to decrease (the larger the distance, the less probability ).
After the model was ready, the next step was to determine the elasticity. What
happens if the distance increases by 10%.
At its core, elasticity determines the
measure of the sensitivity of a variable to a change in another variable and also de-
scribes changes in a variable from one to another. The model was also tested using
scenarios 0 and 1. In which 1 displays an increase in distance of 10% and 0 without
an increase. Using elasticity, which has the formula 𝐸= 𝑝´−𝑝𝑜
𝑝𝑜
* 10. The result was
-0.17, which means inelastic demand. Moreover, if we increase the distance by 100
percent, the elasticity will be 1.7% of the share of the bicycle.
12.2
Model of bicycle-type choice
This model is designed to study transport users when choosing a particular
type of bicycle. Depending on the various attributes and factors that influence the
choice, the forecasting scenario when choosing changes every time. Thus, in this
model, the choice will be evaluated by what variables affect the choice of people
when choosing a particular type of bicycle. This model is different from the preview
model (Binary Logit Model of Bicycle choice) so that the choice will be made be-
tween the three types of bicycles.
Namely, an electric bike, an ordinary bike and a type 1 bike (a bike with a trailer,
Carrier bike, Christiania bike). In other words, the model is calculated based on
observational data that the choice will fall on one of the proposed options. In turn,
the data can have both positive and negative effects on the result. Thus, a positive
effect affects people with a certain choice. However, some changes, which give the
advantage of choice for some, are negatively developed for others. For instance, when
choosing an ordinary bicycle, people rely on its not expensive cost and do not require
many advantages from it, only mobility and ease of movement. While for electric
bicycles or cargo bicycles, the requirement there increases with certain benefits. A
cargo bike, for example, to transport more people or goods at the same time. On
the other hand, an electric bike helps people with physical disabilities or people aged.
47
==PAGE:48==
The specificity of the model is that an individual i from the sample N ( for ex-
ample, i = 1 ...N) is faced with a set of selection criteria j (j ∈J / j = 1,2,3 ... J).
Therefore, individual i chooses an alternative j that optimizes (maximizes or mini-
mizes) his objective function at a given particular moment (Si) (Aloulou F, 2018).
Expressions can be described as follows:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
Y𝑖= 1 ,
if the individual i chooses option 1, means when(𝑆𝑖1 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑆𝑖𝑗)𝑗=1...𝐽)
Y𝑖= 2,
if the individual i chooses option 2,(𝑆𝑖2 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑆𝑖𝑗)𝑗=2...𝐽)
Y𝑖= 𝐽,
if the individual i chooses option J,(𝑆𝑖𝐽= 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑆𝑖𝑗)𝑗=1...𝐽)
Where:
𝑌𝑖- the choice observed.
𝑆𝑖𝑗- means the level of the objective function, the chosen alternative j gives a certain
person i.
Taking into account the considerations, a certain function (𝑉𝑖𝑗) represents the per-
ception of satisfaction of the average person when choosing alternative j. It is also
worth noting that these choice models the objective function is U=V epsilon where
V is (normally) a linear combination of parameters and explanatory variables while
epsilon is an error term (extreme value type 1 for logit models) Thus, the linear
formula is easiest to interpret and evaluate by the formula:
V𝑖𝑗= 𝛼0𝑗+𝛽1𝑋𝑛𝑖1+𝛽2𝑋𝑛𝑖2+𝛽𝑛𝑋𝑛𝑖𝑘
(12.1)
Where:
𝛼0𝑗- is a constant that inherently reflects the influence of other variables that are
not included in the model. In terms of choice, people who choose option 1, in fact,
will be more numerous than those who choose any other option.
𝛽-Coefficients of explanatory variables.
𝑋𝑛𝑖- Option specifications.
Thus, the original model was first calculated, with one indicator (attribute), in
this case, age. Which in turn is divided into 4 groups, namely: 1) the group con-
sists of 6-18, 2) 19-30, 3) 31-64, 4) 64-80. After that, of the three types of bicycle
transport, the option with the greatest demand was chosen, in this case, option 2
(ordinary bike) Asc2. In other words, set Asc2 = 0, because we have to normalize
48
==PAGE:49==
the constant in the selection model. Thus, choosing alternative 2, because it has
the highest demand. After the calculation, it becomes clear that some values are
statistically insignificant, you can see in Table 17 Appendix B and can be excluded
from the model. When model 1 was completely statically acceptable, the base model
was completed and was presented in table 13 below.
Table 13: Model specification 1
From the first calculations, show that only 4 out of 6 indicators are statistically
significant. An overview of the results of model 1, Table 13 shows that all the vari-
ables are very important, p <0.001, only the variable Age group 1 Asc 1 = 0.0381.
The table also shows that age group 4 uses an electric bike more than other groups.
On the other hand, age group 3 uses bike more (a bike with a trailer, Carrier bike,
Christiania bike) than others. Also, indicators of all age groups have a positive sign.
Variables that are not statistically significant were excluded from model 1.
The next indicators to calculate were the distance criteria. Which was divided into
three groups: the first group with criteria from 0 to 5 km, the second from 5 to 11
and the third from 11 and above. In order to determine how the distance affects the
probability of a choice among cycling. In this case, people prefer both types of bikes,
but electric bikes were most preferred. The distance affects the model to a very large
extent when choosing (a bike with a trailer, a Carrier bike, a Christiania bike) the
values of the variables have a negative sign since the distances are best covered with
electric bicycles, which in turn has a positive effect on the model. The following
variables were also included, such as a dummy for men, region (place of residence),
income, and a number of people in the family. The results of the specification for
model 2 are presented in table 14 below.
49
==PAGE:50==
Table 14: Model specification 2
An overview of the results from the specification of model 2, with the addition
of new variables, the value of the p-value changed in some variables. It can be seen
that, for example, the age group 1 Asc 1 = 0.0020, the age group 3 Asc 1 = 0.0524,
the distance of the group 2 Asc 1 = 0.0027, the distance of the group 3 Asc 1 =
0.0362, regarding the region, group 2 (Kolding, Randers) Asc 3 = 0.0018, group 3
(Horsens, Vejle) Asc 3 = 0.0048, group 4 (˚Arhus) Asc 3 = 0.0003, all other terms
are highly significant, p <0.001.
In terms of a mannequin for men, it is a negative sign when men choose an electric
bike.
The factor of residence plays a big role in the choice. In the areas of Copenhagen
and Frederiksberg, both options have both a positive and a negative sign, but they
are highly significant. This is due primarily to the fact that in this area using both
e-bike and a bicycle-type 1 (bicycle with a trailer, Carrier bicycle, bicycle are used
in this area Christiania). Thus, as for the region and the type of bicycle, here the
type of bicycle 1 is more used in Copenhagen and Frederiksberg relative to the base
region (as well as in relation to other cities), on the other hand, e-bikes are used
50
==PAGE:51==
less relatively. However, in all other major cities, electronic bikes are used relatively
more often than basic ones.
Another factor in the calculations was income, which also affects the model. This
factor was also divided into groups: the first group with data up to 120 thousand
a year, the second from 121 to 277, the third from 278 to 378 and the fourth from
379 and higher. From the calculations, it can be said that people of the second and
fourth profitability groups make their choice in the direction of an electric bicycle.
Group 2 whose income is (from 121 to 277), uses an electric bicycle more than other
groups.
The following variables were considered the number of people in the family. The
number of people in the family also plays a large role in choosing a bicycle, for
example, a family with 5-6 people is more inclined to choose the type of bicycle 1
and has a higher rate than other groups. Although, all groups in which the number
of people in a family starts from 3 people in a family and above make their choice
in the direction of a bicycle-type 1.
Consideration of the model specification by criteria such as the distance to the near-
est stop adversely affected the result and had statically insignificant results. The
results are presented in Table 18 Appendix C.
The next step was to determine the likelihood ratio test. In order to reject or
accept the null hypothesis. After the second model was ready, the data are presented
in the tables for both models.
Variables
Model 1
Model 2
Difference between models
Number of variables
6
21
15
Log-likelihood
-3806
-3511
295
Bar square p^{-2}
0.8249
0.8385
0.0136
AIC(Akalke information criterio)
7624
7063
561
Number of Observations
19787
19787
Table 15: Result of specification of two models.
From the results of table 15, it can be seen that model 2 with added variables is
a much better fit than model 1. If we compare the AIC ( Akaike information crite-
rion), then the difference between model 1 and model 2 is 561. Thus, we are aiming
for the AIC (Akaike information criterion) indicator to be lower because the model
51
==PAGE:52==
with the minimum AIC (Akaike information criterion) value is preferred. This also
indicates that model 2 with the value AIC = 7063 better than model 1.
The likelihood ratio test calculated by the formula: -2[(L (𝛽0))-(L (^𝛽))] = −2[(−3806)-
(-3511)]= 590 >25.00. Thus, the test statistics are 𝑥2-distributed with K = 21 - 6
= 15 degrees of freedom, which is 25.00 from the chi-square statistic table. The
obtained value significantly exceeds 25.00, thus the null hypothesis can be rejected.
13
Discussion
This chapter discusses previously calculated results, as well as discussions with
the literature review and in the context of research questions that were described in
the introductory chapter.
Answering the first question: Characteristics of the different uses of bicycles, as
well as factors affecting the bicycle?
It’s no secret to anyone that a bicycle is a recognizable and popular form of urban
transport. Having the advantages as an environmentally friendly, budgetary, and
even able to replace a trip to the gym - in other words, there are many advantages.
Although each person has his own reasons for using a certain type of bike. In most
cases, this is related to human needs. But transportation habits often influence the
choice of bike use. It all starts with fairly simple things from childhood when you
are under 18 years old, the bike is interesting, but also a convenient form of trans-
port. After driving by bicycle becomes associated with work (study). Getting a
little older, factors related to the number of people in the family begin to influence,
and age plays a big role throughout this time. Thus, the culture imposed by society
for the use of bicycles begins at an early age. At its core, the transport habits of
using a bicycle is an almost completely automatic action that repeats over a period
of time. In other words, if a person is used to using a bicycle of the same type, then
this becomes an everyday phenomenon that he does not even think about.
The variety of bicycles is quite huge in this thesis focused on only three types of
bicycles: ordinary bicycle, e-bicycle and (bicycle with a trailer, Carrier bicycle, bi-
cycle are used in this area Christiania). All of them significantly different from each
other in their functions. But the essence remains one, that would deliver a person
to their destination. A bike is an indispensable form of transport when it comes to
a distance of not more than 5 km. Which is also confirmed in the calculations of
52
==PAGE:53==
the first model.
Using an ordinary bike is pretty familiar to people. This type of bike is well suited
for almost all types of driving. Factors affecting the use of a regular bike are distance
and age.
E-bike, the essence of this type of bike is designed to help people make cycling easier.
Because people cannot use an ordinary bike due to physical condition or age. Thus,
the age and physical condition of a person strongly influence the choice and use of
this type of bicycle. Another important factor is income since an electronic bike is
not cheap.
A bicycle with a trailer, Carrier bicycle, bicycle are used in this area Christiania is
a combined method of moving not only yourself but also children or goods. Thus,
the number of people in a family is a factor in choosing this type of bike.
Many other factors can also influence the choice of bicycle use, like weather condi-
tions, time, and much more, but they were not taken into account in this work.
Answering the second question: What factors influence the overall level of bicy-
cle demand in Denmark and how do these factors explain regional and city variation
in bicycling?
To reflect on this issue, there will be a use of the results that were obtained when
calculating the Binary Logit Model of Bicycle choice and Model of bicycle-type
choice.Thus, factors affecting the demand for bicycles in Denmark are directly re-
flected in their use.
For example, the distance factor plays an important role, as it is the first to evaluate
when choosing a bicycle. Calculations show that the greater the distance, the less
likely it is to use only one bike. There is also a definite dependence that after 5.54 km
the probability of choosing a bicycle begins to decrease. Also by this criterion, the
distance to the nearest stop is estimated. If the distance to the nearest destination
(or stop) does not exceed 5.54 km, then the likelihood of using a bicycle is significant.
Changing the distance of movement depends primarily on the goal itself. Travel
goals can be different, in this thesis, the purpose of the trip (work) was considered,
since only this variable has a statistically significant effect on the model. This is also
due to the fact that on weekdays people often use a bicycle-related to the purpose of
work. As for the weekend, people spend time at home or use other vehicles to travel.
The next factor is age, which has been broken down into age groups. Age plays
a significant role in choosing a bicycle, as well as a particular type of bicycle. From
53
==PAGE:54==
the calculations, it is clear that young people more often use a bicycle and lead an
active lifestyle. On the other hand, older people also actively use a bicycle, and an
e-bicycle helps them a lot.
Income and place of residence (region) are closely related to each other. As for
income, people who can afford to buy housing in the city center do not have or do
not use a car. Instead, they prefer a bike. On the other hand, people with lower
incomes are more likely to buy a house on the outskirts of the city or outside the
city, then the likelihood of using a bicycle will decrease since the distance will be
greater for cycling. Thus, the regional factor of residence plays a role in the selection
and use of the bicycle.
54
==PAGE:55==
14
Conclusion
A bicycle as a form of transport performs many functions simultaneously.
With its many benefits, it has a useful effect on the environment and human health.
Bicycle in the field of transport in an urban environment is a useful alternative in
terms of traffic jams and short distance travel.
The purpose of the master’s thesis was to answer the question of demand for bicycles
and the behavior of cyclists in Denmark. Also taken into account the probability of
using different types of bicycles in the presence of the offered alternatives. Research
on the use of bicycles as a mode of transport in countries as developed as Denmark
is very interesting and exciting. This is also relevant if we take into account the fact
that the development of new trends is aimed at improving the quality of life in the
urban environment.
To answer research questions, we analyzed the data set (TU) that was available
from Transport DTU and constitute the logit and bicycle choice models. TU data
contains fairly large and extensive attribute information. Which in turn allows it
possible to analyze and describe the data. In the first logit model, it was analyzed
what factors influence the choice of people when choosing a bicycle. The goal was
to find out what the choice of people would be, along with the offered alternatives,
such as a car, public transport, walking, and others, and what factors influence the
choice of a bicycle.
Using the method of adding new variables to the model, the model is improved
every time, which also gives an idea of what factors influence the choice.
The
elasticity values were given by defining the model as inelastic, which means that
even if with an increase in the distance of 0.5 km, people will still use the bicycle.
Since in this case, it will be the most suitable alternative to using a bicycle compared
to other modes of transport.
In the second choice model, the choice was among the three types of bicycles and a
number of factors that influence the choice.
As in the first model, when adding alternatives, the model improved in every
way. In this case, the model is of great importance when choosing: distance, age,
and a number of people in the family. A variable number of people in the family
showed that if there are 3 or more people in the family, then the probability of
the choice will be to use a bicycle (a bicycle with a trailer, a Carrier bicycle, a
Christiania bicycle). In the age group, the older people are, the more choice falls on
using an electric bike. In terms of distance consideration, the greater the distance,
the greater the probability of using an electric bike. From the point of view of the
55
==PAGE:56==
region, the place of residence, the trend of using bicycles in large cities is greater
and continues to grow every year.
Both models provide a significant set of attributes that influence the decision in
favor of choosing a bicycle, as well as choosing a specific type of bicycle. In terms
of the results obtained, the data may be of interest for future use, in terms of urban
development or in the struggle to reduce the number of private vehicles. Which, in
turn, gives the city green image and care for the health of the population.
Taking into account the results of both models, as well as the choice to use a bicycle,
it is reasonable to assume that the demand for bicycles in Denmark will grow in the
future. Thus, the results obtained in this thesis can be used in further work for the
preparation of various projects and interactions with various branches.
56
==PAGE:57==
15
References
Aloulou F, (February 6th 2018) The Application of Discrete Choice Models in
Transport. Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // www. intechopen. com/
books/ statistics-growing-data-sets-and-growing-demand-for-statistics/
the-application-of-discrete-choice-models-in-transport (Accessed:09 Jan-
uary 2020)
Atlas D. (October 2019) Types of bicycle. Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // www. rydoze. com/ types-of-bikes/ (Accessed:16 November 2019)
Ben-Akiva, Moshe, Steven R Lerman. 1985. Tests and Practical Issues in Devel-
oping Discrete Choice Models. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Application
to Travel Demand, vol. 6, chap. 7. Journal of Business Economic Statistics, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, 286. doi: 10.2307/1391567
Bondam K, (August 2009) Copenhagen city of cyclists. Circulation [Internet]
Available at:
http: // www. epomm. eu/ newsletter/ electronic/ docs/ BicycleAccount2008.
pdf (Accessed:03 January 2020)
Bopp M, Sims D, Piatkowski D, (2018) Bicycling for transportation Circulation
[Internet] Available at:
https: // books. google. dk/ books? id= FC1WDwAAQBAJ& pg= PA83& lpg= PA83& dq=
Titze,+S. ,+ Stronegger,+W. +J. ,+ Janschitz,+S. ,+ %26+ Oja,+P. +( 2007) .+
Environmental,+social,+and+ personal+ correlates+ of+ cycling+ for+ transportation+
in+ a+ student+ population. +Journal+ of+ Physical+ Activity+ %26+ Health,
+4( 1) ,+ 66-79. &source= bl& ots= yzctlgxZGF& sig= ACfU3U3_ VAa1FQL2_ NPMUDhaLUBnOSSF_
Q& hl= en& sa= X& ved= 2ahUKEwi-rMCylcLmAhUTwMQBHSd3DkQQ6AEwAnoECAkQAQ# v=
onepage& q= Titze% 2C% 20S. %2C% 20Stronegger% 2C% 20W. %20J. %2C% 20Janschitz%
2C% 20S. %2C% 20% 26% 20Oja% 2C% 20P. %20( 2007) .% 20Environmental% 2C% 20social%
2C% 20and% 20personal% 20correlates% 20of% 20cycling% 20for% 20transportation%
20in% 20a% 20student% 20population. %20Journal% 20of% 20Physical% 20Activity%
20% 26% 20Health% 2C% 204( 1) %2C% 2066-79. &f= false (Accessed: 20 December
2019)
57
==PAGE:58==
Caspersen CJ, Powell KF, Christenson GM (1985). Physical activity, exercise,
and physical fitness: definitions and distinctions for health – related research. Pub-
lic Health Rep, 100, 126-31
COWI. Environmental factors and health. The Danish experience (2001) Cir-
culation [Internet] Available at: https: // www2. mst. dk/ udgiv/ publications/
2001/ 87-7944-519-5/ pdf/ 87-7944-518-7. pdf (Accessed: 7 December 2019)
Cycling, the European approach (October 2008) Cycling, the European approach
Total quality management in cycling policy. Results and lessons of the BYPAD-
project. Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // ec. europa. eu/ energy/
intelligent/ projects/ sites/ iee-projects/ files/ projects/ documents/ bypad_
platform_ bypad_ cycling_ the_ european_ approach_ en. pdf (Accessed: 22 De-
cember 2019)
David V. (2004) Bicycle: The history , Circulation [Internet] Available at: https:
// books. google. dk/ books? id= VDlaT0KxJfAC& printsec= frontcover& source=
gbs_ ge_ summary_ r& cad= 0# v= onepage& q& f= true (Accessed: 27 November 2019)
David V. (no date) Bicycle: The history , Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // epdf. pub/ bicycle-the-history. html (Accessed: 27 November 2019)
Denmark.dk.
2014.
A nation of cyclists Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // denmark. dk/ people-and-culture/ biking (Accessed: 20 December
2019)
Dill J, Nohad A (2009) Bicycling for Transportation and Health: The Role of In-
frastructure Journal of Public Health Policy, 30, S95-S110. doi:10.1057/jphp.2008.56
Circulation [Internet] Available at: http: // www. lchc. org/ wp-content/ uploads/
01_ LCHC_ Transpo. pdf (Accessed: 1 December 2019)
Dubernet I, Kay W. Axhausen. (24 September 2019) The German value of time
and value of reliability study: the survey work. Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // link. springer. com/ article/ 10. 1007/ s11116-019-10052-4 (Ac-
cessed:07 January 2020)
58
==PAGE:59==
Dufour D. (February 2010) Development and popularization of cycling. PRESTO
(Popularization of the bicycle as a public mode of transport for daily trips). Cir-
culation [Internet] Available at:
https: // ec. europa. eu/ transport/ sites/
transport/ files/ cycling-guidance/ presto_ policy_ guide_ promotion_ of_
cycling_ en. pdf (Accessed:15 October 2019)
Frank, L. D., Greenwald, M. J., Winkelman, S., Chapman, J.,
Kavage, S.
(2009). Carbonless footprints: promoting health and climate stabilization through
active transportation. Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // europepmc.
org/ abstract/ med/ 19850071 (Accessed: 1 December 2019)
Goldberg D, Frank L, McCann D, Chapman J, Kavage S. (January 2007), NEW
DATA FOR A NEW ERA Circulation [Internet] Available at: http: // atl. sites.
olt. ubc. ca/ files/ 2011/ 06/ smartraq_ summary. pdf (Accessed: 30 Novem-
ber 2019)
Gupta V. (no date). THE BICYCLE STORY, Circulation [Internet] Available
at: http: // www. arvindguptatoys. com/ arvindgupta/ bicyclestoryenglish.
pdf (Accessed: 24 November 2019)
Handy S, Wee B Van, Kroesen M. (January 2014) Promoting Cycling for Trans-
port[U+202F]: Research Needs and Challenges. Transp Rev A Transnatl Trans-
discipl J. 2014;34: 37–41. doi:10.1080/01441647.2013.860204 Circulation [Internet]
Available at: http: // reseau. fing. org/ file/ download/ 167313 (Accessed: 8
December 2019)
Kabell M, ( May 2015 ) Copenhagen City of Cyclists - The Bicycle Account
2014. Circulation [Internet] Available at: http: // www. cycling-embassy. dk/
2015/ 05/ 06/ new-bicycle-account-from-copenhagen/ (Accessed: 20 Decem-
ber 2019)
Kirkels M, (September 2016) A short history of the cargo bike The cargo bike:
Undervalued all-rounder with promising future. Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // cargobikefestival. com/ news/ short-history-of-the-cargo-bike/
(Accessed:03 January 2020)
59
==PAGE:60==
Lo T, (November 25, 2016) Cargo Bikes: A Two-Wheeled Enlightenment. Circu-
lation [Internet] Available at: https: // momentummag. com/ cargo-bike-benefits/
(Accessed:25 November 2019)
Madsen T, (2013) Transport cycling behavior: Associations between the built
environment and transport cycling in Denmark. Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // findresearcher. sdu. dk: 8443/ ws/ files/ 88330090/ PhD_ thesis_ tryk_
Thomas_ Madsen_ final. pdf (Accessed: 1 December 2019)
MacArthur J, Harpool M, Scheppke D, (March 2018) Portland State Univer-
sity.
A NORTH AMERICAN SURVEY OF ELECTRIC BICYCLE OWNERS.
Published: March 2018.Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // ppms. trec.
pdx. edu/ media/ project_ files/ NITC_ RR_ 1041_ North_ American_ Survey_ Electric_
Bicycle_ Owners. pdf (Accessed:14 November 2019)
Marshall D, Brauer M, Frank D, (November, 2009), Healthy Neighborhoods:
Walkability and Air Pollution. Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // www.
researchgate. net/ publication/ 40848002_ Healthy_ Neighborhoods_ Walkability_
and_ Air_ Pollution (Accessed: 29 November 2019)
Mobycon, (January 2014) ELECTRIC BICYCLE REPORT. Region of COPEN-
HAGEN. Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // supercykelstier. dk/
wp-content/ uploads/ 2016/ 03/ El-cykelrapport_ h% C3% B8j_ opl% C3% B8sning.
compressed-2. pdf (Accessed:02 January 2020)
Nair R, Nagar M, Jogi P, Sukhadiya J and Gurpritsingh T. Virdi. (April 2018)
Design and Fabrication of Detachable Cargo Bicycle Trolley cum Hand Truck. Circu-
lation [Internet] Available at: https: // www. academia. edu/ 37657530/ Design_
and_ Fabrication_ of_ Detachable_ Cargo_ Bicycle_ Trolley_ cum_ Hand_ Truck
(Accessed:24 November 2019)
Nielsen O, Winther M, Gyldenkærne S, Nielsen M et al (June 2017), DEN-
MARK’S NATIONAL INVENTORY REPORT 2017. Circulation [Internet] Avail-
able at: https: // dce2. au. dk/ pub/ SR231. pdf (Accessed: 29 November 2019)
OECD Environmental Performance Reviews DENMARK (2019) Circulation [In-
ternet] Available at: https: // mfvm. dk/ fileadmin/ user_ upload/ MFVM/ Nyheder/
60
==PAGE:61==
OECD-EPR-Denmark-2019-lv. pdf (Accessed: 7 December 2019)
Physical Activity Guidelines: Chapter 4. (November, 2008) Circulation [Inter-
net] Available at: http: // www. health. gov/ PAGuidelines/ guidelines/ chapter4.
aspx (Accessed: 29 November 2019)
Pucher, J. Buehler, R. (2006). Why Canadians cycle more than Americans: A
comparative analysis of bicycling trends and policies. In: Transport Policy, Vol. 13,
pp. 265-279. Elsevier Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // www. vtpi.
org/ pucher_ canbike. pdf (Accessed: 22 December 2019)
Salmeron-Manzano E and Manzano-Agugliaro F, (May 2018) The Electric Bi-
cycle: Worldwide Research Trends Published: 20 July 2018.(Accessed:14 November
2019)
Simon P, Matthew G, Fred L, (2003) Statistical and Econometric Methods for
Transportation data analysis. Circulation [Internet] Available at:
https: // www. academia. edu/ 28662038/ Statistical_ AND_ Econometric_ Methods_
FOR_ Transportation_ Data_ Analysis (Accessed:01 January 2020)
Tin Tin, S., Woodward, A., Thornley, S., Ameratunga, S. (2009). Cycling and
walking to work in New Zealand, 1991-2006: regional and individual differences, and
pointers to effective interventions Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: //
ijbnpa. biomedcentral. com/ articles/ 10. 1186/ 1479-5868-6-64 (Accessed:
1 December 2019)
Train, Kenneth E. 2003.
Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation.
Cam-
bridge University Press 1–388doi:10.1017/CBO9780511753930. (Accessed:09 Jan-
uary 2020)
Yao C, (January 2014) Bike to Basics: A Cargo Bicycle Design for Short distance
Commuting. Circulation [Internet] Available at: https: // scholarworks. rit.
edu/ cgi/ viewcontent. cgi? referer= &httpsredir= 1& article= 8673& context=
theses (Accessed:24 November 2019)
61
==PAGE:62==
16
Appendix
16.1
Annex A
Table 16: Result of model 1 specification.
16.2
Annex B
Table 17: Model specification before statistically significant(For model 2.1).
62
==PAGE:63==
16.3
Annex C
Table 18: Model specification before statistically significant(For model 2.2)
63
