==PAGE:1==
WaveNet and Global Conditioning
s173101 Hóri Ranason undir Kletti
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
building,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to examine solutions to text-to-speech and speech
synthesis. We focus mainly on WaveNet which is an autoregressive approach
text-to-speech and speech synthesis, in contrast with previous models that are
parametric and concatenative.
We perform a set of experiments where a WaveNet implementation is trained on
a set of datasets. The developers of WaveNet use one of the datasets, VCTK,
to test the performance of WaveNet.
VCTK is also used by the author of
a WaveNet implementation we use for our experiments. We use VCTK as a
baseline dataset. We use the performance of the model that is trained on the
baseline dataset as the baseline performance.
The performance of the other
models’, which are trained on the other datasets is compared to the baseline.
We divide the datasets into two categories which are those that are speaker
identity and those that have an emotional label.
We ﬁnd that the baseline outperformed the WaveNet models’ that were trained
to learn a latent representation of speakers identity. Also, we ﬁnd that models’
trained on latent representations of the emotional labels had similar performance
as the baseline. The results may have been aﬀected by factors such as errors
in the data preprocessing or WaveNet implementation. Also, the quality of the
data may have aﬀected the results.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet med denne afhandling er at undersøge løsninger til tekst-til-tale og tale-
syntese. Vi fokuserer hovedsageligt på WaveNet, som er en autoregressiv tilgang
til tekst-til-tale og talesyntese, i modsætning til tidligere modeller, der er para-
metriske og sammenhængende modeller.
Vi udfører et sæt eksperimenter, hvor en WaveNet implementering trænes på
et sæt datasæt. Udviklerne af WaveNet bruger et af datasættene, VCTK, til
at teste WaveNets ydeevne. VCTK bruges også af forfatteren af en WaveNet-
implementering, som vi bruger til vores eksperimenter. Vi bruger VCTK som et
baseline datasæt. Vi bruger ydeevnen for modellen, der trænes i baseline data-
sættet, som baseline ydelsen. Ydelsen for de andre modeller, der er trænet på de
andre datasæt, sammenlignes med baseline ydelsen. Vi deler datasættene i to
kategorier, som er dem, der er har taler etiket, og dem, der har en følelsesmæssig
etiket.
Vi ﬁnder ud af, at baseline overgik WaveNet modellerne, der blev trænet til at
lære en latent repræsentation af højttalernes identitet. Vi ﬁnder også ud af, at
modeller, der er trænet på latente repræsentationer af de følelsesmæssige eti-
ketter, havde en lignende ydelse som basislinjen. Resultaterne kan have været
påvirket af faktorer såsom fejl i dataforarbejdningen eller WaveNet implemen-
teringen. Kvaliteten af dataene kan også have påvirket resultaterne.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with text-to-speech and speech synthesis.
The thesis consists of description of WaveNet, experiments with WaveNet im-
plementation and analysis of results from experiments.
Lyngby, 16-Februar-2020
s173101 Hóri Ranason undir Kletti
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Ole Winther
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
3
WaveNet
7
3.1
Convolutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Residual blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Gated activation units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
1x1 convolutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Skip-connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Conditioning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methods
15
4.1
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Conditioning on speaker id
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.2
Conditioning on emotional tone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Experiment Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results
23
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
6
Discussion
29
7
Conclusion
31
A Dataset statistics
33
Bibliography
37
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this thesis, we examine text-to-speech(TTS), with special consideration to-
wards speech synthesis.
TTS allows computers to convert text into speech.
This could beneﬁt a range of areas such as educational institutes, assisting peo-
ple with learning disabilities, make computer applications more accessible and
assist people that have reduced eyesight.
There currently are systems that can perform TTS, and there is continuous
work done to make TTS systems sound more like human speech and making
the computations more eﬃcient. Typical approaches to solving TTS problems
are parametric[ZTB09] and concatinative[HB96]. In this thesis, we present and
describe an autoregressive approach called WaveNet[VdOKE+16]. WaveNet is
based on the PixelCNN model that generates pixels for images. The methods
from PixelCNN are adopted and altered, so they are compatible to operate on
audio samples instead of pixels. WaveNet has shown to be able to generate
state-of-the-art speech and, through conditioning, be able to mimic a speakers
voice.
We perform a set of experiments with a WaveNet implementation to examine
how well WaveNet learns speech synthesis on a set of datasets. We use global
conditioning in our experiments to examine how well WaveNet can learn latent
representations. The latent representations consist of speaker identity, to have
the models’ mimic speakers that occur in the dataset. Also, we train WaveNet
models’ to learn latent representations of emotional tone, to examine if the
models’ can mimic sentences said in a speciﬁc emotional tone.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
In chapter 2, we outline a set of related work done in the ﬁeld of TSS and speech
synthesis. In 3 we describe the WaveNet model in both function and architec-
ture. In 4 we describe an implementation of WaveNet, present the datasets that
we use for our experiments. Last, we outline how we perform the experiments.
In chapter 5, we present the results for the experiments and compare them to a
baseline model. In chapter 6, we discuss the results and possible elements that
may have aﬀected the results. Last, in chapter 7, we present a conclusion for
this thesis.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Related Work
Over the years, there have been many proposed approaches to TTS. They im-
plement a variety of methods to have a computer system perform TTS with as
natural speech as possible. It is desirable to have speech that sounds natural
since it makes the speech more understandable by humans. Here we describe a
set of related work to speech synthesis.
CHATR[HB96] is a concatenative approach where an extensive database of
phonemes, also called units, is used to retrieve units and concatenate them
into a complete waveform, that should coincide with the text given as input.
The main issues with this approach are the lookup speed and how to select the
correct units. [HB96] proposes to order the database in a fully connected State
Transition Network(STN) and use a Viterbi algorithm to chose which units to
concatenate. When training such a system, it tries to ﬁnd a path in the STN
that has the lowest cost. This method will, in turn, produce a waveform that
is close to the target waveform. Very similar to HMM’s[Rab89] where the main
diﬀerence is that HMM’s are probabilistic and [HB96]s approach is functional.
To speed up lookup time, they use a Viterbi search. However, Viterbi search
may not be suﬃcient to generate speech in real-time, so they also use some
pruning techniques to limit the number of units that the synthesizer considers.
[HB96] propose two methods to train the synthesizer. With the Weight Space
Search sets of weights are tested to determine the best performing set of weights.
This approach is computationally costly and requires hundreds of hours to pro-
==PAGE:16==
4
Related Work
duce 1 hour of speech. We show later on that Parallel WaveNets are capable of
producing speech in real-time very fast.
With their Regression Training approach, they signiﬁcantly improved on the
time and computational cost it takes to train a concatenative synthesizer. How-
ever, both training methods require an extensive database of phonemes to train
and to produce natural sound from the text.
Another approach is to generate audio with statistical parametric speech synthe-
sis(SPSS)[ZTB09]. SPSS covers a range of models, but HMM-based synthesis
has shown to be somewhat eﬀective at synthesizing speech.
[ZTB09] proposes a synthesizer that does not depend on a database to gener-
ate vocal output. However, it requires a database consisting of speech data for
training of the model. Once trained, it can produce vocal output by using HMM
predictions. This approach has the disadvantage that it cannot produce outputs
that are as high quality better than the concatenative unit selection approach.
However, the SPSS approach does have it’s advantages as well, such as being
very good at capturing voice characteristics and is easily modiﬁable.
The HMM-based speech synthesis proposition can be extended to be more
context-aware with decision trees(DT)[TZB02, ZSS13] that map contexts to
a speciﬁc trained HMM that can handle that speciﬁc context. However, the
HMMs’ with decision trees are outperformed by deep neural networks’(DNN)[ZSS13]
in terms of quality of speech output. DNNs’ negate some of the limitations of
HMMs’ such as vocoding, the accuracy of acoustic models, and over-smoothing.
[ZSS13] shows that the decision tree tends to be larger than DNNs’ which are
more compact and can be more generalized. However, DNN’s are more expen-
sive to train and use, due to the number of calculations they perform during
the forward and backwards propagations. Additionally, DNNs’ parameters are
harder to interpret than those of decision trees.
Through the insights gained from PixelRNN[OKK16] and PixelCNN[VdOKE+16],
Googles’ DeepMind developed the WaveNet architecture, by adapting some of
the methodologies used for image generation to perform speech generation. Pix-
elRNN is based on the recurrent neural network(RNN) architecture[LB+95] and
PixelCNN is based on convolutional neural network(CNN) architecture[GS09,
HS97, GMH13]
The PixelRNN and PixelCNN models aim to predict pixel values based on
previously predicted pixel values. Both models are trained on the ImageNet
dataset[DDS+09] and PixelCNN can match the performance of PixelRNN, how-
ever with a reduced computational cost. The advantages of PixelCNN are that
training and evaluation are faster due to parallelization. However, for the gener-
ation of pixels both models have the same performance due to the process being
sequential.
The models generate an image, by predicting pixel by pixel, where each pre-
==PAGE:17==
5
dicted pixel is conditioned on previously processed pixels. Such predictions are
similar to a time series prediction. Traditionally, RNNs’ are the goto model
architecture for such problems, but the performance of PixelCNN indicates that
CNNs’ are as proﬁcient at predicting time series as RNNs’.
The result from PixelCNN and PixelRNN indicate that there are advantages to
use CNN architectures for time-series predictions. WaveNet is one such attempt
which is described in the next chapter.
==PAGE:18==
6
Related Work
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
WaveNet
In the advent of TTS solutions over the years, DeepMinds’ WaveNet[ODZ+16]
has proven to play an integral role in TSS and voice synthesis. It combines
causal convolutions and dilated convolutions to make a generative model. By
combining these two types of convolution, WaveNet can handle 1D times series
dataset structures and reduce the size of the model without any signiﬁcant loss
in performance, if any.
WaveNet operates on raw 16 kHz audio data meaning that there are 16000
samples for each second of audio.
It takes raw audio samples as input and
outputs a softmax distribution. Then WaveNet optimizes by maximizing the
log-likelihood of the data w.r.t. the parameters.
WaveNet is an auto-regressive model; thus, it makes a prediction based on
previous samples before the sample that we want to predict.
Equation 3.1
shows how a prediction is conditioned on previous samples before it, where xt
at time step t is conditioned on all previous time steps x1, ..., xt−1..
p(x) = ΠT
t=1(xt|x1, ..., xt−1)
(3.1)
To have WaveNet produce voice, it can operate on raw audio data alone. How-
ever, without additional information, WaveNet is limited to the audio it can
generate. By adding a parameter to the input, WaveNet’s performance can in-
crease signiﬁcantly[ODZ+16]. The added parameter conditions WaveNet, and
==PAGE:20==
8
WaveNet
it can be in the form of an additional times series or a categorical parameter.
These additional parameters, as long as it is consistent with the audio input, not
only helps to guide WaveNet towards more accurate predictions. It also allows
for the conditioned generation of audio samples, w.r.t. the added parameter/s.
For the generation of audio samples, WaveNet does not need an extensive dataset
of speech, voice or phonemes data like the concatenative models[HB96]. This
is due to WaveNet being an auto-regressive model. Only during training and
evaluation of WaveNet that there is a need for a massive amount of data.
In this chapter, we describe the WaveNet components and the methods used for
global and local conditioning as outlined in [ODZ+16]. We start by describing
the types of convolutions that WaveNet utilized. Then we describe the residual
blocks of WaveNet. Lastly, we describe WaveNet conditioning.
3.1
Convolutions
The WaveNet model architecture consists mainly of a causal dilated convo-
lutions[YK15]. By using causal convolutions ensures that the time steps are
ordered consistently. The ordering is expressed in WaveNet by not having any
recurrent connections; thus, no prediction can be aﬀected by future time steps.
By not having any recurrent connections in WaveNet, means that the model is
typically faster to train when applied on longer sequences of data. Since the
wav ﬁle format has 16000 samples per second, the sequences can become very
long due to the time it takes to form a sentence, which can be several seconds.
Figure 3.1 show the architecture of a causal CNN. We see that the depth of the
network is equal to the number of times steps that the model considers, i.e. 5.
Figure 3.1: Stack of causal CNN. source: [cau]
The time steps that the model considers for each prediction can be increased
by including dilated convolutions. Since WaveNet operates on time series data
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Convolutions
9
and it uses previous times steps for its predictions, an increase of the time steps
model considers during prediction is beneﬁcial.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the model architecture of a causal dilated CNN. We see
that the number of time steps is increased. For each added layer, the time steps
coverage increases exponentially[YK15].
Figure 3.2: Stack of causal dilated CNN. Source: [Wava]
The diﬀerence between normal convolutions and dilated convolutions can be
seen in equation 3.2 and 3.3[YK15]. Both equations are very similar except for
one parameter l, which denotes the dilation rate. If l = 1 we have a standard
convolution as in equation 3.2. However, if l > 1 we have dilated convolutions
and for each discrete increment of l, the receptive ﬁeld expands exponentially.
Dilated convolutions expand the receptive ﬁeld without losing resolution and
are more eﬃcient than standard convolutions[YK15]. WaveNet’s dilation rate
increases for each layer by a factor of 2∗∗1 as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2. WaveNet
continues to increase dilation rate to 512 and then repeats from 1 to 512 again,
i.e. 1, 2, 4, 8, ..., 512, 1, 2, 4, 8, ..., 512, ... thus increasing the receptive ﬁeld
exponentially and increasing the models capacity to become very deep[ODZ+16].
(F ∗k)(p) =
X
s+t=p
F(s)k(t)
(3.2)
(F ∗l k)(p) =
X
s+lt=p
F(s)k(t)
(3.3)
By using the causal dilated convolutions, WaveNet can operate on time series
data and have a large receptive ﬁeld that enables it to look further back at
previous time steps.
==PAGE:22==
10
WaveNet
3.2
Residual blocks
Each hidden layer of WaveNet has residual blocks[HZRS16] that have dilated
connections to each other. The residual blocks contain a skip-connections where
a copy of the input is passed through a gated activation unit and a 1x1 convo-
lutions. Afterwards, it is added to the residual again. The 1x1 convolution has
two outputs one the produces the output that propagates further in the model
and one identical output that is added together with all other output from all
of the network layers. These are then passed through a parameterized skip con-
nection. The output of the skip connection is the output of the model. An
overview of the residual blocks is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3 and ﬁgure 3.4 shows
how the skip connections collect the outputs from the residual blocks.
Figure 3.3: Overview of residual blocks in WaveNet. source: [res]
The design of the residual blocks in WaveNet is based on the blocks from Pix-
elCNN[VdOKE+16]. The blocks aim to adopt some of the operations from Pix-
elRNN’s LSTM units[OKK16]. These have shown to improve the performance
of PixelCNN.
3.2.1
Gated activation units
The gated activation units in the residual blocks are a set of operations done
on the input to the block. First, the output of a causal convolution is passed as
input. The dilated convolution is done on the input to the block and then split
into two identical feature vectors. Then one is passed through a tanh activation
function, and the other is passed through a sigmoid activation function denoted
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Residual blocks
11
as σ.
Experiments show that the non-linearity activation was signiﬁcantly better than
the rectiﬁed linear activation function for modelling audio signals[ODZ+16].
z = tanh(Wf,k ∗x) ⊙σ(Wg,k ∗x)
(3.4)
Where ∗denotes a convolution operator, denotes an element-wise multiplication
operator, σ is a sigmoid function, k is the layer index, f and g denote ﬁlter and
gate, respectively, and W is a learnable convolution ﬁlter.
3.2.2
1x1 convolutions
1x1 convolutions[SLJ+15] can do feature transformation, using a convolution
with kernel size 1x1 applied onto a feature map. The number of features in
the input is transformed to the number of the ﬁlter of the 1x1 convolution.
1x1 convolutions are a linear transformation; however, the 1x1 convolution can
be followed by a non-linear activation function, such as ReLU, to add more
non-linearity to the network. For residual connections, 1x1 convolutions can
transform output and the residual to the same dimensions[HZRS16] which is
required for an element-wise addition.
3.2.3
Skip-connections
Skip connections are used to train very deep networks[HZRS16, SGS15] by
adding connections from the output from one layer to the output of another
layer.
In ﬁgure 3.3, we see that the skip connection includes a set of operations. These
are an element-wise addition, ReLU activation, a 1x1 convolution and a softmax
activation function. However, the ﬁnal output of the skip connection is a softmax
categorical distribution. Using the categorical output of data that is implicitly
continuous may be counter-intuitive; however, [OKK16] show that a softmax
distribution works better since it is more ﬂexible and makes no assumptions
about the shape of the distribution[ODZ+16]. Since there are 65536 possible
outputs from raw audio stored in 16-bit integers, the µ-law is used to lower this
number. The µ-law equation is shown in equation 3.5. After applying it, the
==PAGE:24==
12
WaveNet
Figure 3.4: Input given to WaveNet and how WaveNet outputs prediction.
source: [RPS17]
size of the softmax layer is only 265.
f(xt) = sign(xt)log(1 + µ|xt|)
log(1 + p)
(3.5)
3.3
Conditioning
By adding another parameter as input, the output from WaveNet is given addi-
tional characterizes. This is called conditioning where the output from WaveNet
has an additional condition apart from all previous audio samples[ODZ+16].
Local conditioning adds a parameter to the input that is drawn from a separate
time series other than audio samples. This is done as follows:
p(x|ht) = ΠT
t=1(xt|x1, ..., xt−1, ht)
(3.6)
Equation 3.6 is identical to equation 3.1 with an added parameter ht where h
is a value drawn from some time series of length T at time t.
Global conditioning of a WaveNet model, adds a single parameter to the input
during training and generation. This parameter is drawn from the ﬁxed set
of mutually exclusive values. The eﬀect the parameter has is that it creates
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Conditioning
13
a latent representation which guides the model to add characteristics to the
output. [ODZ+16] show that global conditioning can add voice characterizes to
the output. This enables the model to generate speech in the voice of a speciﬁc
speaker. The way this is done is as follows:
p(x|h) = ΠT
t=1(xt|x1, ..., xt−1, h)
(3.7)
When compared to equation 3.6, the added parameter h is not drawn from some
time series at time t but another mutually exclusive set of parameters.
==PAGE:26==
14
WaveNet
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Methods
For this thesis, we perform a set of experiments, to test the eﬀects of training
a WaveNet implementation on a set of datasets. The experiments aim to test
how WaveNet performs when operating on new sets of datasets. We use global
conditioning, described in section 3.3, and we condition on speaker ids’ and
emotional tones.
These two conditionings use separate datasets, yet allows
us to examine the models’ capacity to learning diﬀerent characteristics in the
datasets.
We acquire a set of datasets that are applicable for our purposes, i.e. contain
recorded speech of suﬃcient quality and identify the id of the speakers. These
datasets’ are then used to train a set of WaveNet models’ conditioned on the
speaker id, each globally conditioned as described in 3.3.
In this chapter, we outline the setting of the experiments that we perform. First,
we introduce the WaveNet implementation we use for the experiments. Then we
describe the datasets’, including their origin, required preprocessing and argue
the validity of including the dataset. Last, we describe how to experiments are
performed.
==PAGE:28==
16
Methods
4.1
Model
To perform the experiments, we need an existing WaveNet implementation.
The model implementation we use for the experiments is written by the GitHub
user ibab[iba18]. It is an attempt to recreate the WaveNet model as described in
[ODZ+16] using the TensorFlow[AAB+15] library. The implementation includes
both global and local conditioning. However, there is currently only able to make
speech synthesis. Allowing text as input is not included in the model as of yet,
thus no means to train the model to perform TTS.
To decrease the training and generation time, the model implements the method
Fast WaveNet[PKC+16]. Fast WaveNet saves previous calculation in queues,
thus alleviates the computing costs of training models and generating audio
clips. The architecture of Fast WaveNet is depicted in ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the queue scheme implemented by Fast WaveNet.
source: [tom16]
For the experiments for this thesis, we have made some modiﬁcations the ibab’s
implementation. However, there no modiﬁcation made on the WaveNet model
implementation itself.
Only a small sub-set of hyper-parameters have been
adjusted and made static to ensure that all experiments made are under the
same conditions. The original values and our alterations are listed in table 4.1.
The alterations that we have made are based on the results from preliminary
experiments.
We have changed the “Checkpoint every” from 50 to 100, due to storing model
checkpoints is computationally costly and takes relatively long to perform. We
have changed it, so to speed up training.
We have increased the “num. steps”, thus extending training since this enables
the models to improve in generated audio quality.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Datasets
17
Hyper-parameter
Default
New Values
Batch size
1
-
Checkpoint every
50
100
Num. steps
1e5
4e5
Learning rate
1e-3
-
Sample size
100000
-
L2-reg. strength
0
-
Silence threshold
0.3
-
Epsilon
0.001
-
Momentum
0.9
-
Max to keep
5
1
Metadata
False
-
Optimizer
Adam optimizer
-
Loss function
Softmax cross entropy with logits
-
Table 4.1: Hyper-parameter values used for training. - means that the param-
eter has not been changed. Some parameters have been omitted,
since they do not aﬀect training.
By changing the “Max to keep” we limit the storage needed for training the
models, since there is only stored a single model checkpoint, for each model.
For our purposes, this is suﬃcient.
4.2
Datasets
For the experiments, we have selected 7 datasets that we test with the WaveNet
implementation described in 4.1. The datasets are all preprocessed, so they are
compatible with the requirements set by the WaveNet implementation. There
are two requirements; All of the audio ﬁles must be in wav ﬁle format, and the
ﬁles and folders need to adhere to a speciﬁc structure and naming convention
as illustrated in 4.2.
Some of the datasets contain a signiﬁcant amount of data, thus requiring a large
amount of storage. Since some of them exceed the capacity, we have access to,
preprocessing included reduction of the dataset. The method of choosing which
ﬁles to keep varies from dataset to dataset.
Some of the datasets included
metadata that indicates the quality of the individual ﬁles in the dataset. When
available, the metadata is used to select ﬁles to include in the subset of the
dataset. Using this method, we attempt to make a sub-set of the dataset while
==PAGE:30==
18
Methods
Figure 4.2: File and folder structure of the VTKL dataset required for training
by ibab’s WaveNet implementation.
still preserving as much of the audio quality as possible and ﬁlter out recordings
of lower quality. When metadata is not available for a dataset, the speakers
were randomly sampled.
We use two types of datasets for the experiments to examine the diﬀerences be-
tween diﬀerent conditionings. We divide the conditionings we do on the models
into two categories. One is speaker id, and the other is emotional tone.
Ibab’s WaveNet implementation has a feature that ignores individual audio ﬁles
if they contain too much silence. This feature prevents the model from learning
to predict and generate long segments of silence. Some of the audio clips in
some of the datasets may contain a long period of silence. However, we want
the model to be able to insert pauses between sentences and words. Therefore,
we use the parameter “silence_threshold”. This parameter sets a threshold for
how much silence is allowed for each audio ﬁle. If an audio ﬁle exceeds this
threshold, it is ignored and not included as part of the training dataset.
4.2.1
Conditioning on speaker id
The VCTK open-source corpus dataset[eau17] consists of 109 English speak-
ers, with diﬀering dialects, where each has contributed about 400 sound clips.
Most of these sound clips are from the speaker reading out loud from the Her-
ald newspaper. The original purpose of the dataset is for making HMM-based
speech synthesis. However, the dataset can be used for our experiments since it
is compatible with the WaveNet implementation.
The VCTK dataset is used by both for training the original model from [ODZ+16]
and by ibab to test the WaveNet implementation, described in 4.1. With this
dataset, we try to replicate the original results to use as a baseline performance.
Only minor preprocessing is needed to make the VCTK dataset compatible with
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Datasets
19
the WaveNet implementation and global conditioning. The only modiﬁcation
needed is to organize the ﬁles into the directory structure, as shown in 4.2.
Figure 4.3: Average length of sound clips in each dataset.
The TED-LIUM dataset[HNG+18] is a collection of audio samples gathered
from TED talks videos where the audio data has been extracted from the videos.
The original intention for making the dataset was for it to be used for speech
recognition models. The audio samples typically vary between 6 to 8 minutes
in length.
This dataset is relatively large and contains a signiﬁcant amount of speakers.
Since each sound ﬁle is 6 to 8 minutes long and some of the speakers have
multiple talks, the samples per speaker ratio are high. However, what makes
this dataset of particular interest is that there is a low probability for repeating
a sentence. However, we must expect the repetition of very common sentences.
The VCTK dataset has relatively little variation from speaker to speaker since
most of the speaker read out loud from the same literature. The TED-LIUM
dataset has a lot of variation from speaker to speaker. With this in mind, we
compare the VCTK and TED-LIUM results.
For the preprocessing, we ﬁrst converted the ﬁles from sph to wav ﬁle format.
Afterwards, we changed the speaker’s names with a unique id and organized
them into a compatible directory structure. Preliminary experiments show that
keeping the audio ﬁle at their full length caused disruptive memory issues during
training. To mitigate this, we divide each talk into 10 seconds of sound clips.
The LibriSpeech dataset[PCPK15] consists of voice clips gathered from the Lib-
riVox project. The LibriVox projects aim to have volunteers donate their voice
by reading chapters from books that have fallen into the public domain. Each
==PAGE:32==
20
Methods
Figure 4.4: Number of sound clips in each dataset.
audiobook recording has been cut into smaller audio clips that are 13 seconds
long on average.
The LibriSpeech dataset is originally in mp3 ﬁle format. We have converted the
ﬁles to wav ﬁle format. However, since mp3 to wav compression rate is fairly
huge, we have only included a subset of the dataset due to storage limitations.
The Voxforge dataset consists of transcribed recordings where willing partici-
pants contribute their voice to a central database. The dataset aims to make a
large dataset of speech openly available to assist with the development of TTS
and speech recognition systems.
We chose to include this dataset due to it consisting of a large amount of data,
and it is easily altered to ﬁt our aims with the experiments. Due to the size of
the dataset, conﬁrming the quality of the recording is infeasible. However, we
except that it has a diverse set of speakers. In Appendix A ﬁgure A.4 we see
that the dataset has recordings of between 4 and 6 seconds on average. This
length is ideal since we aim to compare with the VCTK dataset, which is similar
have similar characteristics.
The Voxforge dataset is encoded in a set of diﬀerent ﬁle formats and is not
organized per our requirements; thus our preprocessing consisted of converting
the ﬁles to wav and assigning ids to the speakers and organizing the audio ﬁles
into folders according to the WaveNet implementation requirements.
The VoxCeleb dataset[NCXZ19, CNZ18, NCZ17] is a collection of audio-visual
data gathered from youtube of famous ﬁgures that are interviewed. The dataset
is divided into two sets. VoxCeleb1 and VoxCeleb2. VoxCeleb1 contains in-
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Datasets
21
Figure 4.5: Number of speakers that have donated to each dataset.
terviews of 1251 celebrities with a total of 100000 utterances. VoxCeleb2 has
6112 celebrities with a million utterances. Since there is no overlap between
VoxCeleb1 and VoxCeleb2, we have combined them into one dataset. This re-
sults in a dataset with 7363 celebrities with a total of 1006112 utterances; thus
increasing the size of the dataset signiﬁcantly.
Due to the dataset being huge, we have ﬁltered the dataset. We have prepro-
cessed the dataset to only contains audio ﬁles totalling in 80GB of storage space.
The processing also converts the ﬁles into wav format, when necessary. This
results in a subset of the original datasets containing only the speakers that
have the most wav audio ﬁles associated to them.
4.2.2
Conditioning on emotional tone
By conditioning the WaveNet implementation on speaker id, we should be able
to generate speech that sounds similar to each speaker. However, we also want
to examine if the implementation is ﬂexible enough to handle other forms of con-
ditioning. To do this, we use the RAVDESS dataset[LR18] and condition the
WaveNet implementation on the emotional tone of speech and song. RAVDESS
contains both recordings of speech and song performed by 24 professional ac-
tors. 12 male and 12 female, with a total of 7356 recordings. Each recording
is performed in one of a set of emotional tones. The set of emotions is neutral,
calm, happy, sad, angry, fearful, disgust, and surprised.
==PAGE:34==
22
Methods
For the speech part of the dataset, all the recording are either one or two sen-
tences. These are "Kids are talking by the door" and "Dogs are sitting by the
door". These two sentences are always the same except for the emotional tone
they are spoken in.
The song part of the dataset is similar to the speech part with two exceptions.
The sentences are sung instead of spoken, and it does not include recordings of
disgust and surprised emotions.
The characteristics of the two datasets are ideal for testing the conditioning on a
diﬀerent parameter other than speech. Each sound clip in the dataset varies very
little concerning what is said or sung. The variation lies in the emotional tones
they are said or sung in. We want to examine if the WaveNet implementation
can learn this diﬀerence instead of speaker id.
The dataset is well organized with a consistent labelling scheme. All the ﬁles
are in wav ﬁle format. We only needed to preprocess the datasets into the ﬁle
and folder structure shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
4.3
Experiment Setup
We perform our experiments on DTU’s(Danish Technical University) GPU clus-
ter. It consists of 8 Nvidia GeForce RTX 2080 titan GPUs’. We train the mod-
els’ using GPUs’ since they oﬀer a signiﬁcant speed up during training. GPUs’
often have more memory than RAM, enabling them to work with deeper mod-
els’. Additionally, their architecture ﬁts the training of neural networks very
well. Both forward and backpropagation calculations are made in parallel re-
spectively, which is the primary source of the speed up.
We train one model for each dataset and gather performance data during train-
ing. We measure performance in softmax cross-entropy with logits loss. We
use the performance of each model as an indicator of the WaveNet implemen-
tation ability to learn. We use the model that is trained on the VCTK dataset
as a baseline. We do this since both DeepMind and ibab used VCTK in their
experiments.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Results
Here we outline the results from the experiments described in made with the
datasets, model and under the conditions described in chapter 4. The results
consist of loss measurements gathered during training, and these are the basis
for assessing performance.
We only use the loss during training since ibab
WaveNet implementation does not provide any other metric for assessment of
performance. The loss is stored every time a new checkpoint is made during
training.
We present the results in graphs with the actual loss, where the raw loss data
is plotted. Over that, we show a rolling mean loss that smooths the actual loss
data. We use the smoothing of the loss value to detect overall trends and to get
a deeper understanding of how to interpret the results.
We note that we use TensorBoard[AAB+15] to extract the loss values from the
checkpoints. TensorBoard produces a csv ﬁle with 1000 entries which is a more
compact collection of loss data for each model. Since the actual number of steps
is 400000, and we make a new checkpoint every 100’th step, should except 4000
entries.
In ﬁgure 5.1, we see the loss history of the model implementation that is trained
on the VCTK dataset. During the early stages of training, the model was able
to reduce the loss signiﬁcantly. However, in the later stages of training the loss
value is generally constant. There are some variations, although no trend can
be observed which indicates that the model has converged.
==PAGE:36==
24
Results
Figure 5.1: Loss during training with VCTK dataset.
In ﬁgure 5.2, we see the loss for the TED-LIUM model.
Early in training,
we notice a drastic reduction of the loss. After a short time of training, the
reduction in loss becomes less and less, until it ﬂattens out by the end. This
indicates that the model would most likely not beneﬁt from further training;
thus, the model has converged.
There is much variance in the actual loss value. These variations do not diﬀer
signiﬁcantly from being higher nor lower than the mean. In the second part,
the loss lies between about 4 and 2 consistently, except for a few outliers.
Figure 5.2: Loss during training with TEDLIUM dataset.
Compared to the baseline, the TED-LIUM model performs signiﬁcantly worse
than the VCTK model. The TED-LIUM model has more variance and is more
volatile. The variance also tends to be equal above and below the mean.
==PAGE:37==
25
In ﬁgure 5.3, we see the loss for the LibriVox dataset.
The loss is reduced
relatively fast in the early stages of training.
However, once the loss values
reach a certain point, the overall reduction in loss is prolonged. Since there is
a slight indication of the loss still being reduced at the end, this model may
beneﬁt from additional training.
Figure 5.3: Loss during training with LibriVox dataset.
This model’s performance is worse than the baseline. There is much variance
for this model, and it deviates very far from the rolling mean loss. The highest
deviations being a loss of 5 to the lowest being 1.
In ﬁgure 5.4, we see that the loss for the Voxforge model. The loss is reduced
initially at the towards the start of training. However, after this, the loss is not
reduced signiﬁcantly. A minor reduction does happen that stops half-way into
training. The loss and the variance remain somewhat constant, except for a few
outliers. The variance that deviates the most from the mean loss is although
signiﬁcant since some loss values are below one. The variance that lies below
the mean is signiﬁcantly more far-reaching than those above the mean, with a
single exception. Towards the end, there is an outlier indicating a loss of 7. This
is signiﬁcantly higher than the loss at the start of training.
==PAGE:38==
26
Results
Figure 5.4: Loss during training with VoxForge dataset.
Comparing the Voxforge model with the baseline model, we see that the Voxforge
model has worse performance than the baseline. Even though the variance of
the loss is minor with a few exceptions, the mean loss does not reach the same
level as the baseline. Occasionally some of the outliers reach a loss value that
is better or equal to the baseline model; however, this is not a consistent trend.
In ﬁgure 5.5 the loss for the VoxCeleb model is illustrated. The loss is reduced
drastically at the start, and then the reduction slows from without stagnating.
At the start, the variance is more volatile. Later the variance stabilizes between
2.5 and 4. However, due to the downward trend, the variance follows this trend
and outliers below the mean become lower over time, moving the lower limit to
2, instead of 2.5. These factors indicate that the model has not yet converged
and performance can improve by training the model further.
Figure 5.5: Loss during training with VoxCeleb dataset.
==PAGE:39==
27
The loss of the VoxCeleb model lies above the baseline loss. Some of the vari-
ance outliers reach baseline level loss. The downward trend shows that further
training of the model can make it’s performance closer to the baseline.
In ﬁgure 5.6, the loss for the RAVDESS Song model is shown. The loss is quickly
reduced at the beginning of training, and then the loss stagnates overall as is
indicated by the rolling mean loss. The actual loss shows a signiﬁcant amount
of variance in the loss. However, the variance is consistently between 3 and
close to 0. There is no indication of any downwards trends; thus, this model has
converged.
Figure 5.6: Loss during training with emotional tone in song dataset.
Compared to the baseline, the RAVDESS Song model has similar performance.
The variance is more frequent than the variance in the baseline. Regardless
of the loss lie in the same interval, thus indicating similar performance, with
RAVDESS Song model being more inconsistent in its predictions.
In ﬁgure 5.7, the loss for the RAVDESS Speech model is shown. Initially, the
loss is reduced but quickly stagnates indicated by the rolling mean loss. Some
variance can be seen yet they are relatively infrequent. However, some of the
outlier in the variance deviate considerably from the rolling mean loss. The
outliers above the rolling mean loss are especially prone to this. The loss below
the rolling mean loss is signiﬁcantly more stable with no signiﬁcant outliers.
The reason for this is that the overall loss to low, thus not allowing variance
downwards to deviate signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:40==
28
Results
Figure 5.7: Loss during training with emotional tone in speech dataset.
Besides the variance, the RAVDESS Speech model performs better than the
baseline.
While both models have a loss between 1 and 2, the loss for the
RAVDESS Speech model lies lower within this interval than the baseline. How-
ever, there is more variance than in the baseline. The variance is also higher
than in the baseline.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In chapter 5, we train a set of models’ with the WaveNet implementation by
ibab. None of the models’ that conditioned on speaker id performs as good or
better than the baseline. Both of the models’ that are globally conditioned on
emotional labels perform better than those conditioned on speaker id.
The datasets that are used for training models’ that are globally conditioned
on speaker id are relatively larger than the emotional labeled datasets (ﬁgures
4.5, 4.4 and 4.3). This can explain the diﬀerences in performance. Since the
datasets are relatively small, the trained models’ may have overﬁtted. Since
ibab’s WaveNet implementation does not include features for testing and val-
idation, this is hard to determine. Also, the sheer size of the datasets could
demand longer training, yet the results show that only a subset of the models’
could potentially beneﬁt from more training.
The correctness of the WaveNet implementation by ibab[iba18] is only assumed
to be correct.
Since DeepMind has not released an open-source version of
WaveNet, some assumptions must, and have been made by ibab, regarding
some aspects of the models’ architecture and hyper-parameters. The lack of
an oﬃcial release of WaveNet means that we have to assume the correctness
of the implementation. However, this is not necessarily true. Key aspects of
WaveNet may have been omitted in [ODZ+16]. Such suspicions are somewhat
valid since WaveNet’s successor Parallel WaveNet[OLB+17] is in production as
a voice synthesizer for Google Assistant[Wavb], and made by a company secret
==PAGE:42==
30
Discussion
at Google.
Ibab’s implementation does not validate predictions during training. The is no
sub-set of the dataset used for training, that it allocates for test and validation
of the model. Thus making it diﬃcult to detect if the model is overﬁtting.
To extract the losses recorded during the training of the models’, the model
checkpoints are loaded into TensorBoard[AAB+15]. Through the use of Tensor-
Board, we extracted the recorded loss into csv ﬁles. However, TensorBoard bins
the losses into 1000 data points. This can aﬀect the interpretation of the results.
Since binning the losses may result in a reduction in resolution. One checkpoint
is saved at the start of training and one at the end of the training. We have
set the training duration to be 400000 steps and set it to save a new check-
point, every 100’th step. This means that there are saved 4002 checkpoints,
thus recording the loss 4002 times during training. A binning of losses from
4002 to 1000 is a signiﬁcant reduction and can have aﬀected the interpretation
of the results.
A factor that can have to aﬀect the results is the pre-processing of some of the
datasets. Generally, the datasets have to been pre-processed to be compatible
with ibab’s implementation. The pre-processing includes ﬁle type conversion,
cutting audio ﬁles into shorter clips and organizing those datasets into a ﬁle
hierarchy, compatible with the implementation. Regarding the ﬁle type conver-
sions, there can be loss in audio quality, when converting from one ﬁle type to
another. We used to python library PyDub[jia11] for ﬁle conversion, cutting au-
dio ﬁles and measuring the length of audio ﬁles. Since we do not have suﬃcient
insight into the internal workings of Pydub, we cannot validate its correctness,
regarding the handling of audio.
The pre-processing for all datasets are described in section 4.2. Those datasets
that have undergone a signiﬁcant amount of pre-processing are most likely to
have lost of quality and unexpected errors. These factors can aﬀect the mod-
els’ performance signiﬁcantly and thus must be taken into consideration when
assessing the performance of each model.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we examine TTS and speech synthesis with focus on the WaveNet
model. We describe parametric and concatenative approaches as well as the
autoregressive methods, which includes WaveNet.
WaveNet is a causal dilated convolutional network with residual blocks and skip-
connections. It takes raw audio data samples as input and attempts to predict
the next sample. The predictions are conditioned on previous samples. The
conditioning can expand to include additional parameters either from a time
series called local conditioning, or a set of mutually exclusive parameters called
global conditioning.
Using an existing implementation of WaveNet, we perform a set of experiments
to examine how well the WaveNet implementation performs on seven diﬀerent
datasets. We use the model trained on the VCTK dataset as a baseline. We
separate the datasets into two categories. The categories are based on how the
datasets are labeled. Labels are speaker id and emotional label. We globally
condition the models’ depending on either speaker id or emotional label. The
label is determined by the dataset the model is trained on.
We show that models’ trained with global conditioning on speaker id, do not
perform well, compared to the baseline model. The models trained on datasets
with emotional labels have similar performance as the baseline. We examine
how the results could be aﬀected by errors in the WaveNet implementation and
errors in the data preprocessing.
==PAGE:44==
32
Conclusion
==PAGE:45==
Appendix A
Dataset statistics
VCLK
Figure A.1: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the VCLK dataset.
==PAGE:46==
34
Dataset statistics
TED-LIUM
Figure A.2: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the TED-LIUM dataset.
LibriSpeech
Figure A.3: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the LibriSpeech dataset.
==PAGE:47==
35
Voxforge
Figure A.4: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the Voxforge dataset.
Voxceleb
Figure A.5: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the Voxceleb dataset.
==PAGE:48==
36
Dataset statistics
RAVDASS song
Figure A.6: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the RAVDASS song dataset.
RAVDASS speech
Figure A.7: Number of ﬁles per speaker(above) and average length of sound
clips(below) in the RAVDASS speech dataset.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[AAB+15]
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo,
Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey
Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, An-
drew Harp, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal
Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg,
Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray,
Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya
Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay
Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin
Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. Ten-
sorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,
2015. Software available from tensorﬂow.org.
[cau]
Wavenet:
A
generative
model
for
raw
audio.
https:
//xihuanzeng.gitbook.io/deep-music-generation/wavenet.
Accessed: 16-2-20.
[CNZ18]
J. S. Chung, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman. Voxceleb2: Deep
speaker recognition. In INTERSPEECH, 2018.
[DDS+09]
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. Ima-
geNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In CVPR09,
2009.
[eau17]
Junichi; MacDonald Kirsten eaux, Christophe; Yamagishi. Cstr
vctk corpus: English multi-speaker corpus for cstr voice cloning
toolkit, [sound].
pages 198–208. University of Edinburgh. The
Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR)., 2017.
==PAGE:50==
38
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[GMH13]
Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoﬀrey Hinton.
Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural networks. In 2013
IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal
processing, pages 6645–6649. IEEE, 2013.
[GS09]
Alex Graves and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Oﬄine handwriting recog-
nition with multidimensional recurrent neural networks. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, pages 545–552,
2009.
[HB96]
Andrew J Hunt and Alan W Black. Unit selection in a concate-
native speech synthesis system using a large speech database. In
1996 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing Conference Proceedings, volume 1, pages 373–
376. IEEE, 1996.
[HNG+18]
François Hernandez, Vincent Nguyen, Sahar Ghannay, Natalia
Tomashenko, and Yannick Estève. Ted-lium 3: twice as much data
and corpus repartition for experiments on speaker adaptation. In
International Conference on Speech and Computer, pages 198–
208. Springer, 2018.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term mem-
ory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
[HZRS16]
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition.
In The IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June
2016.
[iba18]
ibab. A tensorﬂow implementation of deepmind’s wavenet paper.
https://github.com/ibab/tensorflow-wavenet, 2018.
[jia11]
jiaaro. Pydub. https://github.com/jiaaro/pydub, 2011.
[LB+95]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, et al. Convolutional networks for
images, speech, and time series. The handbook of brain theory and
neural networks, 3361(10):1995, 1995.
[LR18]
Steven R Livingstone and Frank A Russo. The ryerson audio-
visual database of emotional speech and song (ravdess): A dy-
namic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north
american english. PloS one, 13(5), 2018.
[NCXZ19]
Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, Weidi Xie, and Andrew Zis-
serman. Voxceleb: Large-scale speaker veriﬁcation in the wild.
Computer Science and Language, 2019.
==PAGE:51==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
39
[NCZ17]
A. Nagrani, J. S. Chung, and A. Zisserman. Voxceleb: a large-
scale speaker identiﬁcation dataset. In INTERSPEECH, 2017.
[ODZ+16]
Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Si-
monyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew
Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model
for raw audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499, 2016.
[OKK16]
Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
Pixel recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06759,
2016.
[OLB+17]
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, Igor Babuschkin, Karen Si-
monyan, Oriol Vinyals, Koray Kavukcuoglu, George van den
Driessche, Edward Lockhart, Luis C Cobo, Florian Stimberg,
et al. Parallel wavenet: Fast high-ﬁdelity speech synthesis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.10433, 2017.
[PCPK15]
Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khu-
danpur. Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain au-
dio books. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 5206–5210. IEEE,
2015.
[PKC+16]
Tom Le Paine, Pooya Khorrami, Shiyu Chang, Yang Zhang, Pra-
jit Ramachandran, Mark A Hasegawa-Johnson, and Thomas S
Huang.
Fast wavenet generation algorithm.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09482, 2016.
[Rab89]
Lawrence R Rabiner. A tutorial on hidden markov models and
selected applications in speech recognition.
Proceedings of the
IEEE, 77(2):257–286, 1989.
[res]
Wavenet:
A
generative
model
for
raw
audio.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/WaveNet%
3A-A-Generative-Model-for-Raw-Audio-Oord-Dieleman/
df0402517a7338ae28bc54acaac400de6b456a46/figure/4.
Accessed: 16-2-20.
[RPS17]
Dario Rethage, Jordi Pons, and Xavier Serra.
A wavenet for
speech denoising. 06 2017.
[SGS15]
Rupesh K Srivastava, Klaus Greﬀ, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
Training very deep networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 2377–2385, 2015.
==PAGE:52==
40
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SLJ+15]
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott
Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke,
and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 1–9, 2015.
[tom16]
tomlepaine. Fast wavenet: An eﬃcient wavenet generation imple-
mentation.
https://github.com/tomlepaine/fast-wavenet,
2016.
[TZB02]
Keiichi Tokuda, Heiga Zen, and Alan W Black. An hmm-based
speech synthesis system applied to english. In IEEE Speech Syn-
thesis Workshop, pages 227–230, 2002.
[VdOKE+16] Aaron Van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Oriol
Vinyals, Alex Graves, et al. Conditional image generation with
pixelcnn decoders. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 4790–4798, 2016.
[Wava]
http://www.gabormelli.com/RKB/WaveNet_Neural_Network.
Accessed: 14-11-19.
[Wavb]
High-ﬁdelity
speech
synthesis
with
wavenet.
https://deepmind.com/blog/article/
high-fidelity-speech-synthesis-wavenet.
Accessed:
8-
2-20.
[YK15]
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation
by dilated convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122, 2015.
[ZSS13]
Heiga Ze, Andrew Senior, and Mike Schuster. Statistical para-
metric speech synthesis using deep neural networks. In 2013 ieee
international conference on acoustics, speech and signal process-
ing, pages 7962–7966. IEEE, 2013.
[ZTB09]
Heiga Zen, Keiichi Tokuda, and Alan W Black. Statistical para-
metric speech synthesis.
speech communication, 51(11):1039–
1064, 2009.
