==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Dynamic visualization and analysis
of CO2 concentrations in buildings
February 16, 2020
Written by Julie Franck s 143942
Supervisors:
Professor, Head of Section Geo Clausen
Professor, Jørn Toftum
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Poor air quality in the home can aﬀect people’s well-being. One factor aﬀecting
the indoor climate is increased levels of CO2, which is most often due to too many
people in a room and inadequate ventilation. Increased levels of CO2 can also be
an indicator of increased levels of other nuisance substances in the room. This
Master’s project consists of a ﬁeld study that investigated the distribution of CO2
in a living room in a Copenhagen apartment. The apartment is considered to be
representative, considering the size and activities that take place in the room as
usual. The apartment is ventilated by manual natural ventilation when it is per-
sonally considered necessary by the apartment’s occupants. A 3x9 measurement
grid with calibrated CO2 data loggers was assembled in the living room measuring
over 4 days in October 2019. Over the four days the apartment’s two occupants
used the room as usual, while the living room’s CO2 concentrations were recorded.
The results of the study were used to create an animation that shows how CO2
concentrations around the living room changed. A Python script was created for
the purpose, which can be reused in other contexts, as it is independent of rela-
tion, if a similar animation should be desired. In the Python script it is possible
to specially design a new visualization by changing the data, measurement grid,
intervals and texts. In addition, the animation can be printed inside an image
so that the animation can be viewed in relation to the measurement area. After
the visualization was done, the surface midplane used created in the experiment
was digitally recreated in the form of a CFD analysis. The computational CO2
distribution was found in a steady state model. The comparability between the
experimental visualization and the computational distribution of CO2 in the living
room was invalid. The two could not be compared. Deﬁning the correct premises
for a CFD analysis that shows a similarity to the real-life situation is a compli-
cated task. The air quality in the living room proved to be acceptable, though still
with the possibility of side eﬀects. The ventilation method with manual natural
ventilation was found to have potential for improvement.
1
==PAGE:3==
1
Resumé
En forringet luftkvalitet i hjemmet kan have betydning for menneskers velbeﬁnd-
ende.
En faktor der påvirker indeklimaet er forhøjede mængder CO2, hvilket
oftest skyldes for mange personer i et rum og utilstrækkelig udluftning. Forhø-
jede mængder CO2 kan desuden være en indikator for forhøjede mængder af andre
generende stoﬀer i lokalet. Dette kandidat projekt består af en feltundersøgelse der
undersøgte spredningen af CO2 i en stuen i en Københavnsk lejlighed. Lejligheden
anses som værende repræsentativ, idet størrelsen og aktiviteterne der ﬁnder sted i
rummet vurderes til at være sædvanlige. Lejligheden udluftes ved manuel naturlig
ventilation når det personligt vurderes tiltrængt af lejlighedens beboere. Et 3x9
målegitter med kalibrerede CO2 data loggere blev opstalt i stuen over 4 dage i
oktober 2019. Lejlighedens to beboer brugte over de ﬁre dage stuen til sædvanlige
aktiviteter, alt imens stuens CO2 koncentrationer blev optaget. Resultaterne af
undersøgelsen blev brugt til at danne en animation, der viser hvordan CO2 koncen-
trationerne rundt omkring i stuen ændrede sig. Et Python script blev udarbejdet
til formålet, som kan genanvendes i andre sammenhænge, da det er uafhængigt af
relation, skulle en lignende animation ønskes. I Python scriptet er der muligt at
specialdesigne en ny visualisering ved at ændre på dataen, målegitteret, intervaller
og tekster. Desuden kan animationen printes indover et billede, så animationen kan
ses i forhold til måleområdet eller lignende. Efter visualiseringen var udarbejdet,
blev forsøgsopstillingen af den målte overﬂade midt i rummet genskabt digitalt i
form af en CFD analyse. Ved computerkræft blev den beregningsmæssige CO2
fordeling fundet. Sammenligneligheden mellem den eksperimentelle visualisering
og den beregningsmæssige fordeling af CO2 i stuen var ugyldig. De to kunne ikke
sammenlignes. Det er en kompliceret opgave at deﬁnere de korrekte præmisser for
en CFD analyse, der viser en lighed med virkelighedens situation. Luftkvaliteten
i stuen viste sig at være acceptabel, dog stadig med muligheden for en nedsat
komfort. Ventilationsmetoden med manuel naturlig ventilation viste sig at have
forbedrings potentiale.
2
==PAGE:4==
2
Preface
This Master’s Thesis consists of three parts: (1) a ﬁeld study of the CO2 distribu-
tion in a private living room at the address, Rådmandsgade 44, 2200 Copenhagen
N; (2) the creation of a program for 2D visualization of value distributions; (3) a
computational recreation of the ﬁeld study for comparability.
The project was conducted from 26/08/2019 to 16/02-2020 as the ﬁnalization of
the Master’s Degree “Architectural Engineering” at the Technical University of
Denmark. The scope of this thesis corresponds to a workload of 30 ECTS points.
The thesis was executed by Master’s student Julie Franck, with guidance from
Professor and Head of Section, Geo Clausen and Professor Jørn Toftum from the
Department of Civil Engineering. Thank you for helping me with the planning
and guidance throughout the project. Thank you to Nikolaj Birck Frederiksen for
participating in the ﬁeld study, as well as the counterplay during the preparatory
brainstorm before the visualization became.
The visualization program and the video created based on the ﬁeld study are
attached on a USB key. The video ﬁle showing the CO2 distribution from the
ﬁeld study will be referred to throughout the assignment. Please note that the
apartment is my own. I am therefore one of the two participants.
Julie Regitze Franck, s143942
3
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Resumé
2
2
Preface
3
3
Introduction
2
4
Theory
3
4.1
The Indoor Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.1.1
Thermal environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.1.2
Indoor Air Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.2
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2.1
Carbon dioxide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2.3
Natural ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3
Computational ﬂuid dynamics in room air ﬂow analysis . . . . . . .
8
4.4
Python . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Case info . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Method
14
5.1
Data Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.1.1
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.1.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
The Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2.1
FileReader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.2
MainProject . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.3
Matplotlib library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.4
Script Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.5
Design principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Computational model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3.1
Geometry and meshing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3.2
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3.3
Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.4
CO2 Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Results
24
6.1
Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.1
Dinner time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Visualization of air pollutant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7
Discussion
30
7.1
Air quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.2
Comparing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.3
Ventilation method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.4
The experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.5
The Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
==PAGE:6==
7.6
The CFD Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8
Conclusion
34
9
Prespectivation
35
Bibliography
36
A Appendix
37
A.1 Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.2 UDF ﬁle for release ofCO2 source, CO2.c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:7==
3
Introduction
An acceptable thermal environment and adequate indoor air quality are funda-
mental for a comfortable living environment. Pollutants in the indoor environment
can cause a signiﬁcant risk the the welfare of the environments occupants. Various
substances are known to raise concern when present indoors in unwanted quan-
tities. One pollutant worthy of consideration is carbon dioxide. The presence of
CO2 is unavoidable in an occupied living space and creates no cause for concern
under normal circumstances. Increased levels of CO2 is however an indicator of
increased levels of other bioeﬄuents since humans are the primary source of these
pollutants. Therefore, a correlation between CO2 and indoor air quality is con-
sidered. Poor air quality can lead to a reduction in human well-being and health
along with reduced work performance. For this reason, CO2 is considered to have
an indirect eﬀect on human health(2018 long term). In the northern countries
people spend an average of 90 % of their time indoors. If this time is spent in a
climate with a negative human impact, there is cause for action. In cases with
poor indoor air quality diluting or removal of pollutants are recommended through
ventilation. Installation of technical ventilation systems is not always possible or
necessary. A change in residential behaviour is a low-cost and eﬀective solution if
instructed appropriately.
In this project the distribution of carbon dioxide is investigated in a private liv-
ing room. The apartment is located on the 5th ﬂoor in Nørrebro, Copenhagen.
The property was build in 1933 and the method of ventilation is manual natural
ventilation by opening windows. All windows are placed on the vest-side of the
apartment. The living room is approximately 37 m2 divided into to spaces. One
space is primarily used for eating and sitting, the other is relatively unoccupied.
The apartment is next to a busy access road. Noise pollution is therefore a dis-
advantage when opening windows. In addition, the outside air can be heavily
contaminated with exhaust gas from cars when venting around rush hours. The
living room is considered to be relatively representative of apartments in the area.
Data for the case was recorded over 4 days in October 2019. The set up consisted
of data loggers set up in a measuring grid of 3x9 sensors covering the entire living
room while the 2 occupants carried out their daily routines.
The purpose of the project is to gain knowledge about the CO2 distribution in
the living room. Gases and airborne substances are heavily aﬀected by air move-
ments and temperature gradients leading to micro-climates making predictions
and assessments of the space diﬃcult. The hypothesis states that by visualizing
the results as intended, a greater understanding of the room’s air quality will be
achieved. Visualizing the behaviour of the CO2 distribution over time and space
is expected to be an excellent way of describing the situation. The task of creat-
ing a visualization as the intended can be time consuming and does not always
guarantee a useful result. By creating a user friendly and customizable Python
script the setup process can be automatized for future projects. The visualization
is ﬁnally compared to a computational model to evaluate the results and see if the
computational prediction of the CO2 distribution aligns with the visualization.
2
==PAGE:8==
4
Theory
4.1
The Indoor Environment
Humans’ comfort and health are inﬂuenced by the indoor environment they oc-
cupy. The quality of a room’s environment may vary. The term "micro climate"
is often used in this context. With this term, an overall assessment of the thermal
conditions and air quality is used to describe the quality of a room’s diﬀerent
zones. The interaction between all the components of the indoor environment is
important to understand, as humans spend most of their time indoors. The indoor
climate and humans impact each other. Humans supply heat and moisture along
with a number of pollutants to the indoor climate. Without an adequate supply
of new air to the room consequences may arise.
4.1.1
Thermal environment
The thermal environment in an occupied living room is aﬀected by the physical
properties and changes occurring. A signiﬁcant contributing factor to changes in
a natural manual ventilated room is the occupants because of the heat transfer
between the human body and the environment.
The human body is approxi-
mately 37◦C and thermo receptors in the brain, skin and other body parts works
constantly to maintain this temperature. The body temperature is maintained at
37◦C despite ambient temperature changes. However, the skin temperature might
respond to the ambient temperature and can vary over the skin[1]. The heat bal-
ance equation for the human body describes the heat transfer between the human
body and the environment[1].
S = M + W + R + C + K −E −RES
(1)
This means, the body’s heat storage is equal to the metabolic rate, the mechanical
work, the heat exchange by radiation, convection and conduction subtracted by
the evaporation and respiration heat loss [2]. The indoor temperature is usually
within the range of 10-30 ◦C [1]. The heat exchange can be both a heat loss and
a heat gain for both parties. A typical living room with a completely uniform
thermal environment does not exist. The presence of people in a room aﬀects
the air velocity and creates temperature gradients. In occupied spaces the air
movement is often characterized as turbulent which means the air ﬂow is relatively
random. The randomness of the air ﬂow occurs for many diﬀerent reasons, but
among other things due to the velocity and temperature gradients created by the
heat transfer between the occupants and the environment. Other factors can also
inﬂuence the basic physical principles and thereby the distribution of air. This can
be, for example, radiators or other warm objects, cold surfaces, leaks and outdoor
air ﬂows. These physical principles will be discussed in detail later on.
4.1.2
Indoor Air Quality
Indoor air quality is known to inﬂuence the comfort, health and performance of
the people occupying the space. Air contains various substances. Some are in
3
==PAGE:9==
gaseous form others are particles or microbes.
These are often referred to as
contaminants or pollutants.
Certain pollutants present in the indoor air have
been proven to have a direct link to human health. Other pollutants have been
established as indirect inﬂuencers [1]. Some of the most common pollutants found
indoor are volatile organic compounds, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, microbes
and carbon dioxide to name a few. A number of these pollutants emerge from
internal sources such as occupants, diﬀerent activities, equipment or furnishing
[1]. A suﬃcient supply of fresh air is crucial to dilute the amount of pollutants.
However, the supplied air must be of a better quality as external pollution sources
also contributes to the air quality. An example of an outdoor source of pollutants
can be traﬃc emission.
In most cases, contaminants are not present to such
an extent that they exceed the limit threshold. That is one of the reasons why
immediate health eﬀects are rarely encountered although long-term eﬀects to these
limit concentrations are unknown [1].
4.2
Ventilation
The supply of clean outdoor air to the indoors serves a number of purposes. A
person requires approximately 0.1-0.9 l· s−1 of fresh air depending on the persons’
individual metabolic rate.
Inhaled air is approximately 20 % oxygen.
When
exhaled, the air is converted to approximately 15 % oxygen and 5 % carbon dioxide
[1]. The air’s oxygen level decreases with every breath and in a completely leak
proof space a person will with time convert most of the oxygen into carbon dioxide
if new air is not supplies. Luckily, air is supplied to most spaces if not with the help
of mechanical or natural ventilation, then through leakages or inﬁltration. Another
reasons for venting are to dilute or extract gaseous contaminants and control the
level of aerosols to achieve acceptable short-term exposure limits. The growth of
microbes is aﬀected by the humidity level in a space. Keeping the humidity within
the recommended range by diluting the air with outdoor air which contains a lower
moisture content can reduce the risk of hazardous microbes. Slight air movement
is also associated with better occupational comfort and promotes air distribution
in the room [3]. These points all argue for the importance of a supply of fresh air.
To specify how much fresh air is needed to a space an identiﬁcation of heat and
pollution sources is necessary. Several unwanted contaminants are typically be
found in a living room. However, the concentrations of these are often not found
at a dangerous level. However, the commonly observed concentrations may aﬀect
air perception. Contaminants of particularly high concern are not the focal point
here, but some of these found in living rooms may be tobacco smoke, formaldehyde
and VOCs (volatile organic compounds) [1]. The focus here will be on a compound
not recognized as a pollutant by the World Health Organisation. In this context
however, it is considered a pollutant. A compound without direct health damaging
association, but still a compound with a great reason of concern.
4.2.1
Carbon dioxide
CO2 is a chemical molecule present in gaseous form at room temperature.
It
is odorless at low concentrations and colorless.
Human sense of smell has a
4
==PAGE:10==
rapid adaptability.
Increasing the CO2 level in a room can therefore often go
unnoticed[4].
Figure 2: The % dissatisﬁed according to inhalations [4]
The initial impression of poor air quality abates after a few inhalations because
of adaptation to the air quality. The CO2 molecule is heavier than the oxygen
molecule and therefore has a greater displacement force. Carbon dioxide is partic-
ularly known for being part of the respiratory process. In the respiratory process:
C6H12O6 + 6O2 →6CO2 + 6H2O
(2)
Carbohydrates and oxygen are converted to CO2 and water. Both pets and humans
exhale CO2. For humans the production rate of carbon dioxide is related to the
metabolic rate by the equation:
G = 4 · 10−5 · M · A
(3)
Where G is the production of CO2 (l·s−1), M is the metabolic rate (w·m−2) and
A is the surface area of the body (m2) [1]. This concludes to approximately 450
L CO2 daily [1]. CO2 is particularly associated with occupancy. A high level of
CO2 is a sign of a low ventilation rate or an overcrowded space. The outdoor CO2
concentration in the air is approximately 350-400 ppm which is about 0.04% of
the outdoor air. Inside expired air contains about 4.4% by volume of CO2. The
recommended limit of CO2 for an occupational time of 8 hours is 0.5% . However,
it is acknowledged that values below 0.1% are required to avoid discomfort and
headache [1]. It is recognized that CO2 impacts the ability to concentrate and can
inﬂuence a person’s well-being in terms of headaches and dizziness[4].
5
==PAGE:11==
Table 1: The required amount of outdoor air for respiration based on a CO2 production
rate of an adult male of 7.2*10−5 l s−1 [1]
Activity
Metabolic rate [W]
Flow rate demanded to maintain
room CO2 concentration at a
given value assuming 0.04% CO2
in fresh air [l s -1]
0.5 % CO2
0.25 % CO2
Seated quietly
100
0.8
1.8
Light work
160-320
1.3-2.6
2.8-5.6
Moderate work
320-480
2.6-3.9
5.6-8.4
Heavy work
480-650
3.9-5.3
8.4-11.4
Very heavy work
650-800
5.3-6.4
11.4-14.0
4.2.2
Requirements
According to Danish standard 3303 [3], no CO2 concentration requirements are
set for homes. Standard 17772 [5] speciﬁes design concentrations for CO2 in living
rooms, which makes it possible to examine air quality on the basis of a desired CO2
level. Note that the values in the table correspond to the equilibrium concentration
Category
Design ∆CO2 concentration for living rooms
[ppm above outdoor levels]
I
550
II
800
III
1350
IV
1350
Table 2: The ∆design concentration of CO2 [5]
of the air exchange at 4, 7, 10 l / s per person for categories I, II, III with
a CO2 emission of 20 l / h per person [5].
The same standard also requires
access to open windows in living rooms. For other building types, the Danish
Working Environment Authority (Arbejdstilsynet) recommends a concentration
level <1000 ppm [6].
4.2.3
Natural ventilation
Natural ventilation is the supply and exhaust of air from openings in the build-
ing’s envelope without mechanical assistance. Outdoor air is supplied through
open windows or through valves in the facade. The ventilation method is typi-
cally divided into subcategories where the composition of sensors, valves and user
actions is signiﬁcant. In this section, the subcategory manual natural ventilation
is the focal point. This type of ventilation is solely controlled by the active venting
operations of the room’s occupants. With this type of ventilation, it is only the
6
==PAGE:12==
occupants of the house who have to open windows and doors to get fresh air. The
physical forces creating air movement are determined by diﬀerences in pressure
and density in the environment. Air movements due to density diﬀerences are
called the stack eﬀect or buoyancy eﬀect [7]. Movements are triggered when air
of diﬀerent densities is mixed. Density diﬀerences can be a diﬀerence in moisture
content or temperature diﬀerences. When a higher-density airﬂow meets a lower-
density airﬂow, the heavy air will settle at the bottom. The light air to move
upwards. As the colder air warms up, it will rise. The natural pressure diﬀerence
created by wind is dependent on the climatic conditions surrounding the building
[1]. Wind comes from the wind direction with an overpressure and blows towards
the sheltered side where there is underpressure. This phenomenon happens as the
wind tries to establish equilibrium around the building. This driving force can be
exploited by allowing the wind to penetrate the facade of the house by opening
windows. Particular Cross ventilation is eﬀective if it can be established [1]. Cross
ventilation occurs when the wind is allowed to penetrate the facade from diﬀerent
sides of a room. With single-sided ventilation, the wind only has the opportunity
to penetrate the facade from one side. In summer situations where the air is too
hot to allow the buoyance eﬀect to take place, the wind is the most important
ventilation method [1]. A combination of these two forces can occur, their contri-
bution will be determined by the sign of each force. If the signs are the same, the
forces will work together. If they are the opposite, they will work against each
other. If both forces are the same size but opposite sign, they will cancel out each
other.
An advantage of manual natural ventilation is the possibility of control. Control
has been shown to be highly preferred by residents.
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3: The statistical beneﬁt of control [8]
If an occupant has the opportunity to control the supply of fresh air himself, the
satisfaction of indoor air will on average be assessed higher [8].
However, the
eﬀectiveness of the method has not been established [8]. Limiting factors such as
unsuitable opening habits, maintaining the thermal conditions, noise pollutants
and draught are all parameters that can lead to a reduction in the eﬃciency of
the method.
4.3
Computational ﬂuid dynamics in room air ﬂow analysis
Computational ﬂuid dynamic (CFD) is a way of solving problems regarding ﬂuid
ﬂows. The cornerstone of CFD is the three physical fundamental principles upon
which all ﬂuid dynamics is based: (1) the conservation of mass; (2) the conser-
vation of momentum; and (3) the conservation of energy [9]. What makes ﬂuids
complex compared to solids is the interaction between layers of ﬂuid. To account
for these forces between the layers we introduce the physical principles of pres-
sure and viscosity into the mix. Generally these three principles are expressed
in a mathematical form as partial diﬀerential equations when dealing with ﬂuids.
Are these three mathematical equations collected into one system of equations,
given some initial conditions, we can describe the exchange of mass, momentum
and energy through a boundary layer of a control volume which is ﬁxed in space
[9]. This is the Navier-Stokes equations and this is a very diﬃcult equation
to solve. Navier-Stokes equation is famous for its diﬃculty or impossibility to
solve. Turbulence is a chaotic change in a ﬂuid and it occurs every day in room
air. Turbulence is incredible unpredictable and is what makes the results of the
Navier-Stokes equations unpredictable [10]. Because of the complexity of ﬂuids
8
==PAGE:14==
turbulent movements is can become diﬃcult to practically impossible to solve with
analytical solutions. The most common way to solve the equations is therefore
through computer simulations with approximations and simpliﬁcations. In short,
CFD is a tool that can attempt to calculate the properties of particles in a ﬂuid for
a speciﬁed time in a closed volume. Because of the large number of complicated
calculations, it is only possible to use Navier-Stokes equations to calculate room
ﬂows with the help of a computer.
There are countless options when it comes to the setup, simpliﬁcation, approxima-
tion and assumptions of analyzing a situation in a room. A sensible model must
be deﬁned to provide as accurate a solution as possible, at the expense of time. To
ﬁnd solutions the numerical techniques widely used when simulating room air ﬂows
are the ﬁnite element method and the ﬁnite volume method (gul bog). To close
the system of the equations calculated, auxiliary equations containing time-mean
quantities of the ﬂow are needed. Theses auxiliary equations are often referred to
as closure equations or turbulence models. Depending on which turbulence model
is used the complexity and accuracy of the solution can vary. There are many
diﬀerent models to choose from but the standard k-ε turbulence model and the
renormalization group model (RNG) are popular choices when dealing with room
air ﬂows. The standard k-ε turbulence model has the advantage of being usable
in several diﬀerent ﬂow situations with a lower computational demand as opposed
to more complex models; however this model’s representation of what is going on
becomes inadequate when dealing with the eﬀects of small-scale turbulence [1].
Here, unlike the previous model, the RNG model is adequate since its representa-
tion of the eﬀects of small-scale turbulence is improved [1].
The accuracy of an iterative solution must be evaluated. The choice of turbulence
model, boundary conditions, convergence criteria and mesh precision are some of
the factors that need to be evaluated to establish the CFD analysis as reliable. If a
solution is established as reliable, a CFD analysis is a powerful tool for predicting
the spread of contaminants.
4.4
Python
Python is a popular multipurpose programming language that has been in use for
almost 30 years. It is used worldwide by non-programmers and experienced pro-
grammers alike. The language is easy to pick up without previous programming
experience. The language focuses on ease of use, power and speed, accessibility,
interaction and openness [11]. Because Python is approved by the Open Source
Initiative, the software can be freely used, modiﬁed and shared, even for commer-
cial use. Thousands of third-party applications has been developed allowing for
endless possibilities and options. Many applications are available through Pyh-
ton’s standard library others can be found through The Python Package Index
(PyPI) or through the large online community.
Oﬃce workers, students or administrators without programming experience can
be some of the beginners using Python to automate repetitive tasks. Intermediate
programmers can be people interested in making graphical games. These are just
examples of users and some of the tasks that are of interest to solve using Python.
The language is often used for software development and system scripting as it can
9
==PAGE:15==
be used together with software to create workﬂows, connect to database systems
or read and modify ﬁles. It is also used for complex mathematics as it is possible
to perform diﬃcult mathematical tasks and handle big data.
The syntax compared to other programming languages diﬀers with its simple rules
of syntax for readability, due to the large inﬂuence from mathematics and similar-
ities to the English language. It allows developers to write programs with fewer
lines and characters than other programming languages making it also possible
to create a more manageable script. Python do not use semicolon, parenthesis or
curly brackets etc. to the same extent as other languages as it relies on new lines
to complete commands and whitespace for indentation deﬁning loops, functions
or classes. This results in a script with fewer characters giving the script a cleaner
look. For some, this would also mean a simpler readability.
The Zen of Python is interesting to mention when introducing the Python lan-
guage. There are a number of guidelines or statements that describe the principles
that have inspired Python’s syntax and language choices. The 20 guidelines were
published in 1999 and were subsequently implemented in Python interpreter later.
Figure 4: The Zen of Python from Python interpreter [12]
These principles are debatable, but are the basic positions that make the program
so easily accessible. The watchful eye will discover that there are only 19 guidelines
as the last and 20th guideline is an Easter egg or a joke [12]. The rules are not
meant to be followed completely, but the program lays down this structure and
mindset. With these advantages and with this mindset that prefers simplicity, it
makes the Python language an obvious choice when designing a graphical model
that is able to use mathematics and work with a lot of data which must also be
handled by people with no to expert level of experience.
10
==PAGE:16==
4.5
Case info
In this study, data is collected from an apartment located on Nørrebro, one of
Copenhagen’s neighborhoods. The apartment was built in 1933, but the property
has been renovated in recent years. Among other things, the facade has been
repaired and the roof has been replaced. The apartment is housed by 2 people.
The apartment is 85 m2. Approximately 38 m2 is utilized as a living room area.
The apartment is 3 rooms en suite with French doors to separate the bedroom
from 2 interconnecting living rooms. A hallway is located to the east that leads
to the kitchen and bath. The apartment is facing the north-west.
Figure 5: indicative sketch of the apartment
The living rooms are divided by an inner wall. The wall is hollowed on each side
of the door frame as shown in 6.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 6: Sales image of living room B. The dining table is placed diﬀerently. See the
holes in the wall.
In the living room, towards the bedroom, there is a work desk, otherwise the room
is mostly used for shelving etc. In the living room furthest from the bedroom is
a dining table and a sofa area. The corner window is facing Tagensvej, which
is one of Copenhagen’s busiest roads. Below, on the ground, is a traﬃc light.
There are often ambulances with emergency sirens driving by, as Tagensvej is
the road between two of the capital’s largest hospitals, namely the Rigshospitalet
and Bispebjerg Hospital.
Police cars also pass by with evacuation due to the
neighborhood. Noise pollution is a result hereof.
12
==PAGE:18==
Figure 7: Map of the apartment and roads
The apartment used to utilize trickle ventilation, but after the renovation of the
facade the trickle has been closed oﬀ. Instead, it is vented with manual natural
ventilation. The toilet is supplemented with a suction duct and the kitchen is
equipped with a hood. Most often the apartment is ventilated with single-sided
ventilation, but cross ventilation can be created if the balcony door is kept open.
Due to heavy traﬃc, it is unwanted to ventilate around rush hours as the exhaust
gas from cars causes odors and traﬃc noise disturbs.
13
==PAGE:19==
5
Method
The method is divided into 3 parts: (1) the experimental procedure; (2) the
heatmap generation; (3) the CFD setup.
The hypothesis states that with an
accurate measurement grid, CO2 distribution can be visualized, thereby giving an
insightful description of CO2 in the living room. By comparing the computational
model with the visualization the living room environment can be studies further.
5.1
Data Generation
The experiment was carried out at the address: Rådmandsgade 44, 5th ﬂoor TV,
2200 Copenhagen N
5.1.1
Equipment
• 23 CO2 Vaisala sensors series GMD20
• 23 pcs U12 HOBO data loggers
• Calibration tools provided by DTU
• Power supplies
• HOBOware analysis software
• Laboratory racks
• laser ruler
• Painting tape
The U12 HOBO data loggers were predeﬁned to a measuring interval of 5 minutes.
The Data loggers have an accuracy of ± 2 % of range with 2 % of reading.
5.1.2
Procedure
The experiment was carried out on 8-9-10-11 October 2019 from 13:15-10:20. The
data loggers were set up in a grid of 3 rows and 9 columns at a height of 0.9 m.
The height was chosen based on the height of the furniture, which made it easier
to place the measuring instruments. A deviation in height of 20 cm was measured.
This was approved due to the complications of various furniture heights.
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 8: The setup before the height adjustment
The living room was measured to ensure as accurate a picture as possible.
Figure 9: The area of living room A and living room B
Living room B has a cut-oﬀcorner. It was thought that this corner would be
15
==PAGE:21==
diﬃcult to visualize. Therefore, the last sensor in the row was placed as close to
the window as possible to keep the grid straight. As many loggers were set up as
possible without disturbing the usefulness of the living room. In total, 23 data
loggers were set up in a grid of 1.2 x 0.7 m distributed over the ﬂoor plan. An
exception was made around the inner wall. Here the length was 1.6 m.
Figure 10: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
Of the 23 data loggers, 19 were calibrated on October 4, 2019 at DTU. The last
5 data loggers (68, 95, 43, 29, 47) were assumed to be calibrated accurately as
they were passed on directly from another CO2 experiment from DTU. At 3 spots
in the grid, no data logger was placed. These would have been a disturbance to
the movement in the living room. These empty spots are illustrated by a circle in
ﬁgure 11. 3 data loggers failed during the measurement (74, 108, 95). These are
illustrated in white.
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 11: The diﬀerent sensors placement. White sensor indicates error and blank dot
represents no sensor because of complications.
Each logger was set to measure every 5 minutes and measure the CO2 concentra-
tion in the unit of ppm. The measurement interval of 5 min was chosen based
on the duration of the experiment. 5 minutes over 4 days was considered sensible
especially as it was expected that some air in the living room would be stagnant
during the period. At the start of the experiment, it was ensured that the starting
concentration was equal to the outdoor concentration.
In a logbook, all activities during the measurement were noted. These activities
can be seen in Table X.
17
==PAGE:23==
Day
Time
Activity
Number of occupants
08/10 2019
14:00-16:30
Sofa
1
08/10 2019
20:45-21:00
Dinner
2
08/10 2019
21:00-23:15
Sofa
2
09/10 2019
08:15-10:55
Sofa
1
09/10 2019
11:45-12:00
Lunch
1
09/10 2019
16:30-17:15
Opening windows
0
09/10 2019
17:15-18:35
Sofa
1
09/10 2019
20:55-23:00
Sporadically entering
1
10/10 2019
06:30-06:45
Breakfast
1
10/10 2019
10:45-11:15
Sofa
1
10/10 2019
14:50-15:15
Opening windows
0
10/10 2019
19:30-20:00
Dinner
2
10/10 2019
20:20-22:30
Sofa
2
Table 3: The activities and timestamps
During the experiment, the occupants ate at the dining table and sat on the couch.
The maximum number of people in the living room was 2. In general, the activities
in the living room were easy and did not require any high metabolic rate. When
the experiment was over, all data loggers were collected and the data was obtained
on a computer with HOBOware and exported to Microsoft Excel.
5.2
The Animation
During data processing, the aim was to create a script in the program language
Python that is easy to read, adaptable and user-friendly, to make the same script
reusable in other experiments where a heatmap is preferred. It should be able to
be used by people with no experience with Python, as well as experienced users.
For a successful plot, aims were enumerated.
• Easy and clear ﬁle reading
• Find missing data points
• Ability to change colors, labels, legend and text.
• Ability to plot the heat map on top of drawings (eg ﬂoor plans or maps)
• Blur and shadows for a smooth image
• Ability to plot in diﬀerent geometries
Two ﬁles have been created in the process.
18
==PAGE:24==
5.2.1
FileReader
In "FileReader", the path to the data is deﬁned. The program reads csv ﬁles and
is instructed in how to interpret the ﬁles. In the csv ﬁles, the data is loaded as a
list divided by ",". The program is told that in each ﬁle the ﬁrst value in the list
must be displayed ﬁrst. Then the next value in the list and so on until the ﬁle is
complete. The data of the ﬁles is established as a coordinate system in the layout
of a matrix. “FileReader” has one important property. Missing data for 7 sensors
will depict in a weak visualization. To obtain an image for these points in the
living room, the program is equipped with a function that can calculate a value
for the missing points from the surrounding points. The function ﬁnds the mean
average of the surrounding points wherever they are located. In addition, several
missing points in a row can be considered. Here, ﬁrst read point is calculated and
this result is used to calculate the next missing point.
5.2.2
MainProject
In "Scatter", applications are imported, global values and names are deﬁned. The
data is generated and read as called. The data is read from an imported csv ﬁle
that goes through each ﬁle from start value to end value. A color scale and range
of values are added. Titles, Background image and stop value for the animation
are determined. The whole thing is then plotted on an empty created canvas.
5.2.3
Matplotlib library
Python uses diﬀerent libraries with diﬀerent functions. In this case, "Matplotlib"
is selected as a library, as this library has many options and is used widespread.
Greater opportunities are enabled with this choice than with other smaller li-
braries. In "Matplotlib" several diﬀerent core functions can be found. In this
case, "FuncAnimation" is selected. The function "func" opdates the animation.
Another function the program uses is "Data_gen" which is a simple data gener-
ation function which can read the data from the ﬁrst element of the ﬁles to the
selected stop value. The "Animate" feature allows you to customize the anima-
tion. Here, the data is animated based on selected colors, ranges and additions.
To understand the lines of the program, short commentary has been added. This
is done to give understanding to others who want to use the script and possibly
correct and customize everything.
5.2.4
Script Flow
The ﬂow of the script structure is set up so most global values that make each
plot individually must be entered at the beginning of “Scatter”. Here, the path to
the data ﬁles must be entered. The names of the data ﬁles and the time stamp
are deﬁned here. The matrix representing the grid must be deﬁned in rows and
columns, as well as how many data values to read from each ﬁle.
Under the
animation deﬁnition, colors and range can be set. The default color selection is
yellow to orange to red. Other colorbars can be selected.
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 12: A list of diﬀerent potential sequential colormaps with color saturation to chose
from
The colorbar can be selected with all colors, color combinations, and color
eﬀects. By default in the program, the color saturation is selected as light to
gradually more saturated. Following the color and range selection, labels and title
can be selected for the plot. Finally, the path to the background image is listed
so that the program knows which image to plot behind the animation. Below the
image path, the size and visibility of the image can be corrected if needed.
5.2.5
Design principle
A principle of how to create a plot was deﬁned for a more well-organized approach.
This process was followed when the script was created and can be repeated when
a new plot is to be created.
Figure 13: Model of design principle
"Prepare data" contains the setup and proper naming of csv ﬁles and the path
to them. In “Create Plot” the global values are deﬁned. Next, plot to check if
everything is correct. "Customize Plot" is where labels, colors and eﬀects are
selected.
When the desired setup is achieved, the plot is saved and it can be
played when required.
5.3
Computational model
The living room is controlled by manual natural ventilation.
When all of the
room openings are closed, temperature diﬀerences are the main physical property
aﬀecting the air ﬂow. Occupants in the living room create buoyancy driven ﬂows
and exhale CO2. Only two activities are repeated in the living room. One activity
is eating at the dining table another is sitting on the sofa. At 10/10 2019 19:30-
20:00 the occupants are eating dinner at the dining table. A computational remake
20
==PAGE:26==
of this situation is created in the simulation tools ANSYS Workbench and ANSYS
Fluent.
5.3.1
Geometry and meshing
A simple model of living room was recreated in the design software Sketchup.
For an optimized model, it is important to focus only on the most important
elements of the room. Therefore, only the living room skeleton is created, as well
as simpliﬁed versions of the dining table and the sofa in the form of 2 surfaces.
The radiators and the window are also taken into account for the signiﬁcance of
the surface temperatures. Two people were added to the room placed at the dining
table in the dimensions 1.7x0.3x0.16m. The Sketchup model is imported into the
Ansys Workbench 2019 R3 simulation software. After the geometry was imported
into the Workbench program, material was added to the space and all elements
were transformed into surface bodies. The occupants are not given any material
properties as it has no interest to see the inside of their bodies.
Figure 14: The CFD geometry
The model was meshed with hexadron elements.
This method is superior to
a tetrahedron mesh. “Hexa” mesh generally provides better quality and higher
spatial eﬃciency. However, the method is more time-consuming and complicated
to make. Due to the geometry, the model was decomposed into smaller elements
before the sweep method was selected. The decomposed geometry was exported to
the mesh generator. Under physical and solver preferences CFD and Fluent were
selected respectively. A mesh size of 5 cm was created using sweep meshing. A
rule of thumb says a hexa mesh should have a skewness below 0.85. This rule was
adhered to after the mesh generation. After the mesh generation, name selections
were created to later deﬁne the boundary conditions. The mesh was hereafter
exported to ANSYS Fluent for the primary setup regarding properties.
5.3.2
Setup
As part of the setup, SI-units and gravity was enabled due to natural convection.
Because of the temperature diﬀerences in the room the energy equation was en-
21
==PAGE:27==
abled. The Reynolds number was assumed to be high meaning a turbulent indoor
ﬂow. Due to the turbulent ﬂow of the air, the viscous model were chosen as k-
epsilon turbulence with activated for RNG. This was selected based on experts’
opinions as this model is believed to best describe an indoor environment. It was
very important that Full buoyancy eﬀect is also activated. The mass of the room
was deﬁned as air with Boussinesq density, since it was assumed that the tem-
perature diﬀerences in the room are small. The air of the room was considered
an ideal gas. The ambient outside temperature during the measuring days was
according by DMI (Danish Meteorological Institute) to be 10 ◦C.
Figure 15: The boundary conditions
These values are, of course, assumed and not measured. The occupants’ heat load
to the room is complicated to simulate. In this case each occupant adds 120 W
distributed in surfaces and volumes. All inner walls are thought to be adiabatic.
No radiation is assigned to the model as this requires great computer power.
5.3.3
Convergence
Green Gauss Node-based was activated to improve resolution.
The buoyancy
eﬀect is signiﬁcant in the living room, for that reason PRESTO! was selected for
pressure and First Order Upwind for the discretization method of momentum,
turbulent kinetic energy, turbulence dissipation and the energy equation. First
Order Upwind is robust, but less accurate.
It is eﬀective when a convergent
solution is important as in this case. The model initialization was selected by
default. An iso-surface was created horizontally to generate an image depicting a
similar height of the experimental visualization. 10000 iterations are run before
convergence was assumed. The graphs appeared to ﬂatline but would never achieve
convergence. This is presumably due to the turbulence caused by the collision of
22
==PAGE:28==
the thermal plumes with colder air ﬂows. A ﬂux report was calculated to check if
the energy balance was below 1 % deviation. This was the case. After assuming
convergence, the mesh was adapted for a ﬁner mesh.
5.3.4
CO2 Distribution
To see the distribution of CO2 in the room, the pollutant must be added. To ﬁnd
the right volume of CO2 to be released, the equation can be calculated:
qv,CO2 = 17 · M = 17 · 1.2met = 20l/h = 1.0012 · 10−5kg/s
(4)
Where M is the occupants’ metabolic rate (met) which is assumed to be 1.2 met.
In this case 2 occupants are releasing CO2. The total volume of CO2 added to the
living room is calculated to be 40l/h. In order for ANSYS Fluent to release CO2 a
User-deﬁned function (UDF) specially made for the purpose must be interpreted.
Such ﬁle is written in the programming language "C" and must be customized
speciﬁcally for this case. The UDF ﬁle can be found in the appendix. In the
model the CO2 is released from the occupants’ surrounding volume, not their
surfaces. By default, Fluent will display CO2 as mass fraction. This must be
converted to volume fraction in PPM. This is done as:
ppm = massfractionofCO2 · 6.5 · 105
(5)
Equation (5) must be manually deﬁned in Fluent before the results can be dis-
played i ppm.
23
==PAGE:29==
6
Results
This chapter ﬁrst presents the statistical results of the measurement. Reference
will later be made to the animation attached to the USB key. During the 4 days
the living room was examined, a CO2 concentration and temperature deviance
of 1285 ppm and 6◦C were recorded.
The data is presented in the form of 3
graphs: an accumulated curve, a graph of all data loggers’ development over time
and the CO2 concentration and temperature mean over time. A table showing
the statistical facts is also given. A statistical evaluation of the measurements is
useful in order to approve the authenticity of the visualization. From table 4, the
Statistical data based on 20 data loggers [ppm]
Mean value
Median
Min value
Max value
Percentile
25 %
Percentile
75 %
Standard
deviation
963
1029
241
1526
758
1170
285
Table 4: The statistical values
mean and the median values can be read to 1000 ppm. From Table x the outside
concentration must be deducted.
Indoorconcentration = 963ppm −380ppm = 583ppm
(6)
The mean concentration of CO2 above the outdoor level corresponds to category II
according to the design ∆CO2 concentration in table 2. Results are approaching
category I with a diﬀerence of 33 ppm. The 75% percentile value is 1170 ppm
which corresponds to category II with a concentration of 790 ppm above outdoor
concentrations. The living room never exceeds the maximum limit of category II
according to the max value of 1536 ppm.
Figure 16: Graph showing mean values over time
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 28 shows the build up and decay during the measurement. The room was
actively aired twice. This is seen by drastic decreases in concentration and temper-
ature. Here, equal indoor concentrations and outdoor concentrations are achieved.
The concentration can increase as fast as it can drop with ventilation. The rate
of CO2 production with 2 occupants and the ventilation rate when opening the
window are considered to be close in value. During the nights (12 am - 6 am) the
∆concentration seems to be
200 ppm. Whether this concentration is building
up or decreased depends on the starting concentration at 12 am. At each window
opening, a clear drop in temperature is seen. However, the temperature never
drops below the thermal comfort limit.
Figure 17: The cumulative curve
Figure 29 shows a frequency of concentrations within category I of 35%. The
remaining 65% is in category 2. The frequency increases relatively straight. The
calculated mean value in Table X correspond to Figure 29 with a 50 % percentile
of 1000 ppm.
The values of the sensors are fairly similar over time. It may be diﬃcult to detect
anything from Figure 30 due to the unity.
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 18: The measurements through time
However, sensor 113, 68 and 87 shows abnormalities. Sensor 113 has a strong
positive ﬂuctuation at dinner time on the 10Th October. Sensor 68 shows values
below the other sensors throughout the experiment. Sensor 87, on the 9Th October
in the afternoon, the sensor reads a more drastic decrease than the other sensors.
6.1
Animation
Animation "output" should be played now. It is found in the attached USD key.
A color code is selected for the animation that changes from yellow to orange to
red as the CO2 concentrations increase. The shade of the color scale is chosen
based on the perception that red signals increased risk of personal impact or bad
air quality, if you will. The color range is plotted within 300-2000 ppm. The
interval is adjusted according to the statistically calculated min and max values.
The activities that take place in the living room during the measurements can be
seen in Table 3
A general phenomenon is seen in the animation around the radiators. Here the
concentration is always below the general level of the room. Another phenomenon
is a lower concentration in the center of living room A towards the inner wall.
In general, the concentrations in the living room appear to be homogeneously
distributed except at the three areas mentioned. If an occupant is present in the
living room, the concentration of the living room seems to increase and be equally
distributed throughout the room. Leaving the room, the entire concentration of
the room seems to fall uniformly.
26
==PAGE:32==
6.1.1
Dinner time
D. 10/10 2019 at 19:30-20:00 dinner is eaten in the living room. Both occupants
are present. How the CO2 is distributed is further studied in depth. This is done
to have a clear example to recreate in a CFD model. The animation is shown as
a series of images below.
Figure 19: 10/10 2019 at 19:33
Figure 20: 10/10 2019 at 19:38
Figure 21: 10/10 2019 at 19:43
Figure 22: 10/10 2019 at 19:53
Figure 23: 10/10 2019 at 19:58
Figure 24: 10/10 2019 at 20:13
Figure 32 shows a slight increase. Figure 34 shows a large peak, which decreases
in the last 2 images (ﬁgure 35 and ﬁgure 35. From Figure 34 it is clear that the
source of the CO2 is located at the table. From the source, the pollution spreads
and is evenly distributed throughout the room.
6.2
Visualization of air pollutant
An exact value of the concentration level cannot be seen in the CFD calculation
with the chosen method. The analysis is made as a steady state situation, whereas
27
==PAGE:33==
the real situation is time dependent. This creates excessive deviations in concen-
trations. No air leaves or enters the volume of analysis. For that reason, only the
thermal forces determine where the pollutants are carried. With this reason, the
pictures can only tell where an increased or decreased concentration is expected.
This is enough to compare where the pollution is accumulating. A similar colorbar
for the animation is not available in ANSYS Fluent. Instead, color scales have
been chosen that best show the diﬀerences in a logical way.
First, the CO2 distribution on a midplane at a height of 0.9 m was simulated.
Figure 25: The CO2 distribution - CFD
From Figure 37 it can be seen that the calculated CO2 distributes at a higher con-
centration in the sofa area. The pollution is pushed against the inner wall. There
is a lower average concentration in living room A. The concentration is lowest at
the work desk and in the middle of the room. A lower value is also seen in living
room B in front of the television. Where the concentration is highest is against
the outer wall between the occupants and the radiator.
Another view that clariﬁes the high concentrations has been created.
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 26: The highest levels from the CO2 distribution
In Figure 25, it is clearer to see that the concentrations are moving from the dining
table towards the sofa. From here, contaminants are pushed through the opening
to living room A. A circular ﬂow leads the contaminants from the opening coun-
terclockwise around the living room A.
The advantage of a CDF analysis is that, after calculating the model, it is easy to
examine other views and thereby gain a broader understanding. A cross-section
of the height of the room is shown in ﬁgure 39.
Figure 27: The CFD analysis showing the CO2 verticallyy
In ﬁgure 39 it is shown that CO2 rises to the ceiling and hovers through the living
room above the midplane. The vertically lowest concentration of the pollution is
between the mid-plane and the ceiling.
29
==PAGE:35==
7
Discussion
7.1
Air quality
The mean and median values of
1000 ppm from table x signals a poor indoor
climate following recommendations from the Danish Working Environment Au-
thority. As the apartment is of a diﬀerent building type however, the evaluation
of the indoor environmental quality will be assessed from Table x. From table x
the concentration of CO2 corresponds to category II. The result is approaching
category I with a diﬀerence of 33 ppm. 65 % of the measurements corresponds to
category II and never exceeds this category. This result is clearly acceptable. In
ﬁgure 17 3 sensor’s abnormalities were pointed out. Sensor 113 has a strong posi-
tive ﬂuctuation at dinner time on the 10Th October. The reason must be found
in the location from ﬁgure 10. The sensor is located opposite one occupant at the
dining table. Sensor 68 is located at the radiator in living room B. This sensor
shows values below the other sensors throughout the experiment. This may be
because this particular sensor was not calibrated at the attempted start. Sensor
87 is located at the door between the bedroom and the living room. Here, on the
9Th October in the afternoon, the sensor reads a more drastic decrease than the
other sensors. This may be due to inﬁltration from the adjacent bed room. If the
bed room is ventilated, this may be a cause of the sensor’s decrease in concentra-
tion.
The animation shows a pattern as 3 areas are constantly below the rest of the room.
2 areas are up against the radiators. This may be due to the thermal plume from
the rising heat emitted by the radiators. The radiators start a buoyancy that
circulates the concentrations up above the midplane. A probable solution may
also be because 68 sensor is calibrated incorrectly. Sensor 60 is placed against
the radiator in living room A close to the door. The concentration may be lower
due to inﬁltration from the door. Another phenomenon is a lower concentration
in the center of living room A towards the inner wall. A ﬂow from living room
B to living room A which creates this lower concentration is suspected. Frequent
walk-through at this point can also create a ﬂow away from the area. However,
there is increased suspicion of errors in this particular area as fewer data loggers
have been placed in this area to make room for walking.
The result of the measurement shows that the concentration of CO2 in the living
room is well categorized according to Table X. However, the total amount is not
recommended by other sources. Based on the animation, the air turns out to be
mixed satisfactorily. The CFD analysis questions the mixture. Here, the images
indicate that the CO2 accumulates at the sofa area, which is one of the primary
living areas. What is not calculated in the geometry of the CFD analysis are the
holes in the inner walls. These holes can help the CO2 to better relocate from
the sofa area. Due to the warming of the air at the warm surfaces of the living
room, the buoyancy eﬀect sets in. This causes the contaminants to rise above the
occupied zone. According to the animation, the micro-climate is not expected to
change signiﬁcantly in the room. The air quality and thermal gradient appears
30
==PAGE:36==
to be homogeneously dispersed. Major quality diﬀerences are not expected to be
found in the space horizontally.
7.2
Comparing Results
When comparing the result of the experiment with the result of the CFD analysis
coincidences can be observed. Both in the animation and in the CFD, a smaller
concentration of contaminants is seen at the opening towards living room B in
living room A. However, whether this is a coincidence or correct cannot be con-
cluded because there is no measured data from this area. The two models do not
show exactly the same. The animation is time dependent and shows the concen-
tration level in the diﬀerent areas at a speciﬁc time. The CFD model is made
as a steady state analysis and therefore the correct concentrations are not avail-
able. The CFD analysis can only give an inaccurate picture of how the pollution
spreads. Comparing the two models is not possible to a precise enough degree.
7.3
Ventilation method
The ventilation pattern is eﬀective but the opening periods are long: 25-45 min-
utes. This pattern cannot be maintained over the winter period, as the room will
probably become too cold. At the beginning of the measurement the air has been
ventilated. This has resulted in a starting temperature of 19◦C. Temperatures be-
low 19◦C are unwanted. The living room is mostly occupied in the evening. It may
be worthwhile to ventilate for a short time in the evening. This will reduce the
build up and provide a better air quality overnight and a lower starting concentra-
tion the next day. More frequent ventilation in shorter time intervals is expected
to be a better pattern as this will keep the concentration and temperature more
stable. Whether this is practical can be questioned. Watching television, talking
or reading a book on the couch can make the noise from the outside become a
major nuisance. In addition, ventilating in the time period between afternoon
and early evening may be unwanted due to the odor from the car exhaust from
the road. Car exhaust particles are also not recommended in the indoor envi-
ronment. The possibility of creating cross ventilation by opening the windows on
the west side and the balcony door on the south side should be better utilized.
Opening only the windows on the west side will not achieve the same wind power
as cross-ventilation. Cross ventilation can be a good solution to achieve eﬀective
ventilation over a short period of time. It is seen from sensor 87 Table 17 that
the ventilation in the bedroom has a minor eﬀect on the room’s air quality. If the
bedroom is ventilated with the door to the living room open, the air quality of
the living room is expected to be visibly improved.
7.4
The experiment
The experiment was relatively simple. However, there is some skepticism as 7
out of 27 grid points were not measured. In addition, the calibration of sensor
68 can be questioned. Sensors that were calibrated at DTU prior to starting the
experiment had a deviation of <5 ppm. This is considered to be very accurate.
31
==PAGE:37==
It is debatable whether a 5 minute measurement interval was the best choice.
A shorter interval but a shorter measurement period would probably give a more
detailed picture of how the pollution spreads. A measurement every minute would
not give the pollution as much time to spread. From this, it is expected to become
clearer where the pollution develops. In the middle of the living room, 3 sensors
were missing. 2 sensors had to be removed to allow room for walking. The last
sensor did not work. This is a critical point in the space that would have been
interesting to have data from. Especially when looking at the CFD analysis, where
a strong gradient seems to occur.
7.5
The Animation
It became clear that there are a myriad of methods for constructing a heatmap.
With limited knowledge and experience of this type of programming, it proved to
be a diﬃcult task. Each solution method was found to have limitations, and all the
wish points for the visualization were not fulﬁlled. During the preparation of the
animation, 2 general methods were tested. One method showed a smooth result,
but could only visualize in squares. This was not considerate an optimal solution
since the grid had certain measurements. The possibility of making customized
geometries was thus excluded. Animating on top of an image caused the image to
be stretched relative to the square heatmap. The chosen method for the animation
became a scatter plot. With a scatter plot, each sensor could be described as a
zone that had the ability to be deﬁned in length and width. It also allowed each
point to be placed as a coordinate in a coordinate system. Each zone could be
designed by choice. This was a great advantage as the room is abnormally shaped.
The downside to this plot is the ability to smooth between the zones. It was
investigated whether interpolation between the points could be used. It couldn’t.
Diﬀerent ﬁlters could not be implemented either. There was no willingness to
compromise on the correct measurements for the sake of expression style. For
these reasons, the scatter plot was considered superior to the heat map.
A function that could calculate a value for the missing points was added.
In
the beginning, interpolation was tested. It was replaced by an expression of the
average value of the surrounding points. With the program, a missing value is
calculated from the average values from the vertical and horizontal surrounding
points. However, there is an uncertainty here to be aware of, as the horizontal
and vertical values do not have the same distance to the missing point. However,
this function is arranged so that if there are multiple missing points in a row,
it does not take the value from the missing point into consideration. With the
script, similar animations can be created in a very short time. The data must be
loaded as csv ﬁles and the image must be in jpg format. Each csv ﬁle must have
the same ﬁrst name, eg "sensor", and a last name indicating the order in which
the ﬁle should be read. In this case, each ﬁle is speciﬁed as in a matrix. First
ﬁle is ﬁrst point of ﬁrst row and column: "sensor11". The next ﬁle is the next
point in the row: "sensor12", etc. In the next row the ﬁles are called: "sensor21",
"sensor22", "sensor23", etc. If the script is followed chronologically downwards,
the number of data points to be read are speciﬁed, the range of the data, how
fast the plot should run, colors and names of axes should be speciﬁed. As a last
32
==PAGE:38==
step, it is possible to deﬁne where the points should be plotted and how large the
points should be displayed. Here, the form of the points can also be described.
Precise geometries and units of measurement are thus given the highest priority in
the design of this script. In the future, the geometry of a room does not hamper
the possibility of easy and fast animation. However, there is a source of error in
that each sensor describes a zone and not a point. And that missing points are
described based on values that are not exactly equal to the missing value.
7.6
The CFD Analysis
The values speciﬁed during the setup process are not exact values. U-values and
heat gains are assumed. This has a major impact on the model’s performance and
accuracy. Using a steady-state analysis has proved to be a mistake. The system
evolves over time and the thermal plumes in the volume provide turbulence that
a transient model can better handle. The inaccuracy of the CFD model stems
from the setup. In addition to steady state, U-values, climate condition, CO2
levels, heat losses and heat gains, inﬁltration is also important. This is incredibly
complicated to simulate unless the exact value is known. However, the geometry
is considered to be adequate, although the holes in the walls will probably increase
the amount of CO2 in living room A. Even detailed models can be questionable, as
this type of analysis requires multiple inputs and a high level of clarity of real-world
conditions. The assessment of the CFD result is that the model is not accurate
enough to validate the CO2 distribution of the real living room. The result would
have been beneﬁcial if it had been time dependent.
33
==PAGE:39==
8
Conclusion
The distribution of CO2 was investigated in a living room of 38 m2 divided into
2 zones located in Copenhagen. The living room was used for dining and sitting
on the couch during the measurement period from 8th - 11th October 2019. 2
people stayed in the apartment during the experiment and used the living room
as usual. A grid of 3x9 sensors was installed in the living room at a distance
of 1.5x0.95 m at a height of 0.9 m with inaccuracies. The CO2 was measured
every 5 minutes and the data from the investigation was used to create a script
that can animate diﬀerent values’ ﬂuctuations over time and space. The script
was created with reuse in mind. The Scatter animation has a strong emphasis
on sensor locations and precise measurements and therefore a compromise has
been made that gives the visualization a certain style. A CFD analysis of the
living room was created to attempted to validate the CO2 distribution.
This
CFD model proved to be ineﬀective for the purpose and failed to validated the
experiment. Such a computational model must have a solid setup to give a clear
picture of reality. It was not possible to obtain this precision. The air quality
in the living room proved to be acceptable. The CO2 level was in category 2
in 65% of the measurements and the remaining 35% in category 1 based on the
Danish Standard’s design concentration for the same pollution. However, there
is the possibility of headaches and other complications when staying in the living
room during the most concentration-heavy periods since the mean concentration
is about 1000 ppm. The ventilation pattern caused the indoor concentrations to
be lowered to the outdoor level, however, the times of ventilation were long and
only once a day. Concentrations indoors built up in the evening when the living
room was occupied. As there was no airing in the evening, the concentrations
were allowed to decay during the night and the next day until the living room was
occupied again.
34
==PAGE:40==
9
Prespectivation
The same experiment could be repeated at diﬀerent points horizontally and verti-
cally to give a more accurate picture of a living room’s CO2 distribution over time
and space. In addition, an increased number of measurements per hour would
describe CO2 evolution more precisely. The same script can be reused for this
purpose. Multiple measured surfaces will probably give an outstanding picture
of the CO2 distribution in the real situation. With more experience and theo-
retical understanding, the script could possibly reach its full potential and create
animations that is both smooth and accurate. A comparison of the animation
and a computational model failed in this case. An accurate, strong and correctly
composed CFD model could possibly provide a broader insight into the room’s
ﬂow and distribution of pollutants. A transient state analysis would suﬃce. With
these additions and changes, would there be plenty of validation and justiﬁcation
to optimize users’ ventilation patterns? Could the optimal ventilation pattern be
detected?
35
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1] Hazim Awbi. Ventilation of buildings. In Ventilation of buildings. Spon press,
2003.
[2] Geo Clausen. Thermal Environment - brush up. 11222 Indoor Climate, pages
1–9, 2019.
[3] Dansk Standard. Ergonomics of the thermal environment - Analytical deter-
mination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the PMV
and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria. 11222 Indoor Climate,
pages 1–9, 2006.
[4] Geo Clausen. Indoor air quality. 11222 Indoor Climate, pages 1–9, 2019.
[5] Dansk Standard. ISO/TR 17772-2:2018 Energy performance of buildings —
Overall energy performance assessment procedures — Part 2: Guideline for
using indoor environmental input parameters for the design and assessment
of energy performance of buildings. Dansk Standard, pages 1–9, 2018.
[6] Arbejdstilsynet. https://at.dk/regler/at-vejledninger/indeklima-a-1-2/. Ar-
bejdstilsynes, pages 1–9, 2019.
[7] Tine Steen Larsen. Natural ventilation driven by wind and temperature dif-
ference. Ph.D., pages 1–9, 2006.
[8] Geo Clausen. Indoor air quality - science. Science, pages 1–9, 2019.
[9] Henrik Kaarle Versteeg Weeratunge. An Introduction to Computational Fluid
Dynamics: The Finite Volume Method. Pearson, pages 1–9, 2007.
[10] John F. Wendt. Computational Fluid Dynamics. Springer, pages 1–9, 2009.
[11] Python.org. https://www.python.org/. Pearson, pages 1–9, 2019.
[12] Tim Peters. The zen of python. Ph.D., pages 1–9, 2004.
36
==PAGE:42==
A
Appendix
A.1
Figures
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 28: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 29: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 30: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
40
==PAGE:46==
Figure 31: 10/10 2019 at 19:33
Figure 32: 10/10 2019 at 19:38
Figure 33: 10/10 2019 at 19:43
Figure 34: 10/10 2019 at 19:53
Figure 35: 10/10 2019 at 19:58
Figure 36: 10/10 2019 at 20:13
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 37: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
42
==PAGE:48==
Figure 38: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 39: The measurement of the grid [m]. circles represent sensor placement
44
==PAGE:50==
A.2
UDF ﬁle for release ofCO2 source, CO2.c
/∗
Jianhua Fan 2010 May 06
∗/
/∗This UDF r e l e a s e CO2 from a s i n g l e
c e l l .
CO2flux1
i s CO2 source
in kg
/∗This UDF v i s i t s
a l l
c e l l s ,
but should
define CO2 source
for
one
c e l l
/∗The x , y and z coordinate
of
the
c e l l
i s
defined
as
follows
/∗X coordinate
of
the
center
of
the
c e l l
i s
within
the range
[ x0−xs , x0 ]
/∗Y coordinate
of
the
center
of
the
c e l l
i s
within
the range
[ y0−ys , y0 ]
/∗Z coordinate
of
the
center
of
the
c e l l
i s
within
the range
[ z0−zs , z0 ]
/∗(x0 , y0 , z0 )
defines x , y and z coordinate
of
the
r e fe re n ce
point
in me
/∗xs :
the range band in x axis , m
/∗ys :
the range band in y axis , m
/∗zs :
the range band in z axis , m
/∗The rang band should be adjusted
so that
there
i s
only
∗/
/∗
one
c e l l
defined
within
the range .
/∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗
#include "udf . h"
#define
co2flux1
1.0012E−5
#define x0 −7.92
#define y0 1.975
#define
z0 2.9
#define
xs 0.025
#define
ys 0.025
#define
zs
0.025
DEFINE_SOURCE( co2source1 , c , t , dS , eqn )
{
r e a l x [ND_ND] ;
r e a l
vol , source ;
/∗To get
center
coordinate
of
the
c e l l
∗/
C_CENTROID(x , c , t ) ;
/∗To get volume of
the
c e l l
∗/
vol=C_VOLUME( c , t ) ;
/∗check whether the
c e l l
center
point
i s
within
the range
i f
(x[0]<=x0&&x[0]>=x0−xs&&x[1]<=y0&&x[1]>=y0−ys&&x[2]<=z0&&x[2]>=z0−zs )
{
/∗
i f
yes ,
define a CO2 source
source = co2flux1 / vol ;
p r i n t f (" Release CO2−1 from the
c e l l : x=%e , y=%e , z=%e CO2=%e kg/s\n" ,x [ 0 ]
/∗
This message
w i l l
be printed
every time a
c e l l
i s
used to
r e l e a s e CO
/∗There should be only one
l i n e
meaning that CO2 i s
r e l e a s e
from 1
c e l l
∗/
45
==PAGE:51==
/∗The mesh i n t e r v a l
s i z e
should be decreased
i f
there
are more than 1
c
/∗The mesh i n t e r v a l
s i z e
should be increased
i f
there
i s
no
c e l l
∗/
e l s e
/∗
i f
no ,
define CO2 source =0
{ source = 0;}
dS [ eqn ] = 0;
return
source ;
}
46
