==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Stochastic gradient Markov chain
Monte Carlo
Bayesian inference for large datasets
David Frich Hansen
Supervisors:
Mikkel N. Schmidt
Tommy Sonne Alstrøm
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Bayesian modeling has attracted large amounts of attention in recent years in part due
to the growth in computing power and in part due to the overwhelming amount of data
available in practically all areas of science and society. Fully Bayesian inference is typ-
ically associated with a high computational cost and poor scaling with the amount of
data, and Bayesian inference methods are one of the last areas to be ’left behind’ in
the evolution of machine learning methods for analyzing large amounts of data. Quite
recently, work has been done to close this gap, such that we can perform fully Bayesian
inference even in cases with extremely much data.
In this thesis we investigate one of the more prominent subfields in Bayesian inference
in the ’big data’ setting, namely methods that utilize stochastic estimates of gradients
to sample the posterior distribution, thus using only a subset of the data available for
each sample.
This field is known as stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo
(SGMCMC). We investigate how it performs compared to maximum likelihood estima-
tion in terms of uncertainty estimation and compared to regular MCMC, that utilize
exact gradients at the added computational cost. We evaluate the methods in several
settings. Initially we show SGMCMC’s efficiency on synthetic data, and then move on
to showing its’ use in Bayesian deep learning, where a distribution over the weights is
learned instead of optimizing the weights wrt. some likelihood function.
We show that using SGMCMC has a absolute computational advantage over reguar
MCMC methods in cases where the amount of data is large. We then show that in an
image classification setting where neural networks are utilized, we get superior uncer-
tainty estimates on previously unseen classes when utilizing Bayesian inference in deep
learning as compared to the regular stochastic optimization schemes.
We also see, however, that SGMCMC methods are sensitive to the choice of hyper-
parameters of the methods. This indicates that there is still work to be done - especially
theoretical work - to ensure the commercial viability of SGMCMC. Nevertheless, this
thesis provides a proof of concept on the effectiveness and efficiency of stochastic gradient
Markov chain Monte Carlo.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Bayesiansk modellering har tiltrukket stor opmærksomhed i løbet af de seneste år, delvist
på grund af væksten af computerkraft, og delvist på grund af den konstant voksende
mængde af tilgængelig data i stort set alle grene af videnskab og samfund.
Fuld-
byrdet Bayesiansk inferens er typisk forbundet med et højt behov for computerkraft, og
Bayesiansk inferens er et af de sidste områder i udviklingen af machine learning metoder,
der ikke endnu er adapteret til meget store datamængder. For nylig er der blevet pub-
liceret arbejde, der tillader fuldbyrdet Bayesiansk inferens for store datamængder i et
forsøg på at lukke det hul.
I denne afhandling undersøger vi et af de mere prominente områder i Bayesiansk
inferens for store datamængder, navnlig dem, der udnytter stokastiske estimater af gra-
dienter til at sample posterior sandsynlighedsfordelingen fra Bayesiansk statistik. Dette
område kaldes stokastisk gradient Markov kæde Monte Carlo (SGMCMC). Vi under-
søger hvordan SGMCMC klarer sig sammenlignet med maksimum likelihood estimering
i forhold til usikkerhedsestimater og sammenlignet med normal MCMC, der udnytter
eksakte gradienter til en højere beregningsmæssig pris. Vi viser først SGMCMC’s ef-
fektivitet på syntetisk data, og viser dernæst SGMCMC’s brugbarhed i Bayesiansk dyb
læring, hvor der læres en sandsynlighedsfordeling over vægtene i stedet for et punktesti-
mat fundet ved optimering af en likelihood funktion.
Vi viser at SGMCMC har en beregningsmæssig fordel over normal MCMC i tilfælde
hvor datamængden er meget stor. Dernæst viser vi at SGMCMC opnår bedre usikker-
hedsestimater i en billedklassifikations sammenhæng med neurale netværk end normal
optimering, når modellen præsenteres med en hidtil uset klasse.
Vi observerer også, at SGMCMC metoder generelt er sensitive overfor valget af
hyperparametre, og konkluderer at der mangler teoretisk arbejde for at gøre SGMCMC
kommercielt pålidelige. Ikke desto mindre viser vi, at SGMCMC har et stor potentiale
til fuldbyrdet Bayesiansk inferens på store datamængder.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, section for Cognitive Systems at the Technical University of Denmark un-
der supervision of Associate Professor Mikkel N. Schmidt and Senior Researcher Tommy
Sonne Alstrøm in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in
Engineering degree in Mathematical Modeling and Computing.
The work was carried out in the autumn of 2019 and the project covers a workload
of 32.5 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, February 20, 2020
David Frich Hansen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is the culmination of several years of work in the field of Bayesian inference,
carried out by the myself under the supervision of Associate Professor Mikkel N. Schmidt
and Senior Researcher Tommy Sonne Alstrøm.
I would like to extend my sincerest gratitude towards the highly competent supervision
they have provided, be it through continuous support of my ideas, great discussions or
by simply helping ’putting out fires’ whenever I hit a barrier during the work, both with
the present thesis and in the past. You always made sure that this thesis was my work,
but steered me in the right direction whenever you thought I needed it. My biggest
thanks go to you.
Furthermore, I would like to thank my parents, Jan and Tina, and my sister, Ida,
for their neverending support of my work, for listening to my endless talks of technical
material which must surely have been excruciatingly boring to listen to. They never
failed to stand by my side whenever I was about to quit and convinced me to continue
pursuing the degree.
Finally, I would like to extend my thanks to old study mates for valuable discussions
throughout the thesis. I would like to especially thank Patrick M. Jensen and Mikkel
Paltorp-Schmitt for the support they have provided. I consider you some of my closest
friends, and your support of my work with this thesis have confirmed this. Thank you.
Thank you all. Without you, this thesis would have never come to be.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Dynamics based methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Parallel MCMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.3
Variance correction methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.4
Tempered methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.5
Variational Bayes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3
Structure of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Methods and theory
15
2.1
Bayesian modeling and Markov chain Monte Carlo . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.1
Vanilla Markov chain Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Stochastic gradient MCMC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.1
Stochastic gradient Langevin Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.2
Stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2.3
Stochastic gradient Fisher scoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.2.4
A complete framework for SGMCMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.2.5
Stepsize schemes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
2.3
Bayesian deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.3.1
Motivation and introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.3.2
Probabilistic interpretation of common deep learning loss functions 54
3
Experiments and discussion
57
3.1
Comparing with known posterior
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.2
Synthetic classification task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.2.1
Comparison of SGMCMC algorithms and regular SGD . . . . . .
62
3.2.2
Comparison to full-batch Langevin Monte Carlo . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.3
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class .
71
3.3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.3.2
Comparison to stochastic gradient descent - entropy . . . . . . . .
75
3.3.3
Influence of batch-size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
3.3.4
Influence of stepsize scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.4
Conclusions about the methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4
Conclusion
87
4.1
Ideas for fututre work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A Technical appendix
89
A.1 Conjugate probability distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.2 HMC leaves the canonical joint distribution invariant . . . . . . . . . . .
90
A.3 Definition of a Wiener process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.4 Bolzano-Weierstrass’ theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B Guide to attached code
93
B.1 Implementation of the samplers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
B.2 Scripts to run experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Today’s era of big data has provided several challenges for classical statistics and machine
learning methods due to the computational problem of inference. At its’ core, inference
can be seen as the process of estimating (or learning) the properties of some unobserved
probability distribution of which we have observations.
Classical statistics is typically split into two main categories, frequentist statistics
and Bayesian statistics. In frequentist statistics, we consider the probability of an event
as the frequency the event occurs at in the limiting case of infinitely many experiments.
Bayesian statistics takes a different viewpoint namely by interpreting probabilities as
the degree of belief that an event occurs as estimated through observed data.
In this thesis, we will consider inference in Bayesian models.
Bayesian inference is a computationally challenging problem - exact inference is rarely
feasible, and thus we must rely on efficient, approximate (sometimes denoted probabilis-
tic) inference schemes.
Concretely, in Bayesian inference we are interested in the posterior distribution of the
model parameters given the observed data. In theory, this approach yields all properties
of interest in statistical modeling - most probable estimates, how certain we are of these
estimates and so on.
A challenge for Bayesian inference is the amount of computations required to esti-
mate the parameters, especially in cases where much data is available. This is due to
the fact, that many of the classical Bayesian inference methods require an entire pass
through the data for even simple estimations, which quickly becomes a computational
bottleneck for the methods. Thus, a research field, scalable Bayesian inference has seen
a rise in recent years, and a specific type of scalable Bayesian inference is the main focus
of this thesis.
Although effective large scale methods have been developed for Bayesian parameter
estimation through stochastic optimization (for point estimation), there is a lack of
efficient, scalable fully Bayesian inference methods. Fully Bayesian inference allows us
to easily quantify model uncertainty and tackle the problem of overfitting, which is
particularly relevant when fitting complex models in machine learning.
Specifically, we consider Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods where we draw
samples from the posterior distribution of interest, and use these samples to estimate
the full posterior distribution. This yields an unbiased estimate of the posterior, but
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
comes at a computational cost. Several MCMC algorithms exist and we consider so-
called dynamics based methods, in which a dynamical system is simulated to generate
new samples. These samplers require gradients of the log posterior, and thus require a
pass through the entire dataset. We consider developments, for which we can mini-batch
the data. This gives stochastic estimates of the gradients, giving rise to the general term,
stochastic gradient MCMC (SGMCMC) - the title of the present thesis. As we shall see,
this is not straight-forward but recently several results allow for exactly this.
An especially interesting application of these scalable approximate inference schemes
is Bayesian deep learning (see eg. [Nea96] for a great introduction) where we estimate
a distribution over the parameters in neural networks instead of optimizing the weights
with respect to some predefined loss. This opens up some interesting possibilities for
understanding in which cases a model performs poorly. Namely, in classification tasks,
having a probability distribution over the parameters does, in theory, yield all possible
decision boundaries separating the classes in the feature space and their probabilities.
Thus, when presented with completely different data (eg. of a previously unseen class),
the new data instance will (with relatively high probability) be classified wrongly to
several different classes over parameter samples, yielding a low confidence of the classi-
fication as is desired according to the mantra ’the model should know what it does not
know’, tying into the field of explainable AI.
In this thesis, we will develop theory for several SGMCMC methods, implement them
and show their effectivenes in an application of Bayesian deep learning.
1.1
Contributions
In this thesis we seek to investigate the following hypotheses:
1. We expect better uncertainty estimates when using fully Bayesian inference com-
pared to simply optimizing in some Machine Learning model such as a neural
network.
2. Application of more sophisticated fully Bayesian inference methods produce bet-
ter results than simpler ones; measured on either performance (eg. uncertainty
estimates) or speed.
3. Using SGMCMC instead of classical MCMC is needed due to the computational
power required for classical MCMC to be feasible in large-scale applications.
1. refers to the idea of having robust estimation in Bayesian statistics when a lot of
data is available. In cases of classification, a decision boundary created with Bayesian
inference will likely be more uncertain wrt. outliers such that the posterior predictive
distribution of the outlier will be closer to a uniform distribution.
2. refers to using more advanced sampling techniques for the inference problem - the
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Related work
3
more information we can give the sampler, the better it will perform - of course at a
computational cost.
3. refers to the fact that when a lot of data is available, classical MCMC has a bottlenect
in evaluation of the likelihood, and as will be extremely slow. Ahn, Korattikara and
Welling [AKW12] even argue, that for extreme cases, stochastic gradient methods may
produce good predictions when a classical algorithm has not even done a single iteration
to get a single (burn-in) sample.
1.2
Related work
Much previous work has been done in the field scalable Bayesian inference. In the fol-
lowing, we highlight important results and achievements within the field.
The research within this field is split into several groups, as we have illustrated in
Figure 1.1, where we note that the groups are by no means mutually exclusive. Many
of the core ideas in each group have been applied in several of the other groups.
Scalable
Bayesian
inference
Variational
Bayes
Dynamics
based
MCMC
Tempered
methods
Variance
correction
methods
Parallel
MCMC
Figure 1.1: Research areas within scalable Bayesian inference.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.2.1
Dynamics based methods
This thesis will focus on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods for sampling a general
distribution, for which the density is known only up to a normalizing constant.
The majority of these methods are based on one of the original Markov chain Monte
Carlo methods, namely the famous Metropolis algorithm by N. Metropolis [Met+53].
This method was later improved by W. K. Hastings [Has70] to form the widely used
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (M-H algorithm). Many current state-of-the-art sampling
methods can be considered direct extensions of the M-H algorithm. Say we are interested
in samples, θ distributed according to some density f that we can evaluate only up to
a normalizing constant. The method is built up around drawing proposals, θ′ from a
simpler distribution q and accepting or rejecting them based on the probabilities assigned
to them by f. Let θ′ ∼q be the proposed sample and let θ be the previous sample drawn.
Then, we accept θ′ as the next sample with probability,
α(θ′, θ) = min
{f(θ′)q(θ′|θ)
f(θ)q(θ|θ′) , 1
}
,
(1.1)
which is easily computable. There are inherent issues with M-H. For one, there are no
general methods to choose a suitable proposal distribution q. Ideally, q should have the
same support as f and mimic it well, but this may be hard or impossible to achieve in
practice.
The dynamics based methods discussed in this section and throughout this thesis are
direct extensions of M-H that generate proosals by simulating specific dynamical system
(ie. Hamiltonian dynamics, which are intrepretable as a generalization of mehchanical
energy).
The original method for this has later been dubbed Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)
but was originally named Hybrid Monte Carlo and was developed by Duane et. al. in
1987 [Dua+87]. It simulates Hamiltonian dynamics to generate a proposal for the M-H
acceptance probability. R. M. Neal provides a gentle introduction and a great discussion
of this in [Nea11]. HMC utilizes the so-called Leapfrog integrator (a second order Euler
method) to simulate the partial differential equations governing the system. As we shall
discuss later, we can actually define all valid dynamics based samplers in a framework
of stochastic differential equations.
Empirically, HMC explores the state-space much better than the generic proposals usu-
ally used by M-H-like algorithms. Specifically, it addresses some of the issues pertaining
to the frequently used random walk proposal in M-H, often leading to slow mixing of
the Markov chains as well as highly correlated samples.
Furthermore, M.D. Hoffman and A. Gelman developed the No-U-turn sampler (NUTS)
[HG14] based on HMC that perfoms automatic tuning of the hyperparameters in HMC,
leading to faster convergence.
The computation of the likelihood (and log likelihood) requires a full pass through
the data which is unproblematic when the dataset is sufficiently small, but in this mod-
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Related work
5
ern era of big data this may well be a computational bottleneck, and as evident by the
M-H acceptance probability, (1.1), we may even waste computation if the proposed sam-
ple is rejected. Furthermore, several advancements in the field of MCMC sampling may
require several evaluations of the likelihood to get a proposal. This is the case for these
dynamics based methods.
These methods also require gradients of the log posterior for the numerical integrator
used for the dynamics simulation. Due to the development of stochastic optimization,
partly due to the work of H. Robbins and S. Monro [RM51], and the massive use of
stochastic gradient descent in deep learning applications the idea of using a stochastic
estimate of the gradient over only a subset of the data (henceforth called a mini-batch)
has been applied to dynamics based sampling methods as well. The initial work in this
field came from M. Welling and Y. W. Teh in [WT11] where they show that naively
mini-batching the data in eg. HMC violates detailed balance - a sufficient criterion for
the Markov chain to converge to the correct distribution, thus yielding a valid sampler.
To correct for this, previous ideas have revolved around proposing a new sample using
a stochastic gradient estimate and then take a M-H step to correct for the possibly
high variance of the gradient estimate, but this requires a pass through the entire data
which is what we wanted to avoid in the first place. Thus, they suggest using 1st order
Langevin dynamics instead of Hamiltonian dynamics. The two dynamical systems are
similar, but we use a stochastic gradient estimate over a mini-batch of the data and
inject artificial zero-mean Gaussian noise, yielding the parameter update,
∆θ = εt
2
(
∇log p(θ(t)) + N
n
b
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ(t))
)
+ η
(1.2)
where θ(t) is the t’th step of the Markov chain, n is the size of the mini-batch, xti is the
i’th data point of the current mini-batch, εt is the stepsize for this iteration and η ∼
N(0, εtI). A preconditioning matrix M can be introduced to aid the dynamics exploring
the parameter space. The stepsizes should satisfy the Robbins-Monro condition to ensure
convergence,
∞
∑
t=1
εt = ∞,
∞
∑
t=1
ε2
t < ∞.
Now, notice how the part inside the parantheses of (1.2) is an unbiased estimate of
the true gradient over the entire likelihood. Welling and Teh show that this leads to
samples of the correct posterior distribution much faster compared to regular MCMC
methods. This method is denoted stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD).
The method was further developed by T. Chen, E. Fox and C. Guestrin in [CFG14],
who introduce stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC). An important
distinction between MCMC based on Langevin dynamics and Hamiltonian dynamics is
that HMC introduces an auxilliary momentum variable, such that the resulting dynami-
cal system may be interpreted as a hockey puck sliding on the surface of the probability
density with a random Gaussian momentum [Nea11]. Chen et. al. shows that naively
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
mini-batching the data in ordinary HMC, thus using a stochastic gradient, does not
leave the desired distribution invariant making the sampler invalid.
They solve this with a physical argument, where they introduce a friction term to the
dynamics governing the auxilliary momentum variable. The argument is, that ’slowing
down the puck over time’ will allieviate the main issue: the variance introduced by using
a stochastic gradient yields low acceptance probabilities as measured through the M-H
acceptance probability when we simulate the dynamics for a long time. The reason for
the lower acceptance probability is mainly occuring for two reasons: 1) the integrator
used to simulate the dynamics (eg. Leapfrog integration) gives some discretization error
which may give inaccurate simulation, thus not following the dynamics exactly, and 2)
the noisy estimate of the gradient over the mini-batch is not close to the true gradient,
rendering the simulation of the dynamics more inaccurate. The idea is then that de-
creasing the momentum over time will mitigate this issue.
They then proceed to show that adding the friction term to the Hamiltonian dynamics
does indeed leave the desired distribution invariant.
SGHMC was developed from a physical argument, but as one of the authors, E. Fox
show in a later paper - which we will describe in Section 2.2.4 - this is also interpretable
directly from a mathematical viewpoint.
Finally, a third important development has been made in SGMCMC - namely ones
that include local differential geometric information to the sampler through the Fisher
information matrix of the probability surface. The first attempt of this was not in a
mini-batch setting, but rather as a direct development of the fullbatch dynamics based
sampling methods. A description of this can be found in [GC11]. This was further de-
veloped in a stochastic gradient setting by [AKW12] to achieve a version of SGLD that
incorporates Fisher scoring to achieve better mixing than in the case of vanilla SGLD.
Fisher information induces a Riemannian metric tensor on the probability surface and
as such incorporates the local geometry of the surface. This is used to achieve better
mixing.
Although Ahn et.al [AKW12] does not explicitly discuss this geometric interpretation,
it is similar. The geometric aspect of the Fisher information in terms of SGMCMC is,
however, discussed by S. Patterson and Y. Teh in [PT13], where they consider sampling
only on the probability simplex for the specific usecase of latent Dirichlet allocation.
They show that using the local geometry of the probability surface achieves better per-
fomance than eg. online variational methods.
All of this discussion leads to one of the main papers within SGMCMC, namely the
groundbreaking work by Y. Ma, T. Chen and E. Fox in their paper A Complete Recipe
for Stochastic Gradient MCMC [MCF15].
They set out to characterize all possible
valid dynamics based samplers usable with a stochastic estimate of the gradient of the
probability density, and they give a constructive proof that all of the samplers can be
characterized by considering a specific stochastic differential equation.
They claim that all continuous time Markov processes relevant for sampling can be
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Related work
7
written as the following SDE:
dz = f(z)dt +
√
2D(z)dW (t),
(1.3)
where z is the vector of parameters (and any auxilliary variables), f is a function de-
termining the deterministic drift of the SDE (related to the chosen dynamics), D is a
positive semidefinite diffusion matrix and W is a Wiener process of appropriate dimen-
sion.
They then set out to find for what values of f and D the SDE yields the desired station-
ary distribution. If D = 0, then there is no stochastic diffusion and this correspond to
a deterministic dynanimcal system, such as the dynamics of HMC.
They then prove that if we choose f to be of the form,
f(z) = −(D(z) + Q(z))∇H(z) + Γ(z)
(1.4)
where
Γi(z) =
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(Dij(z) + Qij(z))
and H is the energy of the dynamical system (eg.
the Hamiltonian), Q is a skew-
symmetric matrix (Q⊤= −Q), d is the dimension of z and D is once more a positive
semidefinite diffusion matrix, then the stationary distribution of the SDE is p(z) ∝
exp(−H(z)) - which is exactly the desired distribution for dynamics based samplers.
This is not only a way to construct valid samplers, but it describes all valid dynamics
based samplers - including those that work well with stochastic gradients.
The use of stochastic gradients in this framework is done by substituting the gradient
of the Hamiltonian, ∇H by a stochastic estimate derived from the mini-batches. They
proceed to show how some of the previously developed algorithms (eg. SGLD, SGHMC)
can be expressed in this framework. The results are highly abstract, and as such much
work need to be done when applying the recipe.
Due to the many developments in SGMCMC methods in recent years several results
have also been reached wrt. analysis of the methods and the effectiveness and efficiency
of the methods, some of which we will discuss here.
As we have already discussed, an issue with these methods is the extra variance in-
troduced by using stochastic estimates of the gradient of the log posterior. To allieviate
this, several attempts have been made to reduce the variance, eg. [Bak+19; Dub+16;
Che+19] where classical variance reduction methods are used on SGMCMC, namely
SGLD with varying success.
More general analyses have also been made of these methods, where we will highlight
some results.
Teh, Thiery and Vollmer [TTV16] provide a rigorous mathematical framework for
analysing SGLD and use this framework to show the sampler is asymptotically correct
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
and furthermore show that the asymptotically optimal stepsize is εt ≍t−1/3 where f ≍g
denotes asymptotic equivalence, eg. ∃C′, C > 0 : C′f(θ) ≤g(θ) ≤Cf(θ).
Mandt, Hoffman and Blei [MHB17] work towards bridging the gap between stochastic
optimization (eg. SGD) and SGMCMC by showing that SGD with a constant learning
rate simulates a Markov chain with a unique stationary distribution and provide a way
to transform this into a fully Bayesian approximate inference scheme.
Chen et.al. [Che+16a] tries something similar, but they use simulated annealing.
They relate ideas from SGMCMC to stochastic optimization and achieve better perfor-
mance in certain deep learning applications.
Sato and Nakagavva [SN14] look at SGLD in the SDE formulation and use the Fokker-
Planck equation governing the Langevin dynamics to show asymptotic correctness of the
sampler. They use Itô-processes to show that although the sampler is asymptotically
correct, we are only guaranteed weak convergence to the true posterior, even under the
discretization error introduced by the numerical integrator used to simulate the dynam-
ics.
Nagapetyan et.al. [Nag+17] are critical towards the SGMCMC developments by ar-
guing that the variance over the mini-batches are ignored. They try to solve this by
using control variates like Baker et. al. [Bak+19] and argue that the samples provided
by SGMCMC is perhaps simply averages over runs of SGD rather than samples of the
true posterior.
Betancourt [Bet15] is also skeptical towards SGMCMC. He argues that the subsam-
pling (mini-batching) the data introduces too much noise over the stochastic gradient es-
timate - and that the integrators used lead to too erroneous trajectory simulations. Thus
he defers to using symplectic integrators which do not work well when the mini-batches
are small enough for the computations to be efficient. Thus, when using SGMCMC,
there has to be made a compromise on the possible complexity of the target distribu-
tion, which severely limits the usability of the methods.
Chen, Ding and Carin [CDC15] show that using higher order integrators for simulat-
ing the dynamical systems can increase convergence rates for SGMCMC methods. They
show that this applies to large-scale applications. Finally they show that increasing
the order of the integrator can theoretically lead to the convergence rate of SGMCMC
algorithms approaching the convergence rate of standard MCMC algorithms. The use
of higher-order integrators of course lead to more computations, so the tradeoff between
using a higher order integrator thus needing more computations and living with the
more inaccurate simulation has to be considered.
Finally, we mention a paper by Ding et. al. [Din+14] that use the idea of a Nosé-
Hoover thermostat [LR09] to stabilize momentum fluctuations in the dynamical system
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Related work
9
used to generate new samples. The idea is that the thermostats adaptively contol the
mean kinetic energy added to the system (eg. K(θ) in HMC) by adding an extra variable
to the stochastic differential equation governing the underlying Markov process. This is
used to control the variance introduced by mini-batching the data - their method however
still suffers under the errors introduced through the discretization of the system. This
paper ties into the group of ’tempered methods’ in scalable Bayesian inference which is
briefly discussed in Section 1.2.4.
1.2.2
Parallel MCMC
Parallel MCMC cover methods that use techniques from distributed computing to gen-
erate several samples at the same time. The problem with this is mainly that MCMC
is inherently serial. Each sample depends on the previous sample and as such, parallel
MCMC is a difficult problem to tackle. The classical way of performing parallel MCMC
is to simply simulate several chains at once on separate cores in the CPU, but this can
lead to problems when estimating properties of the true distribution (eg. moments) as
the different chains may not mix equally well, or they may converge to different modes
of the target distribution yielding strange results.
The parallel MCMC methods try to mitigate this issue in different ways.
One of the first attempts at parallel MCMC is known as embarrassingly parallel
MCMC introduced by Neiswanger, Wang and Xing in [NWX14]. Here, the idea is to
subsample the data and then run a MCMC algorithm on the subsamples, each yielding
a subposterior which can be combined in a post-processing step. This has the advantage
that the usual communication overhead in parallel computing is avoided, as no messages
has to passed between the chains during the sample generation. If we have M cores
available, and split the data, X, into M mutually exclusive subsets {xmn}M
m=1, each of
the M chains sample their subposterior,
pm(θ) ∝p(θ)1/Mp(xmn|θ),
the samples can be combined to obtain an estimate of the full posterior as a product of
the subposteriors, eg.
p(θ|X) ∝p1p2 . . . pM(θ).
Note that the prior in each subposterior has an altered ’temperature’, which relates to
the thermostat methods and simulated annealing methods of subsection 1.2.4 and some
of the references in subsection 1.2.1. This is useful in eg. a MapReduce framework,
which is very scalable to hundreds of machines.
There has been attempts to fuse the idea of SGMCMC with parallel MCMC. An ex-
ample of this is by Chen et. al. [Che+16b], where they discuss ideas to run SGMCMC
on several cores at once and combining them afterwards. They also discuss problems
with ’stale gradients’ - that is, when distributing a single chain to several cores in an
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
asynchronous way we may encounter an issue where the parameters are updated with
gradient estimates from old steps. They show that using stale gradients has the same
asymptotic convergence rate, but is slower in practice dependent on the ’staleness degree’.
Developing the embarrassingly parallel approach, Srivastava, Cevher, Tran-Dinh and
Dunson suggest a framework, they denote ’WASP’ (Wasserstein posteriors) in [Sri+15].
They use the same ideas of generating subposteriors as in [NWX14] but use the Wasser-
stein barycenter distribution between the subposteriors as a robust estimate of the true
posterior.
They show that this estimate is close to the true posterior as measured
through Wasserstein distance.
Another approach is the consensus Monte Carlo algorithm proposed by Scott et. al.
in [Sco+16], in which they propose to break the dataset into shards that can be pro-
cessed in parallel. This is similar to the embarrassingly parallel approach, but differs in
the way that posterior samples are drawn. Namely, the posterior samples are weighed
over the different shards that are processed by separate workers. The weights have to
be specified in advance and may be equal, yielding an average over the independent
workers. This has several problems. There is an inherent assumption of independent
data, there is an assumption that the mini-batches all yield the same subposteriors and
it works only if the subposteriors are approximately Gaussian. The last one may not be
an issue if the mini-batches are large enough.
Finally, we will mention a very general parallel MCMC framework known as Firefly
MCMC, introduced by Maclaurin and Adams in [MA15]. They show that in the case
where you can bound each term in the likelihood - ie. each term in the sum over the
data points - from below, we are able to sample the true posterior in parallel. They do
this by masking some of the observations randomly by introducing a latent Bernoulli
variable whose parameters depend on this lower bound, thereby adding more weight to
datapoints that contribute significantly to the likelihood. This produces samples from
the true posterior, and can in theory be used on any MCMC algorithm, ones using the
entire dataset or ones that subsample the data.
There have even been attempts to combine parallel MCMC with stochastic gradient
MCMC (eg. dynamics based methods) such as [ASW14].
1.2.3
Variance correction methods
Contrary to the stochastic gradient methods, the methods we will now describe are based
around directly adjusting the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance probability such that the
acceptance probability corrects for the variance introduced by mini-batching the data.
The key difference is that we do not require gradients of the log posterior for these
methods to work - which means that they still suffer from some of the issues pertaining
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Related work
11
to poor exploration of the state space that regular MCMC methods do.
An especially interesting attempt at this was introduced by Seita et.al. in [Sei+18]
based on Barker’s lemma.
Barker’s lemma may be stated as follows:
Lemma 1 (Barker’s lemma). Let g(x) be any function, where g(x) = exp(x)g(−x).
Define the (logarithm of the) regular Metropolis-Hastings acceptance probability over the
full dataset as,
∆(θ, θ′) =
N
∑
i=1
log p(xi|θ′)
p(xi|θ) −log q(θ|θ)p(θ)
q(θ|θ′)p(θ′),
where q is the proposal distribution for the parameters θ.
Then α(θ, θ′) = g(∆(θ, θ′)) satisfies detailed balance.
It is straightforward to show that the regular logistic function (sigmoid) is such a
function, eg. g(x) =
1
1+exp(−x) is such a function.
If we let ∆∗(θ, θ′) denote an unbiased estimate of ∆(θ, θ′) over a mini-batch of the data,
eg.
∆∗(θ, θ′) = N
b
b
∑
i=1
log p(x∗
i |θ′)
p(x∗
i |θ) −log q(θ|θ)p(θ)
q(θ|θ′)p(θ′),
where the superscript x∗
i denotes that the data is indeed in the current mini-batch, then
due to the central limit theorem we have that in the limit of the sizes of the mini-batches,
∆∗= ∆+ Xnorm,
Xnorm ∼¯
N(0, σ2(∆∗)),
where ¯
N denotes a distribution that is approximately normal.
They then proceed to show that an equivalent acceptance test for M-H is to accept
θ′ if,
∆(θ, θ′) + X > 0
for X logistically distributed, and so they decompose X as,
X = Xnorm + Xcorr
for some Xcorr with unknown (correctional) distribution. They show that this correc-
tional distribution is computable, and this yields a mini-batch M-H test as,
∆(θ, θ′) + X = ∆(θ, θ′) + Xnorm + Xcorr = ∆∗(θ, θ′) + Xcorr > 0.
(1.5)
If an extra variable is added to ∆∗to achieve (approximate) unit variance, the correc-
tional distribution is precomputable, and we thus only need to compute it once for the
run of the algorithm.
This yields a mini-batch acceptance test for M-H that allows for mini-batch MCMC,
==PAGE:24==
12
1 Introduction
without needing gradients of the log posterior.
Another more naive approach to correcting for variance in mini-batch MCMC is given
by Korattikara et. al. in [KCW14]. They simply propose trying an initial mini-batch
size and continuing to increase this until the acceptance test is ’precise enough’ (in prac-
tice, a confidence interval of the acceptance probability is computed and the sizes are
increased until it has a certain narrow width) yielding a series of sequential hypotheses
to be tested. They use methods from frequentist statistics to correct the test statistic
and compute confidence intervals on the probability that a sample is accepted of fixed
width and thus gets a valid mini-batch M-H algorithm. The problem here is, that we are
not guaranteed a sufficiently small mini-batch, and we may even need to use the entire
dataset to get a single bit of information.
The work of Korattikara et.
al.
is extended by Bardenet, Douchet and Holmes
in [BDH14], where they implement an adaptive stopping criterion for when to stop in-
creasing the size of the mini-batches. The stopping criterion is based on a user specified
probability such that after some time T the acceptance probability of a proposed sample
is at least the user specified probability.
Finally, we will mention the work of Quiroz et. al. [Qui+19]. They suggest using
control variates to contol the variance of the estimator - in this case a mini-batch estimate
of the acceptance probability over the full dataset. This results in a perturbed (eg. not
biased) posterior but it is shown empirically that the performance is slightly better than
that of comparable methods mentioned in this section.
1.2.4
Tempered methods
The methods discussed here are based on the fact that the estimate of the M-H accep-
tance probability with a mini-batch is in fact equivalent to sampling the true posterior
raised to a known temperature.
This is made clear by Dangna and Wing in [LW17] where they introduce their mini-
batch tempered MCMC (MINT-MCMC) method. The main difference between vanilla
M-H and MINT-MCMC is the fact that when they consider the estimate of the log
likelihood over a mini-batch, they scale the log likelihood by a factor N λ instead of N
(needed to yield an unbiased estimate, see eg. (1.2)). λ is denoted the temperature of
the system. This has to be user specified. They also choose some 0 < τ < 1 and choose
λ < τ, and show that MINT-MCMC samples the true posterior raised to a temperature
T = N 1−λ. In practice, τ controls the mini-batch sizes by selecting the sizes as n = N τ.
λ can be seen as a parameter controlling how much the algorithm should move between
modes (larger λ ensures better location of areas of high probability, whereas smaller λ
ensures more movement between the different modes). This still suffers from the regular
disadvantages of having to choose an appropriate proposal distribution for M-H, but
==PAGE:25==
1.2 Related work
13
compared to other methods, this guarantees that the batchsizes are of constant size
while keeping the sampler asymptotically correct.
Efforts have been made to combine the dynamics based SGMCMC methods with
the tempered MCMC method mentioned above. Namely, Tung-Yu, Wang and Wing
[WWW19] propose a mini-batch M-H algorithm with a reversible SGLD proposal.
They argue that the error stemming from the ε-discretization of the SDE governing the
dynamics of the system in the SGMCMC framework require an M-H correction which
is costly.
As we have previously mentioned, SGMCMC methods circumvent this by
slowing down the dynamics either by introducing friction (as in SGHMC) or by having
a decreasing stepsize scheme (as in SGLD). They adapt the SGLD proposal, but allow
for the step to also move opposite the (stochastic) gradient direction. They then use a
modified M-H acceptance probability very similar to the one above, ie. [LW17]. They ar-
gue that this method gets ’the best of both worlds’ by using the efficient dynamics based
methods to generate a new proposal, while handling the error from the ε-discretization
stemming from simulating the dynamics with a M-H correction after each sample and
keeping the computations efficient by correcting the M-H acceptance probability to be
efficient on mini-batches through raising the acceptance probabilities to a temperature.
1.2.5
Variational Bayes
Varational Bayes (VB) is one of other the major branches when considering Bayesian
inference. As we have discussed, Bayesian inference is seldom analytically tractable and
while MCMC seeks to draw samples from the true posterior distribution, VB tries to find
a suitable approximation thereof by optimizing over a class of distributions to find one
that as ’close’ to the true posterior as measured through the Kullback-Leibler divergence
measure.
This provides a biased estimate of the posterior as compared to the unbiased estimate
produced by MCMC but it has the advantage that VB can be cast as a stochastic
optimization problem, thus taking advantage of some of the recent, powerful results
regarding stochastic optimization.
One of the major works in VB is due to Hoffman, Blei, Wang and Paisley [Hof+13],
where they introduce the theory behind casting the Bayesian inference problem as a
stochastic optimization problem by introducing mean field VB where the underlying
assumption is that each of the latent variables whose distribution should be inferred is
independent. They then show that minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
the posterior distribution and the variational distribution is equivalent to maximizing
the evidence lower bound (ELBO) that is computable from the data.
In theory, VB is tractable for the majority of Bayesian models, but in practice it often
requires some derivations to be done by hand, which limits it compared to MCMC algo-
rithms, that are often usable out-of-the-box.
It can be shown that the ELBO is differentiable, and as such recently black-box opti-
==PAGE:26==
14
1 Introduction
mization routines that perform VB have been proposed eliminating the need for deriving
optimization steps by hand, but these are notoriously unstable and hard to get to con-
verge. Several variants of VB exist, where we will only name a few.
Liu and Wang introduce Stein Variational Gradient Descent [LW16] where they it-
eratively minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the target distribution and
the variational distribution by applying a functional gradient descent. This is done by
considering the relation between the so-called Stein’s identity and the derivative of the
Kullback-Leibler divergence to derive the efficient optimization scheme.
Broderick et. al. propose a method that allow for distributed, asynchronous VB
for streaming data [Bro+13]. They show that compared to the methods proposed by
Hoffman et. al., when the data is streamed, their method severely outperforms that of
Hoffman et.al. after a single pass through the data as measured through efficiency.
1.3
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is structured as such:
• The first chapter contains an introduction to the topic of the thesis as well as a
study of relevant previous work.
• The second chapter contains the theory behind selected SGMCMC methods. Fur-
thermore it contains a small section on the background of MCMC in general and
some relevant properties of Markov chains for sampling probability distributions.
It also contains a small introduction to one of the main uses of SGMCMC for this
thesis - Bayesian deep learning.
• The third chapter contains experimental evaluation and discussion of the methods
and comparisons to regular stochastic optimization techniques as well as compar-
isons of the algorithms - both on some sythetic data as well as on a ’real life’
dataset, namely the well-known CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 image classification
datasets, as provided by Alex Krizhevsky [Kri09] and is available on his home-
page, https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html. A small description of
the dataset is also given.
• The fourth and final chapter concludes on the hypothese in Section 1.1 in the thesis
and presents ideas for future work.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2
Methods and theory
In this chapter, we will discuss and explain the theory behind the methods presented
in this thesis.
We will initially briefly go over Bayesian modeling and some of the
vanilla MCMC methods that lay the foundations of the main topic of this thesis, namely
SGMCMC. Then, we will delve into the SGMCMC methods presented and finally discuss
some of the properties of these methods and compare them theoretically.
2.1
Bayesian modeling and Markov chain
Monte Carlo
Bayesian modeling gives an end-to-end modeling approach for statistical modeling of a
wide range of phenomena. Bayesian modeling is based on Bayes’ theorem that state that
the posterior distribution is proportional to the likelihood times the prior distribution
of the parameters. In this thesis, we consider classification tasks, so we will consider
Bayesian modeling in this framework. Let θ denote the parameters in the model and
let X denote the attributes in the dataset. We let y denote the target variable for the
modeling (eg. the classes of the data points). Then, Bayes’ theorem gives,
p(θ|y, X) = p(y, X|θ)p(θ)
p(y, X)
=
p(y, X|θ)p(θ)
∫
θ p(y, X|θ)p(θ)dθ = likelihood × prior
evidence
,
(2.1)
yielding that,
posterior ∝likelihood × prior.
(2.2)
If the data is conditionally independent (eg. not a time series) and identically distributed
(iid.), the likelihood factorizes into a product of the individual data points, eg.
p(y, X|θ) =
N
∏
n=1
p(yn, Xn|θ).
Due to problems with numerical underflow, we often consider the logarithm of the den-
sities instead, yielding,
log p(θ|X, y) ∝
N
∑
n=1
log p(yn, Xn|θ) + log p(θ),
(2.3)
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Methods and theory
where the symbol ∝means that an additive constant not dependent on θ is omitted.
In this framework, the modeling process is simply specifying a distribution for the
likelihood (or in the case of conditionally independent data, specifying the form of each
term in the likelihood) and specifying a prior distribution of the parameters. The prior
encodes our prior belief of the value of the parameters, and the likelihood encodes how
likely it is that model has been responsible for generating the data.
Another useful way to consider the inclusion of the prior distribution is to think of it
as a regularizer for the model, and in fact letting the prior be Gaussian in, say a simple
linear model is the Bayesian equivalent of regularizing the parameters in the ℓ2 norm.
Note that also when the amount of data increases, the prior is less influent on the poste-
rior distribution tying into the idea that ’we should let the data speak for itself’. When
the prior is uninformative (eg. uniform), we note that the posterior distribution is in-
deed proportional to the likelihood, thus bridging the gap between finding the maximum
aposteriori (MAP) esitmate defined as,
θMAP = arg max
θ
p(θ|X, y),
and the maximum likelihood estimate defined as,
θMLE = arg max
θ
p(X, y|θ).
Bayesian modeling is extremely flexible. We are essentially free to choose the likelihood
and prior as we want, as long as the inference is feasible.
Bayesian modeling also allow for so-called hierachical models, where the priors them-
selves have priors (called hyperpriors) which may themselves have priors (hyper-hyperpriors)
and so on. This is indeed the case, as we shall see now. If we put a hyperprior on θ, say
ψ, then we simply have that,
p(θ, ψ|X, y) ∝p(X, y|θ)p(θ|ψ)p(ψ).
(2.4)
Often we are not interested in all parameters in the models, and if this is the case we
may marginalize over them in the posterior.
This gives us the Bayesian modeling pipeline:
1. Specify the model in terms of likelihood and prior(s), thus getting a joint distribu-
tion over the data and the parameters.
2. Perform (approximate) inference.
3. Validate the model by checking the posterior predictive distribution (see below)
and change it if necessary.
4. Evaluate model by examining the posterior distribution and quantities of interest.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Bayesian modeling and Markov chain Monte Carlo
17
Left is a big question: How to perform inference in Bayesian models? If we consider
Bayes’ theorem, (2.1), the denominator - also denoted the evidence - is very often in-
tractable, as the integral may be of extremely high dimension and almost certainly very
non-linear. This forces us to perform some sort of approximate inference to estimate the
posterior distribution instead.
As we discussed in the introduction, several approximate inference schemes exist. We
will consider a major class of these, namely Markov chain Monte Carlo methods of which
we will mention a few below.
It is useful to check the model fit, and when doing Bayesian modeling we often
consider the posterior predictive distribution, that encompasses all uncertainty regarding
the predictions. Formally, the posterior predictive distribution is defined as,
p(ynew|y, X, Xnew) =
∫
θ p(ynew|y, X, Xnew, θ)p(θ|y, X)dθ
≈1
T
T
∑
t=1
p(ynew|θ(t), y, X, Xnew)
(2.5)
where T is the number of samples from the MCMC algorithm, ynew is the prediction of
the new unseen sample, Xnew is the corresponding features and θ(t) is the t’th sample
from the MCMC algorithm. A great description of this is given by Gelman et. al. in
[Gel+13].
In practice, this means that our prediction for a new data point is simply the average
over the predictions provided by each of the samples from the algorithm. So when we
need a prediction, we do a prediction with the specified likelihood for each of the samples
in the chain and average over them - to achieve the posterior predictive distribution for
the new data point.
2.1.1
Vanilla Markov chain Monte Carlo
To develop the theory of stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, we
initially consider some of the properties of Markov chains and discuss how they relate to
sampling probability distributions and we then go over some of the most simple MCMC
methods that rely on the full dataset to generate a single sample. We then consider one
of the first dynamics based approaches to sample probability distributions, Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo, that provide some basis for the SGMCMC algorithms presented in the
next section.
2.1.1.1
Background
To understand MCMC samplers in general, we start with some basic definitions of
Markov chains and their properties. Information on Markov chain in the viewpoint of
sampling probability distributions can be found in [Bis06].
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Methods and theory
Intuitively a Markov chain is a stochastic process for which the transition at step i
is only dependent on the state at step i −1, which we can formally define as,
Definition 1 (Markov chain). Let {X(i)} be a collection of random variables.
The
collection is a Markov chain if,
p(X(i)|X(1), X(2), . . . , X(i−1)) = p(X(i)|X(i−1)),
holds for all i.
We define the transition kernel as the probability of transitioning from one state to
the next, formally:
Definition 2 (Markov transition kernel). For a Markov chain {X(i)} we define the
transition kernel as the map,
Tm(X(m), X(m+1)) = p(X(m+1)|X(m)).
If the kernel does not change with m we say the Markov chain is homogeneous, otherwise
it is inhomogeneous, and in the case of homogeneous Markov chains, we will omit the
dependence of m notationwise. We also denote this property the Markov property.
We are now ready to define the stationary distribution of a Markov chain, which can
be seen as the distribution p(X(i)) resulting from marginalizing over the possible states
p(X(i−1)) under the corresponding transition kernel, ie.
Definition 3 (Stationary distribution of a Markov chain). A stationary distribution of
a Markov chain is defined as a distribution pS satistfying,
pS(X) =
∑
X′
T(X′, X)pS(X′).
Not every Markov chain has a stationary distribution. A sufficient criterion for a
given distribution to be stationary is to verify that the given chain satisfies detailed
balance wrt. that distribution, defined as,
Definition 4 (Detailed balance). A Markov chain statisfies detailed balance wrt. the
distribution pS if,
pS(X)T(X, X′) = pS(X′)T(X′, X).
One can easily show that detailed balance wrt. a distribution pS ensures that the
distribution is indeed stationary [Bis06, p. 540].
The stationary distribution need not be unique. The entire idea behind MCMC is to con-
struct a Markov chain that has a unique stationary distribution that we are interested in
sampling from, usually the posterior distribution, p(θ|X). For this to be guaranteed, we
have to ensure that the chain converges to the desired stationary distribution regardless
of the initial state distribution p(X(0)). A way to ensure this is to ensure that the sta-
tionary distribution is an equilibrium distribution by ensuring that the chain is ergodic.
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Bayesian modeling and Markov chain Monte Carlo
19
This is the case if all possible states of the Markov chain are aperiodic, non-null and re-
current, which informally means that at the expected time (ie. number of steps) for the
chain to attain a certain state is finite. Then it follows that the chain has a single unique
stationary distribution called the equilibrium distribution and that the chain converges
to this distribution - see eg. [Mur12, Th. 17.2.2] and [Bis06, p. 540].1
Generally, we say that the equilibrium distribution is actually the limiting distribution
of the Markov chain. If we consider the transition kernel as an operator mapping one
state to the next with some probability, we may consider the equilibrium distribution
as the limiting case,
pS = lim
m→∞T mp(X(1)).
(2.6)
From this it is clear that if we are able to construct an ergodic Markov chain with our
desired posterior distribution as equilibrium distribution and we are able to simulate this
Markov chain, we are able to use the simulated states of the Markov chain as samples of
the posterior, which is exactly the wanted. This is indeed the intuition behind MCMC,
where we have deferred all details regarding how to construct such a Markov chain and
how to simulate such a chain to the descriptions of the individual algorithms.
We note that the equilibrium is expressed in terms of a limit, cf. (2.6), so in practice, we
often assume that after some time the Markov chain has converged to the equilibrium
distribution such that the samples are from the right distribution. In terms of MCMC,
this means that we often discard the initial steps of the chain to ensure that the samples
are actually from the correct distribution. There is some debate on how many samples
should be discarded, but depending on the problem at hand and the algorithm to be
used, it is usually between 1% and 50% [SM13; Gey92]. This is usually called burn-in
due to the natiure of the ’cold start’. And as we shall discuss, when using SGMCMC,
there are several considerations to be made wrt. burn-in, as we both need the variance
introduced by the stochastic gradients to be small enough (eg. the SGMCMC algorithm
should converge to a true MCMC algorithm) and the Markov chain has to reach its’
equilibrium distribution once it has converged to a true MCMC algorithm.
It should be noted that MCMC in gereral produces correlated samples. This may
not be intuitive, as the Markov property cf. def. 1 implies that the autocorrelation of
the chain should disappear at every lag greater than 1. This is not the case in practice,
however. Especially the simple MCMC methods have this issue. For some usecases,
this is not a problem, but for applications that rely on indpendent samples, great care
should be taken in how the samples are used. A common, albeit not very efficient, way
to solve this problem is to simply thin out the samples. This is the simple procedure of
removing some samples, keeping only every k samples, resulting in ⌊T/k⌋samples where
T is how many steps the Markov chain is simulated. This procedure helps ’uncorrelate’
the samples, but is wasteful as many more samples are drawn than actually used.
1If we consider the transition kernel as an operator, we can actually consider the equilibrium as the
’eigendistribution’ of this operator with eigenvalue 1.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Methods and theory
We will now go over some of the most basic MCMC samplers that rely on the entire
dataset to generate posterior samples.
2.1.1.2
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
As we have already mentioned in the introduction of this thesis, one of the very sim-
plest MCMC algorithms is the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm initially developed by
Metropolis in 1953 [Met+53] and later augmented by Hastings in 1970 [Has70] to yield
the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. The algorithm was initially for statistical mechan-
ics and simulations of atomic systems, but has later been adapted to the more general
framework of statistical sampling.
In its’ simplest form, we assume that we want to sample some distribution p wrt.
some random variable θ, eg. we want to sample θ ∼p. There are, in general, no assump-
tions on the distribution p and it may be conditioned on several auxilliary variables. In
fact, we only need to be able to evaluate the density of p up to a normalizing constant
not dependent on θ, as will become clear below. We define the unnormalized density of p
by f, ie. f ∝p. We also need a proposal distribution q that we are able to sample from
relatively easily. The idea is then to propose a new sample θ′ from the old sample θ and
accept or reject θ′ as a sample of f by comparing the ratio of probabilities between θ
and θ′. The general steps of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is then, given an initial
sample θ,
1. Draw θ′ ∼q(θ′|θ)
2. Compute the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance probability,
α = f(θ′)q(θ′|θ)
f(θ)q(θ|θ′) .
3. Accept θ′ as a sample of p with probability min{1, α}, eg. set θ ←θ′, otherwise
keep θ as the next sample as well.
4. Repeat until the desired amount of samples have been drawn.
It is clear that the above procedure generates a Markov chain. It is also clear that we
only need to be able to evaluate f and not p as f(x′)/f(x) = p(x′)/p(x).
It can easily be shown that the procedure leaves p invariant, as this procedure satisfies
detailed balance, see def. 4. This is true, as the transition kernel here is T(θ, θ′) =
q(θ|θ′)α, where α is of course dependent on θ and θ′. It is then easy to verify that this
indeed statisfies detailed balance.
This procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Bayesian modeling and Markov chain Monte Carlo
21
Algorithm 1 Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
1: Given: Density to sample up to a normalizing constant f proposal distribution q,
number of samples to draw T, initial sample θ(0).
2: for t = 1 to T do
3:
Draw θ′ ∼q(θ′|θ(t−1))
▷Draw proposal
4:
Compute α =
f(θ′)q(θ′|θ(t−1))
f(θ(t−1))q(θ(t−1)|θ′)
▷Compute acceptance probability
5:
Draw u ∼U(0, 1)
6:
if u < α then
7:
θ(t) ←θ′
8:
else
9:
θ(t) ←θ(t−1)
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return {θ(t)}T
t=0
There are some discussion wrt. the choice of the proposal distribution, q. Obviously p
and q should have the same support, but other than that there are not many requirements
for the proposal distribution. The perfomance of the algorithm, however, is severely
influenced by the choice of q. Ideally, we would want q to be similar to p in some respect
in order for the algorithm both to converge rapidly and explore the state space well, but
this is often impossible or very hard to achieve in practice. A common choice is to let
q be Gaussian centered around the previous step with some isotropic variance, but this
leads to undesirable properties through the random walking behaviour, as discussed by
eg. [Nea11]. Furthermore, the choice of q should be such that the overall acceptance
ratio of the algorithm isn’t too high or too low. If the acceptance ratio is too high, we
often do not explore the state space well, and if it is too low, we will simply stay in
the same area too long. This is one of the reasons that M-H in general has difficulties
escaping modes in the distributions, limiting its’ use in cases where the posterior is
multimodal as is often the case. However, its’ simplicity and ease of implementation
makes is widely used in different areas of statistics.
2.1.1.3
Gibbs sampling
Gibbs sampling [GG84] may be seen as a special case of Metropolis-Hastings for situa-
tions where we are able to condition each of the parameters θ on all the other parameters
and where we are able to easily sample these conditionals.
In the following description, we will let θ\k denote the parameter vector θ containing all
elements except that with index k, eg. θ\k = (θ1, θ2, . . . , θk−1, θk+1, . . . , θd)⊤. The idea is
now to randomly select a single index k and compute p(θk|θ\k) and draw θ(t)
k ∼p(θk|θ\k).
We then select a new random k′ ̸= k and use the new value of θk to compute a new
sample for θk′ ∼p(θk′|θ\k′). We coninue to do this procedure, cycling over the inputs in
θ until a desired amount of cycles have been reached - where each cycle correspond to a
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Methods and theory
single sample of θ.
We first show that this procedure actually gives a Markov chain that with the correct
equilibrium distribution. This can be done in a few ways, but the easiest is to consider
Gibbs sampling as a special case of Metropolis-Hastings. This is indeed the case, as we
have q(θ′
k|θ) = p(θ′
k|θ\k) from which the acceptance probability for a given k follows,
α = p(θ′
k|θ\k)q(θ′
k|θ\k)
p(θk|θ\k)q(θk|θ\k)
= p(θ′
k|θ\k)p(θk|θ\k)
p(θk|θ\k)p(θ′
k|θ\k)
= 1.
We see that considered as a special case of Metropolis-Hastings we actually arrive at a
valid sampler with acceptance probability 1, such that all proposals are accepted.
Intuitively, we may consider the Gibbs sampler as Metropolis-Hastings, where we always
sample along the axes of the state space. This is usually very efficient, as no computations
are wasted as no proposed samples are rejected. There is, however, the severe limitation
that we need to be able to compute all the conditionals, which sets limitations on the
choice of likelihood and priors. These limitations may be too harsh so we may often
resort to other samplers.
2.1.1.4
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (originally Hybrid Monte Carlo, from now HMC) [Dua+87;
Nea11] is one of the first attempts at using a simulation of a dynamical system to gen-
erate proposals in a Metropolis-Hastings framework. HMC borrows many ideas from
physics and the field of partial differential equations and one of the main ideas comes
from a generalization of the conservation of mechanical energy, a well known relation in
classical mechanics.
The name Hamiltonian Monte Carlo comes from the dynamical system simulated to
generate new samples, namely Hamiltonian dynamics. This is defined by two variables,
position, which in our case is the parameter vector θ and some momentum variable,
r which may be considered an auxilliary variable.
Hamiltonian dynamics is defined
through an energy, often denoted the Hamiltonian, which is a generalization of mechani-
cal energy. It is usually defined as the sum of some ’potential’ energy, which is a function
of the position (eg. parameters) and some ’kinetic’ energy, which is a function of the
momentum r, and as such, we define the Hamiltonian,
H(θ, r) = U(θ) + K(r)
where U is the potential energy and K is the kinetic energy.
Hamiltonian dynamics is then governed by the partial differential equation (sometimes
==PAGE:35==
2.1 Bayesian modeling and Markov chain Monte Carlo
23
denoted the motion equations),
dri
dt = −∂H
∂θi
dθi
dt = ∂H
∂ri
,
where θi and ri denotes the i’th element of θ and r respectively.
Now, we have to specify U and K. U should clearly be specified in terms of the distribu-
tion we want to sample, and to achieve the correct stationary distribution, we choose,
U(θ) = −log[p(X|θ)p(θ)] = −log[likelihood × prior].
This choice ensures that the posterior distribution, p(θ|X) ∝p(X|θ)p(θ) is invariant
under the simulation of the Hamiltonian dynamics.
Neal [Nea11] shows that the Hamiltonian is conserved over time, eg.
∂H
∂t = 0 if the
dynamics are simulated exactly. One can relatively easily show that the canonical dis-
tribution of this system, p(θ, r) is p(θ, r) ∝exp[−H(θ, r)] [Nea11], and the conservation
of the Hamiltonian ensures that if the simulation of the system wrt. the motion equa-
tions is exact, the position will move on a hypersurface of constant probability wrt. the
canonical distribution.
We can construct K such that θ and r are independent, and as such it is clear that if
the simualations are exact, simply discarding r after the simulation, θ may be used as a
sample of the posterior.
Now we still need to specify the kinetic energy term K. It may be chosen freely, as long
as we ensure that,
1. The mapping Ts mapping (θt, rt) to (θt+s, rt+s) is reversible. This is of course also
dependent on the method with which the dynamics are simulated.
2. The mapping Ts has unit Jacobian determinant.
In practice, we often choose to let r have a multivariate Gaussian distribution, r ∼
N(0, M) such that K becomes proportional to a quadratic form, K(r) ∝r⊤M −1r. As
for the simulation, exact simulation of the motion equations is intractable. We thus use
the so-called Leapfrog integrator, a second order symplectic integrator, to update the
parameters and momentum. A single Leapfrog step may simply be described as,
rt+ε/2 = rt −ε
2∇U(θt)
θt+ε = θt + εrt+ε/2
rt+ε = rt+ε/2 −ε
2∇U(θt+ε),
that is half a gradient step of r, a full step of θ wrt. the momentum, and then another
half a gradient step of r. ε is the stepsize, and the method is very sensitive to the choice
of ε - too small a value may not explore the state space very well, too large will introduce
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Methods and theory
too much error in the form of inexact simulation of the dynamics. It is relatively easy
to show that the Leapfrog integrator along with the choice of a quadratic kinetic energy
ensures that the proposal is reversible and has unit Jacobian determinant, such that the
requirements above are met.
The algorithm is now to take L leapfrog steps of length ε to simulate the Hamiltonian
dynamics moving a total distance of Lε through the state space to generate a proposal,
eg. moving (θ, r) →(θ′, r′) for a M-H acceptance test based on the differences in energies
in the two states, which is then chosen as the next step in the Markov chain. That is,
(θ′, r′) is accepted with probability α = min{1, exp[−H(θ′, r′) + H(θ, r)]}.
The momentum r should be resampled in the begining of each Leapfrog tracing. This is
clear as the Hamiltonian is preserved when the dynamics are simulated (exactly). The
resampling ensures that the samples do not all have the same probability, as the multiple
traces are not simply moving on curves of constant probability. Technically, we should
negate the momentum after the Leapfrog tracing as this ensures that the Markov chain
is reversible, but if the quadratic kinetic energy is an even function, this is not necessary
in practice.
The procedure is given in Algorithm 2, where we assume the quadratic kinetic energy
is used:
Algorithm 2 Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
1: Given Hamiltonian H specified in terms of U(θ), number of samples to draw T,
stepsize ε, number of Leapfrog steps L, initial sample θ(0) and covariance matrix M.
2: for t = 1 to T do
3:
Draw initial momentum r(0) ∼N(0, M)
4:
Set θ(t) ←θ(t−1), θ′ ←θ(t−1), r′ ←r(0)
5:
for i = 1 to L do
6:
θ′, r′ ←Leapfrog(θ′, r′, ε)
7:
end for
8:
Compute α = min{1, exp[−H(θ′, r′) + H(θ, r)]}
9:
Draw u ∼U(0, 1)
10:
if u < α then
▷Accept sample.
11:
θ(t) ←θ′, r(t) ←r′
▷No negation of momentum, cf. quadratic momentum.
12:
else
13:
θ(t) ←θ(t−1), r(t) ←r(t−1)
14:
end if
15: end for
16: return {(θ(t)}
Left is to show that the procedure does indeed produce samples from the canoncial
joint distribution, eg. the Markov chain leaves this distribution invariant. This follows
from the fact that 1) the Leapfrog integrator preserves volume and 2) the Hamiltonian
is continuous almost everywhere, as argued by [Nea11]. The proof of this can be found
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
25
in appendix A.2.
It is clear that HMC is an extension of Metropolis-Hastings with a clever proposal
that avoids some of the undesired behaviour of a more naive Metropolis-Hastings scheme.
Neal argues that the exploration of the state space in HMC is far superior than that of
a random walk Metropolis-Hastings method, and he argues that HMC is less prone to
’get lost’ in a high dimensional state space, although the dimension of the state space is
twice that of a regular M-H method (due to the addition of the auxilliary momentum).
This comes at a computational cost, though. For every Leapfrog step we need several
evaluations of the likelihood, which is costly when we have a lot of data, as is the setting
of this thesis.
The performance of HMC is strongly dependent on the choice of ε and a little less so
on the choice of L. Neal provides a great discussion of this as well as strategies to tune
these hyperparameters.
Hoffman and Gelman has made attempts to automatically tune these parameters
by suggesting their No-U-Turn sampler (NUTS) [HG14] that adaptively tunes ε and
L under the heuristic that the any given Leapfrog trajectory should seek to venture
far away from the start of the trajectory, and we should tune the parameters as such.
Doing this naively breaks the detailed balance property of HMC, so extra precautions
have to be taken. This is an entire study in itself so we will not delve into the details here.
We have now considered some basic vanilla MCMC samplers that all rely on the full
data set to perform a single parameter update (eg. to draw a single sample), but in
the ’big data’ regime this quickly becomes a computational bottleneck, and so we are
forced to consider more advanced methods if we want to do fully Bayesian inference with
MCMC in these cases. This will be introduced and discussed in the following.
2.2
Stochastic gradient MCMC
The following section will contain the theory behind three of the most common SGM-
CMC algorithms, as well as a treatment of a general framework for SGMCMC and
how this framework relates to the methods discussed. The methods chosen are Stochas-
tic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD), Stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(SGHMC) and Stochastic gradient Fisher scoring (SGFS). These are chosen, as they are
arguably the simplest SGMCMC methods and especially SGLD pioneered the field of
SGMCMC.
2.2.1
Stochastic gradient Langevin Dynamics
Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) is based on Langevin dynamics, which
is similar to Hamiltonian dynamics, but simpler in the fact that they don’t introduce
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Methods and theory
momentum into the system, see eg. [Nea11].
SGLD was one of the first SGMCMC algorithms and was initially introduced by Welling
and Teh in 2011 [WT11], and is - simply put - the fusion of the theory of stochastic
optimization as pioneered by Robbins and Monro [RM51] and dynamics-based MCMC.
We will outline the theory here with some level of detail, as SGLD is the simplest
SGMCMC algorithm in concept.
2.2.1.1
Using stochastic gradients with Langevin dynamics
Langevin dynamics is based on a stochastic differential equation,
dθ = ∇log(p(X|θ)p(θ))dt +
√
2dW (t),
(2.7)
where W (t) is a Wiener process [Hig01, sec. 2]2 of appropriate dimension.
It is relatively easy to show that the stationary distribution of this SDE is exactly
p(θ|X) ∝p(X|θ)p(θ). Thus simulating these dynamics can be used as samples of p(θ|X).
Simulating these dynamics analytically is infeasible, so we introduce an ε-discretization,
such that the update becomes,
∆θ = ε
2
(
∇log p(θ) +
N
∑
i=1
∇log p(xi|θ)
)
+ N(0, εI).
(2.8)
where the sum is introduced as the data is assumed to be independent and identically
distributed.
We can introduce stochastic gradients like Robbins and Monro to this equation, by
introducing mini-batches of data. Let Xt = {xti} be a mini-batch of size n. Then the
Robbins-Monro gradients are easily introduced into (2.8):
∆θ = ε
2
(
∇log p(θ) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ)
)
+ N(0, εI).
(2.9)
The factor N
n is used as N
n
∑n
i=1 ∇log p(xti|θ) then becomes an unbiased estimate of the
true gradient - eg. the gradient is put on the ’right scale’ due to fewer data points.
Now the major question is, how does the introduction of stochastic gradients influence
the stationary distribution? We introduce additional noise from the use of stochastic
gradients, and we introduce noise from the ε-discretization of the dynamics. The classical
solution is to correct every update with a (full data) M-H-correction, but this is costly
for large datasets. Instead, we introduce a variable stepsize εt > 0 that should satisfy
the Robbins-Monro criteria,
∞
∑
t=1
εt = ∞,
∞
∑
t=1
ε2
t < ∞,
(2.10)
2We note that a Wiener process is identical to Brownian motion under these circumstances. The
definition is given in Appendix A.3
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
27
which are interpreted as: the entire statespace should be possible to explore (the first
criterion) while every parameter should converge to the mode of the distribution instead
of just ’bouncing around it’ (the second criterion). Different stepsize schemes are intro-
duced in Section 2.2.5.
Then the update equation simply becomes,
∆θ = εt
2
(
∇log p(θ) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ)
)
+ N(0, εtI).
(2.11)
Welling and Teh [WT11] argue that the decreasing stepsizes allows the stochasticity of
the gradients to be averaged out. Furthermore they argue that the Metropolis rejection
rate goes to 0 asymptotically such that the correction becomes unnecessary.
The general idea behind the method is thus that the stepsizes are chosen such that
the Robbin-Monro criteria are satisfied and using the ε-discretized update (2.11) to get
samples. But some questions are left unanswered. How do we ensure that the samples
achieved using stochastic gradients are actually from the true posterior? How do we
ensure that the noise from the gradients are balanced with the injected noise, controlled
by the stepsize scheme? These questions will be answered in the following.
2.2.1.2
Regime transition
One of the major concerns one has when introducing stochastic gradients is the fact that
the noise introduced by the gradient may adversely affect the stationary distribution of
the Markov process such that the updates from (2.11) may not be distributed according
to the true posterior. We follow [WT11] and give an intuitive argument for why the
samples converge to the right posterior even under the effects of the stochastic gradients.
We define the true gradient,
∇log p(θ|X) = ∇log p(θ) +
N
∑
i=1
∇log p(xi|θ),
(2.12)
and the residual gradient as the difference between the true gradient and the stochastic
gradient as a function of the parameters θ,
log δt(θ) = ∇log p(θ) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xi|θ) −∇log p(θ|X).
(2.13)
Clearly, the SGLD update equation can be stated in terms of these quantitites,
∆θ(t) = εt
2
(
∇log p(θ(t)|X) + log δt(θ(t))
)
+ N(0, εtI).
(2.14)
It is clear that log δt(θ) is a random variable itself. Now, log δt(θ) has zero mean if the
mini-batches are selected independently and are large enough due to the central limit
theorem. We let the variance of log δt(θ) be denoted V (θ). From (2.14), it is immedeately
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Methods and theory
clear that there are two stochastic elements - namely the stochasticity stemming from
the stochastic gradients as measured through log δt(θ) and the injected gaussian noise
with variance εt. From the properties of variance of a random variable Y , we have that
V (aY ) = a2V (Y ) for a scalar a, and so the variance of the stochastic gradients in the
update step is ε2
t
4 V (θ(t)).
The overall goal is to ensure that the total variance of the update is dominated by the
injected noise in all directions, as the algorithm then reduces to a vanilla MCMC algo-
rithm for which the true posterior is stationary.
This is clearly satisfied when the stepsizes εt satisfy the Robbins-Monro criteria, as
εt →0. We have that ε2
t
4 decreases more rapidly than εt and thus for some large enough
t the injected noise will dominate the total variance of the update. Furthermore, the cri-
terion that εt →0 ensures that after some time the discretization error will be neligible.
The update scheme with variable stepsizes, however, leads to an inhomogeneous
Markov process. If we consider a constant stepsize such that the variance is dominated
by the injected noise, the correct posterior is stationary, but in practice it is hard to
verify that this is indeed the case. For badly behaved data, the required stepsize may
be so small that having to traverse the probability space to a region of high probability
is computationally infeasible.
So we resort to having variable stepsizes yielding an inhomogeneous Markov chain. Thus
we have to argue why the variable stepsizes still lead to the samples converging to the
correct stationary distribution. Here, we follow [WT11] very closely.
We assume that we have stepsizes {εt} such that the Robbins-Monro criteria are
satisfied, and fix some ε0 ≪1. After some large enough t (depending on the choice of
stepsize scheme) the stepsizes decrease monotonically. The sequence is clearly bounded
(as measured in the ℓ2(N) norm3). Thus, it follows from Bolzano-Weierstrass’ theorem
(see Appendix A.4 for a statement of the theorem) and the fact that Rd
+ is complete,
that there exists a subsequence of timesteps, say {ts}∞
s=1 such that,
lim
s→∞
ts+1
∑
t=ts+1
εt = ε0.
(2.15)
Informally, this means that when the Markov chain has been simulated long enough,
the total amount of distance travelled from this point on, is simply ε0, as long as one
considers only a finite amount of steps.
Let ηt ∼N(0, εtI) be the injected noise at step t. Then, as ηt are independent over t, it
follows that,

ts+1
∑
t=ts+1
ηt

2
= O(√ε0),
(2.16)
3Recall that ℓ2(N) is the vector space of infintely long sequences for which the sum of the quadratic
elements of each sequence is finite.
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
29
which informally means that the total injected noise between ts + 1 and ts+1 is asymp-
totically bounded from above by √ε0. Thus, if the stepsizes satisfy the Robbins-Monro
criteria, eventually the variance introduced by the stochastic gradients is dominated by
the injected noise, such that SGLD reduces to a constant stepsize full-batch Langevin
Monte Carlo method that is known to converge to the correct posterior.
Thus, for the sampler to be valid, we need a transition of regimes - from the regime
where the variance of the update step is dominated by the stochastic gradients to the
regime, where the sampler has converged to the correct posterior distribution. Welling
and Teh introduce a preconditioner M to the update step to aid the dynamics. This
simply changes the update step to,
∆θ = εt
2 M
(
∇log p(θ) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ)
)
+ N(0, εtM).
(2.17)
Define Vs =
n
N2V (θ) such that Vs denotes the empirical covariance of the stochastic
gradients of each data point within a batch. Welling and Teh then argue that we are in
the valid sampling phase when,
εtN 2
4n λmax(M 1/2VsM 1/2) ≪1,
(2.18)
where λmax(B) is the largest eigenvalue of B, and B1/2 is any ’matrix square root’, eg.
Cholesky factors. This gives a guideline for when we sample correctly and a guideline
for how aggresively we can choose the stepsizes, εt.
This allows us to give a summary of the method, as described in Algorithm 3. We
implement the method in native Python with NumPy and for some experiments utilize
automatic differentiation. Results of the algorithm will be presented in Chapter 3.
Algorithm 3 Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
1: Given log likelihood function log p(xi|θ), log prior log p(θ), number of steps to draw
T, stepsizes {εt}T
t=0 satisfying the Robbins-Monro criteria, preconditioning matrix
M, initial sample θ(0), and mini-batches {Xm}
2: for t = 1 to T do
3:
Get a mini-batch Xt = {xti}
4:
θ(t) ←θ(t−1) + εt
2 M
(
∇log p(θ) + N
n
∑n
i=1 ∇log p(xti|θ)
)
+ N(0, εtM)
5: end for
6: Discard samples when for which the algorithm has not yet converged to correct
posterior
7: return {θ(t)}.
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Methods and theory
2.2.2
Stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) was initially introduced by
Chen, Guestrin and Fox in [CFG14] as a direct development of SGLD, although Rad-
ford Neal discussed the possibility of subsampling the data, thus producing stochastic
gradients for HMC already in 2011 [Nea11, sec. 5.1]. Neal found, however, that naively
subsampling the data will let the discretization error of the dynamics will lead to wildly
bad samples if the full gradient is not used. This is also the reason that a Metropolis
acceptance step is performed in regular HMC.
Chen, Guestrin and Fox prove this formally using the information theoretic concept of
entropy and we will show their arguments below. To solve this issue, the authors use
the physical interpretation of Hamiltonian dynamics - namely as the generalization of
the conservation of mechanical energy (ie. ’a hockey puck sliding on a surface with no
friction’) and augment the dynamics by introducing friction to the system dependent on
the noise introduced by the stochasticity of the gradients. Eventually, some of the same
authors discover in [MCF15] that this argument is actually unnecessary as the friction is
merely a consequence of a much more abstract theoretical framework. We shall discuss
this in Section 2.2.4.
For the following description, we will initially show why naively introducing stochastic
gradients into HMC is formally wrong (ie. the desired distribution is no longer invariant),
then we will show how to fix the problem by introducing friction and finally, we will
relate the method to the well-known stochastic gradient descent with momentum and
show that each update in the Leapfrog tracing is equivalent to a parameter update
from a stochastic gradient descent with momentum optimizer. The ’full’ algorithm is
outlined in Algorithm 4, wheras the relation with SGD with momentum is outlined in
Algorithm 5.
2.2.2.1
Naively using stochastic gradients in HMC
For the description of SGHMC, we will introduce some new notation.
Initially, we
introduce notation for stochastic gradients. Namely, we introduce,
∇eU(θ) = −∇log p(θ) −N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ),
(2.19)
for the stochastic gradient of the log posterior over a mini-batch {xti} of size n, and
once more N is the total number of data points. This notation is also easily extendable
to the true gradient,
∇U(θ) = −∇log p(θ) −
N
∑
i=1
∇log p(xi|θ).
(2.20)
As in SGLD, it is important that the data is independent and identically distributed,
and the mini-batches are large enough such that the central limit theorem holds, eg.
∇U(θ) = ∇eU(θ) + N(0, V (θ)),
(2.21)
==PAGE:43==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
31
where V (θ) is the (co)variance of the stochastic gradients.
Now we can naively substitute the gradient in vanllia HMC, see Algorithm 2, thus
introducing noise to the update of r, ie.
∆r = −ε
2∇eU(θ) = −ε
2∇U(θ) + N(0, ε2
4 V (θ)).
This can be viewed as a discretization of the continuous SDE:



dθ
= M −1rdt
dr
= −∇U(θ) + N(0, B(θ)dt)
(2.22)
where B(θ) = ε
2V (θ) is the diffusion matrix introduced by the noisy gradients. We shall
see this diffusion matrix play an important role when we consider an abstract theoretical
framework for SGMCMC in Section 2.2.4.
The issue with using stochastic gradients naively as above is given as theorem 3.1 in
[CFG14], and we state it with a slightly different notation,
Theorem 1. Let pt(θ, r) be the distribution of (θ, r) that evolves with time, t according
to the dynamics (2.22). Let H(pt) be the entropy of the continuous distribution pt defined
as,
H(pt) = −
∫∫
pt(θ, r) log pt(θ, r)dθdr.
where the logarithm may be chosen freely (usually either with base 2 or base e).
If the density and gradient of pt are vanishing at infinity, and the gradient vanishes
faster than
1
log pt then H(pt) ≥0 which implies that,
∂
∂tH(pt) ≥0
(2.23)
ie. the distribution pt has increasing entropy over time when the Hamiltonian dynamics
are simulated with noisy gradients.
The proof is given in the appendix to [CFG14], where we recall that the canonical
joint distribution is p(θ, r) ∝exp(−H(θ, r)) with H(θ, r) = U(θ) + K(r) and usually
K(r) = 1
2r⊤M −1r for some positive definite ’preconditioning’ matrix M.
The consequence of the theorem is that pt(θ, r) is not stationary under these dynamics,
as stated as corollary 3.1 in [CFG14].
Intuitively this means that we would lose the benefit of the long trajectories in vanilla
HMC by correcting much sooner than we normally would - and the correction (ie.
Metropolis-Hastings) requires all the data, and while there are several results pertaining
to mini-batch Metropolis-Hastings steps (see eg. [KCW14; BDH14; Sei+18]) instead,
the authors try to directly alleviate the problem by introducing a friction term to the
dynamics, thus ’slowing down the puck’ to 1) control the variance introduced by noisy
gradients and 2) to avoid introducing too much noise with the ε-discretization that we
inevitably have to do to simulate the system. This will be addresed in the following.
==PAGE:44==
32
2 Methods and theory
2.2.2.2
SGHMC with friction
Adding a friction term to the Hamiltonian dynamics with noisy gradients (2.22) is
straightforward. Intuitively the friction should be added to the momentum term, ie.
dr to lower the distance travelled in the probability space. The friction should also
depend on the noise introduced by the gradient, such that when the gradients have low
variance - ie. are closer to the true gradient on average - the dynamics are not slowed
as much. Retaining the notation of B(θ) from before, we simply change (2.22) to reflect
this intuition:







dθ
= M −1rdt
dr
= −∇U(θ)dt −B(θ)M −1rdt
|
{z
}
Friction term
+N(0, B(θ)dt)
(2.24)
So do the new dynamics (2.24) solve the problem? It is fairly straightforward to show
that this is indeed the case. To keep notational consistency for later, define,
D =
(
0
0
0
B(θ)
)
Q =
(
0
−I
I
0
)
(2.25)
such that the dynamics (2.24) may be written as,
d(θ, r)⊤= −[D + Q]∇H(θ, r)dt + N(0, Ddt),
(2.26)
where H(θ, r) = U(θ) + K(r) = U(θ) + 1
2r⊤M −1r.
These dynamics are governed by the Fokker-Planck equation [MCF15],
∂
∂t
pt(θ, r) = ∇⊤([D + Q][pt(θ, r)∇H(θ, r) + ∇pt(θ, r)]).
(2.27)
If pt is stationary under these dynamics, the Fokker-Planck equation is 0. This is easily
verified, as we have pt(θ, r) ∝exp(−H(θ, r)) such that,
∇pt(θ, r) ∝∇exp(−H(θ, r)) = −∇H(θ, r) exp(−H(θ, r)),
yielding
[pt(θ, r)∇H(θ, r) + ∇pt(θ, r)] = exp(−H(θ, r))∇H(θ, r) −∇H(θ, r) exp(−H(θ, r)) = 0,
such that the Fokker-Planck equation is 0. A more detailed derivation of this result is
provided in a more general framework in Section 2.2.4.
This result verifies the correctness of the dynamics, but some questions still remain.
We rely heavily on the fact the the (co)variance of the stochastic gradients, measured
through B(θ) is known. In the general case, this is obviously untrue, so some estimate
==PAGE:45==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
33
bB(θ) has to be used. In practice, one can use the emprirical covariance of the noisy gra-
dients over a mini-batch, but this does not solve the problem entirely. Chen, Guestrin
and Fox argue that instead, it is beneficial to introduce a user-specified friction matrix
C such that C ⪰bB(θ) meaning that C −bB(θ) is positive semi-definite. Furthermore, we
still rely on a discretization of the dynamics (2.24) to simulate them, introducing error
to the update.
The discretized dynamics is straightforward even with the introduction of C. Namely,
for stepsizes {εt} we get that for each step in the tracing,



∆θ
= εt
2 M −1r
∆r
= −εt
2 ∇eU(θ) −εt
2 CM −1r + N(0, εt(C −bB))
(2.28)
which is the SGHMC updates. It is summarized in Algorithm 4, where we also introduce
momentum resampling as in regular HMC.
Finally, we briefly discuss the choice of stepsizes. If this version of SGHMC is used then
to converge to the correct posterior, the stepsizes should satisfy the Robbins-Monro
criteria.
In practice, however, one can choose another stepsize scheme to achieve a
biased estimate of the posterior to achieve faster convergence or better exploration of
the state space.
2.2.2.3
Relation to stochastic gradient descent with momentum
Finally, Chen, Guestrin and Fox argue how SGHMC relates to stochastic gradient de-
scent with momentum. To see this, we define,
ν = 1
2εtM −1r
η = ε2
t
4 M −1
α = 1
2εtM −1C
ˆβ = 1
2εtM −1 bB(θ)
(2.29)
By substituting these into the update equations (2.28), we get a reformulated version of
the update equations,



∆θ
= ν
∆ν
= −η∇eU(θ) −αν + N(0, (α −ˆβ)η)
(2.30)
Notice the similarity between this formulation and SGD with momentum. It is clear
that (2.30) is very similar to a single step from SGD with momentum with learning rate
η and momentum parameter 1 −α. The difference is that we inject some noise based
==PAGE:46==
34
2 Methods and theory
Algorithm 4 Stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
1: Given Hamiltonian H specified in terms of U(θ), number of samples to draw T,
stepsizes {εt}, number of Leapfrog steps L, initial sample θ(0), preconditioning matrix
M, specified friction matrix C, estimate of gradient noise bB and mini-batches {Xm}.
2:
3: Sample initial momentum r(0) ∼N(0, M)
4: for t = 1 to T do
5:
if t mod 20 = 0 then
6:
Resample momentum r(t) ∼N(0, M)
7:
else
8:
r(t) ←r(t−1)
9:
end if
10:
(θ′, r′) ←(θ(t−1), r(t))
11:
Get mini-batch Xt = {xti}
12:
for ℓ= 1 to L do
13:
θ′ ←θ′ + εt
2 M −1r′
▷Update position
14:
∇eU(θ′) = −N
n
∑n
i=1 ∇log p(xti|θ′) −∇log p(θ)
▷Compute stochastic
gradient
15:
r′ ←r′ −εt
2 ∇eU(θ′) −εt
2 CM −1r′ + N(0, εt(C −bB))
▷Update momentum
16:
end for
17:
(θ(t), r(t+1)) ←(θ′, r′)
18: end for
19: Remove burn-in from {θ(t)}
20: return {θ(t)}
on these parameters to allow for sampling a probability distribution rather than simply
finding the MAP estimate. Chen, Guestrin and Fox frame it this way: ”When the noise
is removed (via C = bB = 0), SGHMC naturally reduces to a stochastic gradient method
with momentum” and argue that this lets us ’borrow experience’ from SGD to tune
hyperparameters.
There is a point to be made wrt. the relationship between α and η in this formulation.
If α is quite large (say, close to 1), we don’t allow much momentum, and so take a longer
step in the gradient direction, but on the other hand we inject more noise (if ˆβ is fixed),
allowing for more of a random walk behaviour of the sampler. If on the other hand α is
close to 0, we limit the length of the trajectory and do not inject as much noise.
When considering the relationship between ˆβ and bB(θ) we have some more freedom with
B(θ) - as in practice, we fix all parameters η, α and ˆβ to scalar values. This, of course,
means that we sample a biased distribution but allows for much easier fine-tuning of the
hyperparameters. In our experiments, we will always set ˆβ = 0 which is obviously incor-
rect, as this would correspond to no noise in the gradients, but as the steps gets shorter,
the noise of the update step will still go to 0. Thus the samples will still approach a
meaningful posterior, but it will be slightly biased depending on the true noise of the
==PAGE:47==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
35
gradients.
The algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 5 - and it is this formulation we have implemented
for our experiments.
Algorithm 5 Stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo - reformulated
1: Given Hamiltonian H specified in terms of U(θ), number of samples to draw T,
learning rate η, stepsizes {εt}, number of Leapfrog steps L, initial sample θ(0), pre-
conditioning matrix M, friction (or momentum decay) α, estimate of gradient noise
ˆβ (default ˆβ = 0) and mini-batches {Xm}.
2:
3: Sample initial momentum r(0) ∼N(0, M)
4: Compute initial ν = 1
2εtM −1r(0)
5: for t = 1 to T do+
6:
if t mod 20 = 0 then
7:
Resample momentum r(t) ∼N(0, M)
8:
Compute ν = 1
2εtM (−1)r(t)
9:
else
10:
r(t) ←r(t−1) and recompute ν
11:
end if
12:
θ′ ←θ(t−1)
13:
Get mini-batch Xt = {xti}
14:
for ℓ= 1 to L do
15:
θ′ ←θ′ + ν
▷Update position
16:
∇eU(θ′) = −N
n
∑n
i=1 ∇log p(xti|θ′) −∇log p(θ)
▷Compute stochastic
gradient
17:
ν ←ν −η∇eU(θ′) −αν + N(0, η(α −ˆβ))
18:
end for
19:
θ(t) ←θ′
20: end for
21: Remove burn-in from {θ(t)}
22: return {θ(t)}
2.2.3
Stochastic gradient Fisher scoring
Stochastic gradient Fisher scoring (SGFS) may be seen as a direct augmentation of
SGLD and is developed by Ahn, Korattikara and Welling [AKW12].
The general idea is that the immediate shortcoming of SGLD is that preconditioning is
difficult in general - and because of this Markov chains from SGLD mixes very slowly.
Thus, they try to build an adaptive preconditioner based on the fact that when we have
a lot of data, the posterior is approximately Gaussian (’The Bayesian central limit the-
==PAGE:48==
36
2 Methods and theory
orem’).
2.2.3.1
Derivation of the method
For the development of this algorithm, we assume that the data X is generated from
our model with true parameters θtrue. We define the Fisher information (see eg. [Bis06,
p. 298] or [Mur12, sec. 6.2.2] for more on Fisher information) as,
I(θ) = E[∇log p(x|θ)∇log p(x|θ)⊤],
(2.31)
wheree E denotes expectation - in this case over x - and thus the Fisher information
is simply the covariance of the gradient for a single data point x. It is also clear from
the definition of I that it can be seen as the negative Hessian matrix of the log likeli-
hood evaluated in this parameter. This is interesting, as the Hessian measures curvature
in the log-probability space and as such tells us something about the geometry locally
around the point θ - and in fact, the Fisher information induces a metric tensor on the
log-probability space [AN00, ch. 2] - although we will not go into details with this.
In practice, the Fisher information is not known exactly, so we use the empirical
Fisher information which is simply the empirical covariance of the gradients of the data
points. As before, we will denote these by V (θ).
Following Ahn, Korattikara and Welling, we denote I1 = I(θtrue) and due the the linear-
ity of expectation and the assumption that the data points are conditionally indpendent,
if we have n data points, the Fisher information scales linearly, eg. In = nI1.
An important result for this algorithm is the ’Bayesian central limit theorem’ (Bernstein-
von Mises theorem) [Le 86]. This states that (under certain conditions), if the total size
of the dataset N is large, the posterior asymptotically approaches a Gaussian,
θtrue|X ∼N(θtrue, −I−1
N ),
eg. the posterior is Gaussian in the limit of N →∞with the Fisher information as
precision.
As we saw when we discussed SGLD, it is an absolute requirement that the stepsizes
εt becomes sufficiently small before we can actually consider the steps in the Markov
chain as samples from the true posterior. Ahn, Korattikara and Welling argue that we
can mitigate this by changing the update of the system to,
∆θ = 1
2εtM(−IN[θ(t) −θtrue]) + η,
(2.32)
where M is the preconditioner as in SGLD and η ∼N(0, εtM −ε2
t
4 MINM).
Thus, if θ(t) ∼N(µt, Σt) then also θ(t+1) is Gaussian. This is relatively straightforward
==PAGE:49==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
37
to see. Recall that if y ∼N(µy, Σy), z ∼N(µz, Σz) and c is a vector then,
Ay + Bz + c ∼N(Aµy + Bµz + c, AΣyA⊤+ BΣzB⊤),
(2.33)
for matrices A and B. From this it follows that,
θ(t+1) = θ(t) + 1
2εtM(−IN[θ(t) −θtrue]) + η
= θ(t) −1
2εtMINθ(t) + 1
2εtMINθtrue + η
= (I −1
2εtMIN)θ(t) + 1
2εtMINθtrue + η,
(2.34)
which is of the form (2.33). Thus, if we let θ(t+1) ∼N(µt+1, Σt+1) we have that,
µt+1 = (I −1
2εtMIN)µt + 0 + 1
2εtMINθtrue
(2.35)
Σt+1 = (I −1
2εtMIN)Σt(I −1
2εtMIN)⊤+ εtM −ε2
t
4 MINM.
(2.36)
Ahn, Korattikara and Welling argue, that if M is symmetric (as is often the case),
N(θtrue, I−1
N ) is invariant under this chain.
Due to the Bayesian central limit theorem, this means that if we have enough data
(eg. N is large enough), the posterior is approximately Gaussian, and we can use these
dynamics (eg. (2.32)) to simulate it, and thus sample an approximate posterior. As the
Gaussian distribution is particularly ’well behaved’, this works even for large stepsizes
that would make SGLD fail, and we can thus achieve higher mixing rates than we would
have with SGLD. This method, however, only works in the extreme regime, where the
posterior is Gaussian - so how can we make it correct even when the posterior is not
Gaussian - or when we are in a region of the state space where we need to capture
non-Gaussian features of the posterior?
The answer is to provide an adaptive preconditioning matrix, that is able to trade-off
mixing rates by sampling from the approximate posterior, as in (2.32) and the accuracy
by sampling with smaller steps, such that the dynamics are more like SGLD. To do this,
we consider the SGLD updates, (2.11), but change the injected noise to N(0, R) where in
cases where high sampling accuracy is needed (eg. when the posterior is non-Gaussian),
we select R = εtM as in SGLD. but when we want high mixing rates, we choose R
such that we sample from the approximate posterior, eg. with (2.32). Thus, we need to
design R such that this is indeed the case.
Once more, we require the batchsize n to be large enough that the (classical) central
limit theorem holds.
If this is indeed the case, we have that,
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xi|θ) ∼N(Ex[∇log p(x|θ)], 1
nCov[∇log p(θ|x)]),
(2.37)
==PAGE:50==
38
2 Methods and theory
such that NCov[∇log p(x|θ)] ≈IN and NEx[∇log p(x|θ)] ≈∑N
i=1 ∇log p(xi|θ). This
gives us,
∇log p(θ(t)) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ(t)) ≈∇log p(θ(t)) +
N
∑
i=1
log p(xi|θ(t)) + N(0, N
n IN),
(2.38)
for some mini-batch Xt = {xti}.
If the posterior is close to its’ approximate Gaussian as determined by the Fisher in-
formation through the Bernstein-von Mises theorem, we have that the gradient of the
log likelihood is approximately equal to −IN[θ(t) −θtrue]. This allows us to rewrite the
update equation (2.32):
∆θ = 1
2εtM(IN[θ(t) −θtrue]) + N(0, R + ε2
t
4
N
n MINM).
(2.39)
So at high stepsizes, we need to combine this with the variance of η in (2.32), ie.
R + ε2
t
4
N
n MINM = εtM −ε2
t
4 MINM,
(2.40)
yielding,
R = εtM −N + n
n
ε2
t
4 MINM.
(2.41)
To summarize: if we set R with (2.41), the Markov chain samples from the approximate
Gaussian posterior with dynamics very similar to that of SLGD. Thus, for the trade-
off between high mixing rates (eg. high stepsizes) and sampling accuracy (eg. small
stepsizes, as in SGLD), our choice of R should be set accordingly,
R =



εtM
for small steps
εtM −N+n
n
ε2
t
4 MINM
for large steps .
(2.42)
Since the second term in the second case decreases faster than the first term in the
second case, we can simply use this for both high stepsizes and small stepsizes. This
gives us the SGFS update equation for some mini-batch Xt = {xti}:
∆θ = 1
2εtM
(
∇log p(θ(t)) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ(t))
)
+ N(0, εtM −ε2
t
4
N + n
n
MINM),
(2.43)
where M should be chosen such that the covariance of the injected noise is positive
definite. This is often the case for preconditioners, but we can enforce it by choosing
any symmetric positive definite matrix B such that
εtM −ε2
t
4
N + n
n
MINM = εtMBM,
as εtMBM is positive definite if B is positive definite and M (recall M is symmetric by
definition) has full rank. This gives us a choice for M:
M = 4
(
εt
N + n
n
IN + 4B
)−1
,
(2.44)
==PAGE:51==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
39
that is positive definite for any positive definite matrix B. Substituting this into (2.43),
and doing some rearranging we get,
∆θ = 2
(N + n
n
IN + 4B
εt
)−1 (
∇log p(θ(t)) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ(t))
)
+ η
(2.45)
with η ∼N(0, 4B
εt ). This is the stochastic gradient Fisher scoring update equation.
Now, there are some issues. For one, how do we appropriately choose B? And in
general, the Fisher information IN is unknown, so how do we estimate this? We address
these questions in the following.
2.2.3.2
SGFS in practice
An especially interesting attribute is that the a NV (θ) consistent estimator of IN such
that the empirical Fisher information may be used as an estimate of the Fisher informa-
tion - a detail that is crucial, since IN is generally unknown in practical applications.
Let bI denote an estimate of I1 - ie. the empirical Fisher information. Ahn, Korattikara
and Welling suggest using a running average as our estimate, eg.
ˆI(t) =
(
1 −1
t
)
ˆI(t−1) + 1
t V (θ(t)).
(2.46)
They prove that this converges to I1 with an error of O(1/N).
They also suggest letting B = N+n
n IN that is positive definite.
Finally, we found if the starting point θ(0) is bad (eg. extremely low probability),
using the Fisher information from the very first iteration will cause numerical instabili-
ties to arise - probably due to the high curvature of the probability space in this region.
Thus, to mitigate this, we take a few steps where we set B = I, such that the curvature
is effectively ignored for these steps. After a few epcohs (usually only 1), we start in-
cluding the curvature.
Currently there is no formal proof that this actually converges to the correct poste-
rior. If the preconditioner is fixed and the stepsizes are annealed correctly, the algorithm
reduces to SGLD, which is proven to work. Technically, SGFS works for all stepsizes
(even constant stepsizes) as long as enough data is available, and the mini-batches are
sufficiently large. This is reflected in the experiments as we shall see in the next chapter.
The algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 6.
Now there are computational considerations with SGFS. Namely, as we informally
learn an adaptive preconditioner for SGLD with full rank, SGFS is more computationally
expensive than both SGLD and SGHMC - and it scales especially badly with dimension-
ality. This is due to the fact that we have to solve a linear system of size d × d in each
==PAGE:52==
40
2 Methods and theory
iteration of the algorithm where d is the dimension of the state space, as well as sample
a multivariate Gaussian of dimension d with full covariance structure. This ususally
requires a Cholesky decomposition of the covariance matrix, which can be computation-
ally expensive. Ahn, Korattikara and Welling suggest simplifying the algorithm and
assume some parameters to be independent by enforcing the structure of N+n
n IN + 4B
εt
to be block diagonal, or even a single diagonal matrix. In both SGLD and SGHMC,
we enforce the injected noise to be independent across dimensions, which is significantly
cheaper computationally.
We only implement the ’full’ algorithm, and the resulting
running time of SGFS is much higher than both SGLD and SGHMC for experiments
with a high-dimensional parameter space.
==PAGE:53==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
41
Algorithm 6 Stochastic gradient Fisher scoring
1: Given number of steps to draw T, stepsizes {εt}T
t=0, initial sample θ(0), and mini-
batches {Xm}
2: Set initial Fisher information, bI(0) = I
3: for t = 0 to T −1 do
4:
Get mini-batch Xt = {xti}
5:
Compute the mean of the stochastic gradients,
¯∇= 1
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ(t))
6:
Compute empirical Fisher information (eg. empirical covariance of the gradi-
ents),
V (θ(t)) =
1
n −1
n
∑
i=1
(∇log p(xti|θ(t)) −¯∇)(∇log p(xti|θ(t)) −¯∇)⊤
7:
Update running average of Fisher information,
ˆI(t) =
(
1 −1
t
)
ˆI(t−1) + 1
t V (θ(t))
8:
Compute B:
B = N + n
n
ˆI(t)
9:
Draw η ∼N(0, 4B
εt )
10:
Update θ:
θ(t+1) = θ(t) + 2
(N + n
n
N ˆI(t) + 4B
εt
)−1 (
∇log p(θ(t)) + N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ(t))
)
+ η
11: end for
12: Discard burn-in
13: return {θ(t)}
2.2.4
A complete framework for SGMCMC
As mentioned in the the introduction of this thesis, a monumental paper was published
by Ma, Chen and Fox in 2015 [MCF15] providing a theoretical framework for all SGM-
CMC samplers, and in fact, for all dynamics based samplers that simulate a dynamical
system to propose new samples. They argue why, in these cases, M-H corrections are
rarely necessary and provide proofs for the completeness of their framework. We will
consider their work in this section.
Ma, Chen and Fox argue that it follows from the Chapman-Kolmogorov equation
==PAGE:54==
42
2 Methods and theory
that the Markov processes generating valid samplers are all of the form,
dz = f(z)dt +
√
2D(z)dW (t),
(2.47)
where z is a vector containing parameters and any auxilliary variables for the dynamics
(eg.
θ and r in HMC), D is a positive (semi-)definite matrix controlling stochastic
diffusion and W is a Wiener process of appropriate dimension. If f is of the form,
f(z) = −(D(z) + Q(z))∇H(z) + Γ(z),
Γi(z) =
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(Dij(z) + Qij(z)),
(2.48)
then the stationary distribution of the SDE (2.47) is exactly p(z) ∝exp(−H(z)), eg. the
canonical distribution parameterized by the energy of the system (such as the Hamilto-
nian, see above). Here Q is an anti-symmetric matrix, ie. Q⊤= −Q, controlling the
deterministic drift of the SDE. We usually omit the dependence of z on D and Q to
keep notation simple.
If D is only positive semi-definite, the above only holds if the process can be further
shown to be ergodic, see Section 2.1.1.1, whereas if it is positive definite this is not
necessary. The above is relatively easily provable, as we shall see now where we follow
[MCF15].
The proof starts by showing that the evolution of the SDE (2.47) governed by the
corresponding Fokker-Planck equation,
∂
∂tpt(z) = −
∑
i
∂
∂zi
(fi(z)pt(z)) +
∑
i,j
∂2
∂zi∂zj
(Dijpt(z))
(2.49)
has a more compact form,
∂
∂tpt(z) = ∇⊤([D + Q][pt(z)∇H(z) + ∇pt(z)]) .
(2.50)
where ∇denotes the gradient operator defined as the vector containing partial derivatives
of all zi’s, and pt is the distribution of states at time t.
This is indeed the case. Computing the matrix-vector product (2.50) and reducing yields,
∂
∂tpt(z) =
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
d
∑
j=1
[Dij + Qij]
[
pt(z) ∂
∂zj
pt(z)H(z) + ∂
∂zj
pt(z)
]
.
(2.51)
We can split the sum over i and collect terms to yield,
∂
∂tpt(z) =
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi


d
∑
j=1
(Dij + Qij)pt(z) ∂
∂zj
H(z)

+
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
[Dij+Qij]
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
pt(z). (2.52)
If we expand the second sum, we get,
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
[Dij + Qij]
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
pt(z) =
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
Dij
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
pt(z) +
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
Qij
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
pt(z).
(2.53)
==PAGE:55==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
43
Consider now the first of these sums. We can expand this futher, by adding and sub-
tracting partial derivatives of D and collect terms to give,
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂ziDij
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
pt(z) =
d
∑
i=1
d
∑
j=1
∂2
∂zi∂zj
[Dijpt(z)] −
d
∑
i=1

pt(z)
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
Dij

.
(2.54)
Doing the same thing for the sum of Q yields something very similar. This, however
simplifies further due to the anti-symmetry of Q, meaning that
d
∑
i=1
d
∑
j=1
∂2
∂zi∂zj
[Qijpt(z)] = 0,
such that,
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
Qij
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
pt(z) = −
d
∑
i=1

pt(z)
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
Qij

.
(2.55)
Putting these decompositions back into (2.52) and simplifying yields,
∂
∂tpt(z) =
d
∑
i=1



[Dij + Qij]pt(z) ∂
∂zi
H(z) −
d
∑
j=1
{ ∂
∂zj
Dij + ∂
∂zj
Qij
}



+
d
∑
i=1
d
∑
j=1
∂2
∂zi∂zj
[Dijpt(z)].
(2.56)
Recall the definition of f (2.48) from the original SDE (2.47), where we see that the
above simplifies to,
∂
∂tpt(z) = −
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi
[fi(z)pt(z)] +
d
∑
i=1
d
∑
j=1
∂2
∂zizj
[Dijpt(z)],
(2.57)
which is exactly the original Fokker-Planck equation, (2.49), such that the two are
equivalent.
Up until now, we have simply rewritten the Fokker-Planck equation to a compact form.
We still need to show that these dynamics actually have the distribution p(z|X) ∝
exp(−H(z)) as stationary distribution. This is done by showing that the distribution
does not change over time when we substitute exp(−H(z)) into the compact form (2.50),
eg. the Fokker-Planck equation is 0 in this case. This is simply done by verifying that,
[pt(z)∇H(z) + ∇pt(z)] ∝exp[−H(z)]∇H(z) + ∇exp[−H(z)] = 0.
(2.58)
This is clear, as
∇exp(−H(z)) = −∇H(z) exp(−H(z))
such that,
exp[−H(z)]∇H(z) + ∇exp[−H(z)] = exp[−H(z)]∇H(z) −∇H(z) exp[−H(z)] = 0,
==PAGE:56==
44
2 Methods and theory
as we wanted. Thus we have proven that if D is a positive definite matrix and Q is an
anti-symmetric matrix and f is of the form (2.48), the SDE (2.47) does indeed leave
the distribution p(z|X) ∝exp(−H(z)) stationary. Notice the similarity to the proof of
correctness of SGHMC.
This concludes the first part of the work by Ma, Chen and Fox [MCF15]. They also
show that this framework is complete in the sense that not only are Markov processes
of the form (2.47) valid samplers for distributions with ’energy’ H(z), but in fact this
framework encompasses all valid dynamics based MCMC samplers, both those that use
stochastic gradients as well as those with regular gradients. This can be proven by show-
ing that for any choice of the stochastic diffusion D there exists a anti-symmetric matrix
Q such that the sampler is indeed valid. This proof is rather technical so we will only
summarize the main points here.
The proof starts by multiplying both sides of (2.48) by the stationary distribution
pS(z) ∝exp[−H(z)], yielding (elementwise)
fi(z)pS(z) = −pS(z)(D + Q)∇H(z) +
d
∑
j=1
pS(z) ∂
∂zj
(Dij + Qij)
= −exp[−H(z)](D + Q)∇H(z) +
d
∑
j=1
exp[−H(z)] ∂
∂zj
(Dij + Qij).
(2.59)
Each term in the sum is the product of a function of z and a derivative of a function of
z, so we recall the product rule of differentiation and see that for all j,
exp[−H(z)] ∂
∂zj
(Dij+Qij) = −∂
∂zj
(exp[−H(z)])(Dij+Qij)+ ∂
∂zj
(exp[−H(z)](Dij+Qij)).
(2.60)
Substituting this into the sum over j, we get,
d
∑
j=1
exp[−H(z)] ∂
∂zj
(Dij+Qij) = −
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(e−H(z))(Dij+Qij)+
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(e−H(z)(Dij+Qij)),
(2.61)
from which we get,
d
∑
j=1
exp[−H(z)] ∂
∂zj
(Dij +Qij) = −(D +Q)∇e−H(z) +
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(e−H(z)(Dij +Qij)). (2.62)
It is clear that ∇e−H(z) = −∇H(z)e−H(z), so we arrive at,
d
∑
j=1
exp[−H(z)] ∂
∂zj
(Dij +Qij) = (D+Q)∇H(z) exp[−H(z)]+
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(e−H(z)(Dij +Qij)).
(2.63)
==PAGE:57==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
45
Substituting this into (2.59) and simplifying yields,
fi(z)pS(z) =
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(pS(z)(Dij + Qij)).
(2.64)
Using the linearity of the differential operator and rearranging some terms gives us the
relation,
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(QijpS(z)) = fipS(z) −
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(DijpS(z)).
(2.65)
Recall the Fokker-Planck equation for this system (2.49). Substituting pS into the (2.49)
and rearranging the derivatives yield,
∂
∂tpS(z) = −
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi

fi(z)pS(z) −
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(DijpS(z))

.
(2.66)
As pS is assumed to be the stationary distribution, the Fokker-Planck equation is zero
for this distribution. Thus, we have
∂
∂tpS(z) = −
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi

fi(z)pS(z) −
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(DijpS(z))

= 0
(2.67)
yielding,
d
∑
i=1
∂
∂zi

fi(z)pS(z) −
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(DijpS(z))

= 0.
(2.68)
Now we consider the two relations, (2.65) and (2.68). Ma, Chen and Fox suggest trans-
forming these relations with a Fourier transform with spectral variables ξ. Thus, we let
bfi(ξ) be the Fourier transform of fi(z)pS(z) −
∑d
j=1
∂
∂zj (DijpS(z)) and let bQ(ξ) be the
Fourier transform of pS(z)Q, that is,
bQ(ξ) =
∫
pS(z)Qdz,
(2.69)
bfi(ξ) =
∫
fi(z)pS(z) −
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(DijpS(z))dz,
(2.70)
we get a system of linear equations in Fourier space. We note that as
bQ is actually
defined in terms of a derivative of Q, the matrix Q is transformed to 2πiξ bQ [Chr10, Th.
7.1.2, v)].
Remark 1. In the following, there will be two distinct uses of i notationwise. If it is
subscripted, eg. fi it denotes index, wheras if it appears on its’ own, eg. 2πi it is as the
imaginary unit.
==PAGE:58==
46
2 Methods and theory
This gives us a system,



2πiξ bQ
= bf
ξ⊤bf
= 0
(2.71)
for which we are able to construct a bQ that is anti-symmetric and solves the system. It
is clear that bQ should be a linear mapping from the span of ξ to the span of bf.
We can construct bQ as a composition of two matrices,
bQ(ξ) =
1
2πi
bfξ⊤−ξ bf ⊤
ξ⊤ξ
.
(2.72)
It is easily seen that bQ is anti-symmetric, as,
bQ⊤=
1
2πi
1
ξ⊤ξ( bfξ⊤−ξ bf ⊤)⊤
=
1
2πi
1
ξ⊤ξ(ξ bf ⊤−bfξ⊤)
= −bQ
(2.73)
where we used that for matrices A and B, we have that (AB)⊤= B⊤A⊤.
It is also clear that this choice of bQ does indeed solve the linear system, as plugging in
reveals:
2πi bQξ = 2πi 1
2πi
1
ξ⊤ξ
[ bfξ⊤−ξ bf ⊤]
ξ
=
1
ξ⊤ξ

bfξ⊤ξ −ξ bf ⊤ξ
|{z}
=0


=
bfξ⊤ξ
ξ⊤ξ
= bf,
(2.74)
where we used that ξ⊤ξ is a scalar and bf and ξ are orthogonal.
Thus, we have created a skew symmetric matrix bQ that is anti-symmetric and solves the
linear system in frequency space.
Now, the original
bQ can be constructed by dividing the elementwise inverse Fourier
transform of bQ by pS, ie.
Qij =
1
pS(z)
∫
bQije2πiξ⊤zdξ,
=
1
pS(z)
∫ξj bfi −ξi bfj
2πiξ⊤ξ
e2πiξ⊤zdξ.
(2.75)
==PAGE:59==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
47
We can easily verify that Q is indeed anti-symmetric. This is due to the fact that in the
above integral, we have that,
ξj bfi −ξi bfj = −(ξi bfj −ξj bfi).
All other parts of the integral is invariant wrt.
i and j and as such we have that
Qij = −Qji and by extension Q⊤= −Q.
Chen, Ma and Fox argue that all the entries in Q are real and concludes that their
framework is indeed complete.
Before we go into how the framework can be applied in practice, we briefly summarize
the developed theory here.
We saw that for any continuous Markov process of the form,
dz = f(z)dt +
√
2D(z)dW (t),
for some positive definite matrix D and d-dimensional Wiener process W , if f is a
vector-valued function of the form,
f(z) = −(D(z) + Q(z))∇H(z) + Γ(z),
with
Γi(z) =
d
∑
j=1
∂
∂zj
(Dij(z) + Qij(z)),
for some anti-symmetric matrix Q, then the Markov process has the stationary distribu-
tion pS(z) ∝exp(−H(z)) 4. The distribution is unique [MCF15], and simulation of the
Markov process may thus be used to generate samples of pS.
Furthermore, we showed that if pS is indeed the stationary distribution, there exists an
anti-symmetric matrix Q such that for any stochastic diffusion matrix D, the Markov
process may be written on the desired form - and thus that the framework is indeed
complete as claimed by the original authors.
2.2.4.1
The framework in practice
Until this point, we have solely discussed the abstract theory behind the framework, and
we have briefly mentioned that in order for the (correct) samples to be drawn, we need
to simulate the dynamical system governing the Markov process. This is infeasible to do
exactly, so instead we employ an ε-discretization as we have with the specific samplers
(SGLD, SGHMC and the vanilla dynamics based samplers).
The ε-discretized update rule follows the previous ones, as we for {εt}T
t=0 have,
z(t+1) = z(t) −εt
2
{
[D(z(t)) + Q(z(t))]∇H(z(t)) + Γ(z(t))
}
+ N(0, εtD(z(t))).
(2.76)
4Note that if D is only positive semi-definite, ergodicity of the process has to be shown explicitly
==PAGE:60==
48
2 Methods and theory
This is of course based on the full dataset through the evaluation of the gradient ∇H
- which is as we recall parameterized through the ’potential energy’ measured through
the log posterior distribution in the Bayesian context. Now, as we have done previously,
we can provide an unbiased estimate of this gradient based on a mini-batch of the data
by replacing the true gradient by a stochastic gradient as we have described extensively
previously.
We once more assume that the mini-batches are large enough that the
central limit theorem holds. As in SGHMC, we will let eU(θ) denote the noisy negative
log likelihood over a mini-batch, such that the gradient becomes,
∇eU(θ) = −N
n
n
∑
i=1
∇log p(xti|θ) −∇log p(θ),
(2.77)
exactly as we saw with SGHMC.
As the central limit theorem holds, eU(θ) is normally distributed around the true gradient
with some variance V (θ).
As kinetic energy term of the Hamiltonian is unaffected by the stochastic gradients, the
resulting noisy Hamiltonian is also normally distributed around the true Hamiltonian
with the same variance, that is,
f
H(z) = H(z) + (N(0, V (θ)), 0)⊤,
(2.78)
This introduces noise to the dynamical system, very similar to what we discussed
when we considered SGHMC - namely through (2.22). To counteract this introduced
noise, we once more assume we have an estimate of this noise, bB that satisfies D−1
2εt bB ⪰
0 and change the update,
z(t+1) = z(t) −εt
2
{
[D(z(t)) + Q(z(t))]∇H(z(t)) + Γ(z(t))
}
+ N(0, εtεt(D(z(t)) −bBεt)).
(2.79)
The contribution from bB scales with ε2
t, and as such when εt is small, the noise from
the stochastic gradients is dominated by the injected noise (similar to what was done
in SGLD), and this leaves the corerct distribution invariant - and this is the stochastic
gradient version of this framework.
We are now ready to see how the discussed methods - developed with completely different
arguments - fit into this framework. This is done in the following.
2.2.4.2
Casting the previous samplers in this framework
As suggested in the development of the framework, every dynamics based sampler can
be formulated in this framework - by simply specifying D and Q properly. We will do
this for the methods described in this thesis, as it has been done in [MCF15].
SGLD
SGLD is arguably the simplest SGMCMC method, and as such contains no
explicit contribution to the deterministic drift, as measured through Q - so for SGLD,
==PAGE:61==
2.2 Stochastic gradient MCMC
49
we set Q = 0. Furthermore, the diffusion is specified in terms of the preconditioning
matrix M, and as such we have that D = M. As SGLD is uses first order dynamics - ie.
there is no momentum variable, as in SGHMC - so the Hamiltonian is specified solely in
terms of the potential energy, U(θ). Namely, we set H(z) = −log p(θ) −∑N
i=1 log p(xi|θ)
with z = θ. Finally, we do not explicitly correct the dynamics to counteract the effect
of the noise from the stochastic gradients - this is handled implicitly by the decreasing
stepsizes, so bB = 0.
Plugging this into (2.79) yields the SGLD update (2.8).
SGHMC
When we discussed SGHMC, we actually already implicitly put it into this
framework, namely through (2.24) and (2.25). Here, we have z = (θ, r)⊤and H(z) =
U(θ) + K(r). We saw in (2.25) that,
D =
(
0
0
0
B
)
,
and,
Q =
(
0
−I
I
0
)
.
We set bB to be an estimate of the noise of the stochastic gradients (in practice, this can
be 0 if the stepsizes are decreasing fast enough). Plugging these in, yields the SGHMC
update equations.
SGFS
SGFS is simply an augmentation of SGLD with adaptive preconditioning to
allow for larger stepsizes. This means that D and Q are as in SGLD, but we correct
for the noise of the stochastic gradients so we set bB as in SGHMC. This gives us the
SGFS update - recall that the computational challenges in SGFS is due to ensure that
the variance of the injected noise is postitive definite and to have injected noise with a
full covariance structure and to include curvature into the sampler.
So to summarize: the overall idea is to ensure that the SGMCMC method initially
converges to a regular MCMC method and from that point use this ’estimate’ of a regular
MCMC method to sample the posterior utilizing stochastic gradients. This means that
while running an SGMCMC method we get two ’types’ of convergence running simulta-
neously. One ensures that the SGMCMC method itself becomes sufficiently similar to
a full-batch method and thus has the right stationary distribution. The other is regular
convergence known from all MCMC methods, where the Markov chain should converge
to the stationary distribution before the states of the chain may be considered samples
from the stationary distribution. As the second type of convergence is always necessary
for MCMC to work in general, SGMCMC methods are simply methods designed to
alleviate the noise introduced by the stochasticity of the gradients.
==PAGE:62==
50
2 Methods and theory
2.2.5
Stepsize schemes
All the methods we have discussed above include stepsizes. Normally, these should be
decreasing to satisfy the Robbins-Monro criteria, but in some cases other schemes are
preferred to yield a biased posterior, that may give better mixing or faster convergence.
We will experiment with three different stepsize schemes, which will briefly be introduced.
Constant stepsizes
Constant stepsizes are self explanatory. It is simply selecting a
suitable size, ε0, and let εt = ε0 for all t. This is similar to what is done in SGHMC
when the method is formulated as a SGD with momentum. While formally incorrect,
selecting this scheme in SGLD may perform well in practice, and produces a biased
estimate of the posterior (ie. an approximate posterior) instead of an unbiased estimate.
The advantage is, that we may achieve better mixing and faster convergence, which may
be desirable in practice [MCF15]. An illustration of this stepsize scheme is provided in
Figure 2.1(a) where ε0 = 0.01.
Polynomial annealing
The polynomially annealed stepsize scheme is arguably the
simplest parametric scheme that ensures that the Robbins-Monro criteria is satisfied. To
compute the steps, we require the maximum stepsize εmax, the minimum stepsize εmin
(eg. the stepsize of the final parameter update), γ ∈(0.5, 1] and the number of steps in
total T to be predefined. Then we compute,
k =
( εmin
εmax
) 1
γ .
Now, we compute,
b =
kT
1 −k,
and finally,
a = εmaxbγ.
We are now ready to compute the polynomially annealed stepsizes as,
εt = a(b + t)−γ.
(2.80)
This scheme satisfies the Robbins-Monro criteria [RM51] and will anneal the stepsize
from εmax to εmin in T steps where γ controls the rate. The Robbins-Monro criteria are
only satisfied if 0.5 < γ ≤1. An example with εmax = 0.01, εmin = 0.0001 and γ = 0.55
can be seen in Figure 2.1(b).
Cyclic stepsizes
The cyclic stepizes can be defined as [Zha+19],
εt = 1
2εmax
[
cos
(
πmod {t −1, ⌈T/K⌉}
⌈T/K⌉
)
+ 1
]
.
where ⌈·⌉denotes the ceiling function.
This scheme will ensure that the stepsizes are annealed from εmax to 0 K times over T
==PAGE:63==
2.3 Bayesian deep learning
51
steps. The intuition behind the cyclic stepsizes is that we should cycle between large
and small steps to escape local maxima, while still satisfying the Robbins-Monro criteria.
Ideally, intermediate samples from iterations where the stepsize was large should be
discarded, as these are technically not from the correct posterior. In practice, however,
not doing this simply leads to a biased posterior which may indeed be useful in practice.
We refer to Figure 2.1(c) for an illustration
(a) Constant steps with ε0 =
0.01
(b) Polynomial steps, annealed
from 0.01 to 0.0001
(c) Cyclic steps with εmax = 0.1
and 5 cycles
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the different stepsize schemes.
2.3
Bayesian deep learning
Bayesian deep learning (BDL) is closely related to regular deep learning, differing only
in the way inference is performed. As the name may suggest, we can directly adapt
Bayesian statistics into the framework of deep learning by noting that a neural network
is nothing more than a statistical model - albeit difficult to interpret - parameterized
fully by its’ architecture and its’ weights. To keep in the description of BDL we will use
the terms weights (as commonly used in deep learning) and parameters interchangably.
For a great introduction to deep learning in general, we refer to the excellent textbook
by Goodfellow, Bengio and Courville [GBC16]. For a more formal treatment of BDL,
we refer to eg. [Nea96].
2.3.1
Motivation and introduction
Traditionally neural networks are trained using direct stochastic optimization of some
pre-defined loss function over the parameters, essentially learning a maximum likelihood
estimate, depending on the choice of loss function. The loss function is often defined
to ensure high predictive performance on some test set of the data and the weights are
optimized using some stochastic optimization method. Much work has been conducted
in these optimization methods to avoid eg. local minima and to improve training speed,
see eg. [GBC16, ch. 8].
==PAGE:64==
52
2 Methods and theory
Now as the optimization routines focus solely on achieving high predictive perfor-
mance, we may suffer a great loss when it comes to explainability of the model and
estimates of uncertainty. Futhermore, the training of neural networks are prone to over-
fitting the training data, and as such, regularization techniques are often applied.
In the Bayesian framework, the prior acts as a regularizer in a very natural way. This
is because the prior pulls the posterior distribution towards the mode of the prior as
specified by us, and as we have mentioned, choosing a Gaussian prior is equivalent to
regularizing the parameters in the ℓ2-norm. Furthermore, the factorization of the like-
lihood, (2.3) ensures that the more data we have available, the less importance will be
put on the prior. This is clear, when the number of data points N grows, the likelihood
will be dominated by the sum over the data points, in accordance with our intuition
that when much data is available, our own prior belief of the model parameters should
have less impact on the found posterior distribution.
The main difference between regular deep learning and BDL is in the fact that in BDL
we learn a joint distribution over the parameters conditioned on the data instead of a
point estimate in the Bayesian sense - we learn a posterior distribution of the parameters
given the data, p(θ|X). The great advantage here is that all uncertainty regarding both
parameters and predictions are encapsulated completely by the posterior distribution of
the parameters, naturally yielding a measure of our degree of belief in the predictions -
through eg. the posterior predictive distribution, (2.5).
Say we have a classification problem we want to solve using BDL. Directly optimizing
the weights in the network yield a decision boundary that maximizes class separation
in the problem. However, there is probably several decision boundaries separating the
classes equally well - or maybe even better. Which one of the equally probable decision
boundaries you get is dependent on the optimizer, initial value of the weights and the
choice of loss function. The stochastic optimization methods only guarantee convergence
to a local minima. Using BDL we get several of these boundaries, and their associated
probabilities.
If we present the model with some new unseen class that has not been used in the
training of the model, the hypothesis is that in the case of a single decision boundary
most (or all) of the instances of the unseen class will be classified to a single class, as they
may well be in a completely different part of the data space and thus far away from the
boundary - and as they are far away, they are likely classified with high confidence by
the model. We have tried to illustrate this in Figure 2.2. The dashed lines are decision
boundaries that separate the red and blue classes. They all achieve a good separation
of the classes, and are thus all probable decision boundaries for this problem. When
optimizing parameters in a model in the conventional way (be it with deep learning or
some other method), we can get any one of these decision boundaries. When we present
the model with a new unseen class (purple in the figure), they will (almost) all be on the
same side of that boundary, and may even be far away - thus classifying them with high
confidence to either red or blue. In BDL (and other Bayesian classification methods) we
==PAGE:65==
2.3 Bayesian deep learning
53
get samples, from which all of these lines are plausible, and thus in some of the samples
corresponding to a decision boundary, the purple dots will be classified as red, and some
cases be classified as blue - but will have high uncertainty in the posterior predictive
distribution when averaging over all the samples. This is exactly the effect we are trying
to achieve - regardless if the decision boundary is produced by a neural network, such
that the boundary may be non-linear or by a simpler method such as logistic regression.
Figure 2.2: When trying to separate the blue class and the red class in the following
problem, we can achieve multiple decision boundaries that separate the
classes (almost) equally well - illustrated here with dashed lines. When we
present the model with a previously unseen class (purple), for any single
decision boundary they will (almost) all be classified as either red or blue
with relatively high confidence.
So how do we measure this? In the binary case, it is quite easy - simply look at the
posterior predictive probability of assigning a point. In the multiclass problem, we can
consider some other measures - as will be introduced in the following.
2.3.1.1
Enropy as a measure of uncertainty
We will use entropy as the measure of uncertainty for multiclass classifation problems.
See eg.
[Mur12, sec.
2.8] for a general description of entropy from an information
theoretic perspective. Intuitively entropy may be considered a metric that describes how
much information is produced by a stochastic source. That is, if the source of the data
(ie. its’ distribution) have high uncertainty, we will more often see instances with lower
probability and the entropy of the distribution tries to convey the rate with which this
occurs. Namely, if an instance of a probability distribution with low probability occurs,
this carries more ’information’ than a high probability instance would have. This effect
is formally defined by:
==PAGE:66==
54
2 Methods and theory
Definition 5 (Entropy). The entropy H of a discrete random variable C with outcome
space {ci}C
i=1 and probability mass function p(C) is defined as,
H(C) = −
C
∑
i=1
p(C = ci) log2 p(C = ci).
Entropy is measured in a unit corresponding to the logarithm used in the computation
- normally logarithms with base 2 or base e are used (yielding a unit of bits or ’nats’
respectively). We will use the base 2 logarithm in our experiments.
In our context, for an unseen class in a multiclass classification problem, we want to see a
high entropy for each of the data points from the unseen class in the posterior predictive
distribution, as this means that we have a high uncertainty on this classification. The
maximum entropy distribution is the discrete uniform distribution [Mur12, sec. 9.2.6]
where the entropy is log2 C bits for C different outcomes.
In our experiments, we will consider each data point in the unseen class in the poste-
rior predictive distribution and compute their individual entropies in this distribution
- formally we have a random variable for each instance in the unseen class that is dis-
tributed according the posterior predictive distribution of that instance - and it is for
this distribution we will compute the entropy.
2.3.2
Probabilistic interpretation of common deep
learning loss functions
In this section we will consider some of the most common loss functions that has found
use for the common deep leraning tasks of classification and regression. When a neural
network is trained using some of these loss functions it is equivalent to regular maximum
likelihood estimation as known from frequentist statistics where we model some charac-
teristic of the data - often the class in classification tasks and the mean in regression
tasks - using a neural network.
The ones we present here are by no means an exhaustive list of possible loss functions
- but are some of the most common ones. In fact, several highly specific loss functions
exist for specific tasks - and deep learning has proven a flexible tool for modeling almost
anything as long as enough (high quality) data is available and you are able to tailor a
loss function that extracts what you want to learn from the data.
For a more classical introduction to the loss functions we refer to eg. [Nie15; GBC16].
Cross-entropy loss
Perhaps the most common loss function used when using deep
learning for classification is cross-entropy. The per-data loss function is defined as,
L(yi, xi) = −
C
∑
c=1
I(yi = c) log p(yi = c|xi, θ),
(2.81)
==PAGE:67==
2.3 Bayesian deep learning
55
where p(yi = c|xi, θ) is the probability that xi is classified as c under our model with
parameters θ, and
I(yi = c) =



1,
if yi = c
0,
else
.
In practice, we average over the data available in the current batch and use this as our
loss function.
We may consider the classification problem at hand in probabilistic terms, where we
say that the outcome is distributed according to a product of categorical distributions.
Recall the probability mass function of a categorical distribution with probability simplex
π = {pc}C
c=1 is,
p(y|π) =
C
∏
c=1
pI(y=c)
c
.
(2.82)
Taking the logarithm yields,
log p(y|π) =
C
∑
c=1
I(y = c) log pc.
(2.83)
In the context of deep learning, if for a given i set pc = p(yi = c|xi, θ), is is easily seen that
the per-data cross-entropy loss is simply the negative log likelihood of a categorical distri-
bution. As we assume the data is conditionally independent and identically distributed,
we can simply sum the different categorical distributions to yield the cross-entropy loss
function. Thus, minimizing cross-entropy corresponds to maximum likelihood estima-
tion of a sequence of independent categorical distributions.
MSE loss
The mean squared error loss (MSE loss) is very common for regression
problems, eg. for neural networks for continuous outputs. The per-data loss function is
defined as,
L(yi, xi) = (yi −byi)2,
(2.84)
where byi is the prediction from our model - eg. the neural network.
While it may not be as clear as with the cross-entropy this corresponds to maximum
likelihood estimation of a Gaussian response with constant variance. That is, we model
yi ∼N(byi, σ2). As we once more assume conditionally independent data points, the
vector Y containing all the true responses follow a multivariate normal distribution,
Y ∼N( bY , σ2I),
where bY is a vector containing the corresponding predictions. The log likelihood function
for a multivariate Gaussian is,
log N(Y | bY , σ2I) ∝−1
2(Y −bY )⊤σ−2I(Y −bY ) = −1
2σ2(Y −bY )⊤(Y −bY ),
(2.85)
==PAGE:68==
56
2 Methods and theory
where the proportionality is up to an additive constant not dependent on bY - recall that
σ is assumed constant. Evaluating the inner product yields,
log N(Y | bY , σ2I) ∝−
∑
i
(yi −byi)2,
(2.86)
where we drop the terms not dependent on bY .
This is exactly proportional to the negative MSE loss, when considering all the data
in a given batch. Thus, minimizing the MSE loss corresponds to maximum likelihood
estimation when the response is assumed Gaussian with constant variance. We could also
include heteroskedacity in the model by also optimizing over σ2 or even a full covariance
matrix Σ, where we would slightly alter the loss.
Generalizing to any distribution
The paragraphs above discuss only two very com-
mon loss functions for deep learning. But in fact, if we borrow some theory from the
study of generalized linear models (see eg. [MT11]), we can use any assumption of the
distribution of the response depending on what we want to model. In fact, we often
want to model the mean of the stochastic response as a neural network, and this is done
by adjusting the loss function to the distribution at hand. In the popular framework
PyTorch [Pas+19], the negative log likelihood of a Poisson distribution is implemented
as a loss function by,
L(yi, xi) = byi −yi log byi + log(yi!),
(2.87)
where we with very similar arguments as before can deduce that it follows that yi ∼
Poisson(byi) such that the response is assumed to be distributed according to a Poisson
distribution.
To summarize, we have shown that the classical paradigm for training deep learning
models is, in fact, equivalent to maximum likelihood estimation as known from classi-
cal statistics. The main difference between BDL and classical deep learning is in the
way inference is performed to achieve the predictions bY . Here, we put a prior on the
parameters in the neural network and perform fully Bayesian inference on those, while
the distributional assumptions on the response is the same.
There is a clear distinction to be made. The loss function for the neural network is not
entirely the same function as the one fed to an MCMC sampler. The loss function is
included in Bayes’ theorem through the likelihood, but as we have already mentioned,
the prior acts as a regularizer on the model parameters, that helps to avoid overfitting
the model, as well to include prior knowledge in the model parameters.
In our implementation we will use the popular deep learning framework PyTorch for
implementing simple neural networks and for automatic differntiation (eg. backpropa-
gation), and we will not go into detail with general deep learning theory for this project.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 3
Experiments and discussion
In the following, we test and compare the algorithms for which the theory was developed
in the previous section. We will test the algorithms both on synthetic data as well as
on some ’real-life’ data, namely the well known dataset of images, CIFAR-10 (with a
single class from CIFAR-100). The objective of these experiments is to verify or deny
the hypotheses stated in the introduction. We have implemented the three discussed
samplers, SGLD, SGHMC and SGFS in Python using only NumPy and PyTorch. Py-
Torch is only used for implementing neural networks and for automatic differentiation
to compute (stochastic) gradients.
3.1
Comparing with known posterior
To verify that our samplers are able to find the posterior distribution even in the simplest
of cases, we consider an example where the true posterior is known.
We can compute an example for which the posterior is known by utilizing conjugate
priors as introduced in Appendix A.1. Here, if we assume the likelihood of the data is
Gaussian with known covariance Σ and unknown mean vector µTrue, and the prior for
µTrue is Gaussian, eg. µTrue ∼N(µ0, Σ0) the true posterior mean and covariances have
an explicit form, and we get that,
µTrue|X, Σ ∼N((Σ−1
0
+ NΣ−1)−1(Σ−1
0 µ0 + NΣ−1 ¯X), (Σ−1
0
+ NΣ−1)−1),
(3.1)
where N is the number of data points and ¯X = 1
N
∑N
i=1 xi.
This gives a ground truth comparison to verify that the samplers are indeed able to find
the true posterior.
If we choose the following true parameters,
µTrue = (−1, 2)⊤,
Σ =
(
10
5
5
4
)
,
we can compute the true posterior with (3.1).
We simulate 2000 datapoints from N(µTrue, Σ) and choose a standard Gaussian prior,
eg. µTrue ∼N(0, I). We compute the true posterior, and the data and the posterior
density for µTrue can be seen in Figure 3.1.
We run our samplers, SGLD, SGHMC and SGFS with polynomially annealed stepsizes,
see Section 2.2.5 where we anneal the stepsizes from 0.001 to 0.0001 with γ = 0.55, see
Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:70==
58
3 Experiments and discussion
(a) Synthetic data
(b) True posterior density
Figure 3.1: Simulated data and true posterior densities.
Figure 3.2: Polynomially annealed steps for recovering known posterior.
For all samplers we choose a batchsize of 250 and run for 6000 epochs resulting
in 48000 samples. As initial sample, we draw from a standard Gaussian distribution,
resulting in µ(0) = (−2.09, 0.09)⊤. In all cases, we consider the final 10000 samples for
the posterior, as we are then quite sure that the samplers have all converged to the
correct posterior. Finally, we estimate the density from the samples using a Gaussian
kernel density estimate with a bandwidth of 0.01.
SGLD
Running SGLD with no preconditioning (eg. M = I) achieves the result in
Figure 3.3
==PAGE:71==
3.1 Comparing with known posterior
59
(a) Trace of log posterior density
(b) Samples from SGLD
(c) Estimate of posterior density
Figure 3.3: Results of SGLD for recovering known posterior.
SGHMC
We run SGHMC with η = 0.001 and α = 0.95 and resample the momentum
r every 50 parameter updates. The results can be seen in Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:72==
60
3 Experiments and discussion
(a) Trace of log posterior density
(b) Samples from SGHMC
(c) Estimate of posterior density
Figure 3.4: Results of SGHMC for recovering known posterior.
SGFS
We run SGFS where we introduce the Fisher information after 1 epoch. The
result can be seen in Figure 3.5. Interestingly, we see indications of higher correlation
between neighboring samples for SGFS (as seen on the ’lines’ in the sample plot). This
is due to the adaptive preconditioning of SGFS, such that the sampler continuously
transforms the gradient direction based on the local curvature of the parameter space,
such that dimensions pointing towards areas of high probability has higher weight in the
update.
==PAGE:73==
3.1 Comparing with known posterior
61
(a) Trace of log posterior density
(b) Samples from SGFS
(c) Estimate of posterior density
Figure 3.5: Results of SGFS for recovering known posterior.
Summary of results
We see that all the methods are indeed able to find the posterior
to some degree. This gives an indication that the samplers are indeed asymptotically
correct.
As we have mentioned, a common use of Bayesian inference is to find the
Maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate. This can be estimated from the found posterior
densities, and we report the results in Table 3.1, where we also report the true MAP
computed from the true posterior. We see that they are all able to find the true MAP
value with a maximum absolute error of 0.04. This verifies that the methods are correct,
and we have implemented them correctly.
Table 3.1: Found MAP estimates.
µ \Method
Truth
SGLD
SGHMC
SGFS
µ1
-0.92
-0.96
-0.94
-0.92
µ2
2.00
1.98
1.99
2.00
==PAGE:74==
62
3 Experiments and discussion
3.2
Synthetic classification task
We consider a low-dimensional synthetic classification task with many observations to
verify that using SGMCMC methods in the classification does indeed outperform the
classical methods on either speed or as measured through uncertainty of the estimates in
regions far away from the data, related to the final two hypotheses outlined in Section 1.1.
3.2.1
Comparison of SGMCMC algorithms and regular
SGD
We create a simple two-dimensional binary classification task, where the true classes
are distributed according to isotropic Gaussians with standard deviation of 1.5. We
generate 1.000.000 data points, with 500.000 belonging to each of the two classes and
withhold 10.000 data points as a test set. We ensure that there is some overlap between
the classes. The data can be seen in Figure 3.6. We fit a logistic regression with no
Figure 3.6: Synthetic data for classification. Red points denote the positive class.
regularization to the data, where we let the red points denote the positive class. Note
that this is equivalent to a neural network with a single layer with softmax (or sigmoid
in the binary case) activation. When thresholding at 0.5, we get the decision boundary
in Figure 3.7(a) where we show the decision boundary with all the data. In Figure 3.7(b)
we see the probability the model assigns to each point in the space, plotted with the test
set.
As expected, this results in a linear boundary that separates the classes well. How-
ever, if a point is far not very close the decision boundary, the model assigns very high
confidence to the classification, which may be inaccurate if the class is completely new.
We will investigate this in a later experiment. The accuracy of the logistic regression on
the test set can be seen in Table 3.2.
==PAGE:75==
3.2 Synthetic classification task
63
(a) Logistic regression with no regularization (b) Logistic regression probability surface with
test set
Figure 3.7: Logistic regression in the synthetic classification task.
To compare the discussed SGMCMC methods against eachother (cf. the second hypoth-
esis in Section 1.1), we use a simple neural network as classifier, thus using Bayesian
deep learning as compared to classical deep learning. We create a feed forward network
with a single hidden layer of 10 units with a hyperbolic tangent activation function giv-
ing a total of 52 trainable parameters. This will allow the classifier to capture some
non-linearity, as we would otherwise likely get the same result as in logistic regression.
We fix the sizes of the mini-batches to 500 and do 100 epochs, yielding a total of 198.000
samples (or parameter updates in the case of SGD). Each experiment is run twice, with
different initial guesses drawn from a standard normal distribution.
The loss used is cross entropy (negative cross entropy for the samplers) and we put a
standard Gaussian prior on the weights of the network, equivalent to regularizing the
weights in the ℓ2 norm.
To evaluate the results, we consider the posterior predictive distribution, see (2.5) over
the last 20.000 samples using only every other sample, effectively using 10.000 samples
for the posterior. Finally, we consider the trace of the log posterior distribution. For
the samplers, we consider the polynomially annealed stepsizes, annealing the steps from
0.005 to 0.000005 with γ = 0.999.
The results are summarized in Table 3.2, and in all the plots in the following section,
the test set is plotted with posterior predictive distributions.
SGD
We optimize the weights in the classical manner using stochastic gradient descent
with momentum. The learning rate is fixed at 0.001 and the momentum constant is fixed
at 0.9. We use the same batch-size as for all the samplers, and allow the network to train
for 100 epochs. The results are seen in Figure 3.8, where we plot the probability map
along with the test set. We note that this result is almost identical to that of logistic
regression, see Figure 3.7. The accuracy on the test set is 0.88, which is identical to the
==PAGE:76==
64
3 Experiments and discussion
one of logistic regression. This experiment is run only once, as we saw that the results
are (almots) identical, regardless of initial guess.
Figure 3.8: Results of SGD with momentum on the synthetic classification task along
with the test set.
SGLD
We run SGLD as described above and with no preconditioning to keep things
simple. The results of the first run can be found in Figure 3.9. The results of the second
run is found in Figure 3.10. We note several things here. For one, we have indications
of convergence, as seen in the log posterior traces in both experiments. Secondly, we
see some non-linearity as seen in the decision boundary in both the plots. It is not
much, however.
This is probably due to the rapidly decreasing stepsizes, such that
both the injected noise has a relatively small norm and the distance traveled in the
gradient direction is not long. As we only consider samples for which the stepsizes were
quite small - the variance of the update should be dominated by the injected noise -
it is not entirely unsurprising, that we do indeed find a decision boundary similar to
that of logistic regression or normal SGD, see Figure 3.7(b) and Figure 3.8. We found,
however, that greatly increasing the stepsize in the polynomial annealing scheme lead to
divergence of the algorithm. In general, it is quite difficult to achieve good convergence
with SGLD due to relatively naive approach to sampling - SGLD may be seen as SGD
with injected noise and decreasing stepsizes. In fact, Mandt, Hoffman and Blei [MHB17]
discuss this exact effect in their paper. Overall, though, we achieve quite good separation
and the posterior predictive accuracy can be found in Table 3.2.
It is also worth noting that we find the same optima in both experiments, indicating that
this is indeed a region of the parameter space with quite high likelihood. Furthermore,
we note that the posterior is likely quite flat in many dimensions around the optimal
point - probably due to the high dimensionality of the parameter space compared to
the data space (52 dimensions vs. 2 dimensions) - and the naive approach of SGLD in
conjuction with the low stepsizes makes it quite hard for SGLD to move away from this
region, if possible at all. Finally, we note that in the second experiment, Figure 3.10,
we see a more curved decision boundary. This has the same probability as the more
==PAGE:77==
3.2 Synthetic classification task
65
linear boundary found in the first experiment, Figure 3.9. This is due to the fact that
both of these boundaries separate the classes almost equally well (see Table 3.2). This is
probably due to the sampler not traversing the parameter space very much in the final
samples. The prior should be what is pulling these solutions closer together, but as we
have 500 data points in each mini-batch, the prior is very insignificant in this case - it
has the same effect as only a single data point would have had.
(a) Trace of the log posterior, SGLD
(b) Posterior predictive distribution, SGLD
Figure 3.9: Results of SGLD, run 1.
(a) Trace of the log posterior, SGLD
(b) Posterior predictive distribution, SGLD
Figure 3.10: Results of SGLD, run 2.
SGHMC
We run SGHMC with the same polynomially annealed stepsizes, although
this only plays a role everytime we resample the momentum parameter in SGHMC,
and as such most of the time, we effectively run with constant stepsizes. We set L = 5,
α = 0.1 and η = 0.001/5 = 0.0002 to mimic the behaviour of SGD - ie. the total distance
traveled in the state space (ignoring injected noise) for a single iteration of SGHMC is
==PAGE:78==
66
3 Experiments and discussion
the same as a single parameter update in SGD. Furthermore, we select α = 0.1 as this is
equivalent to having SGD with a momentum constant of 0.9. We set the estimate of the
noise of the stochastic gradients to ˆβ = 0 for simplicity. The results of the experiments
can be found in Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12, and the posterior predictive accuracies are
found in Table 3.2.
In the figures we see that SGHMC has converged in both experiments (log posterior
traces). It has to the same decision boundary despite the different initial guesses. This is
once more due to the flat posterior. Futhermore, the qualitative look of the probability
maps are much closer to what we expected from a SGMCMC method on this problem
- the further away we are from the data points, the higher degree of uncertainty the
model puts on these areas. This is seen by the ’fanning out’ behaviour of the contours.
It would be ideal if the model completely encircled the two clusters, and only assigned
a high degree of belief to these areas (ie. probability 1 or probability 0). This is hard
to achieve in practice due to the sequential nature of SGMCMC and MCMC in general.
This would require a large jump in the state space, and that is highly unlikely with the
methods we have implemented. This is exactly the goal of the cyclic stepsize scheme we
have discussed in the previous chapter (Section 2.2.5), but we found that this did not
alleviate the problem in this example probably due to the simplicity of the problem -
the two classes are simply too easily separated by a linear decision boundary.
Finally, we believe that taking 5 steps for every sample and the random momentum
from SGHMC has helped us achieve the fanned out decision boundaries. This is due
to the fact that the noise introduced by the stochastic gradients are accumulated over
the gradient steps between each sample before it is saved, such that we achieve samples
further apart in the parameter space. This effect is slowed down by the friction term in
SGHMC, and the total distance traveled in the gradient direction is (almost) the same
as in SGD. Verifying these propositions requires more analysis, though - and we believe
that the theory discussed by Mandt, Hoffman and Blei [MHB17] is a good starting point.
(a) Trace of the log posterior, SGHMC
(b) Posterior predictive distribution, SGHMC
Figure 3.11: Results of SGHMC, run 1.
==PAGE:79==
3.2 Synthetic classification task
67
(a) Trace of the log posterior, SGHMC
(b) Posterior predictive distribution, SGHMC
Figure 3.12: Results of SGHMC, run 2.
SGFS
We run SGFS with the polynomially annealed stepsizes, and begin including
curvature information (eg. Fisher information) after 5 epochs. The results can be seen
in Figure 3.13 and Figure 3.14. Once more, we see that traces of the log posteriors have
stabilized, indicating convergence of the samplers. Looking at the posterior predictive
distributions, we see some unexpected behaviour. Here it looks as if the sampler has
not converged entirely, especially in run 2, Figure 3.14. While we get a higher predictive
perfomance from run 2, see Table 3.2, we note that the model assigns areas (for instance
in the area where −2 < x1 < −0.2 and −6 < x2 < −3) is assigned (relatively) high
probability of being red. This is quite strange behaviour, but is probably due to the
fact that the data is quite concentrated around the centers of the clusters. As such, the
classes are well separated even if the method looks as if it did not converge. In run 1,
we see behaviour that is more expected. It appears as if model once more finds strange
patches of high probability away from the data.
If we look at the log posterior traces in both runs, we see what looks like a mode switching
behaviour, ie. that the sampler jumps between two modes - but as the log posteriors
overall have an upwards trend, the sampler moves towards area of high probability in
the state space.
Interestingly, we also notice that SGFS finds a completely different optimum in the log
posterior than both SGLD and SGHMC - as seen on both the traces of the log posterior
and the posterior predictive density - in fact, the optimum found by SGFS has much
higher probability in the posterior than both SGLD and SGHMC. This is probably due
to the full covariance structure of the injected noise in the update step - recall that this
is based on the Fisher information.
==PAGE:80==
68
3 Experiments and discussion
(a) Trace of the log posterior, SGFS
(b) Posterior predictive distribution, SGFS
Figure 3.13: Results of SGFS, run 1.
(a) Trace of the log posterior, SGFs
(b) Posterior predictive distribution, SGFS
Figure 3.14: Results of SGFS, run 2.
Summary and discussion
We report the poeterior predictive accuracy of the test
set of all the experiments in Table 3.2. Note that logistic regression and SGD was only
run once, as logistic regression has no probabilistic element in this case and SGD was
found to give the same decision boundary regardless of initial guess.
The main point to take from these experiments is that all methods are indeed able
to separate the classes (almost) equally well, and they all perform on par to classical
methods such as a neural network trained with SGD. We see that although the methods
perform similarly on the test set, they achieve different posterior predictive distributions.
Asymptotically, they should be the same, and only differ on speed of convergence and
mixing rates, so it may seem surprising that the decision boundaries are different for
each of the methods. As we have already mentioned, this is probably due to the higher
dimensionality of the parameter space compared to the data space, yielding a flat pos-
==PAGE:81==
3.2 Synthetic classification task
69
terior. To verify this, further analysis is required, though. We found that decreasing
the number of units in the hidden layer thus reducing the dimensionality of the feature
space yielded similar results on posterior predictive accuracy, but the results were much
more similar to that of SGD confirming our belief that it is indeed the case.
We saw that especially SGFS was quite hard to get to converge to a meaningful decision
boundary. This indicates that the adaptive preconditioning may not benefit the sam-
pling when the problem is as simple as this.
Furthermore, we saw that using the more advanced method, SGHMC, gave better re-
sults in terms of uncertainty in areas away from the data, albeit not as much as we
had hoped. This could probably be improved by further hyperparameter tuning. We
conclude that for all samplers, there is a high sensitivity to hyperparameters. Thus an
idea for future work could be automatic hyperparameter tuning schemes for SGMCMC
similar to what NUTS [HG14] does for HMC.
To conclude on the hypotheses, we see that we achieve better uncertainty estimates
with fully Bayesian inference, in almost all experiments compared to SGD. This will
be explored further in later experiments, see Section 3.3. We also saw that the most
advanced method wrt.
the exploration of the parameter space, SGHMC, performed
qualitatively better than SGLD and SGFS. We will also evaluate this in Section 3.3.
Table 3.2: Posterior predictive accuracy on the test set in the synthetic classification
task.
Method
Run 1
Run 2
Logistic regression
0.88
N/A
SGD
0.88
N/A
SGLD
0.88
0.88
SGHMC
0.88
0.88
SGFS
0.84
0.87
3.2.2
Comparison to full-batch Langevin Monte Carlo
Once more, we generate 1.000.000 data points with the same procedure as before, and
hold out 10.000 points for a test set. The neural netwok is of the same architecture as
before, and we compare the simplest SGMCMC method - SLGD - to regular Langevin
Monte Carlo (which is equivalent to SGLD with batch size equal to N - and omitting
the M-H-correction in Langevin Monte Carlo).
The difference is staggering. Running SGLD with no preconditioning for 100 epochs
with a batch-size of 500 with polynomial stepsize annealing as previously achieves the
trace of log-posterior in Figure 3.15(a), and the probability surface in Figure 3.15(b),
and it achieves a posterior predictive accuracy of 0.89 on the test set. The samples were
==PAGE:82==
70
3 Experiments and discussion
drawin in 427 seconds on a regular laptop, where the backpropagation was perfomed on
a GPU.
(a) Trace of log posterior, SGLD
(b) SGLD probability surface
Figure 3.15: Results of SGLD.
We run Langevin Monte Carlo with the same hyperparameters as in SGLD. Trying
to draw as many samples with this algorithm would take an estimated 14-15 hours on
my machine, and as such we resort to fewer samples. We draw 10.000 samples instead
and achieve the results in Figure 3.16(a) and Figure 3.16(b). This took 398 seconds
which is comparable to the entire SGLD procedure. Here we see clear indications that
the method has not converged, although the posterior predictive accuracy of the test set
is 0.709. We also tried drawing 10.000 samples, which took 2191 seconds and yielded a
posterior predictive accuracy of 0.82, and a similar decision boundary.
(a) Trace of log posterior, LD
(b) LD probability surface
Figure 3.16: Results of Langevin Monte Carlo.
==PAGE:83==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
71
Summary and discussion
The conclusion is that many samples are required to get
the sampler to converge to a meaningful decision boundary. There are several possible
reasons for this. One is the fact that the dimensionality of the parameter space is much
larger than that of the data, meaning that the posterior probably is quite flat around
an optimum. This means that the sampler can probably get somewhere quite far from
the actual maximum - while the gradients have small norm. Note also, that in both
cases, the classes are quite well separated, but the found decision boundaries are quite
different. We believe, that this is due to the fact that the full-batch sampler has not
converged at the time we stopped - underlining the efficiency of SGMCMC compared
to regular MCMC. Another possible reason is the fact that the full-batch method may
have switched between different posterior modes, as there are slight signs of this in the
log posterior trace.
To conclude on the hypothesis regarding the use of SGMCMC over regular MCMC:
We confirm that it seems to be severely advantageous to use stochastic estimates of
gradients when there is a lot of data available. This is seen especially when consider-
ing time spent computing samples. Now when given enough time, all regular MCMC
methods would achieve the same results as SGMCMC - or even slightly better - but in
practice this may be infeasible, and as such we verify the third hypothesis as lined out
in Section 1.1.
3.3
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of
performance on unseen class
To investigate hypothesis 1 and 2 outlined in Section 1.1, we consider a ’real-life’ data
example, namely on the CIFAR-10 image classification data set, which we introduce in
the following. Furthermore, we will include a single class from CIFAR-100 that is not
used in the training of the neural network and compare the uncertainty of the poste-
rior predictive distribution of the unseen class given by the model in case the weights
were found by the SGMCMC methods, and the entropy assigned to the predictive dis-
tribution of the unseen class by the model in case the weights were found by stochastic
optimization. Then we will explore the influence of certain hyperparameters that all the
SGMCMC methods share, namely stepsizes and the sizes of the mini-batches.
We will once more use a neural network to perform the classification, but will use fea-
tures extracted from the images by ResNet-20 [He+16], which we have trained with
conventional methods on the CIFAR-10 training set. The class from CIFAR-100 was
not included in the training of the feature extractor.
==PAGE:84==
72
3 Experiments and discussion
3.3.1
Data
Both CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 are available at https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/
cifar.html as well as a built-in dataset in many major deep learning libraries. Both
of them are collected by Alex Krizhevsky [Kri09] and are freely available for academic
purposes.
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-10 consists of 60.000 32 × 32-pixel RGB images of 10 classes, with
10.000 images in each class. Each class is separated into training sets of 50.000 images
and test sets of 10.000 images. The ten classes are mutually exclusive and as such give
a ’well-behaving’ classification problem. The ten classes are,
1. Planes
2. Cars
3. Birds
4. Cats
5. Deer
6. Dogs
7. Frogs
8. Horses
9. Ships
10. Trucks
The class ’Trucks’ contain only large 18-wheelers and as such are not included in ’Cars’.
CIFAR-100
CIFAR-100 is very similar to CIFAR-10, differing mainly in the number
of classes and the number of images in each class. We select the class ’Chairs’ from
CIFAR-100 for our experiments, as this is not visually similar to any of the CIFAR-10
classes. This gives us a total of 600 images of chairs, originally split into 500 training
examples and 100 test examples. As we do not train the models with this class - we only
evaluate on this class - we concatenate them and use all 600 examples.
Examples of CIFAR-10 images and images of chairs from CIFAR-100 can be seen in
Figure 3.17.
==PAGE:85==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
73
Examples of CIFAR-10 images
(a) CIFAR-10 examples
Examples of chair images from CIFAR-100
(b) Examples of Chairs from CIFAR-100
Figure 3.17: Examples from CIFAR.
3.3.1.1
ResNet-20
To alleviate computational overhead for the CIFAR-experiments, we do not perform full
Bayesian inference on the entire neural network. Instead, we employ the well-known
technique of transfer learning using a common ImageNet architecture known as ResNet-
20 [He+16].
ResNet is a general neural network architecture for image classification. It consists of
two major parts: a convolutional neural network for feature extaction and a feed-forward
neural network for classification based on the extracted features. An illustration of the
ResNet architecture can be seen in Figure 3.18. It is similar to a regular convolutional
neural network, but it adds so-called residual blocks (denoted by the curved arrows on
the figure). We will briefly explain the general idea.
Say F(x) is the result of a forward pass through a part of the network. Instead of
simply feeding this signal forward through the stacked layers, every few layers, we fit the
residual instead, eg. F(x) −x. The original authors argue that learning the mapping
of the residual is easier than learning the features using only forward maps.
The ResNet structure is modular. The residual blocks of the network may be stacked
indefinetely. In the experiments below, we use ResNet-20 consisting of 20 layers in total
for feature extraction that embed the CIFAR images in 64-dimensional Euclidean space.
As preprocessing, we simply normalize the images channel-wise. We augment the data
with random croppings and random horizontal flips. As for the classification network,
tempoarily use a single fully connected layer with 10 outputs. A softmax activation
function is put on the final layer.
We train the network in with stochastic gradient descent with momentum. The initial
learning rate is 0.1, and the momentum constant is set to 0.9. We regularize the opti-
mizer with a weight decay of 10−4.
We anneal the learning rate using a cosine annealing scheme [LH19] with Ti = 200 and
ηmin = 0.001. The data is augmented with random croppings and random horizontal
==PAGE:86==
74
3 Experiments and discussion
Figure 3.18: 34 layer ResNet architecture. Originally fig. 3 of [He+16].
flips.
We train for 650 epochs with a batch-size of 256.
This is only done to train the feature extraction part of ResNet-20. We then pass
through all the training and test data and save the features (eg. the output of the last
avg. pooling layer in Figure 3.18). In the SGMCMC experiments, these features are used
as input to a classification network for which the weights are learned using SGMCMC.
Note that in the original ResNet architecture, only a single feed forward layer is used for
classification, essentially performing logistic regression on the extracted features. In one
of our experiments we will add an extra feed forward layer, such that the classification
network has a hidden layer, allowing the samplers to capture some non-linearity in the
classification.
As for the implementation of ResNet, we use the implementation by GitHub user
chenyaofo, available at https://github.com/chenyaofo/CIFAR-pretrained-models/
that utilize PyTorch [Pas+19] for implementation of the deep learning operations. The
feature extraction is done by adapting the Kaggle kernel available at https://www.
kaggle.com/appian/implementing-image-feature-extraction-in-pytorch/notebook
by Kaggle user Appian.
==PAGE:87==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
75
To visualize the feature extraction, we perform PCA on the extracted 64-dimensional
features. The results can be seen in Figure 3.19.
(a) Without chairs
(b) With chairs
Figure 3.19: PCA after feature extraction with ResNet-20 with no chairs present (a)
and with chairs present (b).
3.3.2
Comparison to stochastic gradient descent -
entropy
We are interested in evaluating how a neural network trained with Bayesian inference (ie.
SGMCMC) handles uncertainty on the unseen class - images of chairs from CIFAR-100
- in order to evaluate hypothesis 1 from Section 1.1. Thus, we setup a simple neural net-
work, similar to the one we used in Section 3.2 with a single hidden layer with 16 units
with a hyperbolic tangent activation function. For the following experiments, we choose
a mini-batch size of 500 such that the central limit theorem holds. For the SGMCMC
methods, we use polynomially annealed stepsizes, where we anneal the steps from 0.01
to 0.001 with γ = 0.55. Once more, we select a simple standard Gaussian prior for the
weights. We use the last 10.000 samples for the posterior. We train for 500 epochs for
both SGD and SGMCMC yielding a total of 50.000 parameter updates / samples.
We evaluate the experiments by considering their posterior predictive accuracy on the
CIFAR-10 test set and on the entropy (see Section 2.3.1.1) they assign to the posterior
predictive distribution over the examples of the unseen class consisting of images of chairs
whose features has been extracted by ResNet-20. Recall that the discrete distribution
with maximal entropy is the discrete uniform, and when we measure in bits and have
10 classes, this entropy is log2(10) ≈3.32 bits which follows directly from the definition
of entropy.
==PAGE:88==
76
3 Experiments and discussion
SGD with momentum
As a baseline, we train the neural network with stochastic
gradient descent with momentum. We choose a constant learning rate of 0.001 and set
the momentum parameter to 0.8. This achieves an accuracy of 0.91 on the CIFAR-10
test set and a histogram of the entropies can be seen in Figure 3.20. We see that most
of the images have close to 0 entropy, while some have higher entropies. This is what we
would expect for a single parameter estimate, yielding only a single decision boundary.
Figure 3.20: Enropy of SGD with momentum on unseen class.
SGLD
We run SGLD with no preconditioning and achieve the results seen in Fig-
ure 3.21. We see indications that the sampler has converged, as seen on the log posterior
trace. Interestingly it initially drops, before stabilizing. This is due to the relatively high
variance of the injected noise in the initial iterations - and thus the initial intial steps
are of relatively low probability measured in the posterior. As the steps are annealed
quickly, it is difficult for the sampler to move significantly from this area.
Looking at the entropies, we see that these are in general higher than those for SGD,
as we wanted. The posterior predictive accuracy on the CIFAR-10 test set for this ex-
periment was 0.87, so we have sacrificed some predictive power for better uncertainty
estimates. This is an effect we shall see several times in the following. As the goal for
these methods is better uncertainty estimates (especially on a completely new class) this
is exactly the behaviour we would like to see.
==PAGE:89==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
77
(a) Trace of log posterior, SGLD
(b) Posterior predictive entropy of unseen class,
SGLD
Figure 3.21: Results of SGLD on unseen class.
SGHMC
We run SGHMC with L = 7, α = 0.2 and η = 0.001/7 to mimic the
behaviour of SGD - with the same arguments as we had in Section 3.2. We once more
set ˆβ = 0 for simplicity. This achieves a posterior predictive accuracy of 0.89. The log
posterior trace and entropy histogram can be seen in Figure 3.22. Once more, we see
indications of convergence in the trace of the log posterior. On the log posterior trace,
we also see indications of better exploration of the local mode the sampler has found, as
can be seen on the larger fluctuations, which is desired behaviour.
This is verified by considering the entropy histogram. Here we see relatively high entropy
for almost all the examples of the unseen class - as we wanted. It is not quite the maximal
entropy, but we believe that this is impossible to achieve in practice.
(a) Trace of log posterior, SGHMC
(b) Posterior predictive entropy of unseen class,
SGHMC
Figure 3.22: Results of SGHMC on unseen class.
==PAGE:90==
78
3 Experiments and discussion
SGFS
We run SGFS with the polynomially annealed stepsizes and begin including
Fisher information after 1 epoch. This results in an accuracy of 0.90 on the CIFAR-10
test set. The log posterior trace and entropy histogram on the unseen class can be seen
in Figure 3.23. It is probable that the sampler has not converged in this example, as is
seen on the log posterior trace. The entropies are very similar to that of SGD. This is
unfortunate, but due to the indications that the sampler has not converged, it is difficult
to be conclusive.
We do not achieve as high posterior predictive accuracy in this experiment. This is
probably due to the fact that the stepsizes are annealed as quickly as they are. Recall
that SGFS is an augmentation of the SGLD dynamics to accomodate high stepsizes,
indicating that the augmentation does not help us much in this scenario.
(a) Trace of log posterior, SGFS
(b) Posterior predictive entropy of unseen class,
SGFS
Figure 3.23: Results of SGFS on unseen class.
Summary and discussion
We saw that all the tested SGMCMC methods were in-
deed able to separate the boundaries, as their posterior predictive accuracies were almost
as high as the conventionally trained neural network, as can be seen in Table 3.3. SGLD
and SGHMC performs comparably well on the CIFAR-100 test set, wheras SGFS is a bit
lower. We believe that the reason for this is the higher dimension of the parameter space
compared to the feature space - much the same as before. The adaptive preconditioning
may have a harder time altering the gradient direction, as the posterior becomes flat.
As the injected noise is also dependent on this preconditioning, we may not traverse the
parameter space in an efficient manner.
The entropies of the predictive distribution on the unseen class is higher for all the
SGMCMC samplers compared to SGD. This is due to the Bayesian inference, where we
average over multiple decision boundaries, and as such the model gives higher uncer-
tainty to the unseen class, exactly as we wanted.
Comparing the individual methods, they are all comparable. Rerunning the experiment
gave extremely similar resuts, so we are confident that this is a good picture of the
==PAGE:91==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
79
general performance on this problem.
To conclude on the hypotheses, we see that the most sophisticated way of exploring
the parameter space, SGHMC achieves the highest general entropy on the unseen class.
This verifies our idea that the more advanced method gives better unceratinty estimates.
This was also the case on the synthetic classification task, Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12,
so we have indications that this is the best method for this kind of problem.
Table 3.3: Posterior predictive accuracies on CIFAR-10 test set.
Method
Accuracy
SGD
0.91
SGLD
0.86
SGHMC
0.89
SGFS
0.89
3.3.3
Influence of batch-size
For this experiment - and all of the following - we change the neural network such that
it contains only a softmax layer (effectively logsitic regression), as is suggested by the
original creators of ResNet [He+16]. This is done, as we are now interested in how
the SGMCMC methods compare to eachother and not necessarily by considering the
entropy. Rather, we consider things like convergence. By making the neural network
smaller, we also reduce the dimensionality of the state space and the computations are
much faster in this case.
We want to determine how well our methods handle the sizes of the mini-batches,
as this is an important parameter in any stochastic gradient method. To do this, we
consider a batch-size of 30 which is just small enough that the central limit theorem
may hold for the stochastic gradients, and a batch-size of 1000 to see how our methods
handle larger sizes. For a more reasonable choice of batch-size (such as 500) we refer to
the section above.
In the following, all experiments are run with no preconditioning, no estimate of variance
of the stochastic gradients and polynomially annealed steps, annealed from 0.01 to 0.001.
For SGHMC, we set α = 0.2, L = 7 and η = 0.001/7, and for SGD we have a constant
learning rate of 0.001 and momentum parameter 0.8. For SGFS, we start using Fisher
information after 1 epoch.
Small batches
In this experiment, we run with a batch-size of 30 for 35 epochs. The
posterior predictive accuracies are in Table 3.4. We have plotted the histograms of the
entropies of the predictive distribution of the unseen class in Figure 3.24. The log pos-
terior traces of the experiment can be seen in Figure 3.25. The posterior predictive
==PAGE:92==
80
3 Experiments and discussion
accuracies on the CIFAR-10 test set can be found in Table 3.4.
(a) SGD
(b) SGLD
(c) SGHMC
(d) SGFS
Figure 3.24: Entopies on unseen classes, small batches.
(a) SGLD
(b) SGHMC
(c) SGFS
Figure 3.25: Log posterior traces, small batches.
Large batches
For this experiment, we have a batch-size of 1000 and train for 500
epochs. The hyperparameters are unaltered from the experiment with small batch-sizes.
==PAGE:93==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
81
The entropy histograms are found in Figure 3.26 and the log posterior traces are found
in Figure 3.27. The posterior predictive accuracies are found in Table 3.4.
(a) SGD
(b) SGLD
(c) SGHMC
(d) SGFS
Figure 3.26: Entopies on unseen classes, large batches.
(a) SGLD
(b) SGHMC
(c) SGFS
Figure 3.27: Log posterior traces, large batches.
Summary
The posterior predictive accuracies can be seen in Table 3.4. We see that,
in general, the models perform similarly on the large batch-sizes and the experiments
==PAGE:94==
82
3 Experiments and discussion
previously. Even SGD manages to find some posterior predictive uncertainty on the as
seen on Figure 3.26, and notably all of the methods give low entropies of the predictive
distribution of the unseen class when the batches are small as seen on Figure 3.24.
We believe that this is due to the fact in cases where the classes are relatively easily
separable (see the PCA plots, Figure 3.19), and the parameter space has much higher
dimension than the data space, some of the units in the classification net may not find
distinct separation criteria, and as such find the same - just lowering the magnitude of
the weights - or find nothing meaningful. In terms of the posterior, this probably means
that the posterior is flat in these dimensions, ie.
the posterior is a ’ridged’ surface.
When the batches are small, the variance of the update step is much more influenced by
the stochasticity of the gradients, and thus there are much higher probability that the
gradients will be larger in these dimensions than the full-data gradient would have been.
This could explain in the lower general entropies, as the methods will not necessarily
move in directions very influent on the class separation. Furthermore, we should expect
slower convergence in these cases. This is also the case, as can be seen by the traces of
the log posterior, Figure 3.25 and Figure 3.27. We conclude, however that for the large
batches, SGHMC performs best both wrt. uncertainty of the unseen class and predictive
accuracy. SGFS and SGLD perform similarly, but SGFS slightly outperforms SGLD on
predictive accuracy and entropy on the unseen class. In the small batch experiment,
we once more see SGHMC perform best, and on par with SGD in terms of predictive
accuracy. In terms of entropy on the unseen class, SGFS performs best, but all of the
methods give many examples in the unseen class with little to no uncertainty, the reasons
for which we have discussed.
Table 3.4: Posterior predictive accuracies.
Method
Small batches
Large batches
SGD
0.91
0.91
SGLD
0.89
0.85
SGHMC
0.91
0.89
SGFS
0.86
0.89
3.3.4
Influence of stepsize scheme
In this section, we test the different stepsize schemes we described in Section 2.2.5 on
the SGMCMC methods. We will not compare them to SGD in this case. In all the
experiments, we choose a mini-batch size of 500 and train for 500 epochs. The neural
network is the same as in the previous experiment. All hyperparameters are the same
as before for the samplers - except the stepsizes. For SGHMC, we set L = 7 and for the
constant stepsizes of ε0 we set η = ε0/L, otherwise we set η = 0.001.
Constant steps
We run with two different constant stepsizes - one that is rather small,
10−6 and one that is larger, 0.3 and see how the methods handle these. The results of
==PAGE:95==
3.3 CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 - comparison of performance on unseen class
83
the run with small stepsizes (ie. 10−6) can be seen in Figure 3.28. The results of the
run with the larger stepsize (0.3) can be seen in Figure 3.29. The posterior predictive
accuracies can be seen in Table 3.5.
(a) SGLD
log
posterior
trace
(b) SGHMC log posterior
trace
(c) SGFS
log
posterior
trace
(d) SGLD entropy on un-
seen class
(e) SGHMC entropy on un-
seen class
(f) SGFS entropy on un-
seen class
Figure 3.28: Results of running the methods with small, constant steps.
(a) SGLD
log
posterior
trace
(b) SGHMC log posterior
trace
(c) SGFS
log
posterior
trace
(d) SGLD entropy on un-
seen class
(e) SGHMC entropy on un-
seen class
(f) SGFS entropy on un-
seen class
Figure 3.29: Results of running the methods with large, constant steps.
==PAGE:96==
84
3 Experiments and discussion
Cyclic steps
We run with the cyclic stepsize scheme as defined in Section 2.2.5, where
we set εmax = 0.05 and make 5 cycles. The results of this experiment can be seen in
Figure 3.30. The posterior predictive accuracies are found in Table 3.5.
(a) SGLD
log
posterior
trace
(b) SGHMC log posterior
trace
(c) SGFS
log
posterior
trace
(d) SGLD entropy on un-
seen class
(e) SGHMC entropy on un-
seen class
(f) SGFS entropy on un-
seen class
Figure 3.30: Results of running the methods with cyclic steps.
Summary
For the small stepsizes, we see that SGLD and SGFS does not converge.
This is probably due to the fact that the relatively naive stepsize scheme does not
allow the samplers to even find an area in the posterior with high probabilities before
the sampling procedure has ended.
Running the methods for more iterations would
probably solve this problem. SGHMC manages to find an optimum and sample around
this. This can probably be explained by the inclusion of the momentum term. As such,
SGHMC on average travels further in the parameter space.
For the larger constant stepsize of size 0.3, we see that all the methods do indeed
converge. Interestingly, SGFS once more finds another optimum - where the entropies
of the predictive distribution of the unseen class are much lower. We are not sure why
this is, and this could be studied in future work. Generally, these results are similar
to the ones found in the entropy comparison experiments, Section 3.3.2. This is to be
expected.
While running SGLD with constant stepsizes are formally incorrect, in practice we simply
get a biased posterior if we do this - and this biased posterior may have good predictive
power and may perform well in general.
SGFS can handle larger stepsizes, as this
samples from the Gaussian approximation of the posterior in cases of large stepsizes.
Thus we should expect convergence, and good mixing rates. The entropies, however, do
not indicate this is the case. This might once more be due to the suggested flat posterior,
==PAGE:97==
3.4 Conclusions about the methods
85
for which SGFS has a difficult time.
The cyclic stepsizes should encourage better mixing, as the stepsizes increase several
times to allow for mode changes.
The results of the cyclic stepsize experiment, see
Figure 3.30, are similar to those of the large, constant stepsize. In areas where the
stepsizes are large, we encourage the methods to explore the parameter space, and we
encourage them to sample when the stepsizes are smaller. This effect is reminiscent
of simply using the polynomially annealed stepsizes, but repeating the process several
times. As the posterior is probably quite flat, it is not likely that the method would
find another mode when the stepsizes are large - rather they would be forced to step
away from this same mode, and then find their way back to the same mode. This would
explain the observed behaviour.
Table 3.5: Posterior predictive accuracies, stepsize experiments.
Method
Constant, small
Constant, large
Cyclic
SGLD
0.44
0.91
0.90
SGHMC
0.82
0.91
0.91
SGFS
0.20
0.90
0.90
3.4
Conclusions about the methods
We have now tested the three implemented SGMCMC methods, SGLD, SGHMC and
SGFS and seen how they perform both in very simple cases, such as the true posterior
localization and the synthetic classification task, as well as in a slightly more advanced
case, the CIFAR-10 classification task.
In this section, we will summarize the overall results of the experiments and discuss the
pros and cons of the implemented methods.
For SGLD we generally saw good performance in most cases, both in terms of un-
certainty estimates measured through the entropy of the unseen classes, and through
posterior predictive performance. We saw that it was able to converge in all scenarios
except the scenario with small constant stepsizes. The issues SGLD has in cases where
it does not give good uncertainty estimates are probably due to its’ simplicity and the
requirement that the stepsizes should be decreasing for it to converge to the correct
posterior. Our experiments with the constant and cyclic stepsizes, however, show that
there may be use in SGLD when another, formally incorrect stepsize scheme is used.
Furthermore, it has the advantage of being relatively intuitive, simple to implement and
quick to run.
SGHMC gave the overall best results in terms of both posterior predictive accuracy
and in terms on uncertainty estimates. We believe, that between the methods we have
studied, SGHMC has the most potential of becoming useful in an industrial setting
==PAGE:98==
86
3 Experiments and discussion
based on this. In our testing, we found that it can be hard to get SGHMC to converge,
as it is very sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters. In our experiments, we also kept
the methods as simple as possible, and as such included no estimate of the variance of
the gradients. We believe, that even including an empirical covariance esitmate would
be beneficial for the sampler. We also believe the reason that the sampler was indeed
able to get higher entropies on the unseen class in the CIFAR-10 experiments as well
as a more reasonable decision boundary in the synthetic classification task is the fact
that several gradient steps are taken, and that the dynamics are second order, such that
the momentum is included. This allows SGHMC to explore the parameter space more
efficiently, and this is exactly the results we see.
SGFS was the worst method in our experiments. Although it converges in most
cases, and give reasonable uncertainty estimates, we see some strange behaviour that
is difficult to explain. We believe that the adaptive preconditioning does not help the
method in cases, such as this, where we believe the posterior is flat in many directions.
During the experiments, we have tried to explain the results of SGFS, but further work
is required to determine the exact reason for the slightly worse results. Furthermore,
SGFS is significantly more computationally intensive than the others, as every iteration
requires the inversion of a d × d matrix as well as a draw from a multivariate Gaussian
with a full covariance structure - where SGLD and SGHMC only requires draws from a
diagonal covariance in case no explicit preconditioning is used. This can also be done in
SGFS, but this also affects the injected noise, and as such will let the method collapse
to something very similar to SGLD.
Finally, there is a general comment to be made on how we measure ’good’ uncertainty
estimates. We have chosen to use entropy as a measure, which is generally descriptive,
and it is difficult - if not impossible - to achieve a maximum entropy distribution, ie.
the discrete uniform distribution. But how do we interpret ’good uncertainty’? If we
consider the synthetic classification task, Figure 3.6, how much uncertainty should be
assigned to, say x = (6, −5)⊤? Clearly, we believe it should be in class ’green’, but
it is unclear how much probability we would put on this example. Clearly, if a data
point is right on the decision boundary, we should have maximum uncertainty (and thus
maximum entropy), but as we see it, this is not clear cut. As such, there is a qualitative
aspect to be considered when deciding how ’good’ uncertainty estimates are. In the ideal
case, a Bayesian inference method should be certain only in regions with much data, but
this may not be the case for a specific application. Thus, work should be done to ensure
that the choice of ’good’ uncertainty estimates can be satisfied by any models, where
inference has been performed by one of the discussed methods.
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
In the introduction, we presented three hypotheses we wanted to investigate (Section 1.1),
which we will conclude on in the present chapter. At the end, we will give some ideas
for how to further develop the work presented in this thesis.
The first of the hypotheses was presented as,
We expect better uncertainty estimates when using fully Bayesian inference
compared to simply optimizing in some Machine Learning model such as a
neural network.
We saw that when hyperparameters of the SGMCMC samplers are tuned correctly, we
do indeed achieve better uncertainty estimates. In the synthetic classification task, we
saw that the implemented methods are able to capture uncertainty to a varying degree
while still retaining equal or comparable perfomance to stochastic optimization. We
tested only simple neural network, but it is our belief that SGMCMC can provide such
results regardless of the conrete model used. Thus we conclude that there are indications
that the hypothesis is indeed true, but furhter work is needed for the methods to be
reliable in industrial applications.
The second hypothesis was,
Application of more sophisticated fully Bayesian inference methods
produce better results than simpler ones; measured on either performance
(eg. uncertainty estimates) or speed.
We have discussed theory for and implemented three prominent fully Bayesian inference
schemes in the stochastic gradient setting, namely stochastic gradient Langevin dynam-
ics (SGLD), stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) and stochastic
gradient Fisher scoring (SGFS). It is our subjective belief that the most sophisticated
of these methods are either SGHMC or SGFS, depending on how we define sophisti-
cated. SGHMC has the most sophisticated dynamics, and should explore the parameter
space more efficiently due to the second order dynamics implemented with an auxilliary
momentum variable. SGFS is the most sophisticated in the sense that it adaptively aug-
ments the state space by preconditioning it based on the curvature of the log posterior.
We saw that, in general, SGHMC performed the best measured both on predictive per-
formance and on uncertainty estimation. SGFS and SGLD were similar with respect to
performance. Speedwise, SGLD was the best, as this requires only a single gradient step
==PAGE:100==
88
4 Conclusion
per sample generated. Thus we conclude, that the sophisticated dynamics of SGHMC
helped performance, while the simplicity of SGLD helped speed. Thus we partially con-
firm the hypothesis.
The final hypothesis was,
Using SGMCMC instead of classical MCMC is needed due to the
computational power required for classical MCMC to be feasible in
large-scale applications.
Although we did not try many different classical MCMC methods, we did try one of
the simplest, comparable methods - namely Langevin Monte Carlo. Here we saw that
the running time was orders of magnitude higher compared to a tuned SGLD method.
This indicates that the hypothesis is true, but we will not conclusively propose that
no classical MCMC methods are feasible for settings such as this. As out-of-the-box
methods, however, SGMCMC has proven efficient in large-scale settings, especially if
the dimensionality of the parameter space is not too large, as SGFS scales poorly with
dimensionality.
Overall, we have seen the efficiency and effectiveness of SGMCMC samplers in a ’big
data’ setting. We have discussed theory of the most common SGMCMC methods and
compared them to classical methods and seen that they do indeed achieve similar pre-
dictive performance, while giving more reasonable uncertainty estimates.
We conclude the thesis with a short list of ideas for further work with SGMCMC.
4.1
Ideas for fututre work
During the work with SGMCMC, we found some shortcomings, which we will address
in the following proposals for future work.
• Develop theory for exact influence of hyperparameters in the developed methods.
• With offset in the complete SGMCMC framework, see Section 2.2.4 or [MCF15],
develop novel SGMCMC sampling schemes - perhaps including domain knowledge
in the design of the dynamics, if possible.
• Develop automatic hyperparameter tuning, similar to what NUTS [HG14] did for
HMC.
• Implement the methods on a GPU such that all the dynamics are simulated on a
GPU instead of just backpropagation, that we have used in our experiments.
• Utilize SGMCMC to perform fully Bayesian inference on an entire neural network,
such that the feature extraction is also Bayesian. This would require theoretical
development of the methods as the parameter space in such a case would be of
extremely high dimension.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A
Technical appendix
This appendix contains some definitions, proofs etc., that are not very relevant for the
general thesis.
A.1
Conjugate probability distributions
For Bayesian models, exact inference is rarely feasible, so we resort to approximate in-
ference schemes in these models. In some cases, however, exact inference is possible.
This is often the case if the prior and the likelihood are conjugate. Here, we will briefly
discuss what conjugate distributions are and why exact inference is tractable in these
cases. We will follow the description in [MT11] closely.
Intuitively, conjugate distributions may be considered as distributions whose densi-
ties have the same functional form. Formally, we first define a so-called exponential
dispersion family as,
Definition 6 (Exponential dispersion family). If a set of probability densities are of the
form,
p(y|θ) = c(y, λ) exp(λ[θy −κ(θ)])
(A.1)
for some λ > 0 (called the precision parameter) and κ(θ) is called the cumulant generator,
that defines the mean and the variance of y, then the set of densities are called an
exponential dispersion family.
Many of the commonly considered distributions (eg. Gaussian, exponential, Poisson,
gamma, beta etc.) come from the same exponential dispersion family.
We can now formally define what a conjugate distribution is:
Definition 7 (Conjugate probability distribution for an exponential dispersion family).
Consider a exponential dispersion family with densities as (A.1). Then consider,
p(θ|m, γ) =
1
C(m, γ) exp
(θm −κ(θ)
γ
)
(A.2)
where
1
C is the normalization constant.
In this case, m is the mean of the distribution and γ > 0 is some parameter. Then
p(θ|m, γ) is indeed a true probability distribution of the parameter θ, and is called the
conjugate prior distribution of θ.
==PAGE:102==
90
A Technical appendix
This definition implies that if the likelihood is from some exponential dispersion
family, then there exists a prior distribution for the parameters that has a closed form,
of the same functional form as the likelihood.
This means that the integral in the
denominator of Bayes’ theorem (see (2.1)) has a closed form solution. Furthermore, it
means that the posterior is itself a distribution from the exponential dispersion family,
and that the parameters of the posterior is simply computable from the parameters of
the likelihood and the priors.
Examples of these conjugate distributions are (in the formulation likelihood-prior) are
Bernoulli-beta, Poisson-gamma, Gaussian-Gaussian, categorical-Dirichlet, multivariate
Gaussian-Inverse Wishart (if the mean of the Gaussian is known).
A.2
HMC leaves the canonical joint
distribution invariant
As we discussed in Section 2.1.1.1, a sufficient criterion for a Markov chain to leave some
distribution as the unique invariant distribution is to show that detailed balance (see
def. 4) is satisfied wrt. this distribution.
This can relatively easily be shown to hold for HMC, as is done in [Nea11]. Let TL
denote the Leapfrog mapping with L steps and some appropriate stepsize ε.
The idea is to divide the (θ, r) space into K different regions, Ak with equal, but small
volume V . Let Bk be the region associated to Ak through the mapping TL, that is Bk is
the image of Ak through TL.
The Leapfrog integrator preserves volume, so it is clear that the regions Bk also have
volume V , and as TL is deterministic the regions Bk also partitions the state space. It
is sufficient to show that ’pointwise detailed balance’ holds over these regions, that is,
p(Ai)T(Bj, Ai) = p(Bj)T(Ai, Bj).
(A.3)
Clearly, as TL is deterministic, T(Bj, Ai) = T(Ai, Bj) = 0 for i ̸= j so the equality is
trivial in this case. For the case of i and j is equal to some common value, say k we
use the fact that the Hamiltonian is continuous almost everywhere and as such takes a
constant value over the entire region Ak if V is sufficiently small. We define this value
as H(Ak), eg. H(Ak) is this constant value for all (θ, r) ∈Ak. Plugging this into (A.3)
and using the M-H acceptance criterion for the transition probabilities as in HMC, we
simply have to show that,
exp[−H(Ak)] min{1, −exp[H(Bk)+H(Ak)]} = exp[−H(Bk)] min{1, exp[−H(Ak)+H(Bk)]},
holds for all k. Now if H(Ak) = H(Bk) then this is obviously satisfied. If H(Ak) < H(Bk)
then the left hand side of the above simplifies to exp[−H(Bk)] as exp[−H(Ak)+H(Bk)] <
1, and the right hand side simplifies to the same, as exp[−H(Bk) + H(Ak)] > 1. So the
criterion still holds, and by symmetry this is completely analogous if H(Bk) < H(Ak).
This means that in all cases of the values of the Hamiltonian over the regions Ak and Bk
==PAGE:103==
A.3 Definition of a Wiener process
91
(A.3) holds, and as such detailed balance is satisfied wrt. the canonical joint distribution,
and this is thus the equilibrium distribution for the HMC procedure, as we wanted to
show.
A.3
Definition of a Wiener process
A Wiener process as defined by Higham in [Hig01] is a random variable W (t) defined
by,
1. p(W (0) = 0) = 1.
2. For s < t, we have that (W (t) −W (s)) ∼N(0, (t −s)I).
3. For s < t < u < v, the random variables W (t) −W (s) and W (v) −W (u) are
independent.
A.4
Bolzano-Weierstrass’ theorem
The theorem is stated as lemma 1.15.10 in [Chr10] and says,
Theorem 2 (Bolzano-Weierstrass’ theorem). Let {xk}∞
k=1 be a bounded infinite sequence
with elements in R. Then {xk}∞
k=1 has a convergent subsequence.
The proof is given by Christensen in [Chr10].
==PAGE:104==
92
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX B
Guide to attached code
The code is structured in two main parts: classes and methods that contain the im-
plementations of the samplers and relevant methods, and scripts that can be run to
generate the results in this report.
B.1
Implementation of the samplers
The samplers all inherit from a superclass called Sampler, implemented in the file
grad_fun.py. Sampler has two members that all the implemented methods need,
1. self.data - a tuple containing the features, a N ×d dimensional np.ndarray and
an array containing labels for supervised learning.
2. self.minibatch_size - an integer holding the size of the mini-batches.
Futhermore Sampler implements three methods:
1. get_stepsizes taking the maximum stepsize, minimum stepsize, number of steps
and gamma. get_stepsizes implements the polynomial annealing scheme as a
generator.
2. get_cyclic_stepsizes is similar to get_stepsizes but takes an initial stepsize,
how many cycles to do and the number of steps. It implements the cyclical stepsizes
as described in the report as a generator.
3. get_batches that takes no arguments and returns a generator yielding mini-
batches of size (approximately) self.minibatch_size.
grad_fun.py also contains a wrapper, that takes the parameters of a neural network as
an array, a mini-batch of data and perfoms backpropagation to yield the log-likelihood
and the gradient of this. This is used for our experiments with Bayesian deep learning.
The files sgld.py, sghmc.py and sgfs.py contains the implementations of all the sam-
plers. Each of them is implemented as a class. The constructor of each of them takes
the relevant parameters and implements a method called sample. This takes parame-
ters relevant for sampling, and simulates the dynamics to give the samples. These are
returned as an array. The method does not remove any burn-in, so if this is desired, it
should be done in post processing.
==PAGE:106==
94
B Guide to attached code
B.2
Scripts to run experiments
The attached code contains three scripts to run the three types of experiments, we have
considered in this thesis - the known posterior experiment, the synthetic classification
task and the experiments with CIFAR-10. Each of defines functions relevant for that ex-
periments, hyperparameters and generation of the plots found in this thesis. All of them
assume that the feature extraction by ResNet has already been performed. The code for
the feature extraction is included as a script called transfer_learn_feature_extraction.py
and this assumes that ResNet has already been trained. The script to train ResNet is
included in the train_resnet.py file.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[AKW12]
Sungjin Ahn, Anoop Korattikara, and Max Welling. “Bayesian posterior
sampling via stochastic gradient fisher scoring”. In: Proceedings of the 29th
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2012. Volume 2.
[International Machine Learning Society], 2012, pages 1591–1598. isbn:
9781450312851.
[AN00]
Shun’ichi. Amari and Hiroshi Nagaoka. Methods of Information Geome-
try. Volume 191. American Mathematical Society, 2000, page 206. isbn:
0821843028.
[ASW14]
S. Ahn, B. Shahbaba, and M. Welling. “Distributed stochastic gradient
MCMC”. In: 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2014 3 (2014).
[Bak+19]
Jack Baker et al. “Control variates for stochastic gradient MCMC”. In:
Statistics and Computing 29.3 (2019), pages 599–615. issn: 15731375. doi:
10.1007/s11222-018-9826-2.
[BDH14]
Rémi Bardenet, Arnaud Douchet, and Chris Holmes. “Towards scaling up
Markov chain Monte Carlo: an adaptive subsampling approach”. In: 31st
International Conference on Machine Learning, Icml 2014. Volume 1. 2014,
pages 630–653. isbn: 9781634393973.
[Bet15]
Michael Betancourt. “The fundamental incompatibility of scalable hamil-
tonian monte carlo and naive data subsampling”. In: 32nd International
Conference on Machine Learning, Icml 2015. Volume 1. 2015, pages 533–
540. isbn: 9781510810587.
[Bis06]
Christopher M Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Vol-
ume 4. 4. Springer, 2006, page 738. isbn: 9780387310732. doi: 10.1117/1.
2819119. arXiv: 0-387-31073-8. url: http://www.library.wisc.edu/
selectedtocs/bg0137.pdf.
[Bro+13]
Tamara Broderick et al. “Streaming variational bayes”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems. 2013.
[CDC15]
Changyou Chen, Nan Ding, and Lawrence Carin. “On the convergence
of stochastic gradient MCMC algorithms with high-order integrators”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Volume 2015-Janua.
2015, pages 2278–2286.
==PAGE:108==
96
Bibliography
[CFG14]
Tianqi Chen, Emily B. Fox, and Carlos Guestrin. “Stochastic gradient
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo”. In: 31st International Conference on Machine
Learning, ICML 2014 5 (2014), pages 3663–3676. arXiv: 1402.4102.
[Che+16a]
Changyou Chen et al. “Bridging the gap between stochastic gradient MCMC
and stochastic optimization”. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2016. 2016, pages 1051–
1060.
[Che+16b]
Changyou Chen et al. “Stochastic gradient MCMC with stale gradients”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Nips (2016), pages 2945–
2953. issn: 10495258. arXiv: 1610.06664.
[Che+19]
Changyou Chen et al. “A convergence analysis for a class of practical
variance-reduction stochastic gradient MCMC”. In: Science China Infor-
mation Sciences 62.1 (January 2019), page 12101. issn: 18691919. doi:
10.1007/s11432-018-9656-y.
[Chr10]
Ole Christensen. Functions, Spaces, and Expansions. 2010. doi: 10.1007/
978-0-8176-4980-7.
[Din+14]
Nan Ding et al. “Bayesian sampling using stochastic gradient thermostats”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Volume 4. January.
2014, pages 3203–3211.
[Dua+87]
S Duane et al. “Hybrid Monte-Carlo”. In: Physics Letters B 195.2 (Septem-
ber 1987), pages 216–222.
[Dub+16]
Avinava Dubey et al. “Variance reduction in stochastic gradient langevin
dynamics”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Vol-
ume 29. 2016, pages 1162–1170.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning. The
MIT Press, 2016, page 775. isbn: 0262035618.
[GC11]
Mark Girolami and Ben Calderhead. “Riemann manifold Langevin and
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series B: Statistical Methodology 73.2 (March 2011), pages 123–
214. issn: 13697412. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9868.2010.00765.x.
[Gel+13]
Andrew Gelman et al. Bayesian data analysis. CRC Press, 2013, page 661.
isbn: 9781439898208.
[Gey92]
Charles Geyer. “Practical Markov Chain Monte Carlo”. In: Statistical Sci-
ence 7.4 (1992), pages 473–483. issn: 08834237. doi: 10.2307/2246094.
url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2246094%7B%5C%%7D5Cnpapers3:
//publication/uuid/1CA942D7-4558-492D-976B-45E29C41C49E.
[GG84]
S Geman and D Geman. “STOCHASTIC RELAXATION, GIBBS DISTRI-
BUTIONS, AND THE BAYESIAN RESTORATION OF IMAGES”. In:
Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 6.6 (1984),
pages 721–741. issn: 19393539, 01628828.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
97
[Has70]
W. K. Hastings. “Monte carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and
their applications”. In: Biometrika 57.1 (April 1970), pages 97–109. issn:
00063444. doi: 10.1093/biomet/57.1.97.
[He+16]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. Volume 2016-Decem. IEEE, June 2016, pages 770–778.
isbn: 9781467388504. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. arXiv: 1512.03385.
[HG14]
Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. “The no-U-turn sampler: Adap-
tively setting path lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo”. In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 15 (2014), pages 1593–1623. issn: 15337928.
[Hig01]
D. J. Higham. “An algorithmic introduction to numerical simulation of
stochastic differential equations”. In: SIAM Review 43.3 (2001), pages 525–
546. issn: 00361445. doi: 10.1137/S0036144500378302. url: https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2343029323.
[Hof+13]
Matthew D. Hoffman et al. “Stochastic variational inference”. In: Journal
of Machine Learning Research 14 (2013), pages 1303–1347. issn: 15324435.
[KCW14]
Anoop Korattikara, Yutian Chen, and Max Welling. “Austerity in MCMC
land: Cutting the metropolis-hastings budget”. In: 31st International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, Icml 2014. Volume 1. 2014, pages 321–336.
isbn: 9781634393973.
[Kri09]
Alex Krizhevsky. “Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images”.
In: … Science Department, University of Toronto, Tech. … (2009), pages 1–
60. issn: 1098-6596. doi: 10.1.1.222.9220. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
[Le 86]
Lucien M. Le Cam. Asymptotic methods in statistical decision theory. Springer-
Verlag, 1986, page 742. isbn: 1461293693.
[LH19]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
warm restarts”. In: 5th International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, ICLR 2017 - Conference Track Proceedings. 2019. arXiv: 1608.
03983.
[LR09]
Benedict Leimkuhler and Sebastian Reich. “A Metropolis adjusted nosé-
hoover thermostat”. In: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Analysis
43.4 (July 2009), pages 743–755. issn: 12903841. doi: 10.1051/m2an/
2009023. url: http://www.esaim-m2an.org/10.1051/m2an/2009023.
[LW16]
Qiang Liu and Dilin Wang. “Stein variational gradient descent: A general
purpose Bayesian inference algorithm”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Volume 29. 2016, pages 2378–2386.
[LW17]
Dangna Li and Wing H Wong. “Mini-batch Tempered MCMC”. In: 0 (2017),
pages 1–26. arXiv: 1707.09705. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.
09705.
==PAGE:110==
98
Bibliography
[MA15]
Dougal Maclaurin and Ryan P. Adams. “Firefly Monte Carlo: Exact MCMC
with subsets of data”. In: IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. Volume 2015-Janua. AAAI Press = The Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Press, 2015, pages 4289–4295. isbn:
9781577357384.
[MCF15]
Yi-An Ma, Tianqi Chen, and Emily B. Fox. “A Complete Recipe for Stochas-
tic Gradient MCMC”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 28 (nips 2015) 28 (2015). issn: 10495258. arXiv: 1506.04696.
[Met+53]
Nicholas Metropolis et al. “Equation of state calculations by fast com-
puting machines”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 21.6 (June 1953),
pages 1087–1092. issn: 00219606. doi: 10.1063/1.1699114. url: http:
//aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.1699114.
[MHB17]
Stephan Mandt, Matthew D. Hof Fman, and David M. Blei. “Stochastic gra-
dient descent as approximate Bayesian inference”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 18 (2017). issn: 15337928.
[MT11]
Henrik Madsen and Poul Thyregod. Introduction to general and generalized
linear models. CRC Press, 2011. isbn: 9781420091557.
[Mur12]
Kevin Murphy. Machine Learning: a Probabilistic Perspective. 2012, page 1104.
isbn: 9780262018029. doi: 10.1007/SpringerReference_35834. arXiv: 0-
387-31073-8.
[Nag+17]
Tigran Nagapetyan et al. “The True Cost of Stochastic Gradient Langevin
Dynamics”. In: (2017). arXiv: 1706.02692.
[Nea11]
Radford M. Neal. “MCMC using hamiltonian dynamics”. In: Handbook of
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (2011), pages 113–162.
[Nea96]
Radford M. Neal. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Volume 118.
Lecture Notes in Statistics. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1996. isbn:
978-0-387-94724-2. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0745-0.
[Nie15]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination
Press, 2015. url: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/.
[NWX14]
Willie Neiswanger, Chong Wang, and Eric P. Xing. “Asymptotically ex-
act, embarrassingly parallel MCMC”. In: Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
gence - Proceedings of the 30th Conference, UAI 2014. AUAI Press, 2014,
pages 623–632. isbn: 9780974903910.
[Pas+19]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep
Learning Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
32. Edited by H. Wallach et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pages 8024–
8035. url: http: // papers. neurips .cc /paper / 9015- pytorch - an -
imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
99
[PT13]
Sam Patterson and Yee Whye Teh. “Stochastic gradient Riemannian Langevin
dynamics on the probability simplex”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2013.
[Qui+19]
Matias Quiroz et al. “Speeding Up MCMC by Efficient Data Subsam-
pling”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 114.526 (2019),
pages 831–843. issn: 1537274X. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2018.1448827.
[RM51]
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. “A Stochastic Approximation Method”.
In: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 22.3 (September 1951), pages 400–
407. issn: 0003-4851. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729586.
[Sco+16]
Steven L. Scott et al. “Bayes and big data: The consensus monte carlo algo-
rithm”. In: International Journal of Management Science and Engineering
Management 11.2 (2016), pages 78–88. issn: 17509661. doi: 10 . 1080 /
17509653.2016.1142191.
[Sei+18]
Daniel Seita et al. “An efficient minibatch acceptance test for metropolis-
hastings”. In: IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence 2018-July (2018), pages 5359–5363. issn: 10450823. arXiv: arXiv:
1610.06848v3.
[SM13]
M N Schmidt and M Mørup. “Nonparametric Bayesian Modeling of Com-
plex Networks”. In: Ieee Signal Processing Magazine 30.3 (2013), pages 110–
128. doi: 10.1109/Msp.2012.2235191.
[SN14]
Issei Sato and Hiroshi Nakagavva. “Approximation analysis of stochastic
gradient langevin dynamics by using Fokker-Planck equation and Itô pro-
cess”. In: 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, Icml 2014.
Volume 3. 2014, pages 2647–2655. isbn: 9781634393973.
[Sri+15]
Sanvesh Srivastava et al. “WASP: Scalable Bayes via barycenters of subset
posteriors”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research. Volume 38. 2015,
pages 912–920.
[TTV16]
Yee Whye Teh, Alexandre H. Thiery, and Sebastian J. Vollmer. “Consis-
tency and fluctuations for stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics”. In: Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 17 (2016), pages 1–33. issn: 15337928.
arXiv: 1409.0578.
[WT11]
Max Welling and Yee Whye Teh. “Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient
langevin dynamics”. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Machine Learning. 2011, pages 681–688.
[WWW19]
Tung-Yu Wu, Y. X. Rachel Wang, and Wing H. Wong. “Mini-batch Metropolis-
Hastings MCMC with Reversible SGLD Proposal”. In: (2019). arXiv: 1908.
02910. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.02910.
[Zha+19]
Ruqi Zhang et al. “Cyclical Stochastic Gradient MCMC for Bayesian Deep
Learning”. In: (2019). arXiv: 1902.03932. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1902.03932.
==PAGE:112==
