==PAGE:1==
Alexis Mihalitsis s134699
Development and validation of a test
method for parabolic trough solar
collector ﬁelds in solar heating plants
Master Thesis, February 2020
==PAGE:2==
Alexis Mihalitsis s134699
Development and validation of a test
method for parabolic trough solar
collector ﬁelds in solar heating plants
Master Thesis, February 2020
==PAGE:3==
Development and validation of a test method for parabolic trough solar
collector ﬁelds in solar heating plants,
Author:
Alexis Mihalitsis s134699
Supervisor:
Weiqiang Kong
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 45 25 17 00
E-mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
Release date:
20/02/2020
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve < MSc in
Sustainable energy : Thermal energy > at Technical University of
Denmark. The report represents < 30 > ECTS points.
Rights:
<Alexis Mihalitsis, DTU>, <2020>
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would ﬁrst like to thank my thesis supervisor Weiqiang Kong in the Department of Civil
Engineering, that guided me through this thesis and was always available for me when I
had questions. He was always there when i needed him, and i truly thank him for that
and appreciate it. I learned a lot during this thesis.
Secondly, i would also like to mention my friend Konstantinos Paidis that sat next to me
in the DTU library while writing his own thesis, and helped me keep my head up in times
where i could not. Thank you Kotso.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
Testing methods for predicting the thermal performance of parabolic trough collectors have
been around for years, but testing methods to evaluate the performance of parabolic trough
collector ﬁeld has not been implemented yet. In this thesis, a generic testing method for
the evaluation and prediction of long term and short term thermal performance for PTC
ﬁelds integrated in power plants is implemented. The developed testing method is based on
experimental data from a power plant in Brønderslev and its respected collector geometry.
The investigated ﬁeld is comprised of 400 PTC collectors, and the testing period includes
six months between April and September. The developed model is then validated where a
mean relative error of 20% was found between the measured and predicted performance,
and a total eﬃciency of 58% was recorded. The obtained performance coeﬃcients are
then compared to the performance coeﬃcients obtained from an analysis conducted in
the Technical University of Denmark regarding the performance of a single PTC collector,
where it was found that the testing method developed in this thesis is more accurate.
ii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
i
Abstract
ii
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Solar Thermal Energy & Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Parabolic Trough Collector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Parabolic Trough Collector Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thermal performance & test standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Steady State test method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Quasi-Dynamic test method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Model Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
PTC eﬃciency and associated losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Brønderslev CHP plant & Measured data
17
3.1
Plant operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
The PTC ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Measured Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Methodology & Model structure
21
4.1
Model Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Solar angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Usefull thermal energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Parameter identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Validation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results & Validation of the Model
33
5.1
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Short-term performance prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Long-term performance prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Conclusion
39
References
41
A Code from Matlab
43
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
The year is 2020, and sustainable energy has never been more relevant. Ever since the
industrial revolution took place from 1820 until 1840 and new manufacturing processes
were discovered, the demand for energy production increased dramatically over the years.
The price to cover that ever-grown demand until today, has been pollution on a large scale
with catastrophic consequences for the future generations of this planet. This reality has
made sustainable solutions necessary to tackle climate change but has also highlighted the
need to invest more money and time into research and development regarding utilisation,
production and harvesting of energy. Nowadays, the global energy supply is mostly covered
by crude oil, coal and gas despite projections showing that these resources are going to be
depleted in the near future, leaving the future global energy demand out of balance.
The solution to this problem is renewable energy, as it reduces the carbon footprint and
contributes to economical growth in the long run at the same time. According to Global
Renewable Energy projections[1], the renewable energy contribution in 2010 was 16.6 %
and has grown to 23.6 % in just 10 years, while it is projected to reach a contribution of
47.7 % by the year 2040. Table 1.1 shows the diﬀerent renewable energy resources that are
utilized today, and the amount of energy production that is expected over the years.
Table 1.1. Global renewable energy projection by 2040.
2001
2010
2020
2030
2040
Total Energy Consumption (Mtoe)
10,038
10,549
11,425
12,352
13,310
Biomass
1,080
1,313
1,791
2,483
3,271
Large Hydro
22.7
266
309
341
358
Geothermal
43.2
86
186
333
493
Small Hydro
9.5
19
49
106
189
Wind
4.7
44
266
542
688
Solar Thermal
4.1
15
66
244
480
Photovoltaic
0.2
2
24
221
784
Solar Thermal electricity
0.1
0.4
3
16
68
Marine (tidal/wave/ocean)
0.05
0.1
0.4
3
20
Total renewable energy sources (Mtoe)
1,365.5
1,745.5
2,694.4
4,289
6,351
Renewable energy sources contribution (%)
13.6
16.6
23.6
34.7
47.7
The importance of increasing the renewable sources share in the total energy consumption
is not something taken lightly in Europe, since governments and policy-makers are working
together to reach the ambitious goals that have been set by the European Union (EU)
regarding CO2 emissions and renewable energy share. These goals include a renewable
energy share increase by 32 % and a greenhouse gas emissions cut of 40 % by the year
2030.[2]
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
1.1
Solar Thermal Energy & Applications
From all renewable energy sources, the sun is the one with the most abundant energy.
Planet earth receives solar radiation power of approximately 1.73 · 1014 (kW)[3], a quantity
that surpasses the global energy demand by far. Meaning that if technology advanced
enough, it would be possible to cover the entire energy demand of the planet only by using
solar power. However, only a small fraction of this energy is being utilized today.
The common characteristic of all solar thermal systems for converting energy is that they
capture the solar radiation as heat and subsequently utilize this heat for two purposes. The
production of electricity through a conventional thermodynamic cycle (Rankine, Brayton,
Stirling) and secondly, water heating or residential space heating for commercial and
industrial processes. Solar thermal collectors are necessary for all these processes, as they
intercept and absorb the solar radiation.
Active heating systems use mechanical parts to pump water or a heat transfer ﬂuid through
the collector. Active systems have a wide range of applications depending on the purpose
and usage of the solar heating system. They can be used to produce heat, electricity or
both at the same time and are usually put into three diﬀerent sub-categories depending
on the temperature they operate at. These categories are low, medium and high level
of heat. The low level temperature heating system can reach a temperature up to ≈
80 (◦C) and is mostly present in residential and commercial applications, such as ﬂat
plate solar collectors heating up water or space. The medium level reaches a temperature
between 100 and 400 (◦C) and includes industrial processes such as steam production for
sterilization applications, desalination evaporators and other similar applications[4]. In
order to produce steam, ﬂat plate collectors are not adequate, since the maximum operating
temperature of a ﬂat plate collector is low relative to the desired input temperature for
heat engines, resulting in a very low collector eﬃciency. This application would require a
concentrated solar power (CSP) system which generates solar power by using mirrors or
lenses to concentrate a large area of radiation onto a small area. Lastly, high level heating
systems reach a temperature between 600 and 1000 (◦C) and are mostly used for power
plant applications, such as producing electricity. These temperatures can only be reached
by CSP systems.
Apart from operating temperature, solar heating systems can also be classiﬁed by the type
of collector the system is using and its motion. There are two types of solar collectors,
namely non-concentrating or stationary and concentrating collectors (CSP). The ﬁrst
category of collectors have a permanently ﬁxed position and does not track the sun, while
relying on the same collector area for absorbing and intercepting solar radiation. The
second category (concentrating collectors) have the ability to track the sun in single-axis
tracking and two-axis tracking, with the diﬀerence being the allowable degrees of freedom
the tracking system can rotate at. The collector can either be positioned in a North-South
alignment and track the sun from East to West, or be positioned in a East-West alignment
and track the sun from North to South. The advantage of the North-South alignment
is that the full aperture area is always normal to the sun at noon, though the collector
performance decreases in the early and late hours of the day due to a large incidence angle.
West-East aligned collectors have their largest incidence angle at noon and the lowest in
mornings and evenings. This means that if two identical systems have opposite alignments
2
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
and are tested over a year, the North-South will collect more sun during the summer but
less during winter. Whereas the East-West will collect less sun during summer and more
during winter. This explanation will help understand the two-axis rotating system, as it
can be aligned both from North-South and East-West giving it a wide range of position
options. As the seasons change, and the path of the sun goes from high in the sky during
summer to low in the sky during winter, the two-axis tracker can optimize the amount of
solar radiation captured. It has to be mentioned though that a two-axis tracking system
is more complicated to install and more expensive. Table 1.2 shows an overview of what
has been discussed so far, regarding the available technologies of solar collectors and their
properties.
Table 1.2. Review of the most used solar energy collectors available on the market today
Motion
Collector
Type
Absorber
Type
Concentration
ratio
Temperature
range (◦C)
Stationary
Flat-plate
collector (FPC)
Flat
1
30-80
Evacuated tube
collector (ETC)
Flat
1
50-200
Compound parabolic
collector (CPC)
Tubular
1-5
60-240
Single-axis
tracking
Compound parabolic
collector (CPC)
Tubular
5-15
60-300
Linear Fresnel
reﬂector (LFR)
Tubular
10-40
60-250
Cylindrical trough
collector (CTC)
Tubular
15-50
60-300
Parabolic trough
collector (PTC)
Tubular
10-85
60-400
Two-axis
tracking
Parabolic dish
reﬂector (PDR)
Point
600-2000
100-1500
Heliostat ﬁeld
collector (HFC)
Point
300-1500
150-2000
Note: In table 1.2 Concentration ratio is deﬁned as the aperture area divided by the
receiver/absorber area of the collector.
1.2
Parabolic Trough Collector
This type of solar collector is a reﬂective sheet of material that is bent into a parabola.
This shape allows the collector to intercept a large amount of solar irradiation and reﬂect
it onto the receiver. It can be seen in Figure 1.1, that the receiver is a black metal tube,
covered with a glass tube in order to reduce convective heat losses and is positioned across
the parabola. The heating ﬂuid that passes through the receiver (usually synthetic oil)
absorbs the reﬂected irradiance and transfers this thermal energy to a heat exchanger.
PTC’s consider only beam irradiance and as mentioned earlier, the irradiance always needs
to be as normal to the aperture area of the collector as possible. For this reason, the
3
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
parabola is positioned on a tracking system that rotates the parabola according to the
position of the sun, in order to minimize the angle of incidence.
Figure 1.1. Schematic of a parabolic trough collector[5].
The greatest advantage of PTC’s compared to ﬂat plate collectors is that the thermal
eﬃciency of PTC’s remain high at high inlet temperatures. Compared to ﬂat plate collectors,
PTC’s have a smaller heat loss area since the heat losses are inversely proportional to the
concentration ratio(C). Resulting in a smaller heat loss area and a smoother eﬃciency
slope. This can be visualized in the following ﬁgure where the collector thermal eﬃciency is
plotted against the heat loss parameter (Tm −Ta)/Gb, where Tm is the mean heat transfer
ﬂuid temperature, Ta is the ambient temperature and Gb is the beam irradiance. It will
be seen that the slope of the ﬂat plate collector is steeper compared to the one of the
concentrating collector.
Figure 1.2. Performance curves for the two collectors[6].
Where "Intercept" is the intersection of the line with the vertical eﬃciency axis and is
also the point where no losses are considered (zero loss eﬃciency). FR is the heat removal
factor and UL is the overall heat loss coeﬃcient of the collector. In the case of the ﬂat
plate collector, the total irradiation is considered whereas for the PTC only the beam
irradiation. It is now clear that PTC’s can achieve a higher thermal eﬃciency at a higher
4
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
temperature diﬀerence, which is also the reason why these collectors are more suitable for
high temperature applications, such as power plants.
1.3
Parabolic Trough Collector Field
Parabolic troughs have proven to be very reliable throughout time in combination with
power plants in order to produce electricity. One of the ﬁrst large scale applications took
place in Southern California in 1985 with an installed capacity of 354 (MWe) (electrical
output) in the Mojave Desert[7]. In order to produce electricity, the heating ﬂuid that ﬂows
through the receiver of the collector passes through a heat exchanger, and then returns to
the collector. The thermal energy that was given to the heat exchanger is used to produce
steam, which in turn drives a turbine that is connected to a generator. Thus, producing
electricity.
Parallel arrays of parabolic troughs are connected together via common pipes in order to
form a loop. A loop has one inlet and one outlet. More loops are positioned in a parallel
formation and are connected to two central header pipes. The energy from the hot side is
either sent to produce electricity, to a district heating network or to a thermal storage unit,
where the "cold" side just ﬂows back to the collectors to repeat the loop. While there can
be diﬀerent formations of PTC ﬁelds depending on the terrain and the available land, the
following Figure shows a possible conﬁguration for a PTC ﬁeld that consists of 20 loops in
total. One loop consists of 8 PTC’s.
Figure 1.3. Example of a PTC ﬁeld structure
1.4
Thermal performance & test standards
Test standards describe methods for validating the durability, reliability, thermal
performance and safety requirements for solar thermal collectors. When it comes to
5
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
evaluating the thermal performance of liquid heating collectors, the following standards
provide alternative testing methods depending on the type of solar collector in question.
EN 12975-2 Is the European standard "Thermal solar systems and components-solar
collectors" and was published in April 2001. Included in the standard, are two alternative
testing methods to determine the thermal performance for diﬀerent types of collectors.
When this standard was published, all countries in the EU had to withdraw their national
standards and use EN 12975-2 for testing their solar collectors. An updated version
was published in 2006, which is basically saying that collectors that are tested under
EN12975-2:2006 will receive the Solar Keymark certiﬁcation. This certiﬁcate demonstrates
to end-users that a product conforms to the relevant European standards and fulﬁls
additional requirements. The Solar Keymark aims at reducing trade barriers and promote
the use of high quality solar thermal products in the European market[8].
ANSI/ASHRAE 93-2003 Is the American standard "Methods of Testing to Determine
the Thermal Performance of Solar Collectors" published in 2003. This standard considers
only steady state testing methods, and not dynamic.
ISO-9806:2017(E) is an International standard called "Solar energy-Solar thermal
collectors-Test methods" published in 2017. This standard also includes the same two
testing methods as EN 12975-2.
All three standards are similar to each other in the sense of testing collectors, their safety
requirements and durability. When it comes to testing methods for thermal performance,
ASHRAE 93 use the well known "Steady State" testing method, where EN12975:2 and
ISO-9806 include a testing method called "Quasi dynamic method" (QDT) that allows a
broader range of collectors to be tested, according to their speciﬁcations[8].
Now that the reader has a basic understanding of what solar energy systems are, how they
are incorporated into power plants, and what test methods are, the problem formulation
of this thesis can now be stated.
1.5
Problem formulation
The three standards that were mentioned earlier, all have the ability to test a single
collector and determine their thermal performance through a testing method. Though,
no published standard today provides a test method for a solar collector ﬁeld. With the
help of the existing standards and their testing methods, a new testing method will be
developed, speciﬁcally for a solar collector ﬁeld comprised of PTC’s. A mathematical
model of a PTC ﬁeld will be developed in Matlab and validated against experimental data
from the PTC ﬁeld in Brønderslev, Denmark. It is expected that the model will be able to
evaluate and predict the thermal performance of the PTC ﬁeld both short term and long
term under transient weather conditions. Moreover, an algorithm is developed within the
model that accounts for the online status of the ﬁeld (which PTC rows are operating out
of the total number of rows each time) which is necessary to calculate the correct usefull
energy from the ﬁeld. Lastly, the optical losses that are associated with PTC collectors
are included and accounted for within the model.
6
==PAGE:15==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
This chapter gathers the research that was reviewed in order to develop the mathematical
model for the PTC ﬁeld. It elaborates on the thermal performance testing methods that
were mentioned in chapter 1.4 and goes into detail about the requirements of each testing
method and how diﬀerent solar collector types can favour a certain method. The research
also covers the heat and optical losses that are associated with PTC’s and their importance
to the mathematical model. Lastly, the philosophy of the software testing method that
was used to develop the mathematical model is explained.
2.1
Steady State test method
This method is the most common when it comes to evaluating thermal performance of
solar collectors, and is used in all three standards that were mentioned. The initial model
for steady state is expressed as the useful power output (Q) of the collector, and can be
seen below.
Q = η0 · Gg −c1 · (Tm −Ta) −c2 · (Tm −Ta)2
(2.1)
This means that this model requires that the irradiance is normal to the aperture area of
the collector. Modiﬁcations to the model through separate tests allows for the steady state
method to also include an incidence angle modiﬁer (Kθ) to account for the incidence angle,
in case the irradiation is not normal to the collector, which will describe the dependency of
incidence angle on the zero loss eﬃciency. Lastly, another term (c5) can be added through
another separate test which describes the eﬀective thermal capacity of the collector in
question. The full model of the steady state method, including all options can be seen
below.
Q = η0 · Gg · K(θ) −c1 · (Tm −Ta) −c2 · (Tm −Ta)2 −c5 · dTm
dt
(2.2)
where,
c1
is the heat loss coeﬃcient at (Tm −Ta = 0) [W/m2K]
c2
is the temperature dependence on the heat loss coeﬃcient [W/m2K2]
c5
is the eﬀective thermal capacitance of the collector [J/m2K]
Tm
is the mean heat transfer ﬂuid temperature [K]
Ta
is the Ambient temperature [K]
η0
is the zero loss eﬃciency [−]
Gg
is the global irradiance [W/m2]
7
==PAGE:16==
2. Literature review
This test method is capable of both outdoors testing under a clear sky and also indoors
simulations with artiﬁcial irradiance. The reason for the clear sky is that this method,
while accepting both beam and diﬀuse irradiance, it only accepts levels of beam irradiance
larger than 700 (W/m2) according to EN 12975-2 [8]. Which in turn means that during the
test, the diﬀuse irradiance factor is limited to 30% [8]. This also means that in order for
the beam irradiance to be high, the time period where the steady state test is performed
should be where the sun is highest in the sky. This can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1. Acceptable time period for steady-state measurements on a clear day. [8]
This method uses only one incidence angle modiﬁer (IAM) to account for the incidence
angle (θ) on the zero loss eﬃciency, therefore collector types that utilize both diﬀuse and
beam irradiance, will have to "share" the incidence angle modifer, where in the QDT
method (presented below) there are 2 separate incidence angle modiﬁers for each type of
irradiation.
2.2
Quasi-Dynamic test method
This testing method was shortly introduced in chapter 1.4, where it was mentioned that
QDT, allows for a broader range of solar collectors to be tested. The reason is that
the model allows for more input parameters to inﬂuence the model, such as the zero
loss eﬃciency for beam and diﬀuse irradiation parameter. This will help increase the
accuracy in solar collector models for collector types that absorb diﬀuse irradiation. For
PTC’s, the possible contribution of diﬀuse irradiance is limited to a fraction of the incident
diﬀuse irradiance, which is determined by the concentration ratio. This results in a highly
statistic uncertainty when determining the eﬃciency for diﬀuse irradiance because of the
low sensitivity [9]. Furthermore, the QDT model introduces two wind parameters, that
measure the wind dependence on the zero loss eﬃciency and one parameter that models
the long-wave irradiance dependency of the collector. The full model of the QDT method,
with all its options is introduced below[8].
8
==PAGE:17==
2. Literature review
Q = η0 · Kθb(θ) · Gb + η0 · Kθd(θ) · Gd −c1 · (Tm −Ta) −c2 · (Tm −Ta)2
−c3 · u · (Tm −Ta) + c4 · (EL −σ · T 4
a ) −c5 · dTm
dt
−c6 · u · Gg
(2.3)
where,
c1
is the heat loss coeﬃcient at (Tm −Ta = 0) [W/m2K]
c2
is the temperature dependence on the heat loss coeﬃcient [W/m2K2]
c3
is the wind speed dependence on the heat losses [J/m3K]
c4
is the long-wave irradiance dependence on the heat losses [−]
c5
is the eﬀective thermal capacitance of the collector [J/m2K]
c6
is the wind dependence on the zero loss eﬃciency [s/m]
Tm
is the mean heat transfer ﬂuid temperature [K]
Ta
is the Ambient temperature [K]
u
is the wind speed [m/s]
EL
is the long wave irradiance(λ > 3 µm) [W/m2]
σ
is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant [W/m2K4]
η0
is the zero loss eﬃcency [−]
Like the steady state method, the QDT model is also expressed as the usefull power output
(Q), and can be used for indoors and outdoors testing as well. The major diﬀerence between
the steady-state test method and the QDT, is that the collector’s useful energy gain is
measured over time intervals of (5–10 min) while the ambient temperature, incident angle
and solar irradiance are allowed to vary. This allows QDT to be performed under clear
and cloudy weather and record data throughout the day, resulting in an accurate model
based on detailed data, that also take into account weather changes. This can be seen in
the following Figure.
Figure 2.2. Time period only acceptable for quasi-dynamic measurements on a day with variable
irradiance. [8]
9
==PAGE:18==
2. Literature review
It is also important to mention that, results gained from the QDT and SS method are
comparable with each other, as long as the extra QDT parameters are removed from the
equation. Fischer.S et.al[8], shows results of a test, where two identical ﬂat plate collectors
were tested with the QDT and SS method. The results show that the QDT model has on
average a slightly higher yearly energy gain (kWh/m2year), due to the fact that according
to EN 12975-2 steady state allows a diﬀuse fraction lower than 30% and a incidence angle
smaller than 20◦(can be seen in table 2.1). And since these parameters surpassed that
limit during the testing period, it resulted in the QDT method being more eﬃcient. This
can be visualized in the following Figure, where the eﬃciency obtained by the two methods
are plotted against the heat loss parameter.
Figure 2.3. Comparison of the eﬃciency curves gained using the two methods.[8]
The following table shows the permitted test conditions for the two testing methods,
according to EN 12975-2.
Table 2.1. Test conditions and permitted deviation according to EN 12975-2. [8]
Parameter
Steady State
Quasi Dynamic
Value
Permitted
Deviation
Value
Permitted
Deviation
Global Irradiance Gg (W/m2)
>700
± 50
300<Gg<1100
-
Incident angle θ (◦)
<20
-
-
-
Diﬀuse fraction Gd/Gg
<30
-
-
-
Ambient temperature (K)
-
± 1
-
-
Local air speed u (m/s)
3± 1
-
-
-
Collector inlet temperature (K)
-
± 0.1
-
± 1
2.3
Model Philosophy
The philosophy of the model follows the software testing method called Grey box testing,
which is the combination of Black and White box software testing. This software testing
10
==PAGE:19==
2. Literature review
method analyses the functionality of an application (e.g solar collector ﬁeld), without
having all of the information regarding the internal structure and design of the application.
Instead, inputs and outputs of the application are compared with each other in order to
form a correlation or a ﬁt. The main focus of this method is the functionality of the system
as a whole. The type of grey box testing that will be used in this thesis is called Functional
testing, which deals with the functional requirements and speciﬁcations of an application.
Parameters of the application are being tested by providing an input and comparing the
actual output with the expected output. In the case of the PTC ﬁeld, regression testing
will be performed for the parameter identiﬁcation.
2.3.1
Parameter Identiﬁcation Tool
In order to retrieve the coeﬃcients of the two testing methods, Draper et al.[10] uses
Multiple Linear Regression (MLR), which is a mathematical tool used to evaluate data,
based on the least squares model. Basically, this tool takes the input parameters to the
model and evaluates the changes they are going through within the model, and the impact
they have on the output parameters. An example is shown in Figure 2.4, where the point
is to create a straight line connecting the measured data points that are investigated, and
in order to achieve a good ﬁt between the mathematical model and the data, the data
points have to be as close to the straight line as possible. If data points are not close to
the straight line, then it means that the measured data would be subject to slight errors
that would alter the regressed coeﬃcients validity. The output result of the model can be
expressed as output result = Model functions + Random error.
Figure 2.4. An example of Multiple Linear Regression
Weisberg et al.[11] describes the Extended MLR method (EMLR) that implements the use
of "dummy variables", which make it possible to identify the same parameter in diﬀerent
subsets or ranges of the investigated data. This is helpfull in the sense that, it can for
example identify the zero loss eﬃciency angle by angle, without the need of an equation.
11
==PAGE:20==
2. Literature review
According to Fischer. et al[8], this method widens the range of collectors that can be
tested, and is especially helpfull for evacuated tube collectors (ETC), compound parabolic
concentrators (CPC) and unglazed collectors since they can not be modelled with standard
incidence angle modiﬁer (IAM) equations due to their form. They would require a two
axis incidence angle modiﬁer.
2.4
PTC eﬃciency and associated losses
When it comes to PTC’s there are two diﬀerent eﬃciencies to consider, namely the optical
eﬃciency and the thermal eﬃciency. The overall eﬃciency of the collector is a function of
both the fraction of direct normal irradiance absorbed by the receiver (optical eﬃciency)
and the heat lost to the environment when the receiver is at operating temperature (thermal
eﬃciency). The overall eﬃciency can either be determined by testing the collector under
actual operating conditions or by separately measuring the two eﬃciencies. The deﬁnition
of the overall collector eﬃciency can be expressed as the ratio of energy collected by the
heat transfer ﬂuid over the direct incident irradiance on the aperture area of the collector.
By taking ﬁgure 2.3 as an example, the overall eﬃciency is normally plotted against the
heat loss parameter ((heat transfer ﬂuid temperature - ambient temperature)/ irradiance).
Assuming that there are no heat losses from the receiver to the environment, the zero
loss eﬃciency(η0) is actually equal to the optical eﬃciency(ηopt). The negative slope of
the eﬃciency curve in Figure 2.3 is related to the heat loss of the receiver when the heat
transfer ﬂuid is operating at higher temperatures than the ambient. This can be expressed
as
ηtot = ηopt −ηhl
(2.4)
where
ηhl = n · qloss
Gb · Aa
(2.5)
Here, qloss represents the total heat loss from an individual receiver and n represents the
number of receivers included in the system. Gb is the beam irradiance and Aa is the
aperture area of the collector.
Like the eﬃciency, when it comes to the losses that are associated with a PTC, there are
optical and thermal losses. The optical losses of the collector can be categorized in ﬁxed
losses and the solar position losses that vary throughout the day, depending on the position
of the sun.
2.4.1
Fixed optical losses
These losses do not have a large impact on the performance of the collector when considered
separately, but they still have to be addressed in order to get a better understanding of
the losses. Fixed optical losses can be minimized to a certain degree through maintenance,
but they will always occur, since the perfect PTC does not exist. The following table is
showing the ﬁxed losses that are associated with PTC’s, and gives an explanation of each
loss separately.
12
==PAGE:21==
2. Literature review
Table 2.2. Fixed optical losses associated with PTC’s [12]
Loss description
Deﬁnitions
Geometry
defects
1) Inaccurate alignment of the mirror
2) Deviation between optical focus and receiver
3) Discontinuities along the mirror
4) Manufacturing errors
Tracking
error
Imperfect alignment with the tracking angle
Mirror
cleanliness
Dirt that attaches onto the mirror, and blocks a fraction
of incoming irradiance
Mirror
reﬂectance
Specular reﬂectance within a cone angle deﬁned by the collector
and receiver geometry
The ﬁxed optical losses are not going to be quantiﬁed or analyzed in the mathematical
model, due to unavailable data but their inﬂuence on the collector performance has already
inﬂuenced the measured data that has been recorded.
2.4.2
Solar position losses
The cosine eﬀect and the shadow eﬀect between two rows are the most important optical
losses, and have the largest inﬂuence on the performance of the collector (optically speaking)
since they rely on the position of the sun and vary depending on the season and time of
day. When it comes to the end eﬀect, Jinping Wang et al[13] found that for a row of PTC
collectors, the end eﬀect eﬃciency did not drop below 98% when it was tested throughout
the year, so its eﬀect on the collector performance is small. A more detailed description of
these losses are given below.
Cosine eﬀect
The cosine eﬀect is the most inﬂuential optical loss of the PTC regarding performance. The
purpose of the PTC mirror, is to reﬂect the incoming irradiance to the receiver. When the
irradiance is not normal to the aperture area of the collector, an angle is formed between
the Sun’s rays and the perpendicular direction of the reﬂecting surface (incident angle).
This angle inﬂuences the performance of the collector in diﬀerent levels throughout the
year. In Summer where the sun is high in the sky, the incidence angle(θ) will be large
during the morning hour and sunset hour but small during the day. The opposite is true
for Winter, where the sun is low in the sky, the incidence angle will be small during the
morning and sunset hours, but will be large during the day. The following Figure shows a
representation of the Cosine eﬀect.
13
==PAGE:22==
2. Literature review
Figure 2.5. Representation of the cosine loss[14]
Shadow eﬀect
Depending on the location of the collector, it might be subject to lateral shading. In
the case of a solar collector ﬁeld, shadow is unavoidable since each row of collectors will
cast a shadow to the next row and so on. This loss will only occur at low solar altitudes,
such as dusk or dawn where the shadow of the previous row will hide a portion of the
collector’s aperture area, resulting in a decrease of the reﬂected irradiance to the receiver.
The following Figure shows a representation of lateral shading, where the ﬁrst row will
cast a shadow to the next.
Figure 2.6. Representation of lateral shading between two PTC rows [15]
14
==PAGE:23==
2. Literature review
End eﬀect
Due to the fact that PTC’s normally use single axis tracking, it is inevitable that sometimes
the sun will be in such a position where it is "sideways" with reference to the collector.
This means that the irradiance from the sun, is entering the collector in such an incidence
angle, that a certain length of the receiver is omitted and is not receiving irradiance. The
end eﬀect is a function of the focal length of the collector, the incidence angle (θ) and the
total length of the collector. The following Figure shows a representation of the end eﬀect
Figure 2.7. Representation of the end eﬀect [13]
where Lf is the focal length, LPTC is the length of the PTC and Z is the portion of the
receiver that is not accepting solar irradiance. Since the end eﬀect is a function of the
incidence angle, it means that its eﬀect on the collector performance is going to be even
smaller during the summer. The research that was mentioned earlier from Jinping Wang,
states that the end eﬀect eﬃciency throughout the day is approximatelly 98% in Winter
and 99% in Summer.
2.4.3
Heat losses
When it comes to PTC’s, the receiver (as a whole) is the only component that is subject
to heat losses. During the introduction , it was shown in Figure 1.1 that the receiver tube
is enclosed in a vacuum sealed glass cover in order to reduce convective heat losses to the
environment. It is worth mentioning that the receiver tube is made from copper, because of
it’s excellent thermal conductivity properties, meaning that the heat within the material is
distributed quicker along the receiver. There are 3 diﬀerent methods of heat transfer, and
all of them take place within the receiver, namely convection, radiation and conduction.
While it is important to know the heat losses involved, this thesis does not include a
thermal analysis of the diﬀerent heat losses within the receiver, instead it will represent all
the heat losses as a whole by calculating parameters c1 and c2 from equation 2.3. The
following Figure shows a cross sectional area of the receiver with the heat losses, for the
readers understanding.
15
==PAGE:24==
2. Literature review
Figure 2.8. Cross Sectional overview of a PTC receiver showing the heat losses[16]
16
==PAGE:25==
3
BRØNDERSLEV CHP PLANT & MEASURED
DATA
This chapter gives a detailed description of the Brønderslev combined heat and power
(CHP) plant and the measured data from its PTC ﬁeld that were used as inputs in order
to develop the mathematical model. The PTC ﬁeld was designed by Aalborg CSP for
the owner Brønderslev Forsyning and came into operation in 2017. The primary purpose
of the plant is to provide heat to the district heating network of Brønderslev, and to
produce electricity through an organic Rankine cycle (ORC). This system is the ﬁrst CHP
plant in the world that integrates CSP and Biomass boilers while also utilizing an ORC
to transform energy into district heating and electricity. The following ﬁgure shows a
schematic of the Brønderslev CHP plant.
Figure 3.1. Schematic of Brønderslev CHP plant [17]
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Brønderslev CHP plant & Measured data
3.1
Plant operation
Looking at Figure 3.1, the plant consists of three diﬀerent energy sources, namely the PTC
ﬁeld, Biomass boilers and a gas engine. The heat transfer oil is circulated between the
PTC ﬁeld, the Biomass boilers, the ORC and a heat exchanger. The energy that is passed
on to the district heating network through the heat exchanger can then either be stored
at the heat storage tank for later use, or be transfered directly to end-use consumption.
Because the PTC ﬁeld is not a very reliable energy source, due to weather ﬂuctuations,
it has to work together with the Biomass boilers as a hybrid thermal system in order to
heat up the heat transfer oil that feeds the ORC and the heat exchanger. In order to have
a steady electricity production from the ORC, the PTC ﬁeld only provides heat to the
ORC when stable conditions are met, otherwise the ORC is primarily fed by the Biomass
boilers. Finally, in order to ensure that the district heating demand is always met, the
gas engine acts like a back up for when the PTC ﬁeld and biomass boilers cannot provide
enough heat.
3.2
The PTC ﬁeld
The PTC ﬁeld is located in coordinates 57.2709◦N, 9.9452◦E and is comprised of 400 PTC
modules in total with a peak performance of 16.6 [MW] and a total mirror aperture area
of 26, 930 [m2]. The composition of the ﬁeld is 10 loops positioned in a parallel formation,
where 1 loop consists of 4 collector rows, and one row consists of 10 modules. Each row, is
positioned on a tracking system that tracks the sun with an accuracy of [± 0.15◦] with an
alignment of N-S at an aperture azimuth angle of 30 [◦]. This conﬁguration is summarized
in the following table, and can also be seen in Figure 3.2.
Table 3.1. PTC ﬁeld composition, size and area [18]
Description
Length
Area
Peak performance
Module
12 m
67.3 m2
41.5 kW
Row (10 modules)
120 m
673 m2
415 kW
Loop (4 rows)
480 m
2,692 m2
1.66 MW
Solar collector ﬁeld (10 loops)
4800 m
26,920 m2
16.6 MW
It can be seen from Figures 3.2 and 3.3, that rows 1V, 2V, 2Ø and 1Ø form a loop. The
heat transfer oil enters the ﬁrst loop from 1V, gathers the energy from 2V,2Ø,1Ø and
delivers it to the ﬁeld outlet. This conﬁguration pattern is repeated for the rest of the
rows as well. Since the PTC alignment is due North-South, this means that the collectors
track the sun from East to West. When the sun rises up in the morning, half of row 17Ø,
half of row 18Ø and row 20Ø will have a slightly increased energy production since they
will not be subject to lateral shading. The opposite is true for rows 1V and 2V, which will
have a slightly increased energy production in the afternoon before the sun sets.
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Brønderslev CHP plant & Measured data
Figure 3.2. Schematic of the Brønderslev PTC ﬁeld [18]
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Brønderslev CHP plant & Measured data
Figure 3.3. Single loop schematic
3.3
Measured Data
The solar collector ﬁeld uses various sensors to collect data throughout the day, which
makes it easier for the user to study the behaviour of the ﬁeld under varying operating
conditions. The data that are going to be used for the development of the mathematical
model are measured in an interval of 1 minute, which is accurate enough in order to develop
a thermal performance testing method. A measurement of 5-10 seconds for example would
be used for a high precision analysis.
The availability of data allowed for an investigation in a time period of 6 diﬀerent months in
2017, namely from April until September. The logic that is followed is that April and May
are going to be used for obtaining the regressed coeﬃcients for the thermal performance,
and the remaining four months will be used to predict the thermal output of the model for
each month separately, based on the regressed coeﬃcients that were obtained in April and
May.
When the plant started operating in mid March 2017, the ﬁnal control strategy was not
decided on yet, which meant that output temperatures had to be carefully monitored in
order to avoid any damages to the oil or the receiver [18]. This meant that the output
Temperature from the collectors was not allowed to surpass 200 (◦C). Naturally, not all
of the collector rows are operational each time. The collectors will sometimes de-focus
from the tracking path for safety reasons if strong wind is recorded or if maintenance is
taking place, resulting in a loss of produced energy since a part of the total aperture area
of the ﬁeld did not accept the incoming irradiance. This was solved by developing an
algorithm that assigns a value of 0 or 1 for each row. Depending on the condition if the
tracking angle is greater than 2◦compared to the position of the sun, the track is assumed
to not be operational and is assigned a value of 0. The value of 1 is for operational rows.
This algorithm will optimize the results of the model, as it will consider the area of the
operational rows, and not the entire ﬁeld when calculating the power output of the ﬁeld.
20
==PAGE:29==
4
METHODOLOGY & MODEL STRUCTURE
Having presented the thermal performance testing methods and standards in the previous
chapters, this chapter explains the methods and procedure that were used in order to
develop the mathematical model of the PTC ﬁeld, which will accurately evaluate and
predict the short term and long term performance. The testing method that will be
used, is basically the QDT method with some additional parameters included, such as
a lateral shading model that accounts for the shade in between rows, and lastly an end
eﬀect parameter that accounts for the end losses of the collectors. The development of the
algorithm that determines the working area of the ﬁeld is included as well and explained.
The cosine eﬀect is included within the incidence angle modiﬁer (IAM) which will be
explained in this chapter. Hence, all the optical losses that are dependant on the position
of the sun, will be included and accounted for in the model. It also made sense to develop
the model according to the EN 12975-2 standard, since the model is going to be based and
validated with data from a Danish power plant, but also accepts the QDT as a testing
method. Finally, in the end of each sub-section of this chapter a table is included that
shows the parameters that were used as inputs, and the parameters that were calculated
within the model, for each section.
4.1
Model Development
Looking at the QDT model in equation 2.3, all the options are available, though not all
of the options are necessary for the PTC ﬁeld. Since the receivers of the PTC ﬁeld are
positioned in an evacuated glass cover, forced convection due to the wind is eliminated
and has no eﬀect on the thermal performance of the receiver. Hence, the wind coeﬃcients
c3 and c6 from equation 2.3 can be eliminated. The long wave irradiance dependence
coeﬃcient c4 will also be neglected, as it is mostly relevant for unglazed collectors, and
not concentrating collectors. Lastly, it was mentioned earlier that the diﬀuse irradiance
has minimal to no impact on the performance of a PTC, which means that the IAM for
diﬀuse irradiance term will be removed as well. This leaves the PTC ﬁeld model with the
minimum parameters for QDT to be performed, according to EN 12975-2. The model can
be seen below (without including shadow and end loss parameters).
Q = η0 · Kθb(θ) · Gb −c1 · (Tm −Ta) −c2 · (Tm −Ta)2 −c5 · dTm
dt
(4.1)
4.1.1
Shadow eﬀect
In order to model the shadow, it has to be expressed in a mathematical way by considering
the geometry of two adjacent PTC rows. The shadow on the aperture area of the adjacent
21
==PAGE:30==
4. Methodology & Model structure
row will depend on the distance between the two rows, the tracking angle and the width of
the collector. This can be seen in the ﬁgure below
Figure 4.1. Representation of lateral shading between two PTC rows [12]
where ωcol represents the tracking angle of the collector (rotation about it’s axis), Wa is
the unshaded aperture width and Lspace is the distance between the two PTC’s. From
here, a ratio term can be derived from the large right angle triangle in Figure 4.1. The
unshaded aperture area can be described as
Wa = cos(ωcol) · Lspace
(4.2)
and the shadow eﬃciency, is then given by
ηshadow = Wa
W
(4.3)
This eﬃciency term has a range between 0 and 1, and since the ﬁrst row is never shaded,
this means that the shadow eﬃciency should never fall below 0.5 between two rows. In order
to implement this eﬀect to the whole solar ﬁeld, an equation was made that determines how
many PTC modules will be unshaded out of the total number of PTC modules. Looking
back at Figure 3.2, when the sun rises from the East, there are 27 PTC modules that will
not receive shading, out of the 400 in total. And before the sun sets at West, there will be
25 unshaded collectors. The shadow coeﬃcient can be written as
S = Un + (n −Un) · ηshadow
n
(4.4)
where Un represents the amount of unshaded PTC modules and n represents the total
amount of PTC modules in the ﬁeld.
22
==PAGE:31==
4. Methodology & Model structure
4.1.2
Incidence angle modiﬁer & End eﬀect
The incident angle modiﬁer accounts for the eﬀects of incidence angle on the zero loss
eﬃciency, and for collectors like parabolic troughs which are tracking the sun over one axis,
the incidence angle changes throughout the day and year. This means that the eﬃciency
of the collector is dependant on the incidence angle, therefore this dependency must be
taken into account in order to correctly predict the long term thermal performance of the
ﬁeld. The equation that describes the incidence angle modiﬁer includes the cosine eﬀect
(cos(θ)) and the angle θ itself.
K(θ) = cos(θ) + k1 · θ + k2 · θ2
(4.5)
Coeﬃcients k1 and k2 will be regressed and predicted within the model, and they describe
the trajectory of the curve of the incident angle modiﬁer.
The end eﬀect which is also a function of the incident angle, also depends on the length
between the collector and the receiver (focal length), the aperture width and the length of
the collector. Since the end eﬀect is a function of the incidence angle, its eﬀects are already
included in the incidence angle modiﬁer, though by including it as a separate parameter in
the model, it is possible to measure its eﬀect on the zero loss eﬃciency directly. The end
loss correction equation is given below by John.A Duﬃe [19].
Eloss = 1 −Lfoc
LPTC
·
 
1 +
w2
48 · L2
foc
!
· tan(θ)
(4.6)
where Lfoc is the focal length and LPTC is the length of the PTC row. The gaps in between
the PTC’s are neglected.
4.1.3
Linearization of the model
Now that the shadow and end loss eﬀects have been addressed, the ﬁnal model can be
presented and transformed into a linear form, in order for multiple linear regression to
take place. The point of MLR is to identify the parameters in the model that are marked
with red. The rest of the parameters that are not marked with red, will be given to the
model as an input, or calculated within the model based on the inputs that are given. So
the only "unknowns" are the parameters marked in red. The model including the shadow,
end loss eﬀect and the incidence angle modiﬁer K(θ) can be seen below.
Q = η · Gb · Eloss · S ·

cos(θ) + k1 · θ + k2 · θ2

−c1 · (Tm −Ta)
−c2 · (Tm −Ta)2 −c5 · dTm
dt
(4.7)
The parameters that are marked with red, need to be in a linear form for MLR to take
place. All of the red parameters are in linear form, except from the IAM coeﬃcients k1
and k2. Therefore, after restructuring the model, the linearized form is shown below.
23
==PAGE:32==
4. Methodology & Model structure
Q =
 
η · Gb · Eloss · S · cos(θ)
!
+
 
η · Gb · Eloss · S · k1 · θ
!
+
 
η · Gb · Eloss · S · k2 · θ2
!
−c1 · (Tm −Ta) −c2 · (Tm −Ta)2 −c5 · dTm
dt
(4.8)
When MLR is performed, the ﬁrst parenthesis will yield the zero loss eﬃciency of the ﬁeld,
the second and third parenthesis will need to be divided with the zero loss eﬃciency in
order to obtain the IAM coeﬃcients k1 and k2. The heat loss coeﬃcients c1 and c2 along
with the eﬀective thermal capacity coeﬃcient c5 are already in linear form.
4.1.4
Parameter section table
The following table shows the parameters that were used in this section
Table 4.1. shadow and end loss parameters
Input
Parameter
Units
Description
Lspace
m
Distance between two PTC modules
W
m
Collector aperture width
Lfoc
m
Focal length between collector-receiver
LPTC
m
PTC Row length
Calculated
within the
model
Wa
m2
Unshaded aperture area
ωcol
◦
PTC Tracking angle
S
-
Shadow Coeﬃcient
θ
◦
Incidence angle
4.2
Solar angles
Solar angles are used in the model in order to describe the Sun dependent optical losses
that were mentioned in Chapter 2.4.2, but are also used to determine the tracking angle of
the collector. The primary purpose of the tracking angle is for the model to understand
that the collector is following the Suns movement, giving the possibility to calculate the
amount of incident radiation on the collector.
In order to determine the location of any surface in reference to the sun, one would have to
use fundamental geometry concepts related to the suns movement around the earth. Time
is measured according to the earth’s spinning around its own axis, where one revolution
of the earth is equal to 24 hours. Commonly used time measurements have a relation
between geographic Longitude and local time, where one degree of Longitude corresponds
to the time diﬀerence of 4 minutes, hence why the known time zones (UTC+) which are 1
hour apart in time, are 15◦apart geographically. While this is fundamental knowledge, it
is an important speciﬁcation for understanding one of the key parameters used to describe
the earths movements in reference to the sun, the hour angle (ω).
24
==PAGE:33==
4. Methodology & Model structure
4.2.1
Hour angle
The hour angle is the angular displacement of the Sun East or West of the local meridian.
One hour represents 15◦in hour angle, and at 12 o’clock (noon) this angle is 0◦, positive
after noon, and negative before noon. The hour angle omega is given by equation
ω = 15 · (tsol −12)
(4.9)
where tsol represents the solar time and is deﬁned as the apparent angular movement of
the Sun in the sky, where the solar noon (12 o’clock) is used as a reference point and is
expressed in hours. The main component of solar time is local standard time (STD) and
the geographical location component in reference to which standard time is deﬁned. The
equation for the hour angle can be seen below.
tsol = tstd + 4 · (Lst −Lloc) + E ± D
(4.10)
Here, Lstd and Lloc are given as inputs to the model, and they are the standard meridian
of the local time zone, and the Longitude of the solar ﬁeld respectively. D refers to the
Daylight saving time, so depending on the season, it can be positive or negative. E is the
equation of time, and it accounts for the variability of the earth’s motion around the Sun.
As the earth spins around itself, it also orbits around the sun, hence why the distance
between the earth and Sun varies throughout the year. The equation of time is given below
(in minutes)
E = 229.2 ·

0.000075 + 0.001868 · cos(B) −0.032077 · sin(B)
−0.014615 · cos(2B) −0.04089 · sin(2B)

(4.11)
where B is calculated as
B = (n −1) · 360
365
(4.12)
and n refers to the number of day within the year.
4.2.2
Declination angle
The declination angle describes the seasonal changes in the mutual location of the earth
and sun (shown in Figure 4.2 ). This angle is formed by a straight line connecting the
earth and sun, and the equatorial plane at solar noon. The declination angle is positive in
the Summer (for the Northern hemisphere) and negative in the winter. The angle is given
by the following equation
δ = 23.45 · sin
 
360 · 284 + n
365
!
(4.13)
25
==PAGE:34==
4. Methodology & Model structure
Figure 4.2. Variation of the declination angle [20]
4.2.3
Solar Zenith angle
In order to determine the position of the sun, with a reference point on earth, it is necessary
to calculate the solar zenith angle (θz). It is an angle between the normal of the solar
collector aperture surface and the direction of beam irradiation. An angle that complements
the zenith angle is the solar altitude angle (θa), as the diﬀerence between the zenith angle
and 90◦is equal to the altitude angle. The solar Zenith angle is given by the following
equation
θz = cos−1

cos(φ) · cos(ω) · cos(δ) + sin(φ) · sin(δ)

(4.14)
where (φ) is the observers latitude and is given to the model as an input.
4.2.4
Solar Azimuth angle
The solar azimuth angle deﬁnes the Sun’s relative direction along the horizon, and it
is measured clockwise with a starting point from North (0◦), then East is (90◦) and so
on. This angle has a range between (−180 ≤γs ≤180), since anticlockwise from North
counts as negative. In order to determine the position of the sun in the sky, Braun and
Mitchell[21] gave a correlation for calculating the solar azimuth for tracking surfaces, which
takes into account the four celestial quadrants and describes the solar azimuth angle γs
as a function of a pseudo solar azimuth angle γ′
s for the ﬁrst and fourth quadrants. This
description is usefull to determine the solar Azimuth when the collector rotates from East
to West. The correlation is given below
γs = C1 · C2 · γ′
s + C3 ·
 
1 −C1 · C2
2
!
· 180
(4.15)
where,
γ′
s = sin−1
 
sin(ω) · cos(δ)
sin(θz)
!
(4.16)
Coeﬃcients C1,C2 and C3 are constants and they are either equal to 1 or -1. The ﬁrst
coeﬃcient C1, is either 1 or -1 when the hour angle (ω) is respectively higher or lower than
26
==PAGE:35==
4. Methodology & Model structure
the hour angle (ωs), which basically deﬁnes if the position of the Sun is due East or West.
This means that this coeﬃcient will change throughout the day. (ωs) is given by
ωs = cos−1
 
tan(δ)
tan(φ)
!
(4.17)
The coeﬃcient C1 is then determined from
C1 =
(
+1
if
|ω| < ωs
−1
if
|ω| ≥ωs
(4.18)
Coeﬃcient C2 is constant for longer periods of time, and mostly changes when the seasons
change, which is also why it is dependant on the declination of the Sun. Depending on the
Latitude , this coeﬃcient might remain constant throughout the whole year. For Northern
Latitudes, this coeﬃcient will always be equal to +1. The coeﬃcient is determined from
the following
C2 =
(
+1
if
φ · (φ −δ) ≥0
−1
if
φ · (φ −δ) < 0
(4.19)
Lastly, coeﬃcient C3 is also variable throughout the day and determines when the hour
angle has passed 12 o’clock (noon), which means that the coeﬃcient is -1 before noon, and
becomes 1 past noon. The coeﬃcient is determined below from
C3 =
(
+1
if
ω ≥0
−1
if
ω < 0
(4.20)
4.2.5
Incident angle and Tracking angle
Now that all of the solar angles have been calculated, it is possible to calculate the incidence
angle and the tracking angle of the collector. The incidence angle (θ) is arguably the most
important angle, as it is directly related to the performance of the collector. Like the
Azimuth angle, there are diﬀerent correlations available depending on the type of collector.
For horizontal tracking surfaces, the incidence angle is given by
θ = cos−1
 q
1 −cos2(90 −θz) · cos2(γs −γ)
!
(4.21)
where γ is the surface aperture Azimuth, given to the model as an input. The tracking
angle ωcol was introduced in chapter 4.1.1 where it was shown how the angle is used to
describe the length of the shadow onto the collector. The tracking angle is calculated as
ωcol = tan−1
 
sin(γs −γ)
tan(90 −θz)
!
(4.22)
27
==PAGE:36==
4. Methodology & Model structure
4.2.6
Parameter section table
Table 4.2. Solar angle parameters
Input
Parameter
Units
Description
tstd
sec
Standard local time
Lst
◦
Standard meridian of local time zone
Lloc
◦
Longitude of the Brønderslev ﬁeld
φ
◦
Latitude of the Brønderslev ﬁeld
E
min
Equation of time
γ
◦
Aperture of axis Azimuth
Calculated
within the
model
ω
◦
Hour angle
tsol
hour
Solar time
δ
◦
Solar declination angle
θz
◦
Solar zenith angle
γs
◦
Solar azimuth angle
4.3
Usefull thermal energy
At this stage, what the mathematical model knows so far is the position of the sun
throughout the day, in reference to the position of the solar ﬁeld. This means that the
collectors can now accurately track the sun, making it possible to determine the amount of
solar irradiation that is being utilized from the collectors. The correct method to calculate
the usefull energy per square meter of the solar collector ﬁeld, would be to measure the
oil temperature at the main inlet and main outlet of the ﬁeld, along with the amount of
oil (mass ﬂow), calculate the thermal capacity of the oil and ﬁnally calculate the usefull
energy (W/m2) using the following formula
Qoil =
˙
moil · cpoil ·

Tout,oil −Tin,oil

Afield
(4.23)
Unfortunately, this simple method can not exactly be used due to two problems. The ﬁrst
problem was described in section 3.3, where due to safety reasons and maintenance not all
of the collector rows will be active all the time. Hence, using the Area of the ﬁeld shown
in equation 4.23 would give an inaccurate result. The second problem can be explained
by looking at Figure 3.1, where the schematic of the Brønderslev power plant is shown.
Apparently, the ﬂow sensor that measures the mass ﬂow in the loop of the Heat transfer
oil was not working properly, so the recorded data of the oil mass ﬂow that were provided
for this analysis can not be used. The best way to solve this problem (still looking at
Figure 3.1) in the given time frame, was to measure the energy after the primary heat
exchanger(HEX), which is the water side. This solution adds a degree of uncertainty to
the model since the eﬃciency of the HEX is unknown, therefore this model will have to
adopt the assumption that the heat loss of the HEX is considered negligible. To avoid any
confusion, the usefull energy Qwater is used to calculate the measured performance from
the water side, but the regression analysis for the thermal performance coeﬃcients still
considers the thermal parameters of oil.
28
==PAGE:37==
4. Methodology & Model structure
Therefore, equation 4.23 can be written as
Qwater =
˙
mwater · cpwater ·

Tout,water −Tin,water

Afield · Aonline
(4.24)
The Aonline parameter refers to the active aperture area of the ﬁeld that is available at
that given time. It was introduced in section 3.3, that this algorithm assigns a value of 0
or 1 depending on the following condition
operationalrows =
(
1
if
|rowi −Spotition| ≤2◦
0
if
|rowi −Spotition| > 2◦
(4.25)
where Spotition is the position of the Sun and rowi refers to the tracking angle of row i,
which goes from 1 until 40. The trough will stay operational, as long as the absolute
diﬀerence between the tracking angle and the position of the sun does not exceed 2◦. This
condition yields a large Matrix with the assigned values, which then Sums the rows of
that Matrix in order to give the amount of operational rows within the entire ﬁeld. The
operational rows are then divided with the total amount of rows in the ﬁeld, in order to
obtain the parameter as a percentage. Hence, this parameter can be multiplied with the
Area of the entire ﬁeld in order to get the actual ﬁeld area that is operational.
In order to determine the thermal performance coeﬃcients c1,c2 and c5 through regression,
the mean temperature of the heat transfer ﬂuid (Tm,oil) must be known. The mean ﬂuid
temperature in this case is considered to be the average sum of the inlet and outlet
temperature of the PTC ﬁeld, shown in the following equation.
Tm,oil = Tin,oil + Tout,oil
2
(4.26)
When calculating the thermal performance coeﬃcients, this parameter acts as an upper
bound in the temperature range that the heat loss is based oﬀ(Tm,oil −Tamb = 0), where
the ambient temperature acts like a lower bound.
4.3.1
Parameter section table
Table 4.3. Thermal output and algorithm parameters
Input
Parameter
Units
Description
˙
mwater
Kg/s
Water mass ﬂow
Tin,water
◦C
Inlet temperature to the HEX
Tout,water
◦C
Outlet temperature from the HEX
Afield
m2
Total ﬁeld Area
Sposition
◦
Solar position
Calculated
within the
model
cpwater
J/Kg ·◦C
Speciﬁc heat of water
Aonline
m2
Operational area fraction
Tm,water
◦C
Mean ﬂuid temperature (water)
29
==PAGE:38==
4. Methodology & Model structure
4.4
Parameter identiﬁcation
The procedure that is followed for the parameter identiﬁcation is performed with accordance
to the thermal performance standard EN 12975-2 where the measured data need to be
re-sampled and averaged between 5 and 10 minutes, where the average of this 5 minutes
is taken as one time-step. When the re-sampling is performed, the linearized collector
model for the thermal power output described in equation 4.8 is considered. Before the
regression can take place, the measured data will have to be checked for errors and then
they need to pass certain ﬁltering conditions. Filtering conditions are implemented in
order to neutralize "bad" measurements (outliers), making the regressed coeﬃcients more
accurate. Some measurements that were registered in the morning for example, where
the PTC ﬁeld just starts operating, the oil needs to be warmed up ﬁrst before it starts
circulating in the receiver. This measurement will have a low thermal power output, which
would drag down the accuracy of the model. Depending on the investigated month, another
ﬁltering condition that was implemented was measurements with a low total operating
aperture area (Aonline) as low as 60% or more would be discarded. A measurement with a
lower percentage than 60% would create "spikes" when graphing the dependant variable
(Qwater) thereby dragging down the accuracy of the regressed coeﬃcients.
The ﬁltering conditions that were used can be seen in the table below.
Table 4.4. Filtering conditions
1) Aonline > 0.6
(%)
2) Gb > 10
(W/m2)
3) −0.1 ≤dTm/dt ≤0.1
(◦C)
4) Qwater > 10
(W/m2)
5) Gb > Qwater
(W/m2)
The third ﬁltering condition applies to the eﬀective thermal capacity which is found through
the derivative of Tm,oil. This parameter describes the change in temperature of the ﬂuid
over time, and it will ﬂuctuate throughout the day depending on the oil temperature
and the weather conditions that aﬀect the oil temperature. So by choosing this ﬁlter,
the model ensures that the measurements that are considered for the regression are close
to "steady state" operation and that no drastic changes in temperature will aﬀect the
thermal performance testing. Fluctuations are of course permitted which is also the point
of QDT testing method, its the sudden changes in temperature that can create "error" in
the regression quality.
The following table shows a re-arrangement of equation 4.8 in order to clearly show
the regressed coeﬃcients that will be determined through the dependent and predictor
variables.
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Methodology & Model structure
Table 4.5. Predictor-Dependent variables and regressed coeﬃcients
Regressed
Coeﬃcients
Predictor
Variables
Dependant
Variable
η
Gb · S · Eloss · cos(θ)
Qwater
k1
Gb · S · Eloss · θ
k2
Gb · S · Eloss · θ2
c1
Tm −Ta
c2
(Tm −Ta)2
c5
dTm/dt
Finally, the procedure that is followed within the mathematical model is described in the
following ﬂowchart, where the blue boxes are the inputs to the model.
Figure 4.3. Mathematical model ﬂowchart
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Methodology & Model structure
4.5
Validation procedure
The goal for this model is to calculate the measured heat output (Qmeasured) and regress the
coeﬃcients through the predictor variables, based on the dependent variable (Qmeasured).
As it was mentioned in section 3.3, the months that will be used for obtaining the regressed
coeﬃcients are April and May, and the predicted performance will be found for June,
July, August and September. The process starts by calculating the usefull heat output
(Qmeasured) for the combined length of the two months.
When the model yields the
regressed coeﬃcients for that particular heat output, these coeﬃcients will need to be
validated against data from another month, in order to ensure that the model is predicting
the thermal performance of the PTC ﬁeld accurately. The goal is to predict a heat output
that is as close to the measured performance as possible. This closest the prediction is to
the measured, the more accurate the model will be. Once the (Qmeasured) and (Qpredicted)
have been obtained for the same month, the statistical analysis can take place. The ﬁrst
step is to plot the (Qmeasured) and (Qpredicted), and see the diﬀerence between them, how far
oﬀthe predicted measurements are from the measured heat output. The validation method
that will be used here, will be based on the relative error between the two measurements.
This process will show the degree to which the model is an accurate representation of the
actual PTC ﬁeld in the real world, based on the perspective of the user. The relative error
is calculated with the following equation
relerror =

Qmeasured −Qpredicted
Qmeasured

(4.27)
Lastly, the performance of a single PTC collector was evaluated by the Technical University
of Denmark, where it was found that the peak eﬃciency is 75% and the ﬁrst order heat loss
was calculated to (c1) 0.017 (Wm−2K−1)[18]. These values have already been validated for
the performance of a single collector, so a prediction will be made using these parameters,
in order to see the diﬀerence between the measured and predicted performance of the ﬁeld,
and that of the prediction with the already validated single collector data. To avoid any
confusion, this particular prediction will be called "Tested", in order to distinguish between
the predictions. This prediction will show if the regressed coeﬃcients of the developed
mathematical model are more accurate than those of the "Tested" parameters for the
performance of the PTC ﬁeld.
32
==PAGE:41==
5
RESULTS & VALIDATION OF THE MODEL
In this section, the results of the validation are going to be presented. For the short term
period analysis, a sunny and a cloudy day will be compared where the measured and
predicted output are shown. Considering that this is a validation, and not a veriﬁcation of
the model, a certain amount of error between the predicted and measured is expected. When
it comes to the long term analysis, each month will be considered separately. A challenge
arises when it comes to the quality of the measured data. Some of the measurements
that were recorded in the PTC ﬁeld, are not very good resulting in outlier data points
within the measured and predicted output. This meant that some of the data would have
to be ﬁltered out so they don’t aﬀect the validation of the model. For the statistical
validation, the relative error will be shown, where it was found that the mean relative
error is 20%. Finally, the regression plot is shown as well, where it can be seen how close
the predicted output is to the measured data. A table is then presented with the mean
values of predicted and measured heat output, as well as the mean amount of heat and
optical losses for each month. Lastly, the "Tested" prediction is shown and compared to
the predicted performance of the mathematical model.
5.1
Validation
Looking at Figure 5.1, the ﬁltered data points represent the measurements that passed
ﬁltering conditions 1, 4 and 5 from table 4.4, along with a re-sampling of 6 minutes to make
the predicted plot visible. Both the Qmeasured and the Qpredicted have passed the ﬁltering
conditions that were mentioned above. The regression shows a correlation coeﬃcient R of
0.97 between the measured and predicted heat output, even though there are still a few
outliers left, that unfortunately could not be removed without altering the precision of the
model. The correlation coeﬃcient is a statistical measure that calculates the strength of
the relationship between the movement of two variables, and has a range between 0 and 1,
where the closest to 1 the parameter is, the more likely it is to be a correlation between the
two parameters. Keeping in mind as well that even though this is a very good ﬁt between
the predicted and measured output, it is not represented by the entire investigated month,
since the parameters needed to be ﬁltered due to the poor quality of data. The available
days of the month after ﬁltering can be seen in Table 5.2.
33
==PAGE:42==
5. Results & Validation of the Model
Figure 5.1. Regression results
When it comes to the relative error, the same thing applies as the regression regarding
the quality of data, since the relative error is calculated from the ﬁltered and re-sampled
Qmeasured and Qpredicted. The error can be seen in the Figure below.
34
==PAGE:43==
5. Results & Validation of the Model
Figure 5.2. Relative error between the Measured and Predicted output
The observations that are presented here, are relative error data points that have been
calculated from equation 4.27 and have been re-sampled by 6 minutes. It can be observed
that the mean relative error is 20% for the month of June, which is not a large error
considering that this is a prediction based on regressed coeﬃcients throughout 23 days.
This means that the coeﬃcients that were regressed from April and May are actually not
very far from the actual performance of the ﬁeld. For the rest of the months within the
analysis, approximately the same amount of relative error was calculated with a deviation of
±4%. The relative error observations that are large, are due to the fact that the measured
heat output was larger than the predicted one at certain observations, so since the absolute
value is considered in equation 4.27, when Qpred < Qmeas the error is larger. This could be
stated as one of the limitations of the relative error. The coeﬃcients that were regressed
from the months April and May can be seen in Table 5.1. And the coeﬃcients that are
shown in this table, are the ones that were used to predict the performance of the ﬁeld in
Table 5.2.
Table 5.1. Regressed coeﬃcients
ηtotal(%)
k1
k2
c1
c2
c5
58
0.0047
−1.4 · 10−4
-0.7
0.01
-3163
35
==PAGE:44==
5. Results & Validation of the Model
5.2
Short-term performance prediction
Figure 5.3. Cloudy Day production (June 4)
Figure 5.4. Sunny day production (June 10)
The ﬁrst observation that can be made for the cloudy day, is that the prediction is very
volatile and deviates in a large degree from the measured performance. It can also be
observed that the measurements end at 14:00 o clock, because the rest of the day did not
meet the ﬁltering criteria that was mentioned earlier. It can also be observed that the
volatility of the prediction causes two diﬀerent errors that are relevant in forecasting and
prediction techniques, namely the phase and amplitude errors. The phase error is created
from odd-order Time derivatives and is characterized as the mismatch in the x direction
(Time). A good example of phase error can be seen in Figure 5.3 at approximately 8:30
in the morning, where the prediction starts increasing earlier in time compared to the
measured performance, resulting in the large area between the measured and predicted
output. A good example of the amplitude error can be seen starting at 9:00, where the
trend of the two measurements is similar, though the prediction has a higher amplitude
which is caused by even-order Time derivatives in the prediction. These errors occur
because the ﬁltered data that were removed, created odd-order or even-order derivatives
depending on the error. So when the remaining data that met the ﬁltering conditions
were "connected" together, it resulted in the mismatch of the derivatives. This could
be one explanation for the volatility of the prediction. Apart from the volatility of the
predicted heat output, the measured heat performance also experiences some deviations in
the production of heat, which can be explained by the fact that it is a cloudy day that is
analyzed, compared to the sunny day where the measured performance is more smooth.
When it comes to the sunny day, the prediction is more accurate, and is only subject to
amplitude error compared to the cloudy day. A case can be made here that, since the
sunny day contains data for the entire day (6:00-22:00), it was not aﬀected in a large
degree by the ﬁltering conditions, compared to the cloudy day. Lastly, the relative error
of the cloudy day (June 4) can be seen in Figure 5.2 where the relative error is larger,
compared to the relative error of the sunny day (June 10). Since the relative error is
more accumulated in the sunny day, it makes sense that the prediction is not so volatile,
compared to the cloudy day.
36
==PAGE:45==
5. Results & Validation of the Model
5.3
Long-term performance prediction
For the prediction of the mean optical and heat losses in (W/m2), the following logic was
followed. First, the mean thermal heat loss for the entire month can be derived from
Qheat.loss = c1 · (Tm −Tamb)
(5.1)
And since the optloss is calculated within the model (Gb · S · Eloss · K(θ)), the two separate
heat losses can be presented. The predicted eﬃciency is simply calculated as the predicted
heat output divided by the irradiance
ηtot = Qpredicted
Gb
(5.2)
The results of the predicted performance can be seen below.
Table 5.2. Long term performance prediction
Qmeas
Qpred
Gb
Qopt.loss
Qheat.loss
ηtot
Relative
Error
R
Days
June
315
375
640
-100
-77
58
20
0.96
23
July
266
326
553
-95
-72
56
23
0.95
29
August
263
300
547
-115
-72
53
18
0.93
27
September
205
235
524
-165
-68
43
19
0.93
15
Units
W/m2
%
-
-
The ﬁrst observation that can be made is that the mean predicted output Qpred is
signiﬁcantly larger than the measured performance. Taking the relative error into account,
the magnitude is still large as the diﬀerence between Qpred and Qmeas is 60 W/m2 for
both June and July even though July has a 3% higher mean relative error. Both the Qpred
and Qmeas have passed the same ﬁltering conditions, so the removal of data should not
aﬀect the quality of the prediction in that respect, and taking into account the availability
of Days that have remained, the predicted heat output is superior at every measurement.
Hence, the model can be considered validated and well performing. When it comes to
the optical and heat losses, it can be observed that the optical losses are of course larger
compared to the thermal losses, which was also expected due to the advantage of the
PTC’s where their heat loss is inversely proportional to the concentration ratio of the
collector (Figure 1.2) which means that the eﬃciency of the collector remains high even at
large temperature diﬀerences between the mean ﬂuid and the ambient. Another reason for
the low heat loss is that the receiver of the PTC is positioned within a glass cover, that
minimises the convection heat losses. Another observation that can be made in the optical
losses, is that September has a comparably high optical loss compared to the other months,
though the available days are also smaller. Normally, it is expected that in September the
optical losses are going to be larger, since they are dependant on the position of the sun,
and the incidence angle is getting larger and larger as the sun progresses from Summer
towards Autumn. The mean predicted eﬃciency of the ﬁeld also shows a reasonable trend,
when compared with the available Gb, their respected losses and the predicted heat output.
37
==PAGE:46==
5. Results & Validation of the Model
Lastly, the "Tested" prediction will be shown, where the validated performance parameters
from a single PTC collector are used in order to make a prediction for the performance of
the ﬁeld. The ﬁgure can be seen below
Figure 5.5. Long term prediction in June using the validated parameters
The ﬁrst thing that is observed apart from the volatility caused from the relative error, is
that the Tested prediction is slightly higher than the model prediction, which is of course
also expected. The Tested prediction was implemented with an eﬃciency of 75% compared
to the 58% that was used from the model, and still the diﬀerence between the Predicted
and Tested is not that large, considering that the Tested prediction is not subject to lateral
shading from other rows like the developed model is, since its only one PTC collector. At
days where the relative error is small (June 10), and the volatility of the prediction is
more stable it can clearly be seen that the prediction is larger than the measured as it was
proven previously, but is also very close to the Tested prediction which is the performance
of a single collector. The fact that the performance prediction of the developed ﬁeld model
is close to the Tested prediction, it shows that the regressed coeﬃcients that were obtained
from the developed mathematical model are more accurate since they can produce almost
the same amount of heat output, with a considerably smaller eﬃciency. Hence, the testing
method that was developed for the performance evaluation of a PTC ﬁeld is accurate and
valid.
38
==PAGE:47==
6
CONCLUSION
The aim of this thesis was to develop and validate a general testing method that would be
able to evaluate and predict the short term and long term thermal performance of a PTC
ﬁeld. In the introduction of the thesis, diﬀerent technologies of CSP were introduced, where
it was shown that CSP collectors are undoubtedly the most suitable for high temperature
applications, such as integration to power plants. The philosophy of the model was stated,
and two diﬀerent testing methods were presented, namely QDT and SS methods. Since the
aim of the thesis was to develop a model that would consider the weather changes as well,
that made QDT a strong candidate as SS needs a clear sky and a certain time frame to be
evaluated and used. The testing method that was developed in this thesis facilitated the
QDT method and integrated certain parameters to favour the accuracy of the model, such
as the lateral shading model, the end loss and the developed algorithm for the operational
area. It was found that the end loss maintained a negligible optical loss of 0.2%, hence it
was not introduced in the results. The operational area algorithm was usefull to determine
the actual heat output of the ﬁeld, even though it was limited in the ﬁltering conditions to
60% acceptable operational area in order to be considered part of the analysed data. A
smaller fraction would allow outliers to exist and hinder the accuracy of the model. This
can be considered as one of the limitations of the developed testing method.
The predicted performance of the PTC ﬁeld was found to be satisfactory, with a mean
relative error ranging from 18-23% which is acceptable in terms of validation as the
regressed coeﬃcients are very close to the actual performance of the ﬁeld, which makes
this testing method a valid method to evaluate the performance of PTC ﬁelds. Regarding
the accuracy of the results, the relative error would possibly be even lower if the volatility
of the predicted heat output did not yield predicted measurements that are lower than
the measured heat output. Furthermore, the quality of the data played a small role in
the accuracy of the model as well, considering the bad measurements that were ﬁltered
out and the wrongly measured oil mass ﬂow, that made it necessary to calculate the heat
output from the water side, neglecting the eﬃciency of the heat exchanger.
For further development of the model and reinforcing the accuracy of the model, more
accurate data would allow for more precise forecasting in the sense of mirror cleaning
schedules, maintenance schedules or even weather forecasting could be incorporated within
the model, in terms of - if the model knows the weather is going to be bad the next day,
don’t start preheating the oil in the morning. This could avoid recording mediocre heat
output measurements in the power plant’s usefull data collection, and would help in the
dynamics of the power plant’s aggregate power production with the Biomass boilers, since
it would be easier to regulate the Biomass stock if it is known in advance, that the next
day, the electricity production from the ORC will only be produced from biomass for
example, and not from the PTC ﬁeld. Lastly, since the developed testing method is based
39
==PAGE:48==
6. Conclusion
on experimental data and collector geometry, the model can be used for other PTC ﬁeld
as well, as long as certain inputs and PTC geometry inputs are changed.
40
==PAGE:49==
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Demirbas. Global renewable energy projections. Energy Sources, Part B:
Economics, Planning, and Policy, 4(2):212–224, 2009. doi:
10.1080/15567240701620499. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/15567240701620499.
[2]
2030 climate energy framework, Feb 2017. URL
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2030_en#tab-0-0.
[3]
Efstathios E. (Stathis) Michaelides. Solar Energy, pages 195–230. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. ISBN 978-3-642-20951-2. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-20951-2_7. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20951-2_7.
[4]
Soteris A. Kalogirou. Chapter 7 - industrial process heat, chemistry applications, and
solar dryers. In Soteris A. Kalogirou, editor, Solar Energy Engineering (Second
Edition), pages 397 – 429. Academic Press, Boston, second edition edition, 2014.
ISBN 978-0-12-397270-5. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-397270-5.00007-8.
URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123972705000078.
[5]
Soteris A. Kalogirou. Chapter 3 - solar energy collectors. In Soteris A. Kalogirou,
editor, Solar Energy Engineering (Second Edition), pages 125 – 220. Academic Press,
Boston, second edition edition, 2014. ISBN 978-0-12-397270-5. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-397270-5.00003-0. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123972705000030.
[6]
Soteris A. Kalogirou. Chapter 4 - performance of solar collectors. In Soteris A.
Kalogirou, editor, Solar Energy Engineering (Second Edition), pages 221 – 256.
Academic Press, Boston, second edition edition, 2014. ISBN 978-0-12-397270-5. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-397270-5.00004-2. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123972705000042.
[7]
Soteris A. Kalogirou. Chapter 10 - solar thermal power systems. In Soteris A.
Kalogirou, editor, Solar Energy Engineering (Second Edition), pages 541 – 581.
Academic Press, Boston, second edition edition, 2014. ISBN 978-0-12-397270-5. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-397270-5.00010-8. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123972705000108.
[8]
S. Fischer, W. Heidemann, H. Müller-Steinhagen, B. Perers, P. Bergquist, and
B. Hellström. Collector test method under quasi-dynamic conditions according to the
european standard en 12975-2. Solar Energy, 76(1):117 – 123, 2004. ISSN 0038-092X.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.07.021. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X03002901.
Solar World Congress 2001.
41
==PAGE:50==
References
[9]
Nicole Janotte, Siw Meiser, Dirk Krüger, Eckhard Lüpfert, Robert Pitz-Paal, Stephan
Fischer, and Hans Müller-Steinhagen. Quasi-dynamic analysis of thermal
performance of parabolic trough collectors. 09 2009.
[10] Norman Draper. Applied Regression Analysis, Third Edition, pages 327–368. 08 2014.
ISBN 9780471170822. doi: 10.1002/9781118625590.ch15.
[11] C. Chatﬁeld. Applied linear regression. by s. weisberg. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series A (General), 149:279–280, 01 1986. doi: 10.2307/2981572.
[12] Michael Wagner and P. Gilman. Technical manual for the sam physical trough model.
01 2011. doi: 10.2172/1016437.
[13] Jinping Wang, Jun Wang, Xiaolong Bi, and Xiang Wang. Performance simulation
comparison for parabolic trough solar collectors in china. International Journal of
Photoenergy, 2016:1–16, 02 2016. doi: 10.1155/2016/9260943.
[14] Amor Gama, Cherif Larbes, Malek Ali, and Fatiha Yettou. Optical and thermal
simulation of parabolic trough concentrator with a novel one axe sun tracking system
based on reﬂector displacement. 05 2016.
[15] Asad Mahmood and Khanji Harijan. Utilizing Solar Thermal Energy in Textile
Processing Units, pages 121–130. Springer Vienna, Vienna, 2012. ISBN
978-3-7091-0109-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0109-4_13. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-0109-4_13.
[16] Lizbeth Salgado, A. Rodriguez-Pulido, and German Calderon. Thermal performance
of parabolic trough solar collectors. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 67:
1345–1359, 01 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.071.
[17] Jensen J.R. Kvist P. Neergaard T.B. Sørensen P. Perers, B. A csp plant combined
with biomass chp using orc-technology in brønderslev denmark. SES Conference
Proceedings Database, 1:1–7, 05 2016. doi: 10.18086/eurosun.2016.05.02.
[18] Alejandro de la Vega Fernandez. Analyses of brønderslev solar energy plant by use of
trnsys. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[19] John A. Duﬃe and William A. Beckman. Solar engineering of thermal processes.
Wiley, 2013.
[20] William B.Stine and Michael Geyer. Power from the sun : Chapter 3, 2001. URL
http://www.powerfromthesun.net/book.html.
[21] J.E. Braun and J.C. Mitchell. Solar geometry for ﬁxed and tracking surfaces. Solar
Energy, 31(5):439 – 444, 1983. ISSN 0038-092X. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(83)90046-4. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0038092X83900464.
42
==PAGE:51==
A
CODE FROM MATLAB
1
%%
Data import
2
[I,delimeter,line]=importdata(’2017Regr.csv’);
3
Timetext=I.textdata(2:end,1);
4
Time=datenum(Timetext,’dd-mm-yyyy HH:MM’);
5
Time2=datetime(Time,’ConvertFrom’,’datenum’,’Format’,’dd/MM/yyyy HH:mm’);
6
Time3=datetime(Time,’ConvertFrom’,’datenum’,’Format’,’HH:mm’);
7
T_in=I.data(:,1); % Inlet Temperature to field (C)
8
T_out=I.data(:,2);% Outlet Temperature from field(C)
9
T_amb=I.data(:,9);% Ambient Temperature (C)
10
G_b=I.data(:,11);% Beam Irradiance (W/m^2)
11
flow=I.data(:,4);% Oil flow rate in the field (Kg/s)
12
dT_m=I.data(:,13);% Temperature differential
13
A_field=26920;% Field Area (m^2)
14
L_field=4800; % Field Length(m)
15
L_foc=1.7; % Focal length (m) (assuming they are equal)
16
L_space=15; % Center distance between two PTC’s (m)
17
w=5.76;% Collector Aperture width (m)
18
Day=day(Time2,’dayofyear’);
19
L_st=-15;% Standard Meridian of local time zone
20
L_loc=-9.94; % Longitude of the location in question (Brnderslev)
21
phi=57.27; % Observers Latitude (Deg) North
22
gamma=30 ; % Aperture of axisAzimuth (not exactly N-S , skewes off 30 Degrees)
23
%%
Calculation of Solar angles
24
B=(Day-1)*360/365; % Degrees
25
E=229.2*(0.000075+0.001868*cosd(B)-0.032077*sind(B)-0.014615*cosd(2*B)-0.04089*sind(2*B));%
equation of time (min) (degrees)
26
Delta=23.45*sind(((Day+284)/365).*360); % Solar declination (Deg)
27
solt=(Time)+(4*(L_st-L_loc)+E-60)/60/24; % Converting minutes to days
28
LST=hour(solt)+minute(solt)/60; % Converting the local solar time in hours
29
omega=15*(LST-12); % Hour angle (Deg)
30
alpha=asind(sind(Delta).*sind(phi)+cosd(Delta).*cosd(omega).*cosd(phi)); % Solar
altitude
31
Pa=asind((sind(omega).*cosd(Delta))./sind(90-alpha)); % Pseudo solar Azimuth
32
wew=acosd(tand(Delta)./tand(phi)); % Determines in which quadrant the sun is,
East or West.
33
34
i=1;
35
C1=[];
36
for i=1:length(omega) % Coefficient C1 determines when the Sun is East or West
37
if abs(omega(i))<=wew
38
C1(i,:)=1;
39
else
40
C1(i,:)=-1;
43
==PAGE:52==
A. Code from Matlab
41
end
42
end
43
44
i=1;
45
C2=[];
46
for i=1:length(phi-Delta)
47
if phi*(phi-Delta)<0
48
C2(i,:)=-1;
49
else
50
C2(i,:)=1;
51
end
52
end
53
54
i=1;
55
C3=[];
56
for i=1:length(omega)
57
if omega(i)>=0
58
C3(i,:)=1;
59
else
60
C3(i,:)=-1;
61
end
62
end
63
64
azimuth=C1.*C2.*Pa+C3.*((1-C1.*C2)./2)*180; % Solar Azimuth (Deg) I.data(:,61);%
65
theta_i=acosd(sqrt(1-cosd(alpha).^(2).*cosd(azimuth-gamma).^(2))); % Incidence
angle (Deg)I.data(:,59);%
66
rho=atand(sind(azimuth-gamma)./tand(alpha));% Tracking angle (Deg) I.data(:,60);
67
68
%%
Calculation of Online PTC rows (online aperture area)
69
tolerance=2;% (Deg)
70
tracking= I.data(:,14);
71
rows=[];
72
for i=15:54
73
Aux_matrix(:,i-14)=abs(I.data(:,i)-tracking);
74
end
75
for i=15:54
76
for j=1:length(Aux_matrix)
77
if Aux_matrix(j,i-14)>tolerance
78
rows(j,i-14)=0;
79
else
80
rows(j,i-14)=1;
81
end
82
end
83
end
84
85
for i=1:length(rows)
86
total(i)=sum(rows(i));
87
end
88
89
online_fraction=sum(rows,2)/40;
90
91
%%
Thermal output
44
==PAGE:53==
A. Code from Matlab
92
% FOR OIL
93
94
T_m_oil=(T_in+T_out)./2; % Mean fluid Temperature (C)
95
DeltaTm=T_out-T_in;
96
differential=dT_m./60;
97
oil_cp=1492.6+3.426.*T_m_oil+0.00006.*T_m_oil.^(2)+0.000002.*T_m_oil.^(3);%
Thermal Capacity of Therminol 66 (J/Kg K)
98
oil_density=1021.5-0.6624.*T_m_oil+0.00003.*T_m_oil.^(2)-0.0000006.*T_m_oil.^(3);%
Density of Therminol 66 (Kg/m^3)
99
diff=T_m_oil-T_amb;
100
diffsq=(T_m_oil-T_amb).^(2);
101
102
% FOR WATER
103
104
T_in_w=I.data(:,6);
105
T_out_w=I.data(:,7);
106
flow_w=I.data(:,8);
107
T_m_w=(T_in_w+T_out_w)./2;
108
diffw=T_m_w-T_amb;
109
diffwsq=(T_m_w-T_amb).^(2);
110
water_cp=0.0001*T_m_w.^3 - 0.0296*T_m_w.^2 + 2.5051*T_m_w + 4134.5;
111
water_density= -2E-06*T_m_w.^3 - 0.0019*T_m_w.^2 - 0.2479*T_m_w + 1004.3;
112
Q_measured=water_cp.*flow_w.*(T_out_w-T_in_w)/3.6/A_field; % Q measured from the
water side, in W/m2
113
%%
Row Shadowing and End losses
114
endl=1-(L_foc/L_field).*(1+(w.^(2)/(48*L_foc.^(2)))).*tand(theta_i); % End loss
correction factor from John.A.Duffie equation 7.13.1
115
un=27;% Number of unshaded collector modules
116
n=400; % Total number of collector modules
117
shadow_eff=abs(cosd(rho)).*(L_space/w); % Shadow efficiency from SAM model
118
119
i=1;
120
while i<=length(shadow_eff) % Making sure the shadow efficiency stays between 0
and 1
121
if shadow_eff(i)>1
122
shadow_eff(i)=1;
123
else
124
i=i+1;
125
end
126
end
127
n_rows=20;
128
s1=(un+(n-un).*shadow_eff)/n; % Shadow efficiency for the whole field
129
coseff=cosd(theta_i); % Cosine effect
130
131
%%
Resampling of 5 minutes and data
filtering
132
Timestep=5; % Minutes
133
online_fraction=mean(reshape(online_fraction,Timestep,[]))’;
134
Q_measured=mean(reshape(Q_measured,Timestep,[]))’;
135
G_b=mean(reshape(G_b,Timestep,[]))’;
136
endl=mean(reshape(endl,Timestep,[]))’;
137
theta_i=mean(reshape(theta_i,Timestep,[]))’;
45
==PAGE:54==
A. Code from Matlab
138
diffw=mean(reshape(diffw,Timestep,[]))’;
139
diffwsq=mean(reshape(diffwsq,Timestep,[]))’;
140
differential=mean(reshape(differential,Timestep,[]))’;
141
s1=mean(reshape(s1,Timestep,[]))’;
142
T_in=mean(reshape(T_in,Timestep,[]))’;
143
diff=mean(reshape(diff,Timestep,[]))’;
144
diffsq=mean(reshape(diffsq,Timestep,[]))’;
145
T_amb=mean(reshape(T_amb,Timestep,[]))’;
146
T_m_oil=mean(reshape(T_m_oil,Timestep,[]))’;
147
%%
Multi-linear regression
148
149
y1=G_b;
150
y2=Q_measured;
151
y3=online_fraction;
152
x1=G_b.*s1.*endl.*cosd(theta_i);
153
x2=G_b.*s1.*endl.*theta_i;
154
x3=G_b.*s1.*endl.*theta_i.^(2);
155
x4=diff;
156
x5=diffsq;
157
x6=differential;
158
x7=theta_i;
159
x8=G_b.*s1.*endl;
160
Matrix=[y1 y2 y3 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 (y2./y3) x7 x8];
161
i=1;
162
while i<=length(Matrix) %Filtering for the online rows. o maios 8elei 0.5
163
if Matrix(i,3)<=0.6
164
Matrix(i,:)=[];
165
else
166
i=i+1;
167
end
168
end
169
170
171
i=1;
172
while i<=length(Matrix)
173
if Matrix(i,1)<10
174
Matrix(i,:)=[];
175
else
176
i=i+1;
177
end
178
end
179
180
181
i=1;
182
while i<=length(Matrix) % Filtering condition for differential
183
if Matrix(i,9)<-0.01
184
Matrix(i,:)=[];
185
else
186
i=i+1;
187
end
188
end
189
46
==PAGE:55==
A. Code from Matlab
190
i=1;
191
while i<=length(Matrix) %Filtering condition for differential
192
if Matrix(i,9)>0.01
193
Matrix(i,:)=[];
194
else
195
i=i+1;
196
end
197
end
198
199
200
i=1;
201
while i<=length(Matrix) %Filtering condition for Q
202
if Matrix(i,11)<=10
203
Matrix(i,:)=[];
204
else
205
i=i+1;
206
end
207
end
208
209
i=1;
210
while i<=length(Matrix) %Filtering condition for Q
211
if Matrix(i,1)<=Matrix(i,11)
212
Matrix(i,:)=[];
213
else
214
i=i+1;
215
end
216
end
217
pipa=Matrix(:,7)./Matrix(:,1);
218
Q_measured=Matrix(:,11);
219
predictor=Matrix(:,4:9);
220
[b,stats,r]=regress(Q_measured,predictor);
221
efficiency=b(1,1); % Regressed efficiency
222
k1=b(2,1)/b(1,1); % First order of incidence angle modifier
223
k2=b(3,1)/b(1,1); % Second order of incidence angle modifier
224
c1=b(4,1); % Heat loss coefficient of the collector at ambient temperature
(W/m-2 K-1)
225
c2=b(5,1); % Temperature dependence of the heat loss coefficient (W/m-2 K-2)
226
c5=b(6,1); % Effective thermal capacity of the collector (kJ/m-2 K-1)
227
228
summary=regstats(Q_measured,predictor,’linear’);
47
==PAGE:56==
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
