==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Final Project of Master of Science Degree 
Department of Management Engineering 
 
 
 
Improving marketing strategy by the use of social media 
 
 
 
 
 
Pedro Felipe dos Santos Viola de Araujo 
s180021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................... 2 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 3 
Amazon Alexa and Personal Assistants .............................................................................................. 5 
About the Project ................................................................................................................................. 9 
Social Media and Marketing ............................................................................................................. 11 
Social Media Marketing Strategy ...................................................................................................... 15 
Sentiment Analysis ............................................................................................................................ 19 
Case Presentation .............................................................................................................................. 28 
Case Solution .................................................................................................................................... 31 
Case Results ...................................................................................................................................... 40 
Discussion ......................................................................................................................................... 51 
Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 55 
Appendices ........................................................................................................................................ 56 
References ......................................................................................................................................... 59 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
Abstract 
This Master’s thesis studies the use of social media users’ publications to evaluate a company’s 
product. The purpose is to answer the research question: How can a company use social media to 
understand the general public’s opinion about its product/service? In order to answer it, a case was 
formulated. Data collected from Twitter was used to analyze users’ opinions about Amazon’s 
personal assistant, Alexa, and its strongest competitor, Google Assistant. The assessment of opinions 
is called Sentiment Analysis. It treats computer texts and provides a categorization of it by combining 
features from Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning Algorithms. 
The methodology used to solve the case was based on the work of [50]. The problem was divided in 
three main phases: Data Collection, Processing, and Classification. In order to perform each of those 
steps, different open-source Python libraries were used, such as Tweepy and NLTK. The data was 
collected using Twitter API and classified through Naïve Bayes algorithm. 
By applying Sentiment Analysis, the results showed that the majority of users do not express their 
opinions about a certain product through Twitter. Instead, they mention the product within daily lives 
situations. Moreover, the dataset training size proved to be a limitation in regards to the accuracy of 
the algorithm applied. The complexity of analyzing subjective messages was also evident. 
In order to overcome those limitations when developing a Sentiment Analysis study, a different 
source of information could be used, such as user’s reviews in big retailers’ websites (Amazon, 
Target, Walmart, El Giganten). 
This study answered the research question by showing that it is possible to collect information in 
social media and understand the users’ feelings about a product. Although, the analysis can be more 
accurate if the training dataset and the source of information is better planned. 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
Introduction 
 
The increasing popularity of social media has changed the way people communicate. Sharing 
and exchanging information has been faster than ever before. Thus, virtual communities have 
not only modified relationships and social behaviors but also created new habits. People 
frequently publish messages of personal content on their social profiles. Many of those 
publications have general day-to-day comments, but part of them reflects a person’s opinions 
and his/her feelings about a specific topic. Hence, despite the intrinsic noisiness existent in 
their messages, social media channels provide a large amount of relevant information about 
how a group of people reacts in the face of certain situations and subjects. 
Social media is interactive in nature. It supports the dialogue one-to-one and also boosts it to 
a comprehensive communication network, facilitating the dialogue from one to many. It can 
connect and disseminate the opinions of a few to large groups of people, breaking any existent 
geographical barriers and creating a relationship where one influences many and many 
influences many. It is true regarding personal habits, religion, fashion trends, products 
quality, brand acceptance, and others. 
The broad reach of social media by their own is a strong reason why companies are entering 
this environment and starting to use it for marketing purposes. According to [7], almost 93% 
of customers expect companies to be present on social media platforms. [53] says that 94% 
of the American business-to-consumer marketers and 82% of the business-to-business 
marketers use Facebook for customer acquisition. 47% of Americans say that Facebook is 
the number-one influencer on their purchasing habits [51]. 
Many businesses use social media to reach their marketing objectives, such as building 
awareness, interacting with customers, and increasing traffic to their website. Giving the 
importance of social media to achieve those goals, the company should have an established 
strategy when making use of those means. [7] With a plan, communication with potential 
customers will be more efficient, and its presence is more likely to be noticed.  
Part of the strategy is concerned about hearing what is being said about the business in social 
media. It helps a company to create proper content, to engage with different subjects [7], to 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
track problems and opportunities. [14] What are the general audience opinions about the 
company? Do they have positive or negative feelings? With that said, this work aims to 
answer the research question:  
How can a company use social media to understand the general public’s opinion about its 
product/service? 
The purpose of this quantitative study is to explore Twitter users’ opinions about Amazon 
Alexa by applying Sentiment Analysis in data captured in that social media. 
One should raise the attention for the fact that content published in social media does not 
follow a defined structure, due to different reasons, such as the use of slangs, abbreviations, 
and different languages in the same sentence. The processes used to assess and sort opinions 
on social media are part of an area in Computer Science called Sentiment Analysis, which 
deals with the computational treatment of opinion, sentiment, and subjectivity in a text [18]. 
Thus, it proves to be suitable for the chosen case. 
Besides, the study will be based on data gathered from Twitter, where publications about 
Amazon Alexa will be collected and evaluated. This social media was chosen due to the 
accessibility of the information shared by users and its popularity – which encourages people 
exchange opinions about products. 
By doing that, it is expected that the company will be able to understand the impact of its 
product/service among Twitter users and if they have positive or negative feelings about it. 
In addition to that, the most used words in tweets will be checked with the intention of 
bringing insights about topics users relate with Amazon Alexa. 
The case study is based on a product/service delivered by Amazon.com, Inc. It is part of a 
category of voice-activated intelligent personal assistants deployed in smartphones, smart 
speakers, or personal computers. [8] The next section provides a more deep introduction to 
those products. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
Amazon Alexa and Personal Assistants 
 
The chosen topic of analysis in this thesis is Amazon’s Alexa. Alexa is a cloud-based voice 
service created by Amazon.com, Inc [4] and integrates a category of products called voice 
assistants. The most popular voice assistants are Apple’s Siri, Amazon’s Alexa, Microsoft’s 
Cortana, and Google’s Assistant. They are software agents embedded in smartphones or 
specific home speakers that can recognize human speech and answer it using synthesized 
voices. [36] Besides interpreting human voice, those systems understand commands and 
accomplish various actions requested by the user.  
Their goal is to overcome the complexity of utilizing a computer system and aid people in 
managing time commitments and performing tasks. [8] Through those assistants, users can 
ask questions, control automated home devices, play media, and manage simple tasks. The 
assistants can be found on widespread devices such as Android or Apple phones as well as 
in Microsoft Windows. [8] By connecting with other applications, they can check emails, to-
do lists, calendars, and others. [36] 
Apple’s Siri is the oldest assistant in the market, been released as a standalone applicative in 
2010 and added to the iOS system in 2011. Shortly after, Microsoft launched Cortana in 
2013. In 2014, Amazon introduced its home speaker Echo with the in-built Alexa assistant. 
While Google’s Assistant was released in 2016 along with its home speaker and added to 
Android-based smartphones as well.  
Each assistant has its own features, but their main functions are the same. Their in-built 
software constantly listens for a keyword to wake it up. As soon as it recognizes the key 
word, it starts recording the user’s voice and sends it to a server where it is processed as a 
command. For each specific command, the server provides the voice assistant with 
appropriate information to be taken back to the user. [36] 
The earlier generations of voice-activated devices depended on a short set of commands and 
provided limited assistance. Recently, due to advances in Natural Language Processing, 
increasing in computer power, and deployment of Machine Learning methods, those 
assistants developed a much richer understanding about the human language. Hence, they 
have been capable of creating meaningful responses quickly. [36] 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
The accessibility of those services increased together with the variety of products offered. 
Amazon has a large set of variations on its Echo product, providing a version for kids to 
versions with audio and video capabilities. [5] Moreover, its app is available for Android and 
iOS phones. Google offers the same services, with its assistant integrated into Android and 
the option of installing it in iPhones. Microsoft and Amazon are working in partnership to 
integrate Cortana to Amazon devices and Alexa to computers. [36] 
Amazon and Google are the market leader companies, with a strong advantage for the first 
one. Amazon dominates the field, due to early launching a home product with a large media 
library available. Google is building capacity, and the releasing of a home-based speaker with 
integration to other Google products are likely to increase its market share. [36] 
One reflection of the popularity of personal assistants is the consumption growth of home 
smart speaker devices. The market is strong and keeps growing. At the end of 2018, 66.4 
million (or 26.2%) of adults had access to one those devices in the United States. It has been 
noticed by game makers, service providers, and developers as more voice apps were 
published. The number of Alexa skills rose by 2.2 times to nearly 60,000 in the U.S. alone in 
2018. During the same period Google Actions grew at a slightly faster rate of 2.5 times to 
over 4,000. Figure 1 shows that, even with a market-share shrinkage from 2018 to 2019, 
Amazon continues in the lead. Google is gaining percentage and the same happens with 
Apple devices, responsible for half of the growth of the “Other” category. [24] 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
 
Figure 1: United States Smart Speaker Market Share by Brand. Retrieved from [24]. 
 
Despite the popularity growth, personal assistants raise unique concerns related to security 
and privacy. One who has access to one of those devices can ask questions and obtain 
information about the accounts and services associated as it reads out calendar contents, 
emails, and other personal information. [36] Furthermore, by the nature of this technology, 
it listens the users all times. Companies say that the devices do not record information unless 
users say the command to wake up the assistant. Although there are cases of malfunctioning 
devices recording information and sending it back to Google serves. [57]    
This is a wide concern and some users expressed apprehension with those appliances 
continuously recording audio/video and collecting their data. [68] These devices transfer 
large amount of behavioral data from users to cloud servers. Hence, there is a potential for 
data to be stolen, leaked, or used to incriminate people. In the event of a data breach, an 
individual could access those platforms and collect private information. [12, 17] 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
In order to prevent those type of activities, Google has upgraded its software to specifically 
identify each user by using voice printing. Apple also created a solution for Siri to recognize 
and just answer a unique user’s voice. 
Amazon’s Alexa is built with Amazon’s store interface. Someone who has access to the 
device can order items through its account. For that reason, Amazon now provides the option 
of setting a voice passcode to confirm purchases and it is working to develop a voice printing 
system. [36] 
Voice assistants became widely adopted and its popularity increases each year. This happens 
because of the compatibility with smartphones and the low prices played by the companies 
in their home speakers. With the advances in voice recognition, software are more capable 
to process commands and provide more natural and accurate answers. In the future, this 
technology can have several uses, from home automation to translation to companionship 
and support for the elderly. [2] 
With that pointed, the next section offers an overview about the project. 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
About the Project 
 
After introducing the project topic, it is important to define some parameters and boundaries. 
Amazon.com, Inc. not only offers the system service Alexa, it also offers the user a possibility 
to purchase a physical device, Echo. In social media, Amazon Echo and Amazon Alexa are 
used interchangeably. In that way, the objects of analysis are the product and the service 
offered by Amazon.com, Inc, Alexa and Echo. 
In order to compare Amazon Alexa’s popularity among Twitter users, the same parameters 
will be studied for Google Assistant and Apple Siri.  
Previous research focused in assessing personal assistants’ capacity to perform specific tasks 
instead of measuring how satisfied users are with the assistants. [4] Other studies investigated 
usability, user experiences and usefulness of a specific smart assistant, but did not include a 
comparison between different assistants. [46] 
Just a few studies had been developed with the intention of comparing different intelligent 
personal assistants. [8] conducted an evaluation with ninety-two participants about it. Four 
smart personal assistants were assessed in two dimensions: the correctness of their answers 
and how natural the responses feel to users. The results showed that Amazon Alexa and 
Google Assistant are significantly better than Apple Siri and Microsoft Cortana.  
This thesis follows the same motivation that [8] had in developing its research: evaluating 
smart assistants with many users, not just the experience of a single person. Moreover, this 
thesis conducts an unbiased analysis. It is especially relevant because most comparisons or 
evaluations of personal assistants had been conducted by the same companies that developed 
the assistants. [8] 
This project develops a first-step evaluation about a service delivered by Amazon. It captures 
the general feeling of Twitter users and compares the product’s popularity with market 
competitors. This assessment has the potential to lead future more in-depth studies, for 
example, exploring the features liked and/or disliked by Twitter users.  
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
The next section approaches a necessary topic to understand the importance of this project. 
It introduces the concept of Social Media and its relevance in marketing usage, setting up a 
background knowledge that will be further required. All the information analyzed in this 
work is retrieved from Social Media, here represented by Twitter. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
Social Media and Marketing 
 
Before understanding the concept of Social Media and its main characteristics, a broader idea 
should be introduced: Web 2.0. [41] refers to Web 2.0 as a set of economic, social, and 
technology trends that collectively form the basis for the next generation of the Internet, a 
more mature, distinctive medium characterized by user participation, openness, and network 
effects. That means interactive, open-source, and user-controlled Internet applications that 
create networks formed by informal users and facilitates the generation of ideas and flow of 
information. 
With that said, social media can be defined as highly accessible applications built within the 
foundations of the Web 2.0 to promote social interaction – mainly represented by the creation 
and exchange of user-generated content. It designs a new framework of communication 
among people and describes a new way for businesses reaching out to their public [14]. 
The primary purpose of a business to use social media is to engage people or increase the 
level of involvement and interaction of a brand with its customers. [38] It changed the 
marketing strategy and provided different means for a firm to inform the public about its 
products and services. [40] 
In the crowded network created by Web 2.0, the communication flows in different ways. 
Businesses talk to customers, consumers talk to companies and, also, to their selves and 
potential consumers. 
The use of social media changed the power structures in the marketplace. It made customers 
more sophisticated. They have more ways of searching, evaluating, choosing, and buying 
goods and services. People tend to interact with others online, providing information, 
exchanging experiences, and recommending products and brands. Consumers tend to trust 
the opinion of other consumers, especially those with prior experience of a product or 
service, rather than company marketing. Social Media are influencing consumers’ 
preferences by shaping their attitudes and behaviors. [40] 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
Social media is an essential part of interactive marketing, making it possible for businesses 
to establish communication with their audience in the most compelling way. To define the 
most effective actions that a company should follow when making use of social media, [14] 
analyzed different methods described in the literature. Even though the methods support 
various applications, the author was able to capture general guidelines common to most of 
them. They, together, formed a basic pattern of social media utilization and were summarized 
by the author in two different categories: the passive approach and the active approach [14]. 
Figure 2 illustrates both categories. 
 
Figure 2: Passive and Active Approaches used in Social Media Marketing, based on [14]. 
 
This thesis will focus on the “passive approach,” although it is important to explain both 
methods to create a solid understanding of the matter. 
The passive approach accounts for using the social media domain as a source of customer 
voice and market intelligence. The objective here is gathering information about market 
needs, customer experiences, competitive movements, and trends. It recognizes that online 
individuals interact with peers providing information, posting reviews, and recommendations 
about brands/products/services. Therefore, social media platforms represent a low-cost and 
high-quality source of what is happening in the marketplace. It is an easy way of accessing 
customer opinion, tracking problems and market opportunities. Conventional market 
research methods (such as surveys) might be costly and time-consuming. In contrast, social 
Passive Approach
Customer voice
Market intelligence
Active Approach
Communication and sales
Customer acquisition and 
retention
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
media data mining provides live information in a fraction of the time, mobilizing much fewer 
resources. Any business should listen to customers by locating and monitoring what people 
discuss in the social media domain. 
On the other hand, the active approach utilizes social media as a channel of communication, 
direct sales, customer acquisition, and retention. The passive approach calls attention to the 
conversations between different online individuals in forums and blogs outside the company 
domains. When the company introduces forums, communities and brings discussions to the 
public, it drives the same conversations to its own domains. It also tends to improve customer 
retention by providing an opportunity of keeping in touch with people interested in the brand 
and making it easier to announce up-to-date news and products. All of that can be done by 
using the existent applications, creating a Twitter account or a Facebook page. 
One way of gaining value by using social media is to get customers involved with the 
innovation process. It can be done by stimulating discussions about product features, design, 
services, and others. This is an essential step for developing Open Innovation and co-creating  
with the customer in a desired field. Differently than the passive approach, the interactions 
driven by the company with the active approach are more structured and encompass a desired 
topic. It reinforces the company-customer relationship and increases the probability of 
market acceptance of the product. Moreover, the offering of product customization 
contributes to increasing customer loyalty. 
It is important to mention that online reviews provide a good picture of a product for a 
potential customer. Individuals trust more in peer opinions than in mainstream marketing. 
Those comments express sincere feelings and experiences and many times reflect a scenario 
that the potential customer can understand and project him/herself. Thus, encouraging the 
general public to give their honest opinions about a product might be more beneficial than 
releasing marketing campaigns. 
The approaches detailed above sum up common good-practice actions held by companies in 
social media. In addition to that, [1] formalized a social media marketing strategy model 
consisting of different movements that include defining target customers, understanding their 
behaviors, and listening to what they say about the company and in general. In that way, it is 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
possible to engage customers in conversations and develop a better relationship between 
them and the brand. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
Social Media Marketing Strategy 
 
This section introduces a social media marketing roadmap for companies that want to engage 
in social media or improve their marketing presence. [7] develops a conceptual framework 
about social media activities that impact the marketing strategy of a company.  
By following this method, a company should not only be interested in targeting as many 
people as possible. Instead, the goal must also be to understand the needs and demands of 
their potential customers (or followers) to create suitable services and offers. 
Due to the likelihood of reaching a high level of exposure, social media platforms are a 
powerful way to introduce a product in the market. To be capable of achieving better results 
in managing the use of those means, a company should develop a well-structured marketing 
strategy. That is mapping actions used to engage a business in social media, dividing the plan 
into levels with direct tasks, and establishing goals to be met. The framework created by [7] 
is following presented in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3: Framework for Social Media Marketing Strategy, based on [7]. 
Discovery 
Process
Strategy
Management
Procedure
Listening and 
Driving Awareness
Strategic Plan
==PAGE:17==
16 
 
 
According to [7], a social media marketing strategy model should contain three main steps: 
discovery process, strategy, and management procedure. The discovery process includes 
elements such as defining the company’s target audience and the goals that the company 
intends to reach with the social media presence.  
The second step is the strategic plan, and it begins with listening and driving awareness. That 
means collecting information about what is said about the company in social media: how 
their followers see the brand and its products. For companies that intend to improve the 
communication with customers, an additional step would be to engage the company in 
conversations with different topics. An example of that happens when an event spread 
quickly on the Internet, and groups of people start sharing their own opinion and discussing 
about that specific happening. Many companies join the opportunity to drive people’s 
attention to them, sharing comments or releasing marketing promotions related to that 
subject. 
Besides that, a strategic plan should be formulated. It is responsible to specify, among the 
vast amount of social media options, which channel will be used to open dialogue with the 
customers. For example, marketing actions that rely on the promotion of visual content are 
generally published on Instagram. In general, businesses would also use Facebook and 
Twitter to reach their audience. 
Furthermore, the central part of the strategic plan is to create content used in the 
advertisement. [7] states that it should focus on the readers, not only the buyers, because 
those are the people who contribute to share information they find interesting.  The use of 
keywords is essential and they should reflect what customers are talking about. Also, sharing 
different data, such as videos and pictures are effective in gathering people’s attention, 
getting involved with the audience, holding question and answer sessions, creating pools. All 
those actions strength the relationship with the audience and make the public notice the 
company’s presence on the media. 
The last step of developing a strategy is the management procedure. That is, applying 
measuring techniques and defining the return on investment strategy. At that point, analytical 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
techniques are used upon the available data, and the results of the marketing promotions are 
compared with the previously set goals. It aims to answer questions as: who actually visited 
the page, was the target audience reached, and others. The most commonly used metrics are 
number of page views, number of followers, frequency of visits, rate of visitor to buyer, 
revenue per customer, abandoned shopping carts, and others.  Those data can be collected 
through an API (Application Programming Interface).  
It is important to notice that this project concentrates on the mainly in the second phase of 
the framework. The focus will be directed to the subsection listening and driving awareness, 
where a company collects information people share about its products on social media. In the 
analyzed case, Sentiment Analysis techniques (further explained) are used to collect 
information shared about Amazon Alexa by Twitter users.  
 [7] and [14] compiled actions a business could use to improve their social media 
management. Their strategies put together a set of approaches widely applied in the industry 
that are likely to be accepted by the social media audience. Moreover, both of them 
acknowledge the importance of utilizing such domains as a source of information about 
customers and the general market. 
In this study, the focus is on the second stage of [7]’s strategy, where the business listens to 
the audience’s opinions and feelings about the brand/product. As previously mentioned, it is 
a pivotal step to improve the relationship with the public and to understand their needs. This 
strategy relies on the idea of collecting information from social media, analyzing it, and 
delivering specific insights.  
The chosen social media was Twitter, and, as in any other social platform, it offers freedom 
for the users to express themselves with the condition of following general rules. It means 
that the user can publish images, videos, use slangs and abbreviations, and combine different 
languages in the same tweet as long as they do not infringe Twitter’s Rules and Policies. [60] 
Therefore, due to the extensive ways a user can express itself, the information gathered from 
Twitter does not obey a specific defined structure. 
Hence, to analyze user-generated information, one reaches out to computer science 
techniques able to process and classify unstructured data. It contains assessments expressing 
==PAGE:19==
18 
 
human ideas that can only be interpreted by a method able to perform language treatment, 
opinion sorting and overcome the intrinsic subjectivity expressed in the source of data. [35] 
For that reason, this project uses Sentiment Analysis to evaluate the content retrieved from 
Twitter. It covers aspects of Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing [50]; thus, 
it encompasses techniques that break the complexity of language processing. The following 
section offers a look at it. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
 
Sentiment Analysis 
 
The multiplication of websites and social networks displays a new scenario of challenges and 
opportunities in the way data is collected and interpreted. Although the research for facts are 
significant, nowadays, internet users have become more interested in opinions expressed 
online. Personal opinions are spreading through online blogs/websites and impacting 
everything from the individuals purchase to presidential elections. [18] Those opinions are 
expressed in informal environments and, generally, do not follow a pre-defined structure.  
The amount of unstructured data available on the web increases at an exponential rate. Both 
the lack of structure and the massiveness of data makes that the complexity of interpreting it 
also increases. In the past, academia and enterprises alike used surveys to collect opinions to 
analyze potentially gainful information. This approach might represent a slow and costly 
application. Therefore, researchers developed more efficient practices to collect and evaluate 
information. [50] This area of study is called Sentiment Analysis. 
Sentiment Analysis (SA) is the computational treatment of opinion, sentiment, and 
subjectivity expressed in the source of data. Also named as Opinion Mining and Subjectivity 
Analysis, it represents an intersection between Natural Language Processing and Machine 
Learning.  Through the application of Sentiment Analysis’ tools, opinions expressed by users 
are handled as a defined commodity to gain a competitive advantage over the use of big data. 
[18] That means having access to specific information that a rival might not have. 
Both Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning are sub-areas of Artificial 
Intelligence, which is defined as the capacity of machines to understand, learn, and mimic 
human intelligence. This area has significantly developed since the emergence of big data 
and the popularization of the internet. Artificial Intelligence applications are spread across a 
wide range of industries, such as health [42], supply chain [6, 28], politics [27] and social 
media [63]. 
Opinions expressed in natural language can frequently be posed in complicated, subtle ways. 
[54] For that reason, Natural Language Processing (NLP) is applied to interpret user-
generated messages. NLP is a sub-field of Artificial Intelligence that manipulates ordinary 
==PAGE:21==
20 
 
human language through computer techniques. It usually takes this language as input and 
transforms it into a representation convenient for computational manipulation. [67] More 
recently, this field has got close to Big data, and the concepts of Machine Learning became 
useful. 
Machine learning (ML) is a field of computer science that studies algorithms and techniques 
for automating solutions to complex problems that are hard to program using conventional 
programing methods. [49] It is a fundamental part of Artificial Intelligence since the primary 
element of an intelligent system is the ability to learn. Among various other applications, ML 
offers a set of tools able to treat Sentiment Analysis problems using syntactic and linguistic 
features. [15, 46] 
Due to having aspects of ML and NLP, Sentiment Analysis is an example of technology 
being used to gain competitive advantage and improve business processes efficiency. It 
transforms human-generated texts into computational data by processing and categorizing 
words and language structures. Sentiment Analysis has the capacity of embedding itself into 
organizations from all fields, explicitly in marketing and advertising, where understanding 
customer opinions and market sentiment is precious. [50] 
[35] developed a comprehensive research to explain the increasing number of scientific 
publications that studied the use of Sentiment Analysis in Twitter. The authors mention that 
most of the use of Sentiment Analysis in Twitter is to fundamentally understand its potential 
applications in the areas of business or government. 
They qualify Twitter as platform with a valuable set of data that is constantly changing. The 
constant flow of information attracted the interest of the research community, that develop 
techniques to extract knowledge from text published by the users about a certain topic. 
The authors point that, due to the same reasons, other communities also realized the 
importance of the information posted on Twitter. Politicians and companies want to know 
what the people write in real time about them, so they request tools able to monitor and 
evaluate opinions, feelings and sentiments that their potential customers are publishing. 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
The rapid expansion of media platforms that facilitate user-generated content displays a 
chance to increase a more in-depth understanding of consumer opinion about subjects, 
brands, or individuals [43]. 
Moreover, consumer reviews have a considerable impact on offline purchasing behavior. 
According to [9, 43], 81% of American internet users have researched a product online, and 
between 73% and 87% report that reviews had influenced their purchasing decisions. This 
influence appears to be even more substantial, with consumers willing to pay up to 99% more 
for a five-star rated product than a four-star rated one [9]. 
Those arguments state the importance of studying such a topic. [27] explored the decision-
making of consumers supported by opinions in online reviews by applying data mining 
algorithms. Likewise, [6] utilized Machine Learning to classify opinions into “positive” or 
“negative” by evaluating the overall sentiment of the published content. The results show 
that those techniques outperformed human evaluation. 
While some studies promote Sentiment Analysis as a powerful and fast tool for opinions 
assessment, it still faces numerous challenges. [10] The same word can have negative or 
positive connotations, depending on the context.  
In addition to that, there are innumerous ways of expressing opinions. Small changes in 
syntax can cause an important difference in the underlying idea. For example, the phrases 
“The movie was good.” and “The movie was not good.” express opposite feelings about the 
same subject and the only difference between them is the negative word “not”. [21] 
Moreover, human opinions might not be expressed with pure type of judgement. They can 
be composed of some sentences with a positive and others with a negative connotation. All 
those factors put together expose the inherent complexity that Sentiment Analysis evaluation 
holds, even for human beings. [30] 
Even though Sentiment Analysis is a widely applied engine in academia and also in 
companies, it does not have a formal, accessible, and comprehensive framework. To 
overcome this situation, [50] developed a literature review that aims to provide a technical 
summary of conventional methods and techniques utilized in this industry. It offers a look at 
various classification methods used to extracting opinions from unstructured texts. Besides 
==PAGE:23==
22 
 
that, the author presents a standard roadmap to be used by one who intends to move forward 
with such an analysis. This thesis adopts the following described structure. 
[50] built a literature review based on the lack of formal available frameworks for an 
accessible and comprehensive look into the Sentiment Analysis field. It provided a technical 
summary of common utilized methods. 
Sentiment Analysis generally is a long process divided into various steps, including gathering 
and cleaning data, model preparation, training classifiers, and extracting information. [55, 
63] However, the whole process is fundamentally divided into three main areas: processing, 
classification, and validation. Those steps are explained by [50] in its framework. 
The Processing phase is more connected to Natural Language Processing, as it treats the data 
taking into account its linguistic features. While the Classification uses algorithms more 
related to Machine Learning to establish patterns. 
[50] observes different techniques used by researches and enterprises in investigations, 
gaining competitive advantage through the use of unstructured data. It does not cover the 
very first step of any Sentiment Analysis process: the acquisition of large data sets. Yet, this 
current study also encompasses that phase.  
At this moment, it is convenient to introduce the framework created by [50]. Although, on 
recognizes the existence of several other Classification methods (and take account of them 
in this study), [50] just mention the ones in the next image (Figure 4).  
==PAGE:24==
23 
 
 
Figure 4: Framework for Sentiment Analysis Techniques, based on [50]. 
By omitting Data Gathering, [50] points Document Processing as the first half of a Sentiment 
Analysis. The aim here is start cleaning and preparing the information that will be used for 
further Classification. This stage can take few or various steps, depending on the complexity 
of the problem. Although, three main phases are generally applied. They are Tokenization, 
Stop Word Filtering, and Stemming. 
When Tokenization is applied, the entire text is divided into smaller units called tokens. The 
text is split in punctuations and spaces. That normally results in each word being a token. In 
that way, isolated words can be categorized according to the function they perform. [18] 
The following step is to remove stop words from the analysis (Stop Word Filtering). Stop 
words are any words that are not useful in the classification, since no information can be 
obtained from it. [33] Generally, those words are articles (‘a’, ‘an’, ‘of’, ‘the’), auxiliary 
verbs (‘is’, ‘are’, ‘was’) and specific words dependent on the dataset [39]. 
The last step of word processing is Stemming. This filtration step consists on the reduction 
of words to their root. It could help reduce the vocabulary size, thereby sharpening results, 
especially for small data sets. It removes the affixes in words. For example, “cleans” and 
“cleaning” are changed to “clean”, as they all have the same meaning. [67] 
==PAGE:25==
24 
 
The second half of Sentiment Analysis is Classification. It categorizes existing objects in the 
data into correct groups or classes by learning standards and features from labelled items. 
[67] The categorization may follow a simple topic-based treatment (Positive or Negative 
Sentiment) or even pursue a more developed analysis, setting different objects in the data to 
specific groups.  Clustering is a data mining method used to determine a class attribution of 
features by applying an unsupervised learning process [62]. Although acknowledging its 
existence, [50] does not explore Clustering in the framework.  
The first method presented by [50] is the Support Vector Machines (SVMs). It is a powerful 
collection of linear models used to classify the tone of communication as Positive or 
Negative, which is a fundamental step in the analysis. [18] 
[3] says that SVMs is effective classification learning tool which is used for pattern 
recognition. It is an extension of generalized portrait algorithm of nonlinear models and is 
applied on the statistical learning theory. 
Besides that, there is Naïve Bayes, which is a probabilistic method this probabilistic based 
on Bayes’ theorem classification algorithm [62]. Despite its high-efficiency, many authors 
modified the original method and created specific versions to suit different purposes. [1]  
[69] adds that Naïve Bayes can be defined as Bayes Theorem with a conditional 
independency assumption that all variables in a given category are conditional independent 
with each other. This is represented by the Figure 5, where the variables A1, A2,…, An are 
elements of a given category C. 
 
Figure 5: Naïve Bayesian Network. Retrieved from [69]. 
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
 
The goal of using a Naïve Bayesian Network probability is to calculate the likelihood of a 
hypothesis of C holding an attribute given conditions that A1, A2,…, An have been observed. 
[69] used Naïve Bayes in email classification to determine which category an email belongs 
to by evaluating keywords. The authors also raise attention for the importance of having a 
training set to establish the variables A1, A2,…, An that belong to different categories.  
Other authors frequently used different methods in sentiment analysis classification. [3] used 
Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt), a feature-based model. It does not make any independence 
assumption between entities and is able to handle overlapping problems. The authors even 
say that MaxEnt handles different types of problem better then Naive Bayes.  
Moreover, other authors applied modifications on the traditional methods, making them more 
complex in order to achieve better results. [21], for example, studied Bayesian networks in 
Sentiment Analysis. They exclude Naïve Bayes in their research stating that this technique 
has been extensively used and well-studied within the sentiment analysis literature. Thus, 
their object of analysis was more complex Bayesian Network structures in order to obtain 
better models than the simple Naïve Bayes approach. 
The use of Sentiment Analysis in Twitter is also referred as Polarity Classification. It is 
assumed that the text published is an opinion, therefore, to find out if a comment is positive 
or negative, it is just necessary to calculate its polarity and to determine whether the text is 
subjective or objective (Subjectivity Classification). [35] 
Different authors studied polarity in Twitter, building experiments with different methods. 
[3] used supervised classification methods to study tweets in English. They used emoticons 
that usually are found in tweets to differentiate between positive and negative tweets.  
[16] used hashtags and emoticons as sentiment labels to train a supervised sentiment classifier 
using the K Nearest Neighbors (kNN) algorithm. The experiments were validated by human 
judges and the results obtained were very optimistic. 
==PAGE:27==
26 
 
[22] analyzed 10,000 tweets published in English about the iPad tablet. They based their 
evaluation on the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) methodology, which is summarized in the 
article.  
[44] studied the application of Sentiment Analysis in Twitter in different occasions to 
calculate the polarity of tweets. Both authors compared the performance of Naïve Bayes with 
two other algorithms: SVM and Conditional Random Fields (CRF). They concluded that the 
best opinions assessment on Twitter was done by using Naïve Bayes. 
Despite being a simple algorithm, Naïve Bayes is one of the most popular Classification 
methods. [13] compared its performance with several other more complex algorithms using 
the same dataset and processing pipes, that means using virtually the same conditions. Their 
results are surprisingly good. Although theoretically weak, Naïve Bayes gives unusually 
good results in practice. It performed better than more sophisticated classifiers, than Balanced 
Winnow and just slightly worse than Maximum Entropy. 
With various algorithms available to evaluate a sentiment in a tweet, the study conducted in 
this project follows the Naïve Bayes classification. The application is based on the Textblob 
package in Python (further explained). The decision of using such method was made due to 
it being easy to apply in practice, compared with other algorithms, and its unusually good 
results.  
This project tackles the further described case by first gathering relevant data. Then, the 
technical guideline created by [50] is used in the Document Processing and Classification 
phases. The information collected on first place is tokenized, stopwords are removed, the 
remaining words are stemmed, and, finally, classified by a classification algorithm. By 
following those steps, this report aims to provide a method to conduct Sentiment Analysis 
using open source tools and data retrieved from Twitter. 
Customers typically view online reviews and product rankings before shopping. On the 
opposite side, organizations look to get feedback from customers frequently – it helps them 
to improve their development, marketing, and customer relationship management. [48]  
The study develops an Opinion Mining procedure that classifies a tweet as positive or 
negative. The method can support companies in understanding the acceptance of its product 
==PAGE:28==
27 
 
by their audience. But not only that, it can also assist potential customers in deciding on a 
product based on other people's opinions. 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
Case Presentation 
 
As stated in the Introduction, this project research aims to answer the question: 
How can a company use social media to understand the general public’s opinion about its 
product/service? 
 In order to answer the research question and exemplify a situation where that questioning 
would emerge, this study proposes a Case Study. 
First, it is important to define the boundaries of this Case or the relevant parameters to be 
analyzed. The company it will focus on is Amazon.com, Inc. The choice was made due to 
being one of the most successful companies nowadays. Hence, people tend to express their 
opinions about well-known brands. Moreover, it is the market leader in the type of product 
analyzed here. 
Amazon.com, Inc is an online retail shopping services provider. Acting through its websites, 
it focuses on product selection, price and convenience. Founded by Jeffrey P. Bezos in July 
1994 and headquartered in Seattle, WA, it has almost 650.000 employees, a market 
capitalization valued in $916.1 billion, and is ranked #28 on Forbes Global 2000 – the world’s 
2000 largest public companies. [19] 
The product evaluated is Amazon’s personal smart assistant Alexa. It is one of the market 
leader services in its category – that also has Apple Siri, Google Assistant, Microsoft Cortana, 
and others. Most of its popularity relies on the fact that Amazon leads the smart speaker 
market with its Amazon Echo, a home device with a built-in personal assistant. 
With the company and its product defined, the next step is to determine the social media that 
will be the studied in this case. The chosen social media should offer one free access to 
content published by its users in order to collect relevant information to be analyzed.  
Moreover, it should have a continuous information flow. Meaning that it should have active 
users sharing their ideas and thoughts through that channel. 
==PAGE:30==
29 
 
Therefore, the chosen social media was Twitter. It is considered the most transparent big 
social network, it encourages back-and forth conversation, and is used by virtually all big 
Western companies for marketing and communication with customers [45].  
Besides that, Twitter provides an opened service to third party development through its 
simple and well-conceived API. [34] This facilitates the development of researches and 
constitutes a unique source with massive amount of information. For example, Twitter has 
on average 330 thousand monthly active users, 145 million daily users, and about 500 million 
tweets sent each day. [52] All those factors make Twitter the right source for collecting user-
generated online data. 
The process of understanding information retrieved from a social media can be exhausting 
due to the large quantity of data available and its lack of structure. Therefore, one utilizes 
computational techniques resulted from the combination of Machine Learning and Natural 
Language Processing. Those areas together define Sentiment Analysis. 
To summarize the purpose of this Case Study, one should keep in mind that data collected 
from Twitter will be processed through Sentiment Analysis techniques in order to obtain an 
understanding of what Twitter users think about Amazon Alexa. 
It is important to notice that the results obtained might suffer influence of various factors, 
specially the time in which occurred the data collection. Unique events might generate 
comments about certain topics, social influencers might share their own opinion about a 
specific product and turn the public attention to that, which will generate loads of comments. 
New product released by companies might also drive general attention and result in the same 
effect. During the Data Gathering phase, it was noticed that many tweets are just a reposting 
of a social influencer. Even though they express that same opinion repeatedly, the reason 
behind the user publishing the content is questionable. The user may post the message 
because it reflects its own opinion about the product or because he/she wants to raise attention 
to fact related to that social influencer life. Due to the questionability of the publishing 
reasons, those tweets were excluded from the analysis. Other than that, no other special 
factors were noticed. 
==PAGE:31==
30 
 
As already mentioned, this study collects and analyzes tweets that exhibit opinions about 
Google’s personal smart assistant, Google Assistant, which is a competitor of Amazon’s 
Alexa. Those opinions were collected with the intention of comparing both products and 
capturing different sentiments regarding each product. 
With the boundaries set and the project structure introduced, the next section tackles the 
solution applied to the case and presents its method. 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
31 
 
Case Solution 
 
The solution presented here follows the structured displayed in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6: Structured used to obtain the results for the Case Study. 
 
The structure defined to tackle the problem is based on the [50]’s approach described in 
Figure 6. The author did not include the Data gathering phase, but accounted Processing and 
Classification. It is important to notice that the Processing phase of the author’s definition 
includes the following steps in Figure 6: Remove URL, Tokenization, Remove stop words, 
and Stemming.  
The goal of this Case Study is to retrieve information about Amazon Alexa shared by Twitter 
users. To do that and accomplish the Data gathering step in Figure 6, one needs to establish 
a connection with Twitter’s platform and create a tool able to capture information from it. 
This is done by setting up a Twitter API account. An API (Application Programming 
Interface) is a tool provided by various websites with the intention of make the interaction 
==PAGE:33==
32 
 
between computer programs and their platform more efficient. [37] In that way, developers 
can have access to platform’s services and collect data. 
To access an API, it is necessary to have four pieces of information: API key, API secret, 
Access token and Access token secret. To obtain that information, one should have an 
account in Twitter and “Create a New App” on [59]. The step-by-step of this operation can 
be followed on [37]. 
With the API information in hands, the next step is to determine how the information 
collected through that tool will be read by one’s computer and saved into a specific file. That 
can be done using the open-source Python’s package Tweepy. With this library installed, 
developers can have access to the Twitter API. [58]  
The operation of collecting information based on content published by Twitter users in their 
tweets is called Twitter Streaming. Tweepy is used to search public tweets that contain 
defined keywords. Figure 7 represents this process.  
 
Figure 7: Twitter Streaming collects data filtered through defined keywords. 
The defined keywords for this project were “Amazon Alexa”, “Amazon Echo”, 
“#amazonalexa”, and “#amazonecho”. On Twitter and other social media websites, people 
tend to use Amazon Alexa and Amazon Echo interchangeably, with both expressions being 
used to describe the personal assistant service and home speaker product offered by 
Amazon.com, Inc. Moreover, social media users utilize hashtags to link their publications to 
a specific topic. Hence, it is relevant to include that feature in the research in order to increase 
the number of captured tweets. 
To stream data from Twitter, the following Python code was used. 
==PAGE:34==
33 
 
from tweepy import Stream 
from tweepy import OAuthHandler 
from tweepy.streaming import StreamListener 
import json 
import re 
 
#consumer key, consumer secret, access token, access secret. 
atoken = "1112376809897766912-5P3VOTOzniTCd509kaXIr2pdx1XlBP" 
asecret = "VAICT4ITbqD4GFflFMktkhqbqW5i951uITuUdU5AtI873" 
ckey = "MoQsV5KyabvNpJT4VCbiyuy53" 
csecret = "DaYEEvCuypEhDGvLDvV57XwnlYjXYCIz2gsDaQgJ04W99u7HOr" 
 
class listener(StreamListener): 
 
    def on_data(self, data): 
        all_data = json.loads(data) 
         
        if 'RT @' not in all_data["text"]: 
    
            def remove_url(txt): 
                return " ".join(re.sub("([^0-9A-Za-z 
\t])|(\w+:\/\/\S+)", "", txt).split()) 
             
            data=remove_url(all_data["text"]) 
            saveFile=open('amazon_alexa.csv','a') 
            saveFile.write(data) 
            saveFile.write('\n') 
            saveFile.close() 
            return(True) 
 
auth = OAuthHandler(ckey, csecret) 
auth.set_access_token(atoken, asecret) 
 
twitterStream = Stream(auth, listener()) 
twitterStream.filter(languages=["en"],track=['#amazonalexa', 
'#amazonecho', 'Amazon Alexa', 'Amazon Echo'])     
 
 
The first section of the coding imports the relevant libraries and tools that are used in the 
following steps: 
from tweepy import Stream 
from tweepy import OAuthHandler 
from tweepy.streaming import StreamListener 
import json 
import re 
 
To use a library, it is necessary to import it first. Using json as an example, the import 
statement enters the json module. This statement tells Python that that module is to be used. 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
The json module has functions related to the Python interpreter and its environment. When 
Python executes the import json statement, it looks for the json.py module in the directory 
listed in the json.path variable. With the file is found, Python runs the statement in the main 
block of the module, and then the module will be available for use. [66] 
The next section in the code specifies the API keys and tokens that will grant access to Twitter 
data: 
#consumer key, consumer secret, access token, access secret. 
atoken = "1112376809897766912-5P3VOTOzniTCd509kaXIr2pdx1XlBP" 
asecret = "VAICT4ITbqD4GFflFMktkhqbqW5i951uITuUdU5AtI873" 
ckey = "MoQsV5KyabvNpJT4VCbiyuy53" 
csecret = "DaYEEvCuypEhDGvLDvV57XwnlYjXYCIz2gsDaQgJ04W99u7HOr" 
 
The Twitter listener is created in the third section of the code and it is established the 
condition of only gathering tweets not re-tweeted by users. It means that tweets created by a 
user and republished by another user are not considered. 
class listener(StreamListener): 
 
    def on_data(self, data): 
        all_data = json.loads(data) 
         
        if 'RT @' not in all_data["text"]: 
 
This section also removes tweets’ URLs in order to make it easier to process and specifies a 
csv file where the tweets are written.  
def remove_url(txt): 
                return " ".join(re.sub("([^0-9A-Za-z 
\t])|(\w+:\/\/\S+)", "", txt).split()) 
             
            data=remove_url(all_data["text"]) 
            saveFile=open('amazon_alexa.csv','a') 
            saveFile.write(data) 
            saveFile.write('\n') 
            saveFile.close() 
            return(True) 
 
==PAGE:36==
35 
 
The last section of the code inputs the API keys and tokens in the Twitter listener, making 
possible for the listener to access the Twitter platform. Moreover, the keyword filter is 
defined to only read tweets that contain specified words. 
auth = OAuthHandler(ckey, csecret) 
auth.set_access_token(atoken, asecret) 
 
twitterStream = Stream(auth, listener()) 
twitterStream.filter(languages=["en"],track=['#amazonalexa', 
'#amazonecho', 'Amazon Alexa', 'Amazon Echo'])     
 
The data collected with the use of the previous code was obtained in three instances. 10,323 
tweets were gathered from December 5, 2019 to December 9, 2019 and more 8,533 tweets 
were gathered from January 3, 2020 to January 7, 2020. From all 18,856 gathered tweets, 
some will be used as a training dataset for the classifier algorithm, while the majority of it 
will be the source of the data analysis. 
Those previous steps summarize the Data Collection phase in which information published 
by Twitter users is read by a Twitter listener and written in a csv file. A comma-separated 
values (csv) file is a delimited text file that stores tabular data (numbers and text) in plain 
text. Each csv line is a data record consisting of one or more fields separated by commas. 
[66] 
The framework created by [50] points out that there are also two main phases after that in a 
Sentiment Analysis: Document Processing and Classification. The Document Processing 
phase approached in this study contains the main three steps already introduced: 
Tokenization, Stopwords Filtration, and Stemming. To accomplish it, another open-source 
Python package is used: NLTK, or Natural Language Toolkit. 
The Natural Language Toolkit is a Python programming library that performs statistical 
analysis using Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools for English written texts. It was 
developed by researches from the University of Pennsylvania. NLTK provides graphical 
demonstrations and sample data. NLTK has been used successfully as a research and teaching 
tool applied to NLP problems in more than 25 countries. NLTK supports classification, 
tokenization, stemming, tagging, parsing, and semantic reasoning functionalities. [66] 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
The data processing was accomplished by using the following Python code. 
import pandas as pd 
import string 
import re 
import io  
import nltk 
from nltk.corpus import stopwords 
from nltk.tokenize import word_tokenize 
from nltk.stem import PorterStemmer 
 
tweets_df=pd.read_csv('amazon_alexa.csv') 
 
def remove_Number(text): 
    text = re.sub('[0-9]+', '', text) 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_Number'] = tweets_df['Tweet'].apply(lambda x: 
remove_Number(x)) 
 
def tokenization(text): 
    text = re.split('\W+', text) 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_tokenized'] = tweets_df['Tweet_Number'].apply(lambda 
x: tokenization(x.lower())) 
 
stopword = nltk.corpus.stopwords.words('english') 
sw=['im','youre','theyre','hasnt','havent','dont','doesnt'] 
 
def remove_sw(text): 
    text = [word for word in text if word not in sw] 
    return text 
     
tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop1'] = 
tweets_df['Tweet_tokenized'].apply(lambda x: remove_sw(x)) 
 
def remove_stopwords(text): 
    text = [word for word in text if word not in stopword] 
    return text 
     
tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop'] = tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop1'].apply(lambda 
x: remove_stopwords(x)) 
 
ps = nltk.PorterStemmer() 
def stemming(text): 
    text = [ps.stem(word) for word in text] 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_stemmed'] = tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop'].apply(lambda 
x: lemmatize(x)) 
 
tweets_df.to_csv(r'filtered_tweets.csv') 
  
==PAGE:38==
37 
 
The code begins with importing the relevant packages and tools that will be used and reading 
the file that contains the tweets gathered in the previous phase. From NLTK, three different 
tools are used: stop words, word tokenize and word stemmer. 
import pandas as pd 
import string 
import re 
import io  
import nltk 
from nltk.corpus import stopwords 
from nltk.tokenize import word_tokenize 
from nltk.stem import PorterStemmer 
 
tweets_df=pd.read_csv('amazon_alexa.csv') 
 
Next step is to remove all numbers from the tweets, as they do not offer any information 
about an individual’s opinion. It is important to notice that the original column in the csv file 
named “Tweet” is used to generate a column named “Tweet_Number” which is the result of 
the first processing step. 
def remove_Number(text): 
    text = re.sub('[0-9]+', '', text) 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_Number'] 
= 
tweets_df['Tweet'].apply(lambda 
x: 
remove_Number(x)) 
Then, it is time to tokenize words, or define each word as a token, an individual isolated 
entity that will be further analyzed by the sentiment algorithm. Again, the pre-processed 
column (at this time, “Tweet_Numer”) is modified to generate the most recent processed 
column “Tweet_tokenized”. 
def tokenization(text): 
    text = re.split('\W+', text) 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_tokenized'] = tweets_df['Tweet_Number'].apply(lambda 
x: tokenization(x.lower())) 
 
The removal of undesirable words is conducted in two steps. First the usual stop words 
defined by NLTK are removed. Then, some word contractions often reproduced in social 
media environment are also separated from the material to be analyzed. 
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
stopword = nltk.corpus.stopwords.words('english') 
 
def remove_stopwords(text): 
    text = [word for word in text if word not in stopword] 
    return text 
     
tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop1'] = 
tweets_df['Tweet_tokenized'].apply(lambda x: remove_sw(x)) 
 
sw=['im','youre','theyre','hasnt','havent','dont','doesnt'] 
 
def remove_sw(text): 
    text = [word for word in text if word not in sw] 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop'] = tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop1'].apply(lambda 
x: remove_stopwords(x)) 
 
The last step in the Document Processing phase is the Stemming in order to reduce the words 
to their root. That mainly happens by removing verbal conjugations and reducing plurals. 
After the Document Processing is done, the generated columns are exported to another csv 
file that will be used for the Classification phase. 
ps = nltk.PorterStemmer() 
def stemming(text): 
    text = [ps.stem(word) for word in text] 
    return text 
 
tweets_df['Tweet_stemmed'] = tweets_df['Tweet_nonstop'].apply(lambda 
x: lemmatize(x)) 
tweets_df.to_csv(r'filtered_tweets.csv') 
 
The final step of Sentiment Analysis is the Classification. The training dataset is processed 
and categorized, then it is used as a parameter for the classification of the main part of the 
tweets. This time, a Naïve Bayes classifier presented in the TextBlob Python package is used 
and the following code is run. 
import pandas as pd 
from textblob.classifiers import NaiveBayesClassifier 
from textblob import TextBlob 
 
 
with open('amazon_training_dataset.csv', 'r') as fp: 
    cl = NaiveBayesClassifier(fp, format="csv") 
 
tweets_df=pd.read_csv('amazon_alexa.csv') 
 
==PAGE:40==
39 
 
def classify(text): 
    r =cl.classify(text) 
    return r 
 
tweets_df['Sentiment'] = tweets_df['Tweet_stemmed'].apply(lambda x: 
classify(str(x))) 
 
tweets_df.to_csv(r'amazon_data_classified.csv') 
 
The training dataset contains the processed tweets and their proper categorization. It needs 
to be opened and read by the Naïve Bayes classifier. The classifier will identify the best 
category that fits each collected tweet utilizing the training dataset as a parameter. 
In order to compare the popularity of Amazon Alexa with its competitors, tweets about the 
Google Assistant were collected as well. From December 12, 2019 to December 15, 2019, 
8,728 publications about the Google Assistant were retrieved from Twitter. The data was 
gathered, processed, and classified using the steps already described. The only difference is 
that the training dataset used in the Classification was included in the Google Assistant’s 
8,728 gathered tweets. 
The next chapter presents and discusses the results obtained in the analysis. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
40 
 
Case Results 
 
During the Classification phase, four different possible categories were defined: positive, 
negative, neutral, and inadequate. The first two categories contain tweets with positive and 
negative comments. Tweets that do not express an opinion are defined as neutral. They are 
more likely talk about a situation. The last category comprehends inadequate tweets. Those 
are tweets not published by individual users and most likely published by an organization or 
company. That includes promotions, marketing campaigns, and announcements from 
magazines and websites. To better visualize it, Figure 8 presents the MS Excel spreadsheet 
containing processed tweets and their categorization. 
 
Figure 8: Categorization of the training dataset for Amazon Alexa. 
==PAGE:42==
41 
 
Figure 8 shows the training dataset when it was already processed. The training dataset 
contained 43 different tweets. They were chosen randomly from the total collected data and 
manually categorized. As can be seen in the image, after processed, the original tweet is 
transformed in a list of modified words, what makes it difficult to be read. Therefore, to 
proceed with the manual categorization, the original unprocessed tweets were used. 
With the training dataset classified, the next step was to categorize the processed Amazon 
Alexa publications. The 18,856 tweets were classified using the Naïve Bayes algorithm 
showed in the previous section. Figure 9 shows a pie chart with the Classification results. 
 
Figure 9: Pie chart with Amazon Alexa data classified. 
The pie chart clearly shows that most of the collected tweets were categorized as inadequate. 
In fact, 62% of the data, or 11,728 tweets were classified as that. 
The results generate an alert about the information collected. The intention of this study was 
to collect tweets about Amazon Alexa published by individuals using their personal Twitter 
ina
62%
neu
34%
pos
3%
neg
1%
Classification of Amazon Alexa tweets
ina
neu
pos
neg
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
accounts. Although, the results obtained indicate that it is likely that most of the tweets 
gathered were published by organizations or companies as part of a marketing campaign or 
an announcement. To check that hypothesis, one took a closer look on the dataset. 
After qualitative analysis of the data, it was concluded that many of the tweets collected were 
probably created as part of announcements of organization or groups. One example of is that 
2,680 the tweets contained the expression  
“Now Playing ___ TuneIn AmazonEcho GreatestHits”.  
When searching in Twitter for similar tweets, the information in Figure 10 was found. 
 
Figure 10: Tweet with high appearance in the dataset for Amazon Alexa. 
As all the 2,680 tweets have the same structure, one can conclude that all of them were 
published by the same Twitter account. In this case, the account owned by “Golden Oldies 
Radio”, which is a radio station based in Liverpool, England. 
In addition to that, many other tweets were likely to be published by group-owned pages. 
Another radio station based on Portland, United States has published 1,897 of the total 
collected tweets. 
Moreover, 68 tweets had the same content:  
“You can now hear Samuel L Jackson’s voice on your Amazon Echo”.  
==PAGE:44==
43 
 
Many users tweeted the same article published by the American technology news portal, The 
Verge. [65] 
Besides that, many of the other collected tweets were publications following the same trend 
of those already mentioned. They were considered inadequate for the study, as they either 
were generated by group-owned accounts or they were generated by personal accounts but 
did not expressed a particular opinion about the product in study. 
34% of the tweets (6,429) were considered neutral. Those are tweets that were probably 
published by individuals with their private account, but that do not express a sentiment about 
the product. Mostly, they just comment something about it or mentioned day-to-day events 
in which the product was part of. A few examples of tweets are:  
“Why did amazon just send me an Alexa I never ordered”, and 
 “My mom really told Alexa Santa uses amazon to deliver gifts bahaha Im not over it”. 
After excluding most of the collected tweets from the analysis, only 698 tweets were 
classified by the algorithm as positive or negative. Figure 11 shows that 623 tweets had 
positive content, while 75 had negative content. 
 
Figure 11: Number of tweets classified as positive and negative for Amazon Alexa. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
pos
neg
Positive and Negative tweets
==PAGE:45==
44 
 
The number of actual relevant tweets was considered low. Only 3% of the total collected data 
was potentially useful for the analysis. 
In order to validate the results, it is necessary to proceed with a qualitative analysis of the 
tweets considered positive and negative. The 623 positive tweets were randomly analyzed. 
Some of them proved to have a positive connotation as in: 
“I would love an Echo Dot so someone in the house would answer me with more than a 
grunt”, and 
“Absolutely in love with Alexa amazon”. 
 
On the other hand, few tweets that would be neutral were classified as positive. For example: 
“me telling my amazon echo to play come over by the internet” 
Even tweets with negative connotation were classified as positive: 
“an amazon echo is not peace of mind” 
Moreover, some tweets would have a positive and negative connotation at the same time: 
“I love my echo dot I just wish amazon made it 10x louder” 
When analyzing the negative tweets, some do have negative connotation: 
“Oh poor stupid Alexa somehow overtime its started to recognize my wifes voice as me no 
longer knows who I am an”. 
But others should be classified as inadequate, such as: 
“How to setup Alexa and get started with Amazons best skills and features amazonbooks”, 
and 
“Allnew Fire TV Cube handsfree with Alexa built in 4K Ultra HD streaming via amazon”. 
Those miss-categorizations expose the fragility of the algorithm used.  
==PAGE:46==
45 
 
As part of the original plan, the data collected for Google Assistant was analyzed as well. 
The same Python codes were applied in the evaluation and 30 random collected tweets were 
used as a training dataset. Figure 12 shows the processed tweets and their manual 
categorization. 
 
Figure 12: Categorization of the training dataset for Google Assistant. 
The next step is to use this dataset to categorize the other 8,698 tweets using the Naïve Bayes 
algorithm. The results are shown in the pie chart (Figure 13). 
==PAGE:47==
46 
 
 
Figure 13: Pie chart with Coocle Assistant data classified. 
As presented in Figure 13, most of the tweets were classified as inadequate (72%) or neutral 
(15%). It might be a sign that most people use Twitter not to express their opinions about a 
certain topic, but just to share events in their lives or to interact with other users and 
organizations without expressing a feeling. 
Once more, it is important to proceed with a qualitative study. Many of the tweets categorized 
as “inadequate” where, in fact, content produced by organizations. 34 different tweets shared 
the following message: 
“Google Assistant Can Now Translate Speech Through Your Phone” 
That refers to the same article [11] published by the American magazine Wired. 
Other tweets were just some comments without meaning, such as :  
“Google Assistant play safe”, or 
“Hey Google is this me” 
72%
15%
8%
5%
Classification of Google Assistant tweets
ina
neu
pos
neg
==PAGE:48==
47 
 
Most likely, some tweets had information not collected by the algorithm used, such as 
images, and videos. 
One can also identify miss-categorization in some tweets, as in: 
“Ha I said hey Google play Christmas carols at 100 volume to get kids out of bed this 
morning”, and 
“Hey google thank u so much”, which probably should be defined as neutral. 
Many tweets were also broken in the middle of the message, such as: 
“berwyn TDCanada Every call I receive hits this now I feel this capability is going to have 
to be offered by d”, which was a reply to @_berwyn_ and @TD_Canada published by a user 
as in Figure 14. 
 
Figure 14: Example of broken tweets in the dataset for Google Assistant. 
Some tweets classified as neutral were also placed in the wrong category, as they were 
published by non-individual-owned accounts. Such as: 
==PAGE:49==
48 
 
“Get a JBL Live 500bt Wireless Over Ear Headphones for N60000 from PlentyGadgets 
Superior JBL Signature Sound p”, which is presented in Figure 15: 
 
Figure 14: Tweet published by non-individual-owned account in the dataset for Google 
Assistant. 
One can notice that the same issues found in the Amazon Alexa’s analysis were also part of 
the Google Assistant’s analysis. Mainly related to quality of data collected and miss-
categorization by the algorithm. 
The following part of this analysis is the evaluation of positive and negative-categorized 
tweets. As displayed in Figure 15, 740 tweets were considered positive and 434 were 
negative, 8% and 5% respectively. 
==PAGE:50==
49 
 
 
Figure 15: Number of tweets classified as positive and negative for Google Assistant. 
17 tweets with the same content were miss-classified as positive:  
“Google Assistants Interpreter mode translates conversations in real time”. 
Moreover, not many tweets have explicit positive messages about Google Assistant. One of 
the few examples is: 
“Google Thank you very much for your response Google I love how the Google Assistant 
helps me”. 
Some messages might have been miss-classified due to the use of words related to 
positiveness, but they were not, indeed, expressing a good feeling about the product, as in: 
“Hey Google search for someone as great as I am” 
Once more, some publications seemed to lack content structure – for example, images, 
videos, emojis, or weblinks. One example is: 
“This also works for Google assistant” 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
pos
neg
Positive vs Negative tweets about Google Assistant 
==PAGE:51==
50 
 
On the other hand, some tweets had very subtle content, which makes the classification more 
difficult, such as in: 
“i love ios but google assistant just wrote me a love poem when i asked her to marry me” 
It was categorized as a positive content, although the message is not clear, and does not 
express a positive idea about the product, neither emphasize a good feature. 
When analyzing the negative tweets, the same issues were identified. In conclusion, the 
classification process did not achieve the expected results. Although, the data evaluation 
produced relevant observations discussed in the next section. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
Discussion 
 
This project intended to study the research question: How can a company use social media 
to understand the general public’s opinion about its product/service?. 
To answer that inquiry, a case study was structured and Twitter’s data about Amazon Alexa 
were collected, processed and classified. The results showed divergence from the original 
expectations. 
The initial idea was to gather data, analyze it and obtain a concrete result, showing positive 
and negative comments about Amazon Alexa. In that way, it would have been proved that a 
company could use social media to collect general public’s opinions about its products. 
In contrast to those expectancies, the exercise proved to be more complex than initially 
foreseen. The results presented in the previous section show the fragility of the model applied, 
combined with structural project mistakes. 
This study was not able to answer the research question. Although, it raised concerns about 
the model and brought the following findings to light. 
The main issue encountered in the project was the model’s inability to classify unstructured 
data. Although many studies use Bayesian networks to perform classification tasks in 
Sentiment Analysis [21], the applied model was not able to interpret the data correctly. 
A possible explanation for that could be the size of the training dataset in comparison to the 
test set. For Amazon Alexa, 43 tweets were used as a training data and for Google Assistant, 
only 30. Those amounts represent less than 1% of the total data for each case. This number 
is considerably lower than used by [47]. In their study, the authors collected 4,845 tweets and 
divided it in the following manner: 80% as training data and 20% as test data.  
To achieve those percentages, more than 22,000 tweets would have to be classified – more 
than 15,000 from Amazon Alexa and almost 7,000 from Google Assistant. The process of 
manual classification would consume a great amount of time and that would require to be 
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
included in the project plan. The initial plan did not account any specific time to be used for 
the manual classification. 
Another way to tackle it would be stablishing a limit for the number of data gathered from 
Twitter. As mentioned before, [47] collected 4,845 tweets. [32] collected almost 200,000 
tweets in 3 years. Following their numbers, this study should be limited to collect from 10,000 
to 15,000 tweets – considering 2 months of the thesis directed to the data collection. Then 
the amount of data to be manual categorized would be smaller.  
Moreover, the data analysis proved to be more complex than expected. The extensive use of 
slangs/expressions and the high level of subjective content contributed to the unexpected 
results. The miss-categorizations expose the difficulty of an algorithm to interpret human 
language, for example, the following tweet: 
“Google assistant for Xbox is insane” 
It is likely that the author of the message wanted to express a positive feeling about the 
product. Although the word “insane” have dual connotation and might be interpreted wrong, 
when taken out of context. 
This finding matches some characteristics that [35] uses to describe Twitter’s content. 
[35] points that tweets are essentially subjective. The linguistic style of tweets is usually 
informal, with extensive use of abbreviations, idioms, and the use of jargon. Users do not 
regard for the correct use of grammar, which increases the difficulty of carrying out a 
linguistic analysis.  Plus, due to the maximum length of a tweet be 140 characters, users refer 
to the same concept with a large variety of short and irregular forms, increasing the challenge 
for the sentiment-topic task.  Finally, the lack of context is also a problem to deal with. 
One way to evaluate the opinions expressed in the tweets would be to follow [3]’s study and 
use emoticons that usually appear in published content to differentiate between positive and 
negative tweets. 
The code used to retrieve the data from Twitter also excluded any type of URL and 
punctuation.  In that way, one would not be able to accomplish the sentiment analysis through 
emoticons, as they are built up with punctuation characters. 
==PAGE:54==
53 
 
The lack of context pointed by [35] also plays a relevant role. Many tweets contain images 
or videos that are used to express the user’s opinions. One example of that is the following 
tweet: 
“Hey Google is this me” 
This tweet does not express any idea, because it was taken out of context. It is possible that 
part of the message was expressed through an image, video, or weblink. The evaluation of 
images to classify a tweet was applied by [25], who used multimodal sentiment analysis 
based on text and image to determine a sentiment polarity score. 
Perhaps, the most relevant finding was that there are many tweets that come from non-
individual owned accounts. It was noticed during a qualitative analysis on the data. 
Fortunately, some contents could be searched through Twitter’s search tools and possible 
authors could be assigned. That issue could easily be solved by collecting demographic 
information about the user who published the tweets. It is an extensive applied good practice. 
[31] The demographics could also be used to understand the product success among different 
ages, genders, and regional areas. Different groups of people have different needs and 
expectations. 
In addition to that, it was found that many people do not express their opinions through 
tweets. They mainly share thoughts, concerns, and daily events, instead. In order to better 
understand the topics related to users’ tweets, one could generate a topic analysis, which is 
also extensive used in the academy. [29] It would help a company to raise attention to certain 
features in its product. 
Many of the collected tweets expressed concerns about safety, such as:  
“Nope I wouldnt feel safe Why Amazon so eager to get in your house”, and  
“amazon I HOPE YOUR LAWYERS REALIZE HOW NEGLIGENT YOUVE BEEN WITH 
THE PERSONAL SAFETY OF EVERY CUSTOMER…”. 
A topic analysis would help understanding the impact of safety matters has on customers by 
counting how many times it was mentioned in tweets. With that understanding, Amazon 
could improve its safety measures and also inform the customers about those improvements, 
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
which would decrease safety-related concerns and prevent those customers of not purchasing 
Amazon Alexa. 
In a general interpretation, topic analysis raises information about what people relate the 
product to. With that knowledge in hands, a company can tackle features related to that matter 
and, also, inform those actions to customers in order to attenuate their concerns. Moreover, 
if the topic does not represent a concern (as when [32] found out that users related a certain 
brand to healthy habits), the company could explore that view and use it in marketing 
campaigns. 
In order to have a better idea of a public opinion about a certain product, online reviews could 
be considered. [56] used Amazon reviews to recognize sarcastic sentences. The website could 
be used for collecting data to be used in opinion mining. 
Finally, one could discuss the methodology applied. One factor that was prioritized was using 
open-source software. Hence, Python was used. On the other hand, many authors applied 
different software, as Hadoop [20], or used combined text mining algorithms [32]. 
The time limitation as the inaccurate project plan (discussed in the Appendix) disabled the 
ability to look for alternative solutions, once the expected results were not achieved. The 
suggestions for further projects would be to prioritize topic analysis over sentiment analysis 
when using Twitter data, due to aforementioned concerns with the unstructured data. It is 
also relevant to collect the whole content that is published, including its author, and perhaps 
its location. 
Moreover, the quality of the training dataset is very important for the further analysis. Then, 
it should be planned ahead of schedule a certain time to work with the training data set, as 
well as its size in comparison to the test data. Otherwise, the analysis might result in 
misleading conclusions. 
The next section summarizes the main topics covered in this project and provides a 
suggestion for future researches. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
55 
 
Conclusion 
 
This study raises the attention to the importance of organizations to use social media as a 
marketing tool. A case study of Twitter users’ opinion about Amazon Alexa was conducted. 
The main idea was to answer the research question and prove that a company can collect 
relevant information published by users (potential customers) in social media and analyze it 
to have insights about a product. Further on, the information collected and analyzed could be 
used to develop product improvements that target users’ needs. 
In this way, the company will be enhancing its marketing strategy by the use social media., 
recognizing it as a source of customer voice and market intelligence. Moreover, the collection 
and analysis of social media information represents a important step in the strategic plan from 
[7], which is listening and driving awareness of users’ opinions about a product. 
The research question was answered by collecting Twitter data and applying Naïve Bayes 
algorithm to categorize it. Although, it exposed the complexity related to the data 
classification and brought important findings to light. The main one is that a few users express 
opinions about Amazon Alexa in Twitter, although, the vast majority of the content published 
is day-to-day situations. Those comments generally do not communicate the user’s feelings 
about the product. 
Moreover, due to the errors committed in the data gathering, one notice that it is extremely 
important to collect more information about a publication than just the text itself (as the user 
account and demographics).  It is also important carefully choose the source when 
researching a topic online. Twitter proved not to be the best source to study users’ opinions 
about Amazon Alexa. User reviews in websites would have been a better source. 
In summary, this study was relevant to found that, even though some users publish opinions 
about a product in social media, much of the information need to be mined. The suggestions 
for the following researches would be to collect user reviews about Amazon Alexa and 
Google assistant. Besides that, a topic analysis would enhance the understanding of users 
concerns. 
 
==PAGE:57==
56 
 
Appendices 
 
Learning objectives 
At the end of this study, the one who performed and followed the project will be able to: 
- 
Create and develop a problem case that reflects a relevant necessity of different 
organizations 
- 
Learn how to solve a data analysis-based problem, mastering scientific methodologies 
to, from a holistic view, delimit and tackle a complex issue 
- 
Communicate the outcomes of a business case solution and understand the 
importance of this application 
- 
Recognize different models used to solve a raised issue in a set environment and apply 
it in an organizational level 
- 
Analyze and identify processes and tools for solving technical problems 
- 
Identify technical issues in a problem set, propose and argument alternative solutions 
based on scientific studies 
 
Project plan as planned and as executed 
 
Figure 16 presents the original Project Plan for this thesis. 
Figure 16: Original Project Plan. 
==PAGE:58==
57 
 
The initial plan suffered modifications throughout the project. The deadline was extended in 
three weeks, in total the project had 30 weeks, and the execution was done as follows (Figure 
17): 
 
 
 
Figure 17: Project Plan reflecting the actual project execution. 
The Literature Research was conducted in the entire project. The use of four more weeks 
than planned was to choose the right algorithm to be used in the data analysis. 
Theoretical Approach refers to the case presentation. It was postponed in seven weeks. That 
happened due to the idea of finalizing the introductory phases before tackling the case. 
Case Modeling refers to defining the tools used to tackle the case and structure a solution. 
Due to the lack of programming knowledge, different techniques used in Sentiment Analysis 
were not applied. 
During the Technical Approach, the Python codes used to crack the problem were build and 
the training and test datasets were processed. Originally, 14 weeks were reserved to this 
phase, but, in practice, it took 10 weeks. The reason to shorten up was to be able to meet the 
deadline. Therefore, this was the most challenging phase of the project, mainly due to the 
complexity of coding in Python and understanding the right libraries to be used.  
Results, Discussion and Conclusion phases were initially planned to be done in four weeks. 
To meet the deadline, it was shortened in one week, and lasted three weeks in total. During 
the interpretation of the results, it was noticed that a quantitative analysis would be 
misleading, and one should proceed with a more qualitative approach. 
Due to the commitment with the deadline the project was reviewed in only one week, instead 
of the originally planned two weeks. 
==PAGE:59==
58 
 
As already mentioned, the most challenging aspect of the project was to proceed with the 
data analysis. This happened due to the lack of computer programming/mathematical 
background. Another exigent aspect of the project was to understand the different algorithms 
applied in Sentiment Analysis. Overall, the project proved to be a good exercise of critical 
thinking and research abilities. 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
59 
 
References 
 
 [1] A. McCallum, K. Nigam, “A comparison of event models for naïve  bayes text 
classification,” in AAAI-98 workshop on learning for text categorization, pp. 4148, 
1998 
[2] A. Reis et al., "Using intelligent personal assistants to assist the elderlies An evaluation of 
Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, Microsoft Cortana, and Apple Siri," 2018 2nd 
International Conference on Technology and Innovation in Sports, Health and Wellbeing 
(TISHW), Thessaloniki, 2018, pp. 1-5. 
[3] Alec Go, Richa Bhayani, and Lei Huang. 2009. Twitter sentiment classification using 
distant supervision. Processing, pages 1–6. 
[4] Amazon Inc. 21 May 2019 from Alexa Skills Kit. Available online: 
https://developer.amazon.com/public/ solutions/alexa/alexa-skills-kit (accessed on 
28 October 2019). 
[5] Amazon, Inc. What Is Alexa? 17 February 2020, https://developer.amazon.com/-
US/alexa 
[6] B. Pang and L. Lee, “Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis,” Foundations and Trends 
in 
Information 
Retrieval, 
vol. 
2, 
no. 
1-2, 
pp. 
1-135, 
[7] Beqiri, G. (2016). Social media and its impact in marketing strategy. European Journal 
of Economics and Management Sciences (pp. 3-9). East West Association for 
Advanced Studies and Higher Education GmbH 
[8] Berdasco, A.; López, G.; Diaz, I.; Quesada, L.; Guerrero, L.A. User Experience 
Comparison of Intelligent Personal Assistants: Alexa, Google Assistant, Siri and 
Cortana. Proceedings 2019, 31, 51. 
==PAGE:61==
60 
 
[9]Cardie, 
C. 
Farina, 
T. 
Bruce, 
and 
E. 
Wagner, 
“Using 
natural 
language 
processing 
to 
improve 
eRulemaking, 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
Digital Government Research (dg.o), San Diego, CA, 2006 
[10] Cambria, E., Das, D., Bandyopadhyay, S., Feraco, A.: A practical guide to sentiment 
analysis, vol. 5. Springer (2017) 
[11] Chokkattu, J. Google Assistant Can Now Translate Speech Through Your Phone, Wired, 
13 
December 
2019, 
https://www.wired.com/story/google-assistant-can-now-
translate-on-your-phone/ 
[12] Chung, H., Lee, S.: Intelligent virtual assistant knows your life. CoRRabs/1803.00466 
(2018) 
[13] Ciric, Milica, et al. “Comparison of Different Algorithms for Sentiment 
Classification.” 2013 11th International Conference on Telecommunications in 
Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Services, Telsiks 2013, vol. 2, IEEE, 
2013, pp. 6704442, 567–70, doi:10.1109/telsks.2013.6704442. 
[14] Constantinides, E. (2014). Foundations of Social Media Marketing. 2nd International 
Conference 
on 
Strategic 
Innovative 
Marketing, 
148, 
40–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.016 
[15] D. Sharma, “Experimental Analysis of KNN with Naive Bayes, SVM 
and Naive Bayes Algorithms for Spam Mail Detection,” vol. 8491, no. 
4, pp. 225228, 2016. 
[16] Davidov, Dmitry, and Oren Tsur. Enhanced Sentiment Learning Using Twitter 
Hashtags and Smileys. 2013. 
[17] Dorai, G., et al.: I know what you did last summer: your smart home Internet of Things 
and your iPhone forensically ratting you out. In: Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, pp. 49:1–49:10. 
ACM, New York (2018) 
==PAGE:62==
61 
 
[18] Eirinaki, Magdalini, et al. “Feature-Based Opinion Mining and Ranking.” Journal of 
Computer and System Sciences, vol. 78, no. 4, ACADEMIC PRESS INC ELSEVIER 
SCIENCE, 29012, pp. 1175–84, doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2011.10.007. 
[14] 
Forbes 
Magazine. 
Amazon, 
17 
February 
2020, 
https://www.forbes.com/companies/amazon 
[20] Gupta, Vijay Shankar, and Shruti Kohli. “Twitter Sentiment Analysis in Healthcare 
Using Hadoop and R.” 2016 3rd International Conference on Computing for 
Sustainable Global Development (Indiacom). Proceedings, edited by M. N. Hoda, 
IEEE, 2016, pp. 3766–72, 3766–72. 
[21] Gutiérrez, Luis, et al. “A Review on Bayesian Networks for Sentiment Analysis.” 
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 865, Springer Verlag, 2019, pp. 
111–20, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-01171-0_10. 
[22] Hernandez, S., and Sallis, P. 2011. Sentiment-preserving reduction for social media 
analysis. 
[23] Jiang, J.; Hassan Awadallah, A.; Jones, R.; Ozertem, U.; Zitouni, I.; Gurunath Kulkarni, 
R.; Khan, O.Z. Automatic online evaluation of intelligent assistants. In Proceedings 
of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web, 18–22 May 2015; 
International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee: Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2015; pp. 506–516. 
[24] Kinsella, B.; Mutchler, A. (2019) Smart Speaker Consumer Adoption Report. 
Voicebot.ai 
[25] Kumar, Akshi, and Geetanjali Garg. “Sentiment Analysis of Multimodal Twitter 
Data.” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 78, no. 17, Springer New York 
LLC, 2019, pp. 24103–19, doi:10.1007/s11042-019-7390-1. 
[26] L. Bing and Z. Lei, Mining Text Data: A survey of Opinion Mining and Sentiment 
Analysis. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2012 
==PAGE:63==
62 
 
[27] L. Bing and Z. Lei, Mining Text Data: A survey of Opinion Mining 
and Sentiment Analysis. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2012 
[28] L.Peng, L. Wen, Y. Li, L. Qiang, D. Min, D. Yue. “Knowledge Acquisition Approach 
Based On Svm In An Online Aided Decision System For Food Processing Quality 
And Safety,” Cybernetics and Information Technologies, vole. 14, no. 5, pp. 118-
128, 2014. 
[29] Lee, Kathy, et al. “Twitter Trending Topic Classification.” Proceedings - Ieee 
International Conference on Data Mining, Icdm, IEEE, 2011, pp. 6137387, 251–58, 
doi:10.1109/icdmw.2011.171. 
[30] Liu, B.: Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language 
Technologies, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–167 (2012) 
[31] Lo, Siaw Ling, et al. “Identifying the High-Value Social Audience from Twitter 
through Text-Mining Methods.” Proceedings of the 18th Asia Pacific Symposium 
on Intelligent and Evolutionary Systems, Vol 1, SPRINGER INT PUBLISHING 
AG, 2015, pp. 325–39, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-13359-1_26. 
[32] Lo, Siaw Ling, et al. “Ranking of High-Value Social Audiences on Twitter.” Decision 
Support 
Systems, 
vol. 
85, 
Elsevier 
B.V., 
2016, 
pp. 
34–48, 
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2016.02.010. 
[33] M. Thomas, B. Pang, L. Lee, “Get out the vote: Determining support 
or 
opposition 
from 
Congressional 
floor-debate 
transcripts,” 
in 
Proceedings of EMNLP, Sydney, Australia, 2006 
[34] Makice, Kevin. Twitter API : up and Running ; [Learn How to Build Twitter 
Applications]. O'Reilly, 2009, pp. XIX, 391 S. (unknown). 
[35] Martínez-Cámara, Eugenio, et al. “Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.” Natural Language 
Engineering, vol. 20, no. 1, CAMBRIDGE UNIV PRESS, 2014, pp. 1–28, 
doi:10.1017/s1351324912000332. 
==PAGE:64==
63 
 
[36] Matthew B. Hoy (2018) Alexa, Siri, Cortana, and More: An Introduction to Voice 
Assistants, Medical 
Reference 
Services 
Quarterly, 37:1, 81-
88, DOI: 10.1080/02763869.2018.1404391 
[37] Moujahid, A. An Introduction to Text Mining using Twitter Streaming API and Python, 
21 July 2014, http://adilmoujahid.com/posts/2014/07/twitter-analytics/ 
[38] Musa, H. et al. (2016). Analyzing the Effectiveness of Social Media Marketing. Issc 
2016 International Conference on Soft Science, Volume 14 (pp. 4-10). Future Acad 
[39] N. Li, D. D. Wu, “Using text mining and sentiment analysis for online 
forums hotspot detection,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 48, no. 00, 
pp. 354-368, 2010. 
[40] Neri, F. et al. (2012). Sentiment analysis on social media. 2012 IEEE/ACM International 
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (pp. 920 – 926). 
IEEE 
[41] 
O’Reilly 
T., 
(2005), 
What 
is 
Web 
2.0?  
www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html 
[42] P. Devijver, J. Kittler, Pattern Recognition Theory and Applications, Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer, 1987 
[43]. Goel, A. Datta and S. Mannan, “Application of Big Data analytics 
in 
process 
safety 
and 
risk 
management,” 
presented 
at 
2017 
IEEE 
International Conference on Big Data, Boston, MA, 2017. 
[44] Pak, A., and Paroubek, P. 2010 (May). Twitter as a corpus for sentiment analysis and 
opinion mining. In N. C. C. Chair, K. Choukri, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, J. Odijk, 
[45] Parmar, B. 50 Companies That Get Twitter – and 50 That Don’t, Harvard Business 
Review, 27 April 2015, https://hbr.org/2015/04/the-best-and-worst-corporate-
tweeters 
[46] Pyae, A.; Joelsson, T.N. Investigating the usability and user experiences of voice user 
interface: A case of Google home smart speaker. In Proceedings of the 20th 
==PAGE:65==
64 
 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and 
Services Adjunct; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2018; pp. 127–131. 
[46] 
R. 
Saxena, 
“DataAspirant: 
K-Nearest 
Neighbor 
Algorithm 
Implementation 
in 
Python”, 
DataAspirant, 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://dataaspirant.com/2016/12/27/k-nearest-neighboralgorithmimplementaion-
python-scratch/. [Accessed: 27-Oct-2018] 
[47] Ramadhani, Rif'At Ahdi, et al. “Comparison of Naive Bayes Smoothing Methods for 
Twitter Sentiment Analysis.” 2016 International Conference on Advanced 
Computer Science and Information Systems, Icacsis 2016, Institute of Electrical 
and 
Electronics 
Engineers 
Inc., 
2016, 
pp. 
7872720, 
287–92, 
doi:10.1109/icacsis.2016.7872720. 
[48] Ramanujam, R. Suresh, et al. “Sentiment Analysis Using Big Data.” 2015 International 
Conference on Computation of Power, Energy, Information and Communication 
(Iccpeic), IEEE, 2015, pp. 480–84, 480–84, doi:10.1109/iccpeic.2015.7259528. 
[49] Rebala, G., Ravi, A., & Churiwala, S. (2019). Machine Learning Definition and Basics. 
An Introduction To Machine Learning, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
15729-6_1, 10.1007/978-3-030-15729-6 
[50] S. Karmaniolos and G. Skinner, "A Literature Review on Sentiment Analysis and its 
Foundational Technologies," 2019 IEEE 4th International Conference on Computer and 
Communication Systems (ICCCS), Singapore, 2019, pp. 91-95. 
[51] Sheth, J. N (2018). How Social Media Will Impact Marketing Media. Social Media 
Marketing (pp. 3-18). Springer Singapore. 
[52] Smith, K. 60 Incredible and Interesting Twitter Stats and Statistics, Brandwatch, 2 
January 2020, https://www.brandwatch.com/blog/twitter-stats-and-statistics/ 
[53] 
Stelzner, 
M. 
(2014, 
May 
1). 
2014 
Social 
Media 
Marketing 
Report. 
http://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/SocialMediaMarketingIndustryReport2014.p
df 
==PAGE:66==
65 
 
[54] 
T. 
Joachims, 
“Making 
large-scale 
SVM 
learning 
practical,” 
Advances 
in Kernel Methods, Cambridge, MA, 1999 
[55] T. Nasukawa, J. Yi, “Sentiment analysis: Capturing favorability using 
natural language processing,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Knowledge Capture, pp. 70-77, 2003 
[56] Tsur, Oren, and Dmitry Davidov. Icwsm – a Great Catchy Name: Semi-Supervised 
Recognition of Sarcastic Sentences in Product Reviews. 2011. 
[57] Tung, Liam. “Google Home Mini Flaw Left Smart Speaker Recording Everything.” 
ZDNet (October 11, 2017). http://www.zdnet.com/article/google-home-mini-flaw-
left-smartspeaker-recording-everything/. 
[58] Tweepy 17 February 2020, http://www.tweepy.org/ 
[59] Twitter, Developers 17 February 2020, https://developer.twitter.com/en.html 
[60] Twitter, Inc. Rules and policies 17 February 2020, https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-
policies 
[61] V. Hatzivassiloglou, K.R.McKeown, “Predicting the semantic orientation of 
adjectives,” in Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and Eighth Conference of the European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 174-181, 1997. 
[62] 
V. 
Vryniotis, 
“DatumBox: 
Naive 
Bayes 
Classifier”, 
GitHub, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://github.com/datumbox/NaiveBayesClassifier. 
[Accessed: 
20- 
Sep-2018]. 
[63] W. Zhang, C. Yu, W. Meng, “Opinion retrieval from blogs,” in Proceedings of the 16th 
ACM 
Conference 
on 
Conference 
on 
Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 831-840, 2007. 
[64] W. Zhong, G. Altun, R. Harrison, P.C. Tai, Y. Pan, “Improved Kmeans clustering 
algorithm 
for 
exploring 
local 
protein 
sequence 
==PAGE:67==
66 
 
motifs 
representing 
common 
structural 
property, 
IEEE 
Transactions 
in NanoBioscience, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 255-265, 2005. 
[65] Welch, C. You can now hear Samuel L. Jackson’s voice on your Amazon Echo, The 
Verge, 
12 
December 
2019, 
https://www.theverge.com/2019/12/12/21013145/amazon-echo-alexa-samuel-l-
jackson-celebrity-voice-now-available-price 
[66] Yao, Jiawei. “Automated Sentiment Analysis of Text Data with NLTK.” Journal of 
Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1187, no. 5, Institute of Physics Publishing, 2019, 
p. 052020, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1187/5/052020. 
[67] 
Z.H. 
Sun, 
Y.X. 
Sun, 
“Fuzzy 
support 
vector 
machine 
for 
regression 
estimation,” 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Systems, 
Man 
and 
Cybernetics, vol. 4, no 8, pp. 3336-3341, 2003 
[68] Zeng, E., et al.: End user security and privacy concerns with smart homes. In: 
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS 2017), pp. 65–80 (2017)  
[69] Zhang, Haiyi, and Di Li. “Naïve Bayes Text Classifier.” Proceedings - 2007 Ieee 
International Conference on Granular Computing, Grc 2007, Inst. of Elec. and Elec. 
Eng. Computer Society, 2007, pp. 4403192, 708–11, doi:10.1109/grc.2007.4403192. 
